royalsocietypublishing . org / journal / rsif Research Cite this article : Young MJ , Silk MJ , Pritchard AJ , Fefferman NH . 2023 The interplay of social constraints and individual variation in risk tolerance in the emergence of superspreaders . J . R . Soc . Interface 20 : 20230077 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rsif . 2023 . 0077 Received : 15 February 2023 Accepted : 11 July 2023 Subject Category : Life Sciences – Mathematics interface Subject Areas : biomathematics , computational biology , biophysics Keywords : epidemic modelling , game theory , heterogeneous population , superspreaders Author for correspondence : Matthew J . Young e - mail : myoung89 @ utk . edu Electronic supplementary material is available online at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 6084 / m9 . figshare . c . 6751396 . The interplay of social constraints and individual variation in risk tolerance in the emergence of superspreaders Matthew J . Young 1 , Matthew J . Silk 2 , Alexander J . Pritchard 2 and Nina H . Fefferman 3 1 Department of Mathematics , and 2 Department of NIMBioS , The University of Tennessee Knoxville , Knoxville 37996 - 4519 TN , USA 3 University of Tennessee Knoxville , Knoxville , TN , USA MJY , 0000 - 0002 - 5528 - 4376 ; MJS , 0000 - 0002 - 8318 - 5383 ; NHF , 0000 - 0003 - 0233 - 1404 Individual host behaviours can drastically impact the spread of infection through a population . Differences in the value individuals place on both socia - lizing with others and avoiding infection have been shown to yield emergent homophily in social networks and thereby shape epidemic outcomes . We build on this understanding to explore how individuals who do not conform to their social surroundings contribute to the propagation of infection during outbreaks . We show how non - conforming individuals , even if they do not directly expose a disproportionate number of other individuals themselves , can become functional superspreaders through an emergent social structure that positions them as the functional links by which infection jumps between otherwise separate communities . Our results can help estimate the potential success of real - world interventions that may be compromised by a small number of non - conformists if their impact is not anticipated , and plan for how best to mitigate their effects on intervention success . 1 . Introduction Mathematical models of infectious disease dynamics are powerful tools for understanding and predicting the course of outbreaks [ 1 ] . They allow us to organize and quantify our conceptualization of the causes and influences of fea - tures of outbreak scenarios [ 1 ] . They also make it possible to interrogate hypothetical situations , considering particular interventions and evaluating their potential impacts [ 1 , 2 ] . Among the features identified as potentially having a major impact on the course of outbreaks are superspreaders — individ - uals who are responsible for a disproportionate number of secondary infections should they become infected themselves [ 3 – 5 ] . The number and distribution of superspreaders have been shown to influence the accuracy of predicting overall outbreak dynamics ( e . g . burstiness [ 6 – 9 ] or dispersion [ 10 – 13 ] ) . One area that , until recently , has received less focus in epidemiological model formulation has been quantifying how factors that influence individual behaviour affect emergent disease dynamics . The COVID - 19 pandemic has provided many examples of how proposed interventions can be compromised by failing to incorporate individual - level effects ( e . g . adherence to non - pharmaceutical interventions , or acceptance of novel vaccines ; [ 14 , 15 ] ) . While up until now , superspreading has been included in epidemiological models as an important feature in ongoing transmission dynamics [ 13 , 16 – 19 ] , the grow - ing realization that the motivations behind individual differences are ( at least in part ) due to behavioural heterogeneity [ 20 , 21 ] suggests that the underlying motivations for behaviour that results in superspreading may itself provide additional points of intervention for altering the course of epidemics . Another insight derived from epidemiological models has been the greater impact of some aspects of population - wide contact network structure than others on how fast infection spread ( e . g . modularity ; [ 22 , 23 ] ) . From a networks © 2023 The Author ( s ) Published by the Royal Society . All rights reserved . perspective , individuals may function as a more indirect type of ‘ superspreader ’ than strictly falls under the traditional definition . Individuals may be responsible for greater num - bers of ‘ descendant infections ’ ( infections that occur due to ongoing transmission dynamics stemming from their own infection ) if they critically connect otherwise isolated popu - lations , even if they expose only relatively few others to infection themselves . We previously explored how individual discrete preferences regarding the value of social contact and infection risk tolerance might lead to the emergence of homo - phily in network community structure [ 24 ] . Here we extend this work to see if potential mismatches in the social net - works available to individuals to satisfy their social and risk avoidance needs might lead to the endogenous emer - gence of individuals who act as these ‘ transmission catalysts ’ . To address this question , we implement an explicit net - work structure to examine how a network with diverse individual priorities for disease avoidance and socialization might alter the transmission dynamics and epidemic severity of an infectious disease . We explore these dynamics with the acknowledgement that a majority of individuals ( ‘ confor - mists ’ , hereafter ) are likely to share similar priorities , e . g . centred around a population median . Some individuals , however , do not conform to these normalized bounds ( ‘ non - conformists ’ , hereafter ) . Their behaviour and social connectivity will be distinct , resulting in infrequent but disproportionately influential behaviours with regard to transmission ( e . g . acting as superspreaders or transmission catalysts due to their unusual preferences ) . Given known patterns of assortativity [ 24 ] , individuals who depart from average behavioural responses when making decisionsaboutsocialcontactsunderthreatofsociallytransmitted infections would be expected to impact emerging network con - nectivity patterns . We include multiple pathways by which individuals derive benefits from social contacts , ranging from purely psychological ( i . e . satisfaction derived from in - person reinforcement of social bonds ) to purely pragmatic ( i . e . needing to maintain income from a job that requires in - person contact with clients and / or co - workers ) . This implies that societal func - tion imposes a minimum bound for community - wide averages in socialization ; individuals cannot fully disengage from social contact with their community , even if they are more risk averse or place far lesser value on social contact . We also include the potential for heterogeneity in infectious disease risk avoidance , where differences may be attributable to alternative perceptions of the severity of infection or in attitudes that determine the acceptability of undertaking those risks . We formulate the question as one of individual fulfilment in a trade - off between social contact and risk tolerance , and then contextualize it within the available outlets for potential contact afforded by social organization . By doing so , we show that emergent social patterns can lead non - conformist individuals to become transmission catalysts , even if they defy the traditional definition of a superspreader role . In particular , our model highlights that the impact of non - conformists in transmission dynamics peaks when constraints on socialization are intermediate . 2 . Methods Let P be a population of players with a bijection onto the ver - tices of a finite connected weighted graph G . We say two players are adjacent if their corresponding vertices on the graph are . 2 . 1 . Game formalism Let M > 0 be a constant . At each time t , player x decides on a social action strategy a x ð t Þ ¼ f a x , y ð t Þ [ ½ 0 , M (cid:2) : y [ N ð x Þg corre - sponding to an amount of social contact they want to have with each player in N ( x ) , the set of players adjacent to them . This social contact requires adjacency and mutual agreement , so the amount of socializing that actually occurs between any players x and y is a 0 x , y ð t Þ : ¼ min ð a x , y ð t Þ , a y , x ð t ÞÞ if x and y adjacent 0 if x and y not adjacent : (cid:1) The utility of player x at time t is defined by u x ð t Þ ¼ s x f ð a x Þ D t (cid:3) r x p ð a 0 x , D t Þ , ð 2 : 1 Þ where f is a non - decreasing concave function ( such as ln ( x ) ) which yields greater utility for higher inputs at diminishing rates , Δ t is the amount of time that passes between each time step , a x ¼ S b x , y a 0 x , y , and p ð a 0 x , D t Þ is the expected probability of becoming infected ( defined in the epidemiology portion of the model below ) . σ x represents the value player x places on socializ - ing overall : more social players will have higher values of σ x and place more emphasis on socializing . ρ x represents the value player x places on health : more health - conscious ( risk - averse ) players will have higher values of ρ x , and place more emphasis on avoiding disease . b x , y is the weight of the connection between players x and y on the graph , representing the value they obtain from mutual socialization relative to the infection risk . Higher values allow players to obtain more value with less risk . For simplicity , we assume this is symmetric , with b x , y = b y , x . 2 . 2 . Epidemiological calculations within the game formalism Because we are interested in the long - term interplay between social and epidemiological dynamics , we model the disease using a discrete susceptible – infective – susceptible ( SIS ) disease on the graph structure with transmission varying based on the actions of the players . Since the force of infection can be expected to scale proportionally to the amount of social contact among the players [ 25 ] , we model the probability of transmission from an infected player y to an uninfected player x in each time step as Δ t β a 0 x , y , where β is the inherent transmissibility of the disease . Additionally , in order to avoid stochastic extinction of the disease both in the population as a whole and in socially isolated sub - graphs , we add an additional small rate of infection g a for each agent regardless of the social dynamics . ( For figures presented in this work , g a is set to 0 . 001 . ) It follows that if player x is unin - fected , the probability of becoming infected in the next time step is p ð a 0 x , D t Þ ¼ 1 (cid:3) ð 1 (cid:3) D tg a Þ Y y [ N ð x Þ ð 1 (cid:3) D t b a 0 x , y q y Þ , ð 2 : 2 Þ where q y is 1 if player y is infected , and 0 otherwise . For small transmission rates , this can be approximated as p ð a 0 x , D t Þ ¼ D t ð g a þ b X y [ N ð x Þ a 0 x , y q y Þ : ð 2 : 3 Þ For simplicity , we use equation ( 2 . 3 ) for agents ’ utility functions . To ensure that the transmission probability cannot exceed 1 , we require the maximum pairwise socialization M ≤ 1 / ( β Δ t ) , though in practice this limit is not reached in simulations with reasonably small β . r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 20 : 20230077 2 We assume that an infected player remains infected for a fixed amount of time , G , before returning to the susceptible state . For figures presented in this paper , we set , b ¼ 0 : 125 , M ¼ 5 , G ¼ 10 , D t ¼ 1 . 2 . 3 . Social - risk typology We consider a population with distinct phenotypes of players . We define low and high values for the relevant parameters such that σ l < σ h , ρ l < ρ h , and assign players with σ x ∈ { σ l , σ h } and ρ x ∈ { ρ l , ρ h } . This creates four types of players , which we denote with identifiers based on their combined parameters : AS ( asocial , σ x = σ l ) , SO ( social , σ x = σ h ) , RT ( risk taking , ρ x = ρ l ) , RA ( risk averse , ρ x = ρ h ) . Combining these identifiers leads to the four types : ASRA , ASRT , SORA , SORT . For figures presented in this paper , we set σ l = 4 , σ h = 12 , ρ l = 30 , ρ h = 60 . Due to the scaling invariance of utility functions , the behaviour of each player will be determined by their risk ratios σ x / ρ x , which will be 0 . 066 , 0 . 133 , 0 . 2 , 0 . 4 , respectively . Additionally , we assume that the type of each player is known to their neighbours . This is a realistic assumption because sociability and risk - aversion ( in the context of health outcomes and protective actions taken ) can be observable in many cases [ 26 – 29 ] . We also assume players know the average frequency of infection within each type , but do not know the infection status of any particular individual . This is consistent with unreli - able proximate cues of infection , especially for diseases with a pre - symptomatic phase [ 30 – 32 ] . Since agents cannot observe the infection status of their neighbours directly , they combine the known social - risk type of neighbours with known infection frequencies to estimate the expected utility of socializing with them . Players will estimate a local maximum for their utility with respect to each potential social partner based on that player ’ s social - risk type . In particular @ u @ a 0 j , k . 0 iff S a 0 x , y , s x r x b I y , ð 2 : 4 Þ where I y is the frequency of infections for agents of the same type as agent y . In essence , the nonlinear rate of returns on utility from socializing weighed against the linear decrease from infection risk will incentivize players to maintain medium values of total socia - lization : players with more or less total socialization than the r . h . s . of equation ( 2 . 4 ) can increase their utility by decreasing or increas - ing their socialization , respectively , with that particular agent . The actual equilibrium point an agent reaches when all pairwise relationships are taken into account will depend on the ( poten - tially complex ) synergistic effects of each individual player ’ s own utility function , the infection rate of each agent type , their neighbours ’ agent types , and the socialization desires of their neighbours over time . In general , we expect each player to main - tain intermediate levels of socialization rather than heading towards the boundaries of 0 or M ; each player effectively having a soft quota for how much socialization they will maintain in the long term . We also expect players with higher risk ratio σ x / ρ x to maintain higher levels of socialization . 2 . 4 . Community structure Unlike the well - mixed population we explore in [ 24 ] , here we construct a community structure via constrained random graphs to extend the patterns observed in that work , but also consider diversity of preference within the structural community , incorporating both individuals who are well - represented by a median valuation placed by their community on socialization and / or health , and individuals who are still members of a com - munity of contacts , but whose preferences are not closely aligned with the median beliefs of the community as a whole . 1 . We create a total of N = N c S c agents subdivided into N c com - munities of size S c ≥ 4 , and choose a primary agent type from the four player types . Within each community , there are S c − 3 agents of the primary type , which we refer to as ‘ conformists ’ and one agent of each other type , which we refer to as ‘ non - conformists ’ . For all figures presented in this work , we set N c = 16 , S c = 10 . 2 . We fix two probabilities c a ≥ c b . For each pair of agents within the same community , they are connected with probability c a . For each pair of agents in different communities , they are con - nected with probability c b . This creates a form of stochastic block model in which any graph structure has non - zero prob - ability , but as c a increases and c b decreases graphs with a clustered structure become increasingly common . For all figures presented in this work , we set c a = 2 / 3 , c b = 2 / 75 , which results in each agent having a mean of six connections in their community and four connections outside their community after this step . 3 . For each non - conformist type , we partition all agents of that type into pairs and connect the agents in each pair if they were not already connected . We justify this on the basis that non - conformists who are surrounded by neighbours dissimi - lar to themselves are likely to go to greater lengths to non - randomly seek out connections with others who are similar to themselves . 4 . We require that every vertex have at least one neighbour , discarding any graph generated with isolated vertices — a rare occurrence with the implemented parameter set . 5 . To incentivize interactions within a community we set b x , y = 1 for connections within a community , and b x , y = 0 . 9 for connec - tions outside the community , so each agent will have a slight preference to socialize with their own community members . We note that we also ran simulations of the model on random graph structures , which we briefly discuss in the electronic supplementary material . 2 . 5 . Minimum socialization To model the tendency for individuals being required to interact with others in their community in a way that they cannot opt out of , we explore the impact of a minimum socialization value ω ≥ 0 and require that the socialization between every pair of mutually connected members within the same community always have socialization a x , y ( t ) ≥ ω . We vary ω over simulations and explore its impact on the dynamics and outcomes . Low values of ω correspond to loosely bound , voluntary communities where it is easy to avoid undesired contact , while high values of ω correspond to close communities in which members interact frequently whether they prefer to or not . This affects not only disease transmission within each community , but also the interactions individuals will have outside their community , as individuals are more likely to seek socialization outside their community if they have less within it , and vice versa . 2 . 6 . Simulations Each agent x begins the simulation with a x , y = 1 for each neigh - bour . At each time step we compute the actual socialization a 0 x , y , then simulate the epidemiological dynamics that result for that time step . Each agent is then informed of the new infection frequency for each social - risk type , and updates their social preferences in the direction of best response . In particular , we fix an update speed Δ a = 0 . 01 , then for each neighbour y , agent x estimates u x in the counterfactual situations where their socia - lization with agent y had been a 0 x , y + n Δ a Δ t , where n ∈ { − 1 , 0 , 1 } , and all other socialization levels remained unchanged . The player then increments a x , y by n Δ a Δ t according to the n that r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 20 : 20230077 3 yields the highest utility . This is computed simultaneously and independently for each y . For each measurement process , we simulate the model for 2000 initial time steps to get past the initial outbreak and reach a more representative long - term state . We then simulate the model for a measurement period of 10 000 time steps in which we track the number of new infections and who causes them . We choose values of ω ranging from 0 to 0 . 3 in intervals of 0 . 015 for figures 5 and 6 , and in intervals of 0 . 03 for all other figures . We run 10 realizations of each parameter set , yielding data from 160 agents of each non - conformist type and 1120 agents of the conformist type , and average the values for each agent type . For some measurements , we construct ‘ parallel networks ’ , in which we create one parent network according to the process defined earlier and create several copies of it . In particular , for each parent network we choose five communities in the network , and create 15 copy networks , one for each non - conformist in the chosen networks . In each copy , we change the corresponding non - conformist into a conformist , changing utility function and agent type that other players perceive them as , but we do not change their connections in the network structure . We then simu - late all networks simultaneously using the same random numbers when computing infection chances for corresponding pairs of agents in different networks , such that the same random event occurring in multiple networks on the same time step , with identical probabilities , will occur in all or none . This decreases the extent to which difference in outcomes reflect random noise , and only allows divergences in network behav - iour to occur due to genuine differences in the probabilities caused by the changes made to the network structure . 2 . 7 . Measurements To understand the social dynamics of the system , we consider how individuals shift in homophily along two axes of socializa - tion : with their community and with their social - risk typology . We use a modified Krackhardt external – internal ( EI ) homophily index [ 24 , 33 ] . In particular , we partition the set of agents accord - ing to either their social - risk type or community membership . Then for each agent x , let the internal socialization I x be the aver - age socialization between x and each neighbour in their group , and let the external socialization E x be the average socialization between x and each neighbour in another group . Type - homophily and community - homophily are defined to be H x ¼ I x (cid:3) E x I x þ E x ð 2 : 5 Þ using the social - risk type partition and community partition , respectively . In the case where individuals socialize exclusively within their own group , this yields H x = 1 , in the case where indi - viduals socialize exclusively outside their own group this yields H = − 1 , and in the case where individuals express no preference between social partners this yields H x = 0 . In the rare event that an agent has no neighbours in their own group or only has neighbours in their own group , then I x or E x , respectively , will be undefined , and we leave H x undefined , omit - ting such agents from the computed averages of that homophily score . The effect an individual has on the spread of a disease is non - trivial to measure , given the complicated epidemiological dynamics . For instance , an individual might be considered to be responsible only for the infections that they directly transmit , or they might be considered partially responsible for infections caused by their epidemiological descendants . Thus , we use several different measures to compare the outcome and effects of individuals . We term these measures as : Direct Attribution , Epidemic Attribution , Global Attribution and Community Attribution . For simplicity , we define each of these based on events occurring over a measurement period of 10 000 time steps . ( Note : the values increase at an approximately linear rate , and so could be generalized to different lengths of time by normalizing based on the measurement period . ) Direct Attribution of agent x , D x , is calculated as the number of infections during the measurement period that were caused by a susceptible individual receiving the infection from agent x over the course of the measurement period . In the case where a sus - ceptible agent is successfully infected by multiple infected individuals in the same time step , the value is split evenly among them : the Direct Attribution of each infector increases by 1 / n where n is the number of infectors . In this way , the total Direct Attribution of all agents is equal to the number of new infections during the measurement period . While Direct Attribution is the most straightforward measure of the impact of an individual on the epidemic , it misses second - order effects caused by the epidemiological descendents of each agent . Observable differences in non - conformists could , how - ever , be attributed to individual utility functions or topological network features . That is , the effect of an individual depends not only on their behaviour , but also on their placement within the network structure . Individuals with more connections , or better placed in a position to bridge different communities or subgraphs in the network may have an outsized effect relative to their total socialization . Additionally , conformists and non - conformists differ not only in their behaviour , but in how other agents treat them , which will affect their role in the epidemic in a way not directly controlled by them . Epidemic Attribution was introduced to assign credit to the originator of local outbreaks . The Epidemic Attribution E x of agent x is defined as follows . If community c has no infected agents at time step t − 1 , and has exactly one at time step t , then we say an Epidemic Event E x , c , t has begun with the infected agent x as its originator . During the Epidemic Event , we track individuals who are infected directly by other agents within community c tracing back to agent x via intra - community con - nections , while ignoring infections that come from outside the community during this time or that leave the community and come back . Effectively , we consider the graph of epidemiological ancestry and find the maximal subtree with agent x as the parent node at time t and all members being part of community c . This means if an individual becomes infected from outside their com - munity while an Epidemic Event is ongoing , their infection and any infections they cause , do not count as part of the Event . Only transmissions that trace back to the originator of the Event with - out leaving the community are counted . Additionally , if an individual becomes infected multiple times during this period they can be measured multiple times , so there is no upper bound on the number of infections an Event can record . The Epidemic Event ends once no more infections are present in the community , or when the measurement period ends . At this point , we attribute all infections caused during the Epidemic Event to the originator , agent x , and increase their Epidemic Attribution E x by the total number of infections in the Event . Any epidemic still ongoing at the end of the measuring process is terminated and counted as if complete in order to avoid undercounting epidemics with extremely long durations . Global Attribution was included to more directly quantify the actual impact of an individual ’ s non - conformity . We construct parallel networks as described above , and define G x of agent x to be the difference in the total number of infections between the parallel network with x recoded to be a conformist and the number of infections in the original network . Community Attribution C x was defined analogously , but with infections restricted to the community of agent x , then multiplied by the number of communities , N c , so that it is comparable in magnitude to Global Attribution . r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 20 : 20230077 4 For all of the above measures , we create an analogous measure for each type of agent by averaging the measure of multiple agents of that type over multiple networks . Together , these features and dynamics allow us to capture how diversity in individual behaviour impacts emergent infection dynamics ( see figure 1 ) . We note that we also created a generalized version of Direct Attribution that accounts for epidemiological ancestry , which we call r - Attribution . However , due to its similarity to Direct Attribution but increased complexity , it is presented in the electronic supplementary material . While to the best of our knowledge the specific formulae and algorithms for these measurements are original to this work , the secondary transmission used in Direct Attribution is a relatively intuitive and traditional metric of tracking infections , and we acknowledge similarities between some of our measurements and other established metrics [ 34 – 37 ] . For the reader ’ s convenience , figure 1 shows an overview of the algorithm used to simulate the model . 3 . Results 3 . 1 . The emergence of community - homophily depends on minimum socialization Emerging homophily is dependent on the minimum sociali - zation , ω , ( see figure 2 for results for a SORA - conformist network ) . For community - homophily , low values of mini - mum socialization result in non - conformists being defined almost exclusively by heterophily . This observation is expec - ted given the mandated connections for conformists with an external community member of the same social - risk typol - ogy . Also as expected , increases in minimum socialization also increase homophily within communities . With low values of minimum socialization , we observed similar patterns in assortativity for social - risk typology as previously published patterns in a model without defined structure [ 24 ] . As minimum socialization was increased , how - ever , all social - risk types converged towards heterophily with the exception of the conformists . This is an artefact of each community only having a single non - conformist of each type . When minimum socialization becomes high enough , each individual is socializing almost entirely due to the con - straint and not their preferences , and thus socializes with all community members equally . For an agent with neighbours of every type in their community , this is measured as zero homophily . But non - conformists are the only agent of their type in their community , so socialize exclusively with other types , despite having neighbours of the same type outside their community . In larger communities with more non - conformists , all agents converge to zero type - homophily as minimum socialization increases . 3 . 2 . Non - conformists cause disproportionately many secondary infections when minimum socialization is intermediate At high values of minimum socialization , all networks produce proportional Direct Attribution that reflects the representation of each type within the network ( i . e . 0 . 7 for con - formists and 0 . 1 for each non - conformist type ; see figure 3 ) . However , at lower values of minimal socialization , non - conformists with a higher risk ratio have a disproportionate impact relative to their frequency in the population in every case apart from with SORT conformists . The effect is greatest at intermediate values of ω . Each type of non - conformist has a frequency of 0 . 1 in each population . For each type of initiate vertices and define network structure . 16 communities each with 10 agents ( 7 conformists , 3 non - conformists ) calculatingglobalattribution ? set minimum socialization ( ω ) no initial step : agents fully socialize with connections ( a x , y = 1 ) yes alter conformity in parallel communities simulate disease spread using actual socialization model halts if t = 12 000 stop START calculate attribution measures agents update socialization based on their utility function Figure 1 . The algorithm used to simulate the model . r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 20 : 20230077 5 conformist , we observe that non - conformists with a higher risk ratio than the conformists are responsible for more than 0 . 1 of infections , while non - conformists with a lower risk ratio are responsible for less than 0 . 1 of infections . The peak in the importance of SORT non - conformists at intermediate minimum socialization values ( ω ) remains when we instead focus on the relative impact of the individual agent by normalizing with respect to the number of agents rather than the total amount of Direct Attribution ( see figure 4 ) . In all cases , for low values of ω we see higher Direct Attribution for more risky agents and for high values of ω the Direct Attributions converge . In simulations with ASRA , ASRT and SORA conformists we observe a local maxi - mum for SORT non - conformists for intermediate minimum socialization values around ω = 0 . 15 ( the peak is consistent across all three types ) . SORT Direct Attribution then decreases again before converging to a concomitant increase with the other agent types at higher values of ω . For SORT conformists we see no similar peak at intermediate values of ω . Note that the total Direct Attribution of all agents is equal to the total number of infections in the population . Thus , we see an increase in the total number of infections as the total socialization rate of agents increases , indicating that we have not yet hit epidemiological saturation ( where everyone is constantly in contact with so many others that as soon as they return to being susceptible after infection , they are assured of being immediately reinfected ) with even our largest considered value of ω . 3 . 3 . The peak in non - conformist importance is a function of the number and size of epidemics they cause Figure 5 shows the Epidemic Attribution of each agent type in networks with SORA conformists as a function of ω . SORT agents again show the greatest impact , with substan - tially higher Epidemic Attribution for most values of ω . We also again observe a non - monotonic trend , where Epidemic Attribution for SORT agents is maximized at intermediate levels of ω rather than at the extremes . To understand this , we separate Epidemic Attribution into two components : ( i ) the frequency of outbreaks intro - duced from outside the community via connection through that agent and ( ii ) the average size of an epidemic started by agents of each type , figure 6 . Figure 6 shows an example of these two components of Epidemic Attribution for networks with SORA conformists . We see that as ω increases , the number of epidemics decreases . To understand this , we consider each of two con - tributing factors . First , as agents are required to socialize more internally , they socialize less externally , thus being less likely to bring in a new infection when their community is uninfected . Second , our definition of Epidemic Events does not allow overlap , so the longer they tend to last the fewer opportunities there are for new ones to start . We also see that as ω increases , the total number of community members infected before the Epidemic Event ends also increases . 0 . 15 0 . 30 RA RT AS SO 0 – 1 0 t yp e - ho m oph il y c o m m un it y - ho m oph il y 1 – 1 0 1 0 . 15 ω 0 . 30 0 ( a ) ( b ) Figure 2 . Homophily of each agent type ( a ) and community membership ( b ) as a function of minimum socialization ( ω ) for networks with SORA conformists . Points are coloured by node type and error bars represent the standard deviation . We use an x - axis jitter for visualization purposes only , distinguishing between adjacent values of ω with grey / white shading . r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 20 : 20230077 6 Again , this is expected , since increased socialization also increases the transmission rate of the infection ( up until a sat - uration point ) , and an epidemic is consequently less likely to go locally extinct . The Epidemic Attribution for each agent type is the product of these two values , so we see it maxi - mized for the SORT agents for intermediate values of ω where both of these factors are of moderate levels simul - taneously rather than at the extremes . The patterns in Epidemic Attribution for simulations with ASRA and ASRT conformists are highly similar ( with minor quantitative differences ) , while data for SORT conformists shows a strik - ingly different pattern , with significantly less attribution for SORT agents , and slightly more for SORA at low values of ω . For concision , results for other conformist types are presented in the electronic supplementary material . 3 . 4 . Non - conformist presence increases network - level infection burden when minimum socialization is intermediate Figure 7 shows the Global and Community Attribution values for non - conformists as ω varies for networks with SORA conformists . Again , we observe that SORT has much higher attribution , and the value peaks for intermediate values of ω . This provides further evidence of the robustness of this peak in the epidemiological importance of non - confor - mists at intermediate values of ω , since the result is consistent across multiple different methods of measuring the role of agents in the epidemiological dynamics . However , we note that the location of the peak is different from the other measures . Interestingly , we see a small negative impact from ASRA and ASRT non - conformists at low to intermediate values of ω that suggests a protective community - level effect , though this seems less apparent in the Global population measure . Inves - tigating over which region of the parameter space among transmissibility , local connectivity and global connectivity this effect is present are questions for future consideration . 4 . Discussion Our results build on the growing awareness that individual preferences and behaviours can shape both the course of out - breaks and our ability to design effective interventions . For example , meaningful thresholds exist in population percen - tages for behaviours such as vaccine acceptance to prevent a widespread outbreak of infection [ 38 , 39 ] , yet there is still awareness of the importance of studying the impact of not only the distribution of behaviours , but their arrangement within the social fabric of a community [ 38 , 40 – 43 ] . Similarly , our work builds from an understanding that the distribution of behaviours can yield unexpected population - level outcomes [ 24 ] , to the more nuanced understanding that rare individuals , who do not conform to the preferences and behaviours of their communities , can have a profound impact on epidemiological dynamics in these communities . Non - conformists who value socializing and are more risk tolerant than the rest of their community can emerge as non - traditional superspreaders 0 . 75 0 . 50 0 . 25 0 . 75 0 . 50 0 . 25 0 ω 0 . 15 0 . 30 0 0 . 15 ASRA conformists ASRT conformists p r opo r ti on o f i n f ec ti on s SORT conformists 0 . 30 0 0 . 15 0 . 30 ASSO RART 0 . 75 1 . 00 0 . 50 0 . 25 ( d ) 0 . 75 0 . 50 0 . 25 0 0 . 15 0 . 30 ω SORA conformists p r opo r ti on o f i n f ec ti on s ( c ) ( a ) ( b ) Figure 3 . The proportion of Direct Attribution attributable to each agent type as a function of minimum socialization ( ω ) for the four networks with conformists of each type . Points are coloured by node type and error bars represent the standard deviation . We use an x - axis jitter for visualization purposes only , distinguishing between adjacent values of ω with grey / white shading . Note that we do not correct here for the numbers of agent of each type ; since the conformists in each network are seven times as frequent as each type of non - conformist , attribution of 0 . 7 for conformists and 0 . 1 for each non - conformist reflects representation rather than an emergent outcome . Each graph shows simulations for networks with a different conformist type . r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 20 : 20230077 7 ( transmission catalysts ) , enabling broader transmission than would be possible in their absence . The similarities across multiple attribution measurements helps demonstrate the robustness of the results . The impact of more risk - tolerant and socialization - valuing ( SORT ) non - conformists peaks at intermediate values of ω and then decreases before again increasing as the high level of minimum socialization overwhelms individ - ual impacts . This change in the relative importance of the non - conformists as minimum socialization levels vary is qualitatively consistent with previous work showing that different patterns of connectivity in network - based infection dynamics yielded differential relative protection against ongoing transmission at different forces of infection [ 44 ] . While that work focused on the per contact transmission probability , our work suggests it is worthwhile to explore whether the emergent result is a composite effect of both connectivity and transmissibility . 600 400 200 0 600 400 200 0 600 D i r ec t A tt r i bu ti on D i r ec t A tt r i bu ti on 400 200 0 600 400 200 0 0 0 . 15 0 . 30 0 0 . 15 0 . 30 0 0 . 15 SORA conformists ASRA conformists ASRT conformists SORT conformists 0 . 30 0 0 . 15 0 . 30 ω ω ASSO RART ( d ) ( c ) ( a ) ( b ) Figure 4 . The mean Direct Attribution of agents of each type as a function of minimum socialization ( ω ) for the four networks with conformists of each type . Points are coloured by node type and error bars represent the standard deviation . We use an x - axis jitter for visualization purposes only , distinguishing between adjacent values of ω with grey / white shading . Note that this normalization corrects for the numbers of agent of each type , such that the conformists and non - conformists are directly comparable . 1000 E p i d e m i c A tt r i bu ti on 500 0 0 . 15 0 . 30 ω AS SO RA RT Figure 5 . The mean Epidemic Attribution of each agent type as a function of minimum socialization ( ω ) for simulations with SORA conformists only . Points are coloured by node type and error bars represent the standard deviation . We use an x - axis jitter for visualization purposes only , distinguishing between adjacent values of ω with grey / white shading . Note that this normalization corrects for the numbers of agent of each type , such that the conformists and non - conformists are directly comparable . r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 20 : 20230077 8 From a global perspective , changes in the relative role of non - conformists can be explained by the assortment of agents into homophilous sets at extreme values of ω but not inter - mediate ones . For low values of ω agents mostly interact with others of their same social - risk type , partitioning the graph into four sets with little cross - interaction . Outbreaks among one type of agent will mostly remain within that type , especially as other agents decrease their socialization with that type in response . For high values of ω agents mostly socialize within their own community , partitioning the graph into many smaller sets with higher minimum socia - lization causing local outbreaks to last much longer within each community , but less likely to spread to others . However , for intermediate values of ω , neither partition is complete , so infections can spread across the entire network , and do so largely carried by the most social agent type . From a local perspective , we can consider this same dynamic on the level of individual SORT agents and their capacity to act as transmission catalysts and / or supersprea - ders . Such agents are highly motivated to maintain substantially higher socialization values than others , leaving them more likely to be infected and making other agents avoid them when feasible . For low values of ω , other agents are able to avoid them , and are thus insulated from the impact of superspreader behaviour . For high values of ω , all agents interact with all others within their community , meaning highly social agents are able to obtain sufficient socialization within their own community and do not seek it externally . Therefore , they are less likely to pick up new infections from outside and introduce them into their pre - viously uninfected community . However , for intermediate values of ω , they engage in both internal and external socialization , causing them to acquire infections from other communities and spread them to their community . By considering a simplified scenario in which one type of agent dominates as conformists and distributions of agent types are identical in different communities , we extract insight into emergent patterns that may be important in planning stra - tegic outbreak mitigation . Minimum socialization is likely to be lowest when outbreaks involve deadly infections that make it acceptable to consider governmentally imposed lock - downs [ 45 , 46 ] , or for populations of privileged people whose livelihoods and access to basic needs do not depend on public exposure ( e . g . [ 47 ] ) . Minimum socialization is likely to be higher among poorer populations whose livelihoods are based on physical labour and other essential jobs that remain working in person even during lockdowns , as well as among groups that do not respect recommendations from public health services . A peak in superspreader impact at intermediate amounts of minimium socialization suggests the impact of a marginal change in socialization will vary depending on whether a community is already to the left or AS 100 50 no . e p i d e m i c s i n f ec ti on s p e r e p i d e m i c 0 0 . 15 0 . 30 400 200 0 0 . 15 0 . 30 SO RA RT ω ( a ) ( b ) Figure 6 . The mean number of epidemics ( a ) and mean epidemic size ( b ) for each agent type as a function of minimum socialization ( ω ) for networks with SORA conformists only . Points are coloured by node type and error bars represent the standard deviation . We use an x - axis jitter for visualization purposes only , distinguishing between adjacent values of ω with grey / white shading . Note that this normalization corrects for the numbers of agent of each type , such that the conformists and non - conformists are directly comparable . r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 20 : 20230077 9 right of this peak . Policies intended to reduce infection risk may be counterproductive in communities with high levels of ‘ minimum socialization ’ if they do not account for this . We show that structural network properties combined with behavioural dynamics can put seemingly poorly con - nected individuals into critical transmission catalyst roles that connect otherwise disconnected communities . Conse - quently , policy - based and socially driven community norms designed to protect people may cause individuals whose beliefs are not well - represented to change their behaviour to compensate , linking between communities , acting as trans - mission catalysts , and therefore putting others at risk . Without public health policies backed by strict enforcement on a population - wide scale ( as have been imposed in some cases [ 48 , 49 ] ) , policies will have to focus on individual decision making and the belief and value systems that motiv - ate it . Community appeals and outreach efforts may have to be nuanced , or there may even be no practical meaningful way to prevent these sorts of connections from being made . At that point , it will probably come down to analyses of surge capacity and the timing of access to medical care as to whether implementing policies that delay , but not prevent , widespread community transmission will be beneficial to implement . These are not easy questions to answer — it may be that decreasing minimum socialization both effectively decreases the total number of infections while also creating new superspreaders who would otherwise have been unre - markable contributors . Shifting who is likely to be infected may also be a critical component of planning , especially if non - conformists in some communities are likely to be more medically vulnerable , as is sometimes the case ( e . g . [ 50 ] ) . Additionally , understanding the source of superspreaders or transmission catalysts and which contexts are most likely to create them allows more targeted interventions , targeted to mitigate their impact on an epidemic . Our results do not provide generalizable answers , but instead provide a general - izable framework by which to realize we should be asking these types of questions . 4 . 1 . Limitations There are some limitations in our study design that restrict its direct applicability to real - world scenarios without additional refinement . By necessity we fix many model parameters rather than investigating its behaviour over a broad par - ameter space . In particular , we consider a specific type of network with a fixed proportion of non - conformists with fixed social and epidemiological parameters . We selected this network structure because of the ubiquity of community structure in human societies and the potential importance of social ‘ bridges ’ between communities in these types of net - work . While we chose most of these specific values in part to preserve continuity from our previous work [ 24 ] , and we expect our results to generalize outside these parameters , identifying the range of network structures over which our conclusions generalize requires further investigation . 4000 2000 G l ob a l A tt r i bu ti on C o mm un it y A tt r i bu ti on 0 0 0 . 15 0 . 30 0 0 . 15 0 . 30 – 500 4000 2000 0 – 500 AS SO RA RT ω ( a ) ( b ) Figure 7 . The mean Global ( a ) and Community ( b ) Attribution for each non - conformist type as a function of minimum socialization ( ω ) for networks with SORA conformists only . Points are coloured by node type and error bars represent the standard deviation . We use an x - axis jitter for visualization purposes only , dis - tinguishing between adjacent values of ω with grey / white shading . r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 20 : 20230077 10 We also note that step 3 of the community structure causes non - conformists to have on average one more connec - tion than conformists . We do not think this has a meaningful impact on our results because infection risk is driven largely by total socialization rather than number of connections , and the increased infections apply equally to all non - conformists at all levels of ω so cannot explain differences between them . However , it is a potential contributor to some of the results we observe . Additionally , each of our measures of attribution have potential weaknesses . For example , Direct Attribution fails to capture the indirect effects of an individual as infections propagate further from them in the network and Epidemic Attribution assigns all credit to the originator of a somewhat arbitrarily defined ‘ event ’ incorporating a definitional restric - tion that once an outbreak is ongoing , a new one cannot be initiated ( a limitation if reinvigoration of outbreaks that would otherwise die out is important ) . Global and Commu - nity Attribution are more difficult to generalize to other features in alternative epidemiological models as they measure the effect of a change in parameters in a single indi - vidual . Further , they are impossible to measure in real - world systems since they rely on counterfactual variations of the same network . However , by measuring the importance of individuals within the population using four different measurements that do not share the same issues , we mitigate these limitations of each individual measure . 5 . Conclusion Our model highlights how mismatches between opportunities for social contact within a community can lead individuals who might otherwise not be described as superspreaders to act as critical connection pathways of transmission among communities . Researchers and policy makers should be aware of the potential for changes in socialization rates to incentivize some individuals to broaden their network of social partners and thus become superspreaders when previously they were not . Even this simplified model demon - strates how policies that may fail to include explicit consideration of the actions of such individuals ( whether by preference or pragmatic requirement ) might compromise the success of recommendations that consider only a ‘ population average ’ description of population - and community - level structure . Our results show that incorporating underlying motivations that cause these individuals to depart from the expected ‘ conformist ’ behaviours can drastically alter emer - gent network structure and consequently outbreak dynamics for an entire population . More effectively including these behavioural motivations will , therefore , be critical when con - sidering or benchmarking policies that rely on individual behaviours to create ( or adhere to ) community standards of practice . Ethics . This work did not require ethical approval from a human subject or animal welfare committee . Data accessibility . All data used in this paper was generated by an ori - ginal model , which can be accessed from the GitHub repository : https : / / github . com / kazarraha / SocDistModel . The data are provided in electronic supplementary material [ 51 ] . Authors ’ contributions . M . J . Y . : conceptualization , formal analysis , investi - gation , methodology , software , validation , visualization , writing — original draft , writing — review and editing ; M . J . S . : conceptualization , investigation , methodology , validation , writing — review and editing ; A . J . P . : conceptualization , investigation , methodology , validation , writing — review and editing ; N . H . F . : conceptualization , funding acquisition , investigation , methodology , project administration , supervision , validation , writing — original draft , writing — review and editing . All authors gave final approval for publication and agreed to be held accountable for the work performed therein . Conflict of interest declaration . We declare we have no competing interests . Funding . This work was supported by NSF DEB 2028710 . M . J . S . received funding from the European Union ’ s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska - Curie grant agreement no . 101023948 . References 1 . Lofgren ET et al . 2014 Mathematical models : a key tool for outbreak response . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 18 095 – 18 096 . ( doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1421551111 ) 2 . Morgan O . 2019 How decision makers can use quantitative approaches to guide outbreak responses . Phil . Trans . R . Soc . B 374 , 20180365 . ( doi : 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2018 . 0365 ) 3 . Kemper JT . 1980 On the identification of superspreaders for infectious disease . Math . Biosci . 48 , 111 – 127 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / 0025 - 5564 ( 80 ) 90018 - 8 ) 4 . Paull SH , Song S , McClure KM , Sackett LC , Kilpatrick AM , Johnson PTJ . 2012 From superspreaders to disease hotspots : linking transmission across hosts and space . Front . Ecol . Environ . 10 , 75 – 82 . ( doi : 10 . 1890 / 110111 ) 5 . Edholm CJ , Emerenini BO , Murillo AL , Saucedo O , Shakiba N , Wang X , Allen LJS , Peace A . 2018 Searching for superspreaders : identifying epidemic patterns associated with superspreading events in stochastic models . In Understanding complex biological systems with mathematics ( eds A Radunskaya , R Segal , B Shtylla ) , pp . 1 – 29 . Berlin , Germany : Springer . 6 . Kirkegaard JB , Sneppen K . 2021 Superspreading quantified from bursty epidemic trajectories . Sci . Rep . 11 , 1 – 7 . 7 . Enright J , Kao RR . 2018 Epidemics on dynamic networks . Epidemics 24 , 88 – 97 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . epidem . 2018 . 04 . 003 ) 8 . Min B , Goh K - I , Vazquez A . 2011 Spreading dynamics following bursty human activity patterns . Phys . Rev . E 83 , 036102 . ( doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 83 . 036102 ) 9 . Mancastroppa M , Vezzani A , Muñoz MA , Burioni R . 2019 Burstiness in activity - driven networks and the epidemic threshold . J . Stat . Mech : Theory Exp . 2019 , 053502 . ( doi : 10 . 1088 / 1742 - 5468 / ab16c4 ) 10 . Nielsen BF , Simonsen L , Sneppen K . 2021 COVID - 19 superspreading suggests mitigation by social network modulation . Phys . Rev . Lett . 126 , 118301 . ( doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 126 . 118301 ) 11 . Gang Y , Tao Z , Jie W , Zhong - Qian F , Bing - Hong W . 2005 Epidemic spread in weighted scale - free networks . Chin . Phys . Lett . 22 , 510 . ( doi : 10 . 1088 / 0256 - 307X / 22 / 2 / 068 ) 12 . Buono C , Alvarez - Zuzek LG , Macri PA , Braunstein LA . 2014 Epidemics in partially overlapped multiplex networks . PLoS ONE 9 , e92200 . ( doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0092200 ) 13 . Garske T , Rhodes CJ . 2008 The effect of superspreading on epidemic outbreak size distributions . J . Theor . Biol . 253 , 228 – 237 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jtbi . 2008 . 02 . 038 ) 14 . David Paltiel A , Schwartz JL , Zheng A , Walensky RP . 2021 Clinical outcomes of a COVID - 19 vaccine : implementation over efficacy . Health Affairs 40 , 42 – 52 . ( doi : 10 . 1377 / hlthaff . 2020 . 02054 ) 15 . Zhang Y , Li L , Jiang Y , Huang B . 2020 Analysis of COVID - 19 prevention and control effects based on the SEITRD dynamic model and Wuhan epidemic statistics . Int . J . Environ . Res . Public Health 17 , 9309 . ( doi : 10 . 3390 / ijerph17249309 ) r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 20 : 20230077 11 16 . Galvani AP , May RM . 2005 Dimensions of superspreading . Nature 438 , 293 – 295 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / 438293a ) 17 . Fujie R , Odagaki T . 2007 Effects of superspreaders in spread of epidemic . Physica A 374 , 843 – 852 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . physa . 2006 . 08 . 050 ) 18 . Kawagoe K , Rychnovsky M , Chang S , Huber G , Miller LJ , Pnini R , Veytsman B , Yllanes D . 2021 Epidemic dynamics in inhomogeneous populations and the role of superspreaders . Phys . Rev . Res . 3 , 033283 . ( doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevResearch . 3 . 033283 ) 19 . James A , Pitchford JW , Plank MJ . 2007 An event - based model of superspreading in epidemics . Proc . R . Soc . B 274 , 741 – 747 . ( doi : 10 . 1098 / rspb . 2006 . 0219 ) 20 . Szapudi I . 2020 Heterogeneity in SIR epidemics modeling : superspreaders and herd immunity . Appl . Netw . Sci . 5 , 1 – 12 . ( doi : 10 . 1007 / s41109 - 020 - 00336 - 5 ) 21 . Duan W , Qiu X , Cao Z , Zheng X , Cui K . 2013 Heterogeneous and stochastic agent - based models for analyzing infectious diseases ’ super spreaders . IEEE Intell . Syst . 28 , 18 – 25 . ( doi : 10 . 1109 / MIS . 2013 . 29 ) 22 . Evans JC , Hodgson DJ , Boogert NJ , Silk MJ . 2021 Group size and modularity interact to shape the spread of infection and information through animal societies . Behav . Ecol . Sociobiol . 75 , 1 – 14 . ( doi : 10 . 1007 / s00265 - 021 - 03102 - 4 ) 23 . Sah P , Leu ST , Cross PC , Hudson PJ , Bansal S . 2017 Unraveling the disease consequences and mechanisms of modular structure in animal social networks . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 114 , 4165 – 4170 . ( doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1613616114 ) 24 . Young MJ , Silk MJ , Pritchard AJ , Fefferman NH . 2022 Diversity in valuing social contact and risk tolerance leading to the emergence of homophily in populations facing infectious threats . Phys . Rev . E 105 , 044315 . ( doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 105 . 044315 ) 25 . Arregui S , Aleta A , Sanz J , Moreno Y . 2018 Projecting social contact matrices to different demographic structures . PLoS Comput . Biol . 14 , e1006638 . ( doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006638 ) 26 . Leecaster M , Toth DJA , Pettey WBP , Rainey JJ , Gao H , Uzicanin A , Samore M . 2016 Estimates of social contact in a middle school based on self - report and wireless sensor data . PLoS ONE 11 , e0153690 . ( doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0153690 ) 27 . Hoang T , Coletti P , Melegaro A , Wallinga J , Grijalva CG , Edmunds JW , Beutels P , Hens N . 2019 A systematic review of social contact surveys to inform transmission models of close - contact infections . Epidemiology 30 , 723 . ( doi : 10 . 1097 / EDE . 0000000000001047 ) 28 . Rimal RN , Storey JD . 2020 Construction of meaning during a pandemic : the forgotten role of social norms . Health Commun . 35 , 1732 – 1734 . ( doi : 10 . 1080 / 10410236 . 2020 . 1838091 ) 29 . Lewis N . 2013 Priming effects of perceived norms on behavioral intention through observability . J . Appl . Soc . Psychol . 43 , E97 – E108 . ( doi : 10 . 1111 / jasp . 12038 ) 30 . Catching A , Capponi S , Yeh MT , Bianco S , Andino R . 2021 Examining the interplay between face mask usage , asymptomatic transmission , and social distancing on the spread of COVID - 19 . Sci . Rep . 11 , 1 – 11 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 021 - 94960 - 5 ) 31 . Cetrulo A , Guarascio D , Virgillito ME . 2020 The privilege of working from home at the time of social distancing . Intereconomics 55 , 142 – 147 . ( doi : 10 . 1007 / s10272 - 020 - 0891 - 3 ) 32 . Townsend AK , Hawley DM , Stephenson JF , Williams KEG . 2020 Emerging infectious disease and the challenges of social distancing in human and non - human animals . Proc . R . Soc . B 287 , 20201039 . ( doi : 10 . 1098 / rspb . 2020 . 1039 ) 33 . Krackhardt D , Stern RN . 1988 Informal networks and organizational crises : an experimental simulation . Soc . Psychol . Q . 51 , 123 – 140 . ( doi : 10 . 2307 / 2786835 ) 34 . Keeling MJ , Rohani P . 2008 Modeling infectious diseases in humans and animals , vol . 837 . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . 35 . Piraveenan M , Prokopenko M , Hossain L . 2013 Percolation centrality : quantifying graph - theoretic impact of nodes during percolation in networks . PLoS ONE 8 , e53095 . ( doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0053095 ) 36 . Gündüç S , Eryigit R . 2021 Time dependent correlations between the probability of a node being infected and its centrality measures . Physica A 563 , 125483 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . physa . 2020 . 125483 ) 37 . Chen X , Tan M , Zhao J , Yang T , Wu D , Zhao R . 2019 Identifying influential nodes in complex networks based on a spreading influence related centrality . Physica A 536 , 122481 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . physa . 2019 . 122481 ) 38 . Keeling M , Tildesley M , House T , Danon L . 2013 The mathematics of vaccination . Math . Today 49 , 40 – 43 . 39 . Anderson RM , May RM . 1991 Infectious diseases of humans : dynamics and control . Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press . 40 . McBryde ES . 2009 Network structure can play a role in vaccination thresholds and herd immunity : a simulation using a network mathematical model . Clin . Infect . Dis . 48 , 685 – 686 . ( doi : 10 . 1086 / 597012 ) 41 . Liu F , Enanoria WTA , Zipprich J , Blumberg S , Harriman K , Ackley SF , Wheaton WD , Allpress JL , Porco TC . 2015 The role of vaccination coverage , individual behaviors , and the public health response in the control of measles epidemics : an agent - based simulation for California . BMC Public Health 15 , 1 – 16 . ( doi : 10 . 1186 / s12889 - 015 - 1766 - 6 ) 42 . Feng Z , Hill AN , Smith PJ , Glasser JW . 2015 An elaboration of theory about preventing outbreaks in homogeneous populations to include heterogeneity or preferential mixing . J . Theor . Biol . 386 , 177 – 187 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jtbi . 2015 . 09 . 006 ) 43 . House T , Keeling MJ . 2011 Epidemic prediction and control in clustered populations . J . Theor . Biol . 272 , 1 – 7 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jtbi . 2010 . 12 . 009 ) 44 . Fefferman NH , Ng KL . 2007 How disease models in static networks can fail to approximate disease in dynamic networks . Phys . Rev . E 76 , 031919 . ( doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 76 . 031919 ) 45 . Caulkins JP , Grass D , Feichtinger G , Hartl RF , Kort PM , Prskawetz A , Seidl A , Wrzaczek S . 2021 The optimal lockdown intensity for COVID - 19 . J . Math . Econ . 93 , 102489 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmateco . 2021 . 102489 ) 46 . Karatayev VA , Anand M , Bauch CT . 2020 Local lockdowns outperform global lockdown on the far side of the COVID - 19 epidemic curve . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 117 , 24 575 – 24 580 . ( doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 2014385117 ) 47 . Fefferman N , Chen C - F , Bonilla G , Nelson H , Kuo C - P . 2021 How limitations in energy access , poverty , and socioeconomic disparities compromise health interventions for outbreaks in urban settings . Iscience 24 , 103389 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . isci . 2021 . 103389 ) 48 . Ren X . 2020 Pandemic and lockdown : a territorial approach to COVID - 19 in China , Italy and the United States . Eurasian Geogr . Econ . 61 , 423 – 434 . ( doi : 10 . 1080 / 15387216 . 2020 . 1762103 ) 49 . Ji T , Chen H - L , Xu J , Wu L - N , Li J - J , Chen K , Qin G . 2020 Lockdown contained the spread of 2019 novel coronavirus disease in Huangshi city , China : early epidemiological findings . Clin . Infect . Dis . 71 , 1454 – 1460 . ( doi : 10 . 1093 / cid / ciaa390 ) 50 . La Greca AM , Prinstein MJ , Fetter MD . 2001 Adolescent peer crowd affiliation : linkages with health - risk behaviors and close friendships . J . Pediatr . Psychol . 26 , 131 – 143 . ( doi : 10 . 1093 / jpepsy / 26 . 3 . 131 ) 51 . Young MJ , Silk MJ , Pritchard AJ , Fefferman NH . 2023 The interplay of social constraints and individual variation in risk tolerance in the emergence of superspreaders . Figshare . ( doi : 10 . 6084 / m9 . figshare . c . 6751396 ) r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 20 : 20230077 12