Genome - wide identification of enhancers in skeletal muscle : the role of MyoD1 Roy Blum , 1 , 2 Vasupradha Vethantham , 1 , 2 Christopher Bowman , 1 , 2 Michael Rudnicki , 3 and Brian D . Dynlacht 1 , 2 , 4 1 Department of Pathology , 2 Cancer Institute , Smilow Research Center , New York University School of Medicine , New York , New York 10016 , USA ; 3 Ottawa Hospital Research Institute , Ottawa , Ontario K1H 8L6 , Canada To identify the compendium of distal regulatory elements that govern myogenic differentiation , we generated chromatin state maps based on histone modifications and recruitment of factors that typify enhancers in myoblasts and myotubes . We found a striking concordance between the locations of these newly defined enhancers , MyoD1 - binding events , and noncoding RNA transcripts . These enhancers recruit several sequence - specific transcription factors in a spatially constrained manner around MyoD1 - binding sites . Remarkably , MyoD1 - null myoblasts show a wholesale loss of recruitment of these factors as well as diminished monomethylation of H3K4 ( H3K4me1 ) and acetylation of H3K27 ( H3K27ac ) and reduced recruitment of Set7 , an H3K4 monomethylase . Surprisingly , we found that H3K4me1 , but not H3K27ac , could be restored by re - expression of MyoD1 in MyoD1 – / – myoblasts , although re - expression of this factor in MyoD1 - null myotubes restored both histone modifications . Our studies identified a role for MyoD1 in condition - specific enhancer assembly through recruitment of transcription factors and histone - modifying enzymes that shape muscle differentiation . [ Keywords : ChIP - seq ; chromatin modifications ; epigenetics ; muscle myogenesis ; MyoD1 ; transcriptional enhancers ] Supplemental material is available for this article . Received July 24 , 2012 ; revised version accepted October 24 , 2012 . Exquisitely orchestrated gene expression programs re - sulting from the concerted interplay of regulatory ele - ments at promoters and enhancers mediate differentiation and development . Although the regulation of promoters has been studied extensively , the function of distant reg - ulatory elements remains less well understood , and it is likely that diverse mechanisms will drive enhancer func - tion . For example , enhancers could interact with pro - moters through looping ( Bulger and Groudine 2011 ) and erase Polycomb proteins and attendant trimethylation of histone H3 Lys 27 ( H3K27me3 ) from the CpG islands of associated genes ( Vernimmen et al . 2011 ) . The observation that small RNAs ( eRNAs ) and large noncoding RNAs ( ncRNAs ) are transcribed across enhancers adds another level of regulation and suggests additional modes of en - hancer function ( De Santa et al . 2010 ; Kim et al . 2010 ) . Although the function of eRNAs is currently unknown , they are thought to be distinct from long ncRNAs , which have been shown to regulate expression largely in trans ( Cabili et al . 2011 ; Guttman et al . 2011 ) . Enhancers are associated with recruitment of RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) and the histone acetyltransferase p300 as well as enrichment of several histone modifica - tions ( monomethylation of H3K4 [ H3K4me1 ] and acety - lation of H3K27 [ H3K27ac ] ) . These observations have accelerated enhancer identification and analysis , particu - larly in embryonic stem ( ES ) cells ( Heintzman et al . 2007 ; Visel et al . 2009 ; for review , see Bulger and Groudine 2011 ) . Recent studies have also begun to define enhancers as ‘‘active’’ or ‘‘poised’’ based on the combinations of chro - matin marks observed in a given state . Thus , H3K27ac and H3K4me1 at distal elements correlate with genes in an active state , whereas H3K4me1 alone or the combina - tion of this mark with H3K27me3 could dictate a poised or inactive state ( Creyghton et al . 2010 ; Rada - Iglesias et al . 2011 ) . Chromatin marks at enhancers are not static and can be dynamically regulated during differentiation . For example , H3K27me3 is replaced by H3K27ac as ES cells differentiate into neurons or as myoblasts differen - tiate into myotubes ( Asp et al . 2011 ; Rada - Iglesias et al . 2011 ) . Tissue - specific transcription factor ( TF ) binding is another hallmark of enhancers ( Creyghton et al . 2010 ) , and one prediction is that such factors will assist in the condition - specific recruitment of histone - modifying enzymes . Genome - wide analyses have identified the location of MyoD1 - binding events at promoters and intergenic re - gions in myoblasts and myotubes ( Blais et al . 2005 ; Cao et al . 2010 ) . Binding of MyoD1 appears to correlate with locally enhanced acetylation of histone H4 ( Cao et al . 4 Corresponding author E - mail brian . dynlacht @ nyumc . org Article is online at http : / / www . genesdev . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1101 / gad . 200113 . 112 . GENES & DEVELOPMENT 26 : 2763 – 2779 (cid:2) 2012 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ISSN 0890 - 9369 / 12 ; www . genesdev . org 2763 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on August 15 , 2015 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from 2010 ) . However , since MyoD1 was shown to bind consti - tutively to many sites , the extent to which these MyoD1 - binding sites contribute to deposition of active histone marks , enhancer function , and gene expression is not known . In addition , genome - wide studies have not yet revealed the mechanisms through which MyoD1 regu - lates enhancers . Here , using methods to detect enhancer signatures , we identified a compendium of regulatory elements that regulate skeletal muscle differentiation . We report a strong association between these enhancers and recruitment of MyoD1 . We found that these regula - tory elements are associated with recruitment of Pol II as well as ncRNAs . MyoD1 plays a pivotal , genome - wide role in recruiting ancillary sequence - specific factors , re - sulting in enhancer assembly and concomitant recruit - ment of histone - modifying enzymes ( p300 and Set7 ) that effect deposition of H3K4me1 and H3K27ac , marks that fail to accumulate at enhancers in MyoD (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells . We pro - pose a model in which MyoD1 acts to coordinate the precise timing of specific chromatin - associated events during myogenic differentiation . Results Genome - wide identification of active enhancers in muscle Our previous genome - wide studies allowed us to focus on differentiation - dependent changes in chromatin modifi - cations over coding regions and promoters ( Asp et al . 2011 ) . We expanded these studies by investigating epige - netic modifications at transcriptional enhancers ( Fig . 1A ) . To identify these elements genome - wide , we examined features strongly associated with distal enhancers ( namely , H3K4me1 and Pol II binding ) ( Asp et al . 2011 ) and per - formed additional chromatin immunoprecipitation ( ChIP ) combined with deep sequencing ( ChIP - seq ) experiments in C2C12 myoblasts and myotubes to map the deposition of H3K27ac and binding of p300 , which acetylates H3K27 ( Jin et al . 2011 ) . In addition , we analyzed H3K18ac , as this mark is associated with p300 activity and is known to overlap with enhancers ( Wang et al . 2008 ) . In agreement with previous studies , we showed that the occurrence of p300 and H3K27ac on gene promoters strongly correlated with gene expression in both states ( Fig . 1B ) . To identify marked genomic regions that could func - tion as constitutive or condition - specific enhancers of expression in muscle , we adopted several stringent crite - ria ( Supplemental Material ) . This analysis resulted in a group of genomic regions that was distributed nearly equally between myoblasts and myotubes ( Fig . 1C ) . Next , we selected a panel of genomic regions that were marked by combinations of enhancer marks in a condition - de - pendent manner . By employing luciferase reporter assays , we showed that each genomic region marked in myo - blasts increased basal expression in myoblasts when in - serted at a distance ( Fig . 1D ) . In contrast , none of the regions marked in myotubes augmented transcription in myoblasts , indicating condition - specific function for these putative myoblast - enhancing regions and reinforcing a correlation between the deposition of these marks and potent enhancer activity . To further confirm our ChIP - seq data , we randomly se - lected a subset of condition - specific enhancers that were associated with genes expressed in a condition - specific manner and validated each with quantitative ChIP ( qChIP ) ( Fig . 1E ; Supplemental Fig . S1A ) . To rigorously identify peaks with the hallmarks of active enhancers , we consid - ered regions that were marked by a combination of at least three enhancer - related features and classified 5 - kb regions as myoblast - or myotube - specific ( uniquely marked in the indicated condition ) and constitutive ( marked in both conditions ) enhancers ( Supplemental Fig . S1B ; Supplemen - tal Table S1 ; Supplemental Material ) . Conservation and condition specificity of enhancers In keeping with recent studies in ES cells ( Creyghton et al . 2010 ) , bone marrow cells ( De Santa et al . 2010 ) , and cortical neurons ( Kim et al . 2010 ) , we speculated that peaks associated with H3K4me1 , H3K27ac , p300 , and Pol II represent ‘‘active’’ enhancers . Since regulatory ele - ments such as enhancers are subject to purifying selection ( Siepel et al . 2005 ) , we evaluated conservation of these regions across 30 placental mammalian genomes using phastCons scoring ( Siepel et al . 2005 ) . We found that the most highly conserved elements clustered within the central regions corresponding to the sequences associ - ated with distinct combinations of at least three marks ( Fig . 2A ) . To enrich for regions with the greatest regula - tory potential , we pooled all peaks belonging to the four most highly conserved groups , and all subsequent anal - yses focused on this group of potentially active enhancers . Overall , we identified 4315 and 6313 potential enhancers in myoblasts and myotubes , respectively . Among this group , 2844 and 4826 were marked in a condition - specific manner in myoblasts and myotubes , respectively , whereas the remaining enhancers were constitutively marked in both conditions ( Fig . 1A ; Supplemental Table S1 ) . To further determine the degree of sequence conserva - tion , we compared our potential enhancers with a pub - lished set of nearly 172 , 000 noncoding sequences that are highly conserved between humans and rodents ( Prabhakar et al . 2006 ) . We found that 34 % of myoblast enhancers and 36 % of myotube enhancers overlapped conserved non - coding sequences ( CNSs ) ( Fig . 2B ; Supplemental Material ) . Association of condition - specific enhancers with CNSs was statistically significant for CNSs with cutoff values higher than a P - value # 10 (cid:2) 20 . However , no statistical sig - nificance was found when elements with an extreme degree of evolutionary conservation , mostly correspond - ing to developmental genes ( Visel et al . 2008 ) , were con - sidered . Therefore , muscle - specific enhancers are strongly conserved but not ultraconserved , consistent with other tissue - specific elements whose evolution occurs at higher rates ( Ponting 2008 ) . We performed several studies to determine whether our compendium overlapped with previously described regulatory elements . First , we took advantage of the VISTA enhancer project—a well - curated database of Blum et al . 2764 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on August 15 , 2015 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from distant - acting enhancers identified based on evolution - arily conserved noncoding sequences ( Visel et al . 2007 ) . We discovered 34 muscle enhancers that were also re - ported to be active enhancers in mice , and this correspon - dence was statistically significant when compared with random genomic sets ( Supplemental Fig . S1C ; Supple - mental Table S2 ) . In addition , consistent with reports of verified skeletal muscle enhancers , Myl1 , Myod1 , and Sgcg distal enhancers showed prominent enhancer sig - natures in myotubes ( Supplemental Fig . S1D ) . Interestingly , we found that although each of the in - dividual enhancer - related marks was equally enriched in myoblasts and myotubes , the ratio of enhancers was , on average , twofold higher in myotubes versus myoblasts Figure 1 . Genome - wide identification of muscle enhancers . ( A ) Approach used to elucidate myogenic enhancers . ( B ) ChIP - seq analyses of p300 and H3K27ac indicate strong correlations with gene expression levels . The average ChIP - seq enrichment per 50 - base - pair ( bp ) bin for the total population of genes in the four expression groups ( see the Supplemental Material ) was plotted with respect to the TSSs of coding genes . The Y - axis presents the average log2 enrichment value . ( C ) Distribution of enhancer - related peaks ( triply marked ) in myoblasts and myotubes . Peaks that satisfy the criteria for enhancer identification are depicted quantitatively as described in the Materials and Methods . ( D ) A series of putative enhancer regions were tested using a luciferase reporter assay . Genomic regions were marked by the indicated enhancer - related features . ( E ) qChIP was used to validate H3K27ac deposition at condition - specific enhancers associated with genes that were highly expressed in a condition - dependent manner . Enriched DNA was analyzed by quantitative PCR ( qPCR ) . ChIP enrichment is shown as percent of input . Error bars depict the standard error of the mean ( SEM ) derived from three independent experiments . ( MB ) Myoblasts ; ( MT ) myotubes . Role of MyoD1 in assembly of muscle enhancers GENES & DEVELOPMENT 2765 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on August 15 , 2015 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from ( Fig . 2C ) , suggesting that the concerted accumulation of multiple marks at enhancers is more tightly associated with the differentiated state . Indeed , most of the enhancers we detected were myotube - specific ( 53 % ) , whereas a smaller fraction appeared to be marked exclusively in myoblasts ( 31 % ) or constitutively throughout differentia - tion ( 16 % ) . The median distance of enhancers to the transcription start sites ( TSSs ) of their nearest associated Figure 2 . Conservation and condition specificity of muscle enhancers . ( A ) The average phastCons conservation scores per base pair were plotted 6 2 kb of the center of condition - specific triply marked peaks . The four most highly conserved and four least well - conserved groups are indicated as highly and poorly conserved , respectively . The panel of highly conserved groups refers to the following enriched combinations of marks : H3K4me1 / H3K27ac / p300 ( 3442 and 5054 ) , H3K4me1 / H3K27ac / Pol II ( 1213 and 2219 ) , H3K4me1 / p300 / Pol II ( 477 and 1051 ) , and H3K27ac / p300 / Pol II ( 333 and 932 ) , where the indicated numbers of genomic fragments are shown parenthetically for myoblasts and myotubes , respectively . ( B ) Enrichment of myoblast and myotube enhancers at CNSs . A database of noncoding genomic human – rodent conserved sequences was intersected with myoblast or myotube enhancers or 1000 random sets of sequences of similar length and composition . The fractions of myoblast and myotube enhancers ( green and red lines , respectively ) and the respective distributions of control random sequences ( cyan box plots ) overlapping annotated CNSs are presented as a ranked series ( shown from left to right ) based on the increasing degree of CNS sequence conservation ( where the smallest P - values indicate the most extreme degree of conservation ) . Muscle enhancers are associated with CNSs that are highly conserved ( left end of the graph ) , but statistical significance is lost when they are compared with sets of extremely conserved CNSs ( far right on the graph ) . ( C ) Coordinated accumulation of multiple marks at enhancers is higher in the differentiated state . Quantitation of triply marked enhancer - related peaks of the four most highly conserved groups . ( D ) Distributions of the median distance from the center of condition - specific enhancers to the TSS of their nearest associated condition - specific gene ( Student’s two - sample t - test ) . Blum et al . 2766 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on August 15 , 2015 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from known genes was ; 50 kb ( Supplemental Fig . S1E ) , consis - tent with previous reports ( Kim et al . 2010 ; Rada - Iglesias et al . 2011 ) . Since active , condition - specific enhancers are likely to amplify expression of associated genes , we linked enhancers with their nearest condition - specific genes ( expressed $ 1 . 5 - fold higher in one condition vs . the other ) and discovered that the median enhancer – promoter dis - tance for myotubes was significantly shorter ( P < 0 . 045 ) than the corresponding distance in myoblasts ( median distances were 39 . 7 kb vs . 53 kb for myotube and myoblast enhancers , respectively ) ( Fig . 2D ) . Since nearly twice as many condition - specific enhancers were identified in myo - tubes as in myoblasts , we performed a series of random sampling analyses that confirmed our original observation and ruled out the possibility that our observation was affected by the unequal number of enhancers analyzed ( Supplemental Fig . S1F ) . This observation indicates that a reduction in the distances between active enhancers and their active linked promoters may be a feature of muscle differentiation . Enhancers are associated with spatially constrained chromatin marks and gene expression We next generated chromatin state maps for condition - specific and constitutive enhancers , plotting H3K4me1 , H3K27ac , p300 , and Pol II enrichment , together with several other histone acetylation and methylation marks that we investigated previously ( Fig . 3A ; Supplemental Fig . S2A ; Asp et al . 2011 ) . We found that the four most conserved enhancer - related features ( H3K4me1 , H3K27ac , p300 , and Pol II ) had overlapping patterns , concentrating within 6 0 . 5 kb of the center of our defined enhancers . H4K12ac , H3K9ac , and H3K18ac were noticeably less focused within this region , and the latter mark contrasts strongly with H3K27ac , although both modifications are catalyzed by p300 ( Jin et al . 2011 ) . To determine whether these enhancer signatures are specific for muscle , we examined existing ChIP - seq data for enhancer - associated marks in several other mouse tissues ( Visel et al . 2009 ; De Santa et al . 2010 ; Kim et al . 2010 ; Mikkelsen et al . 2010 ) . In these tissues , we identi - fied relatively fewer marks or binding events correspond - ing with our identified muscle enhancers , and in those cases , their binding pattern was considerably more dif - fuse ( Fig . 3B ) . Interestingly , however , H3K27ac deposi - tion in murine adipocytes and preadipocytes ( Mikkelsen et al . 2010 ) concentrated near the center of muscle en - hancers and most strongly resembled the pattern in mus - cle ( Fig . 3B ) . Gene ontology ( GO ) analysis of the nearest genes linked with this common set of muscle / adipocyte enhancers pointed to an association with functional cate - gories related to both adipocyte and muscle cell function , including adipocytokine , insulin , and Wnt signaling , as well as muscle development ( Supplemental Table S3 ; Liu et al . 2010 ; Mikkelsen et al . 2010 ) . Indeed , since adipocytes and skeletal muscle cells are derived from a common precursor ( mesenchymal stem cells ( [ MSCs ] ) and fat cells share a common gene expression program or ‘‘myogenic signature’’ ( Seale et al . 2008 ) , our data suggest that these two related cell types also share a set of enhancers that may be relevant for the expression of these genes . Other studies have shown cell type specificity in the partitioning of H3K4me1 and H3K27ac ( Heintzman et al . 2007 , 2009 ) , and our data extend these findings to other enhancer - associated marks . Furthermore , our data reinforce the notion that we identified functionally relevant muscle - specific regulatory elements . Next , we clustered our condition - specific enhancers based on histone modifications and , overall , observed sim - ilar patterns in both conditions ( Fig . 3C ) . Notably , 40 % of myoblast - specific enhancers and 51 % of myotube - specific enhancers were marked by Pol II . While enhancers with Pol II were almost always marked with H3K4me1 and H3K27ac and generally bound by p300 , the majority of enhancers marked with p300 were devoid of Pol II ( Fig . 3C ) . We merged our ChIP - seq data with genome - wide ex - pression profiles of C2C12 myoblasts and myotubes ( Liu et al . 2010 ) to determine whether the appearance of en - hancer marks correlated with condition - specific changes in gene expression . First , we assigned enhancer peaks to individual genes ( ‘‘linked genes’’ ) # 20 kb from a known TSS to reduce the frequency of arbitrary annotation ( Fig . 4A ) . When compared with a control group , the set of genes associated with myoblast - specific enhancers was strongly enriched for genes that are more highly expressed in myoblasts as compared with myotubes ( Fig . 4A ) . An even stronger association was found between myotube - specific enhancers and genes that are more highly expressed in myotubes . We next clustered linked genes using GO func - tional categories ( Fig . 4B ) . Genes associated with myo - blast - specific enhancers and constitutive enhancers were primarily associated with cell cycle , cell migration , cyto - skeleton , tube development , and regulation of myofibril and sarcomere structure . Myotube - specific enhancers were associated with genes required for muscle differenti - ation , including muscle and myofibril development , as well as nitrogen metabolism . Indeed , our data suggest that all muscle regulatory factors ( MRFs ) , MyoD1 , Myog , Myf5 , and Myf6 , are under the control of myotube - specific en - hancers ( Supplemental Fig . S1D ; Asp et al . 2011 ; data not shown ) . Thus , our data indicate that condition - specific enhancers play a strong inductive role in expression of their associated genes vital to initiation and completion of myogenic differentiation ( Supplemental Table S4 ) . Noncoding transcripts are linked with muscle enhancer activity Enhancers are known to recruit Pol II , which results in transcription of short ( < 2 - kb ) eRNAs and long ncRNAs ( Creyghton et al . 2010 ; De Santa et al . 2010 ; Kim et al . 2010 ) . We found a significant association between Pol II enrichment and combinations of enhancer marks ( Fig . 3A , C ) . In addition , ; 7 % of condition - specific enhancers were trimethylated on H3K36 in a condition - specific man - ner throughout the entire enhancer region , indicative of prominent extragenic transcriptional activity that could be associated with large intervening ncRNAs ( lincRNAs ) and enhancer activity ( Fig . 3A , C ; Guttman et al . 2009 ) . Role of MyoD1 in assembly of muscle enhancers GENES & DEVELOPMENT 2767 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on August 15 , 2015 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from Figure 3 . Muscle enhancers are uniquely associated with spatially constrained chromatin marks . ( A ) Chromatin state maps of enhancer - related markers and several other histone marks within a region 6 3 kb of the center of condition - specific enhancers . Data for MyoD1 - binding events were obtained from Cao et al . ( 2010 ) . p300 - and H3K27ac - binding events ( enriched tags ) were identified using Qeseq ( Supplemental Material ) . ChIP - seq data for p300 and H3K27ac were generated in this study , and all other data were published previously ( Asp et al . 2011 ) . The number of condition - specific enhancers significantly enriched with the indicated mark is indicated in the top left corner of each map . ( B ) Correspondence between muscle enhancers and enhancers in nonmuscle tissues . Enriched binding events of enhancer - related marks obtained from several nonmuscle mouse tissues ( Visel et al . 2009 ; De Santa et al . 2010 ; Kim et al . 2010 ; Mikkelsen et al . 2010 ) corresponding to condition - specific muscle enhancers are plotted as indicated . ( C ) Clustering of MyoD1 , enhancer features , and other histone marks based on their deposition at condition - specific muscle enhancers . ( D , E ) Recruitment of p300 and Pol II to MyoD1 - bound enhancers . Recruitment of p300 ( D ) and Pol II ( E ) is significantly higher on enhancers bound by MyoD1 ( two - proportion z - test ) . ( F ) Enrichment of condition - specific enhancers with transcribed ncRNAs deduced from RNA - seq ( Trapnell et al . 2010 ) . ncRNAs were overlapped with condition - specific enhancers or random data sets ( Supplemental Material ) . The fractions of condition - specific enhancer and the respective distributions of random , control sequences ( cyan box plots ) overlapping ncRNAs are presented . ( G ) Coincidence of ncRNAs with enhancers is significantly higher on MyoD1 - bound enhancers . Blum et al . 2768 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on August 15 , 2015 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from Figure 4 . Correlation between assembly of condition - specific enhancers and levels of transcripts of associated protein - coding genes . ( A ) Condition - specific enhancers ( top panel ) and constitutive enhancers , along with random genomic regions ( bottom panel ) , are shown . Observed ( Obs ) and expected ( Exp ) fractions for each group of genes ( highly expressed in myoblasts , highly expressed in myotubes , and constitutively expressed ) are shown together with their respective P - values , as calculated using a x 2 statistical test . Asterisks indicate statistical significance as compared with expected fractions ( P - values < 0 . 05 ) . Expected fractions were calculated for each of the four examined data sets on the basis of the relative frequency of each group of associated genes ( located at a distance # 20 kb from a known TSS ) with respect to all genes associated with the tested data set . Observed frequencies were determined by quantifying the entire list of genes represented by the microarray based on the three gene categories . ( B ) GO categories for genes associated ( located at a distance # 20 kb from a known TSS ) with condition - specific and constitutive enhancers . GO categories with P - values < 0 . 05 are shown . GENES & DEVELOPMENT 2769 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on August 15 , 2015 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from To further investigate whether muscle enhancers co - incide with ncRNA , we merged our enhancer compen - dium with transcriptome profiling ( RNA - seq ) data for C2C12 cells before and after differentiation ( Trapnell et al . 2010 ) and filtered out transcripts with coding potential ( Supplemental Material ) . Association of condition - specific enhancers with myoblast and myotube ncRNAs was statistically significant and more than twofold enriched compared with random genomic sets ( Fig . 3F ; Supplemen - tal Table S5 ) . Strikingly , these results indicated that ; 10 % of condition - specific muscle enhancers are characterized by sites of active , noncoding transcription , consistent with a previous report linking enhancers with overlapping ncRNAs in a variety of cell types ( Fig . 3F ; Supplemental Table S5 ; Cabili et al . 2011 ) . Importantly , we confirmed the expression of several ncRNAs that overlapped with our condition - specific enhancers ( Fig . 5F ) . Approximately 60 % of condition - specific enhancers that overlapped with tran - scribed regions ( based on RNA - seq ) displayed significant levels of Pol II recruitment . Notably , genes associated with these transcriptionally active myoblast enhancer regions were enriched for GO categories related to muscle forma - tion ( including positive regulation of growth and myofibril and skeletal muscle development clusters ) ( data not shown ) . Several key regulators , such as Msx1 , Pax7 , Fgfrl1 , and Six1 , which are transcribed in myoblasts ( Liu et al . 2010 ) , were among these genes . Similarly , genes associated with transcriptionally active myotube enhancers such as Tnnt2 , Myod1 , Neb , and Myog are linked to muscle - related functions , including sarcomere organization , mus - cle cell differentiation , and cell morphogenesis . Although we cannot rule out the possibility of limited coding po - tential of some of the ncRNAs analyzed here , our studies indicate that we identified a substantial group of muscle enhancers associated with noncoding transcripts . Enrichment of TFs on muscle enhancers One prediction is that active muscle enhancers should be enriched for TF - binding sites ( TFBSs ) associated with fac - tors required for the execution of muscle differentiation programs , such as MyoD1 and Mef2c , since it is known that co - occupancy by multiple TFs can assist in the as - sembly of active tissue - specific enhancers . We used the CLOVER algorithm ( Frith et al . 2004 ) to examine which TFBS ( represented by position weight matrices [ PWMs ] ) are enriched in our collection of condition - specific en - hancers ( Supplemental Material ; Supplemental Table S6 ) . We found that the majority of TF motifs were signifi - cantly clustered within a 1 - kb region centered around the middle of the enhancers , supporting the notion that en - hancers could be assembled within constrained genomic regions bound by specific sets of TFs . MyoD1 and related E - box - binding motifs were significantly enriched within this restricted 1 - kb window ( Supplemental Table S6 ) . Indeed , 46 % of myoblast - specific and 80 % of myotube - specific enhancers exhibited enrichment for MyoD1 PWMs within this window . In addition , a consensus MEF2A - binding motif was enriched in ; 27 % of myoblast - and myotube - specific enhancers . An alternative MEF2A - binding motif recently identified in cardiomyocytes ( He et al . 2011 ) was exclusively enriched in myotube - specific enhancers ( Sup - plemental Fig . S2B ; Supplemental Table S6 ) . Our analyses further implicated binding by several TFs with roles in myogenesis . For example , myoblast - specific enhancers were exclusively enriched with Pbx1 and p53 ( Supplemental Fig . S2B ; Supplemental Table S6 ) . Myo - tube - specific enhancers were exclusively enriched with PPAR g and c - Myb ( Supplemental Fig . S2B ; Supplemental Table S6 ) . Other TFs previously implicated in the regula - tion of myogenesis , such as RP58 , Runx , and Jdp2 , were predicted to bind muscle enhancers in both conditions . Our results suggest that these TFs could execute their function through direct binding to muscle enhancers . MyoD1 recruitment to muscle enhancers MyoD1 is known to play a key role in myogenesis , and genome - wide studies have revealed binding events in promoters as well as intergenic regions in myoblasts and myotubes ( Blais et al . 2005 ; Cao et al . 2010 ) . MyoD1 binding is generally associated with gene activation ( Cao et al . 2006 ) . We therefore took advantage of experimen - tally determined MyoD1 - binding sites ( 23 , 271 and 25 , 956 in C2C12 myoblasts and myotubes , respectively ) estab - lished through genome - wide ChIP - seq analysis ( Cao et al . 2010 ) and found that ; 20 % of our predicted MyoD1 - binding sites were occupied by MyoD1 . This finding suggests that additional sequence - specific factors and / or the chromatin environment , dictated by histone modifi - cations described here ( and possibly others ) , play an important role in MyoD1 recruitment at enhancers . To explore a role for MyoD1 at enhancers , we used these previously published MyoD1 ChIP - seq data and confirmed condition - specific binding to a subset of our muscle enhancers ( Supplemental Fig . S2C ) . To determine whether genome - wide correlations exist between MyoD1 binding , a given set of chromatin modifications , factor recruitment , and acquisition of an active enhancer state , we merged the experimentally determined MyoD1 - binding events with our data ( Fig . 3C ) . We found that MyoD1 was recruited to 27 % of myoblast - specific and 31 % of myotube - specific enhancers ( Fig . 3C ) , and , remarkably , the binding of this factor was concentrated very close to the center of these enhancers ( Fig . 3A ) . Among 855 myoblast - specific en - hancers that were bound by MyoD1 in either condition , the majority was bound exclusively in myoblasts ( 31 % ) or in both myoblasts and myotubes ( 60 % ) ( Supplemental Fig . S2D ) . Thus , in myoblasts , the presence of MyoD1 was highly correlated with assembly of enhancers . Similarly , MyoD1 binding was also strongly correlated with assem - bly of myotube enhancers , since the majority of enhancers bound this TF in either myotubes specifically ( 28 % ) or both myoblasts and myotubes ( 57 % ) ( Supplemental Fig . S2D ) . Given the striking overlap between MyoD1 and muscle enhancers , we focused the remainder of our studies on MyoD1 - mediated regulation of these enhancers . Genes linked to upstream MyoD1 - bound enhancers included Mef2c , MyoD1 , Myl2 , Myog , Msx1 , and other key regulators of skeletal muscle development and sarcomere 2770 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Blum et al . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on August 15 , 2015 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from formation ( Supplemental Fig . S2D ) . Interestingly , 15 % of myotube - specific enhancers were bound by MyoD1 exclu - sively in myoblasts , suggesting that assembly of a specific set of myotube enhancers might be suppressed by MyoD1 prior to differentiation and that enhancers could be acti - vated during differentiation upon MyoD1 removal . Alterna - tively , MyoD1 may be required to be present in myoblasts to ‘‘prime’’ these enhancers for complex assembly during the initial stages of differentiation ( Supplemental Fig . S2D ) . We found that ; 90 % of condition - specific enhancers bound by MyoD1 were co - occupied with p300 , in agree - ment with the known biochemical interactions between p300 and MyoD1 ( Fig . 3C , D ; Yuan et al . 1996 ) . Among myotube - specific ( but not myoblast - specific ) enhancers , the fraction of MyoD1 - bound enhancers co - occupied by p300 was significantly higher ( P < 3 3 10 (cid:2) 6 , by two - proportion z - test ) than the fraction of enhancers without MyoD1 that were bound by p300 ( Fig . 3D ) , suggesting that MyoD1 might play a more important role in p300 recruitment during differentiation . In addition , and con - sistent with a role for MyoD1 in promoting Pol II en - gagement at promoters of skeletal muscle genes ( Cao et al . 2006 ) , we found that 47 % of myoblast - specific and 55 % of myotube - specific enhancers that were bound by MyoD1 were co - occupied by Pol II ( Fig . 3E ) . MyoD1 bind - ing significantly increased Pol II recruitment at enhancers ( by 24 % and 9 % in myoblasts and myotubes , respectively ) as compared with enhancers that were not bound by MyoD1 ( Fig . 3E ) . However , overall , the majority of Pol II - bound enhancers was not bound by MyoD1 , suggesting that recruitment of Pol II to muscle enhancers may be largely mediated through MyoD1 - independent mecha - nisms . Taken together , these analyses point toward a com - pelling association between MyoD1 binding and recruit - ment of p300 and Pol II to muscle enhancers and suggest an important and widespread role for this MRF in pro - moting deposition of these factors . A functional role for MyoD1 recruitment to enhancers In the embryo , MyoD1 is expressed in myoblasts , which are committed to the myogenic lineage ( Sassoon et al . 1989 ) . Muscle development is not abolished in mice lacking MyoD1 , likely due to functional compensation by another MRF , Myf5 , which is strongly up - regulated in null animals ( Rudnicki et al . 1992 ) . Nevertheless , MyoD1 knockout ( MyoD1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) ) animals exhibit marked differenti - ation defects , including significant delays in the expression of muscle - specific genes , such as myogenin ( Megeney et al . 1996 ) . Therefore , we investigated the effects of MyoD1 ablation on the assembly of muscle enhancers . We isolated primary myoblasts from wild - type and MyoD1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice ( Rudnicki et al . 1992 ) and confirmed that MyoD1 was depleted from a subset of enhancers in null myoblasts ( Supplemental Fig . S2E ) . Next , we assessed the impact of MyoD1 depletion on the acquisition of enhancer signa - tures by examining deposition of H3K4me1 , H3K27ac , Pol II , and p300 ( Fig . 5A – D ) at selected myoblast - specific enhancers bound by MyoD1 . Interestingly , we detected striking reductions in each of these marks at the MyoD1 - bound enhancers . In sharp contrast , enrichment was not altered at any enhancers that were not bound by MyoD1 . These controls indicate that diminution of each histone mark and recruitment of Pol II and p300 was a direct result of MyoD1 ablation and strongly suggest that MyoD1 plays a prominent role in the acquisition of an enhancer state ( Fig . 5A – D ) . Furthermore , we analyzed expression of a group of protein - coding genes closest to myoblast - specific enhancers that recruited MyoD1 . Importantly , we found that ex - pression of several associated genes was significantly re - duced in the absence of MyoD1 as compared with wild - type myoblasts ( Fig . 5E ) . Furthermore , we discovered that MyoD1 binding significantly increased the frequency with which condition - specific enhancers coincided with ncRNA transcripts ( by 41 % and 67 % in myoblasts and myotubes ) as compared with enhancers that were not bound by MyoD1 ( Fig . 3G ) . We therefore examined the impact of MyoD1 loss on the transcription of ncRNAs that coincided with muscle enhancer regions . To this end , we used RT – PCR to measure expression of several ncRNAs in wild - type and MyoD1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) primary myoblasts ( Fig . 5F ) . Interestingly , we found that in the majority of cases , expression of these ncRNAs was significantly al - tered in cells lacking MyoD1 . In contrast , we found that the expression of ncRNAs transcribed from enhancers that did not bind MyoD1 was not affected in MyoD1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) myoblasts ( Fig . 5F ) . We conclude that MyoD1 acts ( 1 ) lo - cally to direct expression of ncRNAs at enhancers and ( 2 ) at a distance to drive expression of linked , downstream protein - coding genes . MyoD1 is mechanistically linked to recruitment of Set7 , an H3K4 monomethylase Next , we sought to elucidate the mechanisms responsible for MyoD1 - dependent assembly of enhancers . First , given the accumulation of H3K4me1 at enhancers , we examined the recruitment of Set7 / Set9 , an enzyme that catalyzes H3K4 monomethylation . We used qChIP to examine the recruitment of this enzyme to a subset of our enhancers and determined whether the enzyme was recruited in a MyoD1 - dependent manner . We found that Set7 was re - cruited to a cohort of enhancers ( Fig . 5G ) . Interestingly , in MyoD1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) myoblasts , the recruitment of Set7 was signif - icantly diminished at each MyoD1 - bound enhancer but not at enhancers without MyoD1 , indicating that recruitment of Set7 to this group of enhancers depends on MyoD1 . These results are consistent with a recent study dem - onstrating direct MyoD1 / Set7 interactions on the MCK enhancer and the importance of Set7 for promoting myo - blast differentiation via regulation of H3K4me1 deposition ( Tao et al . 2011 ) . Moreover , we detected MyoD1 - independent recruitment of Set7 to enhancers , suggesting that this methyltransferase may be recruited by additional TFs . MyoD1 recruits a cohort of TFs to assemble enhancers in muscle To further investigate MyoD1 - bound enhancers , we sought to identify binding motifs that are uniquely and specifi - Role of MyoD1 in assembly of muscle enhancers GENES & DEVELOPMENT 2771 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on August 15 , 2015 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from cally overrepresented at these enhancers . We searched for TF - binding motifs enriched within a restricted window ( 6 250 bp ) around the center of MyoD1 - binding sites . Our analysis demonstrated that the predicted distributions of several TFs , including Jdp2 , Meis , c - Jun , Ascl2 , RP58 , and Runx , strikingly paralleled the experimentally identified MyoD1 - binding sites in myoblasts ( Fig . 5H ; Supplemental Material ) , although they were more broadly distributed Figure 5 . MyoD1 loss results in reduced assembly of MyoD1 - bound enhancers . ( A – D ) qChIP was performed to detect enhancer - related marks—H3K4me1 ( A ) , H3K27ac ( B ) , Pol II ( C ) , and p300 ( D ) , as indicated—on MyoD1 - bound myoblast - specific enhancers in primary MyoD1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) and wild - type myoblasts . Several myoblast - specific enhancers not bound by MyoD1 were tested as negative controls and showed insignificant alterations in the levels of all marks tested . ( E ) RT - qPCR showing the effect of MyoD1 loss on a cohort of genes that are associated with MyoD1 - bound , myoblast - specific enhancers . Data from wild - type and MyoD1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) primary myoblasts are indicated . Relative expression of each gene is plotted with respect to primary wild - type myoblasts . ( F ) MyoD1 depletion significantly alters expression of ncRNAs transcribed across myoblast - specific enhancers . RNA was obtained from wild - type and MyoD1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) primary myoblasts . Expression levels of ncRNAs coinciding with MyoD1 - bound enhancers were measured by qPCR . As a control , we measured the expression levels of several other ncRNAs that coincide with enhancers that are not bound by MyoD1 . ( G ) qChIP comparing Set7 recruitment with MyoD1 - bound enhancers and enhancers that do not bind MyoD1 . ( H ) Distributions of PWMs enriched in MyoD1 - bound myoblast - specific enhancers . For each predicted binding motif , the accumulative number of matches per 1 bp was plotted across the region ( 6 250 bp ) surrounding the center of observed MyoD1 - binding sites ( Cao et al . 2010 ) . Error bars for all qChIP and RT - qPCR data represent the standard error of the mean ( SEM ) . Blum et al . 2772 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on August 15 , 2015 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from than MyoD1 within this window . This analysis prompted us to examine whether MyoD1 - bound enhancers are indeed populated by these TFs . We initially selected a set of 20 myoblast - specific enhancers bound by MyoD1 that were predicted to recruit Jdp2 , Meis , c - Jun , and Runx , since these factors play a role in myogenesis , and per - formed qChIP experiments in C2C12 myoblasts and myotubes . As controls , we also included myotube - specific enhancers that were not enriched for the predicted signatures and genomic regions upstream of genes that were never expressed in muscle . Interestingly , we showed that each of these factors was bound specifi - cally in the vicinity of their predicted binding sites in a condition - specific manner ( Fig . 6A – D ) . In contrast , controls lacking these predicted TFBSs showed no enrichment for any factor . Furthermore , qChIP analysis using antibodies against a factor that was not predicted to bind these enhancers ( E2F4 ) confirmed the specificity of these binding events ( Fig . 6A – D ) . These findings in - dicate that our in silico approach , coupled with genome - wide ChIP - seq data , was able to accurately predict the binding of several TFs to enhancers in a condition - specific manner . The proximity of each of these factors to MyoD1 - binding sites suggested that they could be recruited cooperatively to enhancers . To test such a dependence on MyoD1 binding , we performed qChIP studies in primary wild - type and MyoD1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) myoblasts . Interest - ingly , we found that binding of c - Jun , Jdp2 , and Runx was significantly reduced in the absence of MyoD1 ( Fig . 6E – G ) , indicating that all three TFs bind to myoblast enhancers in a MyoD1 - dependent manner . Thus , MyoD1 could play a pivotal role in enhancer assembly by recruiting other key TFs with established roles in muscle growth and differentiation . Given the fre - quency with which these sites occur in our muscle en - hancers , we propose that combinations of these TFBSs could constitute new signatures for skeletal muscle enhancers . To test this assertion in a genome - wide manner , we performed ChIP - seq to identify c - Jun - binding sites in growing myoblasts , since c - Jun has been shown to phys - ically interact with MyoD1 in vivo ( Bengal et al . 1992 ) . We found that c - Jun was preferentially enriched in inter - genic regions , but , most importantly , > 37 % of our myo - blast - specific enhancers had at least one binding site for this factor . Of note , c - Jun was enriched in a striking pattern near the center of these myoblast - specific en - hancers ( Fig . 7A ) , and MyoD1 binding was linked to increased , localized enrichment of c - Jun at enhancers ( Fig . 7A , B ) . To examine whether c - Jun participates in the assembly of myoblast enhancers , we suppressed its ex - pression by transfecting C2C12 myoblasts with an siRNA pool targeting c - Jun ( Fig . 7C ) and assessed the levels of H3K4me1 and H3K27ac at selected myoblast - specific enhancers bound by c - Jun ( Fig . 7D , E ) . Notably , we detected significant reductions in the levels of these two enhancer - related histone marks at the c - Jun - bound enhancers but not at selected enhancers that were not bound by c - Jun ( Fig . 7D , E ) . Thus , our studies clearly show that c - Jun participates in the assembly of enhancers in skeletal myoblasts . MyoD1 dictates an enhancer signature The extensive overlap between MyoD1 and muscle en - hancers suggested a critical role for this factor in the as - sembly of enhancers , and our studies in primary MyoD1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) myoblasts ( Fig . 6 ) and myotubes ( data not shown ) pro - vided functional support for this conclusion . To more di - rectly test this prediction and rule out secondary conse - quences of MyoD1 loss , we performed rescue studies wherein we assessed the impact of MyoD1 re - expression on enhancer assembly in a MyoD1 - null background . Here , we stably expressed MyoD1 in primary MyoD1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) myoblasts ( Gerber et al . 1997 ) , and cells harboring the empty vector served as a control . Western blot analysis of nuclear extracts from the resulting cells indicated resto - ration of MyoD1 at levels approximating those of wild - type cells ( Fig . 8A ) . Next , we examined expression of myogenin , a MyoD1 target gene , as myoblasts reached confluence and initiated differentiation . Myogenin levels were nearly undetectable in MyoD1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) myoblasts , owing to a delay in differentiation , but were restored in cells reconstituted with MyoD1 ( Fig . 8B ) . Furthermore , null myoblasts complemented with MyoD1 proliferated and underwent differentiation in a manner indistinguishable from wild - type cells , producing myotubes that phenotyp - ically resembled their wild - type counterparts ( data not shown ) . We also examined expression of several genes associated with enhancers bound by MyoD1 ( Fig . 5E ) and found that expression of MyoD1 significantly augmented their expression , albeit to varying degrees ( Fig . 8C ; data not shown ) . Each of these criteria suggests that MyoD1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells were fully rescued through expression of MyoD1 . Next , we performed qChIP to examine the effect of MyoD1 restoration on deposition of H3K4me1 , H3K27ac , and Pol II at myoblast - specific enhancers . Remarkably , we observed significant increases in H3K4me1 deposition and Pol II recruitment in rescued cells ( Fig . 8D , E ) . Strik - ingly , however , the levels of acetylated H3K27 were not significantly altered ( Fig . 8F ) . Thus , MyoD1 re - expression restored some , but not all , hallmarks of our muscle en - hancers . To further explore this finding in myotubes , we differentiated these primary myoblasts and performed qChIP to detect H3K4me1 and H3K27ac at myotube - specific enhancers . Here , we found that deposition of both chromatin marks was significantly elevated , indicating that restoration of MyoD1 expression promoted the reas - sembly of myotube enhancers ( Fig . 8G – I ) . It is interesting to note that while H3K27ac was markedly increased at myotube - specific enhancers , the level of this mark was not augmented at myoblast - specific enhancers . These results suggest that MyoD1 expression may be required in pre - cursor cells ( which ultimately give rise to myoblasts ) to subsequently allow the correct assembly of myoblast enhancers , since germline deletion of MyoD1 in these precursor cells would abrogate recruitment of p300 and therefore reduce the acquisition of H3K27ac . In this setting , rescue of MyoD1 expression in myoblasts might Role of MyoD1 in assembly of muscle enhancers GENES & DEVELOPMENT 2773 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on August 15 , 2015 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from Figure 6 . Condition - specific and MyoD1 - dependent binding of transcription factors to MyoD1 - bound enhancers . ( A – D ) qChIP was performed to detect binding of c - Jun ( A ) , Jdp2 ( B ) , Meis ( C ) , and Runx1 ( D ) in C2C12 myoblasts and myotubes . qChIP analysis using antibodies against E2F4 confirmed the specificity of our binding events . ( E – G ) qChIP indicated that MyoD1 ablation results in reduced recruitment of c - Jun ( E ) , Jdp2 ( F ) , and Runx1 ( G ) . We included several negative controls corresponding to myotube - specific enhancers that are not enriched for the predicted binding motif and genomic regions located upstream of genes that were never expressed . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on August 15 , 2015 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from miss the appropriate window necessary for the ‘‘prepat - terning’’ of myoblast enhancers . Discussion Identification of enhancer elements in skeletal muscle Here , we identified a compendium of enhancers that function in mammalian skeletal muscle , providing a rich source of data for future discovery of enhancer - associated mechanisms . Our enhancer identification is based on several lines of evidence . First , we showed that each region is character - ized by a set of features known to be associated with enhancers . Second , we showed that distal elements with associated condition - specific signatures are linked to adja - cent genes expressed at appropriate times . Third , known Figure 7 . c - Jun loss results in reduced assembly of c - Jun - bound enhancers . ( A ) Maps of myoblast - specific enhancers that bind MyoD1 and c - Jun within 6 3 kb of the center of myoblast - specific enhancers . The number and percentage of condition - specific enhancers significantly enriched with c - Jun are indicated in the top left corner of each map . ( B ) Recruitment of c - Jun is significantly higher on MyoD1 - bound enhancers . ( C ) Western blot detection of c - Jun in whole - cell extracts prepared from growing C2C12 myoblasts 48 h after transfection with an siRNA pool targeting c - Jun or with a control , nonsilencing siRNA ( NS ) . ( D , E ) qChIP was performed to detect enhancer - related marks—H3K4me1 ( D ) and H3K27ac ( E ) , as indicated—on myoblast - specific enhancers bound by c - Jun after treatment of myoblasts with c - Jun and control siRNAs . Several myoblast - specific enhancers not bound by c - Jun were tested as negative controls and showed insignificant alterations in the levels of all marks tested . Role of MyoD1 in assembly of muscle enhancers GENES & DEVELOPMENT 2775 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on August 15 , 2015 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from Figure 8 . Exogenous MyoD1 expression restores enhancer assembly in primary MyoD1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) myoblasts . ( A ) Western blot detection of MyoD1 in nuclear extracts prepared from growing wild - type , MyoD1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) , and MyoD1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) ( rescued ) primary myoblasts that stably express exogenous MyoD1 . Sin3A is shown as a loading control . ( B ) Western blotting of nuclear extracts of confluent myoblasts indicates that myogenin expression is restored to levels comparable with those of wild - type cells . ( C ) RT - qPCR analysis of three target genes associated with myoblast - specific enhancers bound by MyoD1 . We note that each of the promoters associated with these genes was devoid of MyoD1 binding . ( D – F ) qChIP analysis was carried out to determine the impact of MyoD1 reconstitution in primary myoblasts on deposition of enhancer - related marks H3K4me1 ( D ) , Pol II ( E ) , and H3K27ac ( F ) . ( G – I ) qChIP analysis for H3K4me1 ( G ) , H3K27ac ( H ) , and Pol II ( I ) was performed to examine indicated marks on myotube - specific enhancers after MyoD1 expression . Error bars for all qChIP and RT - qPCR data represent standard error of the mean ( SEM ) . ( J ) Model in which MyoD1 acts to assemble enhancers in muscle . Interactions between MyoD1 and other factors are essential for enhancer assembly and acquisition of a transcriptionally active state . See the text for details . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on August 15 , 2015 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from enhancer regions are recovered in our data set . Fourth , we showed that MyoD1 and a cohort of TFs co - occupy these distal elements . We showed that these enhancers may function to augment transcription of thousands of protein - coding genes and identified a large number of ncRNAs that are specifically associated with these enhancers . Moreover , the ability to recreate enhancer assembly through re - expression of a key regulator , MyoD1 , offers a robust and well - defined system in which to explore the step - wise assembly of enhancers . As expected from pre - vious genome - scale studies , we found that the epigenetic signatures associated with muscle enhancers were uni - que to this tissue , although to some extent they resem - bled the pattern observed in adipocytes , in line with the fact that skeletal muscle cells and adipocytes are derived from a common MSC precursor . Interestingly , we noted that H3K27ac enrichment over the centers of putative enhancer regions was more diffuse in adipocytes than the corresponding regions in muscle , suggesting that mech - anisms that regulate its deposition and enhancer activity may differ to some extent in the two tissues . It will be interesting to obtain corresponding chromatin state maps for MSCs and satellite cells and compare those maps with the committed lineages presented here . We found evidence that many genes expressed at higher levels in myotubes were linked to associated enhancers showing constitutive modifications in both states , sug - gesting that enhancers could be ‘‘primed , ’’ awaiting ex - pression of specific transcriptional regulators later in the differentiation program . We also discovered that enhancer association with conditionally expressed genes decreased as a function of increasing distance from the TSS ( Supple - mental Fig . S1G ) . Such increased distance could impose a functional barrier that limits the ability of enhancers to transmit their signal . A looping model for enhancer func - tion has been proposed , and this observation could support the notion that short loops may have a stronger positive impact on gene transcription than longer loops ( Blackwood and Kadonaga 1998 ) . Moreover , we found that the distance between enhancers and their nearest linked genes de - creased as myoblasts differentiated into myotubes , sug - gesting that chromatin could undergo conformational changes in the differentiated state that facilitate and augment enhancer activity . It is likely that MyoD1 potentiates expression of linked protein - coding genes by binding to the promoters of these genes , in addition to exerting an enhancer assembly func - tion at a distance , as described here . Nevertheless , an analysis of linked promoters ( defined by 6 1 kb around the TSS ) showed that for genes associated with MyoD1 - bound enhancers , the majority of these linked promoters ( ; 60 % of linked promoters in either myoblasts or myo - tubes ) is not occupied by MyoD1 in vivo . Thus , in the absence of MyoD1 , the expression of these genes is likely to be altered as result of deregulation of enhancer as - sembly ( orchestrated by MyoD1 ) rather than through deregulation of promoters . In addition , many of the en - hancers that were examined in our study are linked to promoters that do not exhibit MyoD1 occupancy in vivo ( Fig . 8C ; detailed in Supplemental Table S4 ) , suggesting that expression of these genes was mediated primarily through MyoD1 binding to enhancers . We further note that in many cases where MyoD1 is recruited to both the promoter and enhancer , the signal detected at the promoter could result from looping , a mechanism as - sociated with enhancer - mediated , long - distance gene activation . A pivotal role for MyoD1 in enhancer assembly In this study , we provide new information on the role of MyoD1 in differentiation by demonstrating an unequiv - ocal role for this factor in the assembly of active en - hancers . These studies dramatically extend previous work in which MyoD1 - binding sites were discovered genome - wide ( Blais et al . 2005 ; Cao et al . 2010 ) . More recently , Soleimani et al . ( 2012 ) identified a set of MyoD1 - bound peaks , a substantial number of which were intergenic and ; 5600 of which overlapped with Cao et al . ( 2010 ) . Overall , we found that while the majority of MyoD1 - binding sites is located within gene - associated or previ - ously uncharacterized intergenic regions ( Cao et al . 2010 ) , only ; 10 % of all MyoD1 - binding sites were located within active muscle enhancers ( in both myoblasts and myo - tubes ) , suggesting that there is highly selective binding of MyoD1 to chromatin at transcriptional enhancing regions . Our experiments with C2C12 and primary skeletal muscle cells led us to several important conclusions . First , depletion of MyoD1 results in a dramatic alteration of enhancer signatures , typified by the loss of H3K4me1 and H3K27ac as well as p300 and Pol II recruitment . Second , we show that the loss of Set7 , an H3K4 mono - methylase , could explain the observed reductions in H3K4me1 in MyoD1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) cells . Third , we found that c - Jun , Jdp2 , and Runx1 were recruited to enhancer regions in a spatially constrained domain centered around MyoD1 , and , strikingly , each of these factors was recruited in a MyoD1 - dependent manner . Collectively , these data sug - gest that MyoD1 assists in the corecruitment of several sequence - specific TFs , Set7 , and p300 at enhancers ( Fig . 8J ) . As a result of Set7 and p300 recruitment , H3K4 and H3K27 are monomethylated and acetylated , respectively . Fourth , depletion of MyoD1 resulted in significant alterations in the expression of ncRNAs associated with enhancers . To our knowledge , this is the first indication that MyoD1 may stimulate expression of ncRNAs at enhancers . Fifth , we found that MyoD1 re - expression in primary MyoD1 - null myoblasts rescued some ( H3K4me1 and Pol II ) but not all ( H3K27ac ) hallmarks of these enhancers , whereas H3K27ac was also restored in myotubes . These obser - vations indicate that the timely function of MyoD1 is essential for the correct assembly of muscle enhancers . A failure to express MyoD1 within an essential period would result in inefficient recruitment of enhancer - promoting factors and incomplete assembly of condition - specific enhancers . In addition , it is likely that chromatin plasticity at enhancer regions is temporally limited and irreversibly constrained once the appropriate window for enhancer assembly has passed . Role of MyoD1 in assembly of muscle enhancers GENES & DEVELOPMENT 2777 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on August 15 , 2015 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from While further studies will be required to address this condition - dependent restoration of chromatin signatures at enhancers , this finding suggests that any ‘‘code’’ associ - ated with enhancers may need to be refined or augmented by additional factors , such as TF - binding events or other stimuli , in a condition - specific manner . Our studies set the stage for exciting future experiments aimed at dissecting the nature of muscle - specific enhancers . In addition , it has been proposed that MyoD1 deficiency results in an elevated self - renewal rate , increasing the number of precursor ( satellite ) cells and limiting progres - sion through the myogenic program ( Megeney et al . 1996 ) . In this regard , we speculate that MyoD1 could act to remodel and facilitate assembly of muscle enhancers , thereby diverting cells away from nonmuscle lineages . Our study identified the critical genomic regulatory regions that underlie the network that orchestrates the myogenic program . It will be interesting to align these loci with maps of single - nucleotide polymorphisms ( SNPs ) and mutations linked to genetic disorders of skeletal muscle , since aberrations that may occur within these newly identified myogenic enhancers could impair the regulation of target genes essential for muscle structure and function . Ultimately , our study could shed new light on pathological mechanisms initiated by misregulation of these critical regulatory regions . Materials and methods Quantitative RT - PCR , transfections , and protein detection RNA isolation , reverse transcription , and real - time quantitative PCR were performed as described ( Asp et al . 2011 ) . In each case , expression was normalized to a control gene ( Sparc ) that is in - variant throughout differentiation . All primer sequences are listed in Supplemental Table S8 . Transfections were performed in myoblasts using Lipofectamine LTX ( Invitrogen ) . Nuclear extracts were prepared as described ( Asp et al . 2009 ) , with the modification that hypotonic homogenization buffer was ad - justed to 10 mM KCl , and nuclear extraction buffer was adjusted to 0 . 42 M KCl . Antibodies , ChIP , and ChIP - seq ChIP was performed as described ( Blais et al . 2007 ) using anti - bodies listed in the Supplemental Material . ChIP experiments to detect p300 enrichment in primary myoblasts were performed by fixing cells for 5 min in 1 . 5 mM ethylene glycol - bis succinimidyl - succinate ( EGS ) and subsequent fixation in 1 % formaldehyde at room temperature for 10 min . To quantitatively measure changes in histone marks and factors , the linear range for ChIP and ChIP - seq experiments was empirically determined using serial titrations of antibody and chromatin and then plotting enrichment as a function of chromatin amount . All ChIP exper - iments were carried out using optimized antibody / chromatin ratios . ChIP - seq experiments were performed as described ( Asp et al . 2011 ) . Analysis of ChIP - seq data and enhancer identification ChIP - seq data were analyzed as described previously ( Asp et al . 2011 ) , with the modifications noted in the Supplemental Mate - rial . Enhancers were identified as described in the Supplemental Material . Acknowledgments We thank P . Asp for assistance with initial ChIP - seq experi - ments . We are grateful to the members of the Dynlacht labora - tory for advice and assistance and acknowledge the New York University Genome Technology Core . We thank V . Soleimani for critical reading of our manuscript ; M . Frith , I . Barozzi , and D . Cittaro for their assistance with CLOVER ; and R . Bonasio for help with Bowtie . This work was supported by grants to B . D . D . ( NIH CA077245 and R01GM067132 ) and NIA AG040894 to C . B . References Asp P , Acosta - Alvear D , Tsikitis M , van Oevelen C , Dynlacht BD . 2009 . E2f3b plays an essential role in myogenic differ - entiation through isoform - specific gene regulation . Genes Dev 23 : 37 – 53 . Asp P , Blum R , Vethantham V , Parisi F , Micsinai M , Cheng J , Bowman C , Kluger Y , Dynlacht BD . 2011 . Genome - wide re - modeling of the epigenetic landscape during myogenic dif - ferentiation . Proc Natl Acad Sci 108 : E149 – E158 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1102223108 . Bengal E , Ransone L , Scharfmann R , Dwarki VJ , Tapscott SJ , Weintraub H , Verma IM . 1992 . Functional antagonism between c - Jun and MyoD proteins : A direct physical associ - ation . Cell 68 : 507 – 519 . Blackwood EM , Kadonaga JT . 1998 . Going the distance : A current view of enhancer action . Science 281 : 60 – 63 . Blais A , Tsikitis M , Acosta - Alvear D , Sharan R , Kluger Y , Dynlacht BD . 2005 . An initial blueprint for myogenic differ - entiation . Genes Dev 19 : 553 – 569 . Blais A , van Oevelen CJ , Margueron R , Acosta - Alvear D , Dynlacht BD . 2007 . Retinoblastoma tumor suppressor pro - tein - dependent methylation of histone H3 lysine 27 is as - sociated with irreversible cell cycle exit . J Cell Biol 179 : 1399 – 1412 . Bulger M , Groudine M . 2011 . Functional and mechanistic diversity of distal transcription enhancers . Cell 144 : 327 – 339 . Cabili MN , Trapnell C , Goff L , Koziol M , Tazon - Vega B , Regev A , Rinn JL . 2011 . Integrative annotation of human large intergenic noncoding RNAs reveals global properties and specific subclasses . Genes Dev 25 : 1915 – 1927 . Cao Y , Kumar RM , Penn BH , Berkes CA , Kooperberg C , Boyer LA , Young RA , Tapscott SJ . 2006 . Global and gene - specific analyses show distinct roles for Myod and Myog at a common set of promoters . EMBO J 25 : 502 – 511 . Cao Y , Yao Z , Sarkar D , Lawrence M , Sanchez GJ , Parker MH , MacQuarrie KL , Davison J , Morgan MT , Ruzzo WL , et al . 2010 . Genome - wide MyoD binding in skeletal muscle cells : A potential for broad cellular reprogramming . Dev Cell 18 : 662 – 674 . Creyghton MP , Cheng AW , Welstead GG , Kooistra T , Carey BW , Steine EJ , Hanna J , Lodato MA , Frampton GM , Sharp PA , et al . 2010 . Histone H3K27ac separates active from poised enhancers and predicts developmental state . Proc Natl Acad Sci 107 : 21931 – 21936 . De Santa F , Barozzi I , Mietton F , Ghisletti S , Polletti S , Tusi BK , Muller H , Ragoussis J , Wei CL , Natoli G . 2010 . A large fraction of extragenic RNA pol II transcription sites overlap enhancers . PLoS Biol 8 : e1000384 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1000384 . Frith MC , Fu Y , Yu L , Chen JF , Hansen U , Weng Z . 2004 . Detection of functional DNA motifs via statistical over - representation . Nucleic Acids Res 32 : 1372 – 1381 . Blum et al . 2778 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on August 15 , 2015 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from Gerber AN , Klesert TR , Bergstrom DA , Tapscott SJ . 1997 . Two domains of MyoD mediate transcriptional activation of genes in repressive chromatin : A mechanism for lineage determination in myogenesis . Genes Dev 11 : 436 – 450 . Guttman M , Amit I , Garber M , French C , Lin MF , Feldser D , Huarte M , Zuk O , Carey BW , Cassady JP , et al . 2009 . Chromatin signature reveals over a thousand highly con - served large non - coding RNAs in mammals . Nature 458 : 223 – 227 . Guttman M , Donaghey J , Carey BW , Garber M , Grenier JK , Munson G , Young G , Lucas AB , Ach R , Bruhn L , et al . 2011 . lincRNAs act in the circuitry controlling pluripotency and differentiation . Nature 477 : 295 – 300 . He A , Kong SW , Ma Q , Pu WT . 2011 . Co - occupancy by multiple cardiac transcription factors identifies transcriptional en - hancers active in heart . Proc Natl Acad Sci 108 : 5632 – 5637 . Heintzman ND , Stuart RK , Hon G , Fu Y , Ching CW , Hawkins RD , Barrera LO , Van Calcar S , Qu C , Ching KA , et al . 2007 . Distinct and predictive chromatin signatures of transcrip - tional promoters and enhancers in the human genome . Nat Genet 39 : 311 – 318 . Heintzman ND , Hon GC , Hawkins RD , Kheradpour P , Stark A , Harp LF , Ye Z , Lee LK , Stuart RK , Ching CW , et al . 2009 . Histone modifications at human enhancers reflect global cell - type - specific gene expression . Nature 459 : 108 – 112 . Jin Q , Yu LR , Wang L , Zhang Z , Kasper LH , Lee JE , Wang C , Brindle PK , Dent SY , Ge K . 2011 . Distinct roles of GCN5 / PCAF - mediated H3K9ac and CBP / p300 - mediated H3K18 / 27ac in nuclear receptor transactivation . EMBO J 30 : 249 – 262 . Kim TK , Hemberg M , Gray JM , Costa AM , Bear DM , Wu J , Harmin DA , Laptewicz M , Barbara - Haley K , Kuersten S , et al . 2010 . Widespread transcription at neuronal activity - regulated enhancers . Nature 465 : 182 – 187 . Liu Y , Chu A , Chakroun I , Islam U , Blais A . 2010 . Cooperation between myogenic regulatory factors and SIX family tran - scription factors is important for myoblast differentiation . Nucleic Acids Res 38 : 6857 – 6871 . Megeney LA , Kablar B , Garrett K , Anderson JE , Rudnicki MA . 1996 . MyoD is required for myogenic stem cell function in adult skeletal muscle . Genes Dev 10 : 1173 – 1183 . Mikkelsen TS , Xu Z , Zhang X , Wang L , Gimble JM , Lander ES , Rosen ED . 2010 . Comparative epigenomic analysis of mu - rine and human adipogenesis . Cell 143 : 156 – 169 . Ponting CP . 2008 . The functional repertoires of metazoan genomes . Nat Rev Genet 9 : 689 – 698 . Prabhakar S , Poulin F , Shoukry M , Afzal V , Rubin EM , Couronne O , Pennacchio LA . 2006 . Close sequence comparisons are sufficient to identify human cis - regulatory elements . Genome Res 16 : 855 – 863 . Rada - Iglesias A , Bajpai R , Swigut T , Brugmann SA , Flynn RA , Wysocka J . 2011 . A unique chromatin signature uncovers early developmental enhancers in humans . Nature 470 : 279 – 283 . Rudnicki MA , Braun T , Hinuma S , Jaenisch R . 1992 . Inactiva - tion of MyoD in mice leads to up - regulation of the myogenic HLH gene Myf - 5 and results in apparently normal muscle development . Cell 71 : 383 – 390 . Sassoon D , Lyons G , Wright WE , Lin V , Lassar A , Weintraub H , Buckingham M . 1989 . Expression of two myogenic regula - tory factors myogenin and MyoD1 during mouse embryo - genesis . Nature 341 : 303 – 307 . Seale P , Bjork B , Yang W , Kajimura S , Chin S , Kuang S , Scime A , Devarakonda S , Conroe HM , Erdjument - Bromage H , et al . 2008 . PRDM16 controls a brown fat / skeletal muscle switch . Nature 454 : 961 – 967 . Siepel A , Bejerano G , Pedersen JS , Hinrichs AS , Hou M , Rosenbloom K , Clawson H , Spieth J , Hillier LW , Richards S , et al . 2005 . Evolutionarily conserved elements in vertebrate , insect , worm , and yeast genomes . Genome Res 15 : 1034 – 1050 . Soleimani VD , Yin H , Jahani - Asl A , Ming H , Kockx CE , van Ijcken WF , Grosveld F , Rudnicki MA . 2012 . Snail regulates MyoD binding - site occupancy to direct enhancer switching and differentiation - specific transcription in myogenesis . Mol Cell 47 : 457 – 468 . Tao Y , Neppl RL , Huang ZP , Chen J , Tang RH , Cao R , Zhang Y , Jin SW , Wang DZ . 2011 . The histone methyltransferase Set7 / 9 promotes myoblast differentiation and myofibril assembly . J Cell Biol 194 : 551 – 565 . Trapnell C , Williams BA , Pertea G , Mortazavi A , Kwan G , van Baren MJ , Salzberg SL , Wold BJ , Pachter L . 2010 . Transcript assembly and quantification by RNA - Seq reveals unanno - tated transcripts and isoform switching during cell differen - tiation . Nat Biotechnol 28 : 511 – 515 . Vernimmen D , Lynch MD , De Gobbi M , Garrick D , Sharpe JA , Sloane - Stanley JA , Smith AJ , Higgs DR . 2011 . Polycomb eviction as a new distant enhancer function . Genes Dev 25 : 1583 – 1588 . Visel A , Minovitsky S , Dubchak I , Pennacchio LA . 2007 . VISTA enhancer browser—a database of tissue - specific human en - hancers . Nucleic Acids Res 35 : D88 – D92 . doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gkl822 . Visel A , Prabhakar S , Akiyama JA , Shoukry M , Lewis KD , Holt A , Plajzer - Frick I , Afzal V , Rubin EM , Pennacchio LA . 2008 . Ultraconservation identifies a small subset of extremely con - strained developmental enhancers . Nat Genet 40 : 158 – 160 . Visel A , Blow MJ , Li Z , Zhang T , Akiyama JA , Holt A , Plajzer - Frick I , Shoukry M , Wright C , Chen F , et al . 2009 . ChIP - seq accurately predicts tissue - specific activity of enhancers . Na - ture 457 : 854 – 858 . Wang Z , Zang C , Rosenfeld JA , Schones DE , Barski A , Cuddapah S , Cui K , Roh TY , Peng W , Zhang MQ , et al . 2008 . Combi - natorial patterns of histone acetylations and methylations in the human genome . Nat Genet 40 : 897 – 903 . Yuan W , Condorelli G , Caruso M , Felsani A , Giordano A . 1996 . Human p300 protein is a coactivator for the transcription factor MyoD . J Biol Chem 271 : 9009 – 9013 . Role of MyoD1 in assembly of muscle enhancers GENES & DEVELOPMENT 2779 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on August 15 , 2015 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from 10 . 1101 / gad . 200113 . 112 Access the most recent version at doi : 2012 26 : 2763 - 2779 Genes Dev . Roy Blum , Vasupradha Vethantham , Christopher Bowman , et al . of MyoD1 Genome - wide identification of enhancers in skeletal muscle : the role Material Supplemental http : / / genesdev . cshlp . org / content / suppl / 2012 / 12 / 18 / 26 . 24 . 2763 . DC1 . html References http : / / genesdev . cshlp . org / content / 26 / 24 / 2763 . full . html # ref - list - 1 This article cites 40 articles , 19 of which can be accessed free at : Service Email Alerting click here . right corner of the article or Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the top http : / / genesdev . cshlp . org / subscriptions go to : Genes & Development To subscribe to Copyright © 2012 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on August 15 , 2015 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from