VOL . 74 , No . 4 JULY 1967 PSYCHOLOGICAL REVIEW ASSETS AND LIABILITIES IN GROUP PROBLEM SOLVING : THE NEED FOR AN INTEGRATIVE FUNCTION * NORMAN R . F . MAIER University of Michigan Research on group problem solving reveals that the group has both ad - vantages and disadvantages over individual problem solving . If the potentials for group problem solving can be exploited and if its defi - ciencies can be avoided , it follows that group problem solving can at - tain a level of proficiency not ordinarily achieved . The requirement for achieving this level of group performance seems to hinge on de - veloping a style of discussion leadership which maximizes the group ' s assets and minimizes its liabilities . Since members possess the essential ingredients for the solutions , the deficiencies that appear in group solutions reside in the processes by which group solutions de - velop . These processes can determine whether the group functions ef - fectively or ineffectively . The critical factor in a group ' s potential is organization and integration . With training , a leader can supply these functions and serve as the group ' s central nervous system , thus per - mitting the group to emerge as a Highly efficient entity . A number of investigations have hoped that a better recognition of these raised the question of whether group forces will permit clarification of the problem solving is superior , inferior , varied dimensions of the problem - solv - or equal to individual problem solving , ing process , especially in groups . Evidence can be cited in support of The forces operating in such groups each position so that the answer to include some that are assets , some that this question remains ambiguous , are liabilities , and some that can be Rather than pursue this generalized either assets or liabilities , depending approach to the question , it seems more upon the skills of the members , espe - fruitful to explore the forces that in - cially those of the discussion leader , fluence problem solving under the two Let us examine these three sets of conditions ( see reviews by Hoffman , forces . 1965 ; Kelley & Thibaut , 1954 ) . It is GROUP ASSETS 1 The research reported here was sup - . . , , ported by Grant No . MH - 02704 from the Greater Sum Total of Knowledge and United States Public Health Service . Grate - Information ful acknowledgment is made for the con - . . structive criticism of Melba Colgrove , Junie There is more information m a group Janzen , Mara Julius , and James Thurber . than in any of its members . Thus 239 240 NORMAN R . F . MAIER problems that require the utilization of knowledge should give groups an ad - vantage over individuals . Even if one member of the group ( e . g . , the leader ) knows much more than anyone else , the limited unique knowledge of lesser - in - formed individuals could serve to fill in some gaps in knowledge . For ex - ample , a skilled machinist might con - tribute to an engineer ' s problem solv - ing and an ordinary workman might supply information on how a new ma - chine might be received by workers . Greater Number of Approaches to a Problem It has been shown that individuals get into ruts in their thinking ( Duncker , 1945 ; Maier , 1930 ; Wert - heimer , 1959 ) . Many obstacles stand in the way of achieving a goal , and a solution must circumvent these . The individual is handicapped in that he tends to persist in his approach and thus fails to find another approach that might solve the problem in a simpler manner . Individuals in a group have the same failing , but the approaches in which they are persisting may be dif - ferent . For example , one researcher may try to prevent the spread of a disease by making man immune to the germ , another by finding and destroy - ing the carrier of the germ , and still another by altering the environment so as to kill the germ before it reaches man . There is no way of determining which approach will best achieve the desired goal , but undue persistence in any one will stifle new discoveries . Since group members do not have identical approaches , each can con - tribute by knocking others out of ruts in thinking . Participation in Problem Solving In - creases Acceptance Many problems require solutions that depend upon the support of others to be effective . Insofar as group problem solving permits participation and in - fluence , it follows that more individuals accept solutions when a group solves the problem than when one person solves it . When one individual solves a problem he still has the task of per - suading others . It follows , therefore , that when groups solve such problems , a greater number of persons accept and feel responsible for making the solution work . A low - quality solution that has good acceptance can be more effective than a higher - quality solution that lacks acceptance . Better Comprehension of the Decision Decisions made by an individual , which are to be carried out by others , must be communicated from the de - cision - maker to the decision - executors . Thus individual problem solving often requires an additional stage—that of relaying the decision reached . Fail - ures in this communication process de - tract from the merits of the decision and can even cause its failure or create a problem of greater magnitude than the initial problem that was solved . Many organizational problems can be traced to inadequate communication of decisions made by superiors and trans - mitted to subordinates , who have the task of implementing the decision . The chances for communication fail - ures are greatly reduced when the in - dividuals who must work together in executing the decision have participated in making it . They not only under - stand the solution because they saw it develop , but they are also aware of the several other alternatives that were considered and the reasons why they were discarded . The common assump - tion that decisions supplied by superi - ors are arbitrarily reached therefore disappears . A full knowledge of goals , obstacles , alternatives , and factual in - formation is essential to communica - ASSETS AND LIABILITIES IN GROUP PROBLEM SOLVING 241 tion , and this communication is maxi - mized when the total problem - solving process is shared . GROUP LIABILITIES Social Pressure Social pressure is a major force mak - ing for conformity . The desire to be a good group member and to be ac - cepted tends to silence disagreement and favors consensus . Majority opin - ions tend to be accepted regardless of whether or not their objective quality is logically and scientifically sound . Problems requiring solutions based upon facts , regardless of feelings and wishes , can suffer in group problem - solving situations . It has been shown ( Maier & Solem , 1952 ) that minority opinions in leader - less groups have little influence on the solution reached , even when these opin - ions are the correct ones . Reaching agreement in a group often is confused with finding the right answer , and it is for this reason that the dimensions of a decision ' s acceptance and its objec - tive quality must be distinguished ( Maier , 1963 ) . Valence of Solutions When leaderless groups ( made up of three or four persons ) engage in problem solving , they propose a variety of solutions . Each solution may re - ceive both critical and supportive com - ments , as well as descriptive and ex - plorative comments from other par - ticipants . If the number of negative and positive comments for each solu - tion are algebraically summed , each may be given a valence index ( Hoff - man & Maier , 1964 ) . The first solu - tion that receives a positive valence value of 15 tends to be adopted to the satisfaction of all participants about 85 % of the time , regardless of its qual - ity . Higher quality solutions intro - duced after the critical value for one of the solutions has been reached have little chance of achieving real consider - ation . Once some degree of consensus is reached , the jelling process seems to proceed rather rapidly . The critical valence value of 15 ap - pears not to be greatly altered by the nature of the problem or the exact size of the group . Rather , it seems to des - ignate a turning point between the idea - getting process and the decision - making process ( idea evaluation ) . A solution ' s valence index is not a meas - ure of the number of persons support - ing the solution , since a vocal minority can build up a solution ' s valence by actively pushing it . In this sense , valence becomes an influence in addi - tion to social pressure in determining an outcome . Since a solution ' s valence is inde - pendent of its objective quality , this group factor becomes an important lia - bility in group problem solving , even when the value of a decision depends upon objective criteria ( facts and logic ) . It becomes a means whereby skilled manipulators can have more influence over the group process than their proportion of membership de - serves . Individual Domination In most leaderless groups a domi - nant individual emerges and captures more than his share of influence on the outcome . He can achieve this end through a greater degree of participa - tion ( valence ) , persuasive ability , or stubborn persistence ( fatiguing the op - position ) . None of these factors is related to problem - solving ability , so that the best problem solver in the group may not have the influence to upgrade the quality of the group ' s solu - tion ( which he would have had if left to solve , the problem by himself ) . . 242 NORMAN R . F . MAIER Hoffman and Maier ( 1967 ) found that the mere fact of appointing a leader causes this person to dominate a discussion . Thus , regardless of his problem - solving ability a leader tends to exert a major influence on the out - come of a discussion . Conflicting Secondary Goal : Winning the Argument When groups are confronted with a problem , the initial goal is to obtain a solution . However , the appearance of several alternatives causes individuals to have preferences and once these emerge the desire to support a position is created . Converting those with neu - tral viewpoints and refuting those with opposed viewpoints now enters into the problem - solving process . More and more the goal becomes that of winning the decision rather than finding the best solution . This new goal is unre - lated to the quality of the problem ' s solution and therefore can result in lowering the quality of the decision ( Hoffman & Maier , 1966 ) . FACTORS THAT SERVE AS ASSETS OR LIABILITIES , DEPENDING LARGELY UPON THE SKILL OF THE DISCUSSION LEADER Disagreement The fact that discussion may lead to disagreement can serve either to create hard feelings among members or lead to a resolution of conflict and hence to an innovative solution ( Hoff - man , 1961 ; Hoffman , Harburg , & Maier , 1962 ; Hoffman & Maier , 1961 ; Maier , 1958 , 1963 ; Maier & Hoffman , 1965 ) . The first of these outcomes of disagreement is a liability , especially with regard to the acceptance of solu - tions ; while the second is an asset , par - ticularly where innovation is desired . A leader can treat disagreement as un - desirable and thereby reduce the prob - ability of both hard feelings and inno - vation , or he can maximize disagree - ment and risk hard feelings in his at - tempts to achieve innovation . The skill of a leader requires his ability to create a climate for disagreement which will permit innovation without risking hard feelings . The leader ' s perception of disagreement is one of the critical fac - tors in this skill area ( Maier & Hoff - man , 1965 ) . Others involve permis - siveness ( Maier , 1953 ) , delaying the reaching of a solution ( Maier & Hoff - man , 1960b ; Maier & Solem , 1962 ) , techniques for processing information and opinions ( Maier , 1963 ; Maier & Hoffman , 1960a ; Maier & Maier , 1957 ) , and techniques for separating idea - getting from idea - evaluation ( Ma - ier , 1960 , 1963 ; Osborn , 1953 ) . Conflicting Interests versus Mutual Interests Disagreement in discussion may take many forms . Often participants dis - agree with one another with regard to solutions , but when issues are explored one finds that these conflicting solu - tions are designed to solve different problems . Before one can rightly ex - pect agreement on a solution , there should be agreement on the nature of the problem . Even before this , there should be agreement on the goal , as well as on the various obstacles that prevent the goal from being reached . Once distinctions are made between goals , obstacles , and solutions ( which represent ways of overcoming obsta - cles ) , one finds increased opportunities for cooperative problem solving and less conflict ( Hoffman & Maier , 1959 ; Maier , 1960 , 1963 ; Maier & Solem , 1962 ; Solem , 1965 ) . Often there is also disagreement re - garding whether the objective of a solution is to achieve quality or accept - ASSETS AND LIABILITIES IN GROUP PROBLEM SOLVING 243 ance ( Maier & Hoffman , 1964b ) , and frequently a stated problem reveals a complex of separate problems , each having separate solutions so that a search for a single solution is impos - sible ( Maier , 1963 ) . Communica - tions often are inadequate because the discussion is not synchronized and each person is engaged in discussing a dif - ferent aspect . Organizing discussion to synchronize the exploration of dif - ferent aspects of the problem and to follow a systematic procedure increases solution quality ( Maier & Hoffman , 1960a ; Maier & Maier , 1957 ) . The leadership function of influencing dis - cussion procedure is quite distinct from the function of evaluating or contrib - uting ideas ( Maier , 1950 , 1953 ) . When the discussion leader aids in the separation of the several aspects of the problem - solving process and delays the solution - mindedness of the group ( Maier , 1958 , 1963 ; Maier & Solem , 1962 ) , both solution quality and ac - ceptance improve ; when he hinders or fails to facilitate the isolation of these varied processes , he risks a deteriora - tion in the group process ( Solem , 1965 ) . His skill thus determines whether a discussion drifts toward con - flicting interests or whether mutual interests are located . Cooperative problem solving can only occur after the mutual interests have been estab - lished and it is surprising how often they can be found when the discussion leader makes this his task ( Maier , 1952 , 1963 ; Maier & Hayes , 1962 ) . Risk Taking Groups are more willing than indi - viduals to reach decisions involving risks ( Wallach & Kogan , 1965 ; Wal - lach , Kogan , & Bern , 1962 ) . Taking risks is a factor in acceptance of change , but change may either repre - sent a gain or a loss . The best guard against the latter outcome seems to be primarily a matter of a decision ' s qual - ity . In a group situation this depends upon the leader ' s skill in utilizing the factors that represent group assets and avoiding those that make for liabilities . Time Requirements In genera ] , more time is required for a group to reach a decision than for a single individual to reach one . In - sofar as some problems require quick decisions , individual decisions are fav - ored . In other situations acceptance and quality are requirements , but ex - cessive time without sufficient returns also represents a loss . On the other hand , discussion can resolve conflicts , whereas reaching consensus has limited value ( Wallach & Kogan , 1965 ) . The practice of hastening a meeting can prevent full discussion , but failure to move a discussion forward can lead to boredom and fatigue - type solutions , in which members agree merely to get out of the meeting . The effective utiliza - tion of discussion tim , e ( a delicate bal - ance between permissiveness and con - trol on the part of the leader ) , therefore , is needed to make the time factor an asset rather than a liability . Unskilled leaders tend to be too concerned with reaching a solution and therefore termi - nate a discussion before the group po - tential is achieved ( Maier & Hoffman , 1960b ) . Who Changes In reaching consensus or agreement , some members of a group must change . Persuasive forces do not operate in in - dividual problem solving in the same way they operate in a group situation ; hence , the changing of someone ' s mind is not an issue . In group situations , however , who changes can be an asset or a liability . If persons with the most constructive views are induced to change 244 NORMAN R . F . MAIER the end - product suffers ; whereas if persons with the least constructive points of view change the end - product is upgraded . The leader can upgrade the quality of a decision because his position permits him to protect the person with a minority view and in - crease his opportunity to influence the majority position . This protection is a constructive factor because a minority viewpoint influences only when facts favor it ( Maier , 1950 , 1952 ; Maier & Solem , 1952 ) . The leader also plays a constructive role insofar as he can facilitate com - munications and thereby reduce mis - understandings ( Maier , 1952 ; Solem , 1965 ) . The leader has an adverse ef - fect on the end - product when he sup - presses minority views by holding a contrary position and when he uses his office to promote his own views ( Maier & Hoffman , 1960b , 1962 ; Maier & Solem , 1952 ) . In many problem - solv - ing discussions the untrained leader plays a dominant role in influencing the outcome , and when he is more resistant to changing his views than are the other participants , the quality of the outcome tends to be lowered . This negative leader - influence was demon - strated by experiments in which un - trained leaders were asked to obtain a second solution to a problem after they had obtained their first one ( Maier & Hoffman , 1960a ) . It was found that the second solution tended to be su - perior to the first . Since the dominant individual had influenced the first solu - tion , he had won his point and there - fore ceased to dominate the subsequent discussion which led to the second solution . Acceptance of a solution also increases as the leader sees disagree - ment as idea - producing rather than as a source of difficulty or trouble ( Maier & Hoffman , 1965 ) . Leaders who see some of their participants as trouble - makers obtain fewer innovative solu - tions and gain less acceptance of deci - sions made than leaders who see dis - agreeing members as persons with ideas . THE LEADER ' S ROLE FOR INTEGRATED GROUPS Two Differing Types of Group Process In observing group problem solving under various conditions it is rather easy to distinguish between cooperative problem - solving activity and persuasion or selling approaches . Problem - solv - ing activity includes searching , trying out ideas on one another , listening to understand rather than to refute , mak - ing relatively short speeches , and re - acting to differences in opinion as stimulating . The general pattern is one of rather complete participation , involvement , and interest . Persuasion activity includes the selling of opinions already formed , defending a position held , either not listening at all or listen - ing in order to be able to refute , talking dominated by a few members , unfavor - able reactions to disagreement , and a lack of involvement of some members . During problem solving the behavior observed seems to be that of members interacting as segments of a group . The interaction pattern is not between certain individual members , but with the group as a whole . Sometimes it is difficult to determine who should be credited with an idea . " It just de - veloped , " is a response often used to describe the solution reached . In con - trast , discussions involving selling or persuasive behavior seem to consist of a series of interpersonal interactions with each individual retaining his identity . Such groups do not function as integrated units but as separate in - dividuals , each with an agenda . In one situation the solution is unknown and is sought ; in the other , several solu - ASSETS AND LIABILITIES IN GROUP PROBLEM SOLVING 245 tions exist and conflict occurs because commitments have been made . The Starfish Analogy The analysis of these two group processes suggests an analogy with the behavior of the rays of a starfish un - der two conditions ; one with the nerve ring intact , the other with the nerve ring sectioned ( Hamilton , 1922 ; Moore , 1924 ; Moore & Doudoroff , 1939 ; Schneirla & Maier , 1940 ) . In the intact condition , locomotion and righting behavior reveal that the be - havior of each ray is not merely a function of local stimulation . Loco - motion and righting behavior reveal a degree of coordination and interde - pendence that is centrally controlled . However , when the nerve ring is sec - tioned , the behavior of one ray still can influence others , but internal co - ordination is lacking . For example , if one ray is stimulated , it may step for - ward , thereby exerting pressure on the sides of the other four rays . In re - sponse to these external pressures ( tactile stimulation ) , these rays show stepping responses on the stimulated side so that locomotion successfully occurs without the aid of neural co - ordination . Thus integrated behavior can occur on the basis of external con - trol . If , however , stimulation is ap - plied to opposite rays , the specimen may be " locked " for a time , and in some species the conflicting locomo - tions may divide the animal , thus de - stroying it ( Crozier , 1920 ; Moore & Doudoroff , 1939 ) . Each of the rays of the starfish can show stepping responses even when sectioned and removed from the ani - mal . Thus each may be regarded as an individual . In a starfish with a sectioned nerve ring the five rays be - come members of a group . They can successfully work together for loco - motion purposes by being controlled by the dominant ray . Thus if uni - formity of action is desired , the group of five rays can sometimes be more ef - fective than the individual ray in mov - ing the group toward a source of stim - ulation . However , if " locking " or the division of the organism occurs , the group action becomes less effective than individual action . External con - trol , through the influence of a domi - nant ray , therefore can lead to adaptive behavior for the starfish as a whole , but it can also result in a conflict that destroys the organism . Something more than external influence is needed . In the animal with an intact nerve ring , the function of the rays is coordi - nated by the nerve ring . With this type of internal organization the group is always superior to that of the indi - vidual actions . When the rays function as a part of an organized unit , rather than as a group that is physically to - gether , they become a higher type of organization—a single intact organ - ism . This is accomplished by the nerve ring , which in itself does not do the behaving . Rather , it receives and processes the data which the rays relay to it . Through this central organiza - tion , the responses of the rays become part of a larger pattern so that together they constitute a single coordinated total response rather than a group of individual responses . The Leader as the Group ' s Central Nervous System If we now examine what goes on in a discussion group we find that mem - bers can problem - solve as individuals , they can influence others by external pushes and pulls , or they can function as a group with varying degrees of unity . In order for the latter function to be maximized , however , something must be introduced to serve the func - 246 NORMAN R . F . MAIER tion of the nerve ring . In our con - ceptualization of group problem solv - ing and group decision ( Maier , 1963 ) , we see this as the function of the leader . Thus the leader does not serve as a dominant ray and produce the solution . Rather , his function is to receive information , facilitate com - munications between the individuals , relay messages , and integrate the in - coming responses so that a single uni - fied response occurs . Solutions that are the product of good group discussions often come as surprises to discussion leaders . One of these is unexpected generosity . If there is a weak member , this member is given less to do , in much the same way as an organism adapts to an in - jured limb and alters the function of other limbs to keep locomotion on course . Experimental evidence sup - ports the point that group decisions award special consideration to needy members of groups ( Hoffman & Maier , 1959 ) . Group decisions in industrial groups often give smaller assignments to the less gifted ( Maier , 1952 ) . A leader could not effectually impose such differential treatment on group members without being charged with discriminatory practices . Another unique aspect of group dis - cussion is the way fairness is resolved . In a simulated problem situation in - volving the problem of how to intro - duce a new truck into a group of drivers , the typical group solution in - volves a trading of trucks so that sev - eral or all members stand to profit . If the leader makes the decision the num - ber of persons who profit is often con - fined to one ( Maier & Hoffman , 1962 ; Maier & Zerfoss , 1952 ) . In indus - trial practice , supervisors assign a new truck to an individual member of a crew after careful evaluation of needs . This practice results in dis - satisfaction , with the charge of unfair being leveled at him . Despite these repeated attempts to do justice , super - visors in the telephone industry never hit upon the notion of a general reallo - cation of trucks , a solution that crews invariably reach when the decision is theirs to make . In experiments involving the intro - duction of change , the use of group dis - cussion tends to lead to decisions that resolve differences ( Maier , 1952 , 1953 ; Maier & Hoffman , 1961 , 1964a , 1964b ) . Such decisions tend to be different from decisions reached by individuals be - cause of the very fact that disagreement is common in group problem solving and rare in individual problem solving . The process of resolving difference in a constructive setting causes the ex - ploration of additional areas and leads to solutions that are integrative rather than compromises . Finally , group solutions tend to be tailored to fit the interests and per - sonalities of the participants ; thus group solutions to problems involving fairness , fears , face - saving , etc . , tend to vary from one group to another . An outsider cannot process these variables because they are not subject to logical treatment . If we think of the leader as serving a function in the group different from that of its membership , we might be able to create a group that can func - tion as an intact organism . For a leader , such functions as rejecting or promoting ideas according to his per - sonal needs are out of bounds . He must be receptive to information con - tributed , accept contributions without evaluating them ( posting contributions on a chalk board to keep them alive ) , summarize information to facilitate in - tegration , stimulate exploratory be - havior , create awareness of problems of one member by others , and detect when the group is ready to resolve dif - ferences and agree to a unified solution . ASSETS AND LIABILITIES IN GROUP PROBLEM SOLVING 247 Since higher organisms have more than a nerve ring and can store infor - mation , a leader might appropriately supply information , but according to our model of a leader ' s role , he must clearly distinguish between supplying information and promoting a solution . If his knowledge indicates the desir - ability of a particular solution , sharing this knowledge might lead the group to find this solution , but the solution should be the group ' s discovery . A leader ' s contributions do not receive the same treatment as those of a mem - ber of the group . Whether he likes it or not , his position is different . Ac - cording to our conception of the lead - er ' s contribution to discussion , his role not only differs in influence , but gives him an entirely different function . He is to serve much as the nerve ring in the starfish and to further refine this function so as to make it a higher type of nerve ring . This model of a leader ' s role in group process has served as a guide for many of our studies in group prob - lem solving . It is not our claim that this will lead to the best possible group function under all conditions . In shar - ing it we hope to indicate the nature of our guidelines in exploring group leadership as a function quite different and apart from group membership . Thus the model serves as a stimulant for research problems and as a guide for our analyses of leadership skills and principles . CONCLUSIONS On the basis of our analysis , it fol - lows that the comparison of the merits of group versus individual problem solving depends on the nature of the problem , the goal to be achieved ( high quality solution , highly accepted solu - tion , effective communication and un - derstanding of the solution , innovation , a quickly reached solution , or satisfac - tion ) , and the skill of the discussion leader . If liabilities inherent in groups are avoided , assets capitalized upon , and conditions that can serve either favorable or unfavorable outcomes are effectively used , it follows that groups have a potential which in many in - stances can exceed that of a superior individual functioning alone , even with respect to creativity . This goal was nicely stated by Thi - baut and Kelley ( 1961 ) when they wonder whether it may not be possible for a rather small , intimate group to establish a problem solving process that capitalizes upon the total pool of information and pro - vides for great interstimulation of ideas without any loss of innovative creativity due to social restraints [ p . 268 ] . In order to accomplish this high level of achievement , however , a leader is needed who plays a role quite different from that of the members . His role is analogous to that of the nerve ring in the starfish which permits the rays to execute a unified response . If the leader can contribute the integrative requirement , group problem solving may emerge as a unique type of group function . This type of approach to group processes places the leader in a particular role in which he must cease to contribute , avoid evaluation , and re - frain from thinking about solutions or group products . Instead he must con - centrate on the group process , listen in order to understand rather than to ap - praise or refute , assume responsibility for accurate communication between members , be sensitive to unexpressed feelings , protect minority points of view , keep the discussion moving , and develop skills in summarizing . REFERENCES CROZIER , W . J . Notes on some problems of adaptation . Biological Bulletin , 1920 , 39 , 116 - 129 . 248 NORMAN R . F . MAIER DUNCKER , K . On problem solving . Psy - chological Monographs , 1945 , 58 ( S , Whole No . 270 ) . HAMILTON , W . F . Coordination in the star - fish . III . The righting reaction as a phase of locomotion ( righting and loco - motion ) . Journal of Comparative Psy - chology , 1922 , 2 , 81 - 94 . HOFFMAN , L . R . Conditions for creative problem solving . Journal of Psychology , 1961 , 52 , 429 - 444 . HOFFMAN , L . R . Group problem solving . In L . Berkowitz ( Ed . ) , Advances in ex - perimental social psychology , Vol . 2 . New York : Academic Press , 1965 . Pp . 99 - 132 . HOFFMAN , L . R . , HARBURG , E . , & MAIER , N . R . F . Differences and disagreement as factors in creative group problem solving . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychol - ogy , 1962 , 64 , 206 - 214 . HOFFMAN , L . R . , & MAIES , N . R . F . The use of group decision to resolve a problem of fairness . Personnel Psychology , 1959 , 12 , 545 - 559 . HOFFMAN , L . R . , & MAIER , N . R . F . Qual - ity and acceptance of problem solutions by members of homogeneous and heterogene - ous groups . Journal of Abnormal and So - cial Psychology , 1961 , 62 , 401 - 407 . HOFFMAN , L . R . , & MAIER , N . R . F . Va - lence in the adoption of solutions by prob - lem - solving groups : Concept , method , and results . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 1964 , 69 , 264 - 271 . HOFFMAN , L . R . , & MAIES , N . R . F . Va - lence in the adoption of solutions by prob - lem - solving groups : II . Quality and ac - ceptance as goals of leaders and members . Unpublished manuscript , 1967 . ( Mimeo ) KELLEY , H . H . , & THIBAUT , J . W . Ex - perimental studies of group problem solv - ing and process . In G . Lindzey ( Ed . ) , Handbook of social psychology . Cam - bridge , Mass . : Addison Wesley , 1954 . Pp . 735 - 785 . MAIER , N . R . F . Reasoning in humans . I . On direction . Journal of Comparative Psychology , 1930 , 10 , 115 - 143 . MAIER , N . R . F . The quality of group de - cisions as influenced by the discussion leader . Human Relations , 1950 , 3 , 155 - 174 . MAIER , N . R . F . Principles of human rela - tions . New York : Wiley , 1952 . MAIER , N . R . F . An experimental test of the effect of training on discussion leader - ship . Human Relations , 1953 , 6 , 161 - 173 . MAIER , N . R . F . The appraisal interview . New York : Wiley , 1958 . MAIER , N . R . F . Screening solutions to up - grade quality : A new approach to problem solving under conditions of uncertainty . Journal of Psychology , 1960 , 49 , 217 - 231 . MAIER , N . R . F . Problem solving discus - sions and conferences : Leadership methods and skills . New York : McGraw - Hill , 1963 . MAIES , N . R . F . , & HAYES , J . J . Creative management . New York : Wiley , 1962 . MAIER , N . R . F . , & HOFFMAN , L . R . Using trained " developmental " discussion leaders to improve further the quality of group decisions . Journal of Applied Psychology , 1960 , 44 , 247 - 251 . ( a ) MAIER , N . R . F . , & HOFFMAN , L . R . Qual - ity of first and second solutions in group problem solving . Journal of Applied Psy - chology , 1960 , 44 , 278 - 283 . ( b ) MAIER , N . R . F . , & HOFFMAN , L . R . Or - ganization and creative problem solving . Journal of Applied Psychology , 1961 , 45 , 277 - 280 . MAIER , N . R . F . , & HOFFMAN , L . R . Group decision in England and the United States . Personnel Psychology , 1962 , 15 , 75 - 87 . MAIER , N . R . F . , & HOFFMAN , L . R . Fi - nancial incentives and group decision in motivating change . Journal of Social Psychology , 1964 , 64 , 369 - 378 . ( a ) MAIER , N . R . F . , & HOFFMAN , L . R . Types of problems confronting managers . Per - sonnel Psychology , 1964 , 17 , 261 - 269 . ( b ) MAIER , N . R . F . , & HOFFMAN , L . R . Ac - ceptance and quality of solutions as re - lated to leaders ' attitudes toward disagree - ment in group problem solving . Journal of Applied Behavioral Science , 1965 , 1 , 373 - 386 . MAIER , N . R . F . , & MAIER , R . A . An ex - perimental test of the effects of " develop - mental " vs . " free " discussions on the qual - ity of group decisions . Journal of Applied Psychology , 1957 , 41 , 320 - 323 . MAIER , N . R . F . , & SOLEM , A . R . The con - tribution of a discussion leader to the qual - ity of group thinking : The effective use of minority opinions . Human Relations , 1952 , 5 , 277 - 288 . MAIER , N . R . F . , & SOLEM , A . R . Improv - ing solutions by turning choice situations into problems . Personnel Psychology , 1962 , 15 , 151 - 157 . MAIER , N . R . F . , & ZERFOSS , L . F . MRP : A technique for training large groups of supervisors and its potential use in social research . Human Relations , 1952 , 5 , 177 - 186 . ASSETS AND LIABILITIES IN GROUP PROBLEM SOLVING 249 MOORE , A . R . The nervous mechanism of coordination in the crinoid Antedon rosa - ceus . Journal of Genetic Psychology , 1924 , 6 , 281 - 288 . MOORE , A . R . , & DOUDOROFF , M . Injury , re - covery and function in an aganglionic cen - tral nervous system . Journal of Com - parative Psychology , 1939 , 28 , 313 - 328 . OSBORN , A . F . Applied imagination . New York : Scribner ' s , 1953 . SCHNEIRLA , T . C . , & MAIER , N . R . F . Con - cerning the status of the starfish . Journal of Comparative Psychology , 1940 , 30 , 103 - 110 . SOLEM , A . R . 1965 : Almost anything I can do , we can do better . Personnel Admin - istration , 1965 , 28 , 6 - 16 . THIBAUT , J . W . , & KELLEY , H . H . The social psychology of groups . New York : Wiley , 1961 . WALLACE , M . A . , & KOGAN , N . The roles of information , discussion and concensus in group risk taking . Journal of Experi - mental and Social Psychology , 1965 , 1 , 1 - 19 . WALLACE , M . A . , KOGAN , N . , & BEM , D . J . Group influence on individual risk taking . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychol - ogy , 1962 , 65 , 75 - 86 . WERTHEIMER , M . Productive thinking . New York : Harper , 1959 . ( Received October 24 , 1966 )