Organization Science Vol . 24 , No . 2 , March – April 2013 , pp . 356 – 377 ISSN 1047 - 7039 ( print ) (cid:151) ISSN 1526 - 5455 ( online ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1120 . 0745 ©2013 INFORMS Seizing Opportunity in Emerging Fields : How Institutional Entrepreneurs Legitimated the Professional Form of Management Consulting Robert J . David Desautels Faculty of Management , McGill University , Montreal , Quebec H3A 1G5 , Canada , robert . david @ mcgill . ca Wesley D . Sine Johnson Graduate School of Management , Cornell University , Ithaca , New York 14850 , wds4 @ cornell . edu Heather A . Haveman Department of Sociology and Haas School of Business , University of California , Berkeley , Berkeley , California 94720 , haveman @ berkeley . edu W e draw on the early history of the management consulting ﬁeld to build theory about how institutional entrepreneurs legitimate new kinds of organizations in emerging ﬁelds . We study the professional form of management consulting organization , which came to dominate other alternatives . Pioneers of this organizational form seized opportunities arising from broad institutional change to discredit the status quo and legitimate their model of how to advise organizations on strategic and operational issues . Similar to institutional entrepreneurs seeking to change mature ﬁelds , those in this emerging ﬁeld engaged in theorization , undertook collective action , and established afﬁliations with recognized authorities and elites . But unlike institutional entrepreneurs in mature ﬁelds , the actors we studied could not leverage logics , positions , or collectivities within their emerging ﬁeld ; instead , they drew on logics from outside their ﬁeld , sought afﬁliations with external authorities and elites , and emphasized the beneﬁts of their activities for society at large . Our analysis thus suggests important differences in how actors legitimate novel organizational forms in emerging versus mature ﬁelds and underscores the need for theories of institutional entrepreneurship that explicitly account for ﬁeld context . Key words : organizational forms ; institutional entrepreneurs ; emerging ﬁelds ; management consulting History : Published online in Articles in Advance April 27 , 2012 . Introduction New organizational forms—those that are underpinned by novel logics , that project new social identities , and that carve out new roles in exchange networks—are important carriers of social change and are thus of great interest to organizational scholars . New organizational forms are a source of diversity : as existing forms disap - pear and new ones emerge , the variety of organizations in society is replenished and expanded ( Schumpeter 1942 , Stinchcombe 1965 ) . This can result in consider - able social impact in the form of new products , ser - vices , occupations , and careers . Because they are novel combinations of cultural materials , new organizational forms ultimately represent an important form of cultural change ( Rao 1998 ) . Although scholars have accumulated considerable understanding of the conditions required for new organizational forms to arise and take hold ( e . g . , Ruef 2000 , Seo and Creed 2002 ) , the actions of those who found and promote new organizational forms has received less attention . Therefore , we focus in this paper on how the pioneers of new organizational forms seek to legitimate their social innovations . The study of new form emergence has received con - siderable attention from institutional theorists . These scholars have increasingly attended to “institutional entrepreneurs”—actors who use social skill to over - come skepticism and persuade others to believe the accounts they advance about the beneﬁts of their inno - vations ( DiMaggio 1988 , 1991 ; Fligstein 2001 ) . Much knowledge has accumulated about how actors in estab - lished ﬁelds legitimate new organizational forms as well as how they promote new suborganizational struc - tures , practices , and roles ( e . g . , Greenwood et al . 2002 , Reay et al . 2006 , Zietsma and Lawrence 2010 ) . Schol - ars have also studied how institutional entrepreneurs spur the development of new ﬁelds by promoting new practices within established organizations ( e . g . , Maguire et al . 2004 , Powell et al . 2005 ) . This body of work has breathed new life into institutional analysis by focus - ing attention on institutional entrepreneurs as purpo - sive and self - interested actors , thus answering calls from both institutionalists and their critics for more atten - tion to issues of power and agency ( Perrow 1985 , DiMaggio and Powell 1991 , Abbott 1992 , Stinchcombe 1997 ) . Despite this progress , however , we know far less 356 David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS 357 about how institutional entrepreneurs manage to legiti - mate entirely new kinds of organizations in new ﬁelds ( Dacin et al . 2002 , Perkmann and Spicer 2007 , Tracey et al . 2011 ) . Moreover , whereas much prior research has examined the characteristics of , and the conditions that produce , institutional entrepreneurs , much less prevalent are “detailed descriptions of precisely what it is that institutional entrepreneurs do” ( Lawrence and Suddaby 2006 , p . 220 ) . Accordingly , we ask , how do institutional entrepreneurs legitimate new kinds of organizations in emerging ﬁelds ? Our emphasis on a speciﬁc kind of institutional entrepreneurship within a speciﬁc ﬁeld context helps us make three related contributions to scholarship . First , it allows us to build middle - range theory—a collec - tion of logically interrelated propositions that deals with a clearly bounded aspect of social life ( Merton 1968b ) . Rather than a general theory of institutional entrepreneurship , we develop propositions about insti - tutional entrepreneurship taken by the founders of new organizational forms in emerging ﬁelds . Such midrange theories are readily amenable to empirical conﬁrmation or disconﬁrmation . Second , we develop theory about how the actions of institutional entrepreneurs differ according to contextual factors : the level of maturity of the ﬁeld ( emerging versus established ) and the type of innovation being promoted ( a suborganizational ele - ment versus an entire organizational form ) ( Low and Abrahamson 1997 , Aldrich and Ruef 2006 , Fligstein 2001 , Tracey et al . 2011 ) . Third , we demonstrate the need to take history seriously and show how to connect history with social theory ( Kieser 1994 , Stryker 1996 , Jones and Khanna 2006 ) . Our focus on a speciﬁc context and time period and our development of middle - range theory will , we hope , spur others who study institutional entrepreneurship ( and institutional change more broadly ) to develop more clearly delimited and disconﬁrmable theories . We base our theory - building efforts on an analysis of the early management consulting ﬁeld . Management consulting ﬁrms advise managers on strategy and oper - ations , with the goal of improving performance . Such ﬁrms are widely recognized and accepted today : man - agement consulting revenues top $ 150 billion ( Kipping and Clark 2012 ) , employment tops 600 , 000 ( Kubr 2002 ) , and careers in the industry are among the most coveted ( Lemann 1999 ) . Despite its current prominence , there was essentially no management consulting ﬁeld prior to World War I ( Higdon 1969 , McKenna 2006 ) . At that time , few believed that managerial ( as opposed to engi - neering or vocational ) skills could be learned , much less applied in any systematic way , and a distinct set of ﬁrms dedicated to advising top management had not yet emerged ( Klein 1977 ) . Early management consultants struggled to explain the nature and value of their ser - vices , but by the end of World War II , leading consulting ﬁrms were serving prominent corporations and govern - ment agencies , and the industry was on the cusp of a golden age ( McKenna 2006 , David 2012 ) . Today , the dominant form of management consulting ﬁrm claims a professional identity , one that emphasizes specialized expertise , independence from clients , and codiﬁed stan - dards of conduct and behavior . 1 Between the two World Wars , this organizational form had developed into a proto - institution : a social structure that has the poten - tial to become widely institutionalized ( Lawrence et al . 2002 ) . This transformation is particularly remarkable , given that there is no legal imperative to hire manage - ment consulting ﬁrms , and the outputs of these ﬁrms are impossible to objectively assess . It is this early - stage institutionalization process that we study , the path from strange upstart to proto - institution . We employ a historiographic approach : we carefully scrutinize archival materials to develop a richly detailed account of the lives of organizations and their founders , akin to what ethnographers might do for contemporary organizations ( Ventresca and Mohr 2002 ) . We use these materials to develop a strategic narrative , an account of actors and events based on a subset of historical cases that are most valuable for building theory from history ( Stryker 1996 ) . In following this approach , we start with a well - deﬁned theoretical agenda and then iterate between theory and evidence to develop new insights . Our account is intended to sharpen , illustrate , and ground our arguments , not to provide an empirical test or a comprehensive history of management consult - ing . Our detailed account elucidates the speciﬁc mech - anisms that can lead to an important form of social change : the institutionalization of a new organizational form in a nascent ﬁeld . Using historical data allows us to trace a process that occurred over several decades , thereby overcoming the temporal limitations of ethno - graphic and other ﬁeld methods ( Kieser 1994 , Rao 1998 , Jones and Khanna 2006 ) . We begin by discussing what organizational theorists have discovered about institutional entrepreneurship in other contexts and by highlighting what little we know about the actions involved in the creation of entirely new kinds of organizations in emerging ﬁelds . We then describe our data and method of analysis . After brieﬂy outlining the broad institutional changes that created the opportunity ( though not the necessity ) for manage - ment consulting ﬁrms to emerge , we use our histori - cal data to develop propositions about how institutional entrepreneurs can seize opportunities to legitimate new kinds of organizations in emerging ﬁelds and about how these actions might differ from those of institutional entrepreneurs operating in other contexts . We conclude by discussing how these propositions can be tested and how well they might generalize , and by pondering their implications for theory and future research . David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields 358 Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS Existing Research on Institutional Entrepreneurship The constructs “institutional entrepreneur” and “entrepreneur” partially overlap : some , but not all , insti - tutional entrepreneurs are also traditional entrepreneurs , and some , but not all , traditional entrepreneurs are also institutional entrepreneurs ( Phillips and Tracey 2007 , Tracey et al . 2011 , Tolbert et al . 2011 ) . As we described above , institutional entrepreneurs are socially skilled actors who work to justify and legitimate new kinds of social arrangements . Traditional entrepreneurs , 2 in con - trast , are typically deﬁned simply as those who found new organizations , whether novel or not ( Gartner 1988 , Aldrich and Ruef 2006 ) . Whereas some institutional entrepreneurs engage in institutional change projects without directly founding organizations ( e . g . , Maguire et al . 2004 , Child et al . 2007 ) , other institutional entrepreneurs do found new organizations and are thus also entrepreneurs in the traditional sense . Novel kinds of organizations require “legitimating accounts (cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48) about labor markets , consumer markets , expertise , and distinc - tive products or services” ( DiMaggio 1988 , p . 15 ) . If newly founded organizations are replications of existing organizational forms , however , then no such institu - tionalization project is required ( and the entrepreneurs who founded the organizations are simply traditional entrepreneurs and not institutional entrepreneurs ) . In our study , the founders of early management consulting organizations are both entrepreneurs in the traditional sense of actors who found new ventures and institutional entrepreneurs because their activities can result in an entirely new social form being institutionalized . New organizational forms , unlike replications of existing kinds of organizations , assemble resources in novel ways , project new social identities , and build new types of exchange networks . Institutionalists see new organizational forms as being based on novel logics—underlying “interpretive schemes” that form beliefs about domain , structure , and evaluation method ( Greenwood and Hinings 1996 ) or “theories of moral sentiments” that comprise opinions , beliefs , and judg - ments ( Haveman and Rao 1997 , Rao 1998 ) . Similarly , ecologists posit that new organizational forms are based on new identities that function as social codes , gener - ating both rules of conduct for organizations claiming a particular form and signals to audiences about what they can expect from members of that form ( Hannan et al . 2007 ) . Guided by these notions , we see new organizational forms as embodiments of novel logics and as deﬁned by new identities that generate valida - tion ( or censure ) from audiences . Consistent with insti - tutionalists , we hold that new kinds of organizations require an institutionalization project in which institu - tional entrepreneurs legitimate the theory and values underpinning their ventures . And consistent with ecol - ogists , we recognize that creating and promoting new kinds of organizations requires constructing coherent identities using rules and signals that will be understood and approved by key audience segments . There is great heterogeneity among the contexts in which institutional entrepreneurs work . Two contextual dimensions are particularly important . First , the target or object of institutional entrepreneurs’ efforts can vary broadly . Institutional entrepreneurs can promote novel sub - organizational elements , such as roles , practices , or procedures . Alternatively , institutional entrepreneurs can seek to create and sustain entirely new kinds of organizations that embody novel logics and project new identities . Second , the ﬁelds in which institutional entrepreneurs maneuver vary in their level of maturity . In mature ﬁelds , roles and relationships are relatively stable and have a long history , power relations and coali - tions are sharply deﬁned , and participants perceive that they are involved in a common enterprise ( DiMaggio and Powell 1983 , DiMaggio 1986 , Fligstein 2001 , Fligstein and McAdam 2011 ) . In emerging ﬁelds , roles and rela - tionships are neither clearly deﬁned nor stable , power relations and coalitions have not jelled , and participants seldom recognize that they have common ( congruent or conﬂicting ) interests . Such contextual diversity has rarely been recognized explicitly , but it is important because both the nature of the social innovation and the maturity of the ﬁeld affect the resources and opportuni - ties facing institutional entrepreneurs and the constraints on and threats to their efforts . Table 1 uses these two dimensions to locate our study within prior research on institutional entrepreneurship . 3 Our analysis focuses on quadrant 4 in the table : new kinds of organizations in emerging ﬁelds . We expect that institutional entrepreneurs’ activities and constraints in this context will differ from those in established ﬁelds ( quadrants 1 and 3 ) , where actors must integrate and reconcile proposed new suborganizational elements ( quadrant 1 ) or organizational forms ( quadrant 3 ) with entrenched ﬁeld structures , norms , and understandings . This is certainly no easy task . But in new ﬁelds , insti - tutional entrepreneurs cannot leverage social positions , logics , or collectivities within their ﬁeld , as these are not yet established . We also expect that within emerg - ing ﬁelds , legitimating new organizational forms ( quad - rant 4 ) differs from fostering new practices and relations within and among existing organizations ( quadrant 2 ) . Actors who launch new kinds of organizations in new ﬁelds are faced with the task of legitimating entire self - sustaining entities , whereas those forming new practices out of existing forms of organization can focus on legit - imating the practices . Although we focus on quadrant 4 in this paper , our review of past work suggests that the degree of difﬁculty facing institutional entrepreneurs generally increases as one moves diagonally from quad - rant 1 to quadrant 4 . Indeed , legitimating new kinds of David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS 359 Table 1 The Contexts of Institutional Entrepreneurship : Examples of Empirical Research Level of ﬁeld maturity Locus of change ( new organization form or suborganizational element ) Established ﬁeld New / Emerging ﬁeld Quadrant 1 Quadrant 2 Organizational practice , activity , structure , or role • The emergence of the nurse practitioner in healthcare ( Reay et al . 2006 ) • The emergence of practices of consultation and information exchange in HIV / AIDS treatment ( Maguire et al . 2004 ) • The legitimation of aggressive risk - management practices in mutual funds ( Lounsbury and Crumley 2007 ) • The growth of interorganizational collaboration in biotechnology ( Powell et al . 2005 ) • The legitimation of quality management programs in American business ( Abrahamson and Fairchild 1999 ) • The development of common technological standards in Internet computing ( Garud et al . 2002 ) Quadrant 3 Quadrant 4 Organizational form • The emergence of the multidisciplinary ﬁrm in the accounting ﬁeld ( Greenwood et al . 2002 ) • The emergence of the professional form of management consulting ﬁrm ( this study ) • The legitimation of vocational community colleges distinct from academically oriented , four - year colleges ( Brint and Karabel 1989 ) • The establishment of an art museum form focused on collecting and conserving “high art” for connoisseurs ( DiMaggio 1991 ) • The expansion of specialty coffee retailers in the U . S . coffee industry ( Rindova and Fombrun 2001 ) • The development of consumer watchdog organizations ( Rao 1998 ) organizations in new ﬁelds requires such a potent institu - tionalization project that Aldrich and Fiol ( 1994 ) asked rhetorically if only fools attempted it . What Do Institutional Entrepreneurs Do ? Previous research suggests that institutional entrepre - neurs undertake three kinds of activities : theorization , afﬁliation , and collective action . We brieﬂy discuss each in turn . Theorization . Institutional entrepreneurs theorize the social change they wish to effect : they develop and spec - ify abstract categories of actors , structures , and events and abstract cause – effect relationships among actors , structures , and events ( Strang and Meyer 1993 ) . They identify broad classes of concrete situations as com - parable and motivate new arrangements as effective and replicable . This involves specifying generic prob - lems and justifying particular innovations as solutions to these problems ( Strang and Meyer 1993 , Tolbert and Zucker 1996 ) . Because both problems and solutions are socially constructed , the “solutions” proposed during theorization may not be the most efﬁcient means of addressing the “problems” highlighted by institutional entrepreneurs ; instead , they are promoted as congru - ent with existing structures and practices . For example , institutional entrepreneurs justiﬁed changes in the struc - tures and activities of accounting ﬁrms by emphasizing how those changes were aligned with the profession’s prevailing values and practices , and by exposing con - tradictions within the accounting ﬁeld’s existing logic ( Greenwood et al . 2002 , Suddaby and Greenwood 2005 ) . Similarly , institutional entrepreneurs in the emerging HIV / AIDS treatment ﬁeld theorized new practices of consultation and information exchange between commu - nity organizations and pharmaceutical ﬁrms as consis - tent with the interests of a wide range of stakeholders and “attached” these new practices to existing routines ( Maguire et al . 2004 ) . Actors working to legitimate the role of nurse practitioner had to “hook” this new role into existing healthcare procedures , resource allocations , and structures ( Reay et al . 2006 ) . And those seeking to promote active money management practices in the mutual fund industry had to argue that money manage - ment could “unproblematically” include both conserva - tively and aggressively managed funds ( Lounsbury and Crumley 2007 ) . Together , these ﬁndings suggest that a key activity of institutional entrepreneurs is the theo - rization of change as consistent with existing ﬁeld and organizational logics , practices , and routines . Institutional entrepreneurs also frame their goals and tactics—and the structural incarnations of those goals and tactics—as compatible with the master logics of society at large , such as efﬁciency , equality , or justice ( Meyer and Rowan 1977 , Haveman and Rao 1997 ) . Frames elaborate the grievances and interests of those who are dissatisﬁed with the status quo , diagnose causes , provide solutions , spur collective attributions , and help legitimate social movements ( Goffman 1974 , Snow et al . 1986 ) . Institutional entrepreneurs use frames to give meaning to and justify new social arrangements ( Benford and Snow 2000 ) . For example , founders of the ﬁrst consumer protection leagues framed their ven - tures as impartial and scientiﬁc ; they proposed to serve the public by enhancing the ability to make rational purchase decisions ( Rao 1998 ) . Gay rights advocates invoked a civil rights logic of constitutional democracy , David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields 360 Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS civic responsibility , and the protection of individual lib - erties to justify their proposed changes in legislation and behavior ( Creed et al . 2002 ) . Commercial whale watch - ing was described by proponents as consistent with the animal rights movement in order to capitalize on a shift in the public perception of whales from “monsters to be feared” to “individuals to be appreciated and respected” ( Lawrence and Phillips 2004 , pp . 695 and 698 ) . And nuclear energy was framed as “emission free” and there - fore “sustainable” in a time of growing concern over the environment ( Garud et al . 2010 ) . These studies suggest that the work of institutional entrepreneurs consists not only of navigating logics prevailing in established ﬁelds and organizations but also piggybacking on broader cul - tural schemas . Afﬁliation . Institutional entrepreneurs often forge afﬁliations to legitimate actors so that they can “bor - row” legitimacy from their exchange partners . Status is contagious : ties to high - status others create halos that imbue entrepreneurs’ activities with normative and prag - matic legitimacy ( Crane 1965 , Merton 1968a , Podolny 1993 ) . When customers , employees , and ﬁnanciers can - not assess the value of a new social arrangement directly , they often rely on more easily observed sig - nals , such as the status and legitimacy of afﬁliates ( Bitektine 2011 ) . For example , business , social , and phil - anthropic networks were tapped to establish a new form of art museum ( DiMaggio 1991 ) . Similarly , personal friendships , business contacts , and positions in industry associations were used to promote the investor - owned electric utility ( Granovetter and McGuire 1998 ) . Biotech ventures with afﬁliations to high - status venture capi - tal ﬁrms were more likely to obtain needed resources ( Stuart et al . 1999 ) . Institutional entrepreneurs afﬁliated with organizations staffed by people with AIDS were perceived as more legitimate within the HIV / AIDS treat - ment ﬁeld than those without such afﬁliations ( Maguire et al . 2004 ) . Promoters of ﬂedgling sports seeking recog - nition and resources—symbolic and material—strove to get these sports selected for inclusion in the Olympic Games ; indeed , the selection of basketball into the Olympics in the early 1900s gave the sport national , as well as international , visibility ( Washington and Ventresca 2008 ) . Early satellite radio ﬁrms trumpeted in press releases their afﬁliations to high - proﬁle others that could “sanction the feasibility and normative appropri - ateness” of this new market category within the existing radio - broadcasting ﬁeld ( Navis and Glynn 2010 , p . 445 ) . These studies support the notion that ties to recognized institutions can substitute for objective performance data in demonstrating effectiveness and so improve perceived instrumentality . Collective Action . Banding together can help insti - tutional entrepreneurs counter the inevitable resistance from those who value the status quo ( Rao et al . 2000 , Wijen and Ansari 2007 , Hiatt et al . 2009 ) . For instance , professional associations were vehicles for theorization by accounting ﬁrms seeking to broaden accountants’ domains ( Greenwood et al . 2002 ) and by those advocat - ing new money management practices in mutual funds ( Lounsbury and Crumley 2007 ) . Collaborative agree - ments among software and hardware ﬁrms helped estab - lish a new computer programming standard ( Garud et al . 2002 ) , and a broad alliance of ﬁrms was central to the theorization and spread of a single standard for high - deﬁnition television ( Dowell et al . 2002 ) . Coalitions of diverse constituents were critical to the implementation of mass recycling programs ( Lounsbury et al . 2003 ) and to the establishment of new practices among non - governmental organizations in Palestine ( Lawrence et al . 2002 ) . In brief , the difﬁculty of developing and imple - menting new structures and practices , much less making them “stick , ” often leads institutional entrepreneurs to act collectively . Collective action can also establish the distinctive - ness and exteriority of new kinds of organizations ( Van de Ven and Garud 1989 , Aldrich and Fiol 1994 , Rao et al . 2000 , Swaminathan and Wade 2001 , Sine and Lee 2009 ) . To gain legitimacy , new kinds of organiza - tions must achieve cognitive distinctiveness and possess a “reality of their own” that is detached from the actors who created them or “who ‘happen to’ embody them at the moment” ( Berger and Luckmann 1967 , p . 58 ) . A col - lective identity differentiates members of the collectiv - ity from rivals and provides them with a sharper and more salient image ( Mael and Ashforth 1992 ) . More - over , collections of organizations are unlikely to be iden - tiﬁed with any particular member , which facilitates the intergenerational transmission of their form ( Berger and Luckmann 1967 , Tolbert and Zucker 1996 ) . For exam - ple , the American Association of Junior Colleges dis - tinguished two - year colleges from four - year colleges through journals , conferences , and monographs ( Brint and Karabel 1989 ) . Similarly , the National Electric Light Association and the Association of Edison Illuminating Companies promoted private energy companies within the emerging electricity industry by denouncing city - owned electric ﬁrms , excluding them from their meet - ings , and organizing boycotts against them ( Granovetter and McGuire 1998 ) . Summary and Cross - Context Comparison . Prior re - search demonstrates clearly that institutional entrepre - neurs are “culturally competent actors with strong prac - tical skills” ( Lawrence and Suddaby 2006 , p . 219 ) who work to establish new social arrangements . The activi - ties highlighted in prior work—theorization , afﬁliation , and collective action—are likely to be important in all contexts , but we expect these activities to take differ - ent forms and have different targets in emerging ﬁelds than in established ﬁelds because of the different chal - lenges these contexts pose . The research reviewed here David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS 361 suggests that theorization in established ﬁelds is oriented toward consistency with the ﬁeld’s existing structures , values , and norms , but none of these cultural elements is yet entrenched in emerging ﬁelds . Similarly , afﬁliation targets in established ﬁelds are often obvious because ﬁeld authority structures and status orderings have sta - bilized ; in emerging ﬁelds , this is rarely the case . And vehicles for collective action are not initially available in emerging ﬁelds . These contextual differences call for more attention to , and ﬁne - grained theorizing about , the actions of institutional entrepreneurs who promote new kinds of organizations in emerging ﬁelds . Research Design The early management consulting industry provides an excellent context to study institutional entrepreneurship . The professional form of the management consulting ﬁrm became dominant within the emerging ﬁeld between the two World Wars , thus providing an opportunity to study how a new organizational form becomes a proto - institution ( Lawrence et al . 2002 ) . To study this process , we employed a historiographic approach ( Ventresca and Mohr 2002 ) . We conducted a comprehensive search for archival materials—books , newspapers , general interest and business magazines , consulting industry publica - tions , and academic research—on the early manage - ment consulting industry and the business environment of that period . To ﬁnd data sources , we engaged in snowball sampling : we began with industry histories ( e . g . , Higdon 1969 , Tisdall 1982 , McKenna 2006 ) , then moved on to other sources we discovered as we searched the archives . One source would often refer to another , which we would then track down and read . We com - plemented this strategy with searches of library catalogs and electronic databases covering materials from our period of interest . We proceeded with our search until we unearthed no new materials . Some of our sources were secondary—biographies of the founders of sev - eral early consulting ﬁrms , academic articles , and books about the industry . Others were primary—industry pub - lications , newspapers , business magazines , and original documents reprinted in books . We list the sources we consulted in the online appendix ( at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1120 . 0745 ) . Our reading of the history of management consult - ing quickly revealed that the institutional entrepreneurs in this context—the “agents of legitimacy” ( Dacin et al . 2002 , p . 47 ) of the now - dominant organiza - tional form—were the men who founded some of the ﬁrst professional - form consulting ﬁrms . Accordingly , we focused our attention on these individuals and assessed the actions they took to legitimate their ventures in the face of viable alternatives . The activities of the founders of three early ﬁrms—Booz , Allen & Hamilton , Arthur D . Little , Inc . , and McKinsey & Company— ﬁgure prominently in our analysis . These men elaborated and promoted the logic of the professional management consulting organizational form , and their ﬁrms were among the ﬁrst to follow this model ( Higdon 1969 ) . Data on these ﬁrms are by far the richest available ; we found no comprehensive account of any other early professional consulting ﬁrm . 4 Moreover , later manage - ment consulting ﬁrms ( such as A . T . Kearney and Cresap , McCormick & Paget ) adopted the identity and prac - tices of these pioneering ﬁrms , which indicates that the professional form acquired legitimacy and followers . Indeed , the identity forged by such ﬁrms represents the dominant identity of the ﬁeld today , and management consulting is commonly viewed as a profession ( Kubr 2002 , McKenna 2006 ) . In addition to these early instan - tiations of the professional form of management consult - ing , we studied a prominent instance of an alternative form , the George S . May International Company . Study - ing this competing form allows us to contrast actions that worked ( i . e . , led to a proto - institution ) with those that did not . As historians do , we analyzed our data in an iterative fashion . Our approach is summarized succinctly by the author of a canonical work on historical methods : The historian starts with a provisional selection of facts , and a provisional interpretation in the light of which that selection has been made—by others as well as by him - self . As he works , both the interpretation and the selec - tion and ordering of facts undergo subtle and perhaps partly unconscious changes through the reciprocal action of one on the other . ( Carr 1961 , p . 35 ) Despite frequent claims that historians eschew the - ory , all historians begin with some theory , which guides them in their selection of evidence to scrutinize ( Carr 1961 , Evans 1997 , Calhoun 1998 ) . They then move between their reading of the evidence and their under - standing of theory , updating theory , and updating their search for evidence to investigate new ideas as they arise ( Carr 1961 , Evans 1997 , Gaddis 2002 ) . The end result is revised theories , in the form of new or updated generalizations about the causes of past events . This historical method that we follow highlights temporal change and involves process tracing , through which we identify a causal link between independent variables and the outcome of a dependent variable ( George and Bennett 2005 ) . Process tracing converts “a purely histor - ical account that implies or asserts a causal sequence into an analytical explanation couched in theoretical variables that have been identiﬁed in the research design” ( George and Bennett 2005 , p . 225 ) . Process tracing thus focuses on identifying causal mechanisms and is a ﬁrst step toward expanding the domain of inquiry and developing propositions that can later be tested in other settings . We use process tracing to link the actions of pioneers of the professional form of management consulting ﬁrm to the increasing dominance of this professional form , David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields 362 Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS building theory “in constant dialogue with the histori - cal data” ( Kieser 1994 , p . 618 ) . Our account takes the form of a strategic narrative : narrative in that it is a pro - cessual account of actors and events , strategic in that it selects a subset of cases that are most valuable for building theory from history ( Stryker 1996 , George and Bennett 2005 ) . Beginning with theoretically motivated questions and constructs , we coded archival evidence of theorization , afﬁliations , and collective action—the themes highlighted in previous research . We also noted evidence of legitimating activities not highlighted in pre - vious research . We moved repeatedly between theory and data ; as our ideas sharpened and new ones devel - oped , we returned to archives to look for additional evi - dence . We proceeded until we made no new theoretical advances . Institutional Entrepreneurship in the Early Management Consulting Field Today , management consulting—advice giving to top managers on strategy and operations , with the goal of improving performance—is a well - established and widely accepted ﬁeld of activity and is dominated by ﬁrms based on a professional logic . In this section , we trace the early development of the ﬁeld and this now - dominant organizational form . Because broad insti - tutional change creates opportunities for new organi - zational forms to emerge and take hold ( Stinchcombe 1965 , Haveman and Rao 1997 , Ruef 2000 , Sine et al . 2005 ) , we begin by describing the changing institutional context in which pioneering management consulting ﬁrms operated . Recognizing the need to avoid historical determinism ( Aldrich and Ruef 2006 ) , we then discuss plausible alternatives to the professional form of man - agement consulting . Finally , we assess the actions that early professional - form management consultants took to legitimate their ventures and to thrive despite the exis - tence of viable alternatives . Institutional Change and Opportunity Creation Taking our lead from business historians , we focus on the structural changes in corporations that increased managerial complexity ( Kipping 2002 ) and the regu - latory changes of the 1930s that limited the roles of bankers and accountants as business advisors ( McKenna 1995 , 2006 ) . Although other factors promoted the rise of management consulting , most notably the expansion of business schools and the business press in the early 20th century ( David 2012 ) and corporate downsizing and reduced careerism in the late 20th century ( Ruef 2002 ) , we limit our focus here to the initial opportunities facing pioneering management consultants . From the late 19th to the early 20th century , the American economy shifted from consisting largely of single - product , single - unit , family - owned enterprises to being dominated by diversiﬁed , multiple - unit corpora - tions with dispersed ownership ( Berle and Means 1932 ; Chandler 1977 , 1990 ; Fligstein 1990 ) . Before the Civil War , manufacturing was small scale and often done in family residences ; the few large antebellum factories were single - location textile mills . The landscape began to change after the Civil War , as businesses expanded both their scale and scope of operations . Then , from 1897 to 1904 , the ﬁrst great wave of horizontal corpo - rate mergers took place , and industrial ﬁrms began to integrate vertically ( Nelson 1959 ) . The years after World War I saw a second wave of industrial mergers . By 1930 , corporations of a size unfathomable at the turn of the century had emerged . As a consequence of growth , often fuelled by mergers , corporations became increasingly diversiﬁed and geo - graphically dispersed . Large ﬁrms , even those that did not diversify or expand geographically , were forced to decentralize and develop systems for coordination and control of multiple subunits ( Cochran 1972 , Chandler 1977 , Fligstein 1990 ) . To create and maintain these sys - tems , new kinds of positions were created and ﬁlled by new kinds of managers . Division managers car - ried out their units’ strategies and reported to corpo - rate headquarters ; middle managers ran operating units ; and corporate managers coordinated various divisions , monitored performance , and allocated resources ( Chan - dler 1977 , 1990 ) . These increased needs for coordina - tion and control were generally unanticipated conse - quences of industrial consolidation . Corporate expan - sion also meant that for the ﬁrst time , owners no longer administered their enterprises , relying instead on salaried executives . This separation of ownership and control forced managers to justify their decisions and demon - strate accountability to absentee owners ( Berle and Means 1932 ) . After World War I , ﬁrms relied to some extent on advice from banks and accounting ﬁrms to cope with these complexities . The regulatory environment changed abruptly during the Great Depression , however . The Glass – Steagall Act of 1933 separated commercial and investment banking and outlawed the consultative ser - vices previously performed by commercial banks . In the same year , the Securities Act required that under - writing and corporate reorganization be accompanied by due - diligence studies ( McKenna 1995 ) . Accounting ﬁrms might well have conducted these studies , but to avoid conﬂicts of interest , the Securities and Exchange Commission limited accountants to conducting audits ( McKenna 2006 ) . Together , these regulatory develop - ments prevented existing advisory organizations from addressing the problems caused by structural changes in corporations . In sum , by World War II , American businesses reached a scale and level of complexity never seen before . They maintained far - ﬂung operations , served David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS 363 geographically dispersed customers , and offered diverse product lines . But they generally did not possess the for - mal structures , communication and control systems , or managerial skills necessary to manage their operations efﬁciently . Meanwhile , regulatory changes prevented existing business advisors—banks and accounting ﬁrms—from addressing these problems . As a result , opportunities arose for new kinds of advisors to management . Competing Logics : Alternatives to the Professional Form of Management Consulting The structural and regulatory changes outlined above provided the opportunity for management consulting activities to emerge , but they did not create the necessity for any one particular form of management consult - ing to persist and dominate . Although today the profes - sional form of consulting ( which we describe in detail below in the section “Institutional Entrepreneurship and the Professional Form of Management Consulting” ) is widespread and highly institutionalized ( McKenna 2006 ) , this outcome was not inevitable . Here , we analyze two compelling alternatives to the professional form , one internal to client ﬁrms and one very different exter - nal form . First , instead of hiring external consultants , organi - zations could have internalized the advice - giving func - tion . This was certainly feasible when the pioneering consulting ﬁrms were founded : corporations and gov - ernment bureaus had rapidly growing pools of internal talent to handle management problems ( Bendix 1956 , Jacoby 1985 ) . Moreover , the prevailing view was that managers were born , not made , and that corporate lead - ership and strategic decision making were the domain of executives , not paid experts ( Chandler 1962 , Cochran 1972 ) . Such an internal solution would be predicted by transaction - cost economics ( Williamson 1975 ) . Any - one charged with diagnosing and solving organizations’ problems must know a great deal about their businesses and must cope with the great uncertainty stemming from the complexity of their client organizations . Asset speci - ﬁcity and uncertainty generate coordination and monitor - ing costs , which creates opportunities for consultants to use their knowledge about clients to extract future bene - ﬁts . For these reasons , transaction - cost theory would pre - dict that internal consulting groups would be preferred to external consultants . This has happened for some other forms of expertise . For example , engineers have been described as “corporate professionals” who are “willing to pursue the rewards of a managerial career even when it draws them reluctantly away from technical work” and who have “no particular desire to share their knowl - edge with the public at the expense of the corporation” ( Whalley and Barley 1997 , p . 34 ) . Compared with man - agement consultants , these experts are more often found inside the organizations whose “problems” they solve than in independent , advice - giving ﬁrms . Second , an external form of advisory organization very different from the professional consulting form could have become dominant . In the early days of man - agement consulting , a high - volume , low - cost form was commercially successful and battled for dominance with the professional form . The most notable example of this competing form was founded by George S . May in 1925 . In marked contrast to the staid and sober per - sonas of the professional - form pioneers described in the next section , May was a ﬂamboyant ﬁgure known for his loud Hawaiian shirts and ﬂoral neckties ( Hig - don 1969 ) . A deﬁning feature of May’s ﬁrm was its aggressive , high - pressure sales tactics . May employed a huge arsenal of electric typewriters to churn out sales letters and promotional leaﬂets that were mailed en masse to corporate executives ( Fortune 1944 ) . He also employed a direct sales force , paid on commission , with revenue quotas . May’s sales agents , who were not involved in consulting , made cold calls to sell prelim - inary “survey reports” for a modest fee . May’s con - sultants , men with industry experience as opposed to recent business school graduates , used these reports to generate additional business . As described by a jour - nalist , “ [ F ] ew companies have dared to sell their ser - vices so hard , so blatantly , and so indiscriminately as the George S . May Co . ” ( Stryker 1954 , p . 140 ) . This ﬁrm’s consulting fees were tied to realized cost sav - ings , and it allowed clients to cancel engagements at any time and pay for only those services rendered up to the hour of cancellation ; it furnished weekly reports on Fridays , which had to be approved by clients before work would proceed the following Monday . Because all these practices were anathema to the pioneers of the professional form , May was the target of fre - quent derision from pioneers of that form , who accused him of damaging management consulting’s reputation ( Higdon 1969 ) . In sum , May’s ﬁrm was based on a starkly different logic than that of professional consulting ﬁrms , which , like law and accounting ﬁrms , were grounded in claims of specialized expertise , independence , and objectivity ( Greiner and Metzger 1983 , Kubr 2002 ) . May was also an institutional entrepreneur ( he pioneered a new kind of organization ) but , ultimately , a far less successful one than those we study . Although ﬁrms based on May’s logic exist today , this form long ago lost the battle for dominance ; it occupies a marginal position in contem - porary consulting . Nonetheless , his ﬁrm’s early promi - nence reminds us that successful management consulting businesses could be built without adhering to a profes - sional model . Both alternatives to the professional form of consulting—that is , internal consulting and the exter - nal form founded by May—persist today , but enjoy lit - tle prominence . Some large corporations have internal David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields 364 Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS management consulting units , but this is far from com - mon . And although May’s ﬁrm was more ﬁnancially suc - cessful than the professional ﬁrms early on , it was the target of frequent criticism and did not attract prestigious clients ( Higdon 1969 ) . Unlike the professional form , May’s high - volume , low - cost consulting form had few imitators . In sum , as chronicled by business historians , the professional form of management consulting went on to dominate the ﬁeld in the ensuing decades ( Kubr 2002 , Kipping and Engwall 2002 , McKenna 2006 ) . The question remains as to how the pioneers of the profes - sional form were able to establish the dominance of their form in the presence of viable alternatives . Institutional Entrepreneurship and the Professional Form of Management Consulting How did the founders of early professional management consulting ﬁrms legitimate their novel organizations ? As Rao ( 1998 , p . 916 ) argued , new social forms “do not arise automatically in resource spaces but have to be constructed from prevalent cultural materials . ” Guided by prior research , we organize our analysis in terms of the three general types of action—theorization , afﬁl - iations , and collective action—discussed above . Sensi - tive to context , we highlight how the actions seen in this emerging ﬁeld differ from those uncovered in more mature ﬁelds . Theorization . How did the founders of early profes - sional consulting ﬁrms theorize their novel ventures ? What problems did they identify , and what solutions did they claim to provide ? Our reading revealed that pioneers initially worked to make salient contradictions between prevailing cultural logics and the way poten - tial client organizations were managed . At the time the earliest consulting ﬁrms were founded , the Pro - gressive movement , which held functionality , rational - ity , and bureaucratic administration in government and business to be central to social progress , was at its peak ( Hofstadter 1955 , Wiebe 1962 ) . Consulting pio - neers elaborated the theory that , in the wake of vast structural changes , large organizations were managed inefﬁciently and so were inconsistent with Progressive values . After theorizing the problems facing large orga - nizations , consulting pioneers advocated their new ser - vices as effective solutions to those problems . Such theorization is seen in the activities of Edwin Booz , who in 1914 founded a ﬁrm called the Busi - ness Research Service ( Higdon 1969 , p . 115 ) , which he claimed was the ﬁrst in the Midwest to under - take independent “business investigations” ( Bowman 1984 , pp . 4 – 5 ) . Booz offered “business surveys” that would “diagnose” organizations and identify problems . To emphasize his distinctive approach , he soon changed the ﬁrm’s name to Edwin G . Booz Surveys ( Higdon 1969 , p . 116 ) . He spent his time “probing and tinkering” with clients , looking for “soft underbellies and festering sores” and “nosing around companies” whose leaders “had a problem but weren’t always sure what it was” ( Bowman 1984 , p . 7 ) . His approach was to prompt exec - utives to ask 25 questions designed to highlight inef - ﬁciency , such as , “How can we improve our methods of hiring , training , and development ? ” and “How can I relieve myself of too much detail ? ” ( original documents c . 1926 ; reproduced in Bowman 1984 , p . iv ) . Like Edwin Booz , James O . McKinsey held that many organizations were grossly inefﬁcient ; he worked zeal - ously to publicize this belief ( Higdon 1969 , Wolf 1978 ) . In 1926 , he founded his own management consulting ﬁrm . His approach was to attend executive meetings , listen to discussions , and enumerate a list of prob - lems he diagnosed ( Wolf 1978 , p . 44 ) . Based on this approach , McKinsey developed a consulting tool called the General Survey Outline , a 30 - page questionnaire for evaluating a client ﬁrm’s policies , structure , personnel , controls , facilities , ﬁnancial condition , and industry out - look ( reprinted in Wolf 1978 ) . This comprehensive man - agement audit tool gave executives a holistic view of their operations and a systematic way of uncovering problems hidden in their large , complex organizations ( McKenna 2006 , p . 67 ) —something few , if any , execu - tives had managed to do themselves . Arthur Little also founded a ﬁrm whose purpose was to highlight the gap between client ﬁrms’ practices and Progressive values and to offer solutions . Although Little’s ﬁrm began in 1886 as a chemical testing lab - oratory , by the early 1900s , it was offering managerial advice ( Kipping 2002 , McKenna 2006 ) . A 1907 adver - tisement announced simply , “Other people’s troubles are our business” ( Kahn 1986 , p . 15 ) . Little also placed advertisements in trade journals that highlighted speciﬁc problems , such as one ad that asked , “Are your materials standardized ? ” ( Kahn 1986 , p . 48 ) . These founders of early management consulting ﬁrms thus worked to make salient structures and practices in client ﬁrms that clashed with the Progressive values of efﬁciency and rational organization . They pointed to challenges arising from the growing complexity of the corporate form , such as managerial training and develop - ment , subunit control and coordination , and diversiﬁca - tion . In contrast to the theorization of change witnessed in mature ﬁelds , these new categories of problems were not rationalized as stemming from a functional failing or clash of values within the management consulting ﬁeld itself , because that ﬁeld was just being born . Instead , the rationale for these problems was rooted outside , in the cultural logic of the Progressive movement . Theorization involves not only making problems salient but also specifying solutions . The need to offer distinctive solutions to the problems they made salient pushed management consulting pioneers to exploit exist - ing social categories not yet used by top managers . David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS 365 Edwin Booz , for example , based his solutions to the - orized managerial problems on psychology , which was already an established science ( Higdon 1969 , Bowman 1984 ) . Booz held a master’s degree in psychology from Northwestern University . He claimed that organizations should use the latest psychological techniques to eval - uate and train managers , and he sought to “evangelize American business with the gospel of personnel - oriented management” ( Bowman 1984 , p . 11 ) . His approach would “eliminate guesswork” by “expertly analyzing” organizations and “by going to the bottom of problems” ( original document c . 1919 , reproduced in Bowman 1984 , p . iii ) . His primary consulting tool , the multivector appraisal , used psychometrics to place “the right peo - ple in the right place” in client ﬁrms ( Bowman 1984 , p . 2 ) . This , he claimed , would result in the “reorgani - zation and perfecting of the business method” ( Bowman 1984 , pp . 4 – 5 ) . James McKinsey based his solutions on the disci - pline of accounting and fought to establish accounting as an aid to general management rather than as a mere ﬁnancial control tool ( Wren 2005 , p . 248 ) . In 1922 , McKinsey published a landmark book , Budgetary Con - trol , in which he argued fervently that accounting should emphasize “a comprehensive understanding of the entire organization” and should be seen as “an integrating device for gaining a broad understanding of the prob - lems of administration” ( Wolf 1978 , p . 5 ) . This approach differed from the general tendency , pushed by reg - ulation , for accountants to focus narrowly on audits ( McKenna 2006 ) . McKinsey’s main consulting tool , the General Survey Outline , applied principles of accounting to top management , just as Edwin Booz had done with psychology . The application of accounting to top man - agement , McKinsey theorized , would lead to “the devel - opment of budgets as planning and controlling aids” and would allow managers to identify and correct inefﬁcien - cies ( Wren 2005 , p . 248 ) . Arthur Little rooted his solutions in natural sci - ence methods . Little had studied chemistry at the Mas - sachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) , although he never graduated because of a lack of funds . When Little and his partner Roger Grifﬁn founded their ﬁrm in 1886 , industry made little use of any natural science . Little lamented this and fought fervently to have science , especially chemistry , recognized as a vital component of industrial progress . In 1904 , the company’s letter - head read “Analysis , Research , Advice , Expert Reports , Expert Testimony” ( Kahn 1986 , p . 37 ) . Little believed that science was the key to increasing organizational efﬁ - ciency , and he stated with missionary zeal in 1908 that “every waste that is prevented or turned into proﬁt , every problem solved , and every more effective process which is developed makes for better living in the material sense and more wholesome living in the higher sense” ( quoted in Kahn 1986 , p . 37 ) . Little claimed that the scientiﬁc method gave him “the power to generalize” and “the capacity to apply” his solutions to clients’ problems , and he sought to convince the business world that the scien - tiﬁc method was the “prime mover for the machinery of civilization” and essential to social progress ( quoted in Kahn 1986 , pp . 35 and 42 ) . In sum , early management consultants claimed the ability to solve organizational problems by drawing on forms of expertise that were accepted but had not yet been applied to top management issues . They promised to make management more rational and efﬁcient and so solve the organizational problems they had made salient . By basing their proposed solutions on accepted cate - gories of expertise , pioneering management consultants increased the technical rationality ( Strang and Meyer 1993 , p . 494 ) and normative appropriateness ( Rao 1998 ) of their new ventures . We conclude from our reading of history that the speciﬁc area of expertise is unimportant : if efﬁciency—and , by extension , social progress—was a goal of Progressivism , then any established category of expertise could provide a credible means to achieve that goal . This leads us to propose the following regarding the theorization of new organizational forms in emerging ﬁelds . Proposition 1 . The legitimacy of a new organiza - tional form in an emerging ﬁeld is increased when institutional entrepreneurs identify and promulgate con - tradictions between the status quo and broad institu - tional logics external to their ﬁeld and theorize their organizations as solutions to these problems . Proposition 2 . The legitimacy of a new organiza - tional form in an emerging ﬁeld is increased when insti - tutional entrepreneurs theorize their organizations as solutions embodying established categories of expertise external to their ﬁeld . We previously emphasized the special difﬁculties facing institutional entrepreneurs in emerging ﬁelds . There is , however , a silver lining to this cloud : insti - tutional entrepreneurs in emerging ﬁelds do not have to face resistance from entrenched value systems , sim - ply because these have not yet developed . In contrast , members of established ﬁelds may be more oriented to ﬁeld - speciﬁc norms , values , and beliefs than to external cultural schemas , and so they may be skeptical of claims based on such schemas . For example , theorizing new medical practices using schemas drawn from outside the established medical ﬁeld ( e . g . , religious movements or indigenous traditions ) is unlikely to succeed . In an estab - lished ﬁeld , cultural elements from inside the ﬁeld may provide more traction ; for example , Alfred Peet , a pio - neer of specialty coffee retailing within the mature cof - fee ﬁeld , emphasized his deep knowledge and experience with the coffee - roasting process to legitimate his novel organizational form ( Rindova and Fombrun 2001 ) . The David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields 366 Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS ﬂuid contexts of emerging ﬁelds may therefore be more fertile ground for theorizations that draw on external cul - tural elements than the often self - referential contexts of established ﬁelds and may therefore offer institutional entrepreneurs greater opportunity to manipulate wider cultural symbols when persuading constituents to sup - port new social arrangements ( Fligstein and Drita 1996 , Fligstein 2001 ) . Accordingly , we propose the following . Proposition 3 . Theorizing a new organizational form using cultural elements from outside the focal ﬁeld con - fers greater legitimacy in emerging ﬁelds than in estab - lished ﬁelds . Together , these propositions provide a picture of the - orization in emerging ﬁelds that is starkly different from theorization in established ﬁelds . In established ﬁelds , theorization is focused on the touchstones of the ﬁeld itself : institutional entrepreneurs identify and elaborate problems or crises in the ﬁeld and theorize their pre - ferred solutions as being consistent with ﬁeld norms and values ( e . g . , Greenwood et al . 2002 ) . In emerging ﬁelds , institutional entrepreneurs make salient inconsistencies with broad social values and propose solutions to these inconsistencies that invoke cultural elements external to their ﬁeld . Indeed , in emerging ﬁelds , it is not possible to demonstrate consistency with the ﬁeld’s values because those are not yet embedded . In addition , our reading of history revealed an element of theorization that has not ﬁgured prominently in prior work : pioneers of the professional form of management consulting projected more concern for their clients and for broad social beneﬁts than they did for their own wel - fare . For example , Arthur Little claimed to be uncon - cerned with proﬁtability , holding that “a professional man starts to fail the moment he permits money to shape his career” ( Kahn 1986 , p . 60 ) . Little held that “the lab - oratory is as much God’s temple as the church , ” and he saw it as his mission to spread this gospel , over and above his ﬁrm’s proﬁtability ( Kahn 1986 , p . 86 ) . When the ﬁrm moved to Cambridge in 1917 , he had the motto “Dedicated to Industrial Progress” carved in marble over the ﬁrm’s portal ( Kahn 1986 , p . 52 ) . Indeed , Little man - aged his ﬁrm’s ﬁnances so poorly that it almost went bankrupt several times . In 1921 , even as it was consult - ing to prominent corporations and boasting that it could increase efﬁciency and proﬁts , Little’s ﬁrm showed a loss , prompting senior staff to urge Little to relinquish control ( Kahn 1986 ) . Like Arthur Little , both James McKinsey and Edwin Booz demonstrated more concern for their clients than for their ﬁrms . McKinsey abandoned his ﬁrm in 1935 to implement the recommendations he had given as a consultant to Marshall Field . Undertaking a massive restructuring , including deep job cuts that prompted death threats from employees , McKinsey saved the retailer from bankruptcy ( Wolf 1978 ) . Similarly , Booz approached his work with the “extraordinary righteous - ness” of a “Calvinist preacher” and projected the image of an “industrial clergyman” ( Bowman 1984 , p . 10 ) . He neglected his own managerial duties for months at a time as he became immersed in consulting projects . Frustrated with Booz’s neglect , his partner James Allen left the ﬁrm twice ; only after Booz relinquished con - trol did the ﬁrm become a ﬁnancial success ( Bowman 1984 ) . In sum , all three institutional entrepreneurs pro - jected the impression that they cared more about adding to the greater good by improving client ﬁrms’ efﬁciency than they did about the proﬁtability of their own enter - prises . Whether this altruism was strategic or heartfelt is impossible to know and not of central concern ; what is important is that this was a prominent element of their theorization efforts . Displaying altruism can help those who found new organizational forms overcome the risk of being seen as disingenuous , which would lead audiences to shun the proposed new arrangements as morally suspect . To avoid the “self - promoter’s paradox” ( Ashforth and Gibbs 1990 , Suchman 1995 ) , these institutional entrepreneurs can appeal to the greater good or place audiences’ inter - ests above their own . Doing so imparts “normative dig - nity” ( Berger and Luckmann 1967 , p . 93 ; Fligstein 2001 ) or “moral legitimacy” ( Suchman 1995 ) by demonstrating that the actions of institutional entrepreneurs are under - girded by a prosocial logic and a rejection of narrow self - interest . Work in the traditional entrepreneurship lit - erature , particularly on family business , has suggested that altruism leads to positive ﬁrm outcomes ( Chrisman et al . 2004 , Carney 2005 , Karra et al . 2006 ) . For exam - ple , Karra et al . ( 2006 ) show that altruistic behavior can transcend the immediate family and near kin to more distant kinship and ethnic relations and can ulti - mately reduce ﬁrm agency costs . Our account of early management consulting ﬁrms—which were not family businesses—extends these ideas by suggesting , ﬁrst , that the display of altruism is especially important for new forms of organizations , whose institutional entrepreneurs are viewed with especially strong skepticism because they cannot point to the beneﬁts that derive from other organizations with the same form ( Aldrich and Fiol 1994 ) , and second , that altruism directed outside of dis - tant kinship networks is beneﬁcial . We argue that insti - tutional entrepreneurs must somehow demonstrate that their intentions are congruent with those of their orga - nizations’ audiences , that they place audience members’ interests at least equal to—if not above—their own . In turn , this perception can facilitate trust in new ventures and their founders . We therefore posit the following . Proposition 4 . The legitimacy of a new organiza - tional form in an emerging ﬁeld is increased when institu - tional entrepreneurs demonstrate altruism ( deemphasize their self - interest and emphasize instead the beneﬁts of their activities for constituents or society at large ) . David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS 367 Altruism is even more important in emerging ﬁelds than in established ﬁelds , because institutional entrepreneurs in emerging ﬁelds cannot draw on ﬁeld - level legitimating mechanisms . In contrast to most estab - lished ﬁelds , emerging ﬁelds have no accreditation or rating systems , licenses , or established courses of study or training for ﬁeld practitioners to buttress claims of legitimacy ( Sine et al . 2007 ) . For example , if a den - tist wanted to establish a new kind of practice within the existing ﬁeld of dentistry , say , one that focused on cosmetic dentistry before this became widespread , she could point to her credentials and dental train - ing or seek the sanctioning of the American Den - tal Association . In an emerging ﬁeld , these levers of legitimation are simply not available . This leaves institu - tional entrepreneurs more susceptible to skepticism and charges of pursuing their narrow self - interests . When institutional entrepreneurs in emerging ﬁelds demon - strate more concern for organizational constituents or for society as a whole than for themselves , they can mitigate such skepticism . In established ﬁelds , professing altru - ism may have only a marginal effect ; indeed , if altru - ism is used instead of standard legitimating mechanisms , it may actually increase skepticism , as observers ques - tion why standard mechanisms are being circumvented . Therefore , Proposition 5 . Altruism demonstrated by founders of new organizational forms confers more legitimacy in emerging ﬁelds than in established ﬁelds . We argue further that altruism will be especially important when the outputs of a new organizational form are intangible and its production processes untraceable ( Meyer and Rowan 1977 ) , as they are for ﬁrms that pro - vide expert services ( e . g . , legal , medical , accounting ) . When buying such types of outputs , customers have dif - ﬁculty assessing quality and are therefore vulnerable . And , as explained previously , emerging ﬁelds lack cer - tiﬁcation systems that can substitute for direct measures of quality . To overcome this deﬁcit , providers of intangi - ble services must convince customers that they will act in their best interest . In contrast , in ﬁelds where ﬁrms produce tangible outputs , altruism may still be valued , but customers can easily evaluate the beneﬁts of ﬁrms’ products for themselves and therefore require less reas - surance of ﬁrms’ good intentions . Parsons ( 1951 ) ﬁrst suggested the importance of displays of altruism in a study about physicians’ expert power . He argued that such power was accepted by patients only because of the “collective orientation” of physicians—in other words , the commitment of physicians to put the “welfare of the patient” above their own ( p . 435 ) . This observation is equally true of other expert services : lawyers swear to keep their clients’ information conﬁdential , and accoun - tants insist that they are independent of the organiza - tions that they audit . Indeed , that is one reason these services are labeled “professional . ” In emerging ﬁelds , the founders of new types of organizations that aspire to be seen as providing expert services must devise new signals that they can be trusted to put their clients’ inter - ests , and those of society at large , ahead of their own . This line of thought suggests the following . Proposition 6 . Altruism demonstrated by founders of new organizational forms in emerging ﬁelds con - fers more legitimacy when the outputs of these forms are intangible and output quality cannot be directly assessed . Afﬁliation . Pioneers of the professional form of man - agement consulting made extensive use of afﬁliations to legitimate their new ventures . One important type of afﬁliation was to authorities integral to their theorized logics . As described above , professional management consulting ﬁrms were based on a problem – solution theo - rization , where the “solution” was drawn from accepted categories of expertise . In contrast to what previous research has shown about new organizational forms in established ﬁelds , pioneers of the professional form of management consulting relied on categories of exper - tise that were external to their ﬁeld because no internal categories of expertise had yet been established . Their afﬁliations were to authorities such as universities , pro - fessional societies , and professional journals . For exam - ple , Little became president of the American Chemical Society and the ofﬁcial chemist of the American Insti - tute of Metals ( Kahn 1986 ) . He frequently published in journals such as the Journal of Industrial and Chem - ical Engineering and the American Brewers’ Review . Moreover , despite not having graduated , Little worked to maintain strong ties with MIT . From 1912 on , there was almost always a member of his ﬁrm ( initially Little him - self ) on the MIT Corporation board and , reciprocally , a member of MIT on the company’s board ( Kahn 1986 , p . 49 ) . Little lectured frequently at the university and collaborated on projects with faculty . He was a frequent contributor to the alumni magazine , Technology Review . In 1917 , Little moved his ﬁrm to Cambridge to be closer to MIT and drew most of his staff from the ranks of its graduates . Little raised funds for MIT by convincing industrialists such as George Eastman to donate ( Kahn 1986 , p . 51 ) . In 1921 , he became president of the MIT alumni association . James McKinsey was on the faculty at the University of Chicago , ﬁrst in accounting and later as one of the ﬁrst professors of business policy . He worked closely with Leon Marshall , dean of the business school , and was instrumental in shaping its curriculum ( Wolf 1978 , p . 3 ) . McKinsey’s book , Principles of Accounting , was pub - lished by the University of Chicago Press in 1920 . In 1924 , he became the president of the American Association of University Instructors in Accounting . McKinsey maintained his afﬁliation with Chicago long David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields 368 Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS after he founded his consulting ﬁrm—indeed , he would teach in the early morning , then “rush to his ofﬁce to participate in his consulting practice” ( Wolf 1978 , p . 9 ) . He remained on the faculty until shortly before his death . Similarly , Edwin Booz maintained strong ties to his alma mater , Northwestern University , and to the chair of its psychology department , Walter Dill Scott , who later became Northwestern’s president ( Bowman 1984 ) . It was Scott who recruited Booz into the mili - tary during World War I , which led Booz to establish relationships with many high - proﬁle industrialists who would eventually become clients . Booz’s ﬁrm’s ties to Northwestern were strengthened by the fact that his ﬁrst two permanent associates , George Fry and James Allen , were fellow alumni . Consulting pioneers’ ties to authorities external to the emerging ﬁeld—in this case to the loci of expertise underpinning their problem – solution models—signaled the credibility and appropriateness of their theoriza - tion . Ties to recognized institutions can substitute for objective performance measures , thereby raising the per - ceived instrumentality of new ventures ( Granovetter and McGuire 1998 , Stuart et al . 1999 , Navis and Glynn 2010 ) . They can also signal normative appropriate - ness over and above pragmatic value . Put another way , founders’ ties to recognized authorities and prominent institutions made them “culturally legitimated theorists” ( Strang and Meyer 1993 ) who were well positioned to advocate for their new organizational form . For example , Little’s claim to provide organizational solutions based on chemistry was implicitly supported by his ties to MIT . Similarly , McKinsey’s position as a faculty member at the University of Chicago’s business school signaled both the value and appropriateness of his consulting activities . We thus posit the following . Proposition 7 . The legitimacy of a new organiza - tional form in an emerging ﬁeld is increased when insti - tutional entrepreneurs have ties to authorities external to the ﬁeld and these authorities are integral to the orga - nizational form’s problem – solution theorization . To promote their new ventures , consulting pioneers also made extensive use of ties to individuals and insti - tutions that had a high status in society at large . Forg - ing these afﬁliations required considerable work because none of these three men was born to privilege : Little could not afford to ﬁnish college , McKinsey was born into poverty in the Ozark mountains , and Booz came from a modest Pennsylvania Dutch family and worked his way through college . Therefore , none had easy access to elites . In addition , these three men worked in cities whose local social elites varied greatly : Boston’s elite was in academia or old “Brahmin” families ; New York’s was more ﬂuid , being tied to ﬁnance and com - merce ; and Chicago’s was also ﬂuid but based primarily on manufacturing . Accordingly , the nature of the ties to local elites sought by these three men also varied , as did the beneﬁts ﬂowing from these ties . But we has - ten to note that the elite networks of these three men ranged far beyond the boundaries of the cities where they lived , encompassing nationally recognized individ - uals and national organizations . Arthur Little was a member of Boston’s exclusive St . Botolph’s Club and Brookline Country Club ; he used these memberships to cultivate business contacts ( Kahn 1986 ) . He was a friend of Wallace Donham , dean of the Harvard Business School , and of prominent lawyer ( later Supreme Court Justice ) Louis Brandeis ( Kahn 1986 ; McKenna 2006 , p . 30 ) . Little began a publication at his ﬁrm , the Little Journal , targeted to chemists , engineers , and managers . The journal , with frequent contributions by Little himself , addressed the beneﬁts of applying sci - ence to industry in a way that he believed “was eas - ily understood by the manufacturer , the banker , and the average business man” ( quoted in Kahn 1986 , p . 45 ) . He sent copies of articles to his contacts , including Kodak founder George Eastman and President Woodrow Wilson . Like Little , James McKinsey was active in community and professional organizations , notably the YMCA , the American Red Cross , and the American Management Association ; he became chairman of this last organiza - tion in 1936 . He used these activities and his position at the University of Chicago to cultivate ties to promi - nent businessmen ( Wolf 1978 ) . One colleague claimed that McKinsey devoted “all his lunches , half his break - fasts , and a third of his dinners” to discussing the busi - ness problems of inﬂuential people ; indeed , he was said to have “dined with every banker in Manhattan” and received work from “all but one of them” ( quoted in Wolf 1978 , p . 42 ) . Edwin Booz also promoted professional management consulting through elite contacts . He cultivated a friend - ship with prominent industrialist and ﬁnancier Sewell Avery , who became a lifelong supporter and client ( Higdon 1969 ) . Avery was a key member of a network of high - level contacts later known as Booz Marines , peo - ple who continually hired and recommended the ﬁrm . Booz also maintained strong connections to a frater - nity of Northwestern graduates , the Wranglers . At the Wranglers’ 20th anniversary in 1932 , Booz was honored for contributing “that same gift of analysis and foresight that has enabled him to build up his own business orga - nization in an entirely new ﬁeld” ( Bowman 1984 , p . 6 ) . By afﬁliating with local and national elites , Booz , McKinsey , and Little increased their own prestige and so increased the likelihood that observers would view their ventures as culturally appropriate . Because neither their ﬁrms nor the professional management consulting form had established reputations , these entrepreneurs relied instead on their personal reputations , as signaled by their David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS 369 afﬁliations , for legitimacy . By gaining implicit sanction - ing from elites , professional - form consulting pioneers certiﬁed their reliability and reputations and so were able to persuasively claim pragmatic value and norma - tive appropriateness . After all , if elites support a new activity , others may perceive it as valuable and accept - able ( Kaufman and Patterson 2005 ) . We thus posit the following . Proposition 8 . The legitimacy of a new organiza - tional form in an emerging ﬁeld is increased when insti - tutional entrepreneurs have ties to social elites . We expect afﬁliations with institutions and actors outside the focal ﬁeld to be especially important for new organizational forms in emerging ﬁelds . Whereas established ﬁelds have a well - deﬁned social structure and status hierarchy that institutional entrepreneurs can leverage , these do not yet exist in emerging ﬁelds . In emerging ﬁelds , moreover , founders cannot build con - nections to ﬁeld - speciﬁc institutions because they do not exist ; founders must instead forge ties with exter - nal actors who are broadly legitimate outside the focal ﬁeld . Entrepreneurs in established ﬁelds , in contrast , may face skepticism if they reach beyond ﬁeld bound - aries for legitimacy ; observers may wonder whether entrepreneurs had to go outside ﬁeld boundaries because they could not gain the support of recognized internal authorities . For example , biotechnology ﬁrms will have little success if they rely on relationships with actors other than scientists and medical practitioners for their legitimacy . In addition , high - status actors within estab - lished ﬁelds may resist circumvention of their authority . For all these reasons , we propose the following . Proposition 9 . Afﬁliations with institutions and actors outside the focal ﬁeld confer more legitimacy to new organizational forms in emerging ﬁelds than in established ﬁelds . Collective Action . Pioneers of the professional form of management consulting worked hard to create dis - tinctiveness and exteriority through collective action . Early on , the legitimacy of management consulting was threatened by perceptions of charlatanism ( McKenna 2006 , pp . 197 – 199 ) . In response , several pioneering professional consulting ﬁrms , including those founded by Edwin Booz and James McKinsey , banded together to found the Association of Consulting Management Engineers ( ACME ) in 1929 ( McKenna 2006 , p . 47 ) . 5 Through ACME , member ﬁrms deﬁned their model of consulting in a way that mimicked established profes - sions ( Higdon 1969 ) . They mounted scathing attacks against their common enemies , most notably the high - volume , low - cost form of consulting exempliﬁed by May’s ﬁrm , which , as explained earlier , eschewed the “professional” practices advocated by ACME and relied instead on aggressive sales tactics . May’s ﬁrm was con - sidered by ACME members to be “the bête noire of consulting” and a “vast embarrassment to their trade” ( Higdon 1969 , p . 151 , italics in original ) . This common enemy led ACME members to estab - lish a code of ethics that formally deﬁned norms for professional consulting ﬁrms . It established “high stan - dards for membership and a strict code of profes - sional ethics” ( Higdon 1969 , p . 287 ) and set forth “the major ethical concepts held to be necessary by its members for the practice of management consulting at the professional level ” ( ACME 1959 , p . vii ; emphasis added ) . The code of ethics restricted what ACME con - sidered unprofessional practices : mass media advertis - ing , cold calling , contingent billing , and poaching clients or employees . ACME members were , however , permit - ted to engage in more subtle , indirect forms of self - promotion , such as writing books and scholarly articles , sponsoring seminars , and giving guest lectures . ACME also published reams of documents setting standards of practice , including Professional Practices in Man - agement Consulting , The Common Body of Knowledge Required by Professional Management Consultants , and The Personal Qualiﬁcation of Management Consultants . Together , ACME’s guidelines and publications instan - tiated the professional consulting form’s social code ( Hannan et al . 2007 ) : they set out what any ﬁrm labeling itself a professional consulting ﬁrm should and should not do . This social code became a template for hiring and training consultants and for managing consulting projects . It signaled how to operate a legitimate pro - fessional consulting ﬁrm and in this way offered a membership template ( Lawrence 1999 ) for the ﬂedgling form . It is no surprise , then , that ACME’s primary activities were to promote common structures and prac - tices for member ﬁrms . For example , member ﬁrms were pushed to develop four - tiered structures consist - ing of partners , directors , senior associates , and junior associates ( although exact job titles sometimes varied ) . In addition , ACME ﬁrms typically assigned engagement directors ( partners or senior consultants ) to all projects and staffed projects with young employees straight from the university—practices very different from May’s ﬁrm , where consultants were older men with management experience . The collective creation of a social code contributed to the notion of professional management consulting as a distinct means of rational problem solving , one that existed independently from any individual or ﬁrm . By deﬁning this code in opposition to the “charlatan” George S . May International Company , ACME delin - eated the boundaries of the professional form . In this way , ACME contributed to the objectiﬁcation of early professional ﬁrms by signaling consensus around the beneﬁts of their activities and by codifying their norms David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields 370 Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS and values . These actions distanced the professional management consulting form from the men who founded professional management consulting ﬁrms and conveyed a measure of normative reassurance to potential clients . Professional ﬁrms could henceforth be justiﬁed by point - ing to their code of conduct and consensual beliefs about what they should and should not do . Moreover , ACME and its members could use this code to differen - tiate themselves from other kinds of organizations that claimed the label “management consulting ﬁrm” and to rationalize the ostracism of rogues who strayed from their model ; such punishment for nonconformity is nec - essary for the institutionalization of any form ( Berger and Luckmann 1967 , Hannan et al . 2007 ) . Finally , ACME’s actions contributed to management consulting’s historical continuity , or sedimentation , by providing a model that could be replicated by subsequent genera - tions ( Berger and Luckmann 1967 , Tolbert and Zucker 1996 ) . For example , prominent second - generation con - sulting ﬁrms A . T . Kearney ; George Fry & Associates ; and Cresap , McCormick & Paget were founded as pro - fessional ﬁrms and became members of ACME ( Higdon 1969 , McKenna 2006 ) . In contrast , May’s high - volume , low - cost ﬁrm did not join with others to elaborate its logic into a well - deﬁned social code and was not sys - tematically replicated . We thus propose the following . Proposition 10 . The legitimacy of a new organiza - tional form in an emerging ﬁeld is increased when insti - tutional entrepreneurs collectively deﬁne a social code of prescribed and proscribed behaviors that contrast with those of competing forms and that provide a template for replication . Although collective action is important in both emerg - ing and established ﬁelds , we expect its role in legitimat - ing new organizational forms to differ across these two contexts . In established ﬁelds , powerful collective actors such as industry and professional associations , standards councils , and working groups protect and defend exist - ing norms and values . Because the social codes in estab - lished ﬁelds are already entrenched , collective actors in these ﬁelds often resist rather than promote change . In established ﬁelds , therefore , institutional entrepreneurs may be most successful when working through existing collective actors . For example , large accounting ﬁrms used existing professional associations as a vehicle for legitimating the new organizational form they proposed , effectively limiting the ability of those opposed to the change to resist it ( Greenwood et al . 2002 ) . In the emerg - ing management consulting ﬁeld , in contrast , no collec - tive entity existed to reconcile innovations with existing values and beliefs . Instead , institutional entrepreneurs initiated new collective action to proactively deﬁne the professional form ; indeed , collective action in early man - agement consulting had this as its original motivation . These observed differences between our case and the study of existing ﬁelds lead us to propose the following . Proposition 11 . New collective bodies are more valuable for legitimating new organizational forms in emerging ﬁelds than in established ﬁelds , where existing collective bodies typically resist change that they them - selves do not promote . Increasing Legitimacy of the Professional Form The activities we outlined above bore fruit , not only for the ﬁrms we studied but also for the professional form of management consulting in general . If legiti - macy is a “generalized perception that the actions of an entity are desirable , proper , and appropriate” ( Suchman 1995 , p . 574 ) , then most industry observers would agree that the professional form of management consulting had gained considerable legitimacy by the 1950s ( Klein 1977 , Kipping 2002 , Kubr 2002 , McKenna 2006 ) . Evi - dence of increasing legitimacy comes in part from the success of the ﬁrms we studied ; from their very mod - est origins , they were able to attract large , prestigious clients . For example , early Booz , Allen & Hamilton clients included US Gypsum , Goodyear , the Chicago Daily News , Montgomery Ward , and the Stock Yards National Bank ( Bowman 1984 ) . By 1929 , Booz had undertaken more than 100 client assignments ( Kipping 2002 , p . 32 ) . In 1940 , Booz was hired to reorganize the U . S . Navy , which was doubling in size , and helped cre - ate the Army Services Forces to help the U . S . Army run more efﬁciently ( Bowman 1984 ) . McKinsey & Company also grew rapidly during the late 1920s and early 1930s . In 1935 , the ﬁrm landed a high - proﬁle assignment to conduct a comprehensive analysis of prominent retailer Marshall Field ( Higdon 1969 , Wolf 1978 ) . By 1936 , McKinsey & Company had 25 employees and a second ofﬁce in New York ( McKenna 2006 , p . 19 ) . Arthur D . Little , Inc . , also consulted for the military in the lead - up to and during World War II ; the ﬁrm pioneered the ﬁeld of operations research during this period and consulted with large and expanding ﬁrms such as Sears , Roebuck and Co . ( Kahn 1986 ) . In addition to the growth of these early ﬁrms , new professional - form consulting ﬁrms were founded , many of them offshoots from the ﬁrms we studied ( e . g . , A . T . Kearney from McKinsey & Company ; George Fry & Associates and Cresap , McCormick & Paget from Booz , Allen & Hamilton ) . Although professional - form ﬁrms remained quite small prior to World War II ( Higdon 1969 ) , after the war many were given high - proﬁle assignments in government and in the military – industrial complex . In 1946 , the Hoover Commission hired McKinsey & Company to lead several policy studies ( McKenna 1996 ) . In 1950 , President Truman allocated $ 1 million for managing consulting projects in the government , and in 1952 , President Eisenhower hired McKinsey & Company to reorganize the White House and advise on political appointments—projects David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS 371 that marked the start of a “golden age” for professional management consulting ﬁrms ( McKenna 1996 , 2006 ) . In sum , despite the ﬁnancial difﬁculties that many professional - form consulting ﬁrms experienced in their early years ( all three discussed here were near bankruptcy on more than one occasion ) , it was clear that by the early 1950s , they had become accepted and respected by clients . 6 Having reached proto - institutional status , the form grew in both numbers and prominence in the decades that followed , and , as chronicled by stu - dents of consulting’s history ( e . g . , Kubr 2002 , Kipping and Engwall 2002 , McKenna 2006 ) , the professional form of management consulting went on to dominate the ﬁeld . In other words , we see legitimacy as a continuous variable ( Tolbert and Zucker 1996 ) and the professional form of management consulting as having accumulated legitimacy over time . The form now possesses high lev - els of legitimacy along pragmatic , normative , and cog - nitive dimensions ( Suchman 1995 , Stryker 2000 , Scott 2001 ) and no longer requires recurrent collective mobi - lization ( Jepperson 1991 ) . Indeed , the industry associa - tion that was once so important to the legitimation of the ﬁeld , the Association of Consulting Management Engi - neers ( ACME ; now named the Association of Manage - ment Consulting Firms ) has played only a marginal role since the 1980s . Discussion and Conclusion We analyzed pioneering management consulting ﬁrms and their founders to develop propositions about how institutional entrepreneurs seize opportunities created by broad institutional change to legitimate new organiza - tional forms in emerging ﬁelds . Essentially nonexistent at the onset of World War I , the professional consulting form had gained widespread acceptance by the end of World War II . This transformation occurred despite the lack of clear economic beneﬁts and in the presence of feasible alternatives . In studying the evolution of man - agement consulting , we treated the now - dominant form not as inevitable but as the result of an institutionaliza - tion project . Our analysis suggests that the founders of the earliest consulting ﬁrms used social skills to legit - imate their new organizational form and thereby seize the opportunities created by changes in regulation and corporate demography . We proposed that in emerging ﬁelds , new organizational forms will gain legitimacy if entrepreneurs make salient contradictions between the status quo and broad cultural logics ; use established cat - egories of expertise from outside their ﬁeld to develop solutions to these problems ; deemphasize their own self - interest in favor of their clients and the broader social beneﬁts derived from their operations ; create distinctiveness and exteriority by collectively deﬁning social codes that distinguish their organizational forms from rivals and provide templates for replication ; and create connections to prominent actors outside their ﬁeld , both social elites and authorities integral to their problem – solution models . Throughout our analysis , we drew explicit contrasts between institutional entrepreneurship in emerging and established ﬁelds . Prior research reveals that in estab - lished ﬁelds , those who promote new kinds of organi - zations identify problems in the ﬁeld and theorize their solutions as consistent with ﬁeld norms and values ; for example , those promoting a new organizational form in the accounting ﬁeld placed “emphasis upon the con - tinuity and alignment of change with the prevailing values and practices of the profession ” ( Greenwood et al . 2002 , p . 75 , emphasis added ; see also Reay et al . 2006 ) . Institutional entrepreneurs in existing ﬁelds also work through established collectivities and lever - age existing social structures and status hierarchies within the ﬁeld when seeking to legitimate change ( e . g . , Greenwood et al . 2002 , Sherer and Lee 2002 , Lounsbury and Crumley 2007 ) . This also occurs when institutional entrepreneurs seek to legitimate new prac - tices among existing organizations ; for example , institu - tional entrepreneurs used their positions within existing AIDS organizations to build bridges between the diverse stakeholders that would have to accept new practices of information exchange in the treatment of HIV / AIDS ( Maguire et al . 2004 ) . As in the accounting ﬁeld , these institutional entrepreneurs theorized their new practices in ways that were consistent with existing organizational routines . In short , past work on existing ﬁelds and orga - nizations highlights established structures , logics , and social positions inside the ﬁeld . In contrast , institutional entrepreneurs in the emerging consulting ﬁeld looked outside their ﬁeld for legitimating mechanisms and cre - ated entirely new ﬁeld structures . They ( a ) drew on social logics and cultural elements external to their ﬁeld in their theorization , ( b ) forged ties with external high - status actors and institutions , and ( c ) created a new col - lective body to deﬁne their organizational form’s social code . Recognizing these similarities and differences with prior work leads us to a more contextually contingent understanding of institutional entrepreneurship . Caveats Three limitations of our study merit discussion and sug - gest avenues for future research . First , although we high - lighted consistencies with other work , we based our propositions on a single ﬁeld . Given the distinctive fea - tures of management consulting , our propositions might be most usefully applied to domains where outputs are unmeasurable and causal processes are complex ( Spence 1973 , Hannan et al . 2007 ) . The more intangible the outputs and the more untraceable the causal processes , the more institutional entrepreneurs must attach their new solutions to rationalized myths that resonate deeply ( Meyer and Rowan 1977 ) , such as established categories David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields 372 Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS of expertise . In ﬁelds where quality is easily measured and causal processes direct , it is possible that differ - ent forms of action than those we highlight might be required , or that institutional entrepreneurs may play a lesser role in the legitimation process . Ultimately , only a cumulative body of research can determine how insti - tutional entrepreneurship varies across contexts ; indeed , a critical meta - analysis of research on the actions taken by institutional entrepreneurs in all contexts—new and established ﬁelds , focusing on suborganizational ele - ments , entire organizations , organizational forms , and interorganizational structures and roles—would be of great value . Second , we intentionally focused on the actions of institutional entrepreneurs rather than on the con - texts that facilitate founding new kinds of organiza - tions . We provided an abbreviated account of how institutional change created opportunities for consult - ing and ignored , for example , the effects of changing labor laws , corporate antitrust regulations , and economic cycles ( Ruef 2002 ) . We did this because much prior research has shown how environmental changes cre - ate opportunities for new kinds of organizations ( e . g . , Stinchcombe 1965 , Ruef 2000 , Sine and David 2003 , David 2012 ) but has neglected the work agents must do to seize these opportunities . We recognize that insti - tutional entrepreneurship is contextually embedded and call for tighter theoretical links between opportunity cre - ation and agents’ actions . Third , we built our ideas on a successful case of insti - tutional entrepreneurship . This has allowed us to iden - tify actions that history tells us worked ; much can also be learned from failed cases ( Strang and Soule 1998 , Denrell and Kovacs 2008 ) . Toward an understanding of failed cases , we highlighted a competing form of man - agement consulting and contrasted the actions taken to support it with those taken to support the professional form . May’s ﬁrm was ﬁnancially successful early on , yet its form did not achieve dominance and today occupies a marginal position in the ﬁeld . This form did not ben - eﬁt from , for example , the collective action or the ties to universities that beneﬁted the professional form . We speculate that without the actions we identiﬁed , the man - agement consulting ﬁeld might look very different today . Perhaps management advice would be more internal - ized , or a different form of consulting would dominate . In addition to studying failed cases , knowledge of how management consulting developed in different times and places might yield a more contingent understanding of institutional entrepreneurship . Indeed , research on con - sulting in other countries shows that both institutional context and founders’ actions shape organizational struc - tures and dominant logics within national boundaries ( Kipping and Engwall 2002 ) . Empirical Testing Given the dearth of empirical studies of new organi - zational forms in emerging ﬁelds , it is important to discuss how our propositions might be tested and our ideas extended . Two research strategies seem particu - larly useful . The ﬁrst has been used in many previous studies : longitudinal analysis of ﬁeld evolution , based on historical archives or contemporaneous ethnography . Such studies can beneﬁt from more detailed sequencing of actions , which involves recording who interacts with whom , in what ways , and at what times ; it also involves identifying actors’ interpretations of their behavior at the time it occurs ( Barley and Tolbert 1997 ) . Sequence anal - ysis techniques such as optimal matching ( Abbott 1995 ) and event structure ( Heise 1989 ) can be applied to these kinds of data ( Ventresca and Mohr 2002 ) . Such meth - ods would seem particularly well suited to building a process model of the legitimation of new organizational forms in emerging ﬁelds . For example , our case sug - gests that collective action takes place after theorization has begun and afﬁliations have been established . This contrasts with studies of change in existing ﬁelds ( e . g . , Greenwood et al . 2002 , Maguire et al . 2004 ) , where collective bodies provided a location for theorization to develop . Future work can determine whether the tempo - ral pattern suggested here is the norm . A second useful strategy is one that is seldom used in macro - organizational research : laboratory experiments . Few studies in organization theory—institutionalist , eco - logical , or network—have followed Zucker’s ( 1977 ) lead . A notable exception is Elsbach’s ( 1994 ) analysis of the cattle industry , which used vignettes to assess how perceptions of organizations’ legitimacy change in response to changes in the form and content of organi - zational accounts . A similar technique can be used to test the propositions developed here . Competing forms of organizations could be introduced to subjects using documentation on the activities of early entrepreneurs . Vignettes detailing problem – solution logics underpin - ning organizations could be manipulated in terms of expertise content , demonstrations of selﬂessness , and ties to external authorities and social elites . Collectively deﬁned social codes could also be manipulated . Legit - imacy could be assessed by asking subjects to allocate limited resources among competing forms and to justify their decisions , or by asking for qualitative assessments . As with the research strategy suggested above , temporal ordering can be studied . An experimental method would beneﬁt from high internal validity : it would allow the manipulation of explanatory variables and the quantiﬁ - cation of changes in legitimacy across many different sets of conditions ( David and Bitektine 2009 ) . Conclusion We conclude by summarizing our contribution to the study of institutional entrepreneurship and to organiza - David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS 373 tional theory more broadly . Our work contributes pri - marily to the institutional approach to organizations , which views organizational forms as incarnations of beliefs and values that require legitimation . We studied the often - neglected origins of new ﬁelds and avoided the functionalist assumption that organizational forms expand to the extent that they provide efﬁcient out - comes ( Aldrich and Ruef 2006 , Dacin et al . 2002 ) . Our ﬁndings bring speciﬁcity to the notion that suc - cessful institutional entrepreneurs are “culturally compe - tent actors with strong practical skills” ( Lawrence and Suddaby 2006 , p . 219 ) and “active and artful exploiters” of the problems and contradictions inherent in institu - tional change ( Seo and Creed 2002 , p . 231 ) . Our analysis also suggests that those who promote new organizational forms in new ﬁelds rely on far more than rhetorical skill , a skill that has been much emphasized in prior work on institutional entrepreneurs . The founders of the earliest professional consulting ﬁrms employed a broad array of actions to move their new organizational form from theoretical formulation to proto - institution . They could not leverage ﬁeld - speciﬁc resources or their stand - ing within the ﬁeld ; they had to draw on external sup - ports . At the outset , the actions of these institutional entrepreneurs were distributed and emergent , not coor - dinated or planned . They did not initially have a com - mon agenda to transform an established ﬁeld ; not until much later did they band together to collectively deﬁne the boundaries of their form and formally deﬁne rela - tionships with each other and with clients . Together , these ﬁndings stand in sharp contrast with the imagery of institutional entrepreneurs as powerful actors who , to effect change , rely primarily on their rhetorical skills and social positions within their ﬁeld , and lead us toward an account of institutional entrepreneurship as emergent , multifaceted , and distributed across time and space . Our work also directs attention to contextual differ - ences in institutional entrepreneurship . Although broad classes of action ( e . g . , theorization , afﬁliation , collective action ) appear to be present across contexts , we expect institutional entrepreneurship to differ according to ( a ) whether the targets of change are suborganizational ele - ments ( structures or practices ) or organizational forms and ( b ) whether change occurs in an established or in an emerging ﬁeld . For example , we speculate that theo - rization about organizational forms should be more dif - ﬁcult than theorization about suborganizational elements because it is harder to justify an entirely new form than an element within an existing form . By the same token , afﬁliation targets are harder to ﬁnd for those who seek to launch new organizational forms than for those who seek to launch new subform elements . And as we hypothe - sized above , new organizational forms in emerging ﬁelds face particular challenges not present to the same degree in established ﬁelds—challenges that have implications for institutional entrepreneurship . In addition , our analysis suggests an institutionalist corrective for the classic transaction - cost analysis of the make - or - buy decision inherent in management consult - ing . Transaction - cost economics suggests that , in the presence of uncertainty and asset speciﬁcity , internal solutions are superior to external ones ( Williamson 1975 , 1985 ; David and Han 2004 ) . But the consulting industry has prospered despite potentially high transaction costs . The founders of the earliest management consulting ﬁrms mitigated initial transaction - cost disadvantages by forging ties to universities , professional associations , and social elites and by demonstrating prosocial behavior , which increased clients’ conﬁdence and trust . By devel - oping a social code that prohibited “unprofessional” practices , early consultants mimicked the established professions of law and accounting and so reduced fears of opportunism . In other words , these pioneering institu - tional entrepreneurs greatly improved the “atmosphere” ( Williamson 1975 , p . 40 ) surrounding professional con - sulting , which made this form of consulting far more prevalent than a straightforward transaction - cost analysis would predict . Finally , our work has implications for traditional entrepreneurship research . Not surprisingly , given its substantive importance , entrepreneurship is a thriving topic of research in management and in the two cognate social science disciplines of sociology and economics . Recent theoretical work has suggested that entrepreneurs do not succeed simply by building a better mousetrap but rather by skillfully manipulating existing political and cultural structures , yet few studies of traditional entrepreneurs adopt an institutional approach ( Sine and David 2010 , Tolbert et al . 2011 ) . Our study suggests the very speciﬁc ways in which entrepreneurial effort to promote entirely new kinds of organizations in emerg - ing ﬁelds must go beyond the technical merits of new ventures . Our analysis suggests that establishing new kinds of organizations requires entrepreneurs to con - struct identities for their ventures in ways that legitimate them more than just instrumentally . By highlighting con - tradictions between the status quo and prevailing log - ics , leveraging established ( external ) ﬁelds of expertise , building afﬁliations to elites , demonstrating selﬂessness , and engaging in collective action to establish a distinc - tive social code vis - à - vis alternatives , those struggling to legitimate new kinds of organizations can improve their chance of success . The difﬁculty of doing these things while at the same time tending to technical issues might explain why the institutionalization of new kinds of organizations , as witnessed in the case of professional management consulting , is a rare occurrence . Electronic Companion An electronic companion to this paper is available as part of the online version at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1120 . 0745 . David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields 374 Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS Acknowledgments W . D . Sine and H . A . Haveman contributed equally to this work and are joint second authors . The authors thank the Organization Science anonymous reviewers for their con - structive suggestions , which improved the paper . The authors also gratefully acknowledge helpful comments on previous versions from Eric Abrahamson , Tina Dacin , Raghu Garud , Shin - Kap Han , Jan Jorgensen , Tom Lawrence , Marc - David Seidel , and Pamela Tolbert , as well as from seminar partici - pants at the Academy of Management , the European Group for Organization Studies , and the Administrative Sciences Asso - ciation of Canada . R . David also thanks the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada as well as the Cleghorn Faculty Scholar Award ( Desautels Faculty of Man - agement ) for generous funding . Endnotes 1 We use the label “professional” because this organizational form claims professional status ( McKenna 2006 ) . A full anal - ysis of this claim is beyond the scope of the present paper ; for a review and discussion of management consulting’s status as a profession , see Kirkpatrick et al . ( 2012 ) . 2 We use the composite term “traditional entrepreneur” to more clearly distinguish “entrepreneur” from “institutional entrepreneur . ” We thank an anonymous reviewer for suggest - ing this terminology . 3 The development of Table 1 beneﬁted greatly from a discus - sion with Tom Lawrence , and we thank him for his insights . 4 We note also that no sampling frame—no list of management consulting ﬁrms circa 1920 or 1930—exists , making any kind of probability sampling impossible in this case . 5 Little’s ﬁrm was invited to join ACME on several occasions but declined ( McKenna 2006 , p . 31 ) . Until the 1980s , ACME remained a prestigious association that represented the ﬁeld’s leading ﬁrms . 6 We note the possibility that professional management con - sulting expanded simply because these ﬁrms provided beneﬁts that outweighed their costs . Although we cannot completely rule out this functionalist argument , we observe that there is a paucity of evidence—and much doubt—that consultants provide efﬁcient outcomes ( e . g . , O’Shea and Madigan 1997 , Pinault 2000 , Clark and Fincham 2002 , Kieser 2002 ) . References Abbott A ( 1992 ) An old institutionalist reads the new institutionalism . Contemporary Sociol . 21 : 754 – 756 . Abbott A ( 1995 ) Sequence analysis : New methods for old ideas . Hagan J , Cook K , eds . Annual Review of Sociology , Vol . 21 ( Annual Reviews , Palo Alto , CA ) , 93 – 113 . Abrahamson E , Fairchild G ( 1999 ) Management fashion : Lifecycles , triggers , and collective learning processes . Admini . Sci . Quart . 44 : 708 – 740 . ACME ( 1959 ) Professional Practices in Management Consulting ( Association of Consulting Management Engineers , New York ) . Aldrich HE , Fiol M ( 1994 ) Fools rush in ? The institutional context of industry creation . Acad . Management Rev . 19 : 645 – 670 . Aldrich HE , Ruef M ( 2006 ) Organizations Evolving , 2nd ed . ( Sage , Thousand Oaks , CA ) . Ashforth BE , Gibbs BW ( 1990 ) The double - edge of organizational legitimation . Organ . Sci . 1 : 177 – 194 . Barley SR , Tolbert PS ( 1997 ) Institutionalization and structuration : Studying the links between action and institution . Organ . Stud . 18 : 93 – 117 . Bendix R ( 1956 ) Work and Authority in Industry ( University of California Press , Berkeley ) . Benford RD , Snow DA ( 2000 ) Framing processes and social move - ments : An overview and assessment . Annual Rev . Sociol . 26 : 611 – 639 . Berle AA , Means GC ( 1932 ) The Modern Corporation and Private Property ( Macmillan , New York ) . Berger PL , Luckmann T ( 1967 ) The Social Construction of Reality ( Doubleday , Garden City , NJ ) . Bitektine A ( 2011 ) Towards a theory of social judgments of orga - nizations : The case of legitimacy , reputation , and status . Acad . Management Rev . 36 : 151 – 179 . Bowman J ( 1984 ) Booz Allen and Hamilton : Seventy Years of Client Service , 1914 – 1984 ( Booz Allen and Hamilton , New York ) . Brint S , Karabel J ( 1989 ) The Diverted Dream : Community Colleges and the Promise of Educational Opportunity in America , 1900 – 1985 ( Oxford University Press , New York ) . Calhoun C ( 1998 ) Explanation in historical sociology : Narrative , gen - eral theory , and historically speciﬁc theory . Amer . J . Sociol . 104 : 846 – 871 . Carney M ( 2005 ) Corporate governance and competitive advantage in family - controlled ﬁrms . Entrepreneurship Theory Practice 29 : 249 – 265 . Carr EH ( 1961 ) What Is History ? ( Vintage Books , New York ) . Chandler AD Jr ( 1962 ) Strategy and Structure : Chapters in the History of the American Industrial Enterprise ( MIT Press , Cambridge , MA ) . Chandler AD Jr ( 1977 ) The Visible Hand : The Managerial Revolu - tion in American Business ( Belknap Press of Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA ) . Chandler AD Jr ( 1990 ) Scale and Scope : The Dynamics of Indus - trial Capitalism ( Belknap Press of Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA ) . Child J , Lu Y , Tsai T ( 2007 ) Institutional entrepreneurship in building an environmental protection system for the People’s Republic of China . Organ . Stud . 28 : 1013 – 1034 . Chrisman JJ , Chua JH , Litz RA ( 2004 ) Comparing the agency costs of family and non - family ﬁrms : Conceptual issues and exploratory evidence . Entrepreneurship Theory Practice 28 ( 4 ) : 335 – 354 . Clark T , Fincham R , eds . ( 2002 ) Critical Consulting : New Per - spectives on the Management Advice Industry ( Blackwell , Oxford , UK ) . Cochran TC ( 1972 ) American Business in the Twentieth Century ( Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA ) . Crane D ( 1965 ) Scientists at major and minor universities : A study of productivity and recognition . Amer . Sociol . Rev . 30 : 699 – 714 . Creed WED , Scully MA , Austin JR ( 2002 ) Clothes make the person ? The tailoring of legitimating accounts and the social construction of identity . Organ . Sci . 13 : 475 – 496 . Dacin MT , Goodstein J , Scott WR ( 2002 ) Institutional theory and institutional change . Acad . Management J . 45 : 45 – 57 . David RJ ( 2012 ) Institutional change and the growth of strategy consulting in the United States . Kipping M , Clark T , eds . The Oxford Handbook of Management Consulting ( Oxford University Press , Oxford , UK ) , 71 – 92 . David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS 375 David RJ , Bitektine AB ( 2009 ) The deinstitutionalization of insti - tutional theory ? Exploring divergent agendas in institutional research . Buchanan DA , Bryman A , eds . The Sage Hand - book of Organizational Research Methods ( Sage , Los Angeles ) , 160 – 175 . David RJ , Han S ( 2004 ) A systematic assessment of the empirical support for transaction cost economics . Strategic Management J . 25 : 39 – 58 . Denrell J , Kovacs B ( 2008 ) Selective sampling of empirical settings in organizational studies . Admin . Sci . Quart . 53 : 109 – 144 . DiMaggio PJ ( 1986 ) Structural analysis of organizational ﬁelds : A blockmodel approach . Staw BM , Cummings LL , eds . Research in Organizational Behavior , Vol . 8 ( JAI Press , Greenwich , CT ) , 335 – 370 . DiMaggio PJ ( 1988 ) Interest and agency in institutional the - ory . Zucker L , ed . Institutional Patterns and Organizations ( Ballinger , Cambridge , MA ) . DiMaggio PJ ( 1991 ) Constructing an organizational ﬁeld as a pro - fessional project : U . S . art museums , 1920 – 1940 . Powell WW , DiMaggio PJ , eds . The New Institutionalism in Organizational Theory ( University of Chicago Press , Chicago ) , 267 – 292 . DiMaggio PJ , Powell WW ( 1983 ) The iron cage revisited : Institu - tional isomorphism and collective rationality in organizational ﬁelds . Amer . Sociol . Rev . 48 ( 2 ) : 147 – 160 . DiMaggio PJ , Powell WW ( 1991 ) Introduction . Powell W , DiMaggio P , eds . The New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis ( University of Chicago Press , Chicago ) , 1 – 38 . Dowell G , Swaminathan A , Wade J ( 2002 ) Pretty pictures and ugly scenes : Political and technological maneuvers in high deﬁnition television . Ingram P , Silverman B , eds . The New Institutionalism in Strategic Management ( Advances in Strategic Management , Volume 19 ) ( Emerald Group Publishing , Bingley , UK ) , 97 – 133 . Elsbach KD ( 1994 ) Managing organizational legitimacy in the California cattle industry : The construction and effectiveness of verbal accounts . Admin . Sci . Quart . 39 : 57 – 88 . Evans RJ ( 1997 ) In Defense of History ( W . W . Norton , London ) . Fligstein N ( 1990 ) The Transformation of Corporate Control ( Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA ) . Fligstein N ( 2001 ) Social skill and the theory of ﬁelds . Sociol . Theory 19 : 105 – 125 . Fligstein N , Drita IM ( 1996 ) How to make a market : Reﬂections on the European Union’s single market program . Amer . J . Sociol . 102 : 1 – 33 . Fligstein N , McAdam D ( 2011 ) Toward a general theory of strategic action ﬁelds . Sociol . Theory 29 : 1 – 26 . Fortune ( 1944 ) Doctors of management . ( July ) : 142 – 210 . Gaddis JL ( 2002 ) The Landscape of History : How Historians Map the Past ( Oxford University Press , New York ) . Gartner WB ( 1988 ) “Who is an entrepreneur ? ” is the wrong question . Amer . J . Small Bus . 12 : 11 – 32 . Garud R , Jain S , Kumaraswamy A ( 2002 ) Institutional entrepreneur - ship in the sponsorship of common technical standards : The case of Sun Microsystems and Java . Acad . Management J . 45 : 196 – 214 . Garud R , Gehman J , Karnøe P ( 2010 ) Categorization by associa - tion : Nuclear technology and emission - free electricity . Sine W , David R , eds . Institutions and Entrepreneurship ( Research in the Sociology of Work , Vol . 21 ) ( Emerald , Bingley , UK ) , 51 – 93 . George AL , Bennett A ( 2005 ) Case Studies and Theory Development in the Social Sciences ( MIT Press , Cambridge , MA ) . Goffman E ( 1974 ) Frame Analysis ( Harper & Row , New York ) . Granovetter M , McGuire P ( 1998 ) The making of an industry : Elec - tricity in the United States . Callon M , ed . The Law of Markets ( Blackwell Publishers , Oxford , UK ) , 147 – 173 . Greenwood R , Hinings CR ( 1996 ) Understanding radical organiza - tional change : Bringing together the old and the new institution - alism . Acad . Management Rev . 21 ( 4 ) : 1022 – 1054 . Greenwood R , Suddaby R , Hinings CR ( 2002 ) Theorizing change : The role of professional associations in the transformation of institutionalized ﬁelds . Acad . Management J 45 : 58 – 80 . Greiner LE , Metzger RO ( 1983 ) Consulting to Management ( Prentice Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ ) . Hannan MT , Pólos L , Carroll GR ( 2007 ) Logics of Organization The - ory ( Princeton University Press , Princeton , NJ ) . Haveman HA , Rao H ( 1997 ) Structuring a theory of moral sentiments . Amer . J . Sociol . 102 : 1606 – 1651 . Heise DR ( 1989 ) Modeling event structures . J . Math . Sociol . 14 : 139 – 169 . Hiatt SR , Sine WD , Tolbert PS ( 2009 ) From Pabst to Pepsi : The deinstitutionalization of social practices and the creation of entrepreneurial opportunities . Admin . Sci . Quart . 54 : 635 – 667 . Higdon H ( 1969 ) The Business Healers ( Random House , New York ) . Hofstadter R ( 1955 ) The Age of Reform ( Vintage Books , New York ) . Jacoby SM ( 1985 ) Employing Bureaucracy ( Columbia University Press , New York ) . Jepperson RL ( 1991 ) Institutions , institutional effects , and institution - alization . Powell WW , DiMaggio PJ , eds . The New Institution - alism in Organizational Analysis ( University of Chicago Press , Chicago ) , 143 – 163 . Jones G , Khanna T ( 2006 ) Bringing history ( back ) into international business . J . Internat . Bus . Stud . 37 : 453 – 468 . Karra N , Tracey P , Phillips N ( 2006 ) Altruism and agency in the family ﬁrm : Exploring the role of family , kinship , and ethnicity . Entrepreneurship Theory Practice 30 ( 6 ) : 861 – 877 . Kahn EJ Jr ( 1986 ) The Problem Solvers : A History of Arthur D . Little , Inc . ( Little , Brown and Company , Boston ) . Kaufman J , Patterson O ( 2005 ) Cross - national cultural diffusion : The global spread of cricket . Amer . Sociol . Rev . 70 : 82 – 110 . Kieser A ( 1994 ) Why organizational theory needs historical analyses—And how this should be performed . Organ . Sci . 5 : 608 – 623 . Kieser A ( 2002 ) Managers as marionettes ? Using fashion theories to explain the success of consultancies . Kipping M , Engwall L , eds . Management Consulting ( Oxford University Press , Oxford , UK ) , 167 – 183 . Kipping M ( 2002 ) Trapped in their wave : The evolution of manage - ment consultancies . Clark T , Fincham R , eds . Critical Consult - ing ( Blackwell , Oxford , UK ) , 28 – 49 . Kipping M , Clark T ( 2012 ) Researching management consulting : An introduction to the handbook . Kipping M , Clark T , eds . The Oxford Handbook of Management Consulting ( Oxford Univer - sity Press , Oxford , UK ) , 1 – 26 . Kipping M , Engwall L , eds . ( 2002 ) Management Consulting ( Oxford University Press , Oxford , UK ) . Kirkpatrick I , Muzio D , Ackroyd S ( 2012 ) Professions and profes - sionalism in management consulting . Kipping M , Clark T , eds . The Oxford Handbook of Management Consulting ( Oxford Uni - versity Press , Oxford , UK ) , 187 – 206 . David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields 376 Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS Klein HJ ( 1977 ) Other People’s Business ( Mason / Charter , New York ) . Kubr M ( 2002 ) Management Consulting : A Guide to the Profession 4th ed . ( International Labour Ofﬁce , Geneva ) . Lawrence TB ( 1999 ) Institutional strategy . J . Management 25 : 161 – 187 . Lawrence TB , Phillips N ( 2004 ) From Moby Dick to Free Willy : Macro - cultural discourse and institutional entrepreneurship in emerging institutional ﬁelds . Organization 11 : 689 – 711 . Lawrence TB , Suddaby R ( 2006 ) Institutions and institutional work . Clegg S , Hardy C , Lawrence T , Nord W , eds . The Sage Hand - book of Organizational Studies ( Sage , London ) , 215 – 254 . Lawrence TB , Hardy C , Phillips N ( 2002 ) Institutional effects of interorganizational collaboration : The emergence of proto - institutions . Acad . Management J . 45 : 281 – 290 . Lemann N ( 1999 ) The kids in the conference room : How McKinsey and Co . became the next big step . New Yorker ( Octo - ber 18 ) : 209 – 216 . Lounsbury M , Crumley ET ( 2007 ) New practice creation : An institu - tional perspective on innovation . Organ . Stud . 28 : 993 – 1012 . Lounsbury M , Ventresca M , Hirsch PM ( 2003 ) Social movements , ﬁeld frames and industry emergence : A cultural - political per - spective on US recycling . Socio - Econom . Rev . 1 : 71 – 104 . Low MB , Abrahamson E ( 1997 ) Movements , bandwagons , and clones : Industry evolution and the entrepreneurial process . J . Bus . Venturing 12 : 435 – 457 . Mael F , Ashforth BE ( 1992 ) Alumni and their alma mater : A partial test of the reformulated model of organizational identiﬁcation . J . Organ . Behav . 13 : 103 – 123 . Maguire S , Hardy C , Lawrence TB ( 2004 ) Institutional entrepreneur - ship in emerging ﬁelds : HIV / AIDS treatment advocacy in Canada . Acad . Management J . 47 : 657 – 679 . McKenna CD ( 1995 ) The origins of modern management consulting . Bus . Econom . Hist . 24 : 51 – 58 . McKenna CD ( 1996 ) Agents of adhocracy : Management consultants and the reorganization of the executive branch , 1947 – 1949 . Bus . Econom . Hist . 25 : 101 – 111 . McKenna CD ( 2006 ) The World’s Newest Profession ( Cambridge Uni - versity Press , Cambridge , UK ) . Merton RK ( 1968a ) The Matthew effect in science . Science 159 : 56 – 63 . Merton RK ( 1968b ) Social Theory and Social Structure , enlarged ed . ( Free Press , New York ) . Meyer JW , Rowan B ( 1977 ) Institutionalized organizations : Formal structure as myth and ceremony . Amer . J . Sociol . 83 : 340 – 363 . Navis C , Glynn MA ( 2010 ) How new market categories emerge : Tem - poral dynamics of legitimacy , identity , and entrepreneurship in satellite radio , 1990 – 2005 . Admin . Sci . Quart . 55 : 439 – 471 . Nelson RL ( 1959 ) Merger Movements in American Industry 1895 – 1956 ( National Bureau of Economic Research , Cam - bridge , MA ) . O’Shea J , Madigan C ( 1997 ) Dangerous Company : The Consulting Powerhouses and the Businesses They Save and Ruin ( Times Business , New York ) . Parsons T ( 1951 ) The Social System ( Free Press , Glencoe , IL ) . Perkmann M , Spicer A ( 2007 ) “Healing the scars of history” : Projects , skills and ﬁeld strategies in institutional entrepreneur - ship . Organ . Stud . 28 : 1101 – 1122 . Perrow C ( 1985 ) Review essay : Overboard with myth and symbols . Amer . J . Sociol . 91 : 151 – 155 . Phillips N , Tracey P ( 2007 ) Opportunity recognition , entrepreneurial capabilities , and bricolage : Connecting institutional theory and entrepreneurship in strategic organization . Strategic Organ . 5 : 313 – 320 . Pinault L ( 2000 ) Consulting Demons ( Harper Business , New York ) . Podolny JM ( 1993 ) A status - based model of market competition . Amer . J . Sociol . 98 : 829 – 872 . Powell WW , White DR , Koput KW , Owen - Smith J ( 2005 ) Network dynamics and ﬁeld evolution . Amer . J . Sociol . 110 : 1132 – 1205 . Rao H ( 1998 ) Caveat emptor : The construction of nonproﬁt consumer watchdog organizations . Amer . J . Sociol . 103 : 912 – 961 . Rao H , Morrill C , Zald MN ( 2000 ) Power plays : How social move - ments and collective action create new organizational forms . Staw BM , Sutton RJ , eds . Research in Organizational Behavior , Vol . 22 ( Elsevier , New York ) 237 – 281 . Reay T , Golden - Biddle K , GermAnn K ( 2006 ) Legitimizing a new role : Small wins and microprocesses of change . Acad . Manage - ment J . 49 : 977 – 998 . Rindova VP , Fombrun CJ ( 2001 ) Entrepreneurial action in the creation of the specialty coffee niche . Schoonhoven CB , Romanelli E , eds . The Entrepreneurship Dynamic : Origins of Entrepreneur - ship and the Evolution of Industries ( Stanford University Press , Stanford , CA ) , 236 – 261 . Ruef M ( 2000 ) The emergence of organizational forms : A community ecology approach . Amer . J . Sociol . 106 : 658 – 714 . Ruef M ( 2002 ) At the interstices of organizations : The expansion of the management consulting profession , 1933 – 1997 . Sahlin - Andersson K , Engwall L , eds . The Expansion of Management Knowledge ( Stanford University Press , Stanford , CA ) , 74 – 95 . Schumpeter JA ( 1942 ) Capitalism , Socialism , and Democracy ( Harper & Row , New York ) . Scott WR ( 2001 ) Institutions and Organizations , 2nd ed . ( Sage , Thou - sand Oaks , CA ) . Seo M - G , Creed WED ( 2002 ) Institutional contradictions , praxis , and institutional change : A dialectical perspective . Acad . Manage - ment Rev . 27 : 222 – 247 . Sherer PD , Lee K ( 2002 ) Institutional change in large law ﬁrms : A resource dependency and institutional perspective . Acad . Management J . 45 : 102 – 119 . Sine WD , David RJ ( 2003 ) Environmental jolts , institutional change , and the creation of entrepreneurial opportunity in the US electric power industry . Res . Policy 32 ( 2 ) : 185 – 207 . Sine WD , David RJ ( 2010 ) Institutions and Entrepreneurship . Sine W , David R , eds . Institutions and Entrepreneurship ( Research in the Sociology of Work , Vol . 21 ) ( Emerald Group Publishing , Bingley , UK ) , 1 – 26 . Sine WD , Lee BH ( 2009 ) Tilting at windmills ? The environmental movement and the emergence of the U . S . wind energy sector . Admin . Sci . Quart . 54 : 123 – 155 . Sine WD , David RJ , Mitsuhashi H ( 2007 ) From plan to plant : Effects of certiﬁcation on operational start - up in the emergent indepen - dent power sector . Organ . Sci . 18 : 578 – 594 . Sine WD , Haveman HA , Tolbert PS ( 2005 ) Risky business ? Entrepreneurship in the new independent power sector . Admin . Sci . Quart . 50 : 200 – 232 . Snow DA , Rochford EB , Worden SK , Benford RD ( 1986 ) Frame alignment processes , micromobilization , and movement partici - pation . Amer . Sociol . Rev . 51 : 464 – 481 . Spence M ( 1973 ) Job market signaling . Quart . J Econom . 87 : 355 – 374 . David , Sine , and Haveman : New Organizational Forms in Emerging Fields Organization Science 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 356 – 377 , ©2013 INFORMS 377 Stinchcombe AL ( 1965 ) Social structure and organizations . March J , ed . Handbook of Organizations ( Rand - McNally , Chicago ) , 142 – 193 . Stinchcombe AL ( 1997 ) On the virtues of the old institutionalism . Ann . Rev . Sociol . 23 : 1 – 18 . Strang D , Meyer JW ( 1993 ) Institutional conditions for diffusion . Theory Soc . 22 : 487 – 511 . Strang D , Soule SA ( 1998 ) Diffusion in organizations and social movements . Cook K , Hagan J , eds . , Annual Review of Sociol - ogy , Vol . 24 ( Annual Reviews , Palo Alto , CA ) , 265 – 290 . Stryker P ( 1954 ) The relentless George S . May Co . Fortune ( June ) : 140 – 208 . Stryker R ( 1996 ) Beyond history versus theory : Strategic narrative and sociological explanation . Sociol . Methods Res . 24 : 304 – 352 . Stryker R ( 2000 ) Legitimacy processes as institutional politics : Impli - cations for theory and research in the sociology of organiza - tions . Lawler E , ed . Research in the Sociology of Organizations , Vol . 17 ( JAI Press , Greenwich , CT ) , 179 – 223 . Stuart TE , Hoang H , Hybels R ( 1999 ) Interorganizational endorse - ments and the performance of entrepreneurial ventures . Admin . Sci . Quart . 44 : 315 – 349 . Suchman MC ( 1995 ) Managing legitimacy : Strategic and institutional approaches . Acad . Management Rev . 20 : 571 – 610 . Suddaby R , Greenwood R ( 2005 ) Rhetorical strategies of legitimacy . Admin . Sci . Quart . 50 : 35 – 67 . Swaminathan A , Wade JB ( 2001 ) Social movement theory and the evolution of new organizational forms . Schoonhoven CB , Romanelli E , eds . The Entrepreneurship Dynamic in Industry Evolution ( Stanford University Press , Stanford , CA ) , 286 – 313 . Tisdall P ( 1982 ) Agents of Change : The Development and Prac - tice of Management Consultancy ( Trafalgar Square Publishing , London ) . Tolbert PS , Zucker LG ( 1996 ) The institutionalization of institutional theory . Clegg S , Hardy C , Nord W , eds . The Sage Handbook of Organizational Theory ( Sage , London ) , 176 – 190 . Tolbert PS , David RJ , Sine WD ( 2011 ) Studying choice and change : The intersection of institutional theory and entrepreneurship research . Organ . Sci . 22 : 1332 – 1344 . Tracey P , Phillips N , Jarvis O ( 2011 ) Bridging institutional entrepreneurship and the creation of new organizational forms : A multilevel model . Organ . Sci . 22 : 60 – 80 . Van de Ven AH , Garud R ( 1989 ) A framework for understanding the emergence of new industries . Rosenbloom R , Burgelman R , eds . Research on Technological Innovation , Management and Policy , Vol . 4 ( JAI Press , Greenwich , CT ) , 195 – 225 . Ventresca MJ , Mohr JW ( 2002 ) Archival research methods . Baum JAC , ed . The Blackwell Companion to Organizations ( Blackwell , Cambridge , MA ) , 805 – 828 . Washington M , Ventresca MJ ( 2008 ) Institutional contradictions and struggles in the formation of U . S . collegiate basketball , 1880 – 1938 . J . Sport Management 22 : 30 – 49 . Whalley P , Barley SR ( 1997 ) Technical work and the division of labor : Stalking the wily anomaly . Barley S , Orr J , eds . Between Craft and Science—Technical Work in U . S . Settings ( ILR Press , Ithaca , NY ) , 23 – 52 . Wiebe RH ( 1962 ) Businessmen and Reform : A Study of the Progres - sive Movement ( Quadrangle Books , Chicago ) . Wijen F , Ansari S ( 2007 ) Overcoming inaction through collec - tive institutional entrepreneurship : Insights from regime theory . Organ . Stud . 28 : 1079 – 1100 . Williamson OE ( 1975 ) Markets and Hierarchies : Analysis and Antitrust Implications ( Free Press , New York ) . Williamson OE ( 1985 ) The Economic Institutions of Capitalism ( Free Press , New York ) . Wolf WB ( 1978 ) Management and Consulting : An Introduction to James O . McKinsey ( New York State School of Industrial and Labor Relations , Ithaca ) . Wren DA ( 2005 ) The History of Management Thought , 5th ed . ( John Wiley & Sons , Hoboken , NJ ) . Zietsma C , Lawrence TB ( 2010 ) Institutional work in the transforma - tion of an organizational ﬁeld : The interplay of boundary work and practice work . Admin . Sci . Quart . 55 : 198 – 221 . Zucker LG ( 1977 ) The role of institutionalization in cultural persis - tence . Amer . Sociol . Rev . 42 : 726 – 743 . Robert J . David is an associate professor of strategy and organization and the Cleghorn Faculty Scholar at the Desau - tels Faculty of Management , McGill University . He is also the director of the Centre for Strategy Studies in Organization at McGill . He holds a Ph . D . from Cornell University . He studies the evolution of management practices , organizational forms , and industries from an institutional perspective . Wesley D . Sine is the J . Thomas Clark Professor of Entrepreneurship and Personal Enterprise and associate pro - fessor of management and organizations at Cornell Univer - sity . His research focuses on the emergence of new economic sectors and entrepreneurship ; this research context includes the United States , Latin America , and the Middle East . He explores issues related to institutional change , industry and technology evolution , technology entrepreneurship , and new venture structure and strategy . Heather A . Haveman is a professor of sociology and business at the University of California , Berkeley , where she received a Ph . D . in organizational behavior and indus - trial relations . She studies how organizations , industries , and employees’ careers evolve . Her work has appeared in leading sociology , management , and social science journals .