Enhancing creativity through reorganising mental space concealed in a research notes stack K . Aihara a , * , K . Hori b a National Center for Science Information Systems 3 - 29 - 1 Otsuka , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo 112 8640 , Japan b Dept of Aeronautics and Astronautics , School of Engineering , The University of Tokyo 7 - 3 - 1 Hongo , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo 113 8656 , Japan Received 3 August 1998 ; accepted 17 August 1998 Abstract In this article , we propose a method and its implementation to aid the process of creative thinking . The objective of this research is to enhance human scientiﬁc creativity with computers . In order to aid the process of creative thinking , we have implemented a system named En Passant 2 , which stores the user’s research notes and gives the triggers to recall his / her memories in current context . En Passant 2 has a function to deal with indices and a time attribute of the user’s thought explicitly , and shows the user’s notepads related to his / her awareness of the issues . q 1998 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved . Keywords : Creativity support system ; Change of constraint ; Naturalness of media 1 . Introduction In recent years , computers may be regarded as a partner in thinking . Several studies have been made on thinking support systems . However , systems of many of these studies have implemented ‘‘thinking method’’ , such as KJ method [ 1 ] , on the computers without considering whether the method is effective in cognition or not . The authors have also built several systems , such as AA1 [ 2 ] , for aiding creative activities and these systems have worked effectively . We have come to recognize the neces - sity of theories that explain why the system for aiding crea - tive activities works and how we can improve the system as a result of experiments with our systems . Hori proposed a model for explaining a phenomenon in creative concept formation [ 3 ] . The purpose of this article is to enhance human creativity with computers . This article deals with scientiﬁc creativity . To begin with , we will consider our models of creative thinking and how the system can support its process based on cognitive science . Then , we will propose our method and its implementation . Finally , we will show some experiments and discuss the results . 2 . Related work In order to aid the process of creative thinking , we will begin by considering the models to explain creativity in the ﬁeld of cognitive science . This section reviews existing research in creative thinking and cognitive media . The next section describes our own model , extending the model discussed in this section . 2 . 1 . Process of creative thinking There were a large number of studies on creativity . Wallas explained the creative activity by four processes : preparation , incubation , illumination , and veriﬁcation [ 4 ] . Weisberg proposes that real - world creativity often involves incremental progress toward solutions [ 5 ] . He also points out that the thinker must abandon the initial approach that stems from past experience and reconceptualize the problem in response to the speciﬁc requirements of the problem [ 6 ] . Finke et al . [ 7 ] proposes the Geneplore model , which consists of two distinct processing components : a generative phase , and an exploratory phase . He explains that one constructs mental representations having various properties that promote creative discovery in the generative phase . These properties are then exploited for creative purposes in the exploratory phase . The resulting creative cognitions can be focused or expanded according to task requirements or individual needs by modifying the mental representations Knowledge - Based Systems 11 ( 1998 ) 469 – 478 KNOSYS 1171 0950 - 7051 / 98 / $ - see front matter q 1998 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved . PII : S0950 - 7051 ( 98 ) 00080 - X * Corresponding author . Tel . : 1 81 - 3 - 3942 - 8594 ; Fax : 1 81 - 3 - 5395 - 7064 . and repeating the cycle . Constraints can be imposed at any time during both the phases . Boden [ 8 , 9 ] deﬁnes and explains creativity in terms of the mapping , exploration , and transformation of structured conceptual spaces . A conceptual space is a style of thinking which has various dimensions , limits , pathways , and levels . To overcome a limitation in a conceptual space , one must change it in some way , and a large change can be caused by a transformation . She shows two general ways of transform - ing conceptual space : to drop a constraint , and to negate a constraint . Moreover , Boden distinguishes creativity into two senses : psychological creativity ( P - creativity ) , and historical one ( H - creativity ) . A valuable idea is P - creative , if the person in whose mind it arises , could not have had it before . By contrast , a valuable idea is H - creative if it is P - creative and no one else has ever had it before . In a review of this Boden’s account , Haase explains that creative moments occur when the process of map - following creates a change in the context in which the map is embedded [ 10 ] . Such changes are usually additive changes , which extend the map to cover places originally blank , and the change occasionally is radical . 2 . 2 . Medium and cognitive dimensions Wood uses Green’s notion [ 11 , 12 ] of cognitive dimen - sions to consider the properties of notations and media for sketching [ 13 ] . Using cognitive dimensions , he illustrates interesting relations between medium and processes of sketching . In the chart of these relations we can see that paper allows a lot of properties which generating process required , but word processors do only a few . We should assign the ﬁttest media at this time to the system when we try to build it . 3 . Approach toward supporting creativity This section summarizes how our own model extends other models . Our model adds a notion of meta constraints to the Geneplore model and we revisit Wallas and Boden’s model in our framework in Section 3 . 1 . Then , Section 3 . 2 discusses further how constraints are used in creative think - ing . Our approach in supporting human creative thinking with computers is discussed in Section 3 . 3 . 3 . 1 . Process model of creative thinking Fig . 1 shows our process model of creative thinking based on Finke’s Geneplore model . The Geneplore model can be explained by relations among constraints , generative phase , and exploratory phase in this ﬁgure . We added meta constraints , as a mechanism - change the constraints explicitly . Meta constraints are relations among constraints , in other words . Constraints may constrain one another . Meta constraints , therefore , may be include in constraints . But we separate them to clarify that meta constraints function as a mechanism to change constraints . We will explain the creative process by adapting Wallas’ four stages : preparation , incubation , illumination , and veriﬁcation . During the preparation stage the cycle of the generative and exploratory phase is repeated , just like as generate and test , and constraints are imposed at any time during the both phases . One would often work very intensively on his / her problem but arrive at no solution during this stage . Then one sets the problem aside . This is the incubation stage . After some time , an insight can be gained at generative phase during the illumination stage . We suppose that a change of constraints occurs during the incubation stage . Here one could not arrive at a solution under the constraints in the preparation stage , but gain an insight under the constraints on the illumination stage . We suppose that this change of constraints causes a transform of the conceptual spaces , which is important for creativity as Boden puts it . Finally , the cycle of the generative and exploratory phase is repeated here for veriﬁcation . K . Aihara , K . Hori / Knowledge - Based Systems 11 ( 1998 ) 469 – 478 470 Fig . 1 . A process model of creative thinking based on the Geneplore model . Fig . 2 . A model of thinking . 3 . 2 . Model of thinking This section shows our model of thinking at the genera - tive and exploratory phase in our process model ( Fig . 2 ) . We will call a conceptual space in ones mind ‘mental world’ . We suppose that concepts ﬂoat in mental world and they are located dynamically and relatively . One oper - ates a state of operating ﬁeld , which is focused in mental world at that time . Operations have an effect on a current state of mental world . Operations are selected and executed under constraints , which consists of a large number of vari - eties and have several levels , such as his / her knowledge , experiences , environments , culture , and so on . 3 . 3 . Computer - aided creative thinking We may try to build the system into our models for supporting human creative thinking . For example , † Storing local memories in mental world † Processing on operating ﬁeld : inference engine , simula - tor † Stimulating to change a constraint We would like to emphasize that our approach tries to integrate existing effective technologies based on cognitive models . In this article our approach supports the creative thinking by stimulating the change in constraints . The point of our approach is to aim for providing an environment to consider reﬂectively and reorganize the user’s mental space and a trigger to change a constraint . K . Aihara , K . Hori / Knowledge - Based Systems 11 ( 1998 ) 469 – 478 471 Fig . 3 . Changing a constraint by our tool . Fig . 4 . En Passant 2 system architecture . This article deals with the following phenomenon in recall : † Interference based on ﬁxation † Interference based on time passing and order , such as pro - and retroactive inhibition We suppose that it is effective on the user’s creativity and that the supporting system can give the trigger to change the constraint related to these interferences ( Fig . 3 ) . Now we assume that one’s thought transits downward in the ﬁgure . If the user could recall his / her memories related to the current thought , the user might think in another direction . That is what we expect . The system lets the user to change the relation between temporal constraint and an environment of thinking . Also , in order not to disturb the user’s ﬂow in thinking , it is important to apply an appropriate media on interface . Paper is the best medium to sketch the user’s thinking because he / she wants to express his / her thinking in various ways : language , Figs . , tables , and so on , and actual input devices of the computers cannot give sufﬁcient expressibility . 4 . System : En Passant 2 In this section , we propose the system named En Passant 2 which stores researcher’s notes as a product of thinking and triggers to recall and to reconsider . The user can browse his / her notes and view relations among them interactively . The user inputs his / her scanned notes , which the user writes and draws in everyday research activities into the system . We call such a note loaded into the system a page . Pages serve as an operating ﬁeld and are stored in temporal order . En Passant 2 has an indexing function for a page . We call such an index a mark . Marks are used to provide a type of constraint with the help of the system’s automated spatial arrangement of pages in addition to the temporal constraint . The core system of En Passant 2 consists of two major components : Writing Pad 2 and Mark Daemon . Writing Pad 2 has three modules : Main Window , Page Window , and Adviser ( Fig . 4 ) . The upper side of the Figure shows Writing Pad 2 , which is a user interface of En Passant 2 . The other side illustrates Mark Daemon , which runs automatically in the night . The user stores his / her notes into the system via K . Aihara , K . Hori / Knowledge - Based Systems 11 ( 1998 ) 469 – 478 472 Fig . 5 . Main window . Above left , page list ; right , mark list ; bottom left , marks which are afﬁxed to a selected page ( ‘‘thinking’’ ) in the above page list ; bottom right , pages in which a selected mark ( ‘‘Experiment’’ ) in the above mark list is afﬁxed to . Writing Pad 2 , and Mark Daemon calculates relativities among pages . 4 . 1 . Main window Fig . 5 illustrates an example of Main Window . Main Window show the user’s page list ( left ) and mark list ( right ) . The page list consists of titles of user’s pages in order of input time . The user can look over which mark is put on a selected page in the page list . Marks created and customized by the user are placed in the mark list . Also , the user can select a mark to check with pages to which the mark is afﬁxed to . 4 . 2 . Page window Fig . 6 illustrates an example of Page window . A user can input and edit his / her scanned notes in Page window . Usually , one Page window contains one note . A mark can be afﬁxed at any place in the window . Both the user and the system use these marks as indices to explore in the notes stack . Some ﬁgures , such a line , an oval , or a rectangle can K . Aihara , K . Hori / Knowledge - Based Systems 11 ( 1998 ) 469 – 478 473 Fig . 6 . Page Window ( page 71 of Subject A ) . This ﬁgure illustrates page title ‘‘thinking’’ . Handwritten description is a scanned image . Button ‘‘to IES’’ is a link button to the page titled ‘‘IES’’ . ‘‘Experiment’’ , ‘‘subject’’ , ‘‘kenro’’ and ‘‘saeki’’ marks . be placed in software drawing tool fashion . The user can also input text at any place . If the user would like to make a link to another page , he / she can put link button on the window . 4 . 3 . Mark Daemon Mark Daemon calculates linkage points between two pages . We will regard a linkage point between two pages as relativity between them . The linkage point between page i and j , lp ij , is calculated in the following manner . 1 . If a link is made between page i and j then set lp ij to the default linkage point , lp 0 , else set lp ij to zero 2 . If mark j is put on page i ; mark h , page j then add the value of Mark Relation Matrix , r jh , to lp ij For example , if mark j is put on page i , page j , and page k ; mark h is put on page i and page k ; and a link between page j K . Aihara , K . Hori / Knowledge - Based Systems 11 ( 1998 ) 469 – 478 474 Fig . 7 . Page window ( page 81 of subject A ) . and page k is set , then linkage points are calculated as follows : lp ij (cid:136) r jj 1 r jh lp ik (cid:136) r jj 1 r jh 1 r hh lp jk (cid:136) lp o 1 j r jh Mark Relation Matrices have entries r jh , which describe numerically the relativity between mark j and mark h . These matrices are derived by rules declared by the user . Some samples of rules are provided . For example , a class of ‘‘advisory staff’’ is provided . If the user thinks that mark j and mark h are included in advisory staff , the rule of advi - sory staff sets r jh to the speciﬁed value . The user can custo - mize the matrices by declaration of rules about marks . The users can have multiple rule sets , so each rule set derives its matrix . Further , Mark Daemon calculates coordinates used in Adviser , based on a kind of multi - dimensional scaling method . Resulting from multiple matrices , Mark Daemon calculates multiple coordinates sets . 4 . 4 . Adviser Adviser shows relations among pages as follows . Icons of the pages are selected by the user or the system on a condi - tion . The condition is determined by input time of pages , linkage points between pages calculated by Mark Daemon , afﬁxed marks , and whether search strings by the user is included in the page or not . The user can set the condition in the window called Filter . Selected icons of the pages are conﬁgured in two - dimen - sional space according to coordinates calculated by Mark Daemon . We may say that Adviser visualizes personal information and Filter is a kind of information retrieval . 5 . Experiment Our experiment is in need of authenticity . Authentic problems motivate subjects . Therefore , we have carried out some long - period experiments in the subjects’ own research activities . We recorded the subjects’ usages of En Passant 2 with video camera , an MD recorder , and logs . We had four subjects . In this section , we illustrate two examples of experiments . K . Aihara , K . Hori / Knowledge - Based Systems 11 ( 1998 ) 469 – 478 475 Fig . 8 . A conﬁguration in Adviser ( 1 ) . Circled numbers are page identiﬁers . 5 . 1 . Subject A The ﬁrst subject is a graduate student , the subject had used En Passant 2 for eight months and had stored 90 pages so far . The subject was writing her doctoral disserta - tion and wanted to check related work and to reconsider them . 5 . 1 . 1 . Results The progress of this experiment is reported as follows . 1 . The subject opened Adviser and conﬁgured icons of the pages marked ‘‘Norman’’ and ‘‘Vygotsky’’ were set and were created one hundred days ago . 2 . She viewed the conﬁgured space and referred to page 88 by clicking its icon in Adviser . Then , she reconﬁgured icons of all the pages with ‘‘Norman’’ and ‘‘Vygotsky’’ ( conﬁgured space is shown in Fig . 8 ) 3 . She viewed page 1 by clicking its icon in Adviser . 4 . She viewed page 2 to page 4 by pushing ‘‘Forward’’ button in their Page Windows . 5 . She reconﬁgured icons of the pages with mark ‘‘system’’ , ‘‘Experiment’’ , and ‘‘experiment - hirano’’ ( Fig . 9 ) 6 . She viewed page 81 ( Fig . 7 ) and page 71 ( Fig . 6 ) by clicking their icons in Adviser . 7 . She viewed page 76 by pushing link button in page 71 . 8 . She viewed page 75 , page 74 , page 63 , and page 79 by clicking their icons in Adviser . At ﬁrst , the subject opened Adviser to check if her related works , which afﬁxed mark ‘‘Norman’’ and ‘‘Vygotsky’’ to , had been reﬂected in her doctoral dissertation or not . When the subject viewed the conﬁguration , she said that she felt something was missing . Then , she set the time range free and reconﬁgured the space ( Fig . 8 ) . She viewed page 1 because she noticed the difference from the past conﬁgura - tion . When the subject referred to page 4 following page 1 , she wondered that there was a description she didn’t remem - ber having ever written anything like that at all . Moreover , she was considering about the description without reference to the page . The subject reviewed the page slowly and care - fully . Then , the subject changed the search marks related to her experiments ( Fig . 9 ) . She browsed the pages conﬁgured in Adviser and checked the contents in them . 5 . 1 . 2 . Discussion In an interview after the experiment , the subject said that she remembered descriptions where marks were afﬁxed , but forgot the rest of them . She could recall and reconsider her memory eighth months ago by using Adviser . Although she K . Aihara , K . Hori / Knowledge - Based Systems 11 ( 1998 ) 469 – 478 476 Fig . 9 . A conﬁguration in Adviser ( 2 ) . Circled numbers are page identiﬁers . used to use the page list in Main Window and could ﬁnd the page title , she had never opened the page . I suppose that the display of Adviser hiding time order let the subject change a constraint and triggered further her thinking as illustrated in Fig . 10 . 5 . 2 . Subject B Subject B was another graduate student . We observed an unexpected effect of En Passant 2 in this usage . 5 . 2 . 1 . Results He had stored no pages yet . He was seeking the direction of his study and wanted to reconsider and to classify the last seven notes . At this usage , he referred to his pages from page 7 to page 1 , at ﬁrst . And referring to his pages , he added some marks . In the latter half of the usage , he not only did refer to pages , but also inputted some text and added a new page . He afﬁxed mark ‘‘Modelling’’ to page 6 in the former half . After referring to some pages , he deleted the mark from the page because he changed his mind . Then , he added a new page and wrote down some text about ‘‘Model - ling’’ on it . In another observation , he added ‘‘Speciﬁcation’’ when he referred to page 7 . Then he changed ‘‘Speciﬁcation’’ to ‘‘Speciﬁcation ( Representation of Requirements ) ’’ . More - over , he also added ‘‘Requirement Model’’ and inputted some text on page 7 . 5 . 2 . 2 . Discussion He said that he recognized that ‘‘Speciﬁcation’’ and ‘‘Requirement Model’’ were included in the class of ‘‘Representation of Requirements’’ in this experiment . We suppose that he could articulate ‘‘Requirement Model’’ though the usage of the system because he could be conscious of the relation between ‘‘Speciﬁcation’’ and ‘‘Representation of Requirements’’ . This articulation might have triggered him to describe some text on page 7 . During his research activity after this usage , he described a lot on ‘‘Modelling’’ , ‘‘Speciﬁcation ( Representation of Requirements ) ’’ , and marks unused in this usage . We guess that this usage of En Passant 2 let the subject be conscious of the articulated concepts . And the marks worked as axes of thinking after the usage . 6 . Discussion We discuss the results of the experiments in this section . Firstly , it is observed that En Passant 2 is effective in the following situations : † summarizing the user’s study overall † seeking the direction of the user’s study even if his / her notes stack is not large † collecting pages according to keywords En Passant 2 can correspond to various situations , such reviewing of the user’s study , or seeking the direction . The last situation is unexpected when we designed the system . We may say that the system doesn’t enforce how to think then upon the user . Secondly , recall of the user’s memories in present context helped by En Passant 2 is effective on the furtherance of the user’s thinking . Subjects often searched the desirable pages at that point by marks in the mark list , or titles in the page list . When subjects viewed their pages , they recognized their memories that they couldn’t recall even with their own notes . A subject summarized his study so far and noticed a problem to discuss . Thirdly , we observed that subjects often reviewed their notes based on the page list sorted by time order at ﬁrst . Then , they tended to use a mark list instead of the page list . We suppose that this means a transformation of axis of thinking . Thus time order of pages which reﬂect the order of the user’s thinking is a major constraint . We may say that subjects changed such a constraint themselves uncon - sciously . Adviser may show relations among pages to the user , concealing time order . This function can let the user change a temporal constraint and trigger the user’s creativity . Advi - ser , therefore , can play a role of meta constraints in our process model of creative thinking as shown in Fig . 1 . K . Aihara , K . Hori / Knowledge - Based Systems 11 ( 1998 ) 469 – 478 477 Fig . 10 . Recall memories to present situation . Circled numbers are page identiﬁers . Although the conﬁguration of icons in Adviser cannot always give a effective trigger to the user , sometimes Advi - ser can impel the user to shift his / her thinking when he / she cannot break through the ﬁxation of thinking with the page list or search by marks . Fourthly , individual preferences on setting marks were observed . One gave functional meanings to his / her own marks , for example , ‘‘Hypothesis’’ , or ‘‘Hint’’ . Another gave meanings about the contents , for example , ‘‘Experi - ment’’ , or ‘‘System’’ . We draw attention to the latter usage in particular . A subject who gives meanings about the contents to his / her marks often repeated the cycle of setting marks and editing his / her notes . To interact and to classify marks drove the subject to think further . Being conscious of relations among marks , the subject articulated some concepts . We think it is signiﬁcant that the system lets the user be conscious of both the structure and contents of his / her knowledge . Fifthly , we would like to talk about the continuity of descriptions . Marks are afﬁxed locally . When the user review his / her notes , the user can see both the spatially and the temporally continuous descriptions in En Passant 2 . The users often remember neighborhood of marks . Reconsideration about the descriptions far from marks may be effective , because the user doesn’t remember about them , even though the descriptions might be asso - ciated with marked description . Lastly , we discuss if En Passant 2 helped the user’s crea - tive thinking or not . We will regard supporting generation of the following three valuable concepts in our model of think - ing shown in Fig . 2 as supporting the creative thinking : † a valuable concept as a result of step - by - step operations † a valuable concept generated through a large change of constraint † a concept whose new meaning recognized after a round - trip transition of states of operating ﬁeld involved in a change of mental world The ﬁrst type of concept formation is similar to the crea - tivity that Weisberg explained . The second is close to Boden’s insistence . And the last may be related with Haase’s explanation . We will regard a concept as valuable when the concept can be developed subsequently . Therefore , we cannot esti - mate whether a concept is valuable or not at the moment of the concept formation . And we will use the term ‘‘creativ - ity’’ to refer to the ability of formation of such a valuable concept . A subject articulated a concept ‘‘Design Environment’’ when he reviewed pages in En Passant 2 , and then the subject continued studying on this concept . This concept formation in his mind , therefore , can be regarded as valu - able . We observed that another subject crystallized his study in a text after browsing pages overall . This crystallization illu - minated him to do the rest and the problem at that period . We can say that this crystallization through the usage of the system is valuable for him . Another subject recognized a new meaning in the page chosen in Adviser that was written eight months ago . This recognition can be regarded as creative by a round - trip in her mental world . 7 . Conclusion When we try to build a human – computer interactive system , we must consider cognitive models and make rich experiments . This paper proposed useful models about crea - tive thinking based on researches of cognitive science , the method of support to human creative thinking , and a support system named En Passant 2 . Moreover , we have carried out some long - period experiments and showed cognitive results . References [ 1 ] Kawakita , J . , KJ - hou . Tokyo : Chuuoukouronsha , 1986 [ in Japanese ] [ 2 ] K Hori , A system for aiding creative concept formation Man , IEEE Transactions on Systems and Cybernetics 24 ( 1994 ) 882 – 894 . [ 3 ] K Hori , A mode for explaining a phenomenon in creative concept formation , IEICE Transactions on Information and Systems E76 - D ( 1993 ) 1521 – 1527 . [ 4 ] Wallas , W . , Art of Thought , New York : Harcort Brace , 1926 . [ 5 ] Weisberg , R . W , Creativity , Genius and Other Myths , New York : W H Freeman and Company , 1986 . [ 6 ] Weisberg , R . W . Case studies of creative thinking : Reproduction versus restructuring in the real world , in : Smith , S . M , et al . ( Eds . ) The creative cognition approach . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1995 , 53 - 72 . [ 7 ] Finke , R . A . , et al . , Creative cognition . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1992 . [ 8 ] Boden , M A , The Creative Mind – Myths and Mechanisms , London : George Weidenfeld and Nicolson , 1990 . [ 9 ] Boden , M A ( ed . ) , Dimensions of Creativity , The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1994 . [ 10 ] K B Haase , Too many ideas , just one word : A review of Margaret Boden’s ‘The Creative Mind : Myths and Mechanisms’ , Artiﬁcial Intelligence 79 ( 1995 ) 69 – 82 . [ 11 ] Green , T R G , Cognitive dimensions of notations . In : Sutcliffe , A and Macaulay , L . ( Eds . ) People and computers V . Cambridge University Press , 1989 , 443 - 450 . [ 12 ] Green , T R G , Describing information artifacts with cognitive dimen - sions and structure maps , in : Diaper , A and Hammond , N , ( Eds . ) People and computers VI . Cambridge University Press , 1991 , 297 - 316 . [ 13 ] Wood , C C , A cognitive dimensional analysis of idea sketches , Tech - nical Report 275 , School of Cognitive and Computing Sciences , The University of Sussex , 1993 ftp : / / ftp . cogs . susx . au . uk / pubs / reports / csrp / csrp275 . K . Aihara , K . Hori / Knowledge - Based Systems 11 ( 1998 ) 469 – 478 478