Understanding Anti - Vaccination Attitudes in Social Media Tanushree Mitra 1 , 2 Scott Counts 2 James W . Pennebaker 2 , 3 1 Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Microsoft Research 3 University of Texas at Austin tmitra3 @ gatech . edu counts @ microsoft . com pennebaker @ mail . utexas . edu Abstract The anti - vaccination movement threatens public health by reducing the likelihood of disease eradication . With social media’s purported role in disseminating anti - vaccine infor - mation , it is imperative to understand the drivers of attitudes among participants involved in the vaccination debate on a communication channel critical to the movement : Twitter . Using four years of longitudinal data capturing vaccine dis - cussions on Twitter , we identify users who persistently hold pro and anti attitudes , and those who newly adopt anti atti - tudes towards vaccination . After gathering each user’s entire Twitter timeline , totaling to over 3 million tweets , we ex - plore differences in the individual narratives across the user cohorts . We find that those with long - term anti - vaccination attitudes manifest conspiratorial thinking , mistrust in gov - ernment , and are resolute and in - group focused in language . New adoptees appear to be predisposed to form anti - vaccination attitudes via similar government distrust and general paranoia , but are more social and less certain than their long - term counterparts . We discuss how this apparent predisposition can interact with social media - fueled events to bring newcomers into the anti - vaccination movement . Given the strong base of conspiratorial thinking underlying anti - vaccination attitudes , we conclude by highlighting the need for alternatives to traditional methods of using authori - tative sources such as the government when correcting mis - leading vaccination claims . Introduction Measles , a highly contagious respiratory disease responsi - ble for an estimated 122 , 000 deaths worldwide each year , was officially eradicated from the United States in 2000 . Yet the disease appears to be rebounding . According to the CDC , in 2014 the number of measles cases had reached a 20 - year high 1 ( CDC 2015 ) . Sadly , many of these cases could have been prevented , as 90 % of measles cases in 2014 were in people who were not vaccinated or whose vaccination status was unknown . One reason for this re - bound is that concerns about vaccine side effects have tak - en precedence over the dangers of potentially deadly vac - cine - preventable diseases and a vaccination culture pro - moting anti - vaccination has emerged ( Kata 2010 ) . This persistent vaccine criticism movement has spread rapidly through social media , a channel often used to disseminate Copyright © 2016 , Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelli - gence ( www . aaai . org ) . All rights reserved . medical information without verification by the expert medical community ( Keelan et al . 2010 ) . Given the increasing reliance on online media for accu - rate health information and the general growth of social media sites , the attitudes of anti - vaccination advocates risk becoming a global phenomenon that could impact immun - ization behavior at significant scale ( Kata 2010 ) . In fact a controlled study showed that parents opting to exempt children from vaccination are more likely to have received the information online compared to those vaccinating their kids ( Salmon et al . 2005 ) . These parents benefit from “herd immunity” in which eradication is achieved by immunizing a critical proportion of the population . However , as inter - net - fueled misbeliefs drive people to opt out of vaccina - tion , herd immunity is weakened , increasing the chances of a disease outbreak . Thus it is important to understand the underlying characteristics of individuals with anti - vaccination attitudes . What drives people to develop and perpetuate the anti - vaccination movement ? In this paper we explore this question by examining in - dividuals’ overt expressions towards vaccination in a social media platform extensively used for vaccine discussions : Twitter . By using four years of longitudinal data capturing vaccination discussions on Twitter , we identify three sets of key individuals : users who are persistently pro vaccine , those who are persistently anti vaccine and users who new - ly join the anti - vaccination cohort following an event sym - bolic to the vaccine controversy . Long - term anti - vaccination advocates play an important role in preventing eradication because they sustain weakness in herd immuni - ty , and thus it is crucial to understand them and their moti - vations . Examining new anti - vaccination proponents al - lows us to understand the type of person that would adopt such a stance despite strong recommendations to the con - trary from authoritative organizations like the CDC . After fetching each cohort’s entire timeline of tweets , totaling to more than 3 million tweets , we compare and contrast their linguistic styles , topics of interest , social characteristics and underlying cognitive dimensions , all with an eye to uncovering the drivers of such extreme attitudes against a social good . We find that people holding persistent anti - vaccination attitudes use more direct language and have higher expres - sions of anger compared to their pro counterparts . They also show general conspiracy thinking and mistrust in the government , suggesting characteristics of paranoia . Adopters of anti - vaccine attitudes show similar conspirato - rial ideation and suspicion toward government even before they start expressing anti - vaccine attitudes . This suggests that the new adoptees are already predisposed to form anti - vaccine attitudes . Moreover , long - term anti - vaccine advo - cates exhibit higher sense of group solidarity . Individuals in such close - knit groups typically end up adhering to their extreme positions , often fueling beliefs in false conspira - cies and are particularly resistant to correction ( Sunstein and Vermeule 2009 ) . These findings suggest that health officials attempting to simply correct conspiracy fuelled false claims might be counterproductive . Thus newer methods to counter the harmful consequences of anti - vaccination beliefs are needed . Broadly we hope this work contributes to two bodies of research : computer mediated communication ( CMC ) re - search on contentious topics ( Kata 2010 ; Keelan et al . 2010 ; Salmon et al . 2005 ) , and psychology research on maintaining and adopting an attitude ( Kristiansen and Zanna 1988 ; Rokeach 1968 ; Savion 2012 ) . With respect to CMC research , examining the naturally occurring self - expressions of these cohorts highlight the linguistic style , social media characteristics , and topics of interest driving people with health behavior beliefs that are antithetical to the health of society as a whole . With regards to attitude psychology , while there are numerous lab - based studies listing various factors driving resistant attitudes , our study is one of the first to provide large - scale empirical evidence of factors behind resistant attitudes towards vaccination . Related Work We provide a brief overview of two broad areas of research relevant to our study : attitude measurement and text analyt - ic approaches to study user traits . Measuring Attitude The concept of attitude has long been central to social psy - chology research . However , the definition of attitude has changed over the years resulting in no single universally accepted definition ( Schwarz 2007 ) . For the purposes of this study , we use the evaluative definition of attitude from the seminal work of Eagly and Chaiken ( 1993 ) – “attitude is expressed by evaluating a particular entity with some degree of favor or disfavor” . By examining the social me - dia posts from users we determine whether the expressed attitude towards vaccination is for or against it . Despite a growing body of work on attitude , a major concern in its study has been the problem of accurate measurement . Attitude studies based on questionnaires and self - reports are highly context dependent and results can vary with changes in question wording , format or order ( Schuman and Presser 1981 ) . Participants can also conform to the demands of the questionnaire by creating superficial expressions of attitude ( Abelson 1988 ) . Even newer meth - ods of implicit measures of attitude ( Dovidio and Fazio 1992 ) have shown sensitivity towards context , raising questions about its effectiveness over self - reported measures . However , the rapid growth of text - based social media has opened new opportunities to study attitudes un - obtrusively , as they naturally unfold in large populations and over long time periods . For example , population atti - tudes extracted from tweet sentiments has been shown to correlate with traditional polling data ( O’Connor et al . 2010 ) . Machine learning techniques on textual data have accurately predicted sentence level attitudes in online dis - cussions ( Hassan , Qazvinian , and Radev 2010 ) . Drawing on the success of studying attitudes from online textual data , we built a classifier to determine positive and nega - tive attitudes towards vaccination . Analyzing text to infer individual characteristics Attitudes and language are intimately related ( Eiser 1975 ) . For decades social scientists have demonstrated that indi - viduals often adopt language consistent with their attitudes ( Eiser and Ross 1977 ) . Hence a growing number of studies have used content - analytic approaches to assess individual differences and personality characteristics . A popular ap - proach is simply to count and categorize the words that people speak . A validated tool for such an approach is LIWC , Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count ( Tausczik and Pennebaker 2010 ) . Researchers have used LIWC for a number of psychological measurement tasks , such as deci - phering psychological states of presidential candidates from their spontaneous speech samples ( Slatcher et al . 2007 ) , identifying true and false stories by analyzing lin - guistic styles ( Newman et al . 2003 ) , examining differences between depressed and non - depressed individuals ( Rude , Gortner , and Pennebaker 2004 ) , and contrasting pro - anorexic and pro - recovery people ( De Choudhury 2015 ) . Pro vaccination Tweets Anti Vaccination Tweets Measles Outbreak in U . K . Linked to Poor MMR Vaccine Uptake After Autism Scare [ link ] Would rather have measles in my kid than lifetime seizures and autism , VIT A for a week , big deal # CDCwhistleblower # Vaccines are not a scientific controversy . They work . The vaccines have increased autism , peanut allergies & childhood cancers . Table 1 : Example tweets labeled as pro and anti - vaccination by three master Turkers . Another popular text analytic technique among social psychologists is the Meaning Extraction Method ( MEM ) ( Chung and Pennebaker 2008 ) . MEM can reliably infer the dimensions along which people think about themselves or particular issues . Scientists have used MEM to capture psychological dimensions of self expressions in personal narratives ( Chung and Pennebaker 2008 ) , measure peo - ple’s basic values underlying their attitude ( Ryan L . Boyd et al . 2015 ) and capture dimensions of self - expressions in social media posts , such as Facebook status updates ( Kramer and Chung 2011 ) . Following in their footsteps , our work uses MEM to capture differences in the dimen - sions of thought across groups of individuals with differing attitudes towards vaccination . We complement this with LIWC’s linguistic analysis to examine differences in ex - pression styles . We return to the details of MEM later . Data Collection Our data collection involves two main phases . Figure 1 outlines the main steps . Phase1 : Collecting Pro & Anti - Vaccination Tweets To fetch vaccine specific posts , we first did a manual ex - amination of 1000 Twitter posts and 50 news reports on vaccination to identify search terms and phrases relevant to the vaccination debate . Based on a snowball sampling ap - proach , we used the initial set of search terms to extract a tweet sample from the Twitter Firehose 2 stream between January 1 and 5 , 2012 . Two researchers then manually inspected the sample to identify any co - occurring terms missed and to remove spurious terms that might be return - ing tweets too broad to classify on either side of the issue . The final set had 5 phrases : ‘vaccination + autism’ , ‘vac - cine + autism’ , ‘mmr + vaccination’ , ‘measles + autism’ and ‘mmr + vaccine’ . Using these phrases we fetched tweets spanning four calendar years – January 1 , 2012 to June 30 , 2015 , totaling to 315 , 240 tweets generated by 144 , 817 2 The Twitter Firehose stream is a dataset of all public posts from Twitter made available to us through an agreement with Twitter . unique users . Our next task was to build a classifier to identify pro and anti stance of the collected vaccine tweets . Classify Vaccination Stance – Stance Classifier Our classifier was based on a two - step labeling process : ( 1 ) gathering human annotations on a sample , and ( 2 ) leverage the labeled data to annotate the remaining collection of tweets . For the human annotation task , we randomly sam - pled a batch of 2000 posts from each year ( a total of 8000 posts ) and recruited 3 independent Amazon Mechanical Turk master workers residing in the United States to identi - fy whether the post content is for or against vaccination . Workers were presented with definitions of pro and anti vaccination content along with example tweets to train them in the labeling task . We retained posts where all three workers agreed on the post being either pro or anti . We show a sample in Table 1 . Based on a qualitative examination of the frequently occurring unigrams , bigrams , trigrams and hashtags , we found that trigrams and hashtags were prominent cues of a tweet’s stance towards vaccination . For example , phrases like vaccines causing encephalitis , already # vaccinein - jured like , # VaccineInducedAutism are indicative of the tweet being against vaccination , while shut - up # antivaxx - ers # science , push mmr vaccine , still deny vaccinations signal pro - vaccination stance . Using trigrams and hashtags as features , we built a supervised learning classifier by training a support vector machine ( SVM ) under 10 - fold cross validation . We refer to this as our “stance classifier” . We retained only tweets for which the classifier predicted stance with high probability ( greater than 0 . 9 ) . We pur - posely choose a high threshold to maintain a high level of precision . The prediction accuracy of our classifier was 84 . 7 % . The resulting dataset had 49 , 354 tweets , classified with attitude stance and posted by 32 , 282 unique users . In the next phase , we examine this user set to identify our user cohorts . Phase2 : Identifying User Cohorts The goal of this phase is to segregate three principle actors – long term advocates of pro and anti vaccination attitude and users newly adopting anti - vaccination attitude . Our Figure 1 : Steps to identify user cohorts . Ellipses ( . . . ) shown at the bottom panel of phase 2 correspond to an equivalent module from the top panel . Twitter Firehose Filter vaccine tweets vaccine phrases Tweets with Pro / Anti labels + probability score probability score > 0 . 9 Tweets with pro or anti stance Yes 32K users Get twitter timelines Check vaccination tweet time If vaccine tweets in all 4 years If vaccine tweets post Aug’14 653 users 978 users Get each user’s vaccine tweets Stance Classi fi er pro / anti prob > 0 . 9 active - pro active - anti joining - anti . . . . . . . . Stance Classi fi er If pro tweet count > 70 % of all vaccine tweets If anti tweet count > 70 % of all vaccine tweets . . . . . . . . PHASE 1 PHASE 2 373 users 70 users 223 users Turker labeling Compute features SVM Random sample labeledtweets unlabeledtweets features 49K tweetsfrom 32K users Filter vaccine tweets vaccine phrases criterion for selecting long - term advocates is to identify users who consistently post tweets expressing pro or anti attitudes towards vaccination in all four years ( 2012 to 2015 ) . To find users who newly joined the anti - vaccination cohort , we needed to fix on a time period before which users did not mention about vaccination but actively tweet - ed anti - vaccination posts after that time . We selected Au - gust 15 , 2014 as our cutoff time . This time was marked by a symbolic event pertaining to the vaccine debate : A false claim reported that a CDC whistleblower exposed CDC data linking autism among African - American boys follow - ing MMR vaccination 3 . The event was widely tweeted un - der the # CDCwhistleblower hashtag and was a topic of active discussion among users interested in the vaccine debate . Collecting Historical Posts from Users Recall that 32 , 282 unique users posted our filtered collec - tion of vaccination tweets . We collect their entire Twitter timeline tracing back from June 30 , 2015 ( time when our data collection started ) . Using the same set of vaccine re - lated search terms as in phase 1 , we search each user’s Twitter timeline to find their history of vaccine posts . Next , we pass their vaccine specific tweets through our stance classifier , retaining only those for which the classi - fier is able to determine pro or anti stance with high proba - bility ( > = 0 . 9 ) . Finally we classify users as holding pro ( anti ) attitude if more than 70 % of their vaccination tweets are classified as pro ( anti ) . Users who were consistently classified as pro or anti across all four years are the long - term advocates . Hereafter we refer to them as active - pro and active - anti . Users who were classified as holding an anti - vaccine attitude after August 15 , 2014 are adoptees of the anti - vaccination attitude ( the joining - anti cohort ) . We intentionally did not create a joining - pro cohort . While interesting , our focus is on understanding the anti - vaccination users , for whom the active - pro cohort can pro - vide contrast as necessary . Our cohort selection process takes a very conservative approach , resulting in considerable shrinkage of our cohort pool . We purposely opt for this strategy to maintain high precision and to have high confidence that the users are indeed holding these extreme attitudes . Our final cohort comprises 373 active - pro , 70 active - anti , 223 joining - anti 3 http : / / www . snopes . com / medical / disease / cdcwhistleblower . asp users with each group contributing about 2 . 12M , 0 . 46M and 0 . 85M tweets respectively . Method What can we learn about people with pro or anti attitudes towards vaccination from their digital footprints left in Twitter ? Recall that people’s natural language expression can convey personalities and cognitive processes ( Cohn , Mehl , and Pennebaker 2004 ) . Hence we adopt a lexical approach to compare and contrast our cohorts . Lexical ap - proaches have been widely used by psychologists to cap - ture personality traits ( Allport and Odbert 1936 ) , cognitive processes ( Slobin 1996 ) and more recently to analyze open - ended self - descriptions ( Chung and Pennebaker 2008 ) . The basic premise of a lexical approach is that the important ways in which individuals differ are represented by words . Using lexical approaches we can understand how people talk while mentioning the vaccination issue and what topics they talk about ? To investigate the what aspect we inductively extract meaningful themes from us - ers’ natural language expressions using the Meaning Ex - traction Method ( Chung and Pennebaker 2008 ) . To exam - ine the how aspect we use the LIWC program for compar - ing usage rates of function and content words in tweets from individuals . We complement our lexical quantifica - tions with social media specific features such as user’s follower to following ratio and tweet volume . Meaning Extraction Method ( MEM ) MEM is a topic modeling approach to extract dimensions along which users express themselves . For example , an individual with ‘vaccination’ as an important part of her cognitive self is likely to engage in thoughts related to vac - cination or even other related health topics ( Cantor 1990 ; Markus 1977 ) . These cognitive dimensions will naturally be reflected in the words that she uses in her everyday so - cial media posts . MEM uses a factor analytic approach to form clusters of co - occurring words ( Chung and Penne - baker 2008 ) . Specifically , it performs a principal compo - nent analysis on the matrix of words used by social media post authors to find how they naturally co - occur . These word co - occurrences identify linguistic dimensions that represent psychologically meaningful themes . Contrary to other topic modeling approaches , the MEM extracted di - mensions can be examined at the level of an individual , allowing us to make meaningful inferences in the context of a user . Being a word - count based approach , MEM is highly interpretable . Further , MEM has been shown to capture psychological dimensions of self - expressions in personal narratives ( Chung and Pennebaker 2008 ) and in social media posts ( Kramer and Chung 2011 ) . Figure 2 : User cohort statistics Results Understanding Long - Term Advocates We want to identify the characteristics of individuals hold - ing persistent attitudes towards vaccination , our active - pro and active - anti user cohorts . What topics are relevant to them ? To know what topics the two cohorts talk about , we passed their combined twit - ter feeds ( 2 . 58M in total ) through the Mean Extraction helper software ( Boyd 2015 ) which automates the MEM approach . We identified 8 factors that explain 63 . 4 % of the variability in the user data ( Table 2 ) 4 . Considering the gen - erative nature of language , 63 . 4 % of variance is fairly high ( Chung and Pennebaker 2008 ) . Key factors included the factor labeled ‘Evil Government’ , with terms like war , government , arrest , military , iran , terrorist . The ‘Chronic Health’ factor comprised terms referring to persistent health conditions and its associated risks and treatment . For the ‘Autism vs . Affect’ factor , words describing emo - tion loaded negatively , while words referring to autism loaded positively , suggesting that this factor is referring to autism in an objective sense , devoid of much emotion . An - other important factor that surfaced is ‘Vaccine & Dis - ease’ , with words referring to disease outbreaks ( outbreak , measles , hepatitis , pandemic , hiv ) and vaccination ( vac - cine , immunization , trial ) . It is worth noting that the emer - gence of this last factor helps validate the MEM approach , 4 Similar to other topic modeling methods , researchers have some degree of flexibility to determine the number of themes . For MEM , theme inter - pretability is the main determining factor . as we would expect long - term advocates to be quite in - volved in discussions of vaccines and diseases . Having derived the thematic factors , our next task is to examine the differences and similarities across these dimensions . Following between and within subjects experimental de - sign approach , we perform two sets of comparisons : be - tween groups and within time ( see Table 3 ) . To start , we compare the two long - term active user co - horts across the 8 factors ( Table 3 , Between Group ) . We find that the active - anti group uses more words referring to ‘Evil Government’ , ‘Organic Food’ and ‘Family vs . Nu - ance . Given the loadings of the specific words on the ‘Family vs . Nuance’ factor , the active - anti cohort appears to be relatively focused on the family aspects of vaccina - tion but in absolute terms , without reflection on beliefs or evidence . The active - pro cohort uses ‘Technology’ and ‘Chronic Health’ topics more , the latter implying a general interest in healthy living . The differences were not statisti - cally significant across the remaining factors – ‘Autism vs . Affect’ and ‘Government Vote’ . How do the themes differ before and after a user’s first reference to vaccination ? This analysis helps us capture any significant difference in a user’s behavior across these two important phases . To divide a user’s twitter timeline into the temporal phases , we locate the timestamp of her first vaccination tweet . Next , we group all tweet content into two respective buckets – pre posts , comprising of tweets mentioned before user’s first vaccine tweet and post content groups tweets after this timestamp ( refer Figure 2 for count statistics ) . Recall that our MEM method had al - ready identified the underlying themes in the entire tweet corpus of the two cohorts . By performing an independent sample t - test across the pre and post groups , we are able to distinguish the themes across time ( Table 3 , Within Time ) . We find that users refer to ‘Vaccine & Diseases’ , ‘Autism vs . Effect’ and ‘Organic Food’ more in their post time tweets compared to pre tweet . This suggests a general alertness towards healthy food consumption and the safety Factors Words 1 . Evil Govt . war , government , arrest , military , iran , terrorist , romney , drone , terror , spy , cia , bomb 2 . Autism vs . Affect hate * , feel * , research , said * , damn * , suck * , na - tional , autism , mean * , genetic 3 . Chronic Health risk , improve , heart , surgery , alcohol , chronic , brain , longterm , patient , stroke 4 . Govt . Vote voter , republican , candidate , conservative , budget , romney , senate , democratic 5 . Organic Food food , organic , product , farm , chemical , healthy , pesticide , genetically , gmo , fat 6 . Family vs . Nuance family , interest * , baby , wrong * , kid , toddler , mother , argument * , evidence * , belief * 7 . Technology apple , space , nasa , galaxy , smartphone android , tablet , iphone , rocket , google 8 . Vaccine & Diseases outbreak , measles , hepatitis , hiv , malaria , vac - cine , pandemic , infection , death , polio , tb Table 2 : Themes emerging from the tweets of active - pro and active - anti users . Representative words with the highest factor loadings are shown per theme . Words with negative factor loadings appear with ‘ * ’ . Between Groups Within Time Factors Mean Diff p - val Mean Diff p - val Evil Government A > P < 10 - 15 ns Autism vs . Affect ns Post > Pre < 10 - 15 Chronic Health P > A < 10 - 15 ns Govt . Vote ns ns Organic Food A > P 0 . 042 Post > Pre 0 . 002 Family vs . Nuance A > P < 10 - 15 ns Technology P > A 0 . 012 ns Vaccine & Diseases ns Post > Pre 0 . 001 Table 3 : Theme comparisons between active - pro ( P ) and active - anti ( A ) groups . n marks themes where A > P and n corresponds to P > A . Statistically significant differ - ences are based on an independent sample t - test . ‘ns’ denotes non - significant results . of genetically modified food and pesticides following their first online expression on vaccines . They also start talking about autism in a more objective manner , mostly sharing information about the absence or presence of link between vaccine and autism . How do they present themselves ? To investigate this , we turn to our LIWC results in Table 4 . Again , we list only results with statistically significant differences across co - horts , and call out a few results of note in the text . For in - stance , the active - anti cohort uses significantly more in - group language , indicating their effort to invoke and main - tain social connections and group solidarity . Emotional differences were noteworthy with the active - pro cohort exhibiting greater anxiety and the active - anti cohort greater anger . They also exhibited extreme negative concerns through their higher rates of death related words . On the contrary , active - pro users focused more on the present , and had concerns about work and health ( higher health and sexual category words ) . They also showed higher cognitive processing through their greater usage of causal and in - sight words , indicated an informal style by using more assents and non - fluencies and displayed lower assuredness through increased use of tentative , exclusions , interroga - tives and conjunctions . In contrast , active - anti users were more certain ( higher rates of certain words ) and more di - rect in their language ( fewer assents and non - fluencies ) . They also exhibited a drop in immediacy ( less present fo - cus ) , suggesting possible emotional distancing , an often used coping mechanism to deal with acutely upsetting events ( Holman and Silver 1998 ) . Do their social media characteristics differ ? Finally we examined the following social media characteristics - 1 ) . Attention status ratio , is the ratio of followers ( those who pay attention to the user ) to following ( those the user pays attention to ) ( Hutto , Yardi , and Gilbert 2013 ) , ( 2 ) . Message reach , the ratio of retweets and favorites to the total num - ber of tweets . ( 3 ) . Amount of directed communication is the ratio of tweets with “ @ ” mentions to total tweet count . ( 4 ) . Informational content index is the ratio of tweets contain - ing a URL . As the distribution of social network based measures deviates from normality , we compare these measures across the cohorts using the Wilcoxon signed rank test . We find that active - pro had greater attention - status ratio while active - anti users had more message reach . The extent of directed communication and informa - tional content index was not statistically different . Addi - tionally , to test for differences in the degree of engagement in the vaccine issue , we compute engagement as a propor - tion of tweets related to vaccination in the entire user time - line . We did not find any statistically significant difference , suggesting that both the long - term advocates were equally vested in forwarding their opinions towards vaccination . Understanding Anti - Vaccination Joiners To understand the characteristics of people who join the anti - vaccination movement , we compare recent adoptees ( joining - anti ) with those already perpetuating the move - ment ( active - anti ) . What topics are relevant to them ? To start , we pass the entire Twitter timelines of active - anti and joining - anti us - ers ( 1 . 32M posts in total ) through the MEM analysis as before . We found that 10 factors , explaining 45 . 4 % of the variance emerged from our dataset ( see Table 5 ) . We label Factor 1 ‘War News’ because of its reference to terror and war ( terrorist , rebel , Syria ) . The factor , ‘Secret Govern - ment’ contains terms referring to government’s attempt to conceal information ( secret , cia , underground , caught , alert ) . A parallel factor emerging from our analysis is ‘Government Conspiracy’ with terms alluding to covert schemes ( bilderberg , imf , conspiracy , politics ) . Here the term Bilderberg refers to the Bilderberg group , which has often been accused of conspiracies ( see ( “Bilderberg Group” 2015 ) ) . Another similar theme is the ‘Vaccine Fraud’ factor with terms referring to disbelief in vaccina - tion and government’s attempt to hide the adverse conse - quences of vaccination ( coverup , omit , data , cdcwhistle - blower ) . In particular , cdcwhistleblower was a frequently used hashtag by people from the anti - vaccination camp to refer to the popular hoax story linking autism and vaccines ( “Snopes . com” 2015 ) . Comparing factors across the active - anti and joining - anti user groups shows that joining - anti group refers more to ‘Vaccine Fraud’ , whereas active - anti are more likely to Social & Identity Cog thinking & Tentative Ingroup A > P * Cause P > A * Emotion Insight P > A * * * * Anxiety P > A * Tentative P > A * * * * Anger A > P * * * * Exclusions P > A * * * * Linguistic Style Interrogatives P > A * * * * Assent P > A * * * * Conjunction P > A * * * * Non - fluencies P > A * Certainty A > P * Personal Concerns Work P > A * Time Orientation Death A > P * * * * Present Focus P > A * * Biological States Engagement Health P > A * * * * Vaccine tweet prop Sexual P > A * * Social Media Characteristics Attention Status ratio P > A * Message Reach A > P * Directed Communication Information content index Table 4 : Comparing the active - pro ( P ) and active - anti ( A ) cohorts . Statistically significant LIWC results based on in - dependent sample t - tests are listed . Social media charac - teristics are compared using Wilcoxon rank sum test . p - values are shown after BH correction to control familywise error - rate : * p ≤ . 05 ; * * p ≤ 0 . 01 ; * * * p ≤ . 001 ; * * * * p ≤ . 0001 . refer to ‘War News’ , ‘Secretive Government’ , ‘Govern - ment Vote’ , ‘Chronic Health’ and ‘Government Conspira - cy’ ( see Table 6 ) . This provides additional evidence that those joining the anti - vaccination camp are specifically concerned about vaccination and a potential vaccine fraud , while the long - term anti - vaccination supporters have a broader agenda of government distrust . Comparisons over time show that anti users refer more to ‘Vaccine Fraud’ and ‘Chronic Health’ post their first vaccine tweet . How do they present themselves ? As before , to under - stand how these two groups participate in the vaccine dis - cussion , we turn to comparisons across the LIWC measures ( Table 7 ) , calling out a few results of note . The active - anti users demonstrated higher cognitive complexity by using complex sentences ( based on high preposition usage ) and exhibited concrete thinking through their in - creased use of concrete nouns ( articles ) . In contrast , join - ing - anti users signaled lack of definitiveness through high - er usage of interrogation , discrepancy , negation , exclu - sions and conjunctions words . Consistent with their cogni - tive concreteness , active - anti users also showed emotional distancing by their lower usage of positive emotion words compared to joining - anti . Also in line with their overly concrete expressions , active - anti group had higher personal concern for money and work . Joining - anti had higher rates of leisure words , which is consistent with their higher posi - tive emotion word usage . They were also more present focused and exhibited increased social orientation ( higher social process and increased 2 nd person pronoun usage ) . Do their social media characteristics differ ? We find that active - anti had greater attention - status ratio compared to joining - anti . The extent of directed communication , in - formational content and message reach was not statistically different between the two user cohorts . Taken together , these comparisons suggest that those joining the anti - vaccination cohort are more social and less definitive – indicators of people who might join a cause or a group . Long - term anti - vaccination supporters who are concrete and complex in thought had higher attention sta - tus ratio – indicators of people who could perpetuate a cause . Those joining also posted relatively more content about vaccination ( higher engagement ) , suggesting that for them this was , at least initially , a specific issue of interest , while for long - term anti - vaccination advocates , vaccination appears to be one in a number of government conspiracy issues of interest . This general conspiracy thinking and cognitive mindset thus appears to provide the perfect net to catch people specifically concerned with vaccination . Discussion Anti - vaccine advocates manifest conspiracy thinking Themes emerging from the twitter history of anti - vaccine advocates refer to government conspiracy , deliberate vac - cine frauds , accusations of cover - ups by regulatory bodies ( ‘Secretive Government’ ) and concerns over terror wars ( ‘War News’ ) ( see Table 5 ) . In fact they had significantly higher mentions of vaccine fraud and chronic health con - cerns after their first mention of vaccination . This suggests an important characteristic of people holding unfavorable attitude towards vaccination : an inclination towards con - spiracy thinking – a way of interpreting the world where conspiracy plays a dominant role ( Zonis and Joseph 1994 ) . It is worth noting that these conspiracy related topics sur - face as prominent themes amidst the millions of tweets expressed over multiple years . This suggests that conspira - Factors Words 1 . War News terror , war , terrorist , foreign , rebel , regime , west , turkish , russian , syria , qaeda , humanitarian 2 . Secret Govt . secret , illuminati , homeland , underground , cia , camera , fema , wtc , ufo , agent , sight , caught 3 . Informal Speech lol , feel , em , tomorrow , room , outside , gonna , luck , coffee , cat , bet , suck , easy , annoy , dumb 4 . Govt . Vote tax , voter , romney , obama , president , medicare , democrat , capital , republican , donor , gop , poll 5 . Vaccine Fraud cdcwhistleblower , vaccinate , mmr , fraud , data , investigate , measles , thomspon , coverup , harm 6 . Chronic Health lung , obesity , detect , muscle , clinical , regulation , diabetes , implant , hip , acid , brain , addiction 7 . Organic Food chemical , farmer , food , crop , gmo , usda , organic environmental , genetically , pesticide , monsanto 8 . Government Conspiracy imf , bilderberg , dictatorship , intimidate , eugenic , embassy , laden , conspiracy , politics , infowar 9 . War & Terror dispute , catastrophe , osama , felony , nuke , crisis , helicopter , missile , militia , enforcement , federal 10 . Religious Extremism hamas , Nazis , german , muslim , union , evil , nige - ria , accept , warn , refugee , christian , silence Table 5 : Themes emerging from the social media posts of active - anti and joining - anti users . Representative words with the highest factor loadings are shown per theme . Between Groups Within Time Factors Mean Diff p - val Mean Diff p - val War News A > J < 10 - 15 ns Secretive Govt . A > J < 10 - 15 ns Informal Speech ns ns Govt . Vote A > J < 10 - 15 ns Vaccine Fraud J > A < 10 - 15 Post > Pre < 10 - 15 Chronic Health A > J < 10 - 15 Post > Pre 0 . 002 Organic Food ns ns Govt . Conspiracy A > J 0 . 005 ns War & Terror ns ns Religious Extremism ns ns Table 6 : Theme comparisons between the active - anti ( A ) and joining - anti ( J ) groups . Statistically significant differ - ences are based on an independent sample t - test . n marks themes where A > J . n correspond to themes where J > A . torial ideation is not only driving their anti - vaccination beliefs but that the very notion of conspiracy has a strong hold on their way of reasoning about events in the world . “Freedom of information request reveals major government vaccine conspiracy gaia health # autism # aspie” “Chemtrails / Death - Dumps ! Secret Govt Operation | USAHM Conspiracy News [ link ] ” “9 / 11 Blueprint for Truth – The Most Compelling Presenta - tion Proving the 9 / 11 Conspiracy … [ link ] ” The above example tweets from our anti users also align with research showing people’s consistency with conspira - torial ideas : someone who believes in one conspiracy theo - ry , tends to believe others as well ( Swami et al . 2011 ) . This consistency is an artifact of people’s tendency to maintain a coherent system of attitudes so as to strike internal and psychological consistency ( Bem 1970 ) . For individuals with anti - vaccine attitudes , a paranoid world of conspiracy theories , secret , sinister organizations and manipulative government bodies causing harm are all part of their co - herent system of beliefs . Resoluteness towards anti - vaccination stance Our results present evidence of the strength and persistence of the underlying attitude conviction of long - term anti - vaccine advocates . They showed relatively higher usage of concrete nouns , an indication of definitive expression ( Ta - ble 4 ) . They even used more certainty terms compared to their pro counterparts . This aligns with research examining dimensions of attitude strength and resistance towards change ( Pomerantz , Chaiken , and Tordesillas 1995 ) : a primary dimension of attitude strength is the degree of ex - pressed certainty . In contrast , active - pro advocates used more indirect language . The emerging MEM themes of conspiratorial worldview also support active - anti cohort’s persistence towards anti - vaccine attitudes . Social psychologists have argued that conspiratorial thinking serves as a “cognitive shortcut” that can be used to simplify and explain larger , more complex effects . This sense making function can lead people to con - spiratorial beliefs despite little evidence to warrant such beliefs ( Shermer 2011 ) . This explains the conviction of active - anti cohort towards their anti attitudes over long periods of time . A more concerning fact about conspirato - rial beliefs is their “self - sealing quality” – attempts to re - ject the theory may backfire and those very attempts may be characterized as further proof of conspiracy ( Sunstein and Vermeule 2009 ) . Hence conspiratorial beliefs are very hard to correct . This suggests that dispelling vaccination myths among long - term anti - vaccine supporters might be very difficult , despite the amount of scientific evidence and rational arguments provided by government officials , sci - entific journals or other regulatory bodies ( Wolfe 2002 ) . What about emotional appeals to dismiss vaccine myths ? We find that complementing their cognitive con - creteness with decreased positive emotion expressions , long term anti vaccine advocates can be identified as cate - gorical thinkers – people whose writing is more focused on objects , things and categories , marked by higher use of nouns , articles and prepositions ( Pennebaker 2013 ) . Such categorical thinkers tend to be emotionally distant . In con - trast , active - pro users characterized by higher cognitive processing and an informal expression style signal dynam - ic thinking ( Pennebaker 2013 ) . Thus , appealing to the emo - tional side of the anti - vaccination movement also is not likely to successfully change their attitudes . Finally , long - term anti - vaccination advocates indicate a sense of group solidarity . Social psychologists have shown that higher ingroup language ( like member , family ) is in - dicative of group unanimity and a sense of shared identity ( Tausczik and Pennebaker 2010 ) . Long - term anti - vaccination attitude holders’ increased usage of ingroup language , greater attention - status ratio and farther message reach are indicative of higher group cohesion , particularly in comparison to their pro - vaccination counterparts . En - hanced group cohesion and message reach are useful prop - erties for establishing their beliefs as a movement and to recruiting new members into it . In summary , long - term anti - vaccination supporters are resolute in their conspiracy worldviews , are categorical thinkers not likely to be appealed to by emotion , and ex - hibit high group cohesion . In light of these results , we need new tactics to counter the damaging consequences of anti - vaccination beliefs . Drawing from Sunstein’s work on con - spiracy theories , one possible strategy might be to intro - duce diversity in the closely - knit anti - vaccination groups ( Sunstein and Vermeule 2009 ) . Recall that anti - vaccination proponents display high ingroup characteristics . Weaken - Social & Identity Cog think & Tentative 2 nd person pronoun J > A * * * * 3 rd person pronoun J > A * * Discrepancy J > A * Imperson Pronoun J > A * * * * Negation J > A * * * * Social Process J > A * * * * Exclusions J > A * * Affect & Emotional Distance Interrogation J > A * * * * Positive Emotion J > A * Conjunction J > A * Articles A > J * * * * Insight J > A * * * * Prepositions A > J * * Time Orientation Personal Concerns Present Focus J > A * * * * Leisure J > A * * * * Engagement Money A > J * Vaccine tweet prop J > A * * Work A > J * Social Media Characteristics Atten Status ratio A > J * * Message Reach Directed Communication Information content index Table 7 : Comparing the active - anti ( A ) and joining - anti ( J ) cohorts using LIWC measures . p - values after BH correc - tion to control familywise error - rates are shown . ing the well - knit cognitive clusters of extreme theories by introducing informational and social diversity ( Sunstein and Vermeule 2009 ) might reduce the pool of long - term anti - vaccination advocates . Predisposition among adoptees of anti - vaccine attitudes Recall that new adoptees of anti - vaccine attitudes reveal themes indicating conspiracy thinking as well . Most im - portantly these themes are captured while tracking the us - er’s entire twitter history and not just the posts after they start expressing anti - vaccine attitudes . This reveals a sali - ent trait of joining - anti users : they see the world through the same paranoid lens as the active - anti users . In other words , they are already predisposed to adopt anti - vaccine sentiments . A predisposition is a state of an individual which when activated by a stimulus makes a person re - spond preferentially to the stimulus ( Rokeach 1968 ) . The CDCwhistleblower controversy is an example of how a social media - driven event can trigger people’s preexisting disposition to conspiracy thinking and subse - quently provoke their attitudinal expressions that are coun - terproductive to society . Our current analysis cannot draw causal links from the event , but the timeline is highly sug - gestive : ( a ) people with prior indications of conspiratorial thinking start expressing anti - vaccine attitudes towards a topic after an event , where ( b ) the topic’s anti - attitude is grounded in conspiracy theories and ( c ) the event itself is an alleged conspiracy event . Together this signals the pow - er that a single event can exert on attitude formation . In this case the attitude is detrimental to society . Additional research to explore and generalize how events impact atti - tudes at population scale and how to control damaging attitude formation triggered by an event are fruitful areas for social media - based social science . The linguistic analysis results show another characteris - tic of new adoptees of anti - vaccine attitudes : their lack of assuredness . Perhaps this lack of definitiveness nudges the predisposed minds of joining - anti cohort to latch on to the group of anti - vaccine advocates . We also find that they use more social expressions than their long - term counterparts , again a quality likely to make a person join a group ( Gudykunst , Ting - Toomey , and Chua 1988 ) . Limitations & Future Work Our user cohorts manifest the biases of a population of active social media users engaged in discussing vaccine and health information online . How representative their attitudes and opinions are of the general population is de - batable ( Keelan et al . 2010 ) and this confines the generali - zability of our findings . Studies comparing users and non - users of social media sites have found higher usage among young adults , no significant gender differences and lower percentage of Native American users ( Hargittai 2007 ) . Fu - ture work can examine cohorts who are not heavy social media users but still have strong anti - vaccination views . How do such individuals differ from those relying on so - cial media to express vaccine opinions ? We were as thorough as possible in choosing the search phrases used to collect vaccine specific posts . However the transient nature of social media sites might surface new search terms not included in our analysis . Hence our results are not exhaustive . In this regard , we created a high preci - sion rather than an all - inclusive but potentially noisy vac - cine post dataset . Third , our analysis is based on quantita - tive observations rather than experimentation . Thus we can describe “what” we observe , but our “why” explanations are not causal . Future work , both qualitative and experi - mentation on why pro or anti vaccine advocates exhibit certain attitudes would help deepen the understanding of this phenomenon . Finally , our results exemplify vaccine attitudes on just one social media platform : Twitter . We do not know how this translates to other sites . We hope that future research can build up on our findings and investigate vaccine discussions or more general health information debates on other social media sites and mainstream media . Conclusion Through a case study of the vaccination debate , we demon - strate how analysis of the natural language expressions and social media activities can paint a multi - faceted picture of attitudes around a factious topic . Our study of principal actors in the vaccine debate in a key social media channel revealed that long - term anti - vaccination supporters are resolute in their beliefs and they tend toward categorical thinking and conspiratorial worldviews . New anti - vaccination adoptees share similar conspiracy thinking and hence are predisposed to develop attitudes aligned with the cohort of believers of vaccine myths . These new members tend to be less assured and more social in nature , but with a new and continued focus on health concerns . Our case study suggests that even a single event , CDCWhistleBlow - er in this case , may be a sufficient trigger for these people to adopt an attitude and join a socially counterproductive movement . Given these findings , new interventions such as trying to weaken the long - term government conspiracy base of the movement are needed . References Engelmore , R . , and Morgan , A . eds . 1986 . Blackboard Systems . Reading , Mass . : Addison - Wesley . Abelson , Robert P . 1988 . “Conviction . ” American Psychologist 43 ( 4 ) : 267 . Allport , Gordon W . , and Henry S . Odbert . 1936 . “Trait - Names : A Psycho - Lexical Study . ” Psychological Monographs 47 ( 1 ) : i . Bem , Daryl J . 1970 . “Beliefs , Attitudes , and Human Affairs . , ” 34 . “Bilderberg Group . ” 2015 . Wikipedia , the Free Encyclopedia . https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Bilderberg _ Group . Boyd , R . L . 2015 . “MEH : Meaning Extraction Helper ( Version 1 . 3 . 02 ) [ Software ] . ” http : / / meh . ryanb . cc . Boyd , Ryan L . , Steven R . Wilson , James W . Pennebaker , Michal Kosinski , David J . Stillwell , and Rada Mihalcea . 2015 . “Values in Words : Using Language to Evaluate and Understand Personal Values . ” In Proc . ICWSM . Cantor , Nancy . 1990 . “From Thought to Behavior : ‘Having’ and ‘Doing’ in the Study of Personality and Cognition . ” American Psychologist 45 ( 6 ) : 735 . CDC . 2015 . “Measles Cases in the United States Reach 20 - Year High " . http : / / cdc . gov / media / releases / 2014 / p0529 - measles . html . Chung , Cindy K . , and James W . Pennebaker . 2008 . “Revealing Dimensions of Thinking in Open - Ended Self - Descriptions : An Automated Meaning Extraction Method for Natural Language . ” Journal of Research in Personality 42 ( 1 ) : 96 – 132 . Cohn , Michael A . , Matthias R . Mehl , and James W . Pennebaker . 2004 . “Linguistic Markers of Psychological Change Surrounding September 11 , 2001 . ” Psychological Science 15 ( 10 ) : 687 – 93 . De Choudhury , Munmun . 2015 . “Anorexia on Tumblr : A Charac - terization Study . ” In Proc . ICDH . Dovidio , John F . , and Russell H . Fazio . 1992 . “New Technolo - gies for the Direct and Indirect Assessment of Attitudes . ” Ques - tions about Questions : Inquiries into the Cognitive Bases of Sur - veys 21 : 204 – 37 . Eagly , Alice H . , and Shelly Chaiken . 1993 . The Psychology of Attitudes . Harcourt Brace Jovanovich College Publishers . Eiser , J . Richard . 1975 . “Attitudes and the Use of Evaluative Language : A Two - Way Process * . ” Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour 5 ( 2 ) : 235 – 48 . Gudykunst , William B . , Stella Ting - Toomey , and Elizabeth Chua . 1988 . Culture and Interpersonal Communication . Sage Pubs . Hargittai , Eszter . 2007 . “Whose Space ? Differences among Users and Non - Users of Social Network Sites . ” Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 13 ( 1 ) : 276 – 97 . Hassan , Ahmed , Vahed Qazvinian , and Dragomir Radev . 2010 . “What’s with the Attitude ? : Identifying Sentences with Attitude in Online Discussions . ” In Proc . EMNLP . Holman , E . Alison , and Roxane Cohen Silver . 1998 . “Getting‘ Stuck’ in the Past : Temporal Orientation and Coping with Trau - ma . ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 74 ( 5 ) : 1146 . Hutto , C . J . , Sarita Yardi , and Eric Gilbert . 2013 . “A Longitudinal Study of Follow Predictors on Twitter . ” In Proc . CHI . Kata , Anna . 2010 . “A Postmodern Pandora’s Box : Anti - Vaccination Misinformation on the Internet . ” Vaccine 28 ( 7 ) : 1709 – 16 . Keelan , Jennifer , Vera Pavri , Ravin Balakrishnan , and Kumanan Wilson . 2010 . “An Analysis of the Human Papilloma Virus Vac - cine Debate on MySpace Blogs . ” Vaccine 28 ( 6 ) : 1535 – 40 . Kramer , Adam DI , and Cindy K . Chung . 2011 . “Dimensions of Self - Expression in Facebook Status Updates . ” In Proc . ICWSM . Kristiansen , Connie M . , and Mark P . Zanna . 1988 . “Justifying Attitudes by Appealing to Values : A Functional Perspective . ” British Journal of Social Psychology 27 ( 3 ) : 247 – 56 . Markus , Hazel . 1977 . “Self - Schemata and Processing Information about the Self . ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 35 ( 2 ) : 63 . Newman , Matthew L . , James W . Pennebaker , Diane S . Berry , and Jane M . Richards . 2003 . “Lying Words : Predicting Deception from Linguistic Styles . ” Personality and Social Psychology Bul - letin 29 ( 5 ) : 665 – 75 . O’Connor , Brendan , Ramnath Balasubramanyan , Bryan R . Routledge , and Noah A . Smith . “From Tweets to Polls : Linking Text Sentiment to Public Opinion Time Series . ” In . ICWSM . Pennebaker , James W . 2013 . The Secret Life of Pronouns : What Our Words Say About Us . Reprint edition . Bloomsbury Press . Petty , Richard E . , and Jon A . Krosnick . 2014 . Attitude Strength : Antecedents and Consequences . Psychology Press . Pomerantz , Eva M . , Shelly Chaiken , and Rosalind S . Tordesillas . 1995 . “Attitude Strength and Resistance Processes . ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 69 ( 3 ) : 408 . Rokeach , Milton . 1968 . “Beliefs , Attitudes and Values : A Theory of Organization and Change . ” Rude , Stephanie , Eva - Maria Gortner , and James Pennebaker . 2004 . “Language Use of Depressed and Depression - Vulnerable College Students . ” Cognition & Emotion 18 ( 8 ) : 1121 – 33 . Salmon , Daniel A . , Lawrence H . Moulton , Saad B . Omer , M . Patricia deHart , Shannon Stokley , and Neal A . Halsey . 2005 . “Factors Associated with Refusal of Childhood Vaccines among Parents of School - Aged Children : A Case - Control Study . ” Ar - chives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine 159 ( 5 ) : 470 – 76 . Savion , Leah . 2012 . “Clinging to Discredited Beliefs : The Larger Cognitive Story . ” Journal of the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning 9 ( 1 ) : 81 – 92 . Schuman , Howard , and Stanley Presser . 1981 . Questions and Answers in Attitude Surveys : Experiments on Question Form , Wording , and Context . Sage . Schwarz , Norbert . 2007 . “Attitude Construction : Evaluation in Context . ” Social Cognition 25 ( 5 ) : 638 – 56 . Shermer , Michael . 2011 . The Believing Brain : From Ghosts and Gods to Politics and conspiracies—How We Construct Beliefs and Reinforce Them as Truths . Macmillan . Slatcher , Richard B . , Cindy K . Chung , James W . Pennebaker , and Lori D . Stone . 2007 . “Winning Words : Individual Differences in Linguistic Style among US Presidential and Vice Presidential Candidates . ” Journal of Research in Personality 41 ( 1 ) : 63 – 75 . Slobin , Dan I . 1996 . “From thought and language to thinking for speaking . ” In Rethinking Linguistic Relativity , 70 – 96 . 17 . Cam - bridge University Press . Sunstein , Cass R . , and Adrian Vermeule . 2009 . “Conspiracy The - ories : Causes and Cures * . ” Journal of Political Philosophy 17 ( 2 ) : 202 – 27 . Swami , Viren , Rebecca Coles , Stefan Stieger , Jakob Pietschnig , Adrian Furnham , Sherry Rehim , and Martin Voracek . 2011 . “Conspiracist Ideation in Britain and Austria : Evidence of a Monological Belief System and Associations between Individual Psychological Differences and Real - World and Fictitious Con - spiracy Theories . ” British Journal of Psychology 102 ( 3 ) : 443 – 63 . Tausczik , Yla R . , and James W . Pennebaker . 2010 . “The Psycho - logical Meaning of Words : LIWC and Computerized Text Analy - sis Methods . ” Journal of Language and Social Psychology 29 ( 1 ) : 24 – 54 . Wolfe , Robert M . 2002 . “Vaccine Safety Activists on the Inter - net . ” Expert Review of Vaccines 1 ( 3 ) : 249 . Zonis , Marvin , and Craig M . Joseph . 1994 . “Conspiracy Thinking in the Middle East . ” Political Psychology , 443 – 5 .