e Academy of Management Learning and Education , 2003 , Vol . 2 , No . 2 , 119 - 127 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Analogical Learning in Negotiation Teams : Comparing Cases Promotes Learning and Transfer We used structure - mapping theory ( Gentner , 1983 ) to study learning in negotiation teams . We instructed some teams to compare two training cases and identify a key negotiation principle ; other teams were given the same two cases to study and analyze separately . Teams who compared the two cases during the training period were more likely to transfer a key value - added strategy to a novel face - to - face , two - party negotiation situation than were teams who analyzed the same two cases separately . In fact , analyzing cases separately was no better than no training at all . Teams of negotiators showed comparable levels of knowledge transfer to solo negotiators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . At the forefront of nearly all management issues and challenges is the ability to learn , change , and adapt . Management educators in universities as well as corporate trainers face two inextricably linked challenges : offering relevant strategies and proven techniques to their students and clients and at the same time , providing a foundation so that the principles are actually used on the job . Management educators and corporate trainers , in the new era of knowledge and information technol - ogy , have more choices than ever when it comes to crafting the delivery of knowledge and skills to their students , employees , and clients . However , the choices can be daunting , and the relevant re - search regarding the effectiveness of different training techniques is often not readily accessible . We describe here the effectiveness of a training technique in management classrooms that repre - sents an advance over traditional forms of the case method . The technique , analogical learning , is This research was supported by a fellowship from Northwestern University ' s Dispute Resolution Research Center to Jeffrey Loe - wenstein , and awards from the National Science Foundation , SES - 9870892 , to Leigh Thompson , and Office of Naval Research Contract , # N00014 - 92 - J - 1098 , to Dedre Gentner . JEFFREY LOEWENSTEIN Columbia University LEIGH THOMPSON DEDRE GENTNER Northwestern University 119 based on theoretical research in cognitive psychol - ogy . Its application to management classrooms is straightforward , and implementation costs are low . The study addresses three questions : First , we examine whether team learning and task per - formance is facilitated if team members compare cases - what we have called analogical encod - ing - versus team members analyzing cases sepa - rately or team members not analyzing any training cases . Second , we consider whether separate anal - ysis of training cases yields better task perfor - mance than receiving no training cases . Third , we explore whether , following team training , team or individual performance is facilitated . Finally , we consider the implications of our investigation for the practice of management education and training . ANALOGICAL REASONING AND LEARNING Analogy is recognized as both a source of new ideas and a means for communicating new ideas , thus , analogy is tightly bound to learning ( Gent - ner , Holyoak , & Kokinov , 2001 ) . Researchers study - ing diverse areas , such as marketing ( Gregan - 120 Paxon & Roedder John , 1997 ) , critical thinking ( Halpern , 1998 ) and managerial problem solving ( Isenberg , 1986 ) have implicated analogy in learn - ing . Typically , claims about learning by analogy are that people can use a well - understood topic to make sense of a new topic . The result can be local , mundane learning ( e . g . , a science teacher explain - ing that a heart is like a pump ) , or a breakthrough discovery ( e . g . , the early 20th century physicist Rutherford advanced atomic physics by drawing an analogy between the structure of the solar sys - tem and the structure of an atom ; Gentner , 1983 ) . Failures of Learning We argue that most failures of learning are not attributable to a lack of knowledge but to people ' s inability to retrieve the right knowledge at the right time . Indeed , people often fail to draw anal - ogies when it would be helpful for them to do so ( e . g . , Gick & Holyoak , 1980 ; Pfeffer & Sutton , 2000 ) . In this sense , potentially useful knowledge can remain inert because people fail to recall it to solve a new but related problem . For example , in one investigation , people were presented with the proverbs : " all that glitters is not gold " and " don ' t judge a book by its cover . " Despite their similar meanings , the first , " all that glitters is not gold " in most cases did not remind people of " don ' t judge a book by its cover , " ( Schumacher & Gentner , 1987 ) . Instead , people were reminded of " every cloud has a silver lining . " The same inert knowledge prob - lem has been found in mathematics . For example , Ross ( 1984 , 1987 ) trained students on probability problems ( e . g . , for the principle of waiting time , q ( k - l ) p : if there is a % chance of rain each day , what is the chance there is no rain for the next 3 days ? ) , then tested whether they could apply the princi - ples to new problems . He found that students were more likely to apply principles appropriately if the test problem shared specifics and context with the initial problem ( i . e . , the following was another problem about weather ; 73 % transfer ) than if it was from a new context ( e . g . , a problem about golf ; 43 % transfer ) . Analysis of these studies suggests that people focus on superficial details during learn - ing , and recall examples from memory primarily on the basis of those superficial details ( Gentner & Landers , 1985 ; Gentner , Rattermann , & Forbus , 1993 ; Holyoak & Koh , 1987 ; Keane , 1988 ; Ross , 1984 , 1987 ) . Thus , learning and transfer pose two primary cognitive challenges : schema abstraction ( deriv - ing principles or schemas from examples ) , and an - alogical retrieval ( recalling those schemas later to solve new problems ) . Academy of Management Learning and Education June Analogical Encoding To address these cognitive challenges , we exam - ine a second role for analogy in learning : the mu - tual alignment of two novel situations . Drawing an analogy between two situations , even if neither is well understood , focuses learners on what the two situations have in common . The process of compar - ing cases encourages determining the largest co - herent system shared by the cases , and the cases are then understood with respect to this common system . For example , drawing the analogy be - tween the solar system and an atom mentioned earlier emphasizes smaller units revolving around larger units due to attractive forces ( and deempha - sizes the properties of the units themselves , such as their coloration , temperature , ability to support life , etc . ) . We call this process analogical encoding to stress that drawing analogies during learning leads to understanding the cases differently ( i . e . , with respect to what they have in common ) than if those cases were analyzed independently ( i . e . , with respect to whatever is salient in the individ - ual cases , which is often superficial details ; Loe - wenstein , Thompson , & Gentner , 1999 ; Thompson , Gentner , & Loewenstein , 2000 ) . The structure - mapping theory of analogy ( Gent - ner , 1983 , 1989 ; Gentner & Markman , 1997 ) claims that elements and relations among elements both enter into the comparison process , with structur - ally connected relational commonalities typically dominating object - level commonalities due to peo - ple ' s tacit preferences for structure . For example , 1 - 2 - 3 is a better analogy to a - b - c than is c - a - b . Although there is element - level similarity between a - b - c and c - a - b ( i . e . , they are similar on the sur - face ) , the relations among elements are similar between a - b - c and 1 - 2 - 3 ( i . e . , the elements are structured similarly ) . Thus , structure mapping pre - dicts that when people draw a comparison ( provid - ed there is a structural match across items ) , they will accentuate structural commonalities . The an - alogical encoding process should help learners understand relational structures that are embed - ded in concrete examples . These relational struc - tures , when divorced from the examples , can be considered schemas or principles . If people can recognize principles in cases during learning , this should facilitate recalling those principles later , even without the support of a surface similarity match . On the basis of these conclusions about the com - parison process , we predict drawing comparisons should facilitate learning and transfer relative to examining two examples separately . Further , be - cause separate analysis of study cases should 2003 Loewenstein , Thompson , and Gentner lead to situated , context - specific learning , it should not increase transfer to new contexts unless these contexts are highly " surface similar " to the learning cases . Although separate case analysis should lead to some memory for the cases them - selves , the underlying principles within them should remain inert knowledge . Thus , perhaps rather surprisingly , we predict that people who study two cases separately will show little or no advantage on a later analogous test problem over people who receive no study cases . TEAM LEARNING IN NEGOTIATION Team negotiation is an emerging area of interest ( Brodt & Thompson , 2001 ) , as is learning in teams ( e . g . , Argote , 1999 ) and learning in negotiation ( Lewicki , 1997 ; Wheeler , 2000 ) . However , present theory is mixed as to the circumstances under which teams enhance learning and negotiation performance . Take for example the following different claims as to whether team learning enhances understand - ing relative to individual learning . Teams yield process gains if the task can be characterized by a " truth wins " or best member model ( Steiner , 1972 ) . Further , there is evidence that team learning can be synergistic . For example , Schwartz ( 1995 ) found that pairs of learners better grasped a schema from a single concrete example than did individu - als ; Schwartz attributed the difference to team members fleshing out each other ' s understand - ings . However , teams also exhibit process losses due to social and cognitive shortcomings ( e . g . , pro - duction blocking ) , as frequently seen in studies of creativity and brainstorming ( Diehl & Stroebe , 1987 ; Paulus & Dzindolet , 1993 ) . There are also differing claims as to whether teams of negotiators will outperform individuals . On the positive side , negotiating teams might have greater attentional capacity , and they may share more information than do individuals ( Brodt & Thompson , 2001 ; O ' Connor , 1997 ; Thompson , Peterson , & Brodt , 1996 ) . On the negative side , Schopler and Insko ( 1992 ; Insko & Schopler , 1987 ) found that teams engage in a greater degree of competitive behavior than do solo negotiators . Competitive behavior is likely to increase the use of habitual responses rather than novel responses , and hence , using the new study cases could be less likely among teams than among individuals . In sum , the question remains open as to whether team learning will foster understanding as a result of reading the study cases , and whether team per - formance will enhance knowledge transfer from the study cases to the face - to - face negotiation . 121 We explore the acquisition and use of an impor - tant but difficult negotiation skill : contingent con - tracts . Contingent contracts , defined broadly , func - tion like bets : Parties specify terms that hinge on the uncertain outcome of a future event ( Bazerman & Gillespie , 1999 ; Lax & Sebenius , 1986 ) . Some sub - types of contingent contracts are commonly used in business ( e . g . , performance - based pay , or call options ) , but many other opportunities for use exist that are idiosyncratic . For example , Lax and Sebe - nius ( 1986 : 95 ) described a situation in which a city and a firm building an electricity plant disagreed over the price of electricity . This could have led to an impasse , but instead they realized their differ - ences resulted from differing forecasts over the price of oil ( a crucial fuel for the plant ) and gener - ated an agreement contingent upon future oil prices . That is , they tied the future price of electric - ity charged to the city to future oil prices . Our research question is this : Can teams derive the contingent contract schema from concrete exam - ples and subsequently be able to apply it to a novel negotiation situation ? INVESTIGATION This investigation examines whether negotiation teams benefit from analogy training . In prior re - search , we investigated analogical learning by asking individuals to analyze each case sepa - rately ( " Separate Cases " condition ) or to compare the two cases ( " Comparison " condition ; Loewen - stein et al . , 1999 ; Thompson et al . , 2000 ) . Next , we measured the extent to which learners used the strategy outlined in the training case in their sub - sequent negotiation . We found that Comparison group participants showed a more than twofold transfer advantage relative to Separate Cases group participants ( summarized in Table 1 ) . In - spection of our process data revealed that the quality of peoples ' abstractions of the initial cases was a strong , predictor of subsequent transfer . In sum , drawing comparisons , more so than studying cases separately , led to deriving abstractions , which in turn led to transfer . Here , we examine whether teams of learners will also benefit by comparing cases . Learning in teams may eliminate or magnify the comparison advantage found among individuals . We investi - gate the performance of a baseline group that does not receive training to determine whether separate case study represents an advantage over no case study . Thus , we asked teams of managers and management students to analyze training cases embodying contingent contracts . After studying cases , teams collectively prepared a report . Other ' These groups are summed across data collected previously and are shown here collapsed across those prior studies ( from Gentner et al . , under review ; Loewenstein et al . , 1999 ; Thompson et al . , 2000 ) . They are presented for comparison purposes . negotiators were not given training . Everyone then engaged in a face - to - face negotiation situation . Some teams remained intact ; others were dis - solved and individuals negotiated alone . Our pri - mary measure was whether negotiating groups then formed contingency contracts . We predicted that drawing comparisons should increase the likelihood that participants would successfully transfer the contingent contract schema from the cases to the negotiation . A secondary measure was whether contingent contracts that were formed cre - ated greater joint expected value than other con - tracts . Our investigation was carried out in actual management training courses with participants who were highly motivated to learn . METHODS Participants A group of 270 masters of management ( MBA ) stu - dents and middle - level sales managers partici - pated in the training study . An additional 1 , 110 MBA students and middle - level sales managers served to establish baseline performance . Design We crossed three types of training ( team compari - son training , team separate case training , or no training ) with two types of negotiation perfor - mance ( [ intact ] team or [ dissolved team ] solo ) . Procedure The procedure consisted of two phases : training and face - to - face negotiation . During the training phase , we gave participants two training cases to read in a packet entitled " Negotiation Warm - up Analysis . " The cases were approximately 225 - word descriptions of negotiation situations involving a conflict between individuals . The cases provided concrete details and context information and out - lined a clear and elegant solution to the conflict ; namely , the deployment of a contingency contract . One case described a merchant and buyer negoti - ating over the shipment of goods ; the other de - scribed two brothers negotiating their inheritance of a working farm ( see Loewenstein et al . , 1999 , for the full cases ) . Participants were given approxi - mately 20 minutes to read and discuss the cases with their randomly assigned teammate . In the Separate Cases condition , teams were instructed to analyze each case individually : " What is going on in this negotiation ? Please describe the solution and say how successful you think it is . " In the Comparison condition , teams were instructed to compare the two cases : " What is going on in these negotiations ? Think about the similarities between these two cases . What are the key parallels in the two negotiations ? Please describe the solution and say how successful you think it is . " Participants wrote answers to these questions as a team , which they signed and submitted to their instructors . Next , participants engaged in a face - to - face ne - gotiation . The negotiation task ( 1 ) , allowed an op - portunity for a value - added contingency contract ; ( 2 ) , contained no surface - level similarity to the two training cases ; ( 3 ) , allowed participants to negoti - ate either one - on - one or in teams ; and ( 4 ) , allowed for quantifying agreement outcomes to ensure that the contingent contracts were beneficial . In the " Team " conditions ( N = 38 quartets ) , pairs who had 122 Academy of Management Learning and Education June TABLE 1 Proportion of Participants Who Formed Contingency Contracts by Test Condition ( Number Formed / Number of Negotiation Groups ) NegotiationPerformance TrainingContext Training Type Proportion Forming Contingent Contracts Team None None . 25 ( 42 / 171 ) Team Team Separate Cases . 26 ( 5 / 19 ) Team Team Comparison . 37 ( 7 / 19 ) Total . 32 ( 12 / 38 ) Solo None None . 19 ( 8 / 42 ) Solo Team Separate Cases . 17 ( 3 / 18 ) Solo Team Comparison . 41 ( 17 / 41 ) Total . 34 ( 20 / 59 ) Solo Solo Separate Cases . 24 ( 20 / 83 ) a Solo Solo Comparison . 58 ( 47 / 81 ) a Total . 41 ( 67 / 164 ) 2003 Loewenstein , Thompson , and Gentner studied together stayed intact and negotiated as a team against another team . In the " Solo " condi - tions ( N = 59 dyads ) , the teams were dissolved and individuals negotiated on their own . For their ne - gotiations , participants randomly received one of two roles to play ( buyer or seller ) and negotiated either team on team or individual on individual with someone from the same training condition . The participants were allowed up to 60 minutes to negotiate , at the conclusion of which they were asked to complete and sign a contract specifying the nature of their agreement . RESULTS Analogy training led to better performance than separate cases or no training . Teams that com - pared cases ( n = 24 / 60 = 40 % ) were more likely to form a contingent contract in the actual , face - to - face negotiation than were those who analyzed the cases separately ( n = 8 / 37 = 22 % ) , a marginal as - sociation , X2 ( N = 97 , 1 ) = 3 . 50 , p = . 06 ( see Table 1 ) . Comparison training , but not separate case train - ing , led to an advantage over no training at all . Members of the Comparison group negotiating in - dividually were more likely to form contingent con - tracts than were those in the Baseline group , X Z ( N = 83 , 1 ) = 4 . 95 , p < . 05 , but participants in the Separate Cases group were not , X2 ( N = 60 , 1 ) < 1 , ns . Combining across the different training in - structions ( i . e . , comparison and separate cases ) , we found no reliable difference in generating con - tingent contracts between negotiations among in - tact teams ( n = 12 / 38 = 32 % ) and negotiations among dissolved teams , that is , " solo " individuals ( n = 20 / 59 = 34 % ) , X 2 < 1 , ns . Collapsing across negotiation performance and training context to examine training type , almost twice as many Com - parison ( n = 24 / 60 = 40 % ) group negotiators formed contingent contracts as did Baseline ( n = 50 / 213 = 23 % ) and Separate Cases ( n = 8 / 37 = 22 % ) group negotiators , a reliable association , X 2 ( N = 310 , 2 ) = 7 . 08 , p < . 05 ( see Figure 1 ) . Thus , drawing compar - isons facilitated learning the contingent contract schema from examples and applying it to a novel face - to - face negotiation situation . We also explored a comparison advantage on expected joint gains ( i . e . , negotiation perfor - mance ) . Comparison group participants ( M = $ 4 . 76 million ; SD = $ 1 . 04 million ) generated contracts of greater value than the Separate Cases group par - ticipants ( M = $ 4 . 28 million ; SD = $ 1 . 17 million ) or a random sample of Baseline participants ( N = 39 ; M = $ 4 . 19 million ; SD = $ 0 . 89 million ) , F ( 2 , 133 ) = Separate Cases FIGURE 1 Proportion of Negotiation Groups Forming Contingent Contracts by Training Condition Baseline Comparison 123 4 . 35 , p < . 05 . Post hoc tests of mean differences confirmed that the Comparison group contracts were of reliably higher value than those of both the Separate Cases and Baseline groups , which did not differ reliably from each other . As expected , participants who formed contingent contracts ( n = 39 ; M = $ 5 . 33 million ; SD = $ 1 . 00 million ) attained higher expected joint gains than participants who did not ( n = 97 ; M = $ 4 . 12 million ; SD = $ 0 . 88 million ) , t ( 134 ) = 6 . 99 , p < . 001 . Content Coding of Team Reports Prior researchers have found that comparison fa - cilitates transfer as a result of improving people ' s understanding of the training cases ' structure ( e . g . , Loewenstein et al . , 1999 ) . Raters blind to the hy - potheses of the study coded 40 % of the responses as to whether they were complete , partial , or ab - sent the contingent contract schema ( following the methodology of Loewenstein et al . , 1999 , and Thompson et al . , 2000 ) . Those who drew compari - sons ( 21 / 38 , or . 55 ) were more likely to induce the schema than were those who analyzed cases sep - arately ( 12 / 38 , or . 32 ) , a reliable difference , X2 ( N = 76 , 1 ) = 4 . 34 , p < . 05 . Thus , drawing comparisons facilitated understanding the general principle un - derlying the examples . As a manipulation check to ensure that comparison groups were drawing com - parisons and separate cases groups were not , we 124 Academy of Management Learning and Education coded whether participants made reference to the first study case when discussing the second . As predicted , all Comparison condition participants explicitly described connections between the two examples , but only 18 % of the Separate Cases con - dition participants did so . Many of these links were weak ( e . g . , " again , two parties reached an agree - ment by settling their differences " ) . Thus , it is likely that participants in the Separate Cases con - dition did not notice the common agreement struc - ture across the training cases , despite being told to analyze the solutions to the cases . DISCUSSION The management educator and trainer faces two inextricably linked challenges : what to teach and how to teach . The substantive challenge focuses on what should be taught - the principles to be conveyed and practiced . The procedural challenge focuses on how to teach . We note that in the infor - mation age , management educators and trainers face a dizzying array of choices , with a partial list including didactic or principle - based training , experiential training , coaching , and case - based training . The business school world of manage - ment education continues to rely heavily on the case method . Our empirical investigation of ana - logical learning vis - c - vis the case method sug - gests that it can be improved without losing valu - able content , by changing the learning process . We found that comparing cases during a study session prior to a face - to - face negotiation led to greater understanding of the negotiation strategy ( as evidenced by open - ended statements ) and greater use of the strategy than did analyzing the cases separately . Further , comparison resulted in agreements with higher expected joint gains ( about half a million dollars , in our simulation ) . These findings extend the analogical encoding ad - vantages observed in studies of individuals to team learning . We also found that knowledge transfer ( i . e . , the ability to apply the negotiation strategy in the study cases to resolve the face - to - face negotiation ) among the Separate Cases training condition was low . In fact , these groups were no more likely to form contingent contracts than were groups receiv - ing no training . In sum , comparison training pro - moted learning and transfer of negotiation princi - ples , but separate case training resulted in inert knowledge - that is , people apparently encoded the cases , but did so in a contextually specific manner that obscured the deep similarities to the new case . This striking finding dramatizes the challenge of retrieving prior cases and the impor - June tance of encouraging processes that illuminate the underlying structure of cases . The phenomenon of learning by comparing two analogs may be very general . In our research , we have found advantages for learning by analogical encoding across several populations , two different negotiation principles , and several kinds of train - ing and transfer materials . Benefits of comparison learning have also been found in other domains , such as mathematics and physics ( Catrambone & Holyoak , 1989 ; Glynn & Takahashi , 1998 ; Kurtz , Miao , & Gentner , 2001 ; Ross & Kennedy , 1990 ) , and across a wide range of ages ( Gentner & Namy , 1999 ; Loewenstein & Gentner , 2001 ) . Finally , bene - fits of intensive comparison learning experiences persist for at least months ( Chen & Klahr , 1999 ) . Contrasts With Team Learning Phenomena Theories of group problem solving and decision making suggest that groups discuss the informa - tion they all know about rather than the infor - mation group members hold uniquely ( Larson , Foster - Fishman , & Keys , 1994 ; Stasser , Stewart , & Wittenbaum , 1995 ) . This tendency to discuss com - monly held information may hold for surface - similar items , but not for structurally similar ( and not surface - similar ) information . Our analyses of the team training essays did not suggest that spon - taneous comparison of the training materials oc - curred in the Separate Cases condition . Rather , teams focused on general features of the situation that were not particularly helpful in suggesting a resolution ( e . g . , " a successful negotiation is one where both parties are happy with the outcome , " or " family issues are tricky " ) ; and tended to rehash the superficial , contextual information presented in the case ( e . g . , " Syd wants to ensure the boots arrive but also is interested in a longer term rela - tionship with a major firm . . . " ) . Further , teams who studied cases separately showed very little linking across examples . Common information ef - fects may be largely limited to surface similarities held across parties . The purpose of the case training was to allow learners to acquire a general understanding of the contingent contract schema . This schema is con - ceptually unitary , in the sense that it probably cannot be meaningfully distributed across individ - uals . For this reason , we suggest that teams may have an advantage relative to individuals if the concept to be acquired can be distributed , but may be at a disadvantage if it is unitary . The availabil - ity of many cooks may be ideal for making fruit salad , but not a souffle ; many hands may be ideal for putting together the many parts of a radio , but I l 2003 Loewenstein , Thompson , and Gentner 125 a single set of hands may be best when sitting at the potter ' s wheel . Accordingly , we include in Ta - ble 1 additional data from individuals who were provided the same training materials and negoti - ation test case as the current teams . As shown by our collected data ( Table 1 ) , individual training appears to yield greater benefits for acquiring the contingent contract schema than team training , given individual performance . Although groups may exchange more informa - tion than individual negotiators , there may only be a weak link between information exchange and forming contingent contracts . Thompson , Peterson , and Brodt ( 1996 ) found that groups exchange more information than individuals and that information exchange was directly tied to forming trade - offs ( wherein parties create value by yielding on low - priority issues to make gains on high - priority is - sues ) . However , in related pilot research , we have found that negotiating groups do not all discuss their difference of opinion about the future , those who discuss it do not all propose contingencies , and those that propose contingencies do not all form contingent agreements . Forming contingent agreements may require a level of trust and mon - itoring beyond trade - off agreements , and may ap - pear less legitimate than trade - offs as a result ( e . g . , occasionally we find people who tell us " I would never bet on something as significant as this " ; Lax & Sebenius , 1986 ) . As team negotiations may be more contentious than individual negotia - tions ( Schopler & Insko , 1992 ) , this may be a coun - tervailing tendency to the benefit of greater infor - mation sharing among groups . Implications for Management Education and Training The advantage of comparison is that it can make complex knowledge portable . Professional train - ing , including management , law , and medical training , relies heavily on cases . This is for good reasons : Cases possess sufficient complexity to capture the content domain of interest , and they are memorable . However , single cases are recalled in only limited , highly similar circumstances , such that most cases simply become part of the reposi - tory of inert knowledge that people have but never use . Comparison offers a means by which learners can capitalize on the richness of cases while fos - tering the acquisition of portable abstract princi - ples . We speculate that the cognitive advantages of case comparison are quite general . Case com - parison encourages appropriate analysis , inspires curiosity , and leads to abstracting principles . Thus , drawing on analogical learning theory , we suggest that drawing comparisons can advance the effectiveness of the case method . We focused on negotiation skills because it has been argued that negotiation is the " core of the manager ' s job " ( Lax & Sebenius , 1986 : 2 ) . Negotia - tion also presents natural challenges to learning and transfer : They occur in real time , in emotion - ally charged situations , and across widely varying contexts . It is not surprising then , that untrained negotiators ( even those with professional negotia - tion experience ) often miss opportunities and leave money on the table . Thus , learning negotia - tion principles is both important and challenging , and that analogical encoding facilitated the acqui - sition of negotiation principles is a demonstration of its potential effectiveness . If separate case study is not clearly better with respect to knowledge transfer than no training at all , then training may yield no tangible benefits . Savvy companies may not want to invest in train - ing for transfer that does not provide opportunity for case comparison . Furthermore , educators should not expect learners to make comparisons spontaneously . We found both in the present in - vestigation and our previous studies that few peo - ple not instructed to draw comparisons across sur - face - dissimilar cases actually do so . We have even found that directly telling people that studying the materials will help them in their upcoming nego - tiation was not sufficient to promote transfer . Ap - parently , the lure of elaborating upon individual case details can sidetrack group discussion . We are wary of uses of the case method for manage - ment education if they offer only a detailed anal - ysis of a single instance . Case comparison can be encouraged either through discussing multiple brief cases , as in the present research , or through identifying hypothet - ical variations of one larger case ( Morris & Moore , 2000 ; Williams , 1992 ) . For example , classroom in - structors can lead discussions on the commonali - ties and differences across cases . Not only might this provide immediate benefits in students ' under - standing , it might also suggest to students the metacognitive strategy of searching out compari - son opportunities . It is not difficult to implement such changes in classroom discussions , and the gains may be substantial . If instructors are al - ready using cases , then they can improve by pre - senting additional analogous examples ( they can be quite brief ) that highlight key aspects of the main case . If instructors are using abstract state - ments , it is worth the extra effort to consider at least two concrete instantiations - students fre - quently misunderstand and fail to remember bare presentations of abstract principles . Watch out for 126 Academy of Management Learning and Education misleading commonalities along irrelevant dimen - sions or between two entities playing different roles . This is one reason to choose examples set in different contexts . Advanced students may need only the simple instruction to compare an example to the main case ; novices will benefit from the instructor ' s help in finding correspondences be - tween two instances . Instructors can also provide a " moral of the story " to help ensure that students are reaching a desired interpretation of the analogy . It is useful to speculate about the conditions under which team - level training and , in particular , team - level analogical learning , may be most ben - eficial . We suggest that the particular benefit of teams is that they offer the potential to expand the range of analogies that might be applied to a cur - rent situation . If the task is to find an analogy to a single current problem , a group with diverse expe - riences should be more likely to find a useful anal - ogy than a group with similar experiences or an individual ( Dunbar , 1995 ; Hargadon & Sutton , 1997 ) . For example , Dunbar ( 1995 ) has found that micro - biology research groups with diversely experi - enced group members stimulated novel solutions to each other ' s problems by drawing out analogies from their varied background knowledge . In con - trast , in more homogeneous research groups , re - searchers tended to fail on the same problems - a limit that Dunbar attributed to a lack of analogies on which to draw . CONCLUSION Our research investigation focused on how best to teach negotiation cases so as to enhance learning . We found a consistent and powerful advantage for the analogical encoding method in which learners compare two cases over the more traditional and currently more popular method of teaching by sin - gle case studies . An obvious question , given the powerful effects observed under this short duration effect , is whether there are potential cumulative effects of processing comparisons over a series of learning opportunities . Our speculation is that re - peated use of analogical encoding could acceler - ate conceptual change , yielding understanding of useful management principles that generalize well beyond the initial learning context . REFERENCES Argote , L . 1999 . Organizational learning : Creating , retaining and transferring knowledge . Boston : Kluwer Academic Publishers . Bazerman , M . H . , & Gillespie , J . J . 1999 . Betting on the future : The June virtues of contingent contracts . Harvard Business Review , 77 ( 4 ) : 155 - 160 . Brodt , S . , & Thompson , L . 2001 . Negotiating teams : A levels of analysis approach . Group Dynamics : Theory Research and Practice , 5 ( 3 ) : 208 - 219 . Catrambone , R . , & Holyoak , K . J . 1989 . Overcoming contextual limitations on problem - solving transfer . Journal of Experi - mental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , 15 ( 6 ) : 1147 - 1156 . Chen , Z . , & Klahr , D . 1999 . All other things being equal : Acqui - sition and transfer of the Control of Variables Strategy . Child Development , 70 ( 5 ) : 1098 - 1120 . Davis , J . H . 1969 . Group performance . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Diehl , M . , & Stroebe , W . 1987 . Productivity loss in brainstorming groups : Toward a solution of a riddle . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 53 : 497 - 509 . Dunbar , K . 1995 . How scientists really reason : Scientific reason - ing in real - world laboratories . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight : 365 - 395 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Faraj , S . , & Sproull , L . 2000 . Coordinating expertise in software development teams . Management Science , 46 ( 12 ) : 1554 - 1568 . Gentner , D . 1989 . The mechanisms of analogical learning . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning : 199 - 241 . New York : Cambridge University Press . Gentner , D . 1983 . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science , 7 : 155 - 170 . Gentner , D . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Kokinov , B . N . 2001 . The analogical mind . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Gentner , D . , & Landers , R . 1985 . Analogical reminding : A good match is hard to find . Proceedings of the International Con - ference on Cybernetics and Society : 607 - 613 . Tucson , AZ . New York : Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . 1997 . Structure - mapping in anal - ogy and similarity . American Psychologist , 52 ( 1 ) : 45 - 56 . Gentner , D . , & Namy , L . 1999 . Comparison in the development of categories . Cognitive Development , 14 : 487 - 513 . Gentner , D . , Rattermann , M . J . , & Forbus , K . D . 1993 . The role of similarity in transfer : Separating retrievability from infer - ential soundness . Cognitive Psychology , 25 ( 4 ) : 524 - 575 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . 1980 . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 : 306 - 355 . Glynn , S . M . , & Takahashi , T . 1998 . Learning from analogy - enhanced science text . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 35 ( 10 ) : 1129 - 1149 . Gregan - Paxton , J . , & Roedder John , D . 1997 . Consumer learning by analogy : A model of internal knowledge transfer . Jour - nal of Consumer Research , 24 , 266 - 284 . Halpern , D . F . 1998 . Teaching critical thinking for transfer across domains . American Psychologist , 53 ( 4 ) : 449 - 455 . Hargadon , A . , & Sutton , R . I . 1997 . Technology brokering and innovation in a product development firm . Administrative Science Quarterly , 42 ( 4 ) : 716 - 749 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Koh , K . 1987 . Surface and structural similarity in analogical transfer . Memory & Cognition , 15 : 332 - 340 . Insko , C . , & Schopler , J . 1987 . Categorization , competition , and 2003 Loewenstein , Thompson , and Gentner collectivity . In C . Hendrick ( Ed . ) , Group processes : 213 - 251 . Beverly Hills , CA : Sage . Isenberg , D . J . 1986 . Thinking and managing : A verbal protocol analysis of managerial problem solving . Academy of Man - agement Journal , 29 ( 4 ) : 775 - 788 . Keane , M . T . 1988 . Analogical problem solving . New York : Ellis Horwood , Ltd . , Halsted Press . Kurtz , K . J . , Miao , C . - H . , & Gentner , D . 2001 . Learning by analog - ical bootstrapping . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 10 ( 4 ) : 417 - 446 . Larson , J . R . , Foster - Fishman , P . G . , & Keys , C . B . 1994 . Discus - sion of shared and unshared information in decision - mak - ing groups . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 67 ( 3 ) : 446 - 461 . Lax , D . A . , & Sebenius , J . K . 1986 . The manager as negotiator . New York : The Free Press . Lewicki , R . J . 1997 . Teaching negotiation and dispute resolution in colleges of business : The state of the practice . Negotia - tion Journal , 13 ( 3 ) : 253 - 269 . Loewenstein , J . , & Gentner , D . 2001 . Spatial mapping in pre - schoolers : Close comparisons facilitate far mappings . Jour - nal of Cognition and Development , 2 ( 2 ) : 189 - 219 . Loewenstein , J . , Thompson , L . , & Gentner , D . 1999 . Analogical encoding facilitates knowledge transfer in negotiation . Psy - chonomic Bulletin and Review , 6 ( 4 ) : 586 - 597 . Morris , M . W . , & Moore , P . C . 2000 . The lessons we ( don ' t ) learn : Counterfactual thinking and organizational accountability after a close call . Administrative Science Quarterly , 45 ( 4 ) : 737 - 765 . O ' Connor , K . 1997 . Groups and solos in context : The effects of accountability on team negotiation . Organizational Behav - ior and Human Decision Processes , 72 : 384 - 407 . Paulus , P . B . , & Dzindolet , M . T . 1993 . Social influence processes in group brainstorming . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 64 : 575 - 586 . Pfeffer , J . , & Sutton , R . I . 2000 . The knowing - doing gap . Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Press . Ross , B . H . 1984 . Remindings and their effects in learning a cognitive skill . Cognitive Psychology , 16 : 371 - 416 . 127 Ross , B . H . 1987 . This is like that : The use of earlier problems and the separation of similarity effects . Journal of Experi - mental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 13 ( 4 ) : 629 - 639 . Ross , B . H . , & Kennedy , P . T . 1990 . Generalizing from the use of earlier examples in problem solving . Journal of Experimen - tal Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 16 , 42 - 55 . Schopler , J . , & Insko , C . 1992 . The discontinuity effect in inter - personal and intergroup relations : Generality and media - tion . In W . Stroebe & M . Hewstone ( Eds . ) , European review of social psychology : 121 - 151 . Chichester , England : Wiley . Schumacher , R . , & Gentner , D . 1987 , May . Similarity - based re - mindings : The effects of similarity and interitem distance . Paper presented at the Midwestern Psychological Associa - tion , Chicago , IL . Schwartz , D . L . 1995 . The emergence of abstract representations in dyad problem solving . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 4 : 321 - 354 . Stasser , G . , Stewart , D . D . , & Wittenbaum , G . M . 1995 . Expert roles and information exchange during discussion : The im - portance of knowing who knows what . Journal of Experi - mental Social Psychology , 31 : 244 - 265 . Steiner , I . 1972 . Group processes and productivity . New York : Academic Press . Thompson , L . , Gentner , D . , & Loewenstein , J . 2000 . Avoiding missed opportunities in managerial life : Analogical train - ing more powerful than individual case training . Organi - zation Behaviorand Human Decision Processes , 82 ( l ) : 60 - 75 . Thompson , L . , Peterson , E . , & Brodt , S . 1996 . Team negotiation : An examination of integrative and distributive bargaining . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 70 ( 1 ) : 66 - 78 . Wheeler , M . 2000 . Teaching negotiation : Ideas and innovations . Cambridge , MA : PON Books . Williams , S . M . 1992 . Putting case - based instruction into con - text : Examples from legal and medical education . The Jour - nal of the Learning Sciences , 2 ( 4 ) : 367 - 427 . Wittenbaum , G . M . , & Stasser , G . 1996 . Management of informa - tion in small groups . In J . L . Nye & A . M . Brower , ( Eds . ) , What ' s social about social cognition ? Research on socially shared cognition in small groups : 3 - 28 . Thousand Oaks , CA ; Sage . Jeffrey Loewenstein is a contract assistant professor of management at the Columbia Business School . He earned his PhD in cognitive psychology at Northwestern University . His research focuses on the roles analogy and language play in learning . Leigh Thompson is the J . Jay Gerber Distinguished Professor of Dispute Resolution and Organizations at the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University . Thompson earned her PhD in social psychology at Northwestern University . She investigates how cognition and emotion affect managers ' ability to perform organizational activities . Dedre Gentner is a professor of psychology as well as education and social policy , and is the director of the Cognitive Science Program at Northwestern University . Gentner earned her PhD in cognitive psychology from the University of California at San Diego . Her research addresses topics including learning , language and thought , analogy , metaphor and similar - ity , and mental models .