1 Intellectual Property Rights on Creativity and Heritage : the Case of Fashion Industry Christian Barrère , OMI , Université de Reims ( Preliminary version 1 ) Property rights allow the allocation of the majority of standard industrial goods without any special difficulty . Conversely , when they have to be applied to non standard goods as creative goods new problems are arising . A new and wonderful case of pure creative world is the “Second Life” world . In this world you cannot produce goods but you can create and sell your creations . Competition mainly passes through creativity . So , by selling original houses Anshe Chung , a virtual architect , became the first billion dollars winner . Aimee Weber created a clothing trademark , Preen , and manages it as a real one giving her earnings equivalent to a professional income . Thus property rights problems arose and the first trials about them emerged in 2007 . Kevin Alderman sues John Doe for copyright violation ( concerning the famous Eros SexGen bed ) . Since 2005 Alderman has been selling on Second Life several thousands of this erotic bed at the price of 45 $ US when Catteneo decided to sell a copy for 15 $ US . In the same line conflicts around trade marks , real and virtual , often counterfeited , are multiplying . Higher is the ratio of creative component in a good , higher is the probability of piracy ( Benghozi and Santagata , 2001 ) . If in a pure creative world property rights occur they are still a bit more complicated when creativity joins industry and mass production of luxury groups which are looking for money . It is the case in fashion industries . A few papers concern the problem of property rights in the fashion industry . They generally use the standard and formal framework of Law and Economics analysis and discuss the efficiency of IPR in this industry in relation to copying and piracy . They all observe the weakness of IPR whatever the countries studied are . Some of them criticize this weakness but others propose a more interesting analysis – the piracy paradox – according to which there is now a low IPR equilibrium . They chair the discussion in the mental framework of the American case . The first aim of our paper is to add to it some observations based on the French case , which is here important because the Haute Couture system is a French invention and was the first place where IPR problems emerge and lead to different systems of IPR management . Moreover , it is for the first time in France that financial groups of luxury ( as LVMH and PPR ) succeed in integrating the apparel system in a larger set , the set of luxury goods , and try to implement a new model of IPR management . The second aim is to consider the relation between IPR and the two main inputs of fashion process , creativity and heritages . We think that PR are not a formal and general system able to be directly used for managing the allocation of any resource , whatever its specific characteristics , everywhere and on any circumstance . On the contrary , a ' substantivist ' point of view focuses on these characteristics which , for a part , explain the present configuration of IPR in each case , particularly in the case of the Fashion industry , and the diverse types of IPR 1 We apologize for the bad quality of the English used in this preliminary version . A better version will be available at the conference , in may . 2 management . So , the piracy problems become only a part of the question of IPR in fashion industries . And , as the productive characteristics of the creation process in fashion impeaches to use a standard model of perfect property rights , actors may play on the forms where appears creativity in order to obtain a better protection of their rights . Through managerial and institutional creativity they can modify the configuration of IPR ( Alchian and H . Demsetz , 1973 ; North , 1981 ; Nelson and Winter , 1982 ) . We consider the discussion on the existence of a low - IPR system in a first point . The second point considers the way of producing fashion goods and the third one infers from the specific characters of fashion cultural inputs some difficulties to use the standard model of IPR . The fourth and the fifth ones study the classic and the new models of management of cultural assets in the fashion industry through the use of IPR . 1 The debate on IPR efficiency Fashion uses creativity and personal skills and a Haute Couture dress is a handcraft and unique product ( or is produced in a few copies ) . The purpose of producers is not to improve but to create . Creations remain unique and , as non cumulative knowledge , escape from the incremental character of technical progress . Thus creative products and their main inputs , creativity and heritage , have a strong cultural and economic value and standard efficiency considerations leads to propose a strong system of IPR . Nevertheless , as observed by all the specialists , IPR are low ( see for France , Grumbach , 1993 ; for USA Litman , 1994 , Raustalia and Sprigman , 2006 ) . Thus , some authors criticize this weakness and claim for a strong system of IPR ( for example , Terakura , 2000 ; Hetherington , 2001 ) , either to strictly define IPR or to strongly enforce them . A more original and very interesting analysis argues “ that the fashion industry counterintuitively operates within a regime of free appropriation in which copying fails to deter innovation and may actually promote it . We call this the ' piracy paradox ' . ” ( Raustalia and Sprigman : 5 ) . Two main arguments are used . The first one relates to induced obsolescence . Piracy diffuses innovation in a positional goods world and accelerates the diffusion of designs and styles , leading to an acceleration of the renewal of goods ( “ in short , piracy paradoxically benefits designers by inducing more rapid turnover and additional sales ” ) . We agree with this point but think that it does not lead to a pure acceptation of piracy . The induced obsolescence is only an externality , a global effect on the market . Nothing guarantees that the innovator will be the main beneficiary of the induced obsolescence and , from a free riding point of view , he could take a profit from the obsolescence induced by the copying of other creators while protecting his own innovation . The second , and related , is that “ a low - IP regime helps the industry establish trends via a process we refer to as “anchoring” . Our model of anchoring rests on the existence on definable trends . . . Copying does this by anchoring the new season to a limited number of design themes . . . Thus anchoring helps fashion - conscious consumers understand ( 1 ) when the mode has shifted , ( 2 ) what defines the new mode , and ( 3 ) what to buy to remain within it ” ( Raustalia and Sprigman : 45 ) . . This second point seems doubtful . It misses the difference between copying within the creators circle and the copy of creators ' products by the ready - to - wear or the mass market producers . Creators work at the same time and , preparing a new collection , cannot copy each other . The constitution of definable trends does not derive from their copying but from other mechanisms : all the creators are immerged in the same cultural “mood” ; all choose within a limited set of new fabrics , the designs of which are close and , often , derive from the “cabinets de tendances” . And , if there is “copying” or “meetings” , these 3 processes do not concern the designs ( the Chanel or the Galliano style ) but some general properties : the length of the skirts , the dominant colours , . . . But that mainly regards the mass market . So , anchoring cannot be considered as a consequence of low IPR . To understand the effects of low IPR , we have to precisely consider the relations between Haute Couture and the other segments of the fashion pyramid . This is why it may be interesting to study the historical evolution of fashion industry ( see infra points 4 and 5 ) . For the time being there is no undisputable conclusion on the efficiency of a low IPR system , which would suppose to compare a low and a high IP system . Fashion system going on running with low IPR does not signify that low IPR are the best system , and are the best system regardless of the organisational characteristics of the industry . To understand the relation between IPR and fashion we will now specify the way of producing fashion products , that is to say the process of creation . 2 Culture as a fundamental input of production in fashion industry In fashion industry , culture intervenes as a " new " culture - culture is a flow , through creativity - and as an " old " culture - culture is a stock , through heritage . The current creativity uses the creativity of the past which has been accumulated to constitute heritages and , simultaneously , adds to them . Moreover , when cultural industries use simultaneously creativity and heritages , they benefit from a virtuous circle , goods , knowledge , ideas produced constitute heritages which , in return , favour creativity . By mimicking Sraffa we can speak of a production of creative goods and heritages by creative goods and heritages . Creativity ( and then heritages ) appears , in fashion industry , under three main forms : a product creativity , a managerial creativity and an institutional creativity . It is mainly located in the top segment of the fashion pyramid , Haute Couture , and , after , flows through the other segments ( luxury ready - to - wear of the creators , high quality ready - to - wear , ready - to - wear , street fashion of the mass market ) . 2 . 1 The product creativity Haute Couture is strictly organized around creativity , its key input ( Barrère and Santagata , 2005 ) . Models and designs are not standard outputs but one - offs , yielding unique works , strictly bound up with individual talent . Competition primarily uses creativity and not cost reduction , whether new segments of mass fashion compete through prices but on the basis of a new creativity or thanks to copying the creativity existing in the high segments . In the standard industries there is a trend of technical progress which is incremental . Each good is likely to be substituted by a better one , a more sophisticated , or a cheaper one ; each technology is substituted by a more efficient one . Thus the value of “old” goods or techniques is quickly diminishing . It is not usually the case in creative industries and specially in fashion industry . There can be innovation and technical progress , in which case there can be incrementality but this is not its dominant feature . The principle of fashion is precisely that someone may prefer the fashion of the seventies to the fashion of the sixties but nobody can maintain that one is technically superior to the other . Then creativity embodied in models and designs constitute a heritage of creative products , the value of which is not declining but , conversely , may grow . In the fashion system , these heritages are simultaneously a physical stock of designs and models and the cultural heritage of a style ( e . g . the Chanel style ) . They are as highly valuable as new creators can “revisit” old collections and styles and can “revisit” ( now the key word of creation process ) the history of fashion . This heritage also allows 4 customers to identify a style . Creativity for a creator is not to decide if a skirt has to be long or short . He uses a lot of common inputs and conditions : the mood of the time , the successful movies , the trends in other arts as architecture or design , the personalities of the top stars of the moment , . . . He / she is a creative one because her / his interpretation is unique . In the same conditions John Galliano and Karl Lagerfeld create collections which can have some similar characteristics ( the length of clothes , the dominant colours , . . ) but are fundamentally different . And each one creates his collection within a style , in reference to a specific heritage . Beside the physical and particular stocks of designs and models there is a common heritage of creative knowledge . The history of the Maisons of the great creators ( Chanel , Balenciaga , Dior , Saint Laurent ) and the cult of creation are a major incentive to creativity . Stock inventory effect , memory effect and experience effect facilitate the apprenticeship and transmission of creativity , especially between generations . This heritage implies experience effects . Yves Saint Laurent was just 21 when he succeeded Christian Dior upon his death . His first collection – the Trapeze line – , which was under the critical spotlight , demonstrated a vast culture and an ability to fit into the course of fashion . In the UK , the success of Vivienne Westwood or John Galliano is linked to the tradition of English tailors ( Lehnert , 2000 ) . The creative heritage is also the ability to design new luxury goods , close to Haute Couture , and so to widen the product range . 2 . 2 The managerial creativity If artistic creativity is the most important in the story of fashion , creativity also concerns the management of production process . The Maisons de Haute Couture have been able to join creativity and craft knowledge , consequently heritage of craft dexterity passed down from generation to generation of workers having the technical skill to perform sophisticated technical operations . Until the fifties this system was profitable ; the Maisons de Couture worked according to an artistic logic and under the direction of its founder , the couturier - créateur . The market logic was of secondary importance . But the economic conditions of the fashion system considerably change when the elitist model gave place to a market model . Then a lot of Maisons disappeared : after the Second World War there still were 106 Maisons de Haute Couture in Paris , in 1967 only 19 and now there are less than ten . The survivors are the Maisons which have been able to introduce new managerial creativity . Poiret , before the Second World War , was the first to understand the possibility of using his reputation to sell perfumes and accessories for getting money . Then , through the system of the ‘ griffe ’ , the names of the famous couturiers are widely known beyond the spheres of their direct customers , and , often , through generations . They greatly contribute to the market power of firms ( for instance the reputation assets of Dior acquire a very high value with the globalization of luxury markets ) . After the Second World War , Christian Dior connected Haute Couture and ready - to - wear by creating a high quality ready - to - wear ; this gave birth to a new ready to wear , a luxury one , the ‘ prêt - à - porter des couturiers et créateurs’ which allows the Maisons to expand their market . Conversely , some creators refused the market logic : Cristobal Balenciaga , in 1968 , asserted that the Haute Couture was dead , proclaimed his artistic statute against the market logic , and " refusing to prostitute himself " closed his Maison . Since the seventies the management of the market power of the Maisons became decisive . Beside the creator and artistic director they are run by a manager . It is the case of the famous pairs Yves Saint Laurent and Pierre Bergé , Tom Ford and Domenico De Sole , Calvin Klein and Barry Schwartz , … They modify the leading strategies of the Maisons by considering the market conditions . The profitability of ready - to - wear and accessories offsets the non profitability of the Haute Couture segment and a strict connection is organized between the 5 mass production goods and the laboratory of creativity and reputation of the top segment . 2 . 3 The institutional creativity In the fashion field , creators have invented and imposed a specific institutional organization , the Maison de Haute Couture . While , in the Old system , the models derive from the étiquette de la Cour and the couturiers were craft workers , Charles Worth , during the Second Empire , stood as a creator , an artist ( Worth was defining himself as an " artiste en robes " , a " compositeur de toilettes " , and Poiret was defining clothing as a " produit d ' art " ) , and became a couturier - créateur . Supply appears as dominant on the demand , stylists define good taste and fashion tastes 2 . With this innovation creativity got the upper hand on technical dexterity and the Maison de Haute Couture concentrates the origin of creativity at the top of the system ; later on , creativity flew down , through licenses and production of accessories and was valuated by the ‘ griffe ’ When creativity is on for a long time , as in the French Haute Couture , it includes public policies to improve art , fashion and creativity , trade associations . But reproducing creativity also leads to build a common heritage of tastes , i . e . a semiotic and cultural heritage . Fashion implies conventions to distinguish between good taste and bad taste . The existence of a heritage of tastes and preferences , i . e . a common reading of signs , produces homogeneous representations . In a market of sign - goods it allows demand to adjust to supply . It makes fashion understandable ; it makes creation credible ; it legitimates the creative work as fashion creation . Moreover , it provides a competitive advantage in world markets . The semiotic heritage leads to an image heritage . All French luxury industry goods benefit from this image effect . Consumers clamour for French fashion and luxury products as carriers of the “French touch” . Cultural heritage , mainly the intangible kind , influences individual and social preferences , and consequently affects demand functions insofar as producers can generate demand for these goods through communication strategies . For instance , the demand for Dior perfumes is related at one and the same time to the image of the great Haute Couture creator , to the “French touch” , and to the Parisian heritage of fashion , art and culture . Moreover , a creative district emerges allowing innovations to circulate among the arts and emulating creativity . So , creativity has a strong value and has to be protected . On one hand it has a direct value . The recent successes of Dior derive from the talent of Galliano , the recovery of Gucci is strictly linked to Tom Ford . The reputation of Dior and Saint Laurent companies results from the genius of Christian Dior and Yves Saint Laurent . On the second hand , creativity has an indirect value because it is accumulated in heritages and has a lot of effects flowing over clothing models into the luxury domain . The question of IPR on creativity and heritage is therefore crucial . And fashion producers have a creative role in the organization of a IPR system ; that does not signify that they can make what they want , - peculiarly they suffer the constraints of the specific characteristics of inputs - but that they can influence on the definition and management of rights . Moreover fashion is more and more connected to clothing and luxury industries . Firstly because Haute Couture is not per se profitable but creates models and reputation which are exploited in the prêt - à - porter in which some segments are mass - produced . Secondly because the Maisons de Couture develop accessories ( bags , shoes , ties , perfumes , . . ) which , for the main part , belong to mass production . Thirdly because financial groups ( as the two leaders , LVMH of 2 He declared : « Mon travail n’est pas seulement d’exécuter mais surtout d’inventer . La création est le secret de mon succès . Je ne veux pas que les gens ordonnent leurs vêtements . » quoted by Grumbach , 1993 , p . 19 . 6 B . Arnault and PPR of F . Pinault ) enter the field and build creative groups able to intervene in all the segments of luxury industries . Then specific assets of fashion creation get more and more value : a trademark as Dior has a very high specific value related to the name of Dior and to joint reputation . The new groups which are using sophisticated management seek to improve the management of IPR on these assets and conduce a change from an Old model , the Haute Couture system based on Maisons owned by the great creators ( Chanel , Dior , Balenciaga , . . ) to a New system , with a new model of management through IPR . 3 The difficulties to use the standard model of IPR In the 1960s the French grand couturier Yves Saint Laurent presented a collection called “Mondrian” , openly drawing his inspiration from the famous Dutch painter’s works . This anecdote raises many questions about intellectual property rights . For instance , was Saint Laurent entitled to use Mondrian’s paintings as a source of inspiration regardless of IPR in Mondrian’s creations , and without paying royalties to Mondrian’s heirs ? Could the fashion designer argue Mondrian’s paintings were a part of our common heritage and so free goods ? Talking of “heritage” entails defining what portion of Mondrian’s creation truly constitutes that heritage . Is it only his style of painting ? The colours of his creations ? And so on . Could we share between Mondrian’s creativity and Saint Laurent’s creativity ? To complicate matters , a few weeks later , street fashion produced clothes of lesser quality for the ready - to - wear market inspired by Saint Laurent’s Mondrian collection . One might question whether producers were entitled to propose a collection so “very close” to Saint Laurent creations . Did Saint Laurent’s creations become a heritage street fashion could use as a source of inspiration , much as Saint Laurent himself had done with Mondrian’s paintings ? 3 . 1 A perfect system of Property Rights By clearly stipulating who holds the rights in each economic resource , a property rights system allows for efficient management – including inter - temporal management – of the use of resources because the holders have the full benefit of their fructus . It also allows for resources to be allocated , through abusus , to their most efficient uses . This implies a well defined system of property rights , stipulating the monopolistic boundary line around resource uses that a holder of the property right can enjoy , and , alternatively , all the uses prohibited for other people . A perfectly defined PR would be a clear definition of all the uses that the holder is empowered to make in every state of nature . Formally , a PR system is a complex of relations between three sets : - a set of title holders { H i } , i = 1 , …n - a set of resources { R j } , j = 1 , …m - a set of actions which is the particular uses of each resource { A jk } , j = 1 , …m ; k = 1 , … . z . The uses of my car consist for instance in going to work , going on holidays , carrying luggage , lending it to a friend , and so on . A perfect PR system implies that each action concerning each resource is entitled to the right of someone without any discussion and with the full consequences of those actions in any state of nature . It implies an injective application : H i = > A jk , ∀  i , j , k , what we can observe in a standard production function , as q = f ( I 1 , I 2 , . . , I n ) . That supposes that many conditions are observed : - we can identify all the inputs ( Ii ) , these inputs are clearly defined as homogeneous ones and are separable - we know the relation between each input ( or the marginal quantity of input ) and the 7 output this relation is stable - we can measure the value of the output ( v O ) In this case , we can define property rights in inputs ; the value of the output can be distributed among the contributions from each input . Let us call v O the observed value of the output . Starting with the observation of this v O , we can relate it to some action A jk ; from A jk we can infer the presence of the resource R j and affect it the value v O ; then , it suffices to entitle someone for R j . Each resource is entitled and each PR has a value , that of the highest value among values of the actions entitled by the PR in the resource . Then , each input is clearly linked to a property right and property rights do not overlap . These property rights can produce efficiency . Within a production function framework , this value of property rights is related to the productivity of the resource , and an efficient market can emerge . And , by economic theory , property rights in inputs must be defined to improve efficiency . 3 . 2 Why creativity - based goods make it difficult to implement PR ? The paradigm of the classical political economy is the paradigm of an “energetist " production . Wealth is an accumulation of commodities , produced by direct and indirect labour . There are no qualitative distinctions between different kinds of labour , but quantitative differences expressed by the market through wages hierarchy . “Rare” goods , i . e goods which cannot be reproduced by labour , are marginal ones . Producing is spending inputs which are consumed in the production process , according to a technological combination , and transformed into output . Labour is a sort of intermediary consumption and , as a spending of labour , is made homogeneous as energy spending ( human energy , energy given by equipments , natural energy ) . That implies a lot of implicit conditions : inputs have to be identifiable , separable , homogeneous , reproducible , measurable , organized in stable and known combinations , . . . As far as creativity and heritage are concerned they are special inputs and do not generally satisfy these conditions : • 1 Non separability and non additivity . It is very difficult to identify and to separate the productive contributions of each input : is the success of a fashion collection , and if so to what extent , the result of the creator , of her or his assistants , of the top models , of the manager of the show , of the marketing managers . . . We cannot relate v o to some precise action A jk . Creative production is often a team production . Moreover creation frequently uses heritages and , thus , it is difficult to separate new creativity and old creativity accumulated in heritages and used in the creation process . When Lagerfeld became the new director of Chanel , his first decision was to spend a lot of time visiting all the departments of the Chanel Maison to be impregnated by the heritage of the Maison . He wanted , not to copy Chanel , but to be inspired by the Chanel style to create a new Chanel but in the way of Coco Chanel ( Roux , 2003 ) . How can the new value be separated between direct creative labour and cultural heritage assets , between A jk , A jk + 1 , A jk - 1 , … ? Heritage assets are not standard inputs the value of which is given by the market . And , if the creator produces thanks to a social heritage , it is impossible to conceive a production function incorporating that heritage with which to evaluate marginal productivity . YSL learnt drawing by studying classical painting and drew his inspiration from the models of Dior and Balenciaga but a greater use of the “Dior input” would not have increased his output or improved its quality . And , as looking at the Mondrian collection how to measure the net value of the YSL ' s creativity ? Moreover , the creation function is generally no additive . Each input or condition of the production 8 process may play a decisive role , according to the O - ring effect . • 2 Non reproducibility . While production by transformation of inputs is an operation which can be infinitely repeated , by the productive consumption of necessary inputs , creation appears as a particular phenomenon , founded on such a radical singularity that we cannot have a similar result by buying other inputs . The dresses of the Trapeze line by Christian Dior are behind us and , now , we can only have copies , or “in the touch of Dior” or " paying homage to Dior " new models ; we will never again have some original Dior’s designs and this , whatever the consumption of inputs will be . Moreover , while production by processing of inputs is an operation which can be repeated ad infinitum through the consumption of the necessary inputs , some creations arise as one - off phenomena which are so radically unique that no similar outcome can be obtained by buying further inputs . • 3 Idiosyncrasy . The outcome of the creative process may vary with the environment or even at random . The same inputs sometimes yield a work of genius and sometimes a mediocre product ; Galliano’ performances were not the same everyday . The relation R j - A jk - v o is not stable . The creation of the artist or of the fashion stylist is produced out of nothing , or out of an economic resource , or out of inputs , except for that unique , non - standard resource , be its name genius , creativity , inspiration , or illumination : Yves Saint Laurent claims that in the mornings he daydreams in his office and suddenly an idea comes to him ; then he picks up a pen and sketches a garment . After nights out at discotheques John Galliano goes to his office when he has a “flash’ ; he summons his assistants , he tells them of his visions ; they get down to work and he goes off to bed . How can any true measure of their talent be established ? As we are in an economy of infinite variety ( Caves , 2000 : 6 ) creative inputs do not operate in a standard way and the relation between resources and the value of their effects is often indeterminate . Moreover , some creative inputs are so unique , specific , or idiosyncratic ( the talent of John Galliano or Tom Ford ) , that their potential market is a very small one and does not provide a suitable , stable reference standard . 4 Measurability of effects . Unique cultural creations with no technological dimension but with long time effects are not amenable to comparison , and there is no scale of value for them in terms of their quality ; a YSL concerto is not a Balenciaga or a Poiret composition , a Picasso is not a Poussin , and Borobudur is neither Chambord nor the Empire State Building . It would be nonsense to try to rank these works by their quality or on any scale of creativity : is the invention of the trapeze line in any way superior to the innovation of the miniskirt ? Even if creators are acknowledged in their own time ( e . g . Christian Dior ) , how can their contribution be measured in monetary terms ? And how can one differentiate between the value of a collection , say , and its value for the development of fashion and design ? The question is that much more difficult because many of the effects are non - market effects . Another point is that individual appreciations and then the creation of social appreciation are highly changeable and unpredictable . This makes the value of effects a very random value . The most important creations are often avant - garde creations and are in opposition with the environment of the day . The creator is not acknowledged as a remarkable person and it is only later that his ( or her ) work becomes valuable . And , even if creators are acknowledged in their own time ( e . g . Titian , Picasso or Mozart ) , how can their contribution be measured in monetary terms ? And how can one differentiate between the value of a painting , say , and its value for the 9 development of art ? What is the value of the invention of perspective or of the invention of moving pictures ? How imagining a relation from R j to v o ? The creation of the artist or of the fashion stylist is The question is that much more difficult because many of the effects are non - market effects . Another point is that individual appreciations and then the creation of social appreciation are highly changeable and unpredictable . Moreover , the non ended effects of tangible and intangible cultural heritage assets generates further problems to measure value of the effects . Assigning value to creativity and to creativity accumulated in heritage resources is peculiarly difficult . It is difficult to know what effects a creation might produce across space and , a fortiori , in the course of time . The different values of their uses have to be added and the list of their effects is never complete because new effects may appear later . This point is reinforced by the non incrementality of creative processes . While technical objects disappear , the more recent supplanting the former , the purely creative good establishes a final result . It is no substituted by a new , better , powerful good . George Steiner noted that , when the progress of scientific and technical knowledge is cumulative , in art , literature and music , earlier work is never superseded : “major art is not relegated to antiquarian status ; Chartres does not date . . . What … is in advance on Homer or Sophocles , on Plato or Dante ? Beyond Hamlet , what novel surpasses Madame Bovary or Moby Dick ? » ( Steiner , 2001 ) . Singularity and incomparability of creative goods – among whom fashion goods - are opposed to the idea of an incremental development of science and technology 3 . Creativity also affects consumption by offering new goods and by influencing individual preferences . It does not correspond to an alignment on individual preferences but , more , to the production of novel goods , previously unknown to consumers , and new wants . What procedure can produce a rational or reasonable evaluation of such an effect , and capitalize that effect over time ? • 5 Dominance of creativity . In the creation world , creativity is the main input . Even if the other inputs are the most valuable ( the silk of the dress , the embroidery work , … ) , the result depends mainly on the creativity because of the difference of the results with a non creative producer . The result of the creation process is narrowly related to the process of creativity . The specificity of creation is analyzed through the image of God’s creation . God creates the world because he produces it out of nothing . On the same way , the creation of the artist or of the fashion stylist is made out of nothing , or out of economic resource , or out of input , except the singular and no standard resource , genius , creativity , inspiration , illumination . Modern times spread the idea of a creation from God to Humanity . This notion is out of the standard economic field . Unlike with the production function , the technological combination is unknown , it is difficult to evaluate each input and the measure of time spent is a non sense : What does it matter in terms of the development of society whether Haendel’s Messiah was composed in a week , a month or a year ? In a creative process , creativity is the main input . Even if other inputs make significant contributions the end - result depends mainly on creativity because a 3 Goods which mix creative production and technical properties simultaneously obey to the non incremental property of creativity and to the incremental property of technology , in proportions related to the degree of the incorporated creativity . Research - development process is often a closer standard production process than creation . The investment in RD gives a probabilistic result . And products followed one another in a better way : the last version of software corrects the former bugs and improves some functions ; the new type of car introduces some improvements . Then , for creative goods including technology , improvements are possible : in the luxury industries , the silk “carré Hermès” or the Vuitton luggage can be improved by new raw materials , more sophisticated treatments… 10 creative producer obtains a very different result from a non - creative one . The value of other inputs is increased by the creative effect but creativity has no source and it is out of the principle of economy of means . Specially , the idea of economy of means , i . e . the research of productivity , has no sense in the world of creation . What stake is it for social development that the Messiah of Haendel has been composed within a week , a month or a year ? And what interest is there to seek reducing this length of time ? 3 . 3 How creativity - based goods make it difficult to implement PR ? The previous characteristics of the creation process lead to four types of difficulties : 1 . To define the entitlement . The first problem in defining property rights is to identify all the resources ( present and past as heritages ) , which currently have creative effects or only able to produce some effects in the future , to identify all the producers of resources , to separate their contributions , to distribute rights among them so as to give each producer exclusive rights in their resources and control over the effect of their creative contribution . As seen before , the problems of non separability and non additivity prevent market or society from entitling perfect property rights . The identification and the sharing of the relations effect – resource – holder is often problematic . Then it is not obvious to decide what can be appropriated and who can be defined as the owner . 2 . To organize a market of IPR . In order to define property rights that can be transferred by a market process , resources have to be evaluated . But non separability , non additivity , dominance of creativity and the difficulties of measurability disrupt the evaluation of the effects of the resources . Idiosyncrasy property of creativity joins them to make difficult inferring the value of used resources from the value of their effects and , then , assigning a resource a value . 3 . To enforce IPR . The third problem is to enforce the definition , entitlement and transfer of property rights . As with the Mondrian dress created by Yves Saint Laurent this may be difficult . Piracy and opportunistic behaviours result from difficulties in identifying resources and in entitling them to define exclusive rights . 4 . To justify IPR . The difficulties to clearly define and valuate the productive resources and their holders imply difficulties to justify the present distribution of property rights . Normative problems are arising . Is it fair to give the creator the main part ? Or to the owner of the firm ? As usual in the field of intellectual property rights the distribution of monetary earnings is far from contributing to human happiness or society development – is it fair that Einstein ' s earnings were so weak compared to Bill Gates ' s ones ? These difficulties are more or less important according to the characteristics of the goods and of their creative process . In a first type of situations , the resource – value effects relation is not problematic and the entitlement of resources is enough to define the holder – resource uses relation ( property rights in perfumes are well defined ) . In the second type , the relation is more difficult to define and to evaluate but the effects remain in the private domain . Great fashion creators benefit from their creative image , from a capital of reputation and from a symbolic power . Private assets are then formed . They nourish many other goods such as perfumes and luxury goods , and trademarks can capture their main economic consequences . Firms have a patents portfolio or a brand portfolio and manage these assets by selling or licensing them . In the third type some effects can be captured by other firms or actors . It is the case 11 when the difficulties to define the entitlement leads to difficulties to enforce PR , allowing piracy or copying . In the last cases , the effects flow over into the public area so as with paintings or science . In the fashion industry these diverse cases are existing and , often , overlapped . Thus , strategies and powers play a key role in the organization of IPR and in their management . 4 The classic model of management of cultural assets in the Haute Couture industry To understand the problems of IPR in the classic system of fashion we have to previously consider the Old system , the Court fashion model . The producers were the dressmakers ( couturiers and couturières ) who were mainly able to reproduce the ' canons de l ' étiquette ' . The main source of inspiration was then the common heritage of designs . There was not a creative process but a production process , so no IPR was at stake . The ' novelty ' was introduced at the Court by the courtiers who encouraged their dressmakers to innovate within the étiquette rules and were imitated by the others if the Grands or the King ( the ' arbitres des élégances ' ) accepted it . Even if there were no IPR on creation and even if producers had a low statute , fashion was nevertheless a world of PR . PR concerned consumption , through legal rules ( ' les lois somptuaires ' ) and conventions determining the type of clothes the courtiers and the people were entitled to wear , according to social and political conventions . The Classic model of the ' couturier - créateur ' results from the coming to power of the creator . Creation is a team production but the couturier - créateur has the pre - eminent role and an absolute power on the creation process . The creativity of craft workers is fading away into the products of the Maison . They can make suggestions or create new technical solutions but their creativity is disappearing into the collective product . Obviously their wages include a bonus for the recognition of their skill but it is not related to particular innovations or ideas . They also benefit from collective training . As a collective knowledge heritage , it benefited the individuals through training and the ambient culture . It was therefore partly encapsulated in individual’s skills , increasing their value , and circulating with them when workers changed employers . In this collective heritage no IPRs coming from past work and present creativity , existed although it operated much like capital . To some degree too the craft heritage was a club product ( know - how , routines , procedures , etc . ) , arising from synergies and associated with the specific style of the maison . The creator ( or the maison ) had an implicit IPR in the usus and the fructus of this club heritage but no explicit IPR and therefore no IPR in its abusus ; accordingly it was usually not transferable . Its value was reproduced through the training of new employees coming into contact with the older ones in the maisons . If the maison disappeared , the collective specialized knowledge was generally lost . To some extent also the craft knowledge heritage was the collective and common heritage of the Parisian fashion district , with open access but only within that district . The Maisons paid wages and raw materials and the creator was the residual claimant as the consequence of his / her domination : the creator took the first role and submitted all the other inputs . Creativity appeared to be an attribute of the creator , the couturier - créateur , even if others ( stylists , managers ) did contribute to those creative acts . The creator owned his individual skill and had a partial IPR ( usus and fructus ) in the collective creative skill to which he ( or she ) was able to give rise . The creative products and their heritage assets included specific models and general styles . Particular models were protected by patents ( in France , IPRs 12 in dessins et modèles ) . These IPRs were less strictly enforced ( foreign buyers might copy designs ) but as they were associated with the creator’s style they were not very useful in other styles . Moreover , infringements were of little consequence because the relationship between customers and producers was a personal one and not a market one , so customers addressed their demand directly to bona fide producers . As competition among creators runs by differentiation and as each creator seeks to constitute a clientele he / she has to develop an original style instead of copying . And , when copying did occur IPRs would not provide any solution because it would have been very difficult to prove that one stylist had been copying another one instead of having been inspired by the same social and cultural atmosphere or by the common cultural heritage of fashion . As materials were expensive , piracy was difficult and mainly concerned off - the - peg clothes , which was not the core business of Haute Couture . As above , the styles were too closely associated with the personality of the creator founder , who was the owner and head of the fashion firm . As far as the image of the creator is concerned , the reputations built up were internalized in the firm and protected by the trademark . Nevertheless , this trademark was not a market IPR but a personal IPR taking the form of the griffe ( the creator’s name ) . The griffe expressed the individual crrativity of the couturier and then constituted an heritage which was transferable between products , hence the success of derived products ( accessoires ) , but not between firms . When the firm disappeared , reputation heritage assets , whose value was idiosyncratic , disappeared too . The most important place for piracy was the ready - to - wear system . There was a possibility for the ready - to - wear producers to copy designs of the Haute Couture garments . And it has been actually the case . But these copyists do not compete with the original creators because the outlets of the Haute Couture were reserved to original and legitimated creators within a system of personal relations . The ready - to - wear constitutes another market ; obviously copying avoid them paying royalties to the Maisons . The loss was not very important because ready - to - wear was , before the Second Worl War , in most countries a supply of low quality goods . For instance the French creators , which consider themselves as artists and not as money makers . Conversely , IPRs could not readily be passed on ; the creative knowledge and the corresponding heritage were idiosyncratic . The maisons were closely connected with the personality of the founder through a cultural rationale and not a managerial one . No distinction was possible between the physical creator and his creative heritage , so cultural heritage assets could not be allocated as autonomous resources and no property rights could be entitle for them . Many maisons disappeared when the creator died and no sufficiently creative successor could be found . As the population of firms was highly unstable and as some firms disappeared , this kind of heritage was often lost . In most cases , the market failed to organize the transfer and re - allocation of these heritage assets . So , these assets were not transferable , disappeared upon the death of the creator , and were lost . No IPRs existed in collective creative knowledge heritage assets but they were linked to a special place , the Parisian district , which protect them from absolute unregulated access . Other common heritage assets ( styles , tastes , institutional and cultural heritage assets ) were a common property of the French fashion system . No IPRs protected them but their use presupposed an idiosyncratic connection with this system . Therefore , in this model , IPRs can be less clearly defined without any substantial loss of efficiency and equity in the present period but with substantial losses over time : – when the firm is hand down over time heritage assets are internalized – when the firm disappears , market transfer of heritage assets is generally impossible . 13 In the new model of fashion market , the maisons are purchased by financial groups in the luxury goods industry . Accordingly , the question of IPRs is changing . 5 The new model of management of cultural assets in the Haute Couture industry 5 . 1 New problems The new financial groups in the luxury goods industry are very keen to enhance the value of the maisons ’ creative and heritage assets and develop a more rigorous style of management . They are confronted with three key problems . The first is the growth of the value of creativity with the expansion of the fashion field and its closer association with all the other luxury goods . The second is the reproduction over time of the value of their heritage assets by the groups . They now operate by a long - term , managerial logic , and no longer by the cultural and individual logic of the grands couturiers . The third is the transfer of rights in heritage assets between firms or groups , at some point in time . New IPRs are needed to solve these three problems . They have to be better defined in such a way that creative assets and their connected heritage assets could be protected and exploited . They have to be separate from the person of the creator so they can be passed on , either over time or across space , within the group or within the market , and heritage assets enhanced . So the fashion market model implies a better definition of IPRs in creative heritage assets and the emergence of a market for them . The firms continue to benefit from the private club heritage of craft knowledge , the main change occurs to keep it within the firm or the group over the long term . This is the case of accessory makers like Hermès or Vuitton . Great attention is paid to workers’ training . Their narrow specialization in the firm’s products prevents the formation of an external labour market , so the lack of specific IPRs in club heritage assets does not avoid their transfer over time within firms . At some point in time , this private club heritage may be transferred through the market . New luxury groups take control of existing firms to develop their production of accessories . An important source of value for these groups is that of creative knowledge heritage assets but these cannot be separated from the personality of their creators , they cannot be managed as standard inputs and transferred over time like capital . Transferring them over time , after the death of the founder - creator , implies a decoupling between the creator as a physical person and the creator’s name . The trademark provides a solution : Dior is a world famous trade mark ( and was given as first name to more than one hundred children born in 2003 ) but Christian Dior died 50 years ago . The trademark is no longer the griffe . Nevertheless , this process is not easy . To produce new creative products from the heritage assets of creative knowledge and products implies organizing a new idiosyncratic link between the heritage of a maison de couture and a new creator , capable of reproducing the value of this resource . Lagerfeld has to maintain and expand the value of Chanel’s creative heritage , Galliano that of Dior , and so on . When Lagerfeld arrived at Chanel he began by studying the Chanel style for several months . How could it be defined , how could new goods bearing the Chanel brand be made identifiable as continuing the Chanel spirit ? If successful the heritage assets are a source of value , otherwise the potential value is lost . So the value of IPRs in the non - cumulative cultural heritage assets is only a potential value and cultural heritage assets are not standard economic resources able to circulate by themselves on a market . That fact increases the importance of the work of the new stylists and their key position in the firm ; managers have to be able to allow creators to express their creativity , despite their unconventional behavior . These creators acquire a new specific asset , their ability to maintain and expand the value 14 of heritage assets . Accordingly a market for these skills emerges . Nevertheless , it is a narrow market . When Tom Ford and Domenico De Sole announced they were leaving Gucci , the staff began to look for successors but , as they themselves said , there were few potential candidates . Moreover , creators may use turnover , according to market incentives . These are as important as a market for stylists is emerging and it is necessary to allow for some renewal among creators . Managers seek to prevent opportunistic behaviors by giving creators a share in the profits or a share of capital , that is , to share the IPRs with them . Sophisticated contracts manage the relations between great creators and their groups . Galliano has a share in Dior’s profits and capital and so has an incentive to use Dior’s heritage efficiently ; at first he was authorized to develop his own firm , but afterwards LVMH preferred to take the control of the firm . Internal monetary incentives to be creative may be outdone by external – market – monetary incentives to change jobs . Lastly , IPRs do not allow strictly and clearly separate use of Dior’s heritage for producing Dior goods and for producing Galliano goods . Hence , there is a “hold - up” problem . Dior’s heritage contributes to increasing Galliano’s reputation and not only the firm’s reputation . The owner of the heritage ( the firm ) is not the sole user of the heritage and cannot precisely organize its utilization by his employees , including the creator . So , the economic links between old heritage assets , new heritage assets , creators and firms are a very important point but the legal links are now not sufficient enough to manage them all . Contracts and IPRs remain incomplete . And problems remain , as with the break between Tom Ford and the Pinault group . 5 . 2 Reputation heritage assets : from name to trademark The reputation heritage assets procure growing value for luxury goods industry groups where the market for luxury goods moves into mass production . Groups are then keen to strongly enforce IPRs in trademarks . These IPRs allow them to use their pre - existing reputation for new types of products : obviously they create new accessories to propose an all - round set of luxury goods to consumers ( Vuitton produces not only luggage but has moved into bags , shoes , pens , watches , and so on ; Hermès has added a garment collection designed by Jean - Paul Gaultier to its traditional accessories ) . IPRs also allow corporate restructuring in this growing industry . Another main objective of these groups concerns the image heritage of the maisons : the name of Dior or Saint Laurent is still a sign of quality and creativity , and fashion goods are semiotic goods . But their creators are dead or retired . The problem of the present owners is to transfer the positive image of the great creators who founded their maisons to the name of the firms . Therefore , the task is to start from the “fashion designer’s name” – the griffe ( an association between the creative products and the name of the creator , a personal IPR ) – and to move to the trademark ( an association between the products and the name of the firm , a market IPR ) . This transfer allows the value of the designer’s name to be extended over time and space . The value outlives the grand couturier and extends beyond a particular work to cover the whole product range . 4 The groups organize communication policies to enhance the reputation of the mark : creation of museums or exhibitions ( e . g . Yves Saint Laurent and Giorgio Armani at the Guggenheim ) , purchasing of stores on the main squares of the world’s major cities . Now , the capitalization of heritage in the brand allows the transfer of IPRs in reputation heritage assets . Financial groups can buy and sell firms and associated trademarks : Gucci’s 4 The value of the brand image is especially important for some products in the luxury goods industry such as perfumes . In the case of the perfumes of the French haute couture firms , the value of raw materials represents less than 10 per cent of the price ; the greatest value is imparted by the brand image and the general image of French luxury goods . 15 heritage value can be used both by PPR and by the LVMH group because Gucci is no longer a creator’s name but a brand . Nevertheless , the value of trademarks is very uncertain : in 1977 , sales of the Armani women’s collection were 800 million lire ; three and half years later they were 40 billion . And how can a mark be valued when the creator is dead or has left ? What would be the value of Cardin’s enterprises without Pierre Cardin or of YSL without Saint Laurent , or Gucci without Tom Ford ? And how can the value of Gucci be split between Tom Ford , the creative stylist , and Domenico de Sole , the creative manager ( Beaufumé , 2000 ) ? 5 . 3 Creative piracy and vulgarization of creation In the fashion industry it is very difficult to delineate an IPR in a specific product . Although there is some degree of creativity in mass - production , most cultural creativity is concentrated at the apex of the pyramid , in the maisons . There are two main types of creative piracy . First is piracy from firms and countries which simply copy designs and models and supply a less expensive product ; they save on creative labour and sometimes use inferior quality materials . This kind of piracy benefits from lower wage costs . French and Italian professional institutions have obtained a “designs and models” statute , immediately applicable , and are working on European projects for a directive on author’s rights and designs and models to improve protection in every country ( Benhamou , 2001 ) . They fear European enlargement will lead to a marked upturn in piracy . A second type of piracy is the creative piracy of mass fashion . The protection of designs and models cannot , today , prohibit the use of new models of Haute Couture by the manufacturers of mass fashion . It can prohibit complete product piracy : a firm cannot sell a garment labeled Saint Laurent unless it has been produced in the Saint Laurent workshop . But , under the present legal system , nobody can prohibit street fashion from copying the style and specificities of a model . And the new fashion technologies enable faster copying . Professionals speak of the Zara fashion model : two weeks after the Haute Couture and prêt - à - porter collection fashion parades in Paris , anyone can find very similar products in Zara’s shops . IPRs are inoperative against this kind of copying : – There can be no confusion : prices and quality are very different ; but mass fashion manufacturers can therefore save on creative work and confine themselves to adjustment work . – As in the age of the dress - creator it would be very difficult to demonstrate that one stylist has copied from another and , even more difficult because creation is more inspired by the social and cultural atmosphere ; some organizations are specialized in the production of trend selection ( cahiers de tendances ) . Nevertheless , it is common knowledge that creative piracy is systematically organized . Trade organizations are lobbying to define better protection of IPRs , first and foremost within the European legal system . Another means of combating both types of piracy is to play on consumer preferences . The policy of Haute Couture and prêt - à - porter de luxe firms is , thus , a communication policy to persuade consumers of the social value of a brand . Simultaneously it is a policy to increase the brand’s value , to differentiate it from the standard brands and promote it as a luxury brand , if possible a star or superstar brand . 5 . 4 IPRs in common heritage assets The two main issues here are the management of common heritage assets so they can be reproduced over time and to make them productive . The common heritage of craft knowledge is a configuration of specific assets . They are closely associated with a local geographical context and are non - transferable assets . No market 16 can be organized for them , no IPRs can exist . These assets are formally freely accessible but , in fact , can only be used if firms choose a local installation . Geographical localization constitutes an entry barrier and creates an idiosyncratic relation for firms currently benefiting from these assets . One major consequence of the lack of property rights in this heritage is the absence of any economic management of it . Nobody is responsible for the reproduction of the heritage over time and firms can operate as free riders . In fact , the crisis in Haute Couture has led to a contraction of the craft sector traditionally linked to it and to the loss of highly qualified skills . Public policies are required to manage the economic value of these heritage assets . The institutional heritage of the maison de Haute Couture model is not legally protected either . It may be duplicated abroad but it is connected to the specificities of the Parisian fashion district and to its specialization in a very restricted sphere of the fashion system , that of Haute Couture . The creative knowledge heritage is also locally embedded , but is not controlled by any market or any property rights . It favors French firms but foreign ones can benefit from it by relocating in the Parisian district , by purchasing French firms and by hiring creators who have benefited from this creative atmosphere . The common heritage of styles is a common one but represents a higher value for the firms which produce culturally similar creations . No IPR is defined in these assets and free access is the rule . The same is true for the common heritage of tastes , the semiotic and image heritage of Parisian Haute Couture , and the French touch . Accordingly , French firms attempt to associate the image of French luxury goods closely with their brands : advertising for perfumes invariably states the brand and the name of Paris . This is currently the only way to avoid piracy and the proliferation of pseudo “Made in Paris” commodities . In the future , there may be a local protection of geographic origin : some firms and institutions would like to obtain some form of protection and draw up legal strategies . To increase the productive uses of these common heritage assets both public and professional policies are implemented . Museums and exhibitions maintain and expand the semiotic and image heritage . They improve the image of the country and of its creative products as in the case of the “young British artists” campaign . Professionals now think that cultural institutions and policies have a big economic impact on fashion and luxury goods industries ( Muller , 2001 ) . They organize industrial policies and partially transform common heritage assets into collective heritage assets , with a collective partial management . Luxury goods groups like LVMH and PPR are particularly interested in the image of creativity conveyed by these creations and develop sophisticated and expensive communication policies . They appropriate a part of the common heritage of the age of aristocratic luxury and transform it into a market and into democratic luxury . In this new age , mass markets need powerful images for their goods . The use of heritage is therefore an essential competitive resource . Even so , the common character of the reputation of Haute Couture leads to some difficulties . Financial groups in the luxury goods industry are mainly interested in the earnings from accessories ( perfumes , bags , shoes , watches , pens and so on ) ; Haute Couture itself is no longer profitable but its creativity is the origin of image and reputation effects . Therefore there is a contradiction : reproducing the reputation heritage entails reproducing the creativity of Haute Couture , but these groups are seeking to disinvest in Haute Couture . And private strategies can lead to free riding ; every group wishes to benefit from the reputation but none of them are willing to invest in Haute Couture . The question is serious because reputation in creative industries is unstable ; for instance , the idea that French creativity has been superseded by Italian creativity may easily become a commonplace and lead to bandwagon effects . Therefore , private groups are calling for collective and public policies . 5 5 Cf . the Parisian project of the Cité de la mode , with participation of the profession and of central government . 17 However , in neither case can any perfect IPRs be defined for cultural heritage assets . The replacement of a market model of fashion by the elitist model of the couturier - créateur leads to a development of IPRs to organize the protection and allocation of creative resources , and particularly of cultural heritage assets whose value is growing . Nevertheless , the specificities of such heritage assets prevent the building of a market of IPRs in cultural heritage assets . The standard model of property rights , founded on the paradigm of the production function and of the consumption function , is partially irrelevant depending on the specificities of cultural heritage assets . In the case of gastronomy , heritage assets are even more poorly protected . Four types of problems arise . First is the common character of many cultural heritage assets which involves the incompleteness of the property rights to be defined ( e . g . the case of the YSL collection ) . Second is the difficulty of separating cultural heritage assets and the persons of their builders deriving from the exclusivity of property rights . A third limit can be found in the transferability of property rights , and the fourth one is related to the difficulty of enforcing property rights in creative cultural heritage assets . Finally , these difficulties linked to the definition and to the implementation of property rights in cultural heritage assets allow economic actors to develop strategies concerning the uses of cultural heritage assets . From that point of view , cultural heritage assets become portfolios and the recognition of goods as creative ones increases revenues . This proves the case for Haute Couture when luxury groups like LVMH manage their luxury trademarks through property rights . One may wonder whether this management scheme of cultural heritage assets might not tend to evacuate the creative character of these heritage assets and change them into economic values that can be readily be traded on a market place . Some conclusions We cannot argue that the persistence of a low system of IPR in the fashion industry derives from its efficiency . It is mainly the result of the characteristics of inputs which are used in the creative process of production . As far as creativity and heritages play a decisive role in the creative process , a standard PR system cannot be implemented . Characteristics of creativity constitute strong constraints for defining , entitling , legitimating , enforcing , valuating and exchanging property rights . That has some important consequences on the working of the market and on the firm strategies . Firstly , the strategic choices of the firms are not only between ' low ' and ' high ' IPR system . The different economic players develop strategic behaviours to obtain earnings and may try to protect copyrights , trademarks , new assets , old assets ( heritages ) , private or collective assets , and so on . They consider costs and benefits of the different types of PR and may substitute some for others , for instance the protection of the trademark for the copyrights on designs . Secondly , the institutional characteristics of the industry – as the models of management , the type of ownership , the size of the firms , … - lead to diverse historical models of management through IPR . Presently , the financial groups which integrate fashion into the new luxury industries try to implement new IPR and to move towards a higher system of IPR . 18 References Alchian A . A . and H . Demsetz 1973 The Property Right Paradigm The Journal of Economic History Volume 33 , Issue 1 The Tasks of Economic History March 1973 : 16 - 27 . Barrère C . and V . Chossat , 2004 . “Intellectual Property Rights and Cultural Heritage ; The Case of Non - Cumulative and Non - Degenerative Creation” , Review of Economic Research on Copyright Issues , 1 ( 2 ) : 97 - 117 . Barrère C . et W Santagata 2005 . La mode , une économie de la créativité et du patrimoine à l’heure du marché , Paris , La Documentation Française . Benghozi P . J . and W . Santagata 2001 Market Piracy in the Design - based Industry : Economics and policy Regulation , Economie Appliquée , LIV , n°3 , septembre 2001 : 121 - 148 . Caves R E . 2000 . Creative Industries . Contracts between Art and Commerce , Cambridge ( Mass . ) , Harvard University Press . Hetherington S . L . 2001 , Fashion Runways are No Longer the Public Domain : Applying the Common Law Right of Publicity to Haute Couture Fashion Design , 24 Hastings Comm . & Ent . L . J . 43 ( 2001 ) Lehnert G . 2000 A History of Fashion in the 20th Century , Konemann , Cologne . Nelson R . R . and S . Winter 1982 An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change , The Belknap Press of Harvard University , London . North D . 1981 Structure and Change in Economic History , New York : Norton . Raustiala K . and Chris Sprigman 2006 The Piracy Paradox : Innovation and Intellectual Property in Fashion Design The John M . Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper Series Year 2006 Paper 29 University of Virginia Law School Roux E . 2001 . " La conciliation des contraires : créativité et rigueur dans la gestion de l’identité d’une marque " , communication au colloque La mode , un laboratoire de créativité , Turin , ICER , octobre 2001 . Steiner G . 2001 . Grammars of creation . New Haven : Yale University Press . French translation : Grammaires de la création , Paris , Gallimard . Terakura K . 2000 . Insufficiency of Trade Dress Protection : Lack of Guidance for Trade Dress Infringement Litigation in the Fashion Design Industry , 22 U . Haw . L . Rev . 569 , 618 - 19 ( 2000 ) . Throsby D . 2001 . Economics and Culture , Cambridge , Cambridge University Press . 19 While more extensive today , design copying has long been a widespread practice in the fashion industry , especially in the U . S . The British economist Arnold Plant described , in a work published in 1934 , the already well - established and international practice of design copying , The leading twenty firms in the haute couture of Paris take elaborate precautions twice each year to prevent piracy ; but most respectable “houses” throughout the world are quick in the market with their copies ( not all made from a purchased original ) [ vente à New York des modèles et autorisation de copier mais pas aux maisons françaises de prêt - à - porter ; fortes tentatives de lutter contre la copie mais échec relatif , d ' où changement des stratégies et action par la réputation + système des relations personnelles ; ; le pb se pose quand l ' on passe à une mode de masse , avec prêt - à - porter des couturiers , . . car fin du modèle des relations personnelles pour ce segment ] Rather , it flows from a more general point of copyright doctrine [ en France pb analogue ou pas avec le droit d ' auteur ] : namely , the rule largely denying copyright protection to the class of “useful articles” – i . e . , goods , like apparel ( or furniture or lighting fixtures ) , in which creative expression is compounded with practical utility . A two - dimensional sketch of a fashion design is protected by copyright as a pictorial work . The three - dimensional garment produced from that sketch is , however , ordinarily not separately protected , and copying that uses the garment as a model typically escapes copyright liability . Why ? The doctrinal answer is that the garment is a useful article , and copyright law applies only when the article’s expressive component is “separable” from its useful function . So for most apparel the copyright laws are inapplicable , and as a consequence most of the fashion industry’s products exist in a copyright - free zone . But many firms put significant effort into ensuring that their trademarks are neither diluted nor counterfeited . Trademark infringement cases are common in the fashion industry , but courts carefully distinguish trademark from design piracy claims . In any event , it is clear that major labels put significant effort into trademark policing but almost none into policing design copying . The utility of trademark law in protecting fashion designs , as distinct from fashion brands , is quite limited . Occasionally a fashion design will visibly integrate a trademark to an extent that the mark becomes an element of the design . think , for example , of a Louis Vuitton handbag covered with a repeating pattern of the brand’s well - known “LV” mark . For these goods , the logo is part of the design , and thus trademark provides significant protection against design copying . But for the vast majority of apparel goods , the trademarks are either inside the garment or subtly displayed on small portions such as buttons . Thus for most garments , trademarks do not block design copying . In addition to protection of source - defining marks , trademark law also protects “trade dress , ” a concept originally limited to a product’s packaging , but which , as the Supreme Court has noted , “has been expanded by many courts of appeals to encompass the design of a product . ” Some courts have gone so far as to hold that “ [ t ] rade dress involves the total image of a product such as size , shape , color or color combinations , texture , graphics or even particular sales techniques . ”The doctrine has , however , not yet emerged as a substitute for copyright , in part because trade dress protection is , like copyright , limited to non - functional design elements . Perhaps more importantly , trade dress is limited to design elements that are “source designating” , rather than merely ornamental . To meet this requirement , a manufacturer must show that , “in the minds of the public , the primary significance of a product feature or term is to identify the source of the product rather than the product itself . ” The non - functionality requirement for trade dress may be somewhat lower than obtains in copyright law , because most courts have held that functional design elements may be protected as trade dress if they are part of an assemblage of trade dress elements that contains significant non - functional items . See Fuddruckers , Inc . v . Doc’s B . R . Others , Inc . , 826 F . 2d 837 , 842 ( 9th Cir . 1987 ) For 20 clothing designs , such a standard will rarely be met . The court’s observation in Knitwaves seems correct : consumers may admire a clothing design , but they seldom appreciate that particular design elements are linked to a brand . Consequently , for most clothing designs trade dress protection is unavailable . Patent . But shelter within the design patent provisions is , for two principal reasons , unavailable for virtually all fashion designs . The first reason is doctrinal . Unlike copyright , which extends to all “original” expression ( i . e . , all expression not copied in its entirety from others and that contains a modicum of creativity ) , design patents are available only for designs that are truly “new” [ c ' est le pb du patrimoine qu ' on revisite ] , and does not extend to designs that are merely re - workings of previously - existing designs . There is , moreover , a second and more substantial limitation to the relevance of design patent as a form of protection for fashion designs . The process of preparing a patent application is expensive , the waiting period lengthy ( more than 18 months , on average , for design patents ) , and the prospects of ultimately gaining protection uncertain ( the United States Patent and Trademark Office rejects roughly half of all applications for design patents ) . Given the one - season commercial life of many fashion designs , the design patent is simply too slow and uncertain a form of protection to be relevant . Perhaps most obviously , designs are frequently copied by retailers such as H & M , which offers cheap facsimiles of expensive ready - to - wear in its over 1000 stores . But contemporary design copying is not limited to large retailers aping elite designers . Equally common is the practice of elite designers copying one another . Given the evanescence of many trends , fashion copying is a threat to most creators only if copies are produced and distributed quickly . Yet increasingly they are . Digital photography and design platforms , the Internet , global outsourcing of manufacture , more flexible manufacturing technologies , and lower textile tariffs have significantly accelerated the pace of copying . Copies are now produced and in stores as soon as it becomes clear a design has become hot – and sometimes before . The result is remarkably pervasive appropriation of designs , with marketing of copies and derivatives at every level of the apparel marketplace . Viewed from the perspective of the music or motion picture industries , we know what to call this – piracy . Unlike the music and motion picture industries , the fashion industry has not embarked on an anti - piracy campaign [ parce qu ' on se distingue par la réputation ; donc on pose que les consommateurs ne peuvent confondre Chanel et H & M , l ' on réprime la pure contrefaçon de produit , les sacs Vuitton ] . There is no industry litigation campaign , no highprofile legislative effort , and no discernable attempt to influence public opinion in favor of increased IP protection for fashion designs . that the freedom to copy – euphemistically referred to by designers as “referencing” or “homage” – is largely taken for granted at all levels of the fashion world . In 1994 Yves Saint Laurent famously sued Ralph Lauren in a French commercial court for the “point by point” copying of a YSL women’s dress design . YSL ' s successful lawsuit against Lauren took place in Europe , where IP laws are more protective of fashion designs , a topic to which we return below . The Lauren lawsuit is in many ways the exception that proves the rule , and the rule is that fashion designs are “free as the air to common use . ” According to St . Laurent : “ [ I ] t is one thing to ‘take inspiration’ from another designer , but it is quite another to steal a model point by point , as Ralph Lauren has done . ” French Haute Couture is obviously organized around creativity , its key input . Models and designs are not standard outputs but one - offs , yielding unique works , strictly bound up with individual talent . Until the late 20th century , creativity and private heritage assets were managed within the maison de couture , legal concerns were not prominent , and most IPRs were less clearly defined .