1 Wisdom of the Crowd and Capabilities of a Few : Internal Success Factors of Crowdsourcing for Innovation Dirk Lüttgens , Patrick Pollok , David Antons , Frank Piller Abstract : Crowdsourcing has been demonstrated to be an effective strategy to enhance the efficiency of a firm ' s innovation process . In this paper , we focus on tournament - based crowdsourcing ( also referred to as " broadcast search " ) , a method to solve technical problems in form of an open call for solutions to a large network of experts . Based on a longitudinal study of six companies piloting this application of crowdsourcing , we identify barriers and sources of resistance that hinder its implementation in firms . Our paper contributes to the state of research by analyzing crowdsourcing on the level of pilot projects , hence providing a workflow perspective that considers the creation of dedicated processes and operations of crowdsourcing . This project level analysis enables the identification of specific challenges managers face when implementing crowdsourcing within an established R & D organization . Following a design science approach , we derive suggestions for organizational interventions to overcome these barriers . We find that dedicated promoter roles strongly contribute to a successful implementation of crowdsourcing , turning pilot projects into an organizational routine . Keywords : Tournament - based Crowdsourcing , Broadcast Search , Open Innovation , Barriers to Innovation , Promoter roles . JEL Classification : M15 , O32 , O33 Acknowledgements : The authors thank the VDMA ( Verband Deutscher Maschinen - und Anlagenbau ) for their support of this project ; we are especially grateful to Bruno Scherb for his guidance and advice . The input and ideas by two anonymous reviewers and by the editors of this special issue have significantly improved this paper . Dr . Dirk Lüttgens Rheinisch - Westfälische Technische Hochschule ( RWTH ) Aachen , Lehrstuhl für Technologie - und Innovationsmanagement , Kackertstr . 7 , 52072 , Aachen , Germany E - Mail : luettgens @ tim . rwth - aachen . de Dipl . - Kfm . Patrick Pollok Rheinisch - Westfälische Technische Hochschule ( RWTH ) Aachen , Lehrstuhl für Technologie - und Innovationsmanagement , Kackertstr . 7 , 52072 , Aachen , Germany E - Mail : pollok @ tim . rwth - aachen . de Dr . David Antons Rheinisch - Westfälische Technische Hochschule ( RWTH ) Aachen , Lehrstuhl für Innovation , Strategie und Organisation , Kackertstr . 7 , 52072 , Aachen , Germany E - Mail : antons @ iso . rwth - aachen . de Prof . Dr . Frank Piller Rheinisch - Westfälische Technische Hochschule ( RWTH ) Aachen , Lehrstuhl für Technologie - und Innovationsmanagement , Kackertstr . 7 , 52072 , Aachen , Germany E - Mail : piller @ tim . rwth - aachen . de 2 1 Introduction As knowledge is widely distributed across the external environment , many companies have opened up their innovation process to gain access to the expertise of external parties and existing knowledge from different domains ( Laursen and Salter 2006 ) . Past literature has used the term open innovation to characterize an innovation process that operates as an open search and solution process between several agents beyond conventional organizational and technical boundaries ( Chesbrough 2006 ; Dahlander and Gann 2010 ) . As a management approach , open innovation offers a set of different methods and practices which support innovating compa - nies to identify and integrate relevant external knowledge . The idea is to enable new forms of distributed , crowdsourcing - based problem solving beyond conventional arrangements such as innovation alliances or contract research ( Reichwald and Piller 2009 ) . While earlier literature has demonstrated positive performance contributions of open innovation ( Almirall and Casadesus - Masanell 2010 ; Fey and Birkinshaw 2005 ; Laursen and Salter 2006 ; Leiponen and Helfat 2010 ) , more recent literature has emphasized that firms need to build dedicated processes and internal capabilities to effectively utilize this opportuni - ty ( Bianchi et al . 2011 ; Dahlander and Gann 2010 ; Foss et al . 2011 ) . As Gupta and Go - vindarajan ( 2000 , p . 10 ) state , a firm ' s internal organizational structure determines " the information processing potential between its various subunits and with the environment . " A few studies have looked upon the different structural dimensions through which firms open up their boundaries to identify and utilize knowledge from external sources ( Siggelkow and Levinthal 2003 ; Zhang and Baden - Fuller 2010 ) . Yet , prior research has not differentiated between the different approaches of open innovation ( Dahlander and Gann 2010 ) , like ideation contests , co - creation toolkits , developer communities , or tournament - based crowdsourcing . Even though many open innovation practices are based on the crowdsourcing principle ( Afuah and Tucci 2012 ; Howe 2006 ; Lakhani and Panetta 2007 ) , these practices differ significantly in terms of the type of knowledge exchanged as well as with regard to the stakeholders getting involved . Ideation contests , for example , require only limited disclosure of sensitive information by the focal firm and are primarily used for the acquisition of information about customer needs and preferences during the first stages of the innovation process , often organized by the marketing department ( Piller and Walcher 2006 ) . Tournament - based crowdsourcing in the context of technical problem solving , on the contrary , requires not only the participation of other internal organizational units ( research & development ) , but also seeks a different type of knowledge , solution information in a later stage of the innovation process . In this paper , we focus on the latter method for open innovation , tournament - based crowdsourcing , also called broadcast search ( Jeppesen and Lakhani 2010 ) . Here , a technical challenge of a " seeker " is announced broadly to a group of external " solvers " in form of an open call ( Afuah and Tucci 2012 ; Spradlin 2012 ) . Potential participants screen the challenge and decide whether to invest in solving the challenge and submitting a solution proposal . The seeker then acquires the winning solution , i . e . the one that best meets pre - defined perfor - mance criteria . In most cases , the problem broadcasting and solution transfer is facilitated by an intermediary . Established players in this domain include NineSigma , InnoCentive , and Yet2 ( Diener and Piller 2013 ) . Following such a procedure for technical problem solving is , in most instances , a radical departure from a firm ' s established routines of problem solving during R & D ( Sieg et al . 2010 ; Jeppesen and Lakhani 2010 ) . For example , during the coopera - tion with the intermediary , seeker companies have to disclose technical problem information and might reveal sensitive information about the firm ' s future development projects – in particular areas where this firm lacks problem solving capacity or where it failed in the past . In addition , the company ' s R & D staff has to acknowledge that " outside people are smarter 3 than us " ( Spradlin 2012 , p . 86 ) . Commonly , such perceived risks invoke internal opposition to pilot crowdsourcing or later lead to the rejection of identified external knowledge by the seeker company . The objective of this paper is to investigate the organizational processes and structures that overcome this inertia and support the successful implementation of open innovation . Implementing open innovation ( or any method of crowdsourcing ) is typically carried out by means of pilot projects . Most firms strive to gather experience by testing crowdsourcing first on the level of pilot projects before implementing it ( if ever ) within the entire company . This follows a common practice of implementing organizational or managerial innovation ( Lechner and Floyd 2007 ; Turner 2005 ; Witte 1997 ) . Previous open innovation research , however , has studied aspects of the organizational structure at the company level only ( Dahlander and Gann 2010 ; Foss et al . 2011 ) , but neither has focused on the project level nor has it taken specific aspects into account which follow from the first implementation of crowdsourcing within an established organization ( Lechner and Floyd 2007 ) . In this paper , we want to close this gap by investigating the implementation process of broadcast search ( tournament - based crowdsourcing ) on the level of pilot projects . Our objective is to identify appropriate organizational procedures and practices . In particular , we investigate how tournament - based crowdsourcing can be effectively implemented as an innovation manage - ment practice in a ( seeker ) organization . Following a design science approach ( Hevner et al . 2004 ; Pfeffers et al . 2007 ; von Aken 2005 ) , our intended contribution is twofold : We want to identify both critical incidents which may occur during the implementation of crowdsourcing in the innovation process and also want to derive suggestions for organizational interventions to overcome these barriers . By doing so , we extend the recent state of literature in several ways . First , by analyz - ing the implementation process of crowdsourcing on a project level , we offer a deeper understanding of the general project flow of crowdsourcing projects and their critical activities . Second , we identify and describe specific management challenges companies face when implementing tournament - based crowdsourcing as a new method during their innova - tion process . Third , by matching the identified challenges and hurdles to barriers to innova - tion already described in the literature , we find that dedicated promoter roles strongly support resolving the challenges . We provide a detailed assessment how these promoter roles enable the implementation of crowdsourcing during the innovation process . The remainder of our paper is organized as follows . Section 2 outlines the conceptual background of this research and briefly reviews the literature on crowdsourcing in the context of new product development and innovation . The section concludes with a detailed descrip - tion of the general project flow of tournament - based crowdsourcing on the project level . This structure serves as the conceptual framework for our empirical study . Section 3 describes our research setting and the two research phases that structured our investigation . Section 4 reports the results of our research on an aggregated level as well as from a more detailed process perspective . Finally Section 5 provides the discussion of our findings , comments on the limitations , and derives suggestions for further research . 2 Background : Literature Review and a Process Model 2 . 1 Literature Review : Crowdsourcing for Technical Problem Solving The rationale behind systematic boundary - spanning searches in the sense of open innovation is to overcome the problems of local search and industry blindness ( Brunswicker and Hutschek 2010 ; Stuart and Podolny 1996 ; Rosenkopf and Nerkar 2001 ) . While local , 4 contextually bounded searches turn out to be advantageous when current problems are similar to old problems , e . g . in the case of improvements of existing products and processes , such search routines often do not lead to radical advancements ( Rosenkopf and Almeida 2003 ) . When focusing on a limited solution space , companies only apply the most obvious instead of the most efficient of all solutions in order to solve an innovation problem . Tapping instead into the knowledge of a variety of external agents has been shown to overcome the negative biases of purely local search - based problem solving approaches ( Jeppesen and Lakhani 2010 ) . One way to efficiently access solution information beyond a firm ' s boundaries is an open call directed at a heterogeneous network of external experts . " Open call " here refers to a problem statement that is publicly announced ( also called a " request for proposals " , or RFP ) . The idea behind this " broadcasting of problems " is to spread the problem statement as widely as possible , allowing even unknown outsiders to contribute to its solution . Potential solution providers ( solvers ) decide via self - selection whether they want to participate in the process of finding a solution to the respective technical problem or not . The seeker , i . e . the entity issuing the call , then selects the best submitted solutions and either awards a pre - defined incentive to the winning solver or engages in collaboration with the identified solution provider . Jeppesen and Lakhani ( 2010 ) refer to this process as broadcast search , creating a synonym for the crowdsourcing neologism coined by Howe ( 2006 ) . Other authors use the term " tournament - based crowdsourcing " ( Afuah and Tucci 2012 ) to describe the search for solution opportuni - ties related to actual development tasks in the form of innovation tournaments . This process is facilitated by a number of specialized intermediaries who apply the broadcast search method as a service for other organizations to bridge the gap between solution seeking companies and external solvers ( Feitler et al . 2012 ) . Examples of these intermediaries include NineSigma , InnoCentive , YourEncore , Atizio , or Yet2 . com . The success of these intermediaries is greatly dependent on their ability to achieve a connection between seekers and solvers while establishing it via an interface of their own web platform ( Jeppesen and Lakhani 2010 ) . In addition , these intermediaries support their clients with expertise how to draft a good problem statement ( RFP ) or engage in a pre - selection of fitting solutions . The role of the intermediary also is to monitor fair play and to prevent the exploita - tion of proposals by a seeker that has not acquired the corresponding intellectual property rights ( Diener and Piller 2013 ) . Prior research on intermediary mediated crowdsourcing has demonstrated the effec - tiveness of this approach in the context of technical problem solving . Afuah and Tucci ( 2012 ) , for example , show that depending on the nature of the innovation task , tournament - based crowdsourcing can be a more efficient and effective problem solving mechanism than internal sourcing or designated contracting . As part of an empirical study of 166 crowdsourcing projects , Jeppesen and Lakhani ( 2010 ) observe that InnoCentive could facilitate answers for 30 percent of technical problems which previously could not be solved by their originators , all large global pharmaceuticals or chemical firms . With respect to the solver side , Jeppesen and Lakhani ( 2010 ) find that higher technical marginality , i . e . an increasing distance between a solver ' s field of expertise and the problem domain , is associated with a higher likelihood of success from the solver ' s perspective . These studies demonstrate the power of tournament - based crowdsourcing for solving innovation challenges and for identifying new collaboration partners to trigger knowledge transfer across different domains . Other research has focused on the intermediary side of the process . Some authors provide classification schemes in an attempt to add structure to the constantly growing arena of innovation intermediaries ( e . g . Howells 2006 ; Lopez - Vega 2009 ; Diener and Piller 2013 ) . Other studies have focused on the optimal design and award structure of innovation contests in general and crowdsourcing tournaments in particular , hence investigating an important part of an intermediary ' s business model ( Terwiesch and Xu 2008 ; Boudreau et al . 2011 ) . Ter - 5 wiesch and Xu ( 2008 ) , for example , discuss the effect of solver community size on the outcome of an innovation contest and find that an increase in solver pool size results in a trade - off situation between the overall diversity of solutions ( associated with higher submis - sion quality ) and each solver ' s problem - solving effort . However , surprisingly little research has dealt with the seeker side of the crowdsourcing process . With the notable exception of Sieg et al . ( 2010 ) , who identify critical activities in crowdsourcing projects , and some very recent work by von Krogh et al . ( 2012 ) who add to a better understanding of the problem formulation stage of crowdsourcing tournaments , research on the seeker perspective of problem broadcasting is lacking . Evidence on organizational aspects such as internal process - es or governance structures supporting the implementation of broadcast search from the perspective of a seeker organization does not yet exist . Earlier research on innovation management has also emphasized the need to differen - tiate between the adoption and the implementation of organizational innovation ( Klein and Sorra 1996 ; Klein and Knight 2005 ; Sproull and Hofmeister 1986 ) . In contrast to implementa - tion , which is defined as a process with dichotomous outcomes ( successful implementation and implementation failure ) , innovation adoption is described as an activity that refers to " an organization ' s decision to install an innovation " ( Klein and Sorra 1996 , p . 1057 ) . The need to differentiate between adoption and implementation is supported by the fact that organizations often adopt innovations but later fail to implement them successfully ( Klein and Knight 2005 ) . Consequently , successful implementation is anything but an obligatory sequel to the decision to adopt ( Sproull and Hofmeister 1986 ) . Rather , it has to be interpreted as the " transition period " or " critical gateway " between the decision to adopt the innovation and its routine use ( Klein and Sorra 1996 , p . 1057 ) . Engaging in " broadcast search " and crowdsourc - ing in the innovation process can be regarded as a ( process ) innovation of radical nature from the perspective of the seeker organization ( Spradlin 2012 ) . Hence , the initial decision to adopt crowdsourcing as a management practice by a seeker firm will result in an implementation process by means of pilot projects which will either result in an institutionalized use of crowdsourcing later ( when successfully implemented ) or in the rejection of the method ( when the pilot is considered to be a failure ) . To our knowledge , earlier research has not distin - guished between crowdsourcing pilot projects and the reapplication or routinized use of crowdsourcing as an alternative approach to internal problem solving . In summary , we have a rather limited understanding of how companies should organize in order to effectively apply and implement broadcast search as a management practice . 2 . 2 Crowdsourcing for Innovation : A Conceptual Framework When investigating the implementation of tournament - based crowdsourcing from the perspective of a seeker organization , different stages of such a process can be distinguished ( Diener and Piller 2013 ; Jeppesen and Lakhani 2010 ; Sieg et al . 2010 ) . Sieg et al . ( 2010 ) , for example , identify critical activities in crowdsourcing projects and describe a typical process using the example of InnoCentive . We will broaden this view and extend the description of the general project flow by two additional stages ( initiation and contract negotiation ) in order to also cover the adoption and implementation stage of crowdsourcing . This extended description of tournament - based crowdsourcing is built on our experiences generated during a longitudinal case study which will be described in Section 3 in larger detail . This structure will later serve as a framework for the analysis of the pilot projects included in this study . Stage I : Initiation . Starting point of the initiation stage is the decision to adopt a crowdsourcing approach in the seeker company . A pilot project is initiated . Central during this stage is to communicate the introduction of the approach within the company and to educate employees about it . A second activity in this stage is the identification of an interme - 6 diary . This should include a thorough analysis of the intermediary marketplace . Intermediar - ies differ with regard to their solver community , ways of broadcasting the open call , their IP model , and the level of control that seeker companies can obtain during the crowdsourcing project . Hence , it is important to identify an intermediary that provides the best " fit " to the seeker company and its technical problems ( Diener and Piller 2013 ) . Stage II : Contract negotiation . Once the intermediary has been selected , a contract is completed establishing the legal aspects in terms of the solutions to be generated , the IP terms , as well as the financial conditions ( e . g . platform usage fees , success fees , incentive structures ) . Various contractual agreements are possible , which also can be attributed to the different business models of the intermediaries . Stage III : Problem formulation . Next , the crowdsourcing process starts with crafting the problem statement . The objective is to create a so - called " request for proposals " ( RFP ) document . The RFP document describes the technical problem to be solved and highlights the performance criteria that a winning solution has to meet . Moreover , the RFP informs potential solvers about targeted and possible partnership models ( e . g . development contracts , licensing , consulting , etc . ) in the course of the respective request . At this point of the process , the seeker also decides whether its company name should be disclosed or whether the RFP should be posted anonymously . Writing a RFP is no trivial task and constitutes one of the most im - portant activities of the process ( it hence is a core activity that is supported by experienced personnel of the intermediary ) : First , since the RFP will be broadly distributed among potential solvers , it has to be regarded as a public document and must only contain non - confidential information . Secondly , the problem statement should be written in such a manner that it is clear enough for potential solvers from other fields to understand the core technical issue . At the same time , the technical problem has to be defined with high specificity to keep the scope of interpretation as narrow as possible for potential solvers . Stage IV : Open call . Once completed , the RFP document is broadcasted to the intermediary ' s community of potential solution providers ( refer to Feitler et al . ( 2012 ) for a more detailed description of this stage ) . At this point , broadcast search takes the form of a tournament where potential solvers self - select themselves to participate and submit solutions for evaluation ( Jeppesen and Lakhani 2010 ) . Stage V : Evaluation of responses . After the submission deadline has passed , all solutions submitted by potential solvers are being evaluated . The intermediary supports the evaluation process by rating the level of solution competence indicated by each respondent . Based on this pre - evaluation , the client company decides which proposals are interesting enough to engage in a more detailed interaction with the solver ( e . g . , by means of sample requests , site visits , or telephone conferences ) . Stage VI : Reintegration . After detailed review and evaluation , the seeker will start to build a working relationship with interesting solution providers . Different types of contractual agreements such as licensing agreements , material transfer agreements , or development contracts are possible . Once a contract between the seeker company and a solution provider has been established , the cooperation with the intermediary has reached its conclusion ( for this particular RFP project ) . The crowdsourcing process ends , and a conventional cooperation or contracting process starts . Based on the experience and perceived success of the reintegra - tion stage , a company will decide whether to engage after the pilot projects in additional crowdsourcing activities or not . Hence , the perception of the outcome of this stage determines whether crowdsourcing for technical problem solving will be implemented as a standard practice in the R & D process . 7 3 Research Setting 3 . 1 Methodological Approach Our research is of exploratory nature , as no previous investigation of the implementation of crowdsourcing for technical problem solving on the project level exists . But as the description of the six stages of implementing such a process may already have indicated , multiple factors with different properties may influence the outcome of such an adaption process . To get a better understanding of these underlying factors , we followed a qualitative case study approach , which is suitable when the proposed research addresses a contemporary phenome - non and is largely exploratory in nature ( Darke et al . 1998 ; Yin 2008 ) . Typically , multiple case studies based on a cross - case analysis are used to get a deeper understanding of such factors and to increase the methodological rigor of the investigation ( Eisenhardt 1991 ; Numagami 1998 ) . Multiple case studies are believed to be particularly appropriate in the context of the implementation of new methods and practices ( Miles and Huberman 1994 ; Shakir 2002 ) . Two types of multiple case studies can be distinguished ( van Aken 2005 ) : In developing case studies , the researcher collaborates with the individuals of the organization studies in some kind of action research . In extracting case studies , best practices to solve managerial problems are analyzed and rules are inducted , tested , and refined by adding more cases . We applied the latter type during our study . In our study we follow the paradigm of design science research ( Hevner et al . 2004 ; Pfeffers et al . 2007 ) , which is receiving growing recognition in the information systems discipline , but also in general management research . Fundamentally , design science is a problem solving paradigm for academic research of pragmatic nature ( van Aken 2005 ) . Design science intends to academically develop interventions to solve identified field problems through a process , the " design cycle " , wherein the role of the researcher changes from a passive and observing role in the beginning to a more active and designing role towards the end of the research process ( Takeda et al . 1990 ) . During this cycle , the researcher addresses the identified field problem by intervening in organizational systems or practices . In the context of our research , we followed this procedure by designing an intervention to the process of implementing tournament - based crowdsourcing as a management practice in firms . From a methodological point of view , the design science approach is closely related to the action science paradigm ( Gummesson 2000 ) , and here especially to Canonical Action Research , which has broadly been accepted as a legitimate research method in the IS disci - pline ( Davison et al . 2012 ) . The common idea of these methodologies is to engage in practical problem solving through guidance and modification while following a rigorous cyclical process with the researcher intervening in the problem setting . Given the similarity of the two research approaches ( Lindgren et al . 2004 ; Lee 2007 ) , we strive for rigor by following the guidelines as proposed by Hevner et al . ( 2004 ) as well as the rules of the canonical action research paradigm ( Gummesson 2000 ; Davison et al . 2012 ) . In Research Phase 1 we followed four companies during their piloting of tournament - based crowdsourcing in R & D in form of longitudinal case studies . We studied how the crowdsourcing process was executed and perceived by these companies . Reflecting our observations and contrasting them with results from earlier research in the field in form of a literature study , we derived a set of recommen - dations to improve the implementation process . During Research Phase 2 we applied these suggestions for improvement in form of organizational interventions within two additional companies who followed a modified piloting process , educated by the research team based on the experiences from the first research phase ( Pfeffers et al . 2007 ) . We then compared the outcomes of both processes ( a similar two - step design science approach has been followed by 8 Heinrich et al . ( 2009a , 2009b ) , investigating the piloting and implementation of customer relationship management software ) . 3 . 2 Empirical Setting , Data Collection , and Analytical Approach In order to identify common patterns across our cases , we applied a homogeneous sampling strategy ( Curtis et al . 2000 ) . The rationale behind this sampling was to improve the compara - bility of piloting companies and to reduce potential influences of factors other than our organizational intervention . Therefore , we selected cases with sufficient similarities to allow for a meaningful identification of differentiating factors with regard to the research questions : First , we exclusively focused on pilot projects to avoid biased results due to different levels of experience within our sample . In addition , all of the piloting companies are headquartered in Germany and belong to the domain of mechanical engineering . This excludes the potential influence of cultural and industry specific differences from our study . Firms were selected via cooperation with VDMA ( " Verband Deutscher Maschinen - und Anlagenbau " ) , a large German industry association in the field of engineering . Secondly , all case companies engaged with the same intermediary , NineSigma . While it would have been interesting to also study differences between pilots with different intermediaries ( e . g . , InnoCentive , YourEncore , Atizio , or Yet2 . com ) , we purposefully decided to focus this study on one intermediary . This should help us to better identify differences in internal project structures of the seeker organizations , as all pilots followed the same project structure given by the intermediary . Strictly following a homogeneous sampling strategy throughout the entire research process , we are confident that our case companies show no notable differences which might influence the results of our analysis . An overview of the selected projects can be found in Table 1 . For reasons of confidentiality , company names have been removed . Table 1 : Overview of cases Case Number of employees ( in 2011 ) Revenue in Euro ( in 2011 ) Industry Nature of innovation problem Crowdsourced task ( content of RFP ) Proposals received Number of follow - up projects 1 < 1500 < 200 million Aerospace ; energy ; automotive Product Development of materials for a heavy - duty manufacturing 26 0 2 10 . 000 – 15 . 000 < 10 billion Food ; clothing ; infrastructure ; energy Product Development frictionless surfaces in mass production 35 0 3 > 50 . 000 > 10 billion Automotive ; construction vehicles ; drives industry Process Development of chemical process technology 10 0 4 10 . 000 – 15 . 000 < 10 billion Automation ; renewable energy ; railroad systems Process Development of a filter technology 7 0 5 > 50 . 000 > 10 billion Automotive ; renewable energy ; agriculture ; railroad systems Process Development of a testing procedure 17 3 6 > 50 . 000 > 10 billion Automotive ; military ; sports ; industrial engineering Product Development of a laser technology 37 8 Our research spanned over a period of three years . Data were collected between 2008 and 2011 as part of a longitudinal research performed in real time , meaning that we actively accompaniment the implementation of the observed pilot projects during the two research phases . During this time , our research group was able to obtain data from observations , interviews , meetings , documents such as e - mails and internal reports : We participated in a large number of informal conversations as well as in a total of 15 all - day project meetings with 6 to 25 participants from all company levels . Important decisions were made at some of these meetings concerning the further execution of the different projects . In addition , 20 semi - 9 structured interviews were conducted with project participants , including managers and technical experts at the seeker companies , as well as with the project managers from the intermediary ( see Appendix 1 for an overview of informants ) . The interviews , which lasted between 1 and 2 hours , were kept rather broadly in scope to address a wide range of topics , corresponding to the exploratory character of Research Phase 1 ( see Appendix 2 for the general interview guidelines ) . The interview guide was organized around the different stages of the crowdsourcing process and provided a flexible framework for the interviews . As our respondents represented different hierarchical positions and organizational functions , not all questions were addressed in every interview . In fact , we adapted the interview questions to the specific expertise of the respondents who were free to expand on those issues that appeared most relevant to them . Relevant topics covered by all interviews included the overall satisfaction with the project and the cooperation process , motivations to participate in a tournament - based crowdsourcing project , critical incidents and decision - making situations , the competency and authority of different team members , and difficulties observed during the stages of the pilot process . We also conducted an extensive interview with the program manager of NineSigma who , at this time , was responsible for the German clients of the intermediary and who served as the project manager in all six pilot cases . To ensure the reliability of our results , all interviews were recorded , transcribed , and analyzed by three different members of our research team independently . We looked for recognizable similarities , repeated patterns , and notable differences with regard to success factors and causes of delays of the pilot projects . The content - analysis of the interviews was based on two rounds of coding . In the first analytical step , we approached the interview data without a predefined coding scheme , using open and in - vivo coding to identify common themes . Since the use of multiple sources of data is critical to qualitative research as it facilitates triangulation and validation ( Maxwell 1996 ; Amaratunga and Baldry 2001 ) , we supplemented the interview analysis with information from secondary data sources such as emails , minutes of project meetings , and internal project reports . Secondary documents , however , were not coded as they were used for triangulation purposes only , providing us with information to add detail to the critical events mentioned by interviewees and thus to validate the data collected from the interviews . We compared our results and discussed the differences in our coding outcomes . Through subsequent discussions and referrals to innovation man - agement literature , we finally reached agreement on the codes that were to be used in the second coding round . In order to further strengthen the rigor of the coding process , we applied Holsti ' s ( 1969 ) inter - coder reliability formula . With all of the indicators , the average inter - coder agreement resulted in a satisfactory value of CR = . 862 . 4 Results Following the typical cycle of design science , we will report the findings of Research Phase 1 first , whereby we distinguish between results on the aggregated level and specific observa - tions on the level of each individual project and project stage . The observations in Phase 1 allowed us to identify typical problems and hurdles that evolve during broadcast search . We will discuss these factors and derive suggestions for improvements , based on our own observations and recommendations from the literature . Following the design cycle , we used these suggestions as interventions in two further projects during Phase 2 of our research , as described in Section 4 . 2 . We will discuss how this organizational treatment affected the piloting process and the implementation of the method in the case companies . 10 4 . 1 Findings of Research Phase 1 Analysis : Aggregated perspective In this section , we will look at the overall outcomes of the projects in the four case companies observed during Research Phase 1 . The companies received between 7 and 35 proposals to their RFPs . Analyzing the proposals , we found that broadcast search in principal is well suited to provide solutions for technical problems from the mechanical engineering domain . Based on the evaluation by employees with technical expertise in the respective domain from the different case companies , the proposals provided access to technical knowledge , solutions , and ideas judged to be unfamiliar and unknown compared to the state of the art , but still being " highly interesting " and " worth further processing " . For any of the individual RFP projects , more than 60 percent of the submitted proposals were ( radically ) new to the seeker organiza - tions . Moreover , the companies were able to identify 53 new potential cooperation partners in total . Solutions were primarily submitted by institutions throughout Europe and North America , which resembles the general case at NineSigma . 38 proposals were submitted by companies , 26 by universities , and 14 by other organizations like research centers or research councils . Also noteworthy , the evaluating experts stated that all submissions showed high levels of elaboration and detail . While this enabled a rigid evaluation due to sufficient information , the evaluation stage also lasted considerably longer than expected , as much more information had to be processed . A surprising observation was the huge difference between the time required for company internal processes ( Stages I - III and V ) compared to the crowdsourcing activity ( Stage IV ) . On average , it took less than 40 days to identify the novel solutions via an open call within the intermediary’s network ( Stage IV ) , while the time to get this activity started and to evaluate the incoming proposals spanned over a period of 110 to 145 days . The four case studies demonstrated that on the one side broadcast search has the ability to deliver novel technical solution approaches and to identify promising new cooperation partners . But on the other side , a number of hurdles and barriers within the seeker companies seem to influence the progression of the pilots substantially . Our more granular analysis of the six stages of a RFP project will investigate these barriers in more detail in the following . Analysis of critical instances during the stages of piloting broadcast search In the following section , we will elaborate on critical instances observed during the six stages of crowdsourcing for technical solutions in R & D , as outlined in Section 2 . 2 . As an overview , Table 2 provides exemplary quotes from the interview studies to illustrate these hurdles and sources of resistance . Stage I : Initiation . The initial stage of each project challenged companies with creating a realistic awareness towards the new method . Because of its novelty , the method was not welcomed in the beginning – many employees from R & D had a rather critical attitude towards the new approach , based on fear of potentially losing their job because of outsourcing R & D activities . This skepticism led to the fact that technical problems with a lack of relevance to the current situation were chosen to test the instrument of the RFP : “I am not the guy telling the world what we are doing in our R & D . " ( Interview No . [ 13 ] , R & D En - gineer , Case 4 ) In addition , often problems with the character of a " holy grail " in the industry were suggested – problems long known as highly relevant but complex and " unsolvable " to the entire industry . We also observed that managers , who were asked to " submit problems " to be 11 broadcasted during the pilot , were reluctant to disclose their incapability of not having found a solution to a specific problem . For example , in Cases 1 and 3 , R & D managers chose not to post a RFP for a problem regarding quality management as they feared negative consequences for their company : “We had major problems with the verification of our product quality in the last few years . And even if we post that anonymously , no one will guarantee that neither our competitors nor our cus - tomers will read [ the RFP document ] . ” ( [ 2 ] , Head of Innovation Management , Case 1 ) This problem was even more evident in cases where the decision to sponsor such an initiative had been made on a lower management level . In sum , these problems led to a rather long duration of the first stage as a result of the necessity of multiple iterations and consultations between departments . Also noteworthy , we found that companies selected the intermediary based on rather subjective criteria such as the first impression or an evaluation solely based on best practices . Furthermore , it later turned out that in Cases 3 and 4 problems were chosen which were not in the current technological focus of the respective companies . “Why should we search for solutions to problems from our core business areas ? [ … ] I don’t think anyone out there will do a better job than we do . ” ( [ 13 ] , R & D Engineer , Case 4 ) “Well , I don ' t know , but perhaps it could be interesting … if we get a solution regarding to the problem of [ technical area which was not in the focus of the firm’s R & D activities ] " ( [ 9 ] , R & D Team Leader , Case 3 ) Hence , these two case companies lacked any incentive to reintegrate external solutions in Stage VI . Stage II : Contract negotiation . Hurdles in this stage were based on difficulties to integrate the intermediary ' s contractual conditions into the companies ' contract templates ( terms of conditions ) . The collaboration model with an open innovation intermediary was an unfamiliar format for the legal department so that a new framework of rules had to be found in order to proceed with the project . In particular , issues concerning intellectual property rights were a challenge , e . g . defining a model for property rights on solutions or ideas or the protection of future claims . Often , working out the contract conditions was prioritized low within the legal departments due to their piloting characteristics . But we also observed that the legal counsels had rather little experience with the specific demands of the legal govern - ance structure of an open innovation project . “After a lot of back and forth with our legal department , we finally had to admit that our business conditions didn ' t properly capture the relationship between us and the intermediary . ” ( [ 11 ] , Head of Innovation Management , Case 4 ) “ [ … ] Legal was not willing or able to set up a contract . Every day they seemed to spot new rea - sons , like the ‘Employees Invention Act’ , just to name one example . [ … ] I don’t know , maybe SME do not have these problems , or maybe it’s a ‘German problem’ , but at this point it was already too late . Kind of like trying to shut the barn after the horse has bolted . ” ( [ 5 ] , Business Unit Manager , Case 2 ) This again resulted in a large delay because tasks were deferred . An assessment of e - mails written during this stage indicates delays of 4 weeks and more due to conflicts with the legal department . 12 Stage III : RFP Formulation . Formulating a problem statement meeting the require - ments outlined in Section 2 is a core factor of success . This task not only requires the ability of abstraction but also to define ex ante suitable performance criteria for evaluation . In general , the intermediary provides plenty of support in this stage . Still , capacities within the seeker firm are necessary to formulate a proper RFP . Although R & D managers and engineers in the industry of our study in general are trained to verbalize problems , this stage took significantly longer than anticipated . A first challenge was to find staff able to formulate the problem statement . Here , the firms missed the opportunity to assign competences clearly . The farther the problem deviated from current topics , the fewer employees were interested in investing hours of work . “ [ . . . ] , so of course I met with our company ' s experts once the project was finished to talk about what we could have maybe done better if they would have helped . If they had provided more of their time , the open call document would have been better and more detailed . ” ( [ 1 ] , Innovation Manager , Case 1 ) Furthermore , to our surprise , even trained R & D managers were not truly able to characterize the problem detached from the context of their firm . Firms also had considerable troubles in defining appropriate performance criteria . But without well - defined and realistic performance criteria it is very hard for potential solvers to match their solution proposal with the seeker ' s expectations . “Obviously they [ Cases 1 and 2 ] had a wrong idea about the criteria . [ … ] If someone can solve these problems , just the way they asked for it , he will probably be able to walk on water , you know . I tried to explain to them that they have to define realistic criteria , because otherwise you won’t receive any good proposals . But I’m not sure if they really understood . [ … ] Well and the people from [ Case 3 ] , they were apparently unable to come up with any performance criteria at all . ” ( [ 20 ] , Program Manager , NineSigma ) Altogether , it was obvious that firms faced significant challenges formulating an appropriate RFP . This not only led to a considerable delay of the process but also already to frustration of the projects ' internal supporters and a high dissatisfaction with the open innovation approach in general and tournament - based crowdsourcing in particular . Stage IV : Open call . This stage is essentially handled through the intermediary . Hence , there were no major problems concerning our project firms . Nevertheless , it became apparent that the firms did assign responsibilities only limitedly as inquiries from the intermediary during this stage were answered rather slowly . Stage V : Evaluation of responses . The evaluation of the submitted solutions was again accompanied by several difficulties . Initially , the main problem was to identify suitable technical experts who were capable to evaluate the individual proposals . Due to the fact that the solutions often originated from domains unfamiliar to the firm , employees did not feel comfortable to evaluate solutions due to lack of competencies . “The people in R & D weren ' t particularly interested . ” ( [ 1 ] , Innovation Manager , Case 1 ) “We had problems with finding subject matter experts here [ in the company ] who could first of all help us understand those proposals - - and I am still not sure if we selected the right people - - my colleagues spent a lot of time evaluating these proposals . ” ( [ 7 ] , Innovation Manager Case 2 ) Furthermore , it became obvious that the duration of this stage was in all cases beyond the expected time necessary for evaluation ( keeping in mind that solution providers also expect a 13 feedback on their proposal within an adequate timeframe ) . Although the firms were able to apply existing evaluation methods and practices , they still needed to customize them accord - ing to the respective evaluation task . Additionally , in Case 3 some employees felt that the submitted proposals were not useful for their own work so that they showed little commitment to evaluate them thoroughly . Although not explicitly mentioned in all interviews , it became evident that the selection of evaluators was a critical activity . But in the course of the projects , evaluators or experts were often rather chosen for reasons of availability and capacity than with regard to their qualification . Stage VI : Reintegration . Despite the fact that qualified technical solutions were submitted for all RFPs , at the present time not one of the seeker firms acquired an external solution or engaged in further cooperation with a solver . From a pure efficiency perspective , hence all four pilots can be regarded as a failure : not one of the broadcasted problems has been solved . Apparently , all critical incidents described before added up , especially the problems of " not invented here " and the lack of resources for follow up . “I can ' t tell you what it ' s like to stand in front of conservative managers whose leadership has not been able to solve the problem for years , and then you suggest solving the problem , but now with the help of external parties . ” ( [ 8 ] , Engineer , Case 3 ) However , even RFPs that do not immediately lead to an in - licensing activity or development contracts with solution providers can be considered valuable input for a firm ' s innovation process . By evaluating the proposals , the seeker firm obtains a better overview of the state of the art in the field of the RFP , can generate ideas from the proposals for an internal solution of the problem ( given that there are no IP restrictions ) , or even learns that its original problem statement perhaps is " unsolvable " and needs to be reconsidered . After evaluating the data according to the procedure described in Section 3 , our analysis found that firms face major hurdles in almost every stage of a tournament - based crowdsourc - ing pilot . Our research team engaged in mapping these problems to the broad existing literature on barriers in the innovation process ( for an overview see , e . g . , Bond and Houston 2003 ; Mierow et al . 2007 ) . We found that many of the challenges identified in our cases match earlier findings concerning resistances in ( open ) innovation processes ( Van de Vrande et al . 2009 ; Chesbrough and Crowther 2006 ; Keupp and Gassmann 2009 ; Sieg et al . 2010 ) . Chesbrough and Crowther ( 2006 ) , for example , mention an inadequate management support , the NIH - syndrome , barriers in corporate culture , and insufficient resource endowment as key challenges of implementing open innovation . Oke ( 2004 ) investigates the influence of a bottom - up or top - down implementation of managerial innovation and finds that , in most instances , bottom - up initiatives result in a reactive type of management support which is not as effective as proactive management support resulting from top - down innovation initiatives . Van de Vrande et al . ( 2009 ) find potential problems arising from administrative barriers and a lack of predefined property rights . Research in the organizational change literature indicates that many initiatives fail due to poor internal communication ( Beer and Nohria 2000 ; Finbarr et al . 2003 ) . Other authors have stressed that ambivalent or even negative attitudes result from inflated expectations regarding the performance of ( open ) innovation initiatives ( Hadjima - nolis and Dickson 2001 ) . In a similar vein , but with direct reference to broadcast search , Sieg et al . ( 2010 ) report that unrealistic expectations of project participants often lead to the selection of " wrong " tasks for a RFP , resulting in project failure . In sum , we were able to identify 11 different types of barriers and obstacles in the literature which matched the hurdles occurring in the four case studies . Table 2 illustrates the results of this comparison by identifying the type of barriers and the process stages where 14 they occurred . Exemplary statements from the interviews provide evidence how these hurdles were perceived in practice . The data presented in this table makes evident that barriers exist in every stage of a crowdsourcing project . Initiation and RFP formulation seem to be particularly challenging . In these two stages , nearly every barrier occurred . Besides barriers like poor internal communication , cultural aspects , and insufficient resources , particularly striking barriers within the evaluation stage were inflated expectations and the NIH - syndrome . This led to the fact that no company of Phase 1 started to seriously integrate the external solutions identified via the RFP . Table 2 : Mapping of barriers observed in the pilot cases Barrier and description Examplary quote from expert interviews Stage 1 2 3 4 5 6 ( B1 ) Workflow rigidity : Describes a situation in which workflows and internal processes are always done in a specific way that is not adapted . In our projects , this was seen primarily in the way certain company departments were strongly opposed to adopt the new technique of crowdsourcing . “I was surprised at how people built such strong internal barriers that they simply wouldn ' t allow to be torn down , and their overall reluctant attitude . ( … ) It was a real eye - opener to see this in so many of our company ' s departments . ” ( head of marketing , Case 4 ) x x x x x ( B2 ) NIH ( not - invented - here ) syndrome : The suggestions of " externals " are disregarded and considered to be the wrong independed from their content . Internal processes are done in a way that new knowledge is first and foremost generated " in - house " . In the projects at hand the suggested solution approaches were not reintegrated into the development cycle , although the proposals had been positevely evaluated . “We see the not - invented - here problem a lot . R & D says : Why should we find an external solution when we can do it ourselves ? If we do this , we ' re really only showing how bad we are . ” ( innovation manager , Case 2 ) x x ( B3 ) Lack of internal commitment : This barrier describes the lack of interest of the R & D department in the pilot process in general . This barrier resulted in a rather slow commitment to identify potential problems for the pilot RFP and to provide feedback on the draft RFP . “The people in R & D weren ' t particularly interested . ” ( innovation manager , Case 1 ) x x x x ( B4 ) Bottom - up management : Pilots are being implemented as bootleg projects , bypassing official decision trees . In some of our cases , the projects had the feel of almost being subversive . Management only became aware of them in hindsight . Upper management levels then stepped in or even stopped the projects because they felt that someone had “gone over their heads . ” “There was just a lack of authority . ” ( engineer , Case 3 ) x x x x ( B5 ) Insuffiecent resources : The pilot projects are not equipped with sufficient resources . For instance , not enough personnel were assigned to formulate the problem and to determine what the right solution would be . This was basically due to unrealistic expectations about the project and / or methods . “ [ . . . ] , so of course I met with our company ' s experts once the project was finished to talk about what we could have maybe done better if they would have helped . If they had provided more of their time , the open call would have been better and more detailed . ” ( innovation manager , Case 1 ) x x x x x ( B6 ) Allocating wrong task to pilot : Employees act opportunistically when the problem for the pilot RFP is being selected , suggesting unrealistic tasks that they hope are unsolvable anyway to demonstrate the inefficiency of the new method . In the four pilot cases , frequently " holy grail " problems were supposed , i . e . problems that to date have not yet been solved in the industry , but are of importance to everyone involved in it . In addition , opponents suggests minor problems without internal commitment and interest in their resolution . “ [ . . . ] that was the feedback coming from the colleagues that did this RFP [ . . . ] they had the impression that the open call wasn ' t formulated properly . Next time they would present it differently in a way that communicates it from a perspective of their own technical problem - solving approach , and not in a ‘cutting - edge research´ fashion . ” ( innovation manager , Case 4 ) x x ( B7 ) Insufficient top management support : People in charge of the pilots receive insufficient support from top management . In seeker companies where the top managers were not actively involved in the our pilots , there was often a lack of support for the project by company leadership . This often resulted in a lack of sufficient resources . “I can ' t tell you what it ' s like to stand in front of conservative managers whose leadership has not been able to solve the problem for years , and then you suggest solving the problem , but now with the help of external parties . ” ( engineer , Case 3 ) x x x ( B8 ) Unrealisitc expectation : Success stories of open “I think my colleagues ' expectations were very x x x 15 Barrier and description Examplary quote from expert interviews Stage 1 2 3 4 5 6 innovation and broadcast search in the general press generates an unrealistic set of expectations on the level of some managers . In our pilots , this could be seen in the expectation that even " holy grail " problems in the industry could now be solved using the new method , and this even at very low cost . As a result , the effort required for the pilot was underestimated , i . e . there was the impression that the solution could be found on its own . high or downright unrealistic [ . . . ] . I remember how everyone ' s eyes lit up when we talked about Goldcorp and Netflix and such . Everyone was thinking ‘We ' re going to hit the jackpot with this one and watch the money pile up . ' I think the project showed us that these kinds of expectations are simply unrealistic . ” ( head of R & D , Case 2 ) ( B9 ) Legal barriers : The legal departments of the pilot companies lack experience in IP related issues of open innovation . In our pilots , legal counsels often expressed a general concern about the terms of conditions of the intermediary and the IP structure underlying tournament - based crowdsourcing . Worries by people objecting to contract process were a key reason for delays in the contract stage of the pilots . “After a lot of back and forth in the legal department , we finally had to admit that our business conditions didn ' t properly capture the relationship between us and the intermediary . ” ( head of innovation management , Case 4 ) x ( B10 ) Organizational / administrative barriers : Those in charge of the project are generally not authorized to circumvent improper standard processes in the company and / or acclimate to the requirements of the broadcast search project . In our pilots , frequently organizational ( work ) routines and opponents insisting that the project stick to these led to significant delays . “ [ . . . ] when you obtain a [ solution ] , well , someone needs to have put the money aside to pay for it . But then when you don ' t find a [ solution ] , the money is there , and might just lie around and start to gather dust . These mechanisms are typical of our annual budget planning . [ … ] A lot of things converged [ in the administration ] that , instead of helping the project , did their part to make it a little harder . ” ( head of innovation management , Case 1 ) x x x x ( B11 ) Communication barriers : This barrier describes communication problems between the different departments and among the employee hierarchies . These barriers often led to misunderstandings and delays within the pilot cases . “ [ . . . ] I always thought that the [ department heads ] would let their employees know what was going on . Unfortunately , that ' s exactly what they didn ' t do . ” ( engineer , Case 2 ) x x x x x Design recommendations from Phase 1 Our previous analysis indicates that piloting broadcast search faces many challenges and has to overcome severe barriers . This , however , is a common situation in R & D projects in general and pilots of process innovation in particular . Previous research has distinguished between three larger classes of barriers to innovation ( Witte 1973 ; Hauschildt 1999 ; Gemünden et al . 2007 ) : barriers related to will , barriers related to ability , and bureaucratic or administrative barriers .  The barrier of will describes resistance against innovation and change in general . The cause of this resistance is a rejection based on less justifiable reasons such as individual personal career opportunities , e . g . the motive to increase the own power position , or ideo - logical and ethical motives .  The barrier of ability results from an actual or supposed lack of knowledge in the field of a specific domain . In the case of supposedly missing knowledge , someone knows about a fact or a technical problem or a method , but cannot apply this knowledge in a given situa - tion .  Bureaucratic and administrative barriers are created by organizational or hierarchical circumstances . Employees willing and able to contribute to an innovation project do not have the permission to do so due to existing internal rules or limited capacity and re - sources . To overcome these barriers , a myriad of possible practices has been identified which can be differentiated into two approaches ( Chiaroni et al . 2010 ) : ( 1 ) adjusting a firm’s formal organizational structure , including its reward and incentive system , its processes for coordina - 16 tion and decision making , and its functional structure ; and ( 2 ) more informal aspects which are commonly referred to as organizational roles in the management literature . Regarding formal organization , research has demonstrated , for example , that dedicated organizational functions facilitate experience accumulation and build capabilities to overcome barriers resulting from a lack of competence and experience ( Kale et al . 2002 ; Van de Vrande et al . 2009 ) . In addition , clear formal process models increase the speed of execution by forcing timelines and scheduling responsibilities ( Kessler and Chakrabarti 1996 ) . Process formality also reduces employees’ ambiguity regarding to what they can or cannot decide as it clearly delineates their responsibilities ( Quinn and Spreitzer 1997 ; Randolph and Sashkin 2002 ) . Appropriate organizational incentive systems and strategic budgeting help to overcome employees’ negative attitudes towards the utilization of external resources ( Bianchi et al . 2011 ; Chesbrough 2006 ; Sieg et al . 2010 ) . At least equally important is the informal structure of an organization ( Teece 1996 ) . Here , a critical element can be found in distinct organiza - tional roles . Prior research has underlined the importance of key individuals who emerge informally in organizations and help to resolve barriers to innovation ( Hauschildt and Kirchmann 2001 ; Chiaroni et al . 2010 ) . In addition , organizational culture is frequently mentioned as a critical informal success factor . Organizational culture refers to “the patterns of beliefs and expectations shared by an organization’s members” ( Schwartz and Davis 1981 : 33 ) and has been shown to strongly affect the behavior of individuals . To build these underly - ing beliefs and expectations demands a long and enduring process of training and experience ( Chesbrough 2006 ; Teece 1996 ) . Already this brief review of the literature indicates that our research team faced a vari - ety of alternatives for the intervention in Research Phase 2 . We thoroughly evaluated all alternatives against the requirements of our research design : The proposed design solution ( researcher intervention ) must be applicable and implementable , should be practical , efficient , of a tentative nature , and preferably simple to deploy ( Hevner et al . 2004 ; Baskerville and Wood - Harper 1998 ; van Aken 2005 ) . Given these requirements , formal approaches such as the installation of a new incentive system , dedicated functions , or formalized process models turned out to be inadequate as their implementation implies significant structural modifica - tions , which are not executable within the time frame of a research project . Consider as an example the implementation of a dedicated formal function to coordinate open innovation in a firm . Such an intervention would require serious investments in terms of resources and staff , demanding a sufficient number of RFP projects to justify such a decision . Likewise , reorgan - izing formalized processes and incentive systems is not possible without prior approval from both senior management and employee representatives . Given that our object of inquiry is the common practice to implement open innovation by means of pilot projects , changes in formal organizational parameters do not constitute a practical " design solution " according to the guidelines of design - science research . For the same reasons , also methods addressing a change of organizational culture have to be excluded . A more practical and implementable design solution can be found in informal organi - zational roles . The innovation management literature has frequently found that a successful innovation project depends on the contributions of key individuals such as gatekeepers , champions , and promoters ( Schon 1963 ; Hauschildt and Kirchmann 2001 ; Chiaroni et al . 2010 ; Lichtenthaler and Ernst 2009 ) . Role models such as the mono - personal champion concept ( Schon 1963 ; Howell et al . 2005 ) or the multi - role model of different promoters ( Gemünden et al . 2007 ) offer empirically - proven explanatory models for overcoming obstacles in the innovation processes ( Fichter 2009 ; Rost et al . 2007 ) . These roles emerge informally in organizations and help to resolve barriers in an innovation process . The individuals filling a role are able to create conditions to overcome organizational inertia and opposition ( Howell et al . 2005 ) . While the earlier literature has focused on mono - personal 17 models , the recent literature has stressed multi - personal models . The rationale behind the latter is that an innovation process regularly is complex and involves different persons , departments , and disciplines . Hence , multi - personal role models are seen as particularly effective in providing conditions to overcome inertia in complex innovation projects ( Hauschildt and Kirchmann 2001 ) . The multi - personal model established best in the literature originates from the German innovation management literature . It distinguishes three kinds of promoters , differentiating the type of barriers they help to overcome ( Gemünden et al . 2007 ; Hauschildt 1999 ; Hauschildt and Kirchmann 2001 ) . In addition , promoters can be differentiated according to their base of power on which their influence is grounded : The power promoter is a person who has the hierarchical power to drive a project , to provide necessary resources , and to help to overcome many obstacles concerning will and bureaucracy that might arise during the course of a project . The role of the expert promoter describes a person who has the specific technical knowledge for the innovation problem at hand . The process promoter derives her influence from organizational know - how and intra - organizational social networks . The process promoter establishes and maintains the connection between the power promoter , the expert promoter , and other project members ( Gemünden et al . 2007 ) . In addition , research has shown that promoter roles are especially affecting the success of an innovation project if they appear jointly ( Hauschildt and Kirchmann 2001 ) . Different persons have to be identified who take over the roles and corresponding tasks ( one individual , however , can also hold more than one role ) . In summary , Table 3 illustrates the characteristics of the three promoter roles . By identifying promoters and enhancing their specific competencies and responsibilities , organizations increase the positive outcomes of their innovation projects ( Gemünden et al . 2007 ) . Following the design cycle of our research model , the promoter model appeared to us as a promising idea to overcome the barriers observed in the pilot cases . Hence , in Phase 2 of our research we applied this approach as a design intervention in further organizations piloting tournament - based crowdsourcing ( Cases 5 & 6 ) . The last column of Table 3 already indicates the expected contribution of a promoter role for overcoming the internal barriers and resistance to a crowdsourcing pilot . This positive influence , derived from earlier empirical research , motivated our decision to focus on promoters . We will discuss alternative interven - tions in the conclusions of this paper . Table 3 : Promoter roles according to Gemünden et al . ( 2007 ) and Hauschildt ( 1999 ) Role Type of barrier addressed Source of power Typical contributions Expected contribution in crowdsourcing pilot Expert promoter Barriers of ability Object or problem specific know - how Providing information and topical input ; development of alternatives ; concept evaluation Overcoming barriers B6 , B8 Power promoter Barriers of will ; bureaucratic and administrative barriers Hierarchical position Goal definition ; resource allocation ; protection against opponents ; process control Overcoming barriers B1 , B2 , B3 , B4 , B5 , B9 Process promoter Bureaucratic and administrative barriers ; barriers of will Communication and organizational skills , internal social network Uniting and connecting ; conflict management ; goal - oriented communication ; process management and coordination Overcoming barriers B5 , B7 , B8 , B9 , B10 , B11 4 . 2 Findings of Research Phase 2 18 The objective of the second research phase in design science is to validate the findings from the first phase and to provide evidence whether the derived solution is suitable or not . As discussed before , it appeared appropriate to us to foster the contributions of key individuals to overcome the observed hurdles . Hence , we actively accompanied and analyzed two additional companies ( Cases 5 & 6 ) where we advised managers in charge of the crowdsourcing pilot to actively identify individuals able to fulfill the promoter roles . Analysis : Aggregated perspective In response to their RFPs , case companies 5 and 6 received 17 and 37 solution proposals , respectively . Of these 54 proposals received in total , 25 proposals originated from industry , 21 from university institutions , and 8 from non - profit organizations . Solution providers again originated primarily from European and North American institutions . With regard to novelty and quality , the proposals did not differ from Cases 1 to 4 . However , the overall duration of the process was 120 and 132 days from start to finalizing the evaluation stage in Case 5 and 6 , respectively ( in comparison to an average of 172 days in Cases 1 to 4 ) . This constitutes a notable acceleration of the process of about 30 percent . Even more , we could observe a broader implementation of the broadcast search method : In contrast to Cases 1 to 4 , both case companies continued with the method after completing the pilot . Company 5 immediately signed a contract for three and Company 6 for eight follow - up projects with the intermediary . While it is too early to state that tournament - based crowdsourcing has become a routine in these companies , it demonstrates a striking difference to the earlier cases ( especially given that there was no performance difference in the actual technical outcomes of all six pilot RFPs ) . We will explain this difference in the following , demonstrating how the organizational treatment we identified in Phase 1 – identifying individuals who can serve as promoters – had a positive effect on the outcome . Validation of design recommendation : Intervention of promoters To execute our intervention , we developed a dedicated training and coaching activity . During the initial project kickoff , our team first educated the responsible managers about potential challenges during their planned crowdsourcing endeavors . We recommended that the innovation management functions of the Phase 2 companies should take ownership and responsibility of the broadcast search method , as in general innovation management has the task to build methodological know - how for the organization and hence could serve as a natural process promoter . We then outlined the positive role of promoters in innovation projects and facilitated the identification of key individuals . Building on the procedure to identify promoters proposed by Hauschildt and Kirchmann ( 2001 ) , we asked a series of central questions aiming at the typical characteristics of promoters . In the following , we will report the effect of this intervention on the six process stages of a pilot project . Stage I : Initiation . In both cases , an innovation manager identified himself as a potential process promoter after reading and thinking about the central questions . These managers , who had a wide in - house network at their disposal , addressed different heads of R & D groups and other technical units known to them in order to introduce the method . “ To some extent , I had to take the role of salesman , a role in that one cannot decide but has to promote something to others so that they decide for it” ( [ 15 ] , Innovation manager , Case 5 ) . Our motivation was to start the entire piloting process with a " problem owner " , i . e . an individual who would provide a technical challenge for the RFP originating from her or his actual work . Instead of asking departments to " donate " problems for the pilot , the process 19 promoter actively looked for a unit head who wanted to pilot the method to solve a given technical problem ( and not for the pilot ' s sake ) , and hence would also allocate own capacities and resources . Furthermore , we encouraged the process promoters to identify power and expert promoters by adopting the set of questions suggested by Hauschildt and Kirchmann ( 2001 ) . Again , some heads of department self - identified themselves and took up the role of the power promoter within the projects . The persuasiveness and motivation of the power promoter made it easier to locate a problem suited for broadcasting and to identify an appropriate and qualified expert promoter , in both cases a R & D engineer within the unit of the power promoter willing to post a problem and later to engage in evaluation and exploita - tion . The perceived willingness of these individuals to engage in the new process was taken as one key criterion for selecting an eligible problem . In the end , the entire troika of promoter roles was present in the Cases 5 and 6 . Stage II : Contract negotiation . The legal department got involved in the project at an early stage . Both the power and the process promoter took large care to engage the legal department already in early meetings with the intermediary . In Case 6 , the legal department wanted to postpone the final evaluation of the contract with the intermediary due to more urgent tasks in their core business . Here , the process promoter was able to accelerate the process through his contacts in the corporate headquarters . Stage III : Problem formulation . During RFP formulation the respective expert promoters of Cases 5 and 6 were in close touch with the intermediary and participated in the drafting process , building on their professional competence regarding the technical problem . The intermediary helped them in order to abstract the problem statement . When additional competencies were needed , the process promoter assisted by passing on contact details . When the evaluation criteria for the solutions had to be specified , the power promoter in Case 6 supported the technical expert to identify additional experts who could provide input for criteria definition . When final RFP documents had to be cleared by the firms ' IP department , the process promoters again ensured the prompt execution of this task . Stage IV : Open call . As in Cases 1 - 4 , the intermediary handled the majority of work during this stage . But as the contact already had been established , the process and expert promoters were available for inquiries of the intermediary and could provide swift feedback on any issues that came up during this stage in Cases 5 and 6 . Stage V : Evaluation of responses . Differences between the two firms in Research Phase 2 became apparent in this stage : In Case 5 , the expert promoter took over the evaluation of incoming solutions , while in Case 6 , the expert promoter noted that he was not able to evaluate the proposals on his own because they originated from very different areas of expertise . Hence , other experts were consulted to ensure objectivity and achieve higher quality of the evaluations . The process promoter was present as a moderator during the meetings in both cases . He could intercede if he felt that an idea was evaluated negatively due to a lack of comprehension of the proposed solution approach or any ( unjustified ) objections towards the institution of the solution provider . Stage VI : Reintegration . In Case 5 , test objects were sent to the most promising solution providers for further evaluation . The solution providers were asked to treat the test objects using their proposed approach . The objects were then analyzed internally and taken as the basis for the evaluation and selection of a final cooperation partner . In Case 6 , a coopera - tion project with one of the solution providers was commissioned by the power promoter right after the end of the evaluation stage . In contrast , in none of the Cases 1 - 4 such an activity was started . Discussion 20 Not surprisingly , also the two pilots in Phase 2 of our research showed hurdles and obstacles , which easily could be classified with the taxonomy of barriers presented in Table 2 . The major differences compared to Cases 1 - 4 were in the way how these barriers were handled by the case companies : In Cases 5 and 6 , key individuals took up the roles of promoters , supervised the entire process , and reduced the barriers at an early stage . The stage - related tasks of the promoters are illustrated in Table 4 . Table 4 : Observed activities of the three promoter roles in Cases 5 & 6 Project stages of crowdsourcing pilot ( I ) Initiation ( II ) Contract negotiation ( III ) Problem formulation ( IV ) Open call ( V ) Evaluation of responses ( VI ) Reintegration A c t i v i t i e s f o r p r o m o t er s Process promoter Communication of the new method Making contact ; preparation of information Avoiding of administrative barriers Overcoming communication barriers Guaranteeing neutrality of evaluation Inspire further interest in solutions and method Power promoter Secure budget ; allocate staff Secure support of legal department Allocate staff Secure budget ; allocate capacities Expert promoter Identification of problems for RFP Compensate lacking knowledge ; Creating awareness of the problem Ensure professional accuracy of the evaluation process Solution application or cooperation with new partner An analysis of the e - mail correspondence between the project members revealed very short overall response times of the contacted persons . This can be ascribed to well - defined respon - sibilities and a high level of involvement of the participating promoters . In turn , the entire project team showed a high level of commitment . Due to this commitment , tasks were taken care of instantly and with high accuracy . This led to an acceleration of the entire process of about 30 percent compared to the cases without any organizational intervention ( Research Phase 1 ) . In addition , promoters acted in a troika within the projects at hand , guaranteeing a simultaneous appearance of all three types of promoters . As discussed above , a troika constellation of promoters has been shown to act as an important success factor ( Hauschildt and Kirchmann 2001 ; Gemünden et al . 2007 ) . In line with prior research , we observed that promoters in Cases 5 and 6 appeared simultaneously and barrier related tasks were split between these mutually complementary individuals . Although , as illustrated in Table 4 , the intensity of involvement of each promoter type varies across the different process stages , the simultaneous appearance of these key individuals facilitated the successful implementation of tournament based crowdsourcing in the second phase of our research . Even more , Companies 5 and 6 reported synergies between RFP formulation and internal problem - related knowledge transfer . The ability of firms to generate a written problem statement targeting outsiders from a different industry context became a capability that is universally applicable in R & D projects . The ability to generate good RFPs in the context of crowdsourcing , thus , enabled the companies to better define solution criteria for internal problem solving as well . Being able to encode the often sticky problem - related knowledge and to overcome its tacitness seems to have positively affected firms ' internal ( cross - departmental ) communication of problem - related knowledge . This observation is in line with earlier research on creativity in innovation projects . Studies of techniques such as TRIZ highlight the importance of the ability to abstract problems out of their context in order to think out of the box ( Ward et al . 2004 ) . Hence , engaging in open innovation also facilitated better " closed " innovation within the companies . 21 5 Conclusions 5 . 1 Contributions and Implications Our paper investigates the conditions that allow firms to benefit from crowdsourcing in the innovation process . Our focus has been on a particular method of crowdsourcing , tournament - based crowdsourcing ( " broadcast search " ) targeting the solution of technical problems in an innovation project . In particular , we took a process perspective and studied the interaction within seeker companies and between these companies and intermediaries in the course of pilot projects . Using a design science approach , we actively accompanied six large organiza - tions and their crowdsourcing pilots as participating observers over a period of three years . We develop a deeper , more comprehensive understanding of the broadcast search method and identify essential factors for optimizing the application and implementation of the method in piloting seeker companies : First , we confirm the effectiveness of the crowdsourcing mechanism in the context of technical problem solving , as proposed by earlier research ( Afuah and Tucci 2012 ; Jeppesen and Lakhani 2010 ) . In addition , we identify a set of internal barriers and organizational inertia that can ultimately lead to failure of crowdsourcing initiatives . To the best of our knowledge , our paper is the first considering that most organizations start their crowdsourcing endeavors in form of pilot projects . Previous open innovation and crowdsourcing research has almost exclusively looked upon apparently established procedures in a firm , hence neglecting the still embryonic state of these approaches in industry . Whether a pilot is developed into a general practice in an organization or not depends on the one hand side on the technical outcome of this pilot . But on the other , we could identify a number of organizational and procedural incidents that foster or hamper the progression of a pilot into an organizational practice . Beyond the mere identification of obstacles , barriers could be allocated chronologically along the process stages of a pilot project . This should raise the awareness of managers about potential problems and opposition . While the web - based " problem broadcasting " process of tournament - based crowdsourcing has been successful in all of our cases , enabling the identification of technically novel and feasible solutions to given R & D problems , the solution concepts were neither pursued further in the four cases observed during Research Phase 1 nor did those firms implement the method after the pilot project . In accordance with the design science approach , we actively looked for ways to overcome the identified barriers . Based on a broad literature study , we identified the promoter role model as a promising means to overcome these barriers . We tested this intervention in a modification of the process that was applied to two further pilots in Research Phase 2 . In particular , we educated the companies to actively seek for individuals with promoter charac - teristics . This intervention had a clear positive impact on implementation success . The crowdsourcing process was considerably faster and faced less conflicts compared to the Phase 1 pilots . Next to overcoming the barriers and facilitating a positive outcome in the particular projects , the promoters created a positive climate for the sustainable implementation of the method within their organizations . Such a climate is seen as a critical and necessary condition for the implementation of new practices in general ( Klein and Knight 2005 ; Klein et al . 2001 ) . The strong involvement of the project team members and their high level of motivation can be considered as the main cause why the projects were continued beyond the evaluation stage . The resulting success led to the awareness of the methods ' effectiveness . Both Phase 2 companies turned the pilot initiative into a more permanent practice by commissioning a number of follow - up projects . Obviously , identifying and empowering key individuals as promoters is not the only possible organizational intervention to support the implementation of tournament - based 22 crowdsourcing in the context of innovation . Further measures may include dedicated incen - tive schemes to foster the willingness of R & D managers for external knowledge transfer ( Bianchi et al . 2011 ; Reichwald and Piller 2009 ; Sieg et al . 2010 ) , executive trainings to educate the entire R & D team about the background and exact process of tournament - based crowdsourcing ( Van de Vrande et al . 2009 ) , or strategic budgeting to encourage people to search in the firm ' s periphery instead of engaging in internal problem solving only ( Chesbrough 2006 ) . Following the recommendations of the design science approach , we purposefully focused on one intervention only to validate the contributions of this particular approach . Further research has to study the efficacy of alternative interventions and the relationships between these measures . However , following the empirical research on champi - ons and promoters ( Fichter 2009 ; Hauschildt 1999 ; Howell et al . 2005 ) , we believe that the existence and interventions of these key individuals constitute a meta - capability of an organization required also to implement the other measures outlined before . Hence we suggest that also for other possible interventions , a troika of promoters is crucial when implementing crowdsourcing in an established organization . Further research , however , still has to confirm this statement empirically . In summary , our study contributes to the literature on open innovation and crowdsourcing from three perspectives : ( 1 ) By identifying barriers and organizational obstacles of tournament - based crowdsourcing , we contribute to the literature on managerial innovation by outlining those factors which can prevent the long - term implementation of new organizational practices . We believe that the present literature on crowdsourcing and open innovation predominantly has focused on the advantages and opportunities of these methods , neglecting the laborious path of their implementation . ( 2 ) Existing literature on open innovation has predominantly focused on organizational alignment and performance on the firm level ( Tranekjer and Søndergaard 2013 ) . We extend this research by enhancing our understanding of workflow procedures of crowdsourcing on the project level , focusing on one particular method , tournament - based crowdsourcing ( broadcast search ) . In contrast to a firm level analysis , a study on the project level needs to consider the creation of processes and operations . We could supplement an earlier process description of broadcast search by Sieg et al . ( 2010 ) and were able to identify stage - specific activities and operations that could , if executed correctly , prevent barriers and obstacles during the execution of the method . We believe that more project - level research is needed to provide empirical evidence of factors effecting the long - term application of crowdsourcing in organizations . ( 3 ) We also contribute to the general literature on innovation management and the discussion of the promoter model in particular . Previous research on the effectiveness of promoters within innovation projects has focused on technical products and process innova - tions ( Gemünden et al . 2007 ; Hauschildt and Kirchman 2001 ) . Our study extends this literature by demonstrating the effectiveness of promoters also in the context of managerial ( organizational ) innovation . Challenging the popular belief that crowdsourcing projects are an immediate success and can solve tasks almost automatically , we show that firms have to invest a great deal of internal resources to execute such projects . Effective tournament - based crowdsourcing requires additional commitment , contributions , and capabilities of key individuals ( promoters ) whose involvement becomes a key success factor . Organizations interested in implementing crowdsourcing in innovation have to identify appropriate persons and allocate promoter roles early in the process in order to succeed in a piloting project . Starting with the process promoter seems to be a pragmatic procedure . The process promoter then can find a cooperat - ing power promoter who in turn may help finding a motivated expert ( promoter ) from his or 23 her subordinates . Of importance within this approach is informal identification via self - selection . Even the power promoter should not delegate the task to the expert promoter , but should offer it as an interesting opportunity . 5 . 2 Limitations and Further Research Due to the explorative and qualitative nature of this study , our results face a number of limitations . Our findings should not be easily generalized to other empirical settings , since the observed cases did not intend to reflect a representative sample and should not be miscon - strued as such . Instead , they aim to present indications how broadcast search processes actually run within seeker companies . However , we took great care to follow established quality criteria for qualitative research to enhance the validity of our results , which offer a solid foundation for future quantitative research to empirically test our findings . Another limitation is the exclusive focus on piloting companies from the German mechanical engineering sector . This limitation leaves a multitude of cultural and industrial factors unaddressed , which , without question , have an influence on the decision to adopt or reject new methods and management practices in a firm . A further limitation derives from our observation of pilot cases . While we believe that the focus on pilot cases is a particular strength of our study and contributes to the state of the literature , we were not able to factor in organizational learning as a consequence of a repeated application of broadcast search in a firm . The more companies engage in tournament - based crowdsourcing in the practice , the larger research opportunities will become to study this aspect in the future . The idea to identify individuals with characteristics of a promoter suffers from similar problems as every role concept within the area of innovation management : Roles are not hierarchically assignable and differ from functions or positions within the firm ( Hauschildt 1999 ) . As a consequence , the presence of promoters in crowdsourcing projects can be influenced by managers only to a limited extent . However , organizational learning theory has stressed that structures , besides experience , are an essential determinant for success when management routines shall be changed ( Bontis et al . 2002 ) . Similarly , institutionalization of organizational structures promotes the establishment of organizational routines ( Crossan et al . 1999 ) . This opens up a very interesting avenue for further research to identify which and how operational or organizational structure facilitates the application of tournament - based crowdsourcing . We have already outlined before the need to systematically study the relation - ship between promoters and other organizational measures like incentive schemes , strategic budgets , executive training , or dedicated organizational structures for crowdsourcing in an organization . In the present study , our focus has been on one particular kind of crowdsourcing , tournament - based crowdsourcing of technical problems ( broadcast search ) . However , the question remains whether the observed challenges and organizational interventions can be easily transferred to other forms of crowdsourcing like idea contests , open - source software development , or customer co - creation . This remains subject of future research . Despite these limitations we believe that our study has contributed to a better understanding of crowdsourc - ing in innovation management and hope that it will support managers to benefit from the opportunities of this approach . References Afuah A , Tucci CL ( 2012 ) Crowdsourcing as a Solution to Distant Search . Acad Manage Rev 37 ( 3 ) : 355 - 375 24 Almirall E , Casadesus - Masanell R ( 2010 ) Open vs . Closed Innovation : A Model of Discovery and Divergence . Acad Manage Rev 35 ( 1 ) : 27 - 47 Beer M , Nohria N ( 2000 ) Cracking the Code of Change . Harv Bus Rev 78 ( 3 ) : 133 - 141 Bianchi M , Cavaliere A , Chiaroni D , Frattini F , Chiesa V ( 2011 ) Organisational Modes for Open Innovation in the Bio - Pharmaceutical Industry : An Exploratory Analysis . Tech - novation 31 ( 1 ) : 22 - 33 Bond EU , Houston MB ( 2003 ) Barriers to Matching New Technologies and Market Opportu - nities in Established Firms . J Prod Innov Manag 20 ( 2 ) : 120 - 135 Bontis N , Crossan MM , Hulland J ( 2002 ) Managing an Organizational Learning System by Aligning Stocks and Flows . J Manage Stud 39 ( 4 ) : 437 - 469 Boudreau KJ , Lacetera N , Lakhani KR ( 2011 ) Incentives and Problem Uncertainty in Innovation Contests : An Empirical Analysis . Manag Sci 57 ( 5 ) : 843 - 863 Brunswicker S , Hutschek U ( 2010 ) Crossing Horizons : Leveraging Cross - Industry Innovation Search in the Front - End of the Innovation Process . Int J Innov Manag 14 ( 4 ) : 683 - 702 Chakrabarti AK ( 1974 ) The Role of Champion in Product Innovation . Calif Manage Rev 17 ( 2 ) : 58 - 62 Chesbrough HW ( 2006 ) Open Business Models – How to Thrive in the New Innovation Landscape . Harvard Business School Publishing , Cambridge Chesbrough HW , Crowther AK ( 2006 ) Beyond High Tech : Early Adopters of open Innova - tion in Other Industries . R & D Manag 36 ( 3 ) : 229 - 236 Chiaroni D , Chiesa V , Frattini F ( 2010 ) Unravelling the Process from Closed to Open Innovation : Evidence from Mature , Asset - Intensive Industries . R & D Manag 40 ( 3 ) : 222 - 245 Crossan MM , Lane HW , White RE ( 1999 ) An Organizational Learning Framework : From Intuition to Institution . Acad Manage Rev 24 ( 3 ) : 522 - 537 Curtis S , Gesler W , Smith G , Washburn S ( 2000 ) Approaches to Sampling and Case Selection in Qualitative Research . Soc Sci Med 50 : 1001 - 1014 Dahlander L , Gann AM ( 2010 ) How Open is Open Innovation ? Res Policy 39 ( 6 ) : 699 - 709 Darke P , Shanks G , Broadbent M ( 1998 ) Successfully Completing Case Study Research : Rigour , Relevance and Pragmatism . Inform Syst J 8 ( 4 ) : 273 - 289 Davison RM , Martinsons MG , Ou CX ( 2012 ) The Roles of Theory in Canonical Action Research . MIS Quart 36 ( 3 ) : 763 - 786 Diener K , Piller F ( 2013 ) The Market for Open Innovation , 2nd edn . Lulu , Raleigh Eisenhardt KM ( 1991 ) Better Stories and Better Constructs : The Case for Rigor and Compar - ative Logic . Acad Manage Rev 16 ( 3 ) : 620 - 627 Feitler D , van Beelen D , Kielstra H , Taylor P ( 2012 ) Global Network Platform Evaluation within a Large Multi - National Company . The Proceedings of the XXIII ISPIM Confer - ence 2012 , Barcelona Fey C , Birkinshaw J ( 2005 ) External Sources of Knowledge , Governance Mode and R & D Performance . J Manage 31 ( 4 ) : 597 - 621 Fichter K ( 2009 ) Innovation Communities : The Role of Networks of Promoters in Open Innovation . R & D Manag 39 ( 4 ) : 357 - 371 Finbarr D , Teague P , Kitchen P ( 2003 ) Exploring the Role of Internal Communication During Organisational Change . Corp Comm Int J 8 ( 3 ) : 153 - 162 Foss NJ , Laursen K , Pedersen T ( 2011 ) Linking Customer Interaction and Innovation : The Mediating Role of New Organizational Practices . Organ Sci 22 ( 4 ) : 980 - 999 Gemünden H , Salomo S , Hölzle K ( 2007 ) Role Models for Radical Innovations in Times of Open Innovation . Creativ Innovat Manag 16 ( 4 ) : 408 - 421 Gummesson E ( 2000 ) Qualitative Methods in Management Research . Sage , London 25 Gupta AK , Govindarajan V ( 2000 ) Knowledge Flows within Multinational Corporations . Strateg Manag J 21 ( 4 ) : 473 - 496 Hadjimanolis A , Dickson K ( 2001 ) Development of National Innovation Policy in Small Developing Countries . Res Policy 30 ( 5 ) : 805 - 817 Hauschildt J ( 1999 ) Promoters and Champions in Innovations – Development of a Research Paradigm . In : Brockhoff K , Chakrabarti A , Hauschildt J ( eds ) The Dynamics of Innova - tion – Strategic and Managerial Implications . Springer , New York , pp 167 - 185 Hauschildt J , Kirchmann E ( 2001 ) Teamwork for Innovation – the Troika of Promoters . R & D Manag 31 ( 1 ) : 41 - 49 Heinrich B , Henneberger M , Leist S . Zellner G ( 2009a ) The Process Map as an Instrument to Standardize Processes : Design and Application at a Financial Service Provider . Inf Syst e - Bus Manage 7 ( 1 ) : 81 - 102 Heinrich B , Kaiser M , Klier M ( 2009b ) A Procedure to Develop Metrics for Currency and Its Application in CRM . J Data Inf Qual 1 ( 1 ) : 1 - 26 Hevner AR , March ST , Park J , Ram S ( 2004 ) Design Science in Information Systems Research . MIS Quart 28 ( 1 ) : 75 - 105 Holsti OR ( 1969 ) Content Analysis for the Social Sciences and Humanities . Addison Wesley , Reading Howe J ( 2006 ) The Rise of Crowdsourcing . Wired 14 ( 6 ) : 176 - 183 Howell JM , Shea CM , Higgins CA ( 2005 ) Champions of Product Innovations : Defining , Developing , and Validating a Measure of Champion Behavior . J Bus Ventur 20 ( 5 ) : 641 - 661 Howells J ( 2006 ) Intermediation and the Role of Intermediaries in Innovation . Res Policy 35 ( 5 ) : 715 - 728 Jeppesen LB , Lakhani KR ( 2010 ) Marginality and Problem - Solving Effectiveness in Broad - cast Search . Organ Sci 21 ( 5 ) : 1016 - 1033 Keupp MM , Gassmann O ( 2009 ) Determinants and Archetype Users of Open Innovation . R & D Manag 39 ( 4 ) : 331 - 341 Kale P , Dyer JH , Singh H ( 2002 ) Alliance Capability , Stock Market Response , and Long Term Alliance Success . Strateg Manag J 23 ( 8 ) : 747 - 767 Kessler EH , Chakrabarti AK ( 1996 ) Innovation Speed : a Conceptual Model of Context , Antecedents , and Outcomes . Acad Manage Rev 21 ( 1 ) : 1143 - 1191 Klein KJ , Sorra JS ( 1996 ) The Challenge of Innovation Implementation . Acad Manage Rev 21 ( 4 ) : 1055 - 1080 Klein KJ , Conn AB , Sorra JS ( 2001 ) Implementing Computerized Technology : An Organiza - tional Analysis . J Appl Psychol 85 ( 5 ) : 811 - 824 Klein KJ , Knight AP ( 2005 ) Innovation Implementation – Overcoming the Challenge . Curr Dir Psychol Sci 14 ( 5 ) : 243 - 246 Lakhani KR , Panetta JA ( 2007 ) The Principles of Distributed Innovation . Innovations : Technology , Governance , Globalization 2 ( 3 ) : 97 - 112 Laursen K , Salter A ( 2006 ) Open for Innovation : The Role of Openness in Explaining Innovation Performance among UK Manufacturing Firms . Strateg Manag J 27 : 131 - 150 Lechner C , Floyd W ( 2007 ) Searching , Processing , Codifying and Practicing Key Learning Activities in Exploratory Initiatives . Long Range Plann 40 ( 1 ) : 9 - 29 Leiponen A , Helfat CE ( 2010 ) Innovation Objectives , Knowledge Sources , and the Benefits of Breadth . Strateg Manag J 31 ( 2 ) : 224 - 236 Lee A ( 2007 ) Action is an Artifact – What Action Research and Design Science Offer to Each Other . In : Kock N ( ed ) Information Systems Action Research . Springer , New York , pp 43 - 60 26 Lindgren R , Henfridsson O , Schultze U ( 2004 ) Design Principles for Competence Manage - ment Systems . MIS Quart 28 ( 3 ) : 435 472 Lopez - Vega H ( 2009 ) How demand - driven Technological Systems of Innovation work ? The Role of Intermediary Organizations . Proceedings of the DRUID - DIME Academy Win - ter 2009 Conference , Aalborg Miles MB , Huberman AM ( 1994 ) Qualitative Data Analysis : An Expanded Sourcebook . Sage , Thousand Oaks Numagami T ( 1998 ) The Infeasibility of Invariant Laws in Management Studies : A Reflective Dialogue in Defense of Case Studies . Organ Sci 9 ( 1 ) : 1 - 15 Peffers K , Tuunanen T , Rothenberger MA , Chatterjee S ( 2007 ) A Design Science Research Methodology for Information Systems Research . J Manage Inform Syst 24 ( 3 ) : 45 – 77 Piller F , Walcher D ( 2006 ) Toolkits for Idea Competitions : A Novel Method to Integrate Users in New Product Development . R & D Manag 36 ( 3 ) : 307 - 318 Quinn RE , Spreitzer GM ( 1997 ) The Road to Empowerment . Organ Dyn 26 : 37 - 49 Randolph WA , Sashkin M ( 2002 ) Can Organizational Empowerment Work in Multinational Settings ? Acad Manage Exec 16 : 102 - 115 Reichwald R , Piller F ( 2009 ) Interaktive Wertschöpfung : Open Innovation , Individualisierung und neue Formen der Arbeitsteilung , 2nd edn . Gabler , Wiesbaden Rosenkopf L , Nerkar A ( 2001 ) Beyond Local Search : Boundary - Spanning , Exploration , and Impact in the Optical Disk Industry . Strateg Manag J 22 ( 4 ) : 287 - 306 Rosenkopf L , Almeida P ( 2003 ) Overcoming Local Search Through Alliances and Mobility . Manag Sci 49 ( 6 ) : 751 - 766 Rost K , Hölzle K , Gemünden HG ( 2007 ) Promoters or Champions ? Pros and Cons of Role Specialization for Economic Progress . Schmalenbach Business Review ( 59 ) : 340 - 363 Schon D ( 1963 ) Champions for Radical New Innovations . Harv Bus Rev 41 ( 2 ) : 77 - 86 Schwartz H , Davis S ( 1981 ) Matching Corporate Culture and Business Strategy . Organ Dyn 10 ( 1 ) : 30 - 48 Shakir M ( 2002 ) The Selection of Case Studies : Strategies and Applications to IS Implemen - tation . Research Letters in the Information and Mathematical Sciences 3 ( 1 ) : 191 - 198 Sieg JH , Wallin MW , von Krogh G ( 2010 ) Managerial Challenges in Open Innovation : A Study of Innovation Intermediation in the Chemical Industry . R & D Manag 40 ( 3 ) : 281 - 291 Siggelkow N , Levinthal DA ( 2003 ) Temporarily Divide to Conquer : Centralized , Decentral - ized , and Reintegrated Organizational Approaches to Exploration and Adaptation . Or - gan Sci 14 ( 6 ) : 650 - 669 Spradlin D ( 2012 ) Are you Solving the Right Problem ? Asking the Right Questions is Crucial . Harv Bus Rev 90 ( 9 ) : 84 - 101 Sproull LS , Hofmeister KR ( 1986 ) Thinking about Implementation . J Manage 12 ( 1 ) : 43 - 60 Stuart TE , Podolny JM ( 1996 ) Local Search and the Evolution of Technological Capabilities . Strateg Manag J 17 ( 1 ) : 21 - 38 Takeda H , Veerkamp P , Tomiyama T , Yoshikawam H ( 1990 ) Modeling Design Processes . AI Magazine 11 ( 4 ) : 37 - 48 Teece DJ ( 1996 ) Firm Organization , Industrial Structure , and Technological Innovation . J Econ Behav Organ 31 ( 2 ) : 193 - 224 Terwiesch C , Xu Y ( 2008 ) Innovation Contests , Open Innovation , and Multiagent Problem Solving . Manag Sci 54 ( 9 ) : 1529 - 1543 Tranekjer T , Søndergaard H ( 2013 ) Sources of Innovation , their Combinations and Strengths – Benefits at the NPD Project Level . Int J Technol Manage 61 ( 3 / 4 ) : 205 - 236 Turner JR ( 2005 ) The Role of Pilot Studies in Reducing Risk on Projects and Programs . Int J Project Manage 23 ( 1 ) : 1 - 6 27 Van Aken J ( 2005 ) Management Research as a Design Science : Articulating the Research Products of Mode 2 Knowledge Production in Management . Brit J Manage 16 ( 1 ) : 19 - 36 Van de Vrande V , de Jong JP , Vanhaverbeke W , de Rochemont M ( 2009 ) Open Innovation in SMEs : Trends , Motives and Management Challenges . Technovation 29 : 423 - 437 von Krogh G , Wallin M , Sieg JH ( 2012 ) A problem in becoming : How firms formulate sharable problems for innovation contests . Working Paper . ETH Zürich Ward TB , Patterson MJ , Sifonis CM ( 2004 ) The Role of Specificity and Abstraction in Creative Idea Generation . Creat Res J 16 ( 1 ) : 1 - 9 Witte E ( 1973 ) Organisation für Innovationsentscheidungen : Das Promoteren - Modell . Vahlen , Göttingen Witte E ( 1997 ) Feldexperimente als Innovationstest : Die Pilotprojekte zu neuen Medien . Zeitschrift für betriebswirtschaftliche Forschung 49 ( 5 ) : 419 - 436 Yin RK ( 2008 ) Case Study Research , 4th edn . Sage , Thousand Oaks Zhang J , Baden - Fuller C ( 2010 ) The Influence of Technological Knowledge Base and Organizational Structure on Technology Collaboration . J Manage Stud 47 ( 4 ) : 679 - 704 28 Appendix 1 Overview of Informants and Interviews Inter - view No . Case Position Company Tenure [ yrs ] Main Task in Pilot Project Promoter role Interview duration [ min ] 1 1 Manager , Innovation Management 4 RFP drafting , project owner - 72 2 1 Head of Innovation Management 12 Project leader - 65 3 1 Engineer , R & D 4 Evaluator - 80 4 2 Engineer , R & D 5 Evaluator - 110 5 2 Business Unit Manager , Innovation Management 2 RFP drafting - 103 6 2 Head of R & D 12 Evaluator - 91 7 2 Manager , Innovation Management 3 Project leader 65 8 3 Engineer , R & D 7 Project owner and leader - 89 9 3 Team Leader , R & D 10 Evaluator - 60 10 3 Manager , Business Development 2 RFP drafting - 63 11 4 Head of Marketing 9 Project leader - 63 12 4 Manager , Innovation Management 6 Evaluator - 74 13 4 Engineer , R & D 9 RFP drafting - 85 14 4 Head of Innovation Management 3 Project leader - 120 15 5 Manager , Innovation Management 8 Project leader Process promoter , searching for other promoters 100 16 5 Business Unit Manager , R & D 17 RFP drafting and evaluator Expert promoter 60 17 6 Head of Business Development 15 Evaluator Power promoter , searching for other promoters 115 18 6 Manager , R & D 6 Contract negotiations Process promoter 60 19 6 Engineer , R & D 4 Project owner , evaluator Expert promoter 100 20 9S Program ( project ) manager of OI intermediary Nine Sigma 8 Client coordination and RFP execution 92 29 Appendix 2 Interview Guide Reference Data - What is your official position within the company and how long have you been working in this particu - lar position ? - Could you please indicate to us how exactly you were involved in planning and setting up the open innovation project in your company ? What were your responsibilities ? - Apart from you , who else was involved in planning and conducting the project ? In the following , I will ask you a number of questions structured around six typical stages of an open innovation process : I Initiation ; II Contract negotiations ; III Problem formulation ; IV Call for proposals ; V Evaluation of responses ; VI Reintegration . Stage I : Initiation - Where and when did you / your company first learn about open innovation in general and using RFPs in particular ? - Who came up with the idea of applying open innovation via RFPs within you company and what was the rationale behind applying the method in the context of R & D ? - Where and when did you / your company first learn about NineSigma ? - Why did you choose to collaborate with this particular intermediary ? What were the selection criteria ? - How did you , or did you at all , prepare your employees for the collaboration with the intermediary ? - Did you face any challenges when trying to initiate open innovation via RFPs within your company ? - If yes , please describe these challenges in detail ! How were these challenges solved ? - What did you do in order to convince people who had reservations about the method , what were your counterarguments ? - Did you provide any incentives for employees to participate in the project ? - Recapitulating the initiation process : What were the most important steps and activities in order to get the project running ? Do you see any potential for improvement of this stage ? Stage II : Contract negotiations - Please give a brief description of the contract negotiations with NineSigma . - How long did it take to set up such a contract ? - Who , which departments and persons have been involved in the contract negotiations ? - What hierarchical levels were involved in the negotiations and what were their specific contributions ? Stages III & IV : Problem formulation & call for proposals - Please give a brief summary of the RFP - formulation process . - What were the different contributions of every party involved in this process ? - How long did it take to generate the RFP ? - Were there any restrictions to the use of the method ? ( e . g . was the process restricted to certain topics ? ) - Did you face any problems during the process of generating the RFP ? How did you deal with these problems ? - Do you see any potential for improvement of the RFP - formulation process ? 6 Stage V : Evaluation of responses - Please provide a brief description of the evaluation process ( screening of proposals ) ? - Please elaborate on the evaluation criteria that you used and on what persons and departments were involved in the process . - Were you satisfied with the number and quality of the generated proposals ? - How long did it take for you to evaluate all the proposals ? - Did the process meet your expectations ? - Do you see any potential for improving the evaluation process ? 7 Stage VI : Reintegration - Did challenge owners or other internal stakeholders refuse to collaborate with certain solution provid - ers ? What kind of arguments did they raise ? - Were these arguments reasonable and understandable ? - Did you get the impression to deal with some kind of “not - invented - here” attitude ? - How did you deal with these attitudes ? - Have you already contacted or started working with one ( or more ) solution providers ? 30 8 Cost - benefit analysis - From a cost - benefit perspective , how would you evaluate the performance of the pilot project ? - Please draw a comparison between your internal problem solving approaches and open innovation via RFPs in terms of costs and benefits for your company . - Do you think that your experience with open innovation via RFPs will influence your internal R & D in the future ? - Do you intend to apply open innovation via RFPs again in your company ? - Please provide a brief summary of your experience with open innovation via RFPs : What was especial - ly surprising for you ? What was unexpected in the course of the project ?