Teaching materials for undergraduate legal psychology courses Edith Greene University of Colorado FIRST DRAFT : SUGGESTIONS ARE WELCOME Direct correspondence to Department of Psychology University of Colorado Colorado Springs , CO 80933 ( 719 ) 593 - 3415 egreene @ mail . uccs . edu 2 Many colleges and universities offer at least one undergraduate - level course in psychology and law . This was not always so . In the past ( and , in particular , when the field was in its infancy ) , undergraduate legal psychology courses were few and far between . They were typically developed and taught by faculty whose scholarly interests were in the area of psychology and law . As the discipline has matured , as research findings and policy issues related to psychology and law have been disseminated to and debated among a wider audience , and as more scholars have been attracted to the field , many colleges and universities have begun to develop offerings in this area ( Liss , 1992 ) . Ogloff , Tomkins & Bersoff ( 1996 ) suggest that the increase in number of textbooks devoted to psychology and law reflect the growing number of courses . Brooks / Cole Publishing Company , which publishes three textbooks in legal psychology , lists 213 schools that have adopted one of their titles for classroom use ( personal communication , July 1995 ) . A final indication of growth in the field ( and in undergraduate course offerings ) comes from analysis of the number of syllabi submitted to AP - LS and published as a collection of Psychology and Law syllabi . The first edition , printed in 1983 under the direction of Ronald Roesch , included descriptions of 25 undergraduate courses . The second edition , compiled by Marsha Liss in 1988 , included syllabi from 35 courses , and the third edition , compiled in 1993 by James Ogloff , included descriptions of 55 courses , the majority intended for undergraduates . The syllabus collection is described below . As the number of course offerings has grown , so too has the diversity of approaches to teaching the subject . Many undergraduate courses focus on general topics or surveys of the field . Other courses focus on courtroom issues or criminal justice concerns . A smaller ( but growing ) number of courses focus on mental health or forensic topics . Diversity in the backgrounds and experiences of the instructors has also increased as the number of offerings has grown . Many instructors come to this course with a background in psychology and law . Not infrequently , an undergraduate course is taught or co - taught by an instructor with a J . D . degree . On occasion , a faculty member whose primary scholarly interests are in non - legal areas of social , developmental , cognitive , or abnormal psychology is enlisted to teach this course . That faculty member may have relatively little scholarly knowledge of the interdisciplinary field of psychology and law . The purpose of this paper is to aid both the veteran and novice teachers of legal psychology and to address the concerns of instructors who offer varying content in their courses . In particular , the paper describes several kinds of instructional tools that can assist faculty in preparing an undergraduate legal psychology course . They are meant to provide options for use inside and outside of the classroom and can be tailored to any level 3 of undergraduate education ( e . g . , an introductory level survey course as well as a senior or capstone seminar on a more narrowly - defined topic ) . The described materials do not constitute an exhaustive collection of relevant possibilities . In fact , the listings are somewhat arbitrary ; informed largely by information accessible to the author . Readers of this paper will undoubtedly have suggestions for additional materials . I welcome that input and will incorporate suggestions in later versions of this document . Textbooks Several textbooks are available for use in undergraduate legal psychology courses . These include Bartol and Bartol ( 2nd Ed . , 1994 ) ; Foley , 1993 ; Monahan and Walker ( 3rd Ed . , 1994 ) ; Swenson , 1993 ; and Wrightsman , Nietzel & Fortune ( 3rd Ed . , 1994 ) . Instructor’s manuals accompany the texts of Monahan and Walker and Wrightsman et al . Slobogin ( 1991 ) reviews an earlier edition of Monahan and Walker’s book and Williams ( 1992 ) reviews Wrightman’s text . As Liss ( 1992 ) notes , instructors occasionally assign only specialized readings rather than textbooks . Wrightsman et al . ’s textbook provides a number of suggestions for additional readings . Collection of syllabi In 1983 , the American Psychology - Law Society began to publish Psychology and Law syllabi . The third edition of the collection , compiled in 1993 , includes over 50 syllabi . ( A few copies remain . Contact the author for information . ) Approximately half of the described courses are intended for undergraduates . Roesch , Grisso and Poythress ( 1986 ) described materials included in the first syllabus edition and Liss ( 1992 ) reviewed the course offerings and assigned readings for courses included in the second edition . A similar syllabus compilation project was undertaken by the Law and Society Association in 1989 ( Liss , 1992 ) . For a description of an entire undergraduate course in psychology and law , see Greene ( 1987 ) and Tomkins ( 1992 ) . Demonstration materials Benjamin ( 1991 ) notes that the most effective teaching methods are those that promote students’ active participation in the learning process . A number of ideas for interesting demonstrations , class discussions , and role - playing exercises are included in the Instructor’s Manual for the Wrightsman et al . ( 1994 ) textbook . A selective list of other demonstration ideas follows . 1 . Dragon ( 1992 ) suggests a demonstration of eyewitness accuracy in which students stage and videotape an instructor’s mock assassination . Less dramatic crimes ( including staged assaults and pursesnatchings ) can be reenacted in the classroom to demonstrate the unreliability of eyewitness memory . 4 2 . Grosch and Sparrow ( 1992 ) describe the use of an inexpensive galvanic skin response ( GSR ) monitor to demonstrate lie detection . The demonstration touches on the current controversy surrounding the use of physiological measures to detect deception . 3 . Gray ( 1995 ) describes the dramatization of a retrial of John Hinckley Jr . to teach the concept of the insanity plea . This demonstration involves a cast of six students who reenact the roles of judge , defendant , attorneys , and expert psychiatric witnesses in a moot courtoom of a law school . After the trial , there is a period of discussion about the criteria for the designation of insanity and judgments from student - jurors about the guilt or innocence of the defendant . A lively discussion follows . 4 . Tomkins ( 1992 ) describes role - playing exercises that focus on both trial - level and appellate - level litigation . Early in the course , Tomkins’ students reenact a New York case ( In re Seiferth ) that concerns an adolescent’s right to make her own medical treatment decisions . Students read the judicial opinion from the case and portray the roles of attorneys , social and health care professionals , social and developmental psychologists , and the adolescent and her family in a 3 - hour videotaped trial . After spending several class sessions examining issues related to the use of social science evidence in appellate litigation , the class “reargues” the case of Lockhart v . McCree on the constitutionality of death - qualified juries in capital cases . One student group argues for the constitutionality of Arkansas’ death - qualification procedures ; another group argues on behalf of the respondent ; and a third group represents the APA as amicus curiae in order to present empirical social science evidence on this issue . Oral arguments are presented before a panel of three “Supreme Court Justices” and are videotaped . Tomkins suggests that these demonstrations serve to teach both substantive and methodological psychology as well as issues related to government , law enforcement , public policy , and the courts . He reports that because the materials are provocative and controversial , students are able to retain the information over time . 5 . Larsen’s ( 1987 ) demonstration of the prisoner’s dilemma illustrates the decisions people make when they have the choice of cooperating or competing . With some clever refinement , the demonstration can be effectively used in the context of plea bargaining and negotiating . Videotape materials The subject areas typically covered in an undergraduate legal psychology course are of general interest to many adults . This interest is tapped by film makers of both feature films and educational resource materials . With appropriate integration with other course material and relevant discussion , films and videos can provide immediate , relevant and concrete information to undergraduates ( Fleming , Piedmont & Hiam , 1990 ) . 5 Anderson ( 1992 ) describes an undergraduate psychology and law course that includes in - class discussions of three feature films ( Nuts , 1987 ; The Onion Field , 1979 ; and Taxi Driver , 1976 ) . 1 The discussions are of two sorts : in the first , students identify legal principles and research that is relevant to the film’s content and critique the accuracy of the film’s portrayal of legal material . In the second , students analyze the psycholegal issues the film raises and critique the film’s presentation of these issues . Anderson suggests that feature films provide opportunites for increasing students’ comprehension , refining critical thought , and examining new perspectives . An annotated list of educational videotapes relevant to an undergraduate legal psychology course is included in the Appendix . Using the Internet . A wealth of resources relevant to psychology and law can be found on the Internet . Of most relevance to undergraduates are on - line discussion groups and world - wide web sites . On - Line Discussion Groups . A listserv list is a discussion group organized around a certain topic . Students with access to e - mail can easily “subscribe” to these lists . Once they have subscribed , messages appear in their e - mail box and they may post messages to the group through e - mail to the list’s address . Some instructors require that undergraduate students follow the discussions on these lists in order to become exposed to the breadth and depth of discussion among psycholegal scholars and practitioners . A highly arbitary compilation of some relevant lists and instructions for subscribing : 1 . Psychology and law Address : LISTSERV @ UTEPVM . EP . UTEXAS . EDU Message : Subscribe psylaw - l Your name 2 . Law and society Address : LISTSERV @ POLECAT . LAW . INDIANA . EDU Message : 3 . Credibility assessment and witness psychology Address : LISTSERV @ IDBSU . IDBSU . EDU 1 Anderson also cites these films as being relevant to a psychology and law course : Twelve Angry Men , 1957 ; The Verdict , 1982 ; The Paper Chase , 1973 ; The Conversation , 1974 ; The Bedroom Window , 1987 and The Accused , 1988 . Other feature films also come to mind : The Silence of the Lambs , Presumed Innocent , The Juror ; Dead Man Walking . , Reversal of Fortune , etc . 6 No message necessary 4 . Domestic abuse and violence Address : LISTSERV @ URIACC . URI . EDU Message : Subscribe intvio - l Your name 5 . Evidence Address : LISTSERV @ CHICAGOKENT . KENTLAW . EDU Message : Subscribe Evidence Your name , institution , title 6 . Family law Address : LISTSERV @ ACC . WUACC . EDU Message : Subscribe Familylaw - l Your name 7 . Forensic medicine and sciences Address : MAILSERV @ ACC . FAU . EDU Message : Subscribe Forens - l Your name 8 . Forensic psychiatry Address : MAILBASE @ MAILBASE . AC . UK Message : Join Forensic - psychiatry Your name 9 . Forensic psychology Address : LISTSERV @ SJUVM . STJOHNS . EDU Message : Sub forenpsy U . S . Supreme Court decisions in bulletin format . Since 1993 , the Legal Information Institute of Cornell Law School has provided a free E - mail service , distributing the syllabi of U . S . Supreme Court decisions in bulletin format within hours of their release . To subscribe , send an e - mail message to LISTSERV @ LISTSERV . LAW . CORNELL . EDU Message : subscribe liibulletin Your name Browsing on the Internet : The World Wide Web . The WWW is a tool that utilizes hypertext to permit the user to jump around the Internet at will , accessing all kinds 7 of information ( Kelley - Milburn & Milburn , 1995 ) . To use the WWW , students will need access to a browser . There are text - only browsers , such as Lynx and Cello , and sophisticated graphical browsers , such as Mosaic and Netscape . A highly selective list of some web sites of relevance to legal psychology : 1 . Supreme Court opinions from 1990 - present http : / / www . law . cornell . edu / supct / subct . table . html 2 . A variety of legal resources at Findlaw site http : / / www . findlaw . com / Includes academic law journals and law reviews , statutes and laws , judicial opinions and case law , U . S . Federal government resources , legal news , library information , state government resouces , general legal indexes . A veritable trove of information . 3 . 50 online law libraries and news from the National Law Journal and New York Law Journal http : / / www . ljx . com / 4 . Criminal justice resources http : / / www . stpt . usf . edu / ”greek / cj . html Includes searchable law databases and links to criminal justice agencies and information on juvenile delinquency , drugs and alcohol , prisons and the death penalty , due process and civil liberties , criminal justice education , U . S . Law Week , National Law Journal , and much more . 5 . Psychiatry and law resources http : / / ua1vm . ua . edu / ”jhooper / tableofc . html Includes legal issues for psychiatrists Other links under construction 5 . University of Nebraska Psychology - Law Program http : / / www . unl . edu / psylaw / 8 Conclusion There is significant diversity both in the content of undergraduate legal psychology courses and in the methods by which they are taught . This paper provides information about the kinds of materials that will be useful to instructors regardless of their particular orientations and inclinations . Obviously , the ideas described here represent only a portion of the kinds of instructional tools and techniques now employed in the classroom . The Training and Careers Committee of the American Psychology - Law Society intends to establish a clearinghouse of ideas related to undergraduate education . This paper constitutes an initial step in that direction . Readers are urged to provide the author with suggestions and examples of other kinds of materials that have been succesfully integrated into undergraduate coursework . 9 Reference Notes I thank Stuart Greenberg for suggestions about forensically - related discussion groups and Erica Hyles for assistance in compiling the video list . Please address correspondence to Edith Greene , Dept . of Psychology , University of Colorado , Colorado Springs , CO 80933 . E - mail : egreene @ mail . uccs . edu 10 References Bartol , C . & Bartol , A . ( 1994 ) . Psychology and law : Research and application . Pacific Grove , CA : Brooks / Cole . Benjamin , L . T . ( 1991 ) . Personalization and active learning in the large introductory psychology class . Teaching of Psychology , 18 , 68 - 74 . Dragon , W . ( 1992 ) . To be or not to be : Uses for a videotaped shooting in the classroom . Paper presented at the meeting of the Midwestern Psychological Association , Chicago , Il Fleming , M . , Piedmont , R . & Hiam , C . ( 1990 ) . Images of madness : Feature films in teaching psychology . Teaching of Psychology , 17 , 185 - 187 . Gray , J . ( 1995 ) . Dramatization of a retrial of John Hinckley Jr . to teach the concept of the insanity plea in abnormal psychology . Paper presented at the American Psychological Society Third Institute on Teaching , New York . Greene , E . ( 1987 ) . An undergraduate course in psychology and law . Teaching of Psychology , 14 , 238 - 239 . Grosch , J . & Sparrow , J . ( 1992 ) . Detecting deception : A classroom demonstration . Teaching of Psychology , 19 , 166 - 168 . Kelley - Milburn , D . & Milburn , M . ( 1995 ) . Cyberpsych : Resources for psychologists on the internet . Psychological Science , 6 , 203 - 211 . Larsen , J . ( 1987 ) . Prisoner’s dilemma as a model of understanding decisions . Teaching of Psychology , 14 , 230 - 231 . Lockhart v . McCree , 476 U . S . 162 ( 1986 ) . Ogloff , J . , Tomkins , A . , & Bersoff , D . ( 1996 ) . Education and training in psychology and law / criminal justice : Historical foundations , present structures , and future developments . In press , Criminal Justice and Behavior . Roesch , R . , Grisso , T . & Poythress , N . ( 1986 ) . Training programs , courses and workshops in psychology and the law . In M . Kaplan ( Ed . ) , The impact of social psychology on procedural justice ( pp . 83 - 108 ) . Springfield , IL : Thomas . In re Seiferth , 309 N . Y . 80 , 127 N . E . 2d 820 ( N . Y . 1955 ) . Slobogin , C . ( 1991 ) . A new and improved version of a hard to improve product : A review of J . Monahan and L . Walker ( 1990 ) . Law and Human Behavior , 15 , 95 - 98 . Swenson , L . ( 1993 ) Psychology and law for the helping professions . Pacific Grove , CA : Brooks / Cole . 11 Tomkins , A . ( 1992 ) . The role of applied psychology courses in the undergraduate psychology curriculum : “Psychology and law” courses as a case in point . Unpublished manuscript , University of Nebraska . Williams , K . ( 1992 ) . Review of Wrightsman ( 1991 ) . Contemporary Psychology , 37 , 302 - 303 . Wrightsman , L . S . , Nietzel , M . T . & Fortune , W . H . ( 1994 ) . Psychology and the legal system ( 3rd Ed . ) . Pacific Grove , CA ; Brook / Cole . 12 Appendix List of relevant videotaped materials This list is organized by video distributor and includes a description of the videotape provided by the distributor . Ordering information is provided . Most videos were made within the past 5 years . A . ) PBS Video , 1320 Braddock Place , Alexandria , Virginia 22314 - 1698 or call PBS Video 1 - 800 - 344 - 3337 or fax order to 1 - 703 - 739 - 5269 . Frontline Series , videos as follows : 1 . ) When Children Testify Originally a follow - up to “Innocence Lost” , this program features a panel that discusses the controversial psychological and legal issues of the alleged sexual abuse found in a daycare center in Edenton North Carolina , including the reliability of children’s testimony . 60 minutes , WHEC - OOOK - DFBS , must indicate 1 / 2” VHS format ( purchase $ 49 . 95 ) or 3 / 4” U - matic format ( purchase $ 69 . 95 ) . 2 . ) When Cops Go Bad The corrupting influence of drug money is now listed as the number one threat to the integrity of police forces . FRONTLINE investigates this crisis in three communities in Florida , California , and New Jersey . 60 minutes , FRON - 901K - DFBS , must indicate 1 / 2” VHS format ( purchase $ 200 ) or 3 / 4” U - matic format ( purchase $ 220 ) . B . ) University of California , Extension Media Center , 2176 Shattuck Avenue , Berkeley , CA 94704 . Call ( 510 ) 642 - 5578 to purchase or ( 510 ) 642 - 0460 to preview or rent . 1 . ) Justice is a Constant Struggle ( Natl . Educational Film Festival Award Film Arts Festival honoree ) . Studs Terkel narrates this lively and informative study of the key role played by the National Lawyers Guild - - the first integrated bar association in America - - in helping attain and maintain civil rights over the past 50 years . Includes interviews with some of the most renowned Guild attorneys and traces their strong , if sometimes lonely efforts in support of civil liberties , in opposition to HUAC and the McCarthy hearings , and on behalf of members of the civil rights , antiwar , labor , and sanctuary movements . Produced by Abby Ginzberg . “ Will stimulate classroom discussion of a wide variety of issues critical to recent American history . ” - - Prof . Michael Kazin , Dept . of History , American Univ . ( 1988 ) 28 minutes , color video , Catalog # 37741 , purchase $ 195 , rental $ 40 . C . ) Filmakers Library , Inc . , 124 East 40th Street , Suite 901 , New York , NY 10016 . ( 212 ) 808 - 4980 or fax ( 212 ) 808 - 4983 . 1 . ) Memory - - The Past Imperfect Memory is at the heart of everything we do and affects how we function as human beings . It is a complex 13 system with some extraordinary capacity and some unexpected foibles . This Nature of Things production explores many aspects of memory : long and short term memory ; hypnosis as a method of recalling the past ; the phenomenon of amnesia ; the memory of very young children ; and the veracity of eye witness testimony . Memory does not work like a videotape recorder . There is the acquisition stage , the retention stage and the retrieval stage . At each stage , memory is subject to influences , but the retention stage is especially vulnerable . Several experts share their findings . We hear from psychologist Alan Baddeley of Cambridge University who has been studying various aspects of “working memory . ” Dr . Elizabeth Loftus describes her work as an expert in eyewitness testimony . Psychologist Carolyn Rovee - Collier of Rutgers University describes her research on babies’ memories . 46 minutes , color video , purchase $ 350 , rental $ 65 . 2 . ) Rape : Face to Face This highly - charged documentary examines the causes and consequences of rape , one of the fastest growing crimes in America . It includes an emotional confrontation between rapists and victims of rape ( though not by these particular men ) . The women reveal the depth of the trauma they sustained . The men , who are in therapy at the Washington State Hospital , seem surprised at the deep emotional wounds that the women experienced . The documentary provides an understanding of the thought processes and behavior patterns of violent sex offenders . The program implies that the complex issue of rape is inextricably bound to the value our society places on power , status and the role of women . Suggested audience : psychology , sociology , counseling , rape crisis centers , hospitals , women’s groups . 55 minutes , color video , purchase $ 295 , rental $ 75 . 3 . ) Stories from The Riverside This documentary visits Gatesville Penitentiary in Texas , where three female inmates convicted of murder and serving sentences ranging from 25 to 40 years describe the domestic violence that would eventually bring them to prison . Sonia , Brenda , and Lee Ann relate in their own words stories of the isolation and fear that bound them to their threatening husbands . From their stories , a pattern of violence emerges , creating , in effect , a portrait of family violence in America today . Combined with analysis by experts on domestic vioence and the law , this film show the difficulties victims of abuse have escaping the cycle of violence . It challenges our attitudes towards the victim who acts in violent self - defense . 30 minutes , color video , purchase $ 295 , rental $ 55 . 4 . ) N . Y . Law A group of bright , idealistic , minority law students from England spend the summer as interns in New York . The film follows them in a riveting journey through our legal system . Prosecutors , defense attorneys and judges , many of them black , grope daily for justice . Here is a real - life Bonfire of the Vanities , where the harshness of street life factors into every legal decision . The students see life in the raw . In East Harlem they meet community lawyers who protect people’s apartments against the “hired guns” of property developers . One intern works in the housing court untangling the comic - tragic disputes between 14 landlord and tenant . The judge ( black and female ) tempers her application of the law with a good dose of common sense . Other interns work in the criminal courts where the pressure of work breeds both dedication and cynicism . The group meets the well - known black judge , Bruce Wright , who makes biting pronouncements to them on white justice . By the end of the summer each of the participants has a new understanding of how the legal system impacts on the lives of poor people . N . Y . Law will be as important for the issues it raises , as for the image it projects of young minority men and women working for change through careers in law . 52 minutes , color video , purchase $ 295 , rental $ 75 . 5 . ) Post Mortem : Forensic Science Post Mortem delves into the world of forensic science , and looks at some of the latest techniques in high - tech sleuthing . Fingerprints , fibres , blood - forensic investigators turn these elements into compelling evidence . These experts routinely work with police in their efforts to solve crimes . The pathologist’s interpretation of data is used to reveal the cause and manner of death , type of weapon used , and other details . The entomologist can help determine time of death , while the forensic psychologist can draw up a personality profile that will help track a killer down . Post Mortem takes a close - up look at DNA typing which matches a person’s genetic blueprint to saliva , semen or blood found at the scene of the crime . The film tracks the emotionally - charged murder case of a teenage girl and shows how the defendant was ultimately convicted on the basis of forensic evidence . 47 minutes , color video , purchase $ 350 , rental $ 65 . 6 . ) Exploring Alternatives to Prison and Probation When judges pass sentence on convicted criminals , they generally have only two available options : put the offender into prison or put him back on the street with a term of probation . And while , in some cases , these options are sufficient , problems like prison overcrowding , “revolving door” justice , and the high incidence of repeat offenses have caused many people to feel that prison and probation just aren’t sufficient tools to do the job . The question is : what would be ? This film attempts to answer that question by looking at a range of innovative solutions being tried around the country . We visit five alternative sentencing programs including one in which offenders must perform community service , one which has criminals paying restitution to their victims , and a house arrest program where offenders are monitored by electronic surveillance . We see the risks and costs that each would involve and some of the arguments for and against them . 22 minutes , color video , purchase $ 250 , rental $ 55 . 7 . ) Old Enough to Do Time “If you’re old enough to do the crime , you’re old enough to do the time . ” This documentary investigates the results of this stern policy , a departure from earlier attitudes when juvenile courts were established specifically to help young people reform . We see juveniles as young as thirteen being tried as adults and incarcerated with adult criminals . This program also shows us four alternative correctional programs ; one where minors are referred to community boards instead of the courts ; a second , based on a 15 wilderness “outward bound” program ; a third , based on a residential model ; and a fourth , a “tracking” program which keeps close tabs on youthful offenders . The documentary concludes that by locking up juveniles we gain some short term relief from crime , but in the long run we may be giving up on children who could have been turned around . 55 minutes , color video , purchase $ 395 , rental $ 75 . 8 . ) When Women Kill is a powerful documentary that places the personal stories of three battered women in a legal / historical context . Ann Jones , an authority on women and criminal justice and author of “Women Who Kill” explains the evolution of society attitude toward women who murder abusive spouses . In 18th century England such women were considered to have committed treason and burned at the stake . In the Victorian era , women who poisoned their husbands were declared insane and acquitted on that defense . The Battered Women’s Syndrome , first formulated in 1979 , is still the old insanity argument in new language . By focusing on the “helpless woman” it does not address the many women who try to leave their relationships and continue to be harassed . It does not focus on the violence of the batterers . In this film we meet three women who tell why they killed . One speaks from prison where she is serving a seven - year sentence . Their stories are horrific as they relate the years of beatings , torture , humiliations , and violent attacks on their person and property . There are also sequences of counseling groups for violent men , which provide trenchant insight into why male violence continues and why initiatives taken by the police and the courts often fail . This shatteringly powerful film exposes the obstacles facing women who live with batterers and challenges the social and legal institutions that confront the widespread pattern of violence against women . Directed by Barbara Doran For the National Film Board of Canada . 47 minutes , color video , purchase $ 295 , rental $ 65 . 9 . ) Not Too Young To Die - Capital Punishment For Juvenile Offenders The United States is one of only seven countries , including Iraq and Bangladesh , whose justice system allows the execution of juveniles convicted of crime . Toady there are thirty - three juveniles on death row in eleven states . Here is a critical look at a highly controversial subject . This film takes us into death row in those states where juveniles may be executed . Each story is complicated . The youths have all commited repugnant crimes . Allen Hain locked two victims in the trunk of the car and burnt the vehicle . The victims’ parents express their anger and feel death is a fitting punishment . Yet we learn that Allen who was sixteen at the time of the crime , had a mental age of fourteen , came from an alcoholic family and lived on the street . His caseworker feels he could be rehabilitated . Although the United States subscribes to a U . N . international law that prohibits execution for crimes of juveniles , Attorney General Janet Reno explains that each state has the right to dictate policy on this issue . Juveniles have been executed somewhere in America since 1642 . With violent juvenile crime on the upswing , is execution the answer ? 16 52 minutes , color video , purchase $ 395 , rental $ 75 . 10 . ) The New Gulag - America’s Prisons In the United States there five thousand prisons and one and a half million prisoners . The prison system already costs thirty billion dollars per year to maintain and will escalate as stiffer sentences and tougher treatment are being demanded for criminals . Some estimate that half of all Americans will be incarcerated by the year 2050 . This hard - hitting film shows that building and maintaining prisons has become an industry . Private companies are running them for profit often at the expense of any amenities such as recreation and rehabilitation services . In rural communities prisons are welcomed for providing jobs and markets for a variety of goods needed in prison . In a high security prison in Oklahoma , death - row prisoners are kept for years in bunker - like cells for 23 hours a day . The warden is proud of his tough and mean system , which is condemned by human rights groups . In Phoenix the toughest sheriff in the West feeds his inmates on thirty cents a day and works them in chain gangs . He boasts that he has the cheapest run jail in America . Alvin Brunstein of the American Civil Liberties Union and Marc Mauer , a criminologist , challenge the theory that tougher prisons deter crime . 30 minutes , color video , purchase $ 295 , rental $ 55 . D . ) Guilford Publications , Inc . , Dept . J 1 2 3 4 5 6 , 72 Spring Street , New York , NY 10012 . Call toll - free 1 - 800 - 365 - 7006 ( in New York call 212 - 431 - 9800 ) or fax 212 - 966 - 6708 , previews available . 1 . ) When Children Are Witnesses Until recently , children were routinely excluded from courtrooms , considered neither competent witnesses nor reliable reporters of events . However , as more and more children enter our nation’s court system , recognition is growing that they can be competent and credible witnesses when trial procedures accommodate their special needs and capabilities . Because growing numbers of children are becoming witnesses in a wide variety of types of cases , efforts are being made to find ways to make it possible for their voices to be heard in court without harm to them or the the rights of defendants . When Children Are Witnesses was produced to assist in that process . Through a dramatic presentation of a criminal court trial involving two child witnesses alleged to have been sexually abused , this film highlights issues relevant to any kind of case , criminal or civil , in which children are called upon to testify . The film shows how judges , acting within their judicial discretion , can make proceedings less intimidating to children . For example , it demonstrates the kinds of instructions and cautions judges can give attorneys regarding such procedures as making objections when children are on the stand , or how they can phrase their questions so the children can understand what they are being asked . The film shows how such measures in no way compromise the search for truth , but in fact enhance the probability that the truth will be found . Designed to be used as a self - contained educational resource for judicial and legal education , this film can also be used as a stimulus for discussions and workshops for all professionals who are involved with children entering the courts . 17 As such , it is valuable not only to judges and attorneys , but to court personnel , law enforcement officers , and mental health professionals . Written and produced by Drs . Laurie and Joseph Braga , narrated by L . A . Law’s Richard Dysart . 48 minutes , color video , 1 / 2” VHS format , CAT . # 2935 , purchase $ 195 or 3 / 4” Umatic Format , CAT . # 2936 , purchase $ 210 . E . ) Dr . P . Zimbardo , P . O . Box 2996 , Stanford , CA 94309 - 2996 . Prica $ 100 plus $ 10 postage , shipping & handling . CA residents add 8 . 25 % tax . 1 . ) The Stanford Prison Study Video A new version of this classic experiment on the “power of the situation” is available in a 50 minute VHS format . Guaranteed to stimulate critical thinking and discussion , this recent production uses original archival footage , flashbacks , post - experiment interviews with the prisoners and guards , as well as current follow - ups . It documents the surprise arrests by City Police , as well as graphically showing the pathology that developed - - forcing the 2 - week study to be terminated early . Viewer - tested previews reveal its value across many high school and college courses , and for a variety of community audiences : correctional , judicial , military , and civic . Send check or money order to above address . F . ) Coronet / MTI Film & Video , Distributors of Learning Corporation of America , 108 Wilmot Road , Deerfield , IL 60015 - 9990 . Call toll - free 1 - 800 - 621 - 2131 ( in Illinois and Alaska call collect 312 - 940 - 1260 ) . 1 . ) Double Jeopardy Private Violence Series . Award - winning documentary deals with the problems of the child - victim during judicial proceedings in sexual abuse cases . Case histories demonstrate the benefits of an interdisciplinary approach to handling the delicate problems that arise . Produced by Cavalcade Productions . ( MTI ) 40 minutes , Order # DM06 , 16mm purchase $ 595 , video purchase $ 540 , rental $ 80 . Every Two Seconds : Why You’ll Be A Victim of Crime Compelling documentary examines crime and violence in our society and how the criminal justice system is fighting a losing battle against it . Narrated by Collin Siedor , this two - part film series appeals to viewers to stop blaming society and get to work on solutions . Produced by the Gannett Broadcasting Group ( MTI ) 2 . ) Part I : The Criminal Justice System Focuses on the inherent problems in law enforcement , the courts , and the parole system which often foster criminal activity rather than frustrate it . 23 minutes , Order # GN05 , 16mm purchase $ 475 , video purchase $ 420 , rental $ 75 . 3 . ) Part II : The Society Explores the cultural factors - - child abuse , sex role socialization , competition , instability , poverty , substance abuse , and 18 others - - that combine to instill a tradition of violence we somehow can’t escape . Focuses on cyclical effects of child abuse and its relationship to criminal behavior . 29 minutes , Order # GN06 , 16mm purchase $ 520 , video purchase $ 470 , rental $ 75 . 4 . ) Investigation of Rape From the first call for help to the end of the medical examination , this dramatization of a rape investigation deals with the intricate chain of events engulfing everyone involved in a rape situation . Points out the need for essential psychological first aid for the victim and stresses the need for thoroughness and proper evidence collection in seeking a conviction . Produced by The Filmakers , Inc . 20 minutes , Order # FM03 , 16mm purchase $ 460 , video purchase $ 415 , rental $ 65 . G . ) Films for the Humanities & Sciences , P . O . Box 2053 , Princeton , NJ 08543 - 2053 , toll - free 1 - 800 - 257 - 5126 or 609 - 275 - 1400 8 : 30 a . m . to 5 : 00 p . m . EST , or fax your order 609 - 275 - 3767 24 hours a day . Video prices are for VHS format . 3 / 4” U - matic also available ; please call for the price . Rentals are for one - day showings , add $ 5 . 75 per program for shipping and handling . 1 . ) The Mind of a Serial Killer This program goes behind the scenes to give the real story behind the FBI unit popularized in The Silence of the Lambs . Using a detailed psychological profile , the unit helps the Rochester , New York , police department catch a notorious serial killer who targeted prostitutes . WGBH collection . Best Special Interest , American Correctional Association Film Festival . 60 minutes , color video , # AAG3833 , purchase $ 89 . 95 . 2 . ) The Tarnished Shield : When Cops Go Bad In this investigative report , Barbara Walters interviews Frank Serpico , for whom the issues have remained as black and white as they were when he went public with his famous one - man crusade against police corruption in New York . “There should be no such thing as a crooked cop , ” says Serpico . “Your’re either a crook or a cop . ” Ms . Walters also talks to the police officer whose arrest for dealing drugs triggered the1993 investigation into the New York Police Department . “When you’re a cop , you’re the boss in the street . . . you feel indestructible . . . I figured I could do anything . ” This program examines the environment in which cops go bad , why those who have gone bad flourish , why corruption is so hard to root out , and why whistle blowers are the ones made to feel guilty . 52 minutes , color video , # AZA5298 , purchase $ 149 , rental $ 75 . 3 . ) Suicide and the Police Officer Suicide among police officers is a dramatic example of what happens when those entrusted with the protection of others fail to protect and care for themselves . This program , produced by the New York City Police Foundation , focuses on the underlying problems - - alcohol or drug abuse , severe relationship problems , difficulty in dealing with violence - - that can , if unchecked and unresolved , lead to suicide . This very moving program provides a forum for understanding and perhaps ameliorating the pressures that lead to suicide 19 for those in positions of control . Honorable mention , American Correctional Association Film Festival , Recommended by Booklist . 39 minutes , color video , # AAT3103 , purchase $ 149 , rental $ 75 . 4 . ) Guilty Until Proven Innocent : Asset Forfeiture Laws The concept of presumed innocence is fundamental to American justice , but this program shows how private property in Tennessee was seized on suspicion of illegal activity . Without pressing criminal charges , the case is brought in civil court and the person who has lost his cash or his car must prove his innocence . The program profiles a “typical” citizen who has come up against the asset forfeiture laws - - most are minorities , too poor to pay for proper legal representation , and unlikely ( whether they have committed a crime or not ) ever to get their money back . The program also looks at the argument that the laws are useful in the war against drugs . 30 minutes , color video , # AAT4286 , purchase $ 149 , rental $ 75 . 5 . ) The Death Penalty Capital punishment is a major public issue , with public support at an all - time high and the pace of executions gathering speed - - while research suggests that death sentences are imposed arbitrarily and do not prevent murder . Examining the cases of two men who committed virtually identical murders and were tried in the same courtroom two weeks apart , this program talks with prosecutors , lawyers , jurors , and victims to analyze whether the death penalty is working and how it is applied . 26 minutes , color video , # AZA1938 , purchase $ 149 , rental $ 75 . 6 . ) So Violent a Nation This program with Bill Moyers focuses on Dallas , TX , to examine how violence is affecting American life . Dallas has the highest crime rate of any American city with a population above 500 , 000 . Featured in the program are interviews with a youth caseworker , a victim’s rights advocate , and the Dallas Police Chief . They discuss gun control , police - community relations , education , and other crime related topics . 60 minutes , color video , # AZA5046 , purchase $ 89 . 95 . 7 . ) Violence : An American Tradition From the punishment of defenseless Native Americans by Christopher Columbus 500 years ago , to the domestic and racially motivated assaults that run rampant today , American history is permeated by acts of violence . Using archival photos and footage , as well as the words of both historical figures and current experts in sociology , medicine , and history , this program explores the recurring patterns of violence that have emerged in our society as a result of insurrection , anger , prejudice , and ignorance . Hosted by civil rights activist Julian Bond , the program examines many of th most notorious acts of violenc that have scarred the American psyche over the past 200 years , and concludes that if Americans do not learn from their violent heritage , they may be doomed to repeat it . An HBO production . 55 minutes , color video , # AZA6298 , purchase $ 149 , rental $ 75 . 20 8 . ) The Impact of Violence on Children What is the future of our children in America ? Kids today live in a volatile world where violence in the school , home , and streets is an everyday occurrence . Statistics are staggering as children are not only abused by adults , but are killing each other . This program looks at the sources of violence that affect our children . Among the experts featured in the program are Dr . James Garbarino , Director of Cornell University’s Family Life Developement Center ; James Stayer , President of Children Now ; and Kathleen Kostelny , Ph . D . , of the Erikson Institute . 28 minutes , color video , # AZA5931 , purchase $ 89 . 95 . Beyond Hate - a two part series featuring Bill Moyer who attempts to take us beyond hate by exploring its origins and dimensions through the eyes of world leaders , human rights activists , Arabs and Israelis , high school students , youth gangs , and an American white supremacist group . 9 . ) The Heart of Hatred This program features conversations with a variety of people who have explored the heart of hatred . A Los Angeles gang member uses hate as a survival weapon . White supremacist leader Tom Metzger defends his policies of hate both in a court of law and in interviews . A former Israeli soldier tells how he disguised himself as a Palestinian in order to better understand the source of his own hatred . High school students in Bensonhurst , New York , discuss the beating death of a black youth in their neighborhood , and Myrlie Evers , wife of assassinated civil rights leader Medgar Evers , talks about her own triumph over hate after her husband’s untimely death . A man who physically abused his wife is presented as an example of people who act hatefully when their identity and self - esteem are threatened . 42 minutes , color video , # AZA6797 , purchase $ 89 . 95 . 10 . ) Learning to Hate In the second program , Moyers focuses on how children learn to hate , and how attitudes toward hatred differ from culture to culture . A youth of Arab - Israeli descent becomes friends with a young Orthodox Jew at an international training center that teaches youngsters the tools for dialog and understanding . High school students in Bensonhurst analyze the origins of hatred against gays . In Washington , D . C . , a Holocaust survivor teaches children how stereotyping breeds hatred , and how that hatred can lead to persecution . Jimmy Carter , Nelson Mandela , Elie Wiesel , Vaclav Havel , Li Lu , and Norhtern Ireland peace activist Mairead Corrigan Maguire share their own experiences with hatred and discuss the resolve that helped them deal with it . 44 minutes , color video , # AZA6798 , purchase $ 89 . 95 . 11 . ) Avoiding Conflict : Dispute Resolution Without Violence Violence is the main concern of most Americans . This program details ways of stemming the rising tide of aggression in our schools and playgrounds , our streets and homes . It shows ordinary problems that can ignite into violence , and how the problems can be resolved peacefully . The program focuses not on the problems but 21 on solutions as it highlights anti - violence programs that have made a difference by teaching dispute resolution , avoiding conflict , solving problems nonviolently , and averting domestic and street violence . 47 minutes , color video , # AZA5771 , purchase $ 149 , rental $ 75 . What Can We Do About Violence ? A Bill Moyers Special - This four part series focuses on sloutions to the growing problem of violence in America . The efforts profiled in this series atytest to a growing national movement in which people from all walks of life are working to ptu an end to violence , especially among young people . 12 . ) Juveniles Locked Up In the Ventura School , California’s showcase juvenile prison , inmates discuss how drugs and alcohol , lack of family support , and gang involvement have influenced their lives . The program also looks at Adult Time For Adult Crime , the program in Dade County , FL , whichsends more kids to adult court than any other county in the U . S . But there are alternatives to sentencing of young , violent offenders which are explored in a report from the Last Chance Ranch , a work - study lockup rooted in firm dicipline , treatment , and rehabilitation . 56 minutes , color video , # AZA5484 , purchase $ 89 . 95 13 . ) Domestic Violence , Street Violence Domestic violence is one of the least reported crimes in America . In Nashville , TN , we see how intense police investigatrion and follow - up of domestic abusehave led to the imprisonment of repeat offenders . Teens on Target shows the sucess of a program where a Los Angeles doctor and former teenage patients ( half of whom have spinal injuries from gunshot wounds ) speak to younger kids about weapons and violence . Violence in the media is portrayed , and solutions to its impact on children are discussed . 56 minutes , color video , # AZA5485 , purchase $ 89 . 95 14 . ) Crisis in Our Inner Cities This program examines th tragic story of nine - year - old James Darby , who sent a letter to President Clinton asking him to stop the violence in his city as part of a classroom project . Nine days after he sent the letter , Darby was shot walking home from the park . Sucessful community efforts show how local businesses , religious organizations , and individuals can help at - risk youths build self - esteem and gain skills to help them restructure their lives . 56 minutes , color video , # AZA5486 , purchase $ 89 . 95 15 . ) Solutions for Children This program documents how domestic abuse affects children , and looks at programs such as The Kid’s Club , where troubled children and families are getting help ; Sobriety High , a special school that works to reduce alcohol and drug abuse and lower the incidence of violent crimes ; and Landmark High School in New York , a sucessful experimental effort that promotes small classes , strict enforcement of rules , and parental involvement . 56 minutes , color video , # AZA5487 , purchase $ 89 . 95 . 22 16 . ) The Psychopathic Mind A psychopath could be your neighbor , your spouse , maybe even your child . An estimated three million psychopsths - one person in a hundred - are walking the streets of North America . Exactly who and what makes someone a psychopath , and how are they classified medically ? This program answers these questions as it takes viewers through the mind of a diagnosed psychopath and speaks with one expert who believes that the condition is incurable . 27 minutes , color video , # AZA6306 , purchase $ 99 . 17 . ) Criminal Conversations This program interviews criminals to learn how and why they commit crimes . In a segment on burglary and auto theft , criminals describe how they break into homes and cars , what keeps them out , what they look for , and where they find it . In a segment on fraud , fast - talking flim - flam men and women describe the most popular schemes and how they gain the trust of their victims . In a segment on rape , rapists reveal what they look for in a victim , and how to spot and discourage sexual predators . Rape survivors also explain the benefits of fighting back . Finally , the program looks at kidnapping and how to teach children to be safe without instilling fear , how to spot dangerous situations , and effective self - defense techniques . 22 minutes , color video , # AZA6403 , purchase $ 89 . 95 . 18 . ) Crime and Human Nature Are criminality and antisocial aggressive behavior due to nature or nurture ? Can adult criminal behavior be predicted in the antisocial behavior of children , weak attachment to family , and fatalism about the future ? Anthropologist Ashley Montagu and other experts join Phil Donahue in addressing these questions . 28 minutes , color video , # AZA1327 , purchase $ 89 . 95 . 19 . ) Pedophiles This program reports on child abusers who , despite repeated convictions and extensive therapy , continue their abusive behavior . In frank interviews , pedophiles describe their inability to stop re - offending and the ease with which they manipulate the so - called safeguards to gain access to their prey . The program examines some radical responses to recidivism , which include informing the public when a convicted offender is released and locking serial offenders up for life . It also stresses the apparent evidence that there is no known effective rehabilitation . 52 minutes , color video , # AZA4626 , purchase $ 149 , rental $ 75 . 20 . ) Date Rape This unique documentary - drama takes us inside the store of a rape . Paul and Sue are friends . One night , Paul walks Sue home and she invites him in for coffee . The events that follow change their lives forever as Sue accuses Paul of rape . This program follows the subsequent investigation as it would be conducted in real life . All of the professionals involved are real , with all other roles played by actors . The program observes as the police investigate Sue’s allegation , she is examined by a doctor , friends and witnesses are questioned , forensic evidence is gathered and the police try to find independent witnesses to 23 corroborate Sue’s story . Paul is called in for questioning and relates his version of the night’s events . This powerful story demonstrates both the emotional issues of a case of date rape as well as the process by which police and prosecutors follow - up and prosecute a case . 52 minutes , color video , # AZA5812 , purchase $ 149 , rental $ 75 . 21 . ) Crime in the Suites Ivan Boesky and Dennis Levine , not the swaggering arsonist or mugger , may be the prototypical criminal of our age . This program examines the phenomenon of white - collar crime , which may well be the biggest growth industry in the U . S . today - but at enormous cost : one crime may have hundreds or thousands of victims ; nearly a third of business failures result from embezzlement , pilferage , and swindling by trusted employees . The program profiles two white - collar criminals and a man who lost his pension to a retirement scam , and talks to experts who offer insights into the nature of the phenomenon and how to deal with it . 24 minutes , color video , # AZA2015 , purchase $ 89 . 95 . 22 . ) Southside Strangler : DNA Science In this program , psychological profiling , glass refractory analysis , and DNA fingerprinting are used to identify a serial killer . Homicide detective Joe Horgas painstakingly tracks down a suspect through psychological profiles of known offenders . Glass refractory analysis - the measuring of glass characteristics through the use of light - is used to match glass at one crime scene with a fragment taken from the suspect’s jacket . Semen samples collected from the victims’ bodies match the DNA of the suspect . The match provides the evidence for his conviction . 24 minutes , color video , # AZA6993 , purchase $ 129 , rental $ 75 . 23 . ) Hostages : The Psychology of the Survivors This extraordinary documentary presents the psychological case histories of four hostages who were released - a French businessman kidnapped in Paris , two French journalists captured in Lebanon , and a Dutchman hijacked by Moluccans in Holland . Through expert questioning , the hostages reveal why they were seized , how they lived during captivity , what went through their minds at the time , and their feelings toward their captors and fellow hostages - several of whom were killed by the kidnappers . In particularly poignant scenes , the hostages explain how the incidents have changed their lives forever . In French and Dutch , with English subtitles and narration . 104 minutes , color video , # AZA2244 , purchase $ 159 . 24 . ) Diverting the Mentally Ill from Jail Approximately 670 , 000 inmates with serious mental illnesses are admitted to U . S . jails each year . Some of these must be held in jail because of the seriousness of their crimes , but many of those arrested for nonviolent crimes could be diverted to community - based mental health programs . This documentary examines the problems caused by jailing inmates with mental illnesses , and explores the benefits of diverting these individuals to mental health programs . The documentary profiles several inmates with mental illnesses and examines how best to break the unproductive cycle of 24 repeated arrests and jail for individuals who might otherwise be helped through a broad array of programs . 25 minutes , color video , # AZA6444 , purchase $ 99 . 25 . ) CCI : Case Study of a Southern Prison This program , filmed at the Central Correctional Institution in South Carolina , examines the failure of current U . S . correctional methods , and the expense of that failure in human terms . Interviews with inmates and staff capture emotions ranging from rage to hopelessness , as they discuss the racism and violence indegenous to prison life . The overall picture is that a growing underclass is disportionately punished under our current criminal justice system , and has little chance for rehabilitation . 29 minutes , color video , # AZA7031 , purchase $ 129 , rental $ 75 . 26 . ) Locking Up Women Holloway was once the most feared women’s prison in Britain , where a hard - line regime kept women locked up for 23 hours out of the day . Now it’s gone so soft , say some officers , that the inmates want to stay and the officers want to leave . This program looks at the philosophy of the changes and at the daily routine at this female - dominated enclave ; discusses the new breed of female criminal and the increase of violence in women ; and examines some of the psychological underpinnings of female criminality . 52 minutes , color video , # AZA3885 , purchase $ 89 . 95 . 27 . ) Judgment at Midnight This program enters a world rarely seen : the world of an inmate waiting to die and of a prison preparing to execute him . The program , reported by ABC News correspondent Cynthia McFadden , takes viewers from the cellblock , to the execution chamber , to preparation of the lethal injection , and into the mind of inmate Antonio James as he prepares to pay the ultimate price for his crimes . The program offers a real - life portrait , putting a human face on the controversial issue of capital punishment , as it chronicles both the angry voices of the victims’ families and the touching moments in which the condemned man sees his family for the last time . The program also explores the unusual relationship between the inmate and the warden , who struggles with personal feelings that conflict with his responsibility for carrying out the execution . 46 minutes , color video , # AZA6548 , purchase $ 129 , rental $ 75 . 28 . ) Legislating Morality : There Oughta Be a Law When Americans become outraged with behavior concidered immoral or unethical , a typical response is to call on state legislatures or Congress to pass legislation outlawing it . Can government impose morality on its people by banning negative behavior or mandating positive behavior ? History suggests that such efforts , though well - intentioned in many cases , are often ineffective . This program examines the successes and failures of law as a source of ethics in the U . S . with former New York governor Mario Cuomo ; legal scholar Thomas DiBacco of American University ; and Nadine Strossen , President of the American Civil Liberties Union . 28 minutes , color video , # AZA6387 , purchase $ 89 . 95 . 25 29 . ) Juveniles and the Death Penalty This program visits Death Row inmates who committed murder before they were 18 and talks with prosecutors , defense attorneys , and surviving family members about the kind of punishment appropriate to criminals who were juveniles when they committed their crimes . Is there a moral as well as a legal distinction ? Is society’s goal deterrence ? Revenge ? The convicted murderers are extraordinarily articulate as they demonstrate a range of attitudes , from regret to anomie to religious conversion . 58 minutes , color video , # AZA2140 , purchase $ 159 , rental $ 75 . 30 . ) L . A . Justice This program reports on the court system of Los Angeles County , CA : the near - gridlock created by the overwhelming number of criminal and civil cases ; the effects of waiting - - on a prisoner who has been in jail for 11 months because he can’t make bail , on a family waiting for five years for their civil case to go to trial ; portraits of a judge , a public defender ; a bounty hunter , and a prosecutor ; the obligations and tactics of a defense attorney ; and the new practice of settling of civil cases outside the public court system . 58 minutes , color video , # FC - 2208 , purchase $ 159 , rental $ 75 . 31 . ) See You in Court Americans in record numbers are turning to the courts to solve virtually all disagreements . This program examines whether America is an adversarial society and why people go to court so readily , and how mediation can intervene between conflicting parties to promote reconciliation , settlement , or compromise . 26 minutes , color video , # FC - 1944 , purchase $ 149 , rental $ 75 . 32 . ) Rape : An Act of Hate FBI statistics show that a woman is raped every 7 minutes in the United States . These are reported rapes ; probably ten times as many rapes go unreported . Rape is not a pretty subject and this is not a pretty film . Hosted by Veronica Hamel of Hill Street Blues , it seeks to determine why people rape and to help potential victims protect themselves . The program examines the history and mythology of rape , explains who are its most likely victims and contains interviews with experts in the fields of media , law enforcement and sociology . Winner of an Emmy Award and an American Women in Radio and Television Award . # FC - 1055 , VHS or Beta : purchase $ 149 , rental $ 75 . 33 . ) Alan Dershowitz : A Portrait in the First Person Attorney , teacher , author - - also gadfly and loudmouth - - Alan Dershowitz says he has long since stopped trying to make a good impression , preferring to stand up for what he believes is right . Here he discusses why he became a lawyer ; the flaws in our legal system ; and the effective use of lawyers . 24 minutes , color video , # AAT5220 , purchase $ 89 . 95 . 34 . ) Privacy Rights for Criminals In colonial America , criminals were humiliated by being locked in stocks in the public square . Now , public humiliation is back , ‘90s style . This specially adapted Phil Donahue program introduces a 26 police chief who uses public access television to embarrass the people who were arrested that week in his town . We meet a “video vigilante” who videotapes hookers soliciting and then informs wives of their husbands’ activities , and a judge who orders convicted criminals to take out an ad in the local paper and apologize for their crimes . But not everyone thinks this is a good idea . Attorney Tom Liotti explains why he is opposed to public humiliation . 28 minutes , color video , # AAT5399 , purchase $ 89 . 95 . 35 . ) Plea Bargains : Dealing for Justice The vast majority of criminal cases end in plea bargains . No one argues that this is the most just way - - only the most efficient . This program examines what happens when the deal is struck . Filmed behind the scenes , deep inside the nation’s criminal justice system , it presents an ugly picture that has little to do with justice . 28 minutes , color video , # AAT4593 , purchase $ 149 , rental $ 75 . 36 . ) Juries on Trial Is America’s jury system fair ? In light of the O . J . Simpson trial , this program asks if it isn’t time to reevaluate trial by jury . Is a unanimous vote for conviction the best way to get justice ? Has the O . J . Simpson trial eroded confidence in the jury system ? Experts featured on this program are Judge Robert Bork of the American Enterprise Institute , Fred Cate from the University of Indiana , Lani Guinier of the University of Pennsylvania and author of the recent book Tyranny of the Majority , and Paul Rothstein of Georgetown University . 23 minutes , color video , # AZA5944 , purchase $ 89 . 95 . 37 . ) Trial Consultants : Stacking Juries or Keeping Trials Fair ? This program explores the increasing use of trial consultants , who are now a multi - million dollar industry . Featured in the program are Jane Murdoch - Miller , who literally transforms defendants , accentuating good points , and hiding potential bad points like tattoos , and Jo - Ellan Dimitrius , who has achieved celebrity status by helping to select the jury which acquitted the policemen in the Rodney King case . Dimitrius also helped shape the jury on the O . J . Simpson case , exhaustively researching potential jurors and conducting mock trials to see which type of jurors would acquit O . J . “Eighty percent of people who enter court believe your client is guilty because he’s been arrested , ” says Dimitrius . “So my job is to try to level it up to an even playing field . ” 14 minutes , color video , # AZA5894 , purchase : $ 49 . 95 . 38 . ) Attorneys for the Unpopular Some say these attorneys give lawyers a bad name ; others say they’re the only hope for the downtrodden . This specially adapted Phil Donahue program presents some of the most controversial men ever to have passed the bar exam : William Kunstler , whose clients have ranged from the infamous “Chicago 7” to the terrorists who bombed the World Trade Center ; Barry Slotnick , who defended the so - called “subway vigilante” Bernard Goetz ; Richard Essen , whose specialty is winning acquittals for accused drunk drivers ; and Richard “Racehorse” Haynes , the famous Texas lawyer . These 27 outspoken and radical attorneys explain the tactics they’ve used in their successful defenses of some very unpopular clients . 28 minutes , color video , # AAT5402 , purchase $ 89 . 95 . H . ) The Annenberg / CPB Collection , Dept . HB01 , PO Box 2345 , S . Burlington , VT 05407 - 2345 or call 1 - 800 - LEARNER ( 532 - 7637 ) or fax your order to 802 - 864 - 9846 . For orders up to $ 900 , add 8 % of the total order for shipping & handling , for orders of $ 900 or more , add 3 % . Please allow 7 - 10 business days for your order to arrive . Priority shipping available : to receive order in 3 business days add an additional $ 15 . 00 . To get your order in 4 business days , add an additional $ 7 . 50 . 1 . ) To Defend a Killer What rights do the guilty have ? Ethical dilemmas of our criminal justice system are discussed by U . S . Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia , defense attorney Jack Litman , and philosopher John Smith of Yale . Ethics in America series , each program $ 29 . 95 , coordinated print Ethics in America , by Newton , Prentice - Hall , 1989 : textbook $ 29 . 95 , Source Reader $ 29 . 95 , Faculty Manual $ 15 . 00 . 2 . ) Truth on Trial Is an attorney’s first obligation to the court , the client , the public ? Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia , Judge Robert Merhige , attorneys Floyd Abrams and Stanley Chesley , philosopher John Smith , and others debate civil litigation’s ethical dilemmas . Ethics in America series , each program $ 29 . 95 , coordinated print Ethics in America , by Newton , Prentice - Hall , 1989 : textbook $ 29 . 95 , Source Reader $ 29 . 95 , Faculty Manual $ 15 . 00 . I . ) Insight Media , 2162 Broadway , New York , NY 10024 , ( 212 ) 721 - 6316 , or fax ( 212 ) 799 - 5309 . 1 . ) The Law and Persons With Mental Disability This video , featuring Michael L . Perlin , examines the involuntary civil commitment process . It discusses an individual’s right to treatment , as well as the rights of institutions and communities and considers the problem of homelessness . It probes the right to refuse treatment , focusing on the impact of recent cases . The video discusses tort law , examining cases brought against mental health workers on behalf of mentally disabled individuals . It explains typical judicial responses to power imbalances in cases involving the therapeutic process . It also examines incompetency and the insanity defense . ( 1992 ) 6 volumes , 35 minutes each , color video , # 20396 , purchase $ 525 . 2 . ) Memory , Suggestion , and Abuse In this interview , clinical psychologist Michael Yapko explains that memories are more a function of reconstruction than reproduction . He discusses factors that affect memory , and considers how detailed memories accompanied by strong emotions can be evoked 28 through hypnotic suggestion . Enumerating potential therapeutic pitfalls , he examines the psychotherapeutic interactions that often lead to a diagnosis of childhood sexual abuse . ( 1994 ) 60 minutes , color , video , # 20446 , purchase $ 109 . J . ) University of California Extension , Center for Media and Independent Learning , 2000 Center Street , Fourth Floor , Berkeley , CA 94704 , ( 510 ) 642 - 0460 or fax ( 510 ) 643 - 9271 . 1 . ) From One Prison . . . ( Natl . Educational Film Festival Gold Apple Award , Human Rights Watch Intl . Film Festival honoree , Women in Film Foundation honoree ) This unforgettably powerful documentary exposes the failures of America’s police , criminal justice , and penal systems with regard to the human and civil rights of women . Shot inside a Michigan prison , the film is entirely narrated by four women who are serving life or long - term sentences for killing abusive men in self - defense . The women’s stories , echoing and reinforcing one another , are told with warmth , dignity , and eloquence . Their faces fill the screen , bringing the viewer into visceral contact with the realities of the women’s lives as they relate their stories and recount the injustices and abuse they have suffered . The four women are neither heroines nor vigilantes . They reflect on the social institutions that have failed them - - police , health care , social service agencies , courts - - and reveal that virtually their entire defenses were left out of their trials , since in most cases they were not allowed to testify or bring up their histories of abuse . They also relate their experiences in prison , where rape and sexual harassement by guards , nonexistent medical care , unhealthy food , and rat - infested , overcrowded living conditions are the norm . By Carol Jacobsen . ( 1995 ) 70 minutes , color video , Catalog # 38313 , purchase $ 225 , rental $ 70 . K . ) Filmakers Library , 133 East 58th Street , New York , NY 10022 , ( 212 ) 355 - 6545 . 1 . ) The Unquiet Death of Eli Creekmore As headlines deliver grim details of young children killed at the hands of their parents , the time has come to act in behalf of the child victim . This timely film on a brutal murder on the West Coast will cause audiences to re - examine the issues of family privacy versus intervention . The dramatic story of what happened to Eli is told through moving accounts by family members , teachers , doctors and others . After a history of mistreatment , the three - year - old was brutally beaten by his father when he refused to stop crying at the dinner table . The child’s intestine was ruptured , yet neither parent would respond to his pain . Shortly after midnight , he suffered an agonizing and lonely death . Eli’s plight had not gone unnoticed . Over the years , it had been reported to Child Protective Services by his grandmother , his teacher , and the doctor who had treated his other injuries . Although Eli was removed from his family for a short period , he was returned because the mandate of the agency was to keep families together whenever possible . The case triggered a widespread investigation of both 29 the agency and the state laws . We see how complex are the questions of family privacy , the protection of children , and the responsibility of the state . Produced by KCTSeattle 9 . 55 minutes , color video , purchase $ 445 , rental $ 75 . L . ) Coronet / MTI Film & Video , 108 Wilmot Road , Deerfield , IL 60015 , toll free 1 - 800 - 621 - 2131 or fax 312 - 940 - 3600 . ( In Illinois and Alaska call collect 312 - 940 - 1260 ) . 1 . ) The Criminal Justice System Examines the inherent problems in law enforcement , the courts and the parole system . 23 minutes , Order # GN05 , 16mm purchase $ 475 , Video purchase $ 420 . 2 . ) Going Straight Concerned citizens work with criminal justice professionals to find realistic alternatives to prison for non - violent offenders . Produced by Dave Bell Associates . An MTI release . 28 minutes , Order # DB08 , 16mm purchase $ 520 , Video purchase $ 470 . ( Priced at “For Profit Business” prices . Discount 30 % in video format to calculate the Educational Institution Price ) . Rentals are available at $ 75 for a three day period . 3 . ) Hard Time Narrated by George Kennedy , this film takes viewers behind the locked gates of Stateville Prison , Joliet , Illinois , for a firsthand look at conditions that can do more to generate crime than to reduce it . Produced by Dave Bell Associates . An MTI release . 27 minutes , Order # DB08 , 16mm purchase $ 520 , Video purchase $ 470 . ( Priced at “For Profit Business” prices . Discount 30 % in video format to calculate the Educational Institution Price ) . Rentals are available at $ 75 for a three day period . The National Crime Prevention Test Check your community’s Crime Prevention IQ while they watch and learn from this unique two - part program designed to maximize audience participation and increase information retention . Produced by Calvin Productions . An MTI release . 4 . ) Part I Covers crime in and around the home and neighborhood . Includes burglary , handgun safety , child abuse , battered wives , crimes against the elderly , locks and safety devices , and more . 29 minutes , Order # CJ064 , HCA , 16mm purchase $ 500 , Video purchase $ 455 , rental $ 75 . 5 . ) Part II Covers crimes on the street and in business . Includes robbery , assaults ( including rape ) , child molestation , vandalism , auto theft , forgery , and general safety . 29 minutes , Order # CJ065 , HCA , 16mm purchase $ 500 , Video purchase $ 455 , rental $ 75 . 30 M ) . National Institute of Justice . The National Institute of Justice produced and distributed 22 videotapes in its CRIMEFILE series . Topics include Predicting Criminality , Insanity Defense , Sentencing , etc . Each videotape is accompanied by a study gude . For information on how to obtain programs in the series , contact CRIMEFILE , National Institute of Justice / NCJRS , Box 6000 , Rockville , MD 20850 or call 800 - 251 - 5500 ( 301 - 251 - 5500 from Metropolitan Washington , D . C . and Maryland ) . N ) . University Film and Video . University Film and Video . 1313 Fifth Street , Suite 108 . Minneapolis , MN 55414 1 ) . Inside the Jury Room . From the Frontline Series , this program presents excerpts from an actual criminal jury trial and jury deliberation in Milwaukee , Wisconsin . It is an excellent vehicle for a discussion of jury nullification and provides a rare insight into the decision making processes of a real jury . O ) . ABC . American Broadcasting Company . To order , call 1 - 800 - 913 - 3434 . 1 ) . From the Mouths of Babes . A 20 / 20 segment on suggestibility in young children .