Role of Deformation - induced Lipid Trafficking in the Prevention of Plasma Membrane Stress Failure Nicholas E . Vlahakis , Mark A . Schroeder , Richard E . Pagano , and Rolf D . Hubmayr Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine Division , Mayo Clinic and Foundation , Rochester , Minnesota Cells experience plasma membrane stress failure when the matrix To test this hypothesis , we measured the susceptibility of to which they adhere undergoes large deformations . In the lung , alveolar epithelial cells to stretch amplitude and rate - induced such a mechanism might explain mechanical ventilation – associated plasma membrane wounding . Cell wounding is commonly cell injury . We have previously shown that in alveolar epithelial assessed using ﬂuorescently labeled , membrane - imperme - cells , deformationinduceslipidtraffickingtotheplasmamembrane , able macromolecules such as ﬂuorescein - labeled dextran thereby accommodating the required increase in the cell surface ( FDx ) ( 2 , 3 , 10 – 12 ) . FDx enters the cell through plasma area . We now show that cell wounding is strain amplitude and rate membrane breaks and is retained in the cytoplasm when the dependent and that under conditions of impaired exocytosis strain - membrane defect reseals ( 11 , 13 , 14 ) . However , if a wounded induced cell wounding is significantly increased . In addition , the cell fails to reseal a plasma membrane defect , FDx cannot susceptibility of cells to mechanical injury was not correlated with be retained and the cell cannot be distinguished from an changesincell stiffness . Usingadual - labelingtechnique , wedifferen - uninjured cell . We present here a novel dual - labeling tech - tiated between cell populations that were reversibly and irreversibly nique using ﬁrst FDx and , after stretching , propidium iodide injured and showed that interventions that impair deformation - ( PI ) , which labels the nuclei of injured and nonresealed cells . induced lipid trafficking also reduce the likelihood of plasma mem - Using this approach , we were able to identify three cell popu - braneresealing . Ourfindingssuggestthatcellplasticityandremodel - lations : ( 1 ) wounded and resealed cells , ( 2 ) wounded cells ing responses such as deformation - induced lipid trafficking are more that had not resealed , and ( 3 ) uninjured cells with intact important for cytoprotection from strain injury than are the innate plasma membranes . Our ﬁndings highlight that live – dead mechanical propertiesof thecell . Wealso concludethat indeforma - exclusion assays performed at the end of a deformation ex - tion experiments , tests of cell membrane integrity cannot be inter - periment might be both false positive ( lethal wounding is preted as tests of cell viability because an intact plasma membrane after deformation does not mean that no injury had occurred . not distinguished from wounding and resealing ) and false negative ( wounded and nonresealed cells might not retain Keywords : exocytosis ; plasma membrane wounding ; plasma mem - exclusion dyes ) . brane resealing ; ventilator - induced lung injury Additional experiments were performed under conditions of impaired exocytosis , induced by cold temperature or cho - Cells experience plasma membrane stress failure when the lesterol depletion . These interventions , which impaired DILT , matrix to which they adhere undergoes large deformations also made cells more prone to injury and altered the cells’ ( 1 – 3 ) . In the lung , this mechanism might explain epithelial resistance to shape change . Because changes in cell mechani - and endothelial cell disruptions associated with high tidal cal properties might determine a cell’s susceptibility to injury , volume mechanical ventilation ( 4 , 5 ) . To simulate alveolar we measured the effects of cytoskeleton active agents on volume change during mechanical ventilation , alveolar epi - DILT along with their effects on apparent cell stiffness . Based thelial cells are grown on malleable substrata , which when on these measurements , we conclude that remodeling re - stretched deform the overlying cells , resulting in a large sur - sponses such as DILT are more important for protecting the face - to - volume ratio ( 3 , 6 , 7 ) . In ﬁbroblasts and neurons , plasma membrane against stress failure than are the inherent unfolding of excess plasma membrane and exocytosis allow strength and organization of stress - bearing elements such as cells to increase their surface area while protecting the lipid the subcortical cytoskeleton . bilayer from lytic tension ( 8 , 9 ) . Recently , we reported that in alveolar epithelial cells , intracellular lipids are trafﬁcked METHODS to the plasma membrane after substratum stretch ( 7 ) . This deformation - induced lipid trafﬁcking ( DILT ) is vesicular in Experimental Design for Determination of Plasma nature and energy and strain amplitude dependent and ac - Membrane Breaks commodates deformation - induced changes in cell surface When deformation - induced breaks occur , ﬂuorescently labeled mole - area . cules—typically membrane impermeable—enter the cell along a con - These prior studies led us to postulate that DILT is impor - centration gradient . Cells were incubated with FDx ( 70 kD ; Fluka , tant for protection against deformation - related cell injury . Milwaukee , WI ) and then strained as described later here . After cell deformation , cells were incubated with PI ( 668 D ; Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) orinafewexperimentswithunesteriﬁedcalcein ( 622D ; Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) . Cells with FDx or nuclear PI labeling were ( Received in original form March 14 , 2002 ; accepted in final form July 22 , 2002 ) counted in ﬁve low - power ( (cid:1) 40 ) microscope ﬁelds in each culture well and were tabulated as a percentage of the total cells counted . FDx - Funded by a Glaxo - Wellcome Research Fellowship grant , a grant from the Brewer positive / PI - negative cells were considered wounded and resealed , and Foundation , and National Institutes of Health grants GM 22942 and HL - 63178 . PI - positive / FDx - negative cells were considered wounded and nonre - Correspondence and requests for reprints should be addressed to Nicholas E . sealed . Vlahakis , M . D . , Stabile 8 - 62 , Mayo Clinic , 200 First Street SW , Rochester , MN 55905 . E - mail : vlahakis . nicholas @ mayo . edu Alveolar Epithelial Cell Culture This article has an online data supplement , which is accessible from this issue’s Human A549 ( passages 78 – 88 ) , rat L2 ( passages 27 – 40 ) ( American table of contents online at www . atsjournals . org Type Culture Collection , Rockville , MD ) , and Day 5 primary rat alveo - Am J Respir Crit Care Med Vol 166 . pp 1282 – 1289 , 2002 lar epithelial cells ( AEC ) were grown on six - well culture plates ( Bioﬂex ; Originally Published in Press as DOI : 10 . 1164 / rccm . 200203 - 207OC on July 25 , 2002 Internet address : www . atsjournals . org Flexcell International Corporation , McKeesport , PA ) with a ﬂexible Vlahakis , Schroeder , Pagano , et al . : Exocytosis and Plasma Membrane Breaks 1283 silicoelastic membrane base ( see online data supplement [ Methods section ] ) . Cell Strain Devices Two strain devices were used , both of which have been previously described ( 1 , 7 ) ( see online data supplement [ Methods section ] ) . For cellinjury experiments , strainamplitudesof 3 – 25 % andrates of1 – 140 % per second were studied . For lipid trafﬁcking experiments , a single stretch of 25 (cid:2) 2 . 8 % was applied to the cells . Labeling of Lipid Membranes The methods have been previously described ( 7 ) . Brieﬂy , intracellular membranes of A549 and / or Day 5 AEC cells were ﬂuorescently labeled by incubating with 2 (cid:3) M of FM1 - 43 . The ﬂuorescence intensity of the cell decreases after exocytosis to the plasma membrane . In separate experiments , exocytosis was measured before and after deformation under the following conditions : ( 1 ) cold temperature ( 4 (cid:4) C ) , ( 2 ) plasma membrane cholesterol depletion ( (cid:5) - methyl - cyclodextrin ; Sigma ) , and Figure 1 . Cell wounding in alveolar epithelial cells after a single substra - ( 3 ) cytoskeletalactiveagents ( cytochalasinD , paclitaxel , andcolchicine ; Sigma ) . tum deformation of 25 % amplitude with a strain rate of 140 % per second . Each bar on the graph represents total cell wounding divided Cell Imaging into those cells that were able to reseal ( FDx positive / PI negative ) and those unable to reseal ( PI positive / FDx negative ) . The inset fluorescent For cell injury experiments , cells were viewed immediately after injuri - micrograph illustrates a confluent monolayer of alveolar epithelial cells ous deformationusing a 40 (cid:1) water immersion objective lensto visualize with the injured and resealed cells being green and the injured and FDx or calcein and PI . For lipid trafﬁcking experiments , cells were nonresealed cells being red . Uninjured cells lay in between these cells imaged using an argon ion laser scanning confocal microscope ( Fluo - and are not labeled with fluorescent dyes . view3 ; Olympus , Melville , NY ) . One - micron optical sections were ob - tained using a 40 (cid:1) water immersion objective lens ( Olympus ) . Fluores - cent labels were excited with blue laser light and emission wavelengths collected simultaneously by green and red ﬁlters ( Olympus ) . Membrane ﬂuorescent intensity measurements were calculated with an image dis - Plasma Membrane Resealing after Cell Wounding Maintains play and manipulation package ( 15 ) from a single image slice through Cell Viability the middle of the cell acquired in both its undeformed and deformed Cell viability was determined for both FDx - and PI - positive states . A549 cells and Day 5 primary rat alveolar epithelial cells ( n (cid:6) 3 , eight wells ) . After deformation , the adherent cellswere reincu - Magnetic Twisting Cytometry bated with fresh nutrient media . Twelve and 24 hours later , the The methods have been previously described ( 16 , 17 ) . Ferromagnetic number of FDx - and PI - positive cells was recounted . There was ( Fe 3 O 4 ) microbeads ( 4 . 5 (cid:3) m in diameter ) were coated with a synthetic no difference ( p (cid:7) 0 . 05 ) in the number of FDx - positive cells arginine - glycine - aspartate synthetic peptide ( RGD ) peptide ( Telios when compared immediately after stretch and 12 and 24 hours Pharmaceuticals , Inc . , San Diego , CA ) , added to each well , and placed after stretch ; however , no PI - positive cells were seen . Because into the magnetic twisting cytometer . The beads were magnetized in PI is itself cytotoxic , we repeated these experiments using a the horizontal direction . A magnetic “twisting” ﬁeld , the strength of nontoxic second label , namely unesteriﬁed calcein . No calcein - which deﬁnes local stress , was applied in the vertical direction to twist the beads upward , and apparent cell stiffness was calculated ( 17 ) . positive cells could be identiﬁed after 12 or 24 hours , suggesting that failure to reseal plasma membrane wounds rapidly is a lethal Statistical Analysis event . Fluorescent intensity measurements and cell injury percentages are Plasma Membrane Wounding Is Strain Amplitude and Strain presented as means and SD . Statistical comparisons between experi - Rate Dependent mental conditions were made using the Student t tests for paired obser - vations . Analysis of variance was used to determine strain effect on Figure 2A shows that the number of A549 cells that sustained the percentage of wounded cells across a different strain amplitude , plasma membrane breaks after a single rapid stretch increases strain rate , and temperature . Statistical signiﬁcance was assumed at p (cid:8) as a function of strain amplitude . When compared with no strain , 0 . 05 with respect to a two - tailed probability distribution . cells strained at amplitudes of 9 % ( n (cid:6) 3 , 18 wells ) , 18 % ( n (cid:6) 18 , 63 wells ) , and 25 % ( n (cid:6) 21 , 101 wells ) had a 1 - fold , 3 . 4 - fold , RESULTS and 5 . 2 - fold increase ( p (cid:8) 0 . 01 ) in cell wounding , respectively . At amplitudes of 9 % or less , there was no difference in wounding Substratum Strain Induces Plasma Membrane Wounds compared with unstrained cell populations . Figure 2B shows in Adherent Alveolar Epithelial Cells that this dependence of wounding on strain amplitude was also The fractions of injured cells and their resealing responses in demonstrable in L2 cells ( n (cid:6) 2 , six wells for each strain ampli - different alveolar epithelial culture systems after exposure to a tude ) and in primary Day 5 AEC cells ( data not shown ) . L2 single large deforming stress are shown in Figure 1 . A549 ( n (cid:6) cells and primary alveolar epithelial cells were more susceptible 5 , 27 wells ) , L2 ( n (cid:6) 2 , eight wells ) , and rat alveolar epithelial to wounding than A549 cells . cells ( n (cid:6) 2 , 12 wells ) were rapidly stretched by 25 % . The suscep - Figure 3 ( n (cid:6) 4 , 12 wells ) shows that in A549 and L2 cells , tibility to stretch - induced wounding and the probability of subse - the susceptibility to injury varies not only with strain amplitude quent resealing varied across cell types . The fraction of wounded but also with strain rate . In A549 cells ( Figure 3A ) , at the highest A549 , L2 , and primary rat alveolar epithelial cells was 6 % , 21 % , strain rate of 140 % per second , a single stretch of 25 % produced and 46 % , respectively . The rates of resealing were 38 % , 78 % , two times ( 4 . 9 % versus 2 . 6 % , p (cid:8) 0 . 0001 ) and three times ( 4 . 9 % versus 1 . 3 % , p (cid:8) 0 . 0001 ) more wounding than at rates of 40 % and 21 % , respectively . 1284 AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE VOL 166 2002 Figure 2 . Deformation - inducedcellwoundingincreaseswithincreasing Figure 3 . Deformation - inducedcellwoundingincreaseswithincreasing strain amplitude . Strain rate was set to 140 % per second . ( A ) A549 cells . strain rate . Strain amplitude was set to 25 % . ( A ) A549 cells . ( B ) L2 cells . ( B ) L2 cells . * p (cid:8) 0 . 05 compared with no strain ; # p (cid:8) 0 . 05 comparison * p (cid:8) 0 . 05 compared with no strain ; # p (cid:8) 0 . 05 comparison between between indicated strain amplitudes . indicated strain rates . per second and 12 % per second , respectively . When stretched in FM1 - 43 ﬂuorescence , consistent with inhibition of DILT . at a rate of 3 % per second , a 25 % stretch produced no irrevers - Figure 4B shows that treatment of A549 cells ( n (cid:6) 3 , 18 cells ) ible cell injury . Similarly , in L2 cells ( Figure 3B ) , a single stretch and alveolar epithelial cells ( n (cid:6) 3 , 11 cells ) with (cid:5) - methyl of 25 % with a strain rate of 140 % per second resulted in 0 . 7 cyclodextrin also results in inhibition of DILT compared with times ( 23 . 1 % versus 15 . 9 % , p (cid:8) 0 . 0001 ) and 5 . 5 times ( 23 . 1 % untreated and stretched epithelial cells . (cid:5) - Methyl - cyclodextrin versus 4 . 2 % , p (cid:8) 0 . 0001 ) more wounding than at rates of 40 % was found to reduce the total cholesterol content of A549 cells per second and 12 % per second , respectively . by up to 45 % ( data not shown ) . Cold Temperature and Cholesterol Depletion Inhibits DILT Cholesterol Depletion Increases the Susceptibility of Alveolar To test whether vesicular lipid trafﬁcking is important for pro - Epithelial Cells to Stretch - related Injury tecting cells from mechanical injury , we ﬁrst had to demonstrate Having demonstrated inhibition of DILT , we next sought to that exposure to cold temperature and cholesterol depletion measure the effect of this inhibition on the cells’ susceptibility to indeed inhibited DILT . The effects of cooling on the stretch - deformation - related wounding . The incidence of stretch - related related decrease in FM1 - 43 ﬂuorescence ( a marker of exocytosis ) plasma membrane wounding was signiﬁcantly increased in cho - in A549 cells ( two experiments , six cells ) and in primary rat lesterol - depleted cells compared with placebo - treated controls . alveolar epithelial cells ( two experiments , six cells ) are shown In A549 cells and primary alveolar epithelial cells , cholesterol in Figure 4A . At room temperature , a single stretch of 25 % depletion raised the fraction of wounded cells from 1 . 4 (cid:2) 1 . 5 % caused an eightfold and a threefold decrease in FM1 - 43 ﬂuo - to 4 . 0 (cid:2) 1 . 3 % ( p (cid:8) 0 . 0001 ; Figure 5A ) and from 49 (cid:2) 3 . 2 % to rescence , compatible with a signiﬁcant exocytic response . Also note that at 4 (cid:4) C , the same stretch produced no signiﬁcant change 59 (cid:2) 2 % ( p (cid:8) 0 . 0003 ; Figure 5B ) , respectively . Furthermore , Vlahakis , Schroeder , Pagano , et al . : Exocytosis and Plasma Membrane Breaks 1285 Figure 4 . Low temperature and cholesterol depletion inhibit lipid trafficking to the plasma membrane in both A549 and primary rat alveolar epithelial cells after a single held 25 % substratum deformation . ( A ) At 21 (cid:4) C , the intensity of FM1 - 43 labeling within the cell de - creases consistent with lipid exocytosis . The inset confo - cal micrograph illustrates the loss of FM1 - 43 ( arrows ) after stretch . At 4 (cid:4) C , this response is inhibited ( p (cid:8) 0 . 001 ) . ( B ) (cid:5) - Methyl cyclodextrin inhibits ( in both A549 and alveolar epi - thelial cells ) DILT to the plasma membrane . Each data point represents a single cell and its change in fluorescence between the unstretched and stretched state . The nonstretched cells servedasatimecontrolforlipidtraffickingandphotobleachingeffectsoffluorescentandlaserlight . CD , (cid:5) - methylcyclodextrin . the fraction of wounded cells that healed was substantially re - deformation - related injury ( 1 ) ; however , in prior experiments , duced after cholesterol depletion . The resealing rate of wounded we had assessed injury solely on the basis of FDx retention and and cholesterol depleted A549 cells was 46 (cid:2) 7 . 7 % compared thereby implicitly assumed a lack of temperature effect on the with 73 (cid:2) 30 . 3 % in normal controls ( p (cid:8) 0 . 006 ; Figure 5A ) . resealing rate . Figure 6 shows that this assumption is incorrect . Similar effects were observed in alveolar epithelial cells in which Compared with 37 (cid:4) C , low temperature increased the number of cholesterol depletion lowered the resealing rate from 24 (cid:2) 3 . 4 % cells with stretch - induced wounding . At the 3 % per second , 12 % to 15 (cid:2) 2 % ( p (cid:8) 0 . 0004 ; Figure 5B ) . per second , 40 % per second , and 140 % per second strain rate , low temperature increased total wounding by 2 . 5 - fold , 4 - fold , Cooling Increases the Susceptibility of A549 Cells to 4 - fold , and 3 . 5 - fold , respectively ( p (cid:8) 0 . 001 ) . In addition , low Stretch - related Injury temperature also decreased the number of cells that resealed stretch - induced plasma membrane breaks . At the 3 % per sec - We have previously demonstrated that cooling changes the me - chanical properties of cells and increases their susceptibility to ond , 12 % per second , 40 % per second , and 140 % per second 1286 AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE VOL 166 2002 Figure 6 . Low temperature results in increased numbers of stretch - induced wounded cells ( * p (cid:8) 0 . 05 ) and cells that do not reseal ( # p (cid:8) 0 . 05 ) . A549 cells were stretched at 4 (cid:4) C and were compared with paired wells stretched at 37 (cid:4) C at 3 % per second , 12 % per second , 40 % per second , and 140 % per second strain rates . ments , 15 wells ) resulted in a 34 % increase ( 5 . 1 (cid:2) 1 . 9 % to 8 . 6 (cid:2) 1 . 7 % , p (cid:8) 0 . 0001 ) and a 29 % increase ( 4 . 4 (cid:2) 0 . 7 % to 5 . 8 (cid:2) 1 . 1 % , p (cid:8) 0 . 001 ) , respectively , in the number of wounded cells . Both colchicine and paclitaxel inhibited resealing , increasing the proportion of cells that did not reseal by 1 . 5 - fold ( p (cid:8) 0 . 001 ) . Strikingly , this apparent discordance in ﬁndings is explained by the fact that these agents all impair DILT ( Figure 9 ) . In the presence of cytochalasin D , colchicine , and paclitaxel , DILT was inhibited 6 - fold , 12 - fold , and 11 - fold , respectively ( p (cid:8) 0 . 0001 , 10 cells ) as compared with cells stretched without cytoskeletal agents present . Figure 5 . Cholesterol depletion results in increased stretch - induced wounded cells ( * p (cid:8) 0 . 05 ) and cells that do not reseal ( # p (cid:8) 0 . 05 ) in DISCUSSION both ( A ) A549 and ( B ) Day 5 primary rat alveolar epithelial cells . Cells In this study , we show that inhibition of DILT by low tempera - were deformed with a single 25 % amplitude , 140 % per second strain ture and cholesterol depletion results in an increased probability rate deformation held for 90 second . of cell wounding . This ﬁnding highlights the importance of lipid strain rate , low temperature increased the proportion of nonre - sealed plasma membrane breaks by 40 - fold , 9 . 5 - fold , 5 - fold , and 2 - fold , respectively ( p (cid:8) 0 . 001 ) . Therefore , analyses that are entirely based on FDx retention can substantially underestimate the effects of an intervention such as cooling on stretch injury . Inhibition of DILT Increases the Susceptibility to Stretch Injury Independent of the Cells’ Resistance to Shape Change Wehad previouslyspeculated thatthe inherentmechanical prop - erties of cells determine their susceptibility to deformation injury ( 1 , 3 ) . To test this hypothesis , we measured the effects of choles - terol depletion , cooling , and cytoskeletal active agents on appar - ent A549 cell stiffness as shown in Figure 7 . These interventions have diverse effects on the cells’ resistance to a shape change ; however , these same cytoskeleton active agents all raise the cells’ susceptibility to stretch injury . Figure 8 shows that after microﬁlament depolymerization with cytochalasin D ( n (cid:6) 3 , nine wells ) , the percentage of wounded A549 cells increased from 3 . 8 (cid:2) 0 . 8 % to 6 . 0 (cid:2) 1 . 4 % ( p (cid:8) 0 . 0001 ) , whereas there was an Figure 7 . Change in apparent stiffness in A549 cells exposed to cyclo - increase in the proportion of nonresealed cells by 3 - fold ( p (cid:8) dextrin , low temperature , and cytoskeletal agents . These agents all have 0 . 0001 ) . Changes in microtubular assembly ( colchicine ; four ex - differing effects on cell stiffness . CD (cid:6) (cid:5) - methyl cyclodextrin ; Col (cid:6) colchicines ; Pcl (cid:6) paclitaxel ; Cyto D (cid:6) cytochalasin D . periments , 12 wells ) and disassembly ( paclitaxel ; four experi - Vlahakis , Schroeder , Pagano , et al . : Exocytosis and Plasma Membrane Breaks 1287 wounding than the mechanical properties of the cell’s stress - bearing elements before deformation . By using a dual - labeling technique for identifying plasma membrane wounding , we also show that substratum deformation results in plasma membrane breaks that either reseal ( main - taining cell viability ) or do not reseal ( resulting in cell death ) . We demonstrate that inhibition of DILT not only increases the probability of cell wounding but also decreases the probability of wound resealing , suggesting that DILT plays a role not only in wound prevention but also in wound resealing . Importance of Defining Cell Injury as Wounding or Resealing Although the distinction between wounded and resealed and wounded and nonresealed cells seems obvious , it is rarely made in the literature when analyzing the etiologic factors and biologic consequences of cellular deformation ( 2 , 11 , 18 ) . As a result , cells that are wounded and resealed are often considered “injured” Figure 8 . Treatment of A549 cells with cytoskeletal active agents results without accounting for those cells that were wounded and not in increased numbers of stretch - induced wounded cells ( * p (cid:8) 0 . 05 ) resealed . The implications of these ﬁndings are substantial . and cells that do not reseal ( # p (cid:8) 0 . 05 ) . A549 cells were stretched in the presence of cytoskeletal active agents and compared with paired First , this distinction facilitates a more accurate assessment wells stretched without these agents at an amplitude of 25 % and a of factors determining either wounding or resealing . This is illus - strain rate of 140 % per second . Cyto D (cid:6) cytochalasin D ; Pcl (cid:6) paclitaxel ; trated by our results regarding the effect of strain amplitude and Col (cid:6) colchicines , each at 1 (cid:3) M for 1 hour before stretch and fluores - strain rate . If total cell wounding is not accounted for , one might cence measurement . conclude that resealing increases proportionally with both inter - ventions ; however , by measuring total wounding , it is appreci - ated that they have opposite effects on the probability of reseal - ing . The biologic reason for this is unclear and warrants further exocytosis as a means to accommodate deformation - induced study but does suggest that wounding per se might have determi - changes in cell shape and in turn to prevent plasma membrane nants that are separate from resealing . breaks . We also show that despite the opposite effects of low Second , the determinations of cell death by the use of cellular temperature and cholesterol depletion on apparent cell stiffness , markers depending on plasma membrane integrity potentially the probability of wounding increased . Similarly , the probability are unsuitable for deformation experiments . Many of the cells of cell wounding increased after both increases and decreases considered to be “dead” might merely be injured with resealed in cytoskeletal stiffness . These ﬁndings are explained , at least in plasma membrane breaks . Numerous deformation experiments part , by their inhibition of vesicular lipid trafﬁcking to the plasma to date have used such an approach and now must be reassessed membrane . We therefore conclude that a dynamic remodeling in light of this new data ( 2 , 11 , 12 , 18 ) . This in turn has “down - process such as DILT is a more important determinant of cell stream” implications regarding interpretation of deformation - induced cellular responses . For example , protein measurement will be “confounded” by differing contributions from the irre - versibly wounded and resealed cell populations ( 19 ) . Thus , the degree of wounding and resealing must be established for all experimental conditions and deformation parameters ( including strain rate ) . Third , although the study of alveolar epithelial biology using cell lines has limitations ( 20 ) , our data support the notion that important biologic phenomena are shared by alveolar epithelial cell lines and primary cell cultures , particularly as it pertains to studies of cell injury and repair mechanisms in vitro . We studied human A549 cells , rat L2 cells , and rat primary alveolar epithelial cells and found that the determinants of DILT , wounding , and resealing were similar in primary cells and cell lines . It is of note that injured primary cells were less likely to reseal than wounded A549 and L2 cells . The reasons underlying this remain to be determined , but such factors as differences in state of polariza - tion and interconnectedness , rate constant for cytoskeletal re - modeling and vesicular trafﬁcking , or more global differences in mechanosensing and mechanotransduction might all play a Figure 9 . Perturbation of cellular microfilaments ( cytochalasin D ) or role . microtubules ( colchicine and paclitaxel ) inhibits lipid trafficking to the plasma membrane in A549 cells after a single , held 25 % substratum Cell Plasticity Is More Important for Determination of deformation . Each data point under the 25 % strain bar represents a Wounding Than the Mechanical Properties of the single cell and its change in fluorescence between the unstretched and Stress - Bearing Elements stretched state . The nonstretched cells served as a time control for lipid The cell possesses numerous biologic strategies to adapt to shape trafficking and photobleaching effects of fluorescent and laser light . changes resulting from mechanical forces , many of which have Cyto D (cid:6) cytochalasin D ; Pcl (cid:6) paclitaxel ; Col (cid:6) colchicines , each at 1 (cid:3) M for 1 hour before stretch and fluorescence measurement . been recently reviewed in detail ( 21 , 22 ) . The cytoskeleton is 1288 AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE VOL 166 2002 considered the key stress - bearing element of the cell , and the involves a vesicular process of exocytosis that is independent of integrity of the plasma membrane , an envelope - like structure the mechanical properties of either the plasma membrane or serving as a barrier between the intracellular and extracellular the cytoskeleton . They also highlight the conﬂicting literature environments , is essential for cell survival and function ( 9 ) . Ad - regarding the importance of an intact actin cytoskeleton for herent cells have been modeled as tensegrity structures as a facilitation of wound resealing ( 34 ) . means to explain deformation responses and determinants of The motivation for these studies is the clinical entity of venti - cell injury . The cell is depicted as an integrated network of lator - induced lung injury . Numerous studies have focused on compression struts and tensional guide wires ( the cytoskeleton ) the manifestations and physiologic consequences of ventilator - that is connected to the extracellular matrix through integrins . induced lung injury in animal models and humans . The cytopa - When deformed , the cytoskeleton undergoes conformational re - thologic lesions of ventilator - induced lung injury , namely plasma arrangements and increased tension to adapt to the resultant membrane blebbing , intercellular and intracellular epithelial and cell shape change ( 17 , 23 ) . An intact cytoskeleton is thought to endothelial gap formation , and denudation of the basement fortify the plasma membrane ( 24 ) , and as long as sufﬁcient lipid membrane have all been carefully documented , yet research on surface is available , plasma membrane stress failure can be pre - the pathophysiology and molecular mechanisms of mechanical vented . lung injury has focused largely on downstream events such as We have previously postulated on the adaptive responses of edema formation and inﬂammation , which are consequences of the lipid surface to deforming stress in alveolar epithelial cells cellular mechanotransduction and stress failure . Comparatively ( 3 ) . First , the cell might unfold plasma membrane “rufﬂes , ” thus little is known about the actual deformation experienced by preventing any increase in plasma membrane tension . Second , lung cells during mechanical ventilation , nor have the adaptive the plasma membrane , once unfolded , might be able to accom - responses of lung cells to deforming stresses been rigorously modate a 2 – 3 % lateral strain before yielding ( 8 , 9 , 25 ) . Third , deﬁned . if these responses are overwhelmed , the plasma membrane might In this study , we chose to elucidate alveolar epithelial cell either undergo stress failure or further adapt its stress - bearing injury and repair mechanisms in an in vitro setting . Although elements to prevent plasma membrane breaks . For example , repeated deformation has obvious direct relevance to mechani - after deformation , the protein components of actin - extracellular cal ventilation , we chose a single , held stretch because it was matrix adhesions remodel ( 26 ) , forming larger and stronger focal simple and addressed basic and broad unanswered questions adhesion complexes ( 27 ) . Lipid trafﬁcking to the cell surface is about alveolar epithelial cell mechanics and deformation - related another such adaptive mechanism and has been demonstrated remodeling . The cytoskeleton is the principal stress - bearing ele - in numerous in vitro cell systems using various deformation ment of the plasma membrane , a source of mechanosensing , an proﬁles ( 8 , 9 , 13 , 25 , 28 ) . We have shown that this phenomenon avenue for transport of proteins and lipid cargo , and actively also occurs in alveolar epithelial cells ( 7 ) . We now demonstrate remodels in response to deformation ; however , the quasi - static that after inhibition of DILT by cholesterol depletion and cold mechanical properties of the cytoskeleton did not predict the temperature , the probability of wounding is increased . These susceptibility of cells to deformation injury . Rather , our observa - interventions have opposite effects on cell stiffness : decreased tions are consistent with the hypothesis that a deformed cell by plasma membrane cholesterol depletion and increased by unable to actively regulate its surrounding lipid bilayer cannot cold . One might predict that opposite effects on cell rigidity keep bilayer tension below lytic levels . This remodeling and cell should have opposite effects on the probability of wounding plasticity , as opposed to theinherent static mechanical properties ( 8 , 24 , 29 ) ; however , our ﬁndings show that both interventions of the cytoskeleton , determine the fate of a cell that is forced resulted in an increase in cell wounding . Cholesterol depletion , to assume a certain shape . The concept is akin to the volutrauma low temperature , and cytoskeletal alteration all had one effect idea . Dreyfuss and Saumon ( 4 ) and Hernandez and colleagues in common : inhibition of DILT . Thus , together , these results ( 35 ) showed that pressure applied to the airway is damaging to suggest that the mechanical properties of the cell’s stress - bearing the lung only if this pressure causes a large lung volume excur - elements ( namely the plasma membrane and the cytoskeleton ) sion . Scaled down to the individual cell , this means that for a are less of a determinant of plasma membrane wounding than given external force , a “rigid” cytoskeleton simply prevents a is DILT , a process that actively remodels the stress - bearing capa - large shape change from occurring ; however , when the deforma - bility of the cell . Of note , cellular tensegrity does not account tion of the surrounding matrix , for example , the basement mem - for such active remodeling of cellular stress - bearing elements brane , imposes a large cell strain then having a rigid cytoskeleton ( 30 ) . These results also point out that the cytoskeleton is not simply means that a large deforming stress will be generated . solely a structural force - bearing unit of the cell but rather is Such a stress could become lytic to a “weak” structure , causing integrally involved in facilitating signal transduction and vesicle it to fail . Remodeling of stress bearing elements ( the cytoskele - trafﬁcking between organelles and the plasma membrane ( 31 – ton ) or of potentially stress bearing elements ( the lipid bilayer 33 ) . Also , it would seem that the rate at which the cell is able of the plasma membrane ) is the principal mechanism by which to remodel its stress - bearing elements will determine the proba - the cell can protect itself from such a catastrophic event . bility of wounding . This supposition is indeed supported by our Because remodeling is a rate - dependent process , one might ﬁndings that wounding is increased with increasing strain rate . speculate that the dependence of wounding on strain rate reﬂects Not only was wounding found to be increased with inhibition limits in the rate at which lipid vesicles can be transported to of DILT , but concomitantly , the rate of wound resealing was and fuse with the plasma membrane . It could also reﬂect limits found to be decreased . The mechanisms of cell wound repair in the rate at which the subcortical cytoskeleton can remodel . have been studied extensively and reviewed recently ( 11 , 12 , More work will need to be done to deﬁne the relevant rate 21 ) . It has been postulated that resealing can occur either sponta - constants . The observation that strain rate , not just strain ampli - neously by passive lateral diffusion of lipid molecules within the tude , is an important determinant of cell injury might also have injured plasma membrane edges or by “patch” resealing via clinical relevance on the appropriate choice of ﬂow and rate rapid fusion of lipid vesicles into a large “lipid patch” in close settings during mechanical ventilation . The most important mes - proximity to the wound ( 12 ) or exocytosis of intracellular lipid sage of our work , however , is that mechanisms of deformation - resulting in decreased plasma membrane tension ( 8 , 25 ) . Our results show that wound resealing in alveolar epithelial cells related cell remodeling such as DILT are appropriate and under - Vlahakis , Schroeder , Pagano , et al . : Exocytosis and Plasma Membrane Breaks 1289 16 . Berrios JC , Schroeder MA , Hubmayr RD . Mechanical properties of appreciated treatment targets in the search for pharmacoprotec - alveolar epithelial cells in culture . J Appl Physiol 2001 ; 91 : 65 – 73 . tive agents against ventilator - induced lung injury . 17 . Wang N , Butler JP , Ingber DE . Mechanotransduction across the cell surface and through the cytoskeleton . Science 1993 ; 260 : 1124 – 1127 . Acknowledgment : The authors thank Dr Gary C . Sieck for use and help with confocal microscopy and Dr . Vishwajeet Puri for help with cholesterol quantifica - 18 . Reddy A , Caler EV , Andrews NW . Plasma membrane repair is mediated tion . by Ca 2 (cid:9) - regulated exocytosis of lysosomes . Cell 2001 ; 106 : 157 – 169 . 19 . Grembowicz KP , Sprague D , McNeil PL . Temporary disruption of the plasma membrane is required for c - fos expression in response to me - References chanical stress . Mol Biol Cell 1999 ; 10 : 1247 – 1257 . 1 . Stroetz RW , Vlahakis NE , Walters BJ , Schroeder MA , Hubmayr RD . 20 . Paine R III , Simon RH . Expanding the frontiers of lung biology through Validation of a new live cell strain system : characterization of plasma the creative use of alveolar epithelial cells in culture . Am J Physiol membrane stress failure . J Appl Physiol 2001 ; 90 : 2361 – 2370 . 1996 ; 14 : L484 – L486 . 2 . TschumperlinDJ , MarguliesSS . Equilbiaxialdeformation - inducedinjury 21 . HamillOP , MartinacB . Molecularbasisofmechanotransductioninliving of alveolar epithelial cells in vitro . Am J Physiol 1998 ; 275 : L1173 – cells . Physiol Rev 2001 ; 81 : 685 – 740 . L1183 . 22 . Wirtz HR , Dobbs LG . The effectsof mechanical forces onlung functions . 3 . Vlahakis NE , Hubmayr RD . Cellular responses to mechanical stress . Respir Physiol 2000 ; 119 : 1 – 7 . invited review : plasma membrane stress failure in alveolar epithelial 23 . Chicurel ME , Singer RH , Meyer CJ , Ingber DE . Integrin binding and cells . J Appl Physiol 2000 ; 89 : 2490 – 2496 . mechanical tension induce movement of mRNA and ribosomes to 4 . Dreyfuss D , Saumon G . Ventilator - induced lung injury : lessons from focal adhesions . Nature 1998 ; 392 : 730 – 733 . experimental studies . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998 ; 157 : 294 – 323 . 24 . Morris CE , Homann U . Cell surface area regulation and membrane 5 . Fu Z , Costello ML , Tsukimoto K , Prediletto R , Elliott AR , Mathieu - tension . J Membr Biol 2001 ; 179 : 79 – 102 . Costello O , West JB . High lung volume increases stress failure in 25 . Sheetz MP , Dai J . Modulation of membrane dynamics and cell motility pulmonary capillaries . J Appl Physiol 1992 ; 73 : 123 – 133 . by membrane tension . Trends Cell Biol 1996 ; 6 : 85 – 89 . 6 . Tschumperlin DJ , Margulies SS . Alveolar epithelial surface area - volume 26 . Glogauer M , Arora P , Chou D , Janmey PA , Downey GP , McCulloch relationship in isolated rat lungs . J Appl Physiol 1999 ; 86 : 2026 – 2033 . CAG . The role of actin - binding protein 280 in integrin - dependent 7 . Vlahakis NE , Schroeder MA , Pagano RE , Hubmayr RD . Deformation - mechanoprotection . J Biol Chem 1998 ; 273 : 1689 – 1698 . induced lipid trafﬁcking in alveolar epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung 27 . GeigerB , BershadskyA , PankovR , YamadaKM . Transmembranecross - Cell Mol Physiol 2001 ; 280 : L938 – L946 . talk between the extracellular matrix – cytoskeleton crosstalk . Nat Rev 8 . Dai J , Sheetz MP , Wan X , Morris CE . Membrane tension in swelling Mol Cell Biol 2001 ; 2 : 793 – 805 . and shrinking molluscan neurons . J Neurosci 1998 ; 18 : 6681 – 6692 . 28 . Lewis SA , de Moura JL . Incorporation of cytoplasmic vesicles into apical 9 . RaucherD , SheetzMP . Characteristicsofamembranereservoirbuffering membraneofmammalianurinarybladderepithelium . Nature 1982 ; 297 : membrane tension . Biophys J 1999 ; 77 : 1992 – 2002 . 685 – 688 . 10 . Lin Y - C , Ho C - H , Grinnell F . Fibroblasts contracting collagen matrices 29 . Herring TL , Slotin IM , Baltz JM , Morris CE . Neuronal swelling and form transient plasma membrane passages through which the cells surface area regulation : elevated intracellular calcium is not a require - take up ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate - dextran and Ca2 (cid:9) . Mol Biol Cell ment . Am J Physiol 1998 ; 274 : C272 – C281 . 1997 ; 8 : 59 – 71 . 30 . Ingber DE . Tensegrity : the architectural basis of cellular mechanotrans - 11 . McNeil PL , Steinhardt RA . Loss , restoration and maintenance of plasma duction . Annu Rev Physiol 1997 ; 59 : 575 – 599 . membrane integrity . J Cell Biol 1997 ; 137 : 1 – 4 . 31 . Janmey PA . The cytoskeleton and cell signaling : component localization 12 . McNeil PL , Terasaki M . Coping with the inevitable : how cells repair a and mechanical coupling . Physiol Rev 1998 ; 78 : 763 – 781 . torn surface membrane . Nat Cell Biol 2001 ; 3 : E124 – E129 . 32 . Suter DM , Forscher P . Transmission of growth cone traction force 13 . Bi G - Q , Morris RL , Liao G , Alderton JM , Scholey JM , Steinhardt RA . through apCAM - cytoskeletal linkages is regulated by Src family tyro - Kinesin - and myosin - driven steps of vesicle recruitment for Ca 2 (cid:9) - sine kinase activity . J Cell Biol 2001 ; 155 : 427 – 438 . regulated exocytosis . J Cell Biol 1997 ; 138 : 999 – 1008 . 33 . Yeaman C , Grindstaff KK , Wright JR , Nelson WJ . Sec6 / 8 complexes on 14 . Terasaki M , Miyake K , McNeil PL . Large plasma membrane disruptions trans - Golgi network and plasma membrane regulate stages of exo - are rapidly resealed by Ca 2 (cid:9) - dependent vesicle - vesicle fusion events . cytosis in mammalian cells . J Cell Biol 2001 ; 155 : 593 – 604 . J Cell Biol 1997 ; 139 : 63 – 74 . 34 . Miyake K , McNeil PL , Suzuki K , Tsunoda R , Sugai N . An actin barrier 15 . Hanson DP , Robb RA , Aharon S , Augustine KE , Cameron BM , Camp to resealing . J Cell Sci 2001 ; 114 : 3487 – 3494 . JJ , Karwoski RA , Larson AG , Stacy MC , Workman EL . New software 35 . Hernandez LA , Peevy KJ , Moise AA , Parker JC . Chest wall restriction toolkits for comprehensive visualization and analysis of three - dimen - limits high airway pressure - induced lung injury in young rabbits . J Appl Physiol 1989 ; 66 : 2364 – 2368 . sionalmultimodalbiomedicalimages . JDigitImaging 1997 ; 10 : 229 – 230 .