The evolution of eukaryotic cells introduced a major challenge for these organisms — the need to transfer content between distinct membrane - enclosed organelles in a specific and regulated manner . Such transport involves the budding of vesicular or tubular carriers from donor membranes followed by their transport to specific acceptor membranes , and culminates in their docking and fusion , which results in the content of the carriers mixing with the acceptor compartments . Cytosolic coat molecules that are responsible for cargo sequestration and vesicle budding , motor proteins that propel vesicles along microtubules and actin filaments , and the princi - pal mediators of specific membrane fusion , the SNARE complexes , have all been identified . But how are ligand sequestration and coat assembly and disassembly regu - lated , how do the right motors associate with the right vesicles and how is directionality in SNARE complex formation obtained ? Clearly , there is a requirement for coordination of these events : this is where the Rab GTPases come into the picture . Rab GTPases constitute the largest family of small GTPases , which function as molecular switches that alternate between two conformational states : the GTP - bound ‘on’ form and the GDP - bound ‘off’ form ( FIG . 1 ) . In humans , there are more than 60 members of the Rab family that are localized to distinct intracellular mem - branes 1 – 3 ( FIG . 2 ; Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . Rab GTPases are reversibly associated with membranes by hydrophobic geranylgeranyl groups that are attached to one or ( in most cases ) two carboxy - terminal Cys residues , and this is intrinsic to their role in regulating membrane traffic . Through their indirect interactions with coat components , motors and SNAREs , the Rab GTPases serve as multifaceted organizers of almost all membrane trafficking processes in eukaryotic cells . This Review discusses the key functions , mechanisms and biological implications of this fascinating family of regulatory switches . The Rab switch and its circuitry The conversion between GDP - and GTP - bound forms of Rab GTPases ( FIG . 1 ) involves major conformational changes in two variable regions , termed switch I and switch II ( reviewed in REF . 4 ) . Exchange of GDP with GTP is catalysed by guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) , which recognize specific residues in the switch regions and facilitate GDP release 5 . The high cytosolic concentration of GTP ( ~ 1 mM ) ensures that GTP binds as soon as GDP has been released . Several types of speci fic effector molecules , including sorting adaptors , tethering factors , kinases , phosphatases and motors , can be activated or recruited by the GTP - bound Rab through interactions with both switch and interswitch regions 6 . Conversion from the GTP - to the GDP - bound form occurs through GTP hydrolysis , which is not only driven by the intrinsic GTPase activity of the Rab protein but is also catalysed by GTPase - activating proteins ( GAPs ) . As many as 38 different human Rab GAPs with restricted specificities have been identified 7 . The crystal structure of the catalytic TBC domain of a GAP in complex with a Rab GTPase shows that the GAP contributes two conserved Arg and Gln ‘finger’ residues that accelerate the catalytic activity of the Rab GTPase 8 . Centre for Cancer Biomedicine , Faculty of Medicine , University of Oslo , Montebello , N‑0310 Oslo , Norway and Department of Biochemistry , Institute for Cancer Research , The Norwegian Radium Hospital , Oslo University Hospital , Montebello , N‑0310 Oslo , Norway . e‑mail : stenmark @ ulrik . uio . no doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2728 Published online 15 July 2009 SNARE ( Soluble N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive factor attachment protein receptor ) . A small membrane protein on the vesicle membrane or the target membrane that forms a tetrahelical bundle with two or three other SNAREs on opposing membranes , thereby causing membrane docking and fusion . Guanine nucleotide exchange factor A protein that facilitates the exchange of GDP for GTP in the nucleotide - binding pocket of a GTP - binding protein . Rab GTPases as coordinators of vesicle traffic Harald Stenmark Abstract | Membrane trafficking between organelles by vesiculotubular carriers is fundamental to the existence of eukaryotic cells . Central in ensuring that cargoes are delivered to their correct destinations are the Rab GTPases , a large family of small GTPases that control membrane identity and vesicle budding , uncoating , motility and fusion through the recruitment of effector proteins , such as sorting adaptors , tethering factors , kinases , phosphatases and motors . Crosstalk between multiple Rab GTPases through shared effectors , or through effectors that recruit selective Rab activators , ensures the spatiotemporal regulation of vesicle traffic . Functional impairments of Rab pathways are associated with diseases , such as immunodeficiencies , cancer and neurological disorders . REVIEWS NATuRE REvIEwS | Molecular cell Biology voluME 10 | AuGuST 2009 | 513 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Rab RAB RAB RAB GTP GDP GTP GDP P i GDF GDI Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology E ff e c t o r E ff e c t o r GEF REP GGT GDP GDP Geranylgeranyl GAP GTPase - activating protein A protein that stimulates the intrinsic ability of a GTPase to hydrolyse GTP to GDP . GDP dissociation inhibitor A protein that prevents GDP release from Rab - and Rho - family GTPases and regulates the cycling of these GTPases between the membrane and the cytosol . Clathrin - coated pit A small invagination of the plasma membrane that is covered with a clathrin lattice on the cytosolic side and is about to form a clathrin - coated endocytic vesicle . Although there are rare examples of Rab effectors that prefer the GDP - bound form 9 , this form can be con - sidered to be the inactive state of Rab GTPases . Rab GDP dissociation inhibitor ( GDI ) was originally identified as a factor that prevents release of GDP from Rab , thereby stabilizing the inactive form 10 . Subsequent research has revealed that Rab GDI has additional functions that are even more crucial — it chaperones geranylgeranylated Rab GTPases in the cytosol , mediates their delivery to their cognate membranes and recycles them back to the cytosol 11 – 13 . A similar function is carried out by a structurally related protein , Rab escort protein ( REP ) 14 , with the exception that REP captures newly synthesized Rab proteins and presents them to the geranylgeranyl transferase before targeting them to the membrane delivery cycle 15 , 16 . A salient feature of the Rab GTPase family is the distinct intracellular localization patterns of different members 17 . The targeting of different Rab GTPases to distinct membranes is incompletely understood , but there is good evidence that membrane - bound GDI displacement factors ( GDFs ) play a key part in this specificity by recognizing specific Rab – GDI complexes and promoting GDI release , thereby facilitating the association of the geranylgeranylated Rab GTPase with the relevant membrane 18 . Rab GTPases in vesicle budding Although early models of intracellular membrane traffic postulated that there is a high level of bulk flow between various organelles , it is now clear that cargo selection into specific transport vesicles is a fundamental mecha - nism in intracellular trafficking . In principle , sorting is mediated by the association of transmembrane proteins , representing cargo or cargo receptors , with cytosolic coat complexes . Because distinct coat complexes recognize distinct structural determinants of various cargoes , coat assembly is cargo - specific . However , in addition to the cargo itself , several other determinants , including mem - brane curvature , lipid composition and Rab GTPases , contribute to ensuring specific coat recruitment to distinct intracellular membranes ( FIG . 3a ) . An example of a Rab GTPase that is involved in cargo - specific coat assembly is the late endosomal RAB9 , which functions in the recycling of mannose - 6 - phosphate receptors ( M6PRs ) from late endosomes to the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) . The cytosolic tail of M6PRs is recognized by the sorting adaptor TIP47 ( also known as M6PRBP1 ) , an effector of RAB9 ( REF . 19 ) . The interaction with RAB9 not only recruits TIP47 to late endosome membranes but also increases the affinity of TIP47 for its cargo , thereby facilitating M6PR sort - ing into late endosomal recycling buds . Another Rab GTPase that is important for cargo sequestration is RAB5 . This GTPase , complexed with GDI , was identi - fied as an essential factor for assembly of clathrin - coated pits at the plasma membrane and for clathrin - mediated endocytosis of transferrin receptors 20 . The emerging picture is that at least some Rab GTPases control several key events in vesicle budding from donor membranes , including coat assembly , cargo selection and physical budding . Rab GTPases in vesicle uncoating Although they are crucial for cargo sequestration and membrane budding , vesicle coat complexes interfere with membrane fusion and must therefore be shed prior to engagement with the acceptor membrane ( FIG . 3b ) . A well - studied example is the clathrin coat and its cargo adaptor protein complex AP2 on endocytic vesicles , the removal of which has proved crucial for proper mem - brane trafficking in the nerve terminal 21 . The inter action of AP2 with the plasma membrane and its derived vesicles is stabilized by the phosphoinositide ( PI ) phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) ( BOX 1 ) and is enhanced by AP2 - associated kinase 1 ( AAK1 ) , which mediates phosphorylation of the AP2 subunit μ2 . Clathrin - coated vesicles contain RAB5 , and a recent study has shown that this GTPase and its GEF , GTPase - activating protein and vPS9 domain - containing protein 1 ( GAPvD1 ; the mammalian homologue of Caenorhabditis elegans RME - 6 ) , coordinate AP2 uncoating by promoting dephosphorylation of μ2 and increasing PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 turnover 22 . The dephosphoryl - ation of μ2 is probably a consequence of a direct dis - placement of AAK1 by GAPvD1 , whereas PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 turnover might be induced by RAB5 - mediated recruit - ment of a class I PI 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) 23 or by recruitment of a PI phosphatase 24 . It will be interesting to learn whether similar cooperative mechanisms between Rab GTPases and their GEFs apply to other vesicle uncoating reactions . Figure 1 | The rab switch and its circuitry . Conversion of the GDP - bound Rab into the GTP - bound form occurs through the exchange of GDP for GTP , which is catalysed by a guanine nucleotide exchange factor ( GEF ) and causes a conformational change . The GTP - bound ‘active’ conformation is recognized by multiple effector proteins and is converted back to the GDP - bound ‘inactive’ form through hydrolysis of GTP , which is stimulated by a GTPase - activating protein ( GAP ) and releases an inorganic phosphate ( P i ) . The newly synthesized Rab , in the GDP - bound form , is recognized by a Rab escort protein ( REP ) . The REP presents the Rab to a geranylgeranyl transferase ( GGT ) , which geranylgeranylates the Rab on one or two carboxy - terminal Cys residues . The geranylgeranylated , GDP - bound Rab is recognized by Rab GDP dissociation inhibitor ( GDI ) , which regulates the membrane cycle of the Rab . Targeting of the Rab – GDI complex to specific membranes is mediated by interaction with a membrane - bound GDI displacement factor ( GDF ) . R E V I E W S 514 | AuGuST 2009 | voluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Mitochondria RAB32 RAB5 RAB14 RAB22 RAB22 RAB5 RAB7 RAB7 RAB7 RAB9 Caveosome Autophagosome RAB24 RAB33 Lysosome ER Golgi TGN IC Lipiddroplet Lateendosome Macropinosome Recylingendosome Apicalrecyclingendosome Late phagosome Early phagosome RAB5 RAB4 RAB5 RAB21 Early endosome RAB15 RAB15 RAB11 RAB35 RAB18 RAB1 RAB2 RAB5 CCV Earlyendosome RAB6RAB33RAB40 RAB22 RAB17 RAB25 Secretoryvesicles and granules Melanosome GLUT4 vesicle Cilium Tightjunction RAB8RAB10RAB14 RAB27 RAB32 RAB3RAB26RAB27RAB37 RAB8RAB17RAB23 RAB8 RAB5RAB34 Nucleus RAB13 Focaladhesions RAB38 Integrin Figure 2 | localization and function of rab gTPases . An epithelial cell with its vesicle transport pathways and the localizations of selected Rab GTPases . RAB1 , located at endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) exit sites and the pre - Golgi intermediate compartment ( IC ) , mediates ER – Golgi trafficking . RAB2 , located at the IC , might also regulate Golgi – ER trafficking . The Golgi - localized RAB6 , RAB33 and RAB40 mediate intra - Golgi trafficking . RAB33 , together with RAB24 , also regulates the formation of autophagosomes . RAB8 mediates constitutive biosynthetic trafficking from the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) to the plasma membrane and also participates in GLUT4 vesicle translocation ( with RAB10 and RAB14 ) and ciliogenesis ( with RAB17 and RAB23 ) . RAB3 , RAB26 , RAB27 and RAB37 mediate various types of regulated exocytic events and RAB27 also mediates the translocation of melanosomes to the cell periphery . RAB32 and RAB38 are involved in the biogenesis of melanosomes and RAB32 also controls mitochondrial fission . RAB13 regulates the assembly of tight junctions between epithelial cells . RAB18 controls the formation of lipid droplets . RAB22 mediates trafficking between the TGN and early endosomes and vice versa . RAB5 , which is localized to early endosomes , phagosomes , caveosomes and the plasma membrane , mediates endocytosis and endosome fusion of clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) , macropinocytosis ( with RAB34 ) and maturation of early phagosomes ( with RAB14 and RAB22 ) . RAB21 mediates integrin endocytosis . RAB11 and RAB35 mediate slow endocytic recycling through recycling endosomes , whereas RAB4 mediates fast endocytic recycling directly from early endosomes . RAB15 is involved in the trafficking from early endosomes to recycling endosomes and in the trafficking from apical recycling endosomes to the basolateral plasma membrane . RAB17 and RAB25 control trafficking through the apical recycling endosomes to the apical plasma membrane . The late endosome - associated RAB7 mediates maturation of late endosomes and phagosomes , and their fusion with lysosomes . Another late endosomal GTPase , RAB9 , mediates trafficking from late endosomes to the TGN . R E V I E W S NATuRE REvIEwS | Molecular cell Biology voluME 10 | AuGuST 2009 | 515 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Rab R a b R a b R a b R a b Rab GDP - bound inactive Rab Rab GTP - bound active Rab R a b R a b R a b R a b GDF GDI G D I GDI Ligand PI - binding coat protein PI - x PI - y Receptor Sorting adaptor PI kinase or phosphatase Motor adaptor R a b Tether Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology t - and v - SNAREs GEF GAP b Uncoating c Motility e Fusion d Tethering a Sorting Cytoskeletal track Acceptor membrane Donor membrane Motor Myosin V family A subfamily of the myosin family of motor proteins that ‘walk’ towards the barbed ( plus ) end of actin filaments and typically mediate vesicle movement from the cell centre to the periphery . Rab GTPases in vesicle motility Directionality and efficacy of vesicle delivery are in part mediated by actin filaments and microtubules , which facilitate local and long - range vesicle transport , respec - tively . Higher eukaryotes contain various motor proteins that are capable of powering directional vesicle transport along such molecular cables . This necessitates high spe - cificity in the attachment of motors to vesicles , and there are several examples in which Rab GTPases and their effectors proofread these types of interactions ( FIG . 3c ) . In particular , there is strong evidence from both yeast 25 and higher cells that actin motors of the myosin V family associate with cargo vesicles in a Rab - dependent manner 26 . A well - studied example involves RAB27A , which recruits an adaptor protein , melanophilin , to the membranes of melanosomes , thereby connecting the melanosomes to myosin va 27 . Myosin va then shuttles these RAB27A - positive vesicles towards the cell periphery , which is cru - cial for the proper functioning of melanocytes 28 . A second RAB27A effector , synaptotagmin - like protein 2 ( SlP2 ; also known as SYTl2 ) , is recruited after melanophilin to mediate the correct peripheral distribution of melano - somes 29 . Another example of a Rab effector that func - tions as a myosin v adaptor is RAB11 family - interacting protein 2 ( RAB11FIP2 ) , which links RAB11A - positive endocytic recycling vesicles to myosin vb 30 . Interestingly , myosin vb can also function as a direct effector of both RAB8A and RAB11A in endocytic recycling pathways 31 , which demonstrates that myosin motors can be both direct and indirect effectors of Rab GTPases . Because microtubules are organized by the centro - some , microtubule - dependent membrane traffic towards the cell periphery generally requires plus - end - directed motors of the kinesin superfamily . Conversely , minus - end - directed motors , such as cytoplasmic dynein , power microtubule - dependent vesicle traffic towards the peri - centriolar region . Both types of microtubule - dependent motors are regulated by Rab GTPases . Kinesins can be direct effectors of Rab GTPases ; for example , the cyto - kinesis regulator rabkinesin 6 ( also known as KIF20A ) is an effector of the Golgi - localized RAB6 ( REFS 32 , 33 ) . Kinesins can also be indirectly regulated by Rab GTPases . For example , KIF16B , which is involved in endocytic recycling , is recruited to endosome membranes by bind - ing to PtdIns - 3 - phosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 ) P ) , the formation of which is controlled by RAB5 ( REF . 34 ) ( BOX 1 ) . Although dynein has not yet been identified as a direct Rab effector , this minus - end - directed microtubule motor is an indirect effector for the late endosomal RAB7 . The RAB7 effec - tor Rab - interacting lysosomal protein ( RIlP ) mediates minus - end - directed trafficking of late endosomes by recruiting a subunit of the dynactin complex , which is associated with dynein 35 . likewise , the RAB6 effector bicaudal D1 mediates attachment of Golgi vesicles to the dynein – dynactin complex in Golgi - to - endoplasmic retic - ulum ( ER ) transport 36 . The multiple ways by which Rab GTPases associate with motor proteins probably reflect the important role these proteins have in attaching the right transport vesicle to the right motor . Rab GTPases in vesicle fusion The first evidence for a function of Rab GTPases in membrane traffic was the observation that mutation of the yeast Rab GTPase Sec4 causes accumulation of TGN - derived vesicles that are destined for the plasma membrane 37 . This raised the possibility that Rab GTPases might mediate vesicle docking or fusion , a concept that has proved correct ( FIG . 3d ) , although , as outlined above , the Rabs also regulate additional aspects of membrane trafficking . The functional mechanism of Sec4 in the fusion of TGN - derived vesicles with the plasma mem - brane is a typical example of how these GTPases control membrane fusion — by recruiting elongated tethering Figure 3 | rab gTPase functions in vesicle trafficking . Distinct membrane trafficking steps that can be controlled by a Rab GTPase and its effectors ( indicated in orange ) . a | An active GTP - bound Rab can activate a sorting adaptor to sort a receptor into a budding vesicle . b | Through recruitment of phosphoinositide ( PI ) kinases or phosphatases , the PI composition of a transport vesicle might be altered ( the conversion of PI - x into PI - y ) and thereby cause uncoating through the dissociation of PI - binding coat proteins . c | Rab GTPases can mediate vesicle transport along actin filaments or microtubules ( collectively referred to as cytoskeletal tracts ) by recruiting motor adaptors or by binding directly to motors ( not shown ) . d | Rab GTPases can mediate vesicle tethering by recruiting rod - shaped tethering factors that interact with molecules in the acceptor membrane . Such factors might interact with SNAREs and their regulators to activate SNARE complex formation , which results in membrane fusion . e | Following membrane fusion and exocytosis , the Rab GTPase is converted to its inactive GDP - bound form through hydrolysis of GTP , which is stimulated by a GTPase - activating protein ( GAP ) . Targeting of the Rab – GDP dissociation inhibitor ( GDI ) complex back to the donor membrane is mediated by interaction with a membrane - bound GDI displacement factor ( GDF ) . Conversion of the GDP - bound Rab into the GTP - bound form is catalysed by a guanine nucleotide exchange factor ( GEF ) . R E V I E W S 516 | AuGuST 2009 | voluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology O O O O P O O O O – HO HO OH OHOH OHOH OH OH OH OH 2 3 4 5 1 6 PtdIns R HO OH PtdIns ( 3 ) P R P HO PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 R P P HO PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 R P P P HO PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 R P P Endosome OHOH HO HO PtdIns ( 4 ) P R P Golgi Plasmamembrane PI 4 - phosphatase PI 5 - phosphatase OCRL1 PI 5 - kinase PI 4 - kinase Class III PI 3 - kinase Class I PI 3 - kinase INPP5B P P P P P P P RAB5 RAB5 RAB5 RAB7 RAB5 R = Multiple Rabs Multiple Rabs Kinesin superfamily A superfamily of motor proteins that ( with a few exceptions ) move vesicles and other cargoes towards the plus ( polymerizing ) end of microtubules . Cytoplasmic dynein A large microtubule motor that moves vesicles and other cargoes towards the minus ( depolymerizing ) end of microtubules . Exocyst An octameric protein complex that is involved in targeting post - Golgi vesicles to the plasma membrane . complexes that form long - distance contacts between the transport vesicle and the acceptor membrane . In its GTP - bound form , Sec4 interacts with Sec15 , a subunit of the octameric exocyst tethering complex 38 . Some of the exocyst subunits bind to Rho GTPases on the plasma membrane , thereby allowing the exocyst to tether Sec4 - positive vesicles to their acceptor membrane 39 . The concept that Rab effectors mediate vesicle teth - ering raises the question of how this is coordinated with membrane docking and fusion . Studies of the early endosomal GTPase RAB5 have addressed this issue . RAB5 is essential for homotypic early endosome fusion and for heterotypic endocytic vesicle to endo - some fusion in vitro 40 , 41 , and has turned out to be an excellent model for understanding how Rab GTPases cooperate with other components of the vesicle docking and fusion machinery , including the SNAREs . A first clue was the finding that a GTPase - deficient mutant of RAB5 stim ulates homotypic early endosome fusion and causes the formation of giant early endosomes , which indicates that the active GTP - bound form of RAB5 is the one involved in endosome fusion 42 . Subsequent screens for effectors that interact with the GTP - bound form of RAB5 have yielded a surprisingly wide range of molecules that cooperate to mediate fusion of endo - some membranes , including the two tethering factors early endosome antigen 1 ( EEA1 ) and rabenosyn 5 ( REFS 43 , 44 ) . EEA1 forms parallel coiled - coil dimers and has both amino - and carboxy - terminal RAB5 - binding sites , which makes it a plausible candidate for a tether between RAB5 - positive vesicles 43 , 45 . Coordination of RAB5 - mediated tethering with docking and fusion occurs at two levels . one is the direct interaction between rabenosyn 5 and vacuolar protein sorting - associated protein 45 ( vPS45 ) , a mem - ber of the Sec1 family of SNARE regulators 44 , 46 . The other is mediated by direct interactions of EEA1 and rabenosyn 5 with the endosomal SNAREs syntaxin 6 and syntaxin 13 , and syntaxin 7 ( also known as Avl in Drosophila melanogaster ) , respectively 46 – 48 . How these interactions serve to regulate docking and fusion remains an open issue . one possibility is that the inter - actions of SNARE or Sec1 proteins with RAB5 effectors controls their conformational states . Another scen - ario is that RAB5 effector binding sterically controls the interactions between SNAREs and Sec1 proteins . Box 1 | Phosphoinositides and their regulation by Rab GTPases Phosphorylation of the hydroxyl groups at the 3 , 4 and 5 carbon positions of the inositol ring of phosphatidylinositol ( PtdIns ) yields phosphoinositides ( PIs ) , which contribute to membrane identity by recruiting specific proteins , including Rab effectors , to restricted areas of cellular membranes . Several of the PI kinases and phosphatases that regulate the metabolism of specific PIs are activated by Rab GTPases ( see the figure ) . Class III PI 3‑kinase , which phosphorylates PtdIns to PtdIns‑3‑phosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 ) P ) on endosomes , is an effector of RAB5 and RAB7 . PI 4‑kinase , which phosphorylates PtdIns to PtdIns ( 4 ) P , and PI 5‑kinase , which phosphorylates PtdIns ( 4 ) P to make PtdIns‑4 , 5‑bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) , have not yet been identified as Rab effectors . INPP5B , which dephosphorylates PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 to make PtdIns ( 4 ) P , is an effector of multiple Rab GTPases . Class I PI 3‑kinase , which phosphorylates PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 to make PtdIns‑3 , 4 , 5‑trisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ) at the plasma membrane , is an effector of RAB5 . Dephosphorylation of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 to PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 at the plasma membrane is mediated by PI 5‑phosphatase , a RAB5 effector , and by the phosphatase OCRL1 , which is an effector of multiple Rabs . Dephosphorylation of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 to PtdIns ( 3 ) P is mediated by PI 4‑phosphatase , which is a RAB5 effector . Note the involvement of RAB5 in both phosphorylation and dephosphorylation pathways that lead to formation of PtdIns ( 3 ) P 23 , 24 . The subcellular localizations of the various PIs are indicated . For simplicity , PtdIns ( 5 ) P and PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P 2 , which have so far not been linked to Rab functions , have been omitted from the figure . R E V I E W S NATuRE REvIEwS | Molecular cell Biology voluME 10 | AuGuST 2009 | 517 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved COPII vesicle An endoplasmic reticulum - derived vesicle , coated with the heterotetrameric COPII protein complex , that is involved in biosynthetic transport to the Golgi . Microdomain In the context of this Review , a small membrane domain ( 0 . 2 – 1 . 0 μ m in length ) that can be distinguished by light microscopy . A third option is that SNAREs and Sec1 proteins serve as attachment points for tethers formed by the RAB5 effectors . Importantly , the reconstitution of RAB5 - mediated fusion of proteo liposomes , supplemented with specific SNAREs and RAB5 effectors , has recently been achieved 49 and directly demonstrates the coordina - tion of SNARE - mediated fusion by a Rab and its effec - tors . This system should allow a precise dissection of the spatiotemporal relationships between Rab , Sec1 and SNARE proteins in membrane fusion . The question of how Rab GTPases control the SNARE complexes has also been addressed in studies of exo - cytosis , as exemplified by RAB27A , which , in addition to mediating vesicle – motor attachment , also controls docking of exocytic dense - core vesicles to the plasma membrane 50 , 51 . Specifically , the RAB27A effector granu - philin ( also known as SlP4 ) interacts directly with the Sec1 - related munc 18 - 1 ( also known as syntaxin - binding protein 1 ) , which promotes docking of dense - core vesi - cles to the plasma membrane 52 . Because over expression of granuphilin causes increased docking but inhibits exocytosis , release of granuphilin probably precedes cor - rect SNARE complex assembly and membrane fusion 51 . Docking of dense - core vesicles to the plasma membrane is also controlled by another RAB27A and RAB3A effec - tor , rabphilin , possibly through an interaction with the plasma membrane SNARE synaptosomal - associated protein 25 ( SNAP25 ) 53 . A useful model for studying Rab functions is the homotypic fusion of yeast vacuoles in vitro , which has the advantage that it can be readily manipulated by both genetic and biochemical means . This assay enabled the direct demonstration that homotypic vacuole fusion requires the yeast RAB7 homologue Ypt7 on both mem - branes , which suggests that homotypic fusion involves bivalent Rab effector complexes 54 . Moreover , results from the vacuole fusion assay have shown that Ypt7 - mediated membrane tethering precedes the pairing of SNAREs from opposite membranes 55 . This suggests that a key function of Rab - mediated vesicle tethering might be to favour the energetics of SNARE complex formation . Although vesicle tethering complexes are typically recruited from the cytosol to the GTP - bound Rab , this is not always the case , as shown with vesicle tethering at the Golgi . This multicisternal compartment contains multiple elongated coiled - coil proteins that function as Rab effectors in membrane tethering . Some of the Golgi tethering complexes fail to be recruited to transport vesicles but instead are permanently associated with the Golgi matrix , as found with RAB1 effectors in COPII vesicle - mediated transport between the ER and the Golgi complex . Although RAB1 recruits the tethering protein p115 during CoPII vesicle budding 56 , this is not suffi - cient for fusion of the vesicles with the cis - Golgi . Such fusion requires the additional RAB1 effector GM130 , which is a subunit of a tethering complex that is perm - anently associated with the cis - Golgi and which interacts with p115 ( REF . 57 ) . The sequential interactions with solu - ble and membrane - associated tethering complexes could provide a mechanism for coordinating vesicle budding with vesicle tethering and fusion 57 . An unanticipated feature of tethering complexes is that they often contain GEFs for the Rab GTPase that serves to recruit them in the first place . An example of this is pro - vided by the RAB5 effector rabaptin 5 , which is complexed to the RAB5 GEF rabex 5 ( also known as RABGEF1 ) and thereby amplifies RAB5 activation in microdomains of the endosome membrane 58 , 59 . likewise , in yeast the multimeric TRAPP - I and TRAPP - II complexes , which mediate vesicle tethering in ER – Golgi and intra - Golgi traffic , contain GEFs for Ypt1 ( which is homologous to RAB1 ) and possibly for Ypt31 and Ypt32 ( REFS 60 – 62 ) , and the HoPS tethering complex , which is involved in late endosome – lysosome fusion , contains a GEF for the late endosome - associated Ypt7 ( which is homologous to RAB7 ) 63 . The inclusion of GEFs in Rab effector com - plexes enables positive - feedback loops that ensure local activation of the Rab GTPase in the membrane domains that engage in tethering events ( see below ) . Coordination of Rab functions Rab domains . one of the early findings that paved the way for our current understanding of Rab functions was the observation that different Rab GTPases are localized to distinct organelles 17 . later studies , using low levels of overexpressed green fluorescent protein - tagged endo - somal Rab GTPases , have shown that even different Rab proteins localized on the same organelle occupy distinct membrane microdomains , which are sometimes referred to as Rab domains 64 ( FIG . 4 ) . Such studies have shown that early and recycling endosomes are comprised of multi - ple combinations of RAB4 , RAB5 and RAB11 domains that are dynamic but do not significantly intermix over time . Three main populations have been observed : one that contains only RAB5 , a second that contains RAB4 and RAB5 , and a third that contains RAB4 and RAB11 ( FIG . 4 ) . Similarly , late endosomes contain distinct mem - brane domains that are positive for RAB7 and RAB9 , respectively , with RAB9 domains showing the strongest accumulation of M6PRs 65 . These studies reveal the existence of mechanisms for lateral segregation of Rab GTPases into membrane domains with distinct functions . The most attractive mechanism for such segregation is that it is , at least in part , mediated by effector proteins . These might cause segregation because of their associations with additional molecules in the organelle membrane , as exemplified by the RAB9 effector TIP47 ( also known as M6PRBP1 ) 66 . Because GDP - bound Rab proteins are prone to extraction from membranes by Rab GDI ( FIG . 3 ) , local activation by GEF activity will also enrich a Rab GTPase in certain microdomains . Positive - feedback loops , involving Rab effectors that contain GEFs for the Rab GTPases that recruit them in the first place , will contribute to the amplification of local Rab activation and enrichment ( FIG . 5a ) . In addition , effector binding often stabilizes Rab proteins in their GTP - bound conformations . Coordination of Rabs by effector coupling . The co - existence of several distinct Rab GTPases in the same membrane , albeit in distinct microdomains , raises the question of how their functions are coordinated . R E V I E W S 518 | AuGuST 2009 | voluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Recyclingendosome Earlyendosome Lateendosome TGN RAB4 RAB7 RAB9 RAB4 Lysosome RAB11 RAB5 Retromer A heteropentameric protein complex that mediates vesicle transport between early endosomes and the trans - Golgi network . An important clue comes from the fact that an increas - ing number of Rab effectors are found to contain sepa - rate binding sites for two or more different Rab GTPases ( FIG . 5b ) . The binding of two distinct Rab GTPases to one Rab effector at the same time could play a part in membrane interactions in trans during vesicle tether - ing . However , it could also function in cis during the maintenance of and cooperation between separate Rab domains . This has been proposed for rabenosyn 5 , which contains separate binding sites for RAB4 and RAB5 . overexpression of rabenosyn 5 causes enhanced overlap of RAB4 - and RAB5 - containing membrane domains and increases the rate of transferrin recycling , which suggests that this Rab effector connects separate endosomal membrane domains in cis 67 . An even more striking example of a Rab effector that contains several Rab - binding sites is Golgi coiled - coil protein GCC185 ( also known as GCC2 ) , which localizes to Golgi membranes through cooperative interactions with RAB6 and the GTPase ADP - ribosylation factor - like protein 1 ( ARl1 ) 68 . In addition to binding to these GTPases , GCC185 contains multiple other Rab - binding sites , including sites for RAB1 , RAB2 , RAB9 , RAB15 , RAB27B , RAB30 and RAB33B 69 . Although the binding of GCC185 to RAB6 , ARl1 and RAB9 has been pro - posed to mediate tethering of late endosome - derived vesicles with the TGN , the additional Rab - binding domains might be involved in maintenance of normal Golgi stack morphology 69 . In support of this hypoth - esis , depletion of GCC185 induces the formation of mini Golgi stacks 70 . other GRIP and coiled - coil domain proteins in the Golgi also contain multiple Rab - binding sites , and such proteins might surround the Golgi to spe - cifically capture and retain Rab - containing membranes , thereby excluding other structures 71 . Rabs specify membrane identity . By recruiting specific effectors to restricted membrane microdomains , the Rab GTPases function to specify membrane identity . In addi - tion to protein recruitment , these GTPases might also confer membrane identity by controlling local levels of PIs ( BOX 1 ) . Generated through the activities of PI kinases and phosphatases , these lipids serve to recruit specific protein complexes to membranes , thereby cooperating with Rab GTPases to define membrane identity . The idea that many Rab GTPases might be capable of controlling the PI composition of a membrane is supported by the finding that the PI 5 - phosphatase oCRl is an effector of multiple Rab GTPases 72 . However , to date , the most striking example is provided by RAB5 , which recruits the class III PI3K complex to produce PtdIns ( 3 ) P on endosome membranes 23 . Interestingly , the RAB5 effec - tors EEA1 , rabenosyn 5 and rabankyrin 5 ( also known as ANKFY1 ) contain PtdIns ( 3 ) P - binding FYvE domains and are probably recruited to endocytic membranes through the coincident detection of GTP - bound RAB5 and PtdIns ( 3 ) P 43 , 44 , 73 . Thus , RAB5 has a dual role in the recruitment of these effectors , thereby ensuring a high level of specificity . Remarkably , RAB5 controls not only class III PI3K but also several other enzymes involved in PI metabolism . These include the p110β subunit of a class I PI3K , which produces the signalling PI PtdIns - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ) at the plasma membrane 23 , as well as PI 4 - phosphatase and PI 5 - phosphatase . Through sequential activation of the class I PI3K , and the PI 4 - phosphatase and the PI 5 - phosphatase , RAB5 is capable of stimulating form - ation of PtdIns ( 3 ) P at the plasma membrane 24 . This indicates that Rab GTPases might function to control cascades of PI phosphorylation and dephosphoryla - tion reactions to precisely define the PI composition in restricted membrane domains . Crosstalk between Rabs . The control of PI metabolism provides a mechanism for crosstalk between two Rab GTPases , as demonstrated by the retromer coat com - plex in the sorting of cargo that is destined for recy - cling from endosomes and the TGN . RAB5 mediates the formation of PtdIns ( 3 ) P on endosome membranes through the recruitment of the class III PI3K com - plex 23 ( BOX 1 ) , whereas PtdIns ( 3 ) P in turn recruits the retromer subunits SNX1 and SNX2 , which simultane - ously detect this PI and high membrane curvature , as found in endosomal tubules 74 . These subunits associ - ate with the cargo - interacting retromer subcomplex vPS26 – vPS29 – vPS35 , which is an effector of RAB7 ( REF . 75 ) . In this way , the selection of cargo for retro - grade trafficking from endosomes to the TGN requires the coordinated activities of two Rab GTPases and their PI - associated effectors . Figure 4 | rab domains . The occurrence of microdomains enriched for specific Rab GTPases , as exemplified with endosomes . Early endosomes contain separate domains enriched in RAB5 ( blue ) and RAB4 ( red ) , which are involved in endosome fusion and endocytic recycling , respectively . The recycling endosome contains domains enriched in RAB4 and RAB11 ( green ) , which are involved in vesicle trafficking from the early endosome and to the plasma membrane , respectively . Late endosomes contain domains enriched in RAB7 ( yellow ) and RAB9 ( purple ) , which mediate trafficking to lysosomes and the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) , respectively . R E V I E W S NATuRE REvIEwS | Molecular cell Biology voluME 10 | AuGuST 2009 | 519 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Rab Rab Rab GTP RabGTP RabGTP GTP GTP GDP RabGTP GTP GDP a Positive feedback Rab Rab GTP GTP GDP GDP c Activation coupling Rab Rab Rab GTP GTP GDP GDP d Rab conversion b Effector coupling RabGDP P i Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Effector Effector GEF EffectorGEF EffectorGEF Effector GAP There is , however , an additional and even more versa - tile mechanism for ensuring crosstalk between two Rab GTPases in the same pathway . This mechanism , called Rab conversion , entails the recruitment of a GEF for one Rab GTPase by another GTPase that acts upstream . Such conversion has been elegantly shown in the case of the maturation of RAB5 - positive early endocytic struc - tures into later RAB7 - positive structures , which involves the RAB5 - mediated recruitment of the HoPS complex , in which the vPS39 subunit is a RAB7 GEF 76 ( FIG . 5c ) . Mathematical modelling of this system suggests that RAB5 activates RAB7 until RAB7 reaches a threshold upon which it inactivates RAB5 through a negative - feedback loop that is predicted to involve RAB7 - mediated recruit - ment of a RAB5 GAP 77 ( FIG . 5d ) . The negative - feedback loop ensures a rapid inactivation of RAB5 as soon as a certain level of GTP - bound RAB7 has been reached , and is referred to as a ‘cut - out switch’ by analogy with electrical circuit - breakers 77 . It is likely that similar Rab conversion switches exist for other pathways that involve organelle maturation , although this remains to be investigated . Rab GTPases and receptor signalling There is a tight interrelationship between receptor sig - nalling and membrane trafficking 78 . Activation of many hormone and growth factor receptors causes their traf - ficking to lysosomes , where they are degraded , and several signalling pathways require translocation of receptors from the plasma membrane to endosomes . Among the multiple regulators that relay receptor sig - nalling to the endosomal membrane trafficking machin - ery are the Rab GTPases . The significance of their role is shown by the importance of the endosomal RAB23 in the attenuation of sonic hedgehog signalling down - stream of the sonic hedgehog receptor , patched 1 , and its effector , smoothened 79 . likewise , the late - endosomal RAB7 controls apoptosis downstream of growth fac - tor withdrawal 80 . Another endocytic GTPase , RAB5 , is a hub for crosstalk between signalling and trafficking ( FIG . 6 ) . Activation of the epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor causes conversion of RAB5 into its active , GTP - bound form , thereby stimulating trafficking of the recep - tor along the early endocytic pathway 81 . This activation is , at least in part , mediated by the RAB5 GEF RIN1 , which is activated by the small GTPase Ras downstream of EGF receptor stimulation 82 . Activation of RAB5 downstream of growth factor receptors not only facilitates receptor trafficking through the stimulation of endosomal fusion but also transmits signals for cytoskeletal regulation . Specifically , RAB5 is required for the formation of circular ruffles downstream of activated growth factor receptors . Such ruffles form in response to changes in the subcortical actin cytoskeleton and mediate macropinocytosis , which involves the cell - ular uptake of large volumes of extracellular fluid 83 . The RAB5 effector that is responsible for crosstalk with the actin cytoskeleton is RN - tre ( also known as uSP6Nl ) , which also possesses RAB5 GAP activity and inter - acts with actin and actinin 4 . Interestingly , RN - tre is recruited to activated growth factor receptors through the adaptor EGF receptor kinase substrate 8 ( EPS8 ) , which acts upstream of the small GTPase RAC1 , a regu - lator of the actin cytoskeleton 84 . Another indirect link between RAB5 and RAC1 is that the activation of RAC1 by motogenic stimuli , such as growth factors , requires RAB5 - dependent endocytosis 85 . RAB5 is also involved in a direct signalling pathway downstream of the EGF receptor through its effectors APPl1 and APPl2 , which reside on a subpopulation of endosomes and translocate to the nucleus in response to EGF stimulation . Here , they control gene expression and proliferation through interaction with the NuRD histone deacetylase complex , which is involved in chromatin rearrangements 86 . APPl1 also activates a cytoplasmic signalling cascade that mediates cell survival by its regu - lation of the activity and substrate specificity of AKT1 survival kinase 87 . In contrast to RAB5 activation induced by growth factors , hypoxia inhibits RAB5 - regulated endocytic trafficking by preventing transcription of the RAB5 effector rabaptin 5 . This causes prolonged signal - ling downstream of growth factor receptors and pro - vides a possible mechanism to account for the increased activities of such receptors in hypoxic tumours 88 . Rab GTPases and diseases The physiological importance of Rab GTPases , which is to be expected from their central role in membrane traf - ficking , is reflected by the association of these proteins and their regulators or effectors with many diseases . In particular , infectious , neurological and endocrinological diseases can result from pathogen - induced or inherited dysfunctions of Rab pathways , consistent with the crucial role for membrane trafficking in immunity and regulated exocytosis . The involvement of Rab GTPases in cell sig - nalling is reflected by the association of Rab dysfunctions with cancers . Figure 5 | coordination of rab functions . a | Positive - feedback loops are created when a Rab effector complex contains guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) , which catalyse the exchange of GDP for GTP , for the same Rab GTPase that recruits them in the first place . b | Rab effectors frequently contain separate binding sites for two Rab GTPases , enabling tethering between two membranes or coordination of microdomains in the same membrane . c | When a GEF for a second Rab is included in the effector complex of the first Rab GTPase , the second Rab will be activated through the conversion from a GDP - bound form to a GTP - bound form . d | The effector complex of the secondarily activated Rab GTPase might contain a GTPase - activating protein ( GAP ) for the first Rab GTPase . This GAP can hydrolyse the GTP on the first Rab , thereby converting the Rab to the GDP - bound form and releasing an inorganic phosphate ( P i ) . R E V I E W S 520 | AuGuST 2009 | voluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology AKT1 RAB5 RAC1 Ras GTP GDP GDP GTP GTP GDP GDP P Growth factor receptor Growth factor RIN1 E3B1 EPS8 RN - tre Actinin 4 Macropinocytosis Endocytosis Migration Survival Actin RAB5 APPL1 or APPL2 Endosome RAC1 Alsin GTP Histone NuRD Acetylgroup Transcription Nucleus SOS1 SOS1 Tight junction A circumferential ring at the apex of epithelial cells that is formed by multiprotein complexes from two adjoining cells . It keeps the respective plasma membranes of the cells close together , creating a fluid - impermeable barrier . Rab GTPases hijacked by pathogens . A large group of viruses enter cells through various endocytic pathways , and some viruses hijack Rab - dependent pathways to induce their own internalization 89 . For example , group B coxsackievirus enters epithelia through the internaliza - tion of tight junctions by a mechanism that is dependent on RAB5 and RAB34 , which are two Rab GTPases that are known to control macropinocytosis 90 . likewise , many intracellular bacteria enter cells by Rab - dependent mechanisms , including macropinocytosis . This has been particularly well described in the case of Salmonella enterica subsp . enterica serovar Typhimurium invasion , in which as many as 18 different Rab GTPases associate with the S . Typhimurium phagosomes during different stages of their maturation 91 . Phagocytes play an important part in the innate immune system through their engulfment and destruc - tion of pathogens . Phagocytosis requires the coordinated actions of several endocytic Rab GTPases , in particular RAB5 , which is known to associate with early phago - somes , and RAB7 , the association of which increases as the phagosomes mature and is a prerequisite for their eventual fusion with lysosomes to yield degradative phagolysosomes 92 – 94 . Because phagosome maturation is essential for the efficient killing of engulfed patho - gens , and because Rab GTPases play a key part in this process , several intracellular pathogens have evolved strategies for interfering with the recruitment and func - tions of phagosomal Rabs 93 . For example , Helicobacter pylori secretes a toxin that hijacks RAB7 , localizing it to the bacterium - containing phagosome , thereby creat - ing a protective niche for intracellular survival of the bacterium 95 . By contrast , mycobacteria use a distinct strategy by secreting factors that prevent RAB7 acquisi - tion by the phagosome , thereby preventing phagosome maturation 96 . Moreover , several intracellular bacteria secrete factors that prevent the recruitment or activa - tion of RAB5 , including Listeria monocytogenes 97 and S . Typhimurium 98 . The exact mechanisms by which such bacteria interfere with RAB5 remain to be established , but the net outcome seems to be an evasion of normal phagosome maturation , thereby preventing bacterial destruction in the phagolysosome . Pathogenic hijacking of Rab GTPases is not restricted to the endocytic pathway . Some intracellular pathogens recruit membranes from the ER or the pre - Golgi inter - mediate compartment ( IC ) to create a replicative intra - cellular niche , and this can involve Rab GTPases . An interesting example is Legionella pneumophila , which infects alveolar macrophages and secretes two pro - teins that directly target the GTPase cycle of the ER - or IC - associated RAB1 . one of these proteins , SidM ( also known as DrrA ) , acts as both a GEF and a GDF for RAB1 , whereas the other , lepB , is a RAB1 GAP . The functional consequence of the expression of these proteins is that L . pneumophila - containing vacuoles recruit RAB1 and behave functionally as ER or IC membranes , thereby evading destruction in lysosomes 99 , 100 . Rabs and cancer . Dysregulated receptor signalling and trafficking is associated with cancer development 101 , 102 , and therefore the aberrant expression of Rab GTPases might be predicted to cause tumorigenesis . Indeed , RAB25 is frequently overexpressed in breast and ovar - ian cancers and is strongly associated with decreased survival 103 . overexpression of RAB25 in cell culture stimulates proliferation and inhibits apoptosis , which is consistent with its tumorigenic properties 103 . Although the mechanisms that underlie the effects of RAB25 on proliferation and apoptosis remain elusive , it is tempt - ing to speculate that they are caused by aberrant recy - cling of signalling receptors , given the established role of RAB25 in trafficking through recycling endosomes 104 . In addition , RAB25 is a rare example of a Rab that has been found to interact directly with a transmembrane protein , β1 integrin 105 . The ability of RAB25 to control recycling of the fibronectin receptor α5β1 integrin and thereby facilitate invasive cell migration is also consistent with its tumorigenicity . Notably , loss of another Rab that associates with and controls the endocytic trafficking of Figure 6 | rab modulation of receptor signalling . RAB5 - mediated events that occur downstream of an activated growth factor receptor . The binding of a growth factor to its receptor causes Tyr phosphorylation of the receptor , which leads to the recruitment and activation of the Ras guanine nucleotide exchange factor ( GEF ) SOS1 and the subsequent activation of Ras . An effector of Ras , RIN1 , acts as a GEF for RAB5 and activates RAB5 to stimulate endocytosis and macropinocytosis . RAB5 stimulation of macropinocytosis occurs through the RAB5 effector RN - tre ( also known as USP6NL ) , which controls actin dynamics by direct interaction or through the actin - binding protein actinin 4 . RN - tre is recruited to growth factor receptors by associating with EPS8 , a growth factor receptor - binding protein that activates RAC1 through the adaptor E3B1 ( also known as ABI1 ) and SOS1 . Importantly , RAB5 is indirectly involved in signalling events that stimulate cell migration ( through the RAB5 - dependent translocation of RAC1 to endosomes ) , survival ( through the RAB5 effector APPL1 , which mediates the activity of AKT1 ) and transcription ( through the nuclear translocation of APPL1 or APPL2 and interaction with the histone deacetylase complex NuRD , resulting in release of an acetyl group from a histone to modulate chromatin structure ) . On the endosome , there is additional crosstalk between RAC1 and RAB5 through the recruitment of the RAB5 GEF alsin by RAC1 . R E V I E W S NATuRE REvIEwS | Molecular cell Biology voluME 10 | AuGuST 2009 | 521 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved integrins , RAB21 ( REF . 106 ) , has been found in cancer and correlates with aneuploidy . The correlation with aneu - ploidy is thought to reflect the requirement of RAB21 - mediated integrin endocytosis for correct cytokinesis 107 . other Rab GTPases that have been implicated in car - cinogenesis include RAB8 , which mediates exocytosis of a matrix metalloprotease involved in cell invasion 108 , and RAB23 , which controls sonic hedgehog signalling ( see above ) 79 , 109 . Because of the recent opportunities provided by microarray analyses and high - throughput sequencing of tumours , additional Rab GTPases involved in cancer , as well as their regulators and effectors , are likely to be identified in the near future . Inherited Rab - related disorders . Albinism can be caused by mutations in multiple genes , and certain forms of partial albinism , known as Griscelli syndrome ( GS ) , are associated with dysfunctions of RAB27 and its effec - tors . There are three forms of GS : GS1 is associated with mutations in myosin va , GS2 is associated with muta - tions in RAB27A and GS3 is associated with mutations in the RAB27A effector melanophilin . Interestingly , all of these proteins participate in the actin - dependent move - ment of melanosomes towards the periphery of melano - cytes . Myosin va is the motor protein that translocates melanosomes along actin filaments , whereas RAB27A attaches the melanosomes to myosin va through the adaptor melanophilin ( see above ) . The dysfunction of any of these three proteins explains the albino pheno - type of patients with GS . In addition , GS2 is character - ized by severe immunodeficiency , and this phenotype is related to the functions of RAB27A and its effectors SlP2 and munc 13 - 4 in exocytosis of cytotoxic granules from T cells and neutrophils 28 , 110 , 111 . A more subtle syndrome that could also involve dysfunction of RAB27A is choroideremia , which is an X - linked form of progressive blindness that is character - ized by degeneration of the retinal pigment epithelium and the two underlying cell layers . The gene affected in choroideremia encodes REP1 , one of two isoforms of an accessory protein ( FIG . 1 ) of Rab geranylgeranyl trans - ferase 112 . The limited phenotype of REP1 dysfunction can probably be explained by the presence of the REP2 isoform , which can compensate for the loss of REP1 . However , this compensation is not absolute and RAB27A , which is expressed in the retinal pigment epithelium , is poorly geranylgeranylated in choroideremia cells . This raises the possibility that the choroideremia pathology is indirectly due to RAB27A dysfunction in the retinal pigment epithelium 113 . The fusion of synaptic vesicles with the presynaptic plasma membrane , which results in release of neuro - transmitter , is crucial for transmission of nerve impulses and is one of the best - characterized membrane fusion events in mammalian cells . Given the importance of Rab GTPases in the regulation of exocytosis , inherited Rab dysfunctions could affect brain functions . This has indeed proved to be the case . For example , a rare form of nonspecific X - linked mental retardation is caused by a mutation in Rab GDP dissociation inhibitor α ( GDI1 ) , one of two GDI isoforms in humans . Because GDIs regulate the functions of all GTPases and have partially redundant functions , it is not easy to pinpoint which Rab GTPase is primarily affected by the dysfunction of GDI1 . Members of the RAB3 subfamily , which are associated with synaptic vesicles and regulate their exocytosis , are plausible candidates . Consistent with the important role of these proteins in synapse functions , mutations in the catalytic and regulatory subunits of a RAB3 GAP cause inherited neurological diseases : warburg Micro syndrome and Martsolf syndrome , respectively 114 , 115 . It is worth noting that it is not only Rab GTPases in the exocytic pathway that are required for normal nerve functions . There is a tight interplay between exocytic and endocytic pathways in neurons , and mutations in the gene that encodes the late endosomal GTPase RAB7 are indeed associated with neuropathies , such as Charcot - Marie - Tooth disease type 2B 116 . Although further work is needed to clarify the exact cellular mechanisms that underlie Rab - dependent neurological diseases , their manifestation reflects the fundamental function of membrane traffic in nerve activity and the key roles that Rab GTPases have in this process . Insulin - stimulated fusion of vesicles containing the glucose transporter GluT4 with the plasma membrane is required for dietary glucose uptake into muscle and fat cells , and its impairment is associated with obesity and type II diabetes . Although the mechanisms of GluT4 translocation are elusive , it is clear that this process requires Rab GTPases and their regulators . Specifically , two related Rab GAPs , AS160 ( also known as TBC1D4 ) and TBC1D1 , are required for GluT4 translocation downstream of the insulin - activated protein kinase AKT1 117 , 118 , and genetic inactivation of TBC1D1 causes leanness in mice 119 . This phenotype is consistent with the possibility that GTP - bound Rab triggers the GluT4 vesicle to translocate to the plasma membrane , whereas GDP - bound Rab , maintained by the activities of AS160 and TBC1D1 , favours an intracellular distribution of GluT4 vesicles . The best candidates for Rab GTPases that regulate GluT4 translocation are those that have been found on GluT4 vesicles : RAB8A , RAB8B , RAB10 and RAB14 . All of these are substrates for AS160 and TBC1D1 , and RAB10 has been shown to be important for GluT4 translocation 120 . It is also worth noting that mutations in the less characterized RAB23 gene cause Carpenter syndrome , a pleiotropic disorder that includes obesity , although it is not known whether RAB23 has any role in GluT4 translocation 121 . In addition to providing insight into human genetics , studies of mouse mutants provide significant insight into the physiological functions of Rab GTPases . Examples include RAB3A - mutant mice , which have impaired syn - aptic transmission and shortened circadian rhythms 122 , 123 ; RAB8A - deficient mice , which have functional and mor - phological aberrations of the small intestine 124 ; RAB23 - mutant mice , which have an open brain phenotype 79 ; and RAB38 - mutant mice , which have a partial albino phenotype ( known as chocolate ) 125 . The use of mice and other model organisms is expected to cause rapid progress in our understanding of how Rab GTPases control physiology and disease . R E V I E W S 522 | AuGuST 2009 | voluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Conclusions and perspectives A large body of research during the past two decades has transformed the models of Rab functions in membrane traffic from simple regulators of vesicle docking to univer - sal coordinators of membrane identity and all aspects of vesicle trafficking . The functions of the endocytic GTPase RAB5 show the versatility of these molecular switches at various stages of vesicle delivery . RAB5 mediates cargo sequestration into and budding of endocytic vesicles 20 , the uncoating of clathrin - coated vesicles 22 , vesicle motil - ity along microtubules 126 and the tethering of vesicles to acceptor membranes 40 , 41 . The orchestration of these functions is mediated by coordinated recruitment of more than 20 different effectors 127 , which underscores the multitasking ability of a single Rab GTPase . It remains to be established how the recruitment of dis - tinct effectors by the same GTPase in different situations is achieved , although the high number of effectors for a single Rab could also reflect the use of distinct effec - tors in different cell types , as with RAB27 ( REF . 50 ) . when taking into account that there are more than 60 different Rab GTPases in humans , each with some specific and some shared regulators and effectors , it is evident that it will take a major effort to understand Rab - mediated control of vesicular traffic at a systems level . The diversity of the Rabs presumably reflects the multitude of intra - cellular trafficking pathways in various cell types , and Rabs indeed are versatile tools for elucidating novel traf - ficking pathways . Despite this complexity , the Rab field has now progressed to a stage at which modelling of iso - lated trafficking steps has become feasible 77 . The possibil - ity of reconstituting the minimal Rab machinery that is required for single trafficking steps , such as vesicle fusion , will speed up our ability to model Rab - mediated control of vesicle trafficking at higher resolution 49 . Although Rab GTPases principally function as regu - latory switches that spatiotemporally coordinate the recruitment of various regulators of membrane traf - ficking , their outputs also impinge on other regulatory circuits , such as phosphorylation , ubiquitylation and palmitoylation . Such post - translational modifications might alter either the function of the Rab GTPase itself 128 – 133 or that of its interacting partners 134 – 138 , thereby adding another layer of control to their activities . In this way , phosphoregulation of Rab functions contributes to the dramatic changes in membrane traffic that occur during , for example , mitosis 131 . Besides increasing the number of known Rab regu - lators and effectors and elongating the list of known Rab - associated diseases , recent studies have provided a novel concept . The coupling between Rab effectors and Rab regulators , best illustrated by the inclusion of Rab GEFs and GAPs in Rab effector complexes , not only ensures the wiring of positive - feedback loops and inhibi - tory circuits but also enables crosstalk between distinct Rab GTPases during , for example , organelle matura - tion 76 . A coordinated function of multiple Rab GTPases is also indicated by the increasing number of effectors that are found to contain separate binding sites for two or more Rabs 67 , 69 , 71 , 139 . The regulation of intracellular vesicle traffic by Rab GTPases has profound implications for physiology and disease , as exemplified by the hijacking of Rab pathways by intracellular pathogens and by the multiple genetic diseases that result from dysfunctions of Rab GTPases or their interactors . It has recently become clear that Rab GTPases , such as RAB6 , RAB11 and RAB35 , are crucial during cytokinesis , which reflects the importance of bio - synthetic and endocytic membrane trafficking during this final stage of cell division 140 – 142 . likewise , the bio - genesis of primary cilia , sensory structures on the cell surface , requires RAB8A , RAB17 and RAB23 , which integrate microtubule dynamics with polarized mem - brane traffic receptor signalling 143 . A further clarification of how Rab GTPases cooperate to coordinate membrane traffic will contribute to our understanding of complex cell biological processes , which should eventually result in improved treatment of human diseases . 1 . Schwartz , S . L . , Cao , C . , Pylypenko , O . , Rak , A . & Wandinger - Ness , A . Rab GTPases at a glance . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 3905 – 3910 ( 2007 ) . 2 . Pereira - Leal , J . B . & Seabra , M . C . Evolution of the Rab family of small GTP - binding proteins . J . Mol . Biol . 313 , 889 – 901 ( 2001 ) . Provides a useful overview of Rab subfamilies in yeast , nematodes , flies and humans , and defines Rab - specific sequence motifs . 3 . Zerial , M . & McBride , H . Rab proteins as membrane organizers . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 107 – 117 ( 2001 ) . 4 . Pfeffer , S . R . Structural clues to Rab GTPase functional diversity . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 15485 – 15488 ( 2005 ) . 5 . Delprato , A . , Merithew , E . & Lambright , D . G . Structure , exchange determinants , and family - wide rab specificity of the tandem helical bundle and Vps9 domains of Rabex - 5 . Cell 118 , 607 – 617 ( 2004 ) . 6 . Eathiraj , S . , Pan , X . , Ritacco , C . & Lambright , D . G . Structural basis of family - wide Rab GTPase recognition by rabenosyn - 5 . Nature 436 , 415 – 419 ( 2005 ) . 7 . Haas , A . K . et al . Analysis of GTPase - activating proteins : Rab1 and Rab43 are key Rabs required to maintain a functional Golgi complex in human cells . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 2997 – 3010 ( 2007 ) . 8 . Pan , X . , Eathiraj , S . , Munson , M . & Lambright , D . G . TBC - domain GAPs for Rab GTPases accelerate GTP hydrolysis by a dual - finger mechanism . Nature 442 , 303 – 306 ( 2006 ) . 9 . Shirane , M . & Nakayama , K . I . Protrudin induces neurite formation by directional membrane trafficking . Science 314 , 818 – 821 ( 2006 ) . 10 . Matsui , Y . et al . Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel type of regulatory protein ( GDI ) for smg p25A , a ras p21 - like GTP - binding protein . Mol . Cell . Biol . 10 , 4116 – 4122 ( 1990 ) . 11 . Ullrich , O . , Horiuchi , H . , Bucci , C . & Zerial , M . Membrane association of Rab5 mediated by GDP - dissociation inhibitor and accompanied by GDP / GTP exchange . Nature 368 , 157 – 160 ( 1994 ) . 12 . Ullrich , O . et al . Rab GDP dissociation inhibitor as a general regulator for the membrane association of rab proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 18143 – 18150 ( 1993 ) . 13 . Soldati , T . , Shapiro , A . D . , Svejstrup , A . B . & Pfeffer , S . R . Membrane targeting of the small GTPase Rab9 is accompanied by nucleotide exchange . Nature 369 , 76 – 78 ( 1994 ) . References 12 and 13 show the function of Rab GDI in delivering isoprenylated Rabs to specific membranes . 14 . Alexandrov , K . , Horiuchi , H . , Steele - Mortimer , O . , Seabra , M . C . & Zerial , M . Rab escort protein - 1 is a multifunctional protein that accompanies newly prenylated rab proteins to their target membranes . EMBO J . 13 , 5262 – 5273 ( 1994 ) . 15 . Seabra , M . C . Nucleotide dependence of Rab geranylgeranylation . Rab escort protein interacts preferentially with GDP - bound Rab . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 14398 – 14404 ( 1996 ) . 16 . Shen , F . & Seabra , M . C . Mechanism of digeranylgeranylation of Rab proteins . Formation of a complex between monogeranylgeranyl - Rab and Rab escort protein . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 3692 – 3698 ( 1996 ) . Shows the function of REP in escorting newly synthesized Rabs to Rab geranylgeranyl transferase . 17 . Chavrier , P . , Parton , R . G . , Hauri , H . P . , Simons , K . & Zerial , M . Localization of low molecular weight GTP binding proteins to exocytic and endocytic compartments . Cell 62 , 317 – 329 ( 1990 ) . First paper to show the localization of different Rabs to distinct intracellular membranes . 18 . Sivars , U . , Aivazian , D . & Pfeffer , S . R . Yip3 catalyses the dissociation of endosomal Rab – GDI complexes . Nature 425 , 856 – 859 ( 2003 ) . First identification of a Rab GDF . 19 . Carroll , K . S . et al . Role of Rab9 GTPase in facilitating receptor recruitment by TIP47 . Science 292 , 1373 – 1376 ( 2001 ) . 20 . McLauchlan , H . et al . A novel role for Rab5 – GDI in ligand sequestration into calthrin - coated pits . Curr . Biol . 8 , 34 – 45 ( 1998 ) . 21 . Cremona , O . et al . Essential role of phosphoinositide metabolism in synaptic vesicle recycling . Cell 99 , 179 – 188 ( 1999 ) . R E V I E W S NATuRE REvIEwS | Molecular cell Biology voluME 10 | AuGuST 2009 | 523 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 22 . Semerdjieva , S . et al . Coordinated regulation of AP2 uncoating from clathrin - coated vesicles by rab5 and hRME - 6 . J . Cell Biol . 183 , 499 – 511 ( 2008 ) . Provides the first functional mechanisms for a Rab GTPase in vesicle uncoating . 23 . Christoforidis , S . et al . Phosphatidylinositol - 3 - OH kinases are Rab5 effectors . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 249 – 252 ( 1999 ) . 24 . Shin , H . W . et al . An enzymatic cascade of Rab5 effectors regulates phosphoinositide turnover in the endocytic pathway . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 607 – 618 ( 2005 ) . 25 . Arai , S . , Noda , Y . , Kainuma , S . , Wada , I . & Yoda , K . Ypt11 functions in bud - directed transport of the Golgi by linking Myo2 to the coatomer subunit Ret2 . Curr . Biol . 18 , 987 – 991 ( 2008 ) . 26 . Seabra , M . C . & Coudrier , E . Rab GTPases and myosin motors in organelle motility . Traffic 5 , 393 – 399 ( 2004 ) . 27 . Wu , X . S . et al . Identification of an organelle receptor for myosin - Va . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 271 – 278 ( 2002 ) . 28 . Menasche , G . et al . Mutations in RAB27A cause Griscelli syndrome associated with haemophagocytic syndrome . Nature Genet . 25 , 173 – 176 ( 2001 ) . First demonstration that a genetic disease is caused by a Rab mutation . 29 . Kuroda , T . S . & Fukuda , M . Rab27A - binding protein Slp2 - a is required for peripheral melanosome distribution and elongated cell shape in melanocytes . Nature Cell Biol . 6 , 1195 – 1203 ( 2004 ) . 30 . Hales , C . M . , Vaerman , J . P . & Goldenring , J . R . Rab11 family interacting protein 2 associates with Myosin Vb and regulates plasma membrane recycling . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 50415 – 50421 ( 2002 ) . 31 . Roland , J . T . , Kenworthy , A . K . , Peranen , J . , Caplan , S . & Goldenring , J . R . Myosin Vb interacts with Rab8a on a tubular network containing EHD1 and EHD3 . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 2828 – 2837 ( 2007 ) . 32 . Echard , A . et al . Interaction of a Golgi - associated kinesin - like protein with Rab6 . Science 279 , 580 – 585 ( 1998 ) . 33 . Fontijn , R . D . et al . The human kinesin - like protein RB6K is under tight cell cycle control and is essential for cytokinesis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 21 , 2944 – 2955 ( 2001 ) . 34 . Hoepfner , S . et al . Modulation of receptor recycling and degradation by the endosomal kinesin KIF16B . Cell 121 , 437 – 450 ( 2005 ) . 35 . Jordens , I . et al . The Rab7 effector protein RILP controls lysosomal transport by inducing the recruitment of dynein – dynactin motors . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1680 – 1685 ( 2001 ) . 36 . Matanis , T . et al . Bicaudal - D regulates COPI - independent Golgi – ER transport by recruiting the dynein – dynactin motor complex . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 986 – 992 ( 2002 ) . 37 . Salminen , A . & Novick , P . J . A ras - like protein is required for a post - Golgi event in yeast secretion . Cell 49 , 527 – 538 ( 1987 ) . First demonstration that a Rab GTPase controls vesicle traffic . 38 . Guo , W . , Roth , D . , Walch - Solimena , C . & Novick , P . The exocyst is an effector for Sec4p , targeting secretory vesicles to sites of exocytosis . EMBO J . 18 , 1071 – 1080 ( 1999 ) . 39 . Guo , W . , Tamanoi , F . & Novick , P . Spatial regulation of the exocyst complex by Rho1 GTPase . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 353 – 360 ( 2001 ) . 40 . Gorvel , J . P . , Chavrier , P . , Zerial , M . & Gruenberg , J . rab5 controls early endosome fusion in vitro . Cell 64 , 915 – 925 ( 1991 ) . First direct demonstration that a Rab GTPase controls membrane fusion . 41 . Rubino , M . , Miaczynska , M . , Lippé , R . & Zerial , M . Selective membrane recruitment of EEA1 suggests a role in directional transport of clathrin - coated vesicles to early endosomes . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 3745 – 3748 ( 2000 ) . 42 . Stenmark , H . et al . Inhibition of rab5 GTPase activity stimulates membrane fusion in endocytosis . EMBO J . 13 , 1287 – 1296 ( 1994 ) . Identifies the GTP - bound form of a Rab GTPase as the active conformation in membrane fusion . 43 . Simonsen , A . et al . EEA1 links PI ( 3 ) K function to Rab5 regulation of endosome fusion . Nature 394 , 494 – 498 ( 1998 ) . 44 . Nielsen , E . et al . Rabenosyn - 5 , a novel Rab5 effector , is complexed with hVPS45 and recruited to endosomes through a FYVE finger domain . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 601 – 612 ( 2000 ) . 45 . Callaghan , J . , Simonsen , A . , Gaullier , J . - M . , Toh , B . - H . & Stenmark , H . The endosome fusion regulator EEA1 is a dimer . Biochem . J . 338 , 539 – 543 ( 1999 ) . 46 . Morrison , H . A . et al . Regulation of early endosomal entry by the Drosophila tumor suppressors rabenosyn and Vps45 . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 4167 – 4176 ( 2008 ) . 47 . Simonsen , A . , Gaullier , J . - M . , D’Arrigo , A . & Stenmark , H . The Rab5 effector EEA1 interacts directly with syntaxin - 6 . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 28857 – 28860 ( 1999 ) . 48 . McBride , H . M . et al . Oligomeric complexes link Rab5 effectors with NSF and drive membrane fusion via interactions between EEA1 and syntaxin 13 . Cell 98 , 377 – 386 ( 1999 ) . 49 . Ohya , T . et al . Reconstitution of Rab - and SNARE - dependent membrane fusion by synthetic endosomes . Nature 20 May 2009 ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nature 08107 ) . First reconstitution of Rab - mediated fusion using liposomes , purified SNAREs and RAB5 effectors . 50 . Fukuda , M . Versatile role of Rab27 in membrane trafficking : focus on the Rab27 effector families . J . Biochem . 137 , 9 – 16 ( 2005 ) . 51 . Tsuboi , T . & Fukuda , M . The Slp4 - a linker domain controls exocytosis through interaction with Munc18 – 1 syntaxin - 1a complex . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 2101 – 2112 ( 2006 ) . 52 . Gomi , H . , Mizutani , S . , Kasai , K . , Itohara , S . & Izumi , T . Granuphilin molecularly docks insulin granules to the fusion machinery . J . Cell Biol . 171 , 99 – 109 ( 2005 ) . 53 . Tsuboi , T . & Fukuda , M . The C2B domain of rabphilin directly interacts with SNAP - 25 and regulates the docking step of dense core vesicle exocytosis in PC12 cells . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 39253 – 39259 ( 2005 ) . 54 . Haas , A . , Scheglmann , D . , Lazar , T . , Gallwitz , D . & Wickner , W . The GTPase Ypt7p of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is required on both partner vacuoles for the homotypic fusion step of vacuole inheritance . EMBO J . 14 , 5258 – 5270 ( 1995 ) . 55 . Ungermann , C . , Sato , K . & Wickner , W . Defining the functions of trans - SNARE pairs . Nature 396 , 543 – 548 ( 1998 ) . 56 . Allan , B . B . , Moyer , B . D . & Balch , W . E . Rab1 recruitment of p115 into a cis - SNARE complex : programming budding COPII vesicles for fusion . Science 289 , 444 – 448 ( 2000 ) . 57 . Moyer , B . D . , Allan , B . B . & Balch , W . E . Rab1 interaction with a GM130 effector complex regulates COPII vesicle cis - Golgi tethering . Traffic 2 , 268 – 276 ( 2001 ) . 58 . Stenmark , H . , Vitale , G . , Ullrich , O . & Zerial , M . Rabaptin - 5 is a direct effector of the small GTPase Rab5 in endocytic membrane fusion . Cell 83 , 423 – 432 ( 1995 ) . 59 . Horiuchi , H . et al . A novel Rab5 GDP / GTP exchange factor complexed to Rabaptin - 5 links nucleotide exchange to effector recruitment and function . Cell 90 , 1149 – 1159 ( 1997 ) . Shows the inclusion of a Rab GEF in a Rab effector complex . 60 . Wang , W . , Sacher , M . & Ferro - Novick , S . TRAPP stimulates guanine nucleotide exchange on Ypt1p . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 289 – 296 ( 2000 ) . 61 . Jones , S . , Newman , C . , Liu , F . & Segev , N . The TRAPP complex is a nucleotide exchanger for Ypt1 and Ypt31 / 32 . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 4403 – 4411 ( 2000 ) . 62 . Cai , Y . et al . The structural basis for activation of the Rab Ypt1p by the TRAPP membrane - tethering complexes . Cell 133 , 1202 – 1213 ( 2008 ) . 63 . Wurmser , A . E . , Sato , T . K . & Emr , S . D . New component of the vacuolar class C - Vps complex couples nucleotide exchange on the Ypt7 GTPase to SNARE - dependent docking and fusion . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 551 – 562 ( 2000 ) . 64 . Sonnichsen , B . , De , R . S . , Nielsen , E . , Rietdorf , J . & Zerial , M . Distinct membrane domains on endosomes in the recycling pathway visualized by multicolor imaging of Rab4 , Rab5 , and Rab11 . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 901 – 914 ( 2000 ) . Proposes the concept of Rab domains . 65 . Barbero , P . , Bittova , L . & Pfeffer , S . R . Visualization of Rab9 - mediated vesicle transport from endosomes to the trans - Golgi in living cells . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 511 – 518 ( 2002 ) . 66 . Aivazian , D . , Serrano , R . L . & Pfeffer , S . TIP47 is a key effector for Rab9 localization . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 917 – 926 ( 2006 ) . 67 . de Renzis , S . , Sonnichsen , B . & Zerial , M . Divalent Rab effectors regulate the sub - compartmental organization and sorting of early endosomes . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 124 – 133 ( 2002 ) . 68 . Burguete , A . S . , Fenn , T . D . , Brunger , A . T . & Pfeffer , S . R . Rab and Arl GTPase family members cooperate in the localization of the golgin GCC185 . Cell 132 , 286 – 298 ( 2008 ) . 69 . Hayes , G . L . et al . Multiple Rab GTPase binding sites in GCC185 suggest a model for vesicle tethering at the trans - Golgi . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 209 – 217 ( 2009 ) . 70 . Reddy , J . V . et al . A functional role for the GCC185 golgin in mannose 6 - phosphate receptor recycling . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 4353 – 4363 ( 2006 ) . 71 . Sinka , R . , Gillingham , A . K . , Kondylis , V . & Munro , S . Golgi coiled - coil proteins contain multiple binding sites for Rab family G proteins . J . Cell Biol . 183 , 607 – 615 ( 2008 ) . 72 . Fukuda , M . , Kanno , E . , Ishibashi , K . & Itoh , T . Large scale screening for novel Rab effectors reveals unexpected broad Rab binding specificity . Mol . Cell Proteomics 7 , 1031 – 1042 ( 2008 ) . 73 . Schnatwinkel , C . et al . The Rab5 effector Rabankyrin - 5 regulates and coordinates different endocytic mechanisms . PLoS Biol . 2 , e261 ( 2004 ) . 74 . Carlton , J . et al . Sorting nexin - 1 mediates tubular endosome - to - TGN transport through coincidence sensing of high - curvature membranes and 3 - phosphoinositides . Curr . Biol . 14 , 1791 – 1800 ( 2004 ) . 75 . Rojas , R . et al . Regulation of retromer recruitment to endosomes by sequential action of Rab5 and Rab7 . J . Cell Biol . 183 , 513 – 526 ( 2008 ) . 76 . Rink , J . , Ghigo , E . , Kalaidzidis , Y . & Zerial , M . Rab conversion as a mechanism of progression from early to late endosomes . Cell 122 , 735 – 749 ( 2005 ) . Introduces the concept of Rab conversion . 77 . Conte - Zerial , P . et al . Membrane identity and GTPase cascades regulated by toggle and cut - out switches . Mol . Syst . Biol . 4 , 206 ( 2008 ) . 78 . Von Zastrow , M . & Sorkin , A . Signaling on the endocytic pathway . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 19 , 436 – 445 ( 2007 ) . 79 . Eggenschwiler , J . T . , Espinoza , E . & Anderson , K . V . Rab23 is an essential negative regulator of the mouse Sonic hedgehog signalling pathway . Nature 412 , 194 – 198 ( 2001 ) . 80 . Romero , R . K . , Peralta , E . R . , Guenther , G . G . , Wong , S . Y . & Edinger , A . L . Rab7 activation by growth factor withdrawal contributes to the induction of apoptosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 2831 – 2840 ( 2009 ) . 81 . Barbieri , M . A . et al . Epidermal growth factor and membrane trafficking . EGF receptor activation of endocytosis requires Rab5a . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 539 – 550 ( 2000 ) . 82 . Tall , G . G . , Barbieri , M . A . , Stahl , P . D . & Horazdovsky , B . F . Ras - activated endocytosis is mediated by the Rab5 guanine nucleotide exchange activity of RIN1 . Dev . Cell 1 , 73 – 82 ( 2001 ) . 83 . Lanzetti , L . , Palamidessi , A . , Areces , L . , Scita , G . & Di Fiore , P . P . Rab5 is a signalling GTPase involved in actin remodelling by receptor tyrosine kinases . Nature 429 , 309 – 314 ( 2004 ) . 84 . Lanzetti , L . et al . The Eps8 protein coordinates EGF receptor signalling through Rac and trafficking through Rab5 . Nature 408 , 374 – 377 ( 2000 ) . 85 . Palamidessi , A . et al . Endocytic trafficking of Rac is required for the spatial restriction of signaling in cell migration . Cell 134 , 135 – 147 ( 2008 ) . 86 . Miaczynska , M . et al . APPL proteins link Rab5 to nuclear signal transduction via an endosomal compartment . Cell 116 , 445 – 456 ( 2004 ) . 87 . Schenck , A . et al . The endosomal protein Appl1 mediates Akt substrate specificity and cell survival in vertebrate development . Cell 133 , 486 – 497 ( 2008 ) . 88 . Wang , Y . et al . Regulation of endocytosis via the oxygen - sensing pathway . Nature Med . 15 , 319 – 324 ( 2009 ) . 89 . Marsh , M . & Helenius , A . Virus entry : open sesame . Cell 124 , 729 – 740 ( 2006 ) . 90 . Coyne , C . B . , Shen , L . , Turner , J . R . & Bergelson , J . M . Coxsackievirus entry across epithelial tight junctions requires occludin and the small GTPases Rab34 and Rab5 . Cell Host Microbe 2 , 181 – 192 ( 2007 ) . 91 . Smith , A . C . et al . A network of Rab GTPases controls phagosome maturation and is modulated by Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium . J . Cell Biol . 176 , 263 – 268 ( 2007 ) . 92 . Desjardins , M . , Huber , L . A . , Parton , R . G . & Griffiths , G . Biogenesis of phagolysosomes proceeds through a sequential series of interactions with the endocytic apparatus . J . Cell Biol . 124 , 677 – 688 ( 1994 ) . 93 . Kinchen , J . M . & Ravichandran , K . S . Phagosome maturation : going through the acid test . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 781 – 795 ( 2008 ) . R E V I E W S 524 | AuGuST 2009 | voluME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 94 . Kitano , M . , Nakaya , M . , Nakamura , T . , Nagata , S . & Matsuda , M . Imaging of Rab5 activity identifies essential regulators for phagosome maturation . Nature 453 , 241 – 245 ( 2008 ) . 95 . Terebiznik , M . R . et al . Helicobacter pylori VacA toxin promotes bacterial intracellular survival in gastric epithelial cells . Infect . Immun . 74 , 6599 – 6614 ( 2006 ) . 96 . Via , L . E . et al . Arrest of mycobacterial phagosome maturation is caused by a block in vesicle fusion between stages controlled by rab5 and rab7 . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 13326 – 13331 ( 1997 ) . 97 . Prada - Delgado , A . et al . Inhibition of Rab5a exchange activity is a key step for Listeria monocytogenes survival . Traffic 6 , 252 – 265 ( 2005 ) . 98 . Mallo , G . V . et al . SopB promotes phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate formation on Salmonella vacuoles by recruiting Rab5 and Vps34 . J . Cell Biol . 182 , 741 – 752 ( 2008 ) . 99 . Ingmundson , A . , Delprato , A . , Lambright , D . G . & Roy , C . R . Legionella pneumophila proteins that regulate Rab1 membrane cycling . Nature 450 , 365 – 369 ( 2007 ) . 100 . Machner , M . P . & Isberg , R . R . A bifunctional bacterial protein links GDI displacement to Rab1 activation . Science 318 , 974 – 977 ( 2007 ) . 101 . Polo , S . , Pece , S . & Di Fiore , P . P . Endocytosis and cancer . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 1 – 6 ( 2004 ) . 102 . Bache , K . G . , Slagsvold , T . & Stenmark , H . Defective downregulation of receptor tyrosine kinases in cancer . EMBO J . 23 , 2707 – 2712 ( 2004 ) . 103 . Cheng , K . W . et al . The RAB25 small GTPase determines aggressiveness of ovarian and breast cancers . Nature Med . 10 , 1251 – 1256 ( 2004 ) . 104 . Wang , X . , Kumar , R . , Navarre , J . , Casanova , J . E . & Goldenring , J . R . Regulation of vesicle trafficking in Madin – Darby canine kidney cells by Rab11a and Rab25 . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 29138 – 29146 ( 2000 ) . 105 . Caswell , P . T . et al . Rab25 associates with α 5 β 1 integrin to promote invasive migration in 3D microenvironments . Dev . Cell 13 , 496 – 510 ( 2007 ) . 106 . Pellinen , T . et al . Small GTPase Rab21 regulates cell adhesion and controls endosomal traffic of β 1 - integrins . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 767 – 780 ( 2006 ) . 107 . Pellinen , T . et al . Integrin trafficking regulated by Rab21 is necessary for cytokinesis . Dev . Cell 15 , 371 – 385 ( 2008 ) . 108 . Bravo - Cordero , J . J . et al . MT1 - MMP proinvasive activity is regulated by a novel Rab8 - dependent exocytic pathway . EMBO J . 26 , 1499 – 1510 ( 2007 ) . 109 . Hou , Q . et al . Integrative genomics identifies RAB23 as an invasion mediator gene in diffuse - type gastric cancer . Cancer Res . 68 , 4623 – 4630 ( 2008 ) . 110 . Neeft , M . et al . Munc13 – 4 is an effector of Rab27a and controls secretion of lysosomes in hematopoietic cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 731 – 741 ( 2005 ) . 111 . Holt , O . et al . Slp1 and Slp2 - a localize to the plasma membrane of CTL and contribute to secretion from the immunological synapse . Traffic 9 , 446 – 457 ( 2008 ) . 112 . Seabra , M . C . , Brown , M . S . & Goldstein , J . L . Retinal degeneration in choroideremia : deficiency of rab geranylgeranyl transferase . Science 259 , 377 – 381 ( 1993 ) . 113 . Seabra , M . C . , Ho , Y . K . & Anant , J . S . Deficient geranylgeranylation of Ram / Rab27 in choroideremia . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 24420 – 24427 ( 1995 ) . 114 . Aligianis , I . A . et al . Mutations of the catalytic subunit of RAB3GAP cause Warburg Micro syndrome . Nature Genet . 37 , 221 – 223 ( 2005 ) . 115 . Aligianis , I . A . et al . Mutation in Rab3 GTPase - activating protein ( RAB3GAP ) noncatalytic subunit in a kindred with Martsolf syndrome . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 78 , 702 – 707 ( 2006 ) . 116 . Verhoeven , K . et al . Mutations in the small GTP - ase late endosomal protein RAB7 cause Charcot - Marie - Tooth type 2B neuropathy . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 72 , 722 – 727 ( 2003 ) . 117 . Miinea , C . P . et al . AS160 , the Akt substrate regulating GLUT4 translocation , has a functional Rab GTPase - activating protein domain . Biochem . J . 391 , 87 – 93 ( 2005 ) . 118 . Roach , W . G . , Chavez , J . A . , Miinea , C . P . & Lienhard , G . E . Substrate specificity and effect on GLUT4 translocation of the Rab GTPase - activating protein Tbc1d1 . Biochem . J . 403 , 353 – 358 ( 2007 ) . 119 . Chadt , A . et al . Tbc1d1 mutation in lean mouse strain confers leanness and protects from diet - induced obesity . Nature Genet . 40 , 1354 – 1359 ( 2008 ) . 120 . Sano , H . , Roach , W . G . , Peck , G . R . , Fukuda , M . & Lienhard , G . E . Rab10 in insulin - stimulated GLUT4 translocation . Biochem . J . 411 , 89 – 95 ( 2008 ) . 121 . Jenkins , D . et al . RAB23 mutations in Carpenter syndrome imply an unexpected role for hedgehog signaling in cranial - suture development and obesity . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 80 , 1162 – 1170 ( 2007 ) . 122 . Kapfhamer , D . et al . Mutations in Rab3a alter circadian period and homeostatic response to sleep loss in the mouse . Nature Genet . 32 , 290 – 295 ( 2002 ) . 123 . Geppert , M . et al . The role of Rab3A in neurotransmitter release . Nature 369 , 493 – 497 ( 1994 ) . 124 . Sato , T . et al . The Rab8 GTPase regulates apical protein localization in intestinal cells . Nature 448 , 366 – 369 ( 2007 ) . 125 . Loftus , S . K . et al . Mutation of melanosome protein RAB38 in chocolate mice . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 4471 – 4476 ( 2002 ) . 126 . Nielsen , E . , Severin , F . , Backer , J . M . , Hyman , A . A . & Zerial , M . Rab5 regulates motility of early endosomes on microtubules . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 376 – 382 ( 1999 ) . 127 . Christoforidis , S . , McBride , H . M . , Burgoyne , R . D . & Zerial , M . The Rab5 effector EEA1 is a core component of endosome docking . Nature 397 , 621 – 626 ( 1999 ) . 128 . Chiariello , M . , Bruni , C . B . & Bucci , C . The small GTPases Rab5a , Rab5b and Rab5c are differentially phosphorylated in vitro . FEBS Lett . 453 , 20 – 24 ( 1999 ) . 129 . Ding , J . , Soule , G . , Overmeyer , J . H . & Maltese , W . A . Tyrosine phosphorylation of the Rab24 GTPase in cultured mammalian cells . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 312 , 670 – 675 ( 2003 ) . 130 . van der Sluijs , P . et al . Reversible phosphorylation – dephosphorylation determines the localization of rab4 during the cell cycle . EMBO J . 11 , 4379 – 4389 ( 1992 ) . 131 . Bailly , E . et al . Phosphorylation of two small GTP - binding proteins of the Rab family by p34cdc2 . Nature 350 , 715 – 718 ( 1991 ) . 132 . Karniguian , A . , Zahraoui , A . & Tavitian , A . Identification of small GTP - binding rab proteins in human platelets : thrombin - induced phosphorylation of rab3B , rab6 , and rab8 proteins . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 90 , 7647 – 7651 ( 1993 ) . 133 . Kang , R . et al . Neural palmitoyl - proteomics reveals dynamic synaptic palmitoylation . Nature 456 , 904 – 909 ( 2008 ) . 134 . Mace , G . , Miaczynska , M . , Zerial , M . & Nebreda , A . R . Phosphorylation of EEA1 by p38 MAP kinase regulates mu opioid receptor endocytosis . EMBO J . 24 , 3235 – 3246 ( 2005 ) . 135 . Mattera , R . , Tsai , Y . C . , Weissman , A . M . & Bonifacino , J . S . The Rab5 guanine nucleotide exchange factor Rabex - 5 binds ubiquitin ( Ub ) and functions as a Ub ligase through an atypical Ub - interacting motif and a zinc finger domain . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 6874 – 6883 ( 2006 ) . 136 . Mattera , R . & Bonifacino , J . S . Ubiquitin binding and conjugation regulate the recruitment of Rabex - 5 to early endosomes . EMBO J . 27 , 2484 – 2494 ( 2008 ) . 137 . Chavez , J . A . , Roach , W . G . , Keller , S . R . , Lane , W . S . & Lienhard , G . E . Inhibition of GLUT4 translocation by Tbc1d1 , a Rab GTPase - activating protein abundant in skeletal muscle , is partially relieved by AMP - activated protein kinase activation . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 9187 – 9195 ( 2008 ) . 138 . Steele - Mortimer , O . , Gruenberg , J . & Clague , M . J . Phosphorylation of GDI and membrane cycling of rab proteins . FEBS Lett . 329 , 313 – 318 ( 1993 ) . 139 . Vitale , G . et al . Distinct Rab - binding domains mediate the interaction of Rabaptin - 5 with GTP - bound Rab4 and Rab5 . EMBO J . 17 , 1941 – 1951 ( 1998 ) . 140 . Hill , E . , Clarke , M . & Barr , F . A . The Rab6 - binding kinesin , Rab6 - KIFL , is required for cytokinesis . EMBO J . 19 , 5711 – 5719 ( 2000 ) . 141 . Riggs , B . et al . Actin cytoskeleton remodeling during early Drosophila furrow formation requires recycling endosomal components Nuclear - fallout and Rab11 . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 143 – 154 ( 2003 ) . 142 . Kouranti , I . , Sachse , M . , Arouche , N . , Goud , B . & Echard , A . Rab35 regulates an endocytic recycling pathway essential for the terminal steps of cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 16 , 1719 – 1725 ( 2006 ) . 143 . Yoshimura , S . , Egerer , J . , Fuchs , E . , Haas , A . K . & Barr , F . A . Functional dissection of Rab GTPases involved in primary cilium formation . J . Cell Biol . 178 , 363 – 369 ( 2007 ) . Acknowledgements I thank M . Zerial for introducing me to the fascinating world of Rabs . Work in my laboratory is generously supported by the Research Council of Norway , the Norwegian Cancer Society , the South - Eastern Norway Regional Health Authority and the European Union . DATABASES OMIM : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / query . fcgi ? db = OMIM Charcot - Marie - Tooth disease type 2B | choroideremia | GS1 | GS2 | GS3 | Martsolf syndrome | type II diabetes | Warburg Micro syndrome UniProtKB : http : / / www . uniprot . org ARL1 | EEA1 | GCC185 | M6PRBP1 | RAB1 | RAB5 | RAB25 | RAB27A | rabenosyn 5 | REP1 | REP2 | RN - tre InterPro : http : / / www . ebi . ac . uk / interpro / FYVE | TBC FURTHER INFORMATION Harald Stenmark’s homepage : http : / / www . rr - research . no / stenmark SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION See online article : S1 ( table ) all links are acTive in The online Pdf R E V I E W S NATuRE REvIEwS | Molecular cell Biology voluME 10 | AuGuST 2009 | 525 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved