Meta - Level Support for Facilitating Participation in Website ( Re - ) Design Activities Henrik Hertel University of Rostock , Germany henrik . hertel @ uni - rostock . de Anke Dittmar University of Rostock , Germany anke . dittmar @ uni - rostock . de Doritt Linke University of Rostock , Germany doritt . linke @ uni - rostock . de ABSTRACT Complex websites need to evolve continuously as they con - tribute to shaping the relationships between involved stake - holders . The paper presents conceptual ideas and a prototyp - ical tool to facilitate participation in web redesign activities . The proposed meta - level support allows to augment dedi - cated parts of web pages by sets of design options . End users are provided with means to explore and assess the alternative design ideas in a parallel prototyping manner and to create and share annotations . A real - world example is used to moti - vate and illustrate the suggested approach . The contribution to end - user design and cultures of participation is discussed . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → User centered design ; Participatory design ; Interface design prototyping ; Web - based interaction . KEYWORDS Meta - design ; parallel prototyping ; web - augmentation ACM Reference Format : Henrik Hertel , Anke Dittmar , and Doritt Linke . 2020 . Meta - Level Support for Facilitating Participation in Website ( Re - ) Design Activi - ties . In ACM SIGCHI Symposium on Engineering Interactive Comput - ing Systems ( EICS ’20 Companion ) , June 23 – 26 , 2020 , Sophia Antipolis , France . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 6 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3393672 . 3398641 1 INTRODUCTION The evolution of web applications from static , content - based web pages to dynamic applications with functionality and ser - vices is accompanied by increased user participation . While Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personalorclassroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesarenotmadeordistributedforprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitationonthefirstpage . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . EICS ’20 Companion , June 23 – 26 , 2020 , Sophia Antipolis , France © 2020 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 7984 - 7 / 20 / 06 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3393672 . 3398641 in the Web 1 . 0 - era , users were mainly limited to reading and form filling , Web 2 . 0 applications enabled them to switch between the role of consumer and ( collaborative ) content pro - ducer . By blogging or wiki editing users become ‘prosumers’ and Olsina et al . [ 15 ] describe corresponding websites as be - ing in an endless beta condition . Mashups and web augmen - tation even allow web users to compose new applications from existing web resources and to customize websites , re - spectively [ 3 ] . Such means for end - user development support the idea of ‘open systems’ that users can modify and evolve at use time but also face challenges such as participation overload [ 8 ] . Depending on their expertise and motivation , individuals can or want to contribute to a website at different levels ( e . g . , as local developer , content provider , or just as reader ) . Hence , in their meta - design framework , Fischer et al . [ 7 , 8 ] call for a variety of technological environments to support a broad spectrum of participation scenarios . This paper investigates the idea of end - user design en - vironments for web applications with a focus on technical aspects . In particular , we look at websites with diverse stake - holders where participation in evolutionary redesign activ - ities is needed to adapt them to the changing needs and constraints . Design requires both elaboration of meaning - fully distinct design options and making choices [ 2 ] . The paper proposes meta - level tool support which allows ( local ) developers to augment dedicated parts of websites by sets of design options . End users can choose between and comment on those options . Additionally , the creation and sharing of annotations is supported . The paper is organized as follows . Section 2 introduces a motivating example that is also used to illustrate the concep - tual design , prototypical implementation , and intended use of the presented tool support . Related work , contributions to end - user design , and future work are discussed in section 3 . We finish with some conclusions in section 4 . 2 META - LEVEL TOOL SUPPORT Like any other artifact , websites are shaped by , and in turn shape , the social and organizational contexts of involved stakeholders . This section presents tool support ( based on web augmentation techniques ) aimed at facilitating participa - tion in redesigning web applications with diverse stakehold - ers ( e . g . , institutional websites ) . In such cases , stakeholders EICS ’20 Companion , June 23 – 26 , 2020 , Sophia Antipolis , France Henrik Hertel , Anke Dittmar , and Doritt Linke do not form a ‘monolithic community’ and the complexity of the application results from different interests in presenting and using information . We first look at a small example from our own experience : the website of a university department . Motivating Example Websites of university departments are often created and managed by content management systems and need to fit into the university website . User groups include prospec - tive students , undergraduate and graduate students ( local , national , international ) , visitors , faculty / staff ( department , university , other universities ) , parents , research consumers , research program managers , and press [ 16 ] . Ritter et al . show in their task analysis that “nearly all the constituencies of a university department now interact with its Web site , and that nearly all the tasks and work that departments do are mirrored on the Web site as well” [ 16 ] . The authors admit that the range of users and the breadth of tasks “suggests a wider and deeper use than we thought we would see” [ 16 ] . Two authors of this paper observed a similar underesti - mation of the complexity of their department website when they were involved in a redesign process triggered by a new university web layout . For instance , the department manage - ment initially assumed an automated ‘content transfer’ from the existing to the new layout . Most parts of the website were completely revised . The ‘study & teaching’ area was redesigned together with graduate students participating in an interaction design course , with three teacher representa - tives , and with participants in a design workshop . The new design took more account of the needs of prospective and beginner students . The revision of the ‘research’ area was carried out by a small group of professors , discussed among professors in one of their regular meetings , and led to minor modifications . Students and staff members were asked to comment on the resulting online prototype . Some of the new design ideas could only be implemented with their volun - tary contributions . It was generally more effective to directly contacting colleagues and students ( face - to - face and email ) than to sending out group mails . Not surprisingly , many par - ticipants of the above mentioned meetings and workshop later provided contributions . Complex websites evolve over a sustained span of time . In our understanding , their redesign does not refer to required periodic updates but to more comprehensive revisions with exploratory steps ( e . g . , due to strategic refocusing , changes in user expectations or new design constraints ) . Besides gen - eral challenges of user participation ( e . g . , securing time and space to get committed in design processes , lack of design skills such as brainstorming , change of perspectives , concept creation [ 13 ] ) , we also noticed limitations of existing proto - typing approaches to engage a broader audience in co - design activities . Figure 1 : Annotations are bundled together in tickets . Figure 2 : Main components of the end - user design environ - ment . Conceptual Design and Architecture In this work , we employ ideas from parallel prototyping and collaborative annotations to contribute to end - user design environments that facilitate different levels of participation in the addressed domain . Such environments need to support an alternation between phases where new ideas for parts of the website under consideration are developed ( idea gen - eration ) and phases where those ideas are compared and assessed ( idea convergence ) . The proposed tool is especially aimed at supporting participation in idea convergence by sharing and discussing sets of design options . ( This , of course , can prepare idea generation again ) . We refer to our tool support as ‘meta - level’ support be - cause web augmentation techniques are used to easily inte - grate ‘throw - away’ implementations of design options and annotation mechanisms into running web applications . Web augmentation builds on top of the rendering of an existing website [ 3 ] . In our case , alternative designs for particular parts of web pages are added and can be explored in a paral - lel prototyping manner . According to Dow et al . [ 4 ] , parallel prototyping , that is the creation and sharing of multiple de - signs foster exploration , prevent people from framing design problems too narrowly , and improve results [ 4 ] . It also helps designers to react appropriately to critique and feedback on design ideas [ 4 , 5 ] . Our augmented web pages offer the following features to end users . Meta - Level Support for Facilitating Participation in Website ( Re - ) Design Activities EICS ’20 Companion , June 23 – 26 , 2020 , Sophia Antipolis , France Exploration and choice : - Switching between and viewing design options for dedi - cated parts of web pages . - Choosing between options , commenting , and posting . Collaborative referencing of web page elements : - Creation , editing , and positioning of annotations , - Posting of tickets ( optionally as public viewable ) , - Rating of public viewable annotations . Figure 1 illustrates the ‘life cycle’ of annotations , bundled together in tickets . As long as a ticket is not submitted the annotations can be modified . If it is submitted as ‘public viewable’ the annotations can be viewed and rated by all users of the augmented web pages . Otherwise , they can only be viewed by the creator or via the management platform . Figure 2 shows the overall architecture of the meta - level tool support consisting of three main components . The back - end offers a Representational State Transfer ( REST ) API to communicate with the client - side modules for end users and the client - side management platform . The management plat - form ( to be implemented as Single Page Application , SPA ) can be used by ( local ) designers and developers to augment their website and make it accessible to all end users or to sub - groups . For each website domain , after being registered and verified , projects can be created and managed which span the web pages under redesign . In the prototypical implementa - tion described below HTML sections and a CSS preprocessor are used to specify and handle alternative designs . It should be noted that design options can and perhaps even should be ‘sketchy’ to convey the basic ideas ( the second scenario in the next sub - section illustrates this ) . A project aggregates all tickets and selections of favored design options that are submitted for the assigned web pages . Feedback information can be viewed and shared by email , tickets can be closed for rating or deleted etc . The client - side module adds a meta - level feedback area with the above described functionality to web pages under consideration . If alternative designs are specified for some parts of a web page the feedback area provides local dialog boxes that allow end users to switch between the different designs , to select one option and give comments . Prototype and Scenarios of Use The prototypical implementation of the proposed tool sup - port employs widely used web technologies and development tools including the following ones . - Client - side module : TypeScript and tslint 1 for static code analysis , HTML5 , SCSS and node - sass 2 as CSS preproces - sor , webpack 3 as module bundler . 1 https : / / palantir . github . io / tslint 2 https : / / github . com / sass / node - sass 3 https : / / webpack . js . org Figure 3 : User interface of the meta - level feedback area . Figure 4 : Dianne injects the feedback area to web pages ( see button labeled ‘Feedback’ in the bottom window ) . - Management platform ( SPA ) : JavaScript , HTML5 and CSS , Vue . js as JavaScript framework for SPAs , bootstrap 4 as CSS framework , webpack , auth0 . js 5 ( library for SPAs to do authentication ) , SignalR 6 ( library for bidirectional com - munication with server - side module ) . - Backend : C # , ASP . NET Core 7 as cross - platform web - devel - opment framework , Microsoft SQL Server LocalDB ( data - base management system ) , EF Core 8 as cross - platform object - relational mapping framework , SignalR , Fluent - Email 9 ( library for sending emails ) . Figure 3 depicts the user interface of the feedback area that augments web pages : ( 1 ) submission of tickets , ( 2 ) viewing 4 https : / / getbootstrap . com 5 https : / / auth0 . com / docs / libraries / auth0js / v9 6 https : / / www . asp . net / signalr 7 https : / / github . com / aspnet / Home 8 https : / / github . com / aspnet / EntityFrameworkCore 9 https : / / github . com / lukencode / FluentEmail EICS ’20 Companion , June 23 – 26 , 2020 , Sophia Antipolis , France Henrik Hertel , Anke Dittmar , and Doritt Linke Figure 5 : Paul creates an annotation . of public and private annotations , ( 3 ) exploration of design options for one or more parts of a web page . The relevant elements of the prototype are now demonstrated by two simple scenarios of use where we take up the example de - scribed at the beginning of this section . Let us imagine that the ‘research’ area of the website is under redesign and the following actors from the department are involved : - end - user designers : Paul ( student ) , Claire ( PhD student ) , Ann ( secretary ) , - local developer and content manager : Dianne ( system engineer ) , - local designer : Carl ( research associate ) . Scenario I : . Dianne and Carl want to initiate a discussion about the research area . Dianne logs in to the management platform and adds a new project to the website domain . The tool offers three modes to embed the feedback area . - Mode 1 : a button is automatically embedded in the upper right corner of the web page to activate the feedback area ( by using a predefined HTML < div > tag ) . - Mode 2 : the activation of the feedback area is attached to an existing element of the web page . - Mode 3 : similar to mode 1 but the feedback area is only included if the URL is extended by a generated query parameter . Dianne selects mode 1 to address all users . She is asked to insert the generated script ( see figure 4 ) into the source code of all relevant web pages to map them to the project . Figure 5 depicts Paul’s actions . He activated the feedback center and moved an annotation to the first two cards saying that they do not much differ in content . He has no more comments and submits his ticket as public viewable . When Carl enters the management platform he notices the arrival of two tickets , one sent by Paul and the other anonymously . Ann can view the annotations and ratings of these tickets as well ( figure 6 ) . Scenario II : . In the second scenario , Carl and Dianne , to - gether with other colleagues , developed some ideas for pre - senting the department’s research activities . Carl asks Di - anne to implement the two design options he created for the main research page and to keep it sketchy . In our proto - typical implementation , parts with alternatives have to be Figure 6 : Ann views the annotations and ratings of public viewable tickets . specified as HTML sections with two attributes ( a unique name and a problem description ) and with sub - sections rep - resenting the design options . Each design option has a title ( as HTML attribute ) and can again contain nested options . Additionally , SCSS code has to be specified for the options . Only one option is visible at a time , the others are hidden by the CSS declaration “display : none” . Figure 8 shows code fragments of the example in figure 7 . Dianne uses mode 3 ( described above ) to augment the web pages by the feedback area . She sends a group email with the generated link to the research staff members . Figure 7 shows someone switching between the design options and commenting on their choice . The option on the left - hand side is similar to the old page but with the new required layout , the option on the right - hand side adds content , there are changes in the navigation structure and presentation . Finally , Dianne and Carl view and share ( by email ) information about submitted choices . For example , Claire prefers the second option because research is not only presented in terms of projects ( figure 9 ) . 3 DISCUSSION , RELATED AND FUTURE WORK Fischer et al . [ 8 ] distinguish between closed systems and open systems to discuss different assumptions about develop - ment processes and the role of the designer and user . “Closed systems typically create a sharp separation between design and use” [ 8 ] and result in interactive tools that are ‘designed for use before use’ . In contrast , open systems acknowledge the co - evolution between users and ( technological ) systems . The aim is not to develop ‘complete’ systems but to consider design as open and continuous process . Users are included as co - designers throughout the entire existence of the sys - tem ; they are provided with tools for ‘designing in use’ . The approach in this paper supports the idea of open systems . Meta - Level Support for Facilitating Participation in Website ( Re - ) Design Activities EICS ’20 Companion , June 23 – 26 , 2020 , Sophia Antipolis , France Figure 7 : At the meta - level , parts with design options are framed in red , with an attached dialog box for exploration , choice and comments . Take note that the design options in the example are implemented in a sketchy way . 1 < section data - fm - area - name = " Research " 2 data - fm - area - description = " Research area under construction . Please , . . . " > 3 < ! - - 1 . Alternative - - > 4 < section data - fm - area - item - title = " old content , new layout " > 5 < div class = " row " > 6 < div class = " column " > 7 < div class = " card " > 8 < h4 > < b > Focuses < / b > < / h4 > 9 . . . 10 < / section > 11 < ! - - 2 . Alternative - - > 12 < section data - fm - area - item - title = " alternative proposal " > 13 < div class = " wrapper " > 14 < div class = " box1 " > 15 . . . 16 < / section > 17 < / section > 1 [ data - fm - area - name = " Research " ] { 2 / * 1 . Alternative * / 3 & > [ data - fm - area - item - title ] : nth - child ( 1 ) { . . . 4 } 5 / * 2 . Alternative * / 6 & > [ data - fm - area - item - title ] : nth - child ( 2 ) { 7 display : none ; 8 . vertical - menu a { 9 display : block ; . . . 10 } 11 } Figure 8 : Specification of two design options for a part of the page named “Research” ( top : HTML code fragment , bottom : SCSS code fragment ) . Of course , the boundary between closed and open systems is blurred . However , web development tools such as wire - frame tools for early design , content management systems , and even wikis - although supporting collaboration , content - providing , and user feedback - rather assume closed systems . Figure 9 : Carl and Dianne view feedback on design options via the management platform . They provide less suitable means for end - user redesign which not only concerns modifications of the content but also of the behavior and presentation of websites [ 1 ] . Open systems are especially promoted by end - user development and under - lying conceptual frameworks ( e . g . , meta - design [ 8 ] ) . There are currently two main categories of tools for end - user web development ( apart from tools to directly create websites ) [ 1 ] . Mashup tools enable end users to create new web applica - tions by combining existing resources and services . Web augmentation tools help to customize and extend existing web pages . CrowdAdapt [ 14 ] , as an example , provides a vi - sual design environment that augments web pages to adapt their layout . Additionally , crowdsourcing is used for sharing the adaptations . Aldalur et a . [ 1 ] give a good overview of existing end - user development tools along five dimensions EICS ’20 Companion , June 23 – 26 , 2020 , Sophia Antipolis , France Henrik Hertel , Anke Dittmar , and Doritt Linke ( programming paradigm , subject of adaptation are two of them ) . Our approach focuses less on customization and end - user programming and more on integrating exploratory design activities into website evolution . In the context of the object - oriented development paradigm , such an integration is con - sidered in [ 11 ] and a software architecture is suggested that allows to easily compose alternative ‘throw - away extensions’ with the evolutionary prototype at run time . We use web augmentation techniques to enable a similar exploration of alternative design ideas . The proposed tool support con - siders the central meta - design concepts mentioned in [ 12 ] : convivial tools , domain - orientation , open , evolvable systems , underdesigned systems , and collaborative work practices . In particular , the demonstrated parallel prototyping for dedi - cated web page areas is a novel contribution to underdesign , a technique that provides design spaces for users and helps them to understand an existing system as incomplete and evolving . In meta - design , “not every participant must contribute , but all participants must have opportunities to contribute when they want to” [ 7 ] . Various role systems are needed to avoid participation and collaboration overload in specific domains and situations . For instance , in the study by Fogli and Provenza [ 9 ] , administrative employees become end - user developers of e - government services while citizens stay exclusively in the role of end users of these services . The ne - gotiation of the relationships between website owners , devel - opers of external scripts , and end users in web augmentation contexts is investigated in [ 6 ] . Fischer et al . [ 8 ] recommend to have meta - designers who technically enable and support users’ participation and maieuta designers who encourage and sustain certain ‘cultures of participation’ . Websites which are in the focus of this paper have to meet the needs and in - terests of diverse stakeholders and different levels of engage - ment can be expected . As the above scenarios indicate , the suggested meta - level tool support allows to create different projects for a website in order to provide specific augmenta - tions ( sets of design options ) to specific groups of end users . However , it is beyond the scope of this paper to empirically investigate experiences of maieuta designers and others in using the tool . At this stage , we have only collected initial feedback from colleagues and students . While studies on parallel prototyping [ 4 , 5 ] and collaborative annotations [ 10 ] suggest that these techniques support participation , we have to carry out an in - depth experimentation to investigate the effectiveness of our tool in encouraging co - design activities . Related questions concern , for example , the number of de - sign options which should ideally be offered to end users and whether alternative ways of representing design options have an influence on the quality of the comments . 4 CONCLUSIONS It is increasingly accepted that richer ecologies of participa - tion are crucial in ( re - ) design activities [ 7 ] . The presented tool support contributes to an end - user ( re - ) design environ - ment for web applications . We have shown that it facilitates different levels of participation . Possible ways of using the tool have to be investigated in future empirical studies . REFERENCES [ 1 ] I . Aldalur , M . Winckler , O . Díaz , and P . Palanque . 2017 . Web Augmen - tation as a Promising Technology for End User Development . In New Perspectives in End - User Development . Springer , 433 – 459 . [ 2 ] B . Buxton . 2007 . Sketching User Experiences : Getting the design right and the right design . M . Kaufmann . [ 3 ] O . Díaz , C . Arellano , and M . Azanza . 2013 . A Language for End - User Web Augmentation : Caring for Producers and Consumers Alike . ACM Trans . Web 7 , 2 ( 2013 ) , 51 . [ 4 ] S . Dow , J . Fortuna , D . Schwartz , B . Altringer , D . Schwartz , and S . Klem - mer . 2011 . Prototyping Dynamics : Sharing Multiple Designs Improves Exploration , Group Rapport , and Results . In Proc . of CHI ( CHI ’11 ) . ACM , 2807 – 2816 . [ 5 ] S . P . Dow , A . Glassco , J . Kass , M . Schwarz , D . L . Schwartz , and S . R . Klemmer . 2010 . Parallel prototyping leads to better design results , more divergence , and increased self - efficacy . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 17 , 4 ( 2010 ) , 18 : 1 – 18 : 24 . [ 6 ] D . Firmenich , S . Firmenich , G . Rossi , M . Winckler , andD . Distante . 2015 . User Interface Adaptation Using Web Augmentation Techniques : To - wards a Negotiated Approach . In Proc . of ICWE 2015 ( LNCS ) , Vol . 9114 . Springer , 147 – 164 . [ 7 ] G . Fischer . 2011 . Understanding , Fostering , and Supporting Cultures of Participation . Interactions 18 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 42 – 53 . [ 8 ] G . Fischer , D . Fogli , and A . Piccinno . 2017 . Revisiting and Broadening the Meta - Design Framework for End - User Development . In New Perspectives in End - User Development . Springer , 61 – 97 . [ 9 ] D . Fogli and L . P . Provenza . 2011 . End - User Development of e - Government Services through Meta - modeling . In Proc . of IS - EUD 2011 ( LNCS ) , Vol . 6654 . Springer , 107 – 122 . [ 10 ] F . Gao . 2013 . A case study of using a social annotation tool to support collaboratively learning . The Internet and Higher Education 17 , 4 ( 2013 ) , 76 – 83 . [ 11 ] H . Hertel and A . Dittmar . 2017 . Design support for integrated evolu - tionary and exploratory prototyping . In Proc . of EICS . ACM , 105 – 110 . [ 12 ] B . Koehne , D . F . Redmiles , and G . Fischer . 2011 . Extending the Meta - designTheory : EngagingParticipantsasActiveContributorsinVirtual Worlds . In Proc . of IS - EUD 2011 ( LNCS ) , Vol . 6654 . Springer , 264 – 269 . [ 13 ] P . Marti and L . Bannon . 2009 . Exploring User - Centred Design in Practice : Some Caveats . Knowledge , Technology & Policy 22 ( 2009 ) , 7 – 15 . [ 14 ] M . Nebeling , M . Speicher , and M . C . Norrie . 2013 . CrowdAdapt : en - abling crowdsourced web page adaptation for individual viewing con - ditions and preferences . . In Proc . of EICS 2013 . ACM , 23 – 32 . [ 15 ] L . Olsina , R . Sassano , and L . Mich . 2008 . Specifying Quality Require - ments for the Web 2 . 0 Applications . In Proc . of the 7th International Workshop on Web - Oriented Software Technologies ( IWWOST’2008 ) . [ 16 ] F . E . Ritter , Andrew R . Freed , and Onida L . M . Haskett . 2005 . Discov - ering user information needs : the case of university department web sites . Interactions 12 , 5 ( 2005 ) , 19 – 27 .