The Retractable Airplane Landing Gear and the Northrop " Anomaly " : Variation - Selection and the Shaping of Technology Author ( s ) : Walter G . Vincenti Source : Technology and Culture , Vol . 35 , No . 1 ( Jan . , 1994 ) , pp . 1 - 33 Published by : The Johns Hopkins University Press on behalf of the Society for the History of Technology Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 3106747 Accessed : 10 / 09 / 2010 08 : 42 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use , available at http : / / www . jstor . org / page / info / about / policies / terms . jsp . JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use provides , in part , that unless you have obtained prior permission , you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles , and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal , non - commercial use . Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work . Publisher contact information may be obtained at http : / / www . jstor . org / action / showPublisher ? publisherCode = jhup . Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission . JSTOR is a not - for - profit service that helps scholars , researchers , and students discover , use , and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive . We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . Society for the History of Technology and The Johns Hopkins University Press are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize , preserve and extend access to Technology and Culture . http : / / www . jstor . org The Retractable Airplane Landing Gear and the Northrop " Anomaly " : Variation - Selection and the Shaping of Technology WALTER G . VI NCENTI Airplane designers today routinely provide their high - performance aircraft with a landing ( and takeoff ) gear that retracts inside the vehicle in flight . Few people apart from the designers give attention to that fact . As with other devices that attract little notice , however , the retractable landing gear has a history of more than incidental interest . Looked at deliberately , its story contains lessons about the processes of learning and change in engineering . This article does not pretend to a full history of the retractable gear . Such a task would call for a book . ' Though I aim to put the story in context , I shall focus primarily on an episode in the United States in the first half of the 1930s , when the retractable gear was entering prominently and permanently into airplane design . In that period , as retractable gear were appearing on a series of innovative airplanes , a succession of high - performance craft from the noted designer John Northrop continued to exhibit a streamlined fixed undercarriage . These beautifully trim aircraft are certain to be remembered by any observer of the aeronautical scene at the time - as was I as an aviation enthusiast in high school . Thinking back on them prompted me to wonder : How was it that Northrop , who led the way in other respects , was apparently so slow to adopt retraction ? An answer to this MR VINCENTI is a member of the Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics at Stanford University . He thanks the host of people who helped collect and comprehend the material in this article : Richard Allen , Gerald Balzer , Glenn Bugos , Ira Chart , Edward Constant , Fred Culick , David Edge , the late Edward Heinemann , Nicholas Hoff , Thomas Hughes , John Kimball , Stephen Kline , Ilan Kroo , Gerald Landry , Edwin Layton , Mark Levinson , Robert McGinn , Anne Millbrooke , Russell Robinson , Eric Schatzberg , Paul Seaver , Richard Shevell , Richard Smith , and a Technology and Culture referee . ' For a brief outline of the history of the airplane landing gear , both fixed and retractable , see C . Ellam , " Developments in Aircraft Landing Gear , 1900 - 1939 , " Transactions of the Newcomen Society 55 ( 1983 - 84 ) : 48 - 51 . ? 1994 by the Society for the History of Technology . All rights reserved . 0040 - 165X / 94 / 3501 - 0004 $ 01 . 00 1 2 Walter G . Vincenti question , I hoped , might supply evidence concerning the variation - selection model for the growth of engineering knowledge put for - ward in my recent book . 2 The story turned out more instructive than I anticipated . Beyond its significance for the variation - selection model , it has implications - cautionary , I believe - for the social study of technology . I will take up these matters following a narrative of the Northrop episode and its context . The Usual View Adoption of retractable gear contributed to what John Rae calls the " airframe revolution " of the early 1930s . As discussed in the volumes by Rae and by Ronald Miller and David Sawers , American designers combined this and other innovations - aluminum stressed - skin struc - ture , wing flaps , and the controllable - pitch propeller - into what would remain the dominant configuration for both military and civil purposes for the next twenty years . This synthesis is seen as coming about through a series of ten or so key land - based aircraft , beginning with the Boeing Monomail and Northrop Alpha , single - engine com - mercial designs of 1930 , and culminating in the well - known Douglas twin - engine airliners , the DC - 1 , - 2 , and - 3 of 1933 - 36 . The various innovations , introduced in different combinations as the series grew , came together as a whole in the DC - 1 . Of the series , the Monomail ( fig . 1 ) and the Lockheed Orion , an advanced but still wood - structured transport of 1931 ( fig . 2 ) , are often pointed to as pioneering use of retractable gear . Since this airframe revolution , the retractable under - carriage has been an accepted and essential element of high - performance land - based aircraft . 3 To the extent they have examined the issue , historians tend to see the introduction of the retractable gear as an essentially reasoned and ordered affair . Lawrence Loftin , in his detailed and technically informed book Quest for Performance , compares the numerical drag coefficient of the Orion with that of Lockheed ' s earlier fixed - gear Vega and states that , generally speaking , " the spectacular reduc - tions in drag associated with . . . use [ of retractable gear ] on an 2W . G . Vincenti , What Engineers Know and How They Know It : Analytical Studies from Aeronautical History ( Baltimore , 1990 ) , chap . 8 . ' J . B . Rae , Climb to Greatness : The American Aircraft Industry , 1920 - 1960 ( Cambridge , Mass . , 1968 ) , chap . 4 ; R . Miller and D . Sawers , The Technical Development of Modern Aviation ( New York , 1970 ) , pp . 18 - 20 , 47 - 50 , 63 - 65 , 73 - 75 , 84 ; P . W . Brooks , The Modern Airliner : Its Origins and Development ( London , 1961 ) , chaps . 1 , 3 . Other craft commonly mentioned in the series are the following , all with twin engines and retractable gear : Boeing B - 9 and Martin B - 10 bombers ( 1931 - 32 ) , Boeing 247 transport ( 1933 ) , and Lockheed Electra transport ( 1934 ) . FIG . 1 . - Boeing Monomail . ( Courtesy of the Boeing Company and Paul G . Spitzer . ) FIG . 2 . - Lockheed Orion . ( Courtesy of Richard S . Allen . ) 4 Walter G . Vincenti aerodynamically clean airplane were found to far outweigh the relatively small increases in weight . " Though in the end correct , this statement suggests that the desirability of the retractable gear was obvious and subject to simple and straightforward engineering assess - ment . Walter Boyne , in his semipopular The Leading Edge , casts his net wider , mentioning , in various contexts , the sporadic , anticipatory use of retractable gear on an assortment of early airplanes : J . W . Martin ' s Kitten of 1917 ( which was incapable of flight ) , the Dayton Wright RB - 1 of 1920 ( a remarkably advanced design generally for its day ) , and the Verville Sperry R - 3 of 1922 . Though increasing speed and other factors are likewise mentioned , adoption in the 1930s appears as an essentially foresighted progression , first to a variety of streamlined fairings for a fixed undercarriage , and then to the clearly " ideal solution " of the retractable gear . The main unknown in the last step was what sort of gearing , actuating mechanism , and the like , to use for retraction . The question was thus not whether a retractable landing gear ought to be used - that was self - evident ; the problem for the engineer was how best to achieve this end structurally and mechanically . Views such as these , I submit , underlie the usual historical references to the retractable gear . 4 The Northrop Anomaly Within the view of the Monomail , Orion , and their successors as a foresighted progression , Northrop ' s persistence with fixed gear seems a curious anomaly . The question in the introduction can then be recast as follows : If retraction was so clearly the way to go , why did an innovative designer like Northrop continue on such a seemingly aberrant course ? John K . ( " Jack " ) Northrop was , by anyone ' s count , one of the most creative and influential airplane designers in the quarter - century following the mid - 1920s . After work as a self - taught draftsman - engineer with the Loughead brothers , Malcolm and Allan , in Santa Barbara and with Douglas Aircraft in Santa Monica , Northrop in 1927 joined Allan Loughead in the recently formed Lockheed Aircraft Company in Hollywood . At Lockheed he became well known as designer of the innovatively streamlined Vega , a cantilever high - wing wood - structured monoplane that blazed trails and set records at the hands of Hubert Wilkins , Amelia Earhart , Wiley Post , and others . Parting company with Lockheed in 1928 , he became the guiding spirit of the Avion Corporation , where he built an experimental all - metal 4L . K . Loftin , Jr . , Quest for Performance : The Evolution of Modern Aircraft ( Washington , D . C . , 1985 ) , p . 89 ; W . J . Boyne , The Leading Edge ( New York , 1986 ) , pp . 10 , 77 - 78 , 90 - 93 , 189 - 90 . The Retractable Airplane Landing Gear monoplane , described at the time as a " flying wing . " Though the pilot and engine were indeed enclosed within the unusually thick wing , the craft had in fact a tail supported by twin booms . 5 At the beginning of 1930 , Avion became a division of United Aircraft and Transport Corporation , an aviation holding company , and its name was changed to the Northrop Aircraft Corporation . This turned out to be the first of a succession of three companies to bear the Northrop name . With these companies , Northrop led the design of a number of notable airplanes . He is probably best remembered for his giant experimental ( true - ) flying - wing bomber of the late 1940s . 6 The Northrop airplanes that concern us here , however , are the Greek - letter series coincident with - indeed , part of - the airframe revolution . The Northrop Alpha ( fig . 3 ) inaugurated the series in March of 1930 . Like the contemporary Boeing Monomail , the Alpha featured stressed - skin all - metal construction equal or superior to previous wooden structures in terms of strength in relation to weight . Where the Monomail ' s wing used more or less conventional ( though aluminum ) truss - type spars and ribs , however , the Alpha ' s wing was made up throughout from aluminum sheet , cut and formed into channel - shaped elements for the spanwise and chordwise compo - nents of the internal frame . These were then riveted to one another and to the wing skin to form , in effect , an assembly of contiguous , more or less rectangular , boxes . This relatively light , inexpensive , and rugged multicellular structure , which Northrop had employed also on the Avion " flying wing , " was described by Aviation magazine as a " radical and promising innovation . " Probably Northrop ' s most impor - tant contribution to aeronautics , it was imitated , with modifications , in the Douglas DC - series and later aircraft . 7 5J . K . Northrop , " The All - Wing Type Airplane , " Aviation 28 ( March 29 , 1930 ) : 645 - 48 . 6For Northrop , the Avion Corporation , and the three Northrop companies till 1939 , see R . S . Allen , The Northrop Story , 1929 - 1939 ( New York , 1990 ) . Pages 133 - 46 contain a short history of every Northrop airplane produced in that period ; much of the information on Northrop aircraft comes from this source . For mainly the third Northrop company , see F Anderson , Northrop : An Aeronautical History ( n . p . , 1976 ) . For Northrop airplanes , see also G . Balzer , " The Aircraft of Jack Northrop , " Journal of the American Aviation Historical Society 26 ( Spring 1981 ) : 80 - 87 . For the Vega and the Lockheed Company , see R . J . Francillon , Lockheed Aircraft since 1913 ( London , 1982 ) ; and R . S . Allen , Revolution in the Sky : The Lockheeds of Aviation ' s Golden Age , rev . ed . ( New York , 1988 ) . 7 " The Northrop ' Alpha " ' Aviation 29 ( December 1930 ) : 361 - 62 , quoted phrase on 361 ; K . D . Wilson , " Jack Northrop ' s Metal Miracle - the Alpha 4A , " Model Aviation 6 ( October 1980 ) : 55 - 60 , 122 - 24 . For Northrop ' s multicellular wing structure , see also Miller and Sawers , pp . 64 - 65 ; N . J . Hoff , " A Short History of the Development of Airplane Structures , " American Scientist 34 ( July 1946 ) : 370 - 88 ; Northrop , p . 646 ; Brooks , fig . on p . 81 . 5 6 Walter G . Vincenti FIG . 3 . - Northrop Alpha , original passenger version , with tripod landing gear . ( Courtesy of John B . Kimball . ) The Alpha differed from other craft in the airframe revolution , however , by retaining a fixed landing gear . In its initial version , this gear had the unstreamlined tripod ( or split - axle ) arrangement com - mon on other airplanes of the time ( see fig . 3 ) . Transcontinental and Western Air ( TWA ) , forerunner of Trans World Airlines , acquired thirteen Alphas of this type . These it used successfully , beginning in 1931 , to establish twenty - four - hour mail service between New York and Los Angeles . 8 Jack Northrop , a self - described " nut about streamlining , " 9 was not unaware , of course , of the aerodynamic attractions of retractable gear . As part of a generalized discussion of prospective design refinements that introduced an article of early 1930 on his " flying wing , " he stated that in general " Landing gear retraction offers one of the largest theoretically possible [ aerodynamic ] gains . " He had in 1929 , in fact , already used a retractable gear briefly on the " flying wing . " This gear , designed by Northrop and built by the Menasco Manufacturing Company , proved troublesome in cross - wind takeoffs and landings in early flight tests ; it was replaced with fixed gear to expedite the testing and never reinstalled before the " flying wing " was discontinued in favor of the increasingly important fixed - gear Alpha . Later in 1929 , 8Allen , Northrop , p . 18 . 9Quoted by Miller and Sawers ( n . 3 above ) , p . 62 . The Retractable Airplane Landing Gear FIG . 4 . - Wind - tunnel model of Northrop Alpha with " pants - type " ( or trouser ) gear . ( From wind - tunnel archives , California Institute of Technology , courtesy of Gerald Landry . ) reporting on design progress on the Alpha to a technical advisory committee of United Aircraft , he indicated further that " a retractile [ sic ] gear is being designed to be incorporated later . " ( Terminology , as well as type of gear , had yet to be standardized . ) Though events themselves were complicated , use of retractable gear was clearly Northrop ' s intention ultimately for the Alpha . ' ? By mid - 1930 , his ideas were evidently changing . In May , in a second report to the advisory committee , he mentioned , not only the " retrac - tile " gear , but a new " pants - type " gear as well . To assess this carefully streamlined fixed gear , Northrop had wind - tunnel tests conducted in late 1930 on a model of the Alpha ( fig . 4 ) at the California Institute of Technology . Also tested for comparison were the existing tripod gear and a streamlined underwing enclosure to stow a retracted gear . Caltech ' s Clark Millikan and Arthur Klein , reporting on the tests , noted a large reduction in drag for both the enclosure and the pants - type gear . They expressed " surprise , " however , that the pants - type gear proved almost as beneficial as retraction into the enclosure . These results were apparently crucial in influencing Northrop to ' " Northrop , p . 645 ; A . S . Menasco , " The Founder ' s Story " ( speech to the Manage - ment Club , California Division , Menasco Manufacturing Co . , January 29 , 1969 ; reprinted by the company , n . d . ) ; " Report of Second Meeting , Technical Advisory Committee " ( United Aircraft & Transport Corp . , Seattle , December 2 - 6 , 1929 ) . 7 8 Walter G . Vincenti adopt the pants - type gear in place of a retractable design for modification of the Alpha . " For Northrop , as for designers before and since , choice and design of a landing gear involved tension between a number of conflicting requirements . ' 2 These fall into five categories that ( except for the inclusion of weight in certain cases ) are common to most devices . They can be listed as follows with application in particular to the landing gear . I assume that the reasons behind them do not call for explanation . Performance : In addition to being able to withstand the necessary landing loads , the landing gear should cause as little aerody - namic drag as possible . Weight : As with all components of an airplane , the landing gear should be as light as possible . Initial Cost : Cost of design , materials , and manufacture should be minimized . Reliability : If retractable , the gear should fold and extend with rare malfunctions . Maintenance : The gear should be maintainable in working order in routine operation with a minimum of time and expense . ( The various aspects of a possible category of operating costs I take to be subsumed under performance and maintenance . An unavoidable element of arbitrariness exists in any classification of this sort . ) If aerodynamic performance - that is , reduction of drag - were the sole consideration , the retractable gear , which eliminates landing - gear drag entirely , would be the immediate , obvious choice . It is in this sense that the usual view sees such gear as the " ideal solution . " In fact , the additional requirements cannot be ignored . With regard to performance in relation to weight , a retractable gear invariably weighs more than a well - designed fixed gear for the same situation , and this weight must be supported by an increase in lift . Producing " " Report of Third Meeting , Technical Advisory Committee " ( United Aircraft & Transport Corp . , Hartford , Conn . , May 19 - 23 , 1930 ) ; C . B . Millikan and A . L . Klein , " Wind Tunnel Tests of Modifications to 1 / 6th Scale Model of Northrop Alpha Airplane , " GALCIT Report no . 102 ( California Institute of Technology , Pasadena , December 30 , 1930 ) . The tests were among the first in Caltech ' s new 10 - foot tunnel . In the report to the United Aircraft technical committee in May , Northrop had reported that , when completion of the Caltech tunnel was delayed , models had been sent for test to New York University . I am unable to find reports of these tests . ' 2For a brief contemporary textbook discussion of such requirements , see C . C . Carter , Simple Aerodynamics and the Airplane , 4th rev . ed . ( New York , 1932 ) , p . 191 . For considerations in the design of landing gear before retraction was adopted , see W . L . Smith , Air Transport Operation ( New York , 1931 ) , pp . 149 - 55 . The Retractable Airplane Landing Gear 9 this lift in turn creates drag that tends to offset the gain from retraction . The resulting trade - off can be calculated on the basis of theoretical equations well understood in Northrop ' s time . 13 Knowl - edge about cost , reliability , and maintenance , however , can come only from experience with construction and operation of a new gear when the design departs appreciably from the normal . Designers have to project such matters as best they can , but their projections are unavoidably fallible . As with most engineering problems in the real world , the overall task is complex . Evidence suggests that Northrop was alert to all these consider - ations . Whether he in fact calculated the trade - off between weight and performance is impossible to say - design analyses of this sort rarely survive for long . Writing to Jack Frye , operations chief for TWA , he did say regarding the modified Alpha that " both take - off and cruising speeds were appreciably better in our tests in spite of the additional load of 350 lbs . used with the new [ i . e . , pants - type ] gear . " Concern for cost , reliability , and especially weight is implicit in a statement , in his previously mentioned article on the " flying wing , " that design of a retractable gear " is exceedingly difficult due to the high [ landing ] loads involved . " The interrelated demands of all five requirements ( cost , reliability , and maintenance subsumed in effect under " simplicity " ) appear in the following passage from a Northrop sales brochure from a few years later : " Carefully developed stream - lining provides an aerodynamic efficiency in the Northrop gear almost equal to full retraction but with greater simplicity and much less weight . " A second brochure contains a full paragraph detailing the maintenance virtues of the Northrop gear . 14 Northrop , however , had a special concern , stemming from the additional fact that a retractable gear needs space for stowage when retracted . According to an interview with the prominent designer Edward Heinemann , who worked as a young engineer on the Alpha , he - Northrop - was uneasy about the effect of this requirement on his innovative wing structure . Providing space to stow the retracted gear inside the low wing - the aerodynamically preferred place to put it - would require interrupting the multicellular arrangement , and Northrop was reluctant to do this . He had gone to great effort to keep ' 3For the necessary basic equation , see , e . g . , eq . ( 6 . 28 ) in J . D . Anderson , Jr . , Introduction to Flight ( New York , 1978 ) , p . 220 . This equation must be corrected for an obvious algebraic typographical error . ' 4J . K . Northrop to J . Frye , August 18 , 1931 , wind - tunnel archives , California Institute of Technology ; Northrop , " The All - Wing Type Airplane , " p . 645 ; " Northrop Delta Model " ( sales brochure , Northrop Corp . , undated , probably ca . 1934 ) ; " The Northrop Long Range Bomber " ( sales brochure , Northrop Corp . , undated , probably ca . 1936 ) . 10 Walter G . Vincenti FIG . 5 . - Northrop Beta . ( Courtesy of Northrop Corporation and Ira E . Chart . ) the structure light and simple , and providing sufficient strength in the presence of such interruption might compromise this achievement . The fact that the prospective stowage space tested at Caltech took the form of a streamlined enclosure under the wing supports this contention . When the Caltech tests showed the pants - type gear to give almost as much drag reduction as would retraction into this enclosure , Northrop ' s course was presumably clear . A carefully streamlined pants - type fairing over a relatively light , tubular , load - carrying struc - ture gave him a reliable , low - drag , easily maintained , low - cost landing gear that did not require compromising the wing structure . 15 As it happened , the pants - type gear appeared first , not on the Alpha , but on the Northrop Beta ( fig . 5 ) in April 1931 . This elegant two - seat sport monoplane , for a complex of reasons , never went into production . ' 6 After further encouraging tests at Caltech in the early summer , ' 7 the pants - type gear - now and subsequently called a " trou - ser " gear - was installed on existing Alphas starting in September . ' Author ' s interview with E . H . Heinemann , Rancho Santa Fe , Calif . , March 12 , 1991 . " 6A second prototype Beta was built with a single cockpit and radial air - cooled engine . The project was not pursued , however . ' 7A . L . Klein and C . B . Millikan , " Wind Tunnel Tests of a 1 / 6th Scale Model of a Northrop Alpha Airplane with Various Fillets and Other Modifications , " GALCIT Report no . 103 ( California Institute of Technology , Pasadena , July 27 , 1931 ) . The Retractable Airplane Landing Gear FIG . 6 . - Northrop Alpha , mail version , modified to incorporate trouser landing gear . ( Courtesy of Richard S . Allen . ) Ultimately , all of TWA ' s Alphas had their original tripod gear similarly replaced , some at the Northrop factory in southern California and some by TWA in its shops at Kansas City . The last of the seventeen Alphas that were built ( fig . 6 ) carried mail on TWA ' s routes for most of four years . The sole Alpha remaining today hangs , in the company of two other key aircraft of the airframe revolution ( Boeing 247 and Douglas DC - 3 ) , in the National Air and Space Museum in Washington , D . C . The landing - gear decision behind him , Northrop used the trouser gear without question on succeeding airplanes . The Northrop Gamma ( fig . 7 ) , which first flew in late 1932 , attracted admiration as one of the sleekest and most advanced aircraft of its day . Along with the Lockheed Orion , it pioneered the use of wing flaps for landing and takeoff . Northrop laid out the initial Gamma , the Texaco Sky Chief shown here , for the record - setting , advertising - minded flier Frank Hawks , though he probably had airmail use in mind as well . The Northrop Delta , a nine - place passenger - carrying airplane with a larger - diameter fuselage but the same basic layout as the Gamma , appeared in mid - 1933 . Figure 8 shows the landing gear on a Delta , with a portion of the fairing removed for maintenance of the structure , shock absorber , and wheels . ' 8 The Gamma Polar Star used ' Northrop sales brochures ( n . 14 above ) ; " The Northrop Delta , " Aero Digest 23 ( December 1933 ) : 28 - 29 , 31 . 11 FIG . 7 . - Initial Northrop Gamma , Texaco Sky Chief , built for Frank Hawks . ( Courtesy of Northrop Corporation and Ira E . Chart . ) 10 , ' _ [ . - S . S , . . g ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ao FIG . 8 . - Trouser landing gear of Northrop Delta , fairing removed for maintenance . ( Courtesy of Richard S . Allen . ) The Retractable Airplane Landing Gear by Lincoln Ellsworth in his trans - Antarctic exploration flight of 1935 also resides in the Air and Space Museum . The Gamma and Delta , in various modifications for a number of purchasers , competed successfully with their contemporaries in the airframe revolution . In the hands of Hawks , Frye , and Howard Hughes , Gammas set transcontinental speed records from Los Ange - les to New York from 1933 to 1936 . The cruising speed of around 190 miles per hour ( mph ) for both airplanes kept pace with the 190 - 200 mph of the DC - 1 , which appeared in the same year as the Delta . The Gamma and Delta gave little , if anything , away in performance to their contemporaries with a retractable gear . The last Northrop craft to use the trouser gear was the XFT - 1 , a small fighter designed for the U . S . Navy and completed early in 1934 . Wind - tunnel tests at Caltech showed a relatively high proportion of landing - gear drag , owing to the large size of the gear relative to the small overall airframe . 19 Despite this fact , the airplane showed the highest speed of any navy fighter of the time . Poor spin characteristics worked against it , however , and only the prototype was built . Following the XFT - 1 , Northrop began apparently to see the trade - offs differently . From 1934 to 1937 , he and his designers - including Heinemann , who was becoming increasingly Northrop ' s right - hand man - went over gradually to retractable gear . The tran - sition extended over a number of adaptations of the Gamma for use by the military services . It included several forms of backward retraction of the wheels into vertical , faired pods beneath the wing ( based on wind - tunnel tests at Caltech ) and finally - on the A - 17A army attack plane - retraction laterally inward into a horizontal , completely flush enclosure at the juncture of the fuselage and the leading edge of the wing . These arrangements all managed to avoid interrupting Northrop ' s multicellular wing structure . Details of the events were complex and need not concern us here . 20 Northrop ' s thinking in moving away from the trouser gear can only be conjectured . Thanks to airframe innovations and increasing en - gine power , flight speeds were going up . The theoretical equations ' 9C . B . Millikan and A . L . Klein , " Wind Tunnel Tests on a Model of the Northrop XFT - 1 Navy Fighter Airplane , " GALCIT Report no . 123 ( California Institute of Technology , Pasadena , July 13 , 1933 ) . 20Allen , Northrop ( n . 6 above ) , pp . 94 - 97 , 100 , 105 - 6 ; R . Wagner , American Combat Planes , 3d ed . ( New York , 1982 ) , pp . 164 - 66 , 354 - 55 ; C . B . Millikan and A . L . Klein , " Wind Tunnel Tests on a 1 / 6th Scale Model of the Northrop XBT - 1 ( Class VSB - VB ) Single - Engine Monoplane , " GALCIT Report no . 141 ( California Institute of Technol - ogy , Pasadena , October 18 , 1934 ) . 13 14 Walter G . Vincenti indicate that , as speed increases , the drag penalty from carrying the additional weight of the retractable gear becomes progressively smaller relative to the gain from retraction . 21 This shifting trade - off doubtless had influence . At the same time , experience with cost , reliability , and maintenance was being accumulated - demonstrably encouraging in the case of reliability ( see below ) - and engineers were becoming more ingenious in their structural and mechanical designs . For Northrop , this ingenuity included ways to avoid compromising his multicellular wing structure . All these things could have influenced him to move into what the usual view sees as the obvious mainstream of development . In the context of the usual view - that introduction of the retract - able landing gear was a foresighted progression toward an essentially preordained outcome - the Northrop episode does seem a curious anomaly . Northrop ' s persistence with a fixed gear looks to be a temporary deviation from an engineering mainstream , a conse - quence , in part , of concern for his new multicellular wing structure . That , at least , is how things appeared until I dug deeper into contemporary events . The " anomaly " interpretation , I soon realized , oversimplifies the historical context . A More General View The oversimplification becomes apparent from two bodies of evidence : the airplanes and research efforts of the time and the writings of contemporary engineers . To go fully into these matters would be part of the book imagined in the introduction . The following overview , I believe , covers the essentials . As one can see from the annual volumes of Jane ' s All the World ' s Aircraft , the years 1928 - 35 witnessed a remarkable variety of landing gear on American airplanes . Besides the key airplanes already men - tioned from the airframe revolution , 22 retractable gear showed up on a diversity of craft . Examples include ( among others ) the four - place low - wing Alexander Bullet ( 1929 ) ; two military biplanes , the Grum - man FF - 1 ( 1931 ) and Curtiss YO - 40 ( 1932 ) , the former with gear retracting into the side of the fuselage instead of the wing ; and a commercial biplane , the Beechcraft B - 17 - L ( 1934 ) . Especially charac - teristic of the diversity were two commercial airliners : the single - engine low - wing Vultee V - 1 ( 1932 ) , at 215 mph cruising speed probably the fastest airplane in the group , and the twin - engine biplane Curtiss Condor ( 1933 ) , at 145 mph one of the slowest . This 21See n . 13 above . 22See text and n . 3 above . The Retractable Airplane Landing Gear 15 range suggests that introduction of retractable gear was hardly a considered progression . 23 Other airplanes besides Northrop ' s used trouser gear . These in - cluded the Curtiss A - 8 ( 1931 ) and A - 12 ( 1933 ) military attack monoplanes , the Beechcraft predecessor ( 1932 ) of the biplane men - tioned above , and the Seversky Sev - 3 ( 1934 ) , the first of two carefully streamlined Seversky monoplanes with such gear . Even the Boeing Monomail , which appeared initially in 1930 with retractable gear , was tested for comparison equipped with trouser gear . ( No final decision was made since the airplane never went into production . Subsequent Boeing designs , however , favored retraction . ) All these arrangements were different in detail from Northrop ' s and from each other , and may well have been arrived at independently - evidence on this point is hard to come by . 24 All through the period , airplanes also appeared with fixed gear incorporating so - called wheel pants ( streamlined fairings enclosing the wheels ; fig . 9 ) ; even a representative sample would be impractical here . One designer , the noted Giuseppe Bellanca , touched all bases ; his various aircraft of the period exhibited unstreamlined fixed gear , wheel pants , trousers , and retractable gear . 25 Bellanca and his con - temporaries appear to have been trying everything they could collec - tively think of . ( Attention here has been limited to commercial and military planes . Racing planes will be mentioned later . ) Research on landing gear from the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics reflected similar diversity . After noting the potential aerodynamic gains from retraction and the increasing use of retract - able gear , the committee ' s Annual Report for 1933 also stated that " the use of nonretractable gears in several high - performance airplanes indicates the need for more information on the possibilities " with fixed gear . This need , along with measurements on certain partly retractable arrangements , was addressed in wind - tunnel tests by research engineers at the committee ' s Langley Field laboratory ; the 23Jane ' s All the World ' s Aircraft , various eds . ( London ) , passim ; see also Wagner , passim ; and J . P . Juptner , U . S . Civil Aircraft , 9 vols . ( Los Angeles and Fallbrook , Calif . , 1962 - 81 ) , passim . Information in the next two paragraphs comes also from these sources . John Kimball ( Freedom to Soar [ Mountain View , Calif . , 1989 ] , p . 11 ) states that Northrop provided a " fully retractable landing gear " on a Gamma for the prominent flier Jacqueline Cochran . I am unable to confirm this statement in Cochran ' s or Northrop ' s writings or elsewhere . 24Trouser gear ( using skids instead of wheels ) appeared as early as 1920 at the Wasserkuppe glider meetings in Germany on the Black Devil glider of the noted designer Wolfgang Klemperer ; A . Welch and L . Welch , The Story of Gliding ( London , 1965 ) , pp . 51 - 53 . 25R . Deering , " The Bellanca Story , Part II , " Sport Flying 2 ( August 1968 ) : 42 - 57 . 16 Walter G . Vincenti FIG . 9 . - Lockheed Sirius built for Charles A . Lindbergh , showing typical example of wheel pants . ( Courtesy of Richard S . Allen . ) results appeared in three reports published in 1934 - 35 under the common title " The Drag of Airplane Wheels , Wheel Fairings , and Landing Gears . " The first report alone covered tests of twenty - two different fixed landing gear in a total of fifty - five modifications . A Northrop - type trouser gear proved to have the lowest drag . Calcula - tions based on the results showed that on a hypothetical , aerodynami - cally clean monoplane with a top speed of 210 mph , replacement of the trouser gear by a fully retractable gear would increase the speed by 8 . 6 mph . 26 The report judged that " Whether or not the . . . increase in speed due to a retractable gear . . . is worth the design and structural complications in all cases is a question that can be solved only by the designers of airplanes . " 27 As we have seen from their products , that is what designers , in effect , were trying to do . 26Some tests of airplanes with retractable gear ( e . g . , S . J . DeFrance , " The Aerody - namic Effect of a Retractable Landing Gear , " Technical Note no . 456 [ NACA , Washington , D . C . , 1933 ] ) reported reductions of minimum drag by as much as 50 percent with gear retracted . Such comparisons are highly misleading , however , because no effort was made to streamline the extended gear in such situations . 27Nineteenth Annual Report of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics , 1933 ( Washington , D . C . , 1934 ) , p . 10 ; W . H . Herrnstein , Jr . , and D . Biermann , " The Drag of Airplane Wheels , Wheel Fairings , and Landing Gears , Part 1 , Part 2 : Nonretractable and Partly Retractable Landing Gears , Part 3 , " Report nos . 485 , 518 , 522 ( NACA , Washington , D . C . , 1934 , 1935 , 1935 ) , quotation from part 1 , p . 9 . ffiRf . q * r . * 177 0 ! " ti ? . , ar ; " ? " ; ? nt : ? ? i ; cL ~ : ~ : ' : . . . . . . _ q The Retractable Airplane Landing Gear Writings in engineering publications suggest the considerations going through designers ' minds . In his magazine article on the " flying wing " quoted earlier , Northrop , after noting the theoretical gains from mechanical retraction , added : " but a tremendous amount of thought has been given to the problem and it still remains essentially unsolved . " John G . Lee of the Chance Vought Corporation , in an article on the " Relation of Design to Airplane Maintenance " in the SAE Journal in 1932 , likewise described the landing - gear problem as " now being fought out . " He observed that " no absolutely reliable retracting mechanism has really been designed , " that " maintenance problems . . . with a retractable gear are severe , " and that " the whole situation may be regarded as strictly experimental . " Frank T . Courtney , a consulting test pilot writing on " Air - Transport - Design Economy . . . " in the same journal and year , also viewed the retractable gear skeptically . In his view , the structural economy of a fixed gear doing double duty as part of the supporting structure for an externally braced wing might " lead to at least as great over - all efficiency . . . , with an additional saving in maintenance . " And even as knowledgeable a figure as Hall L . Hib - bard , assistant chief engineer ( later chief engineer ) at Lockheed , in a general review of " Problems in Fast Air Transport Design " in Mechanical Engineering in 1933 , expressed doubts . Despite his com - pany ' s two years of success with retractable gear on the Orion , Hibbard still saw " some question as to the advisability of the retract - able gear from the standpoint of speed increase . " He based this opinion on " careful wind tunnel tests " ( otherwise unspecified ) of fixed gear of the " pure cantilever type . . . , similar to that pioneered by Northrup [ sic ] . " 28 Textbook writers expressed similar sentiments . Wesley L . Smith in his 1931 book on Air Transport Operation , put forth the opinion , as in Northrop ' s flying - wing article , that the problem of the retractable gear " has not yet been satisfactorily solved . " C . C . Carter , in his popular aerodynamic textbook of 1932 , noted use of retractable gear on the Boeing Monomail and B - 9 bomber and discussed the weight , reliabil - ity , maintenance , and stowage problems of such gear . Because of these problems , and despite its obvious aerodynamic advantages , the re - tractable gear , he asserted , " has not been regarded favorably by the Air Corps . " Although the device might prove necessary someday , he " felt that such a development is in the distant future . Improvements 28Northrop ( n . 5 above ) , p . 645 ; J . G . Lee , " Relation of Design to Airplane Mainte - nance , " SAE Journal 31 ( October 1932 ) : 412 - 20 , quotations on 418 ; E T . Courtney , " Air - Transport - Design Economy and Air - Transport Testing , " SAE Journal 31 ( September 1932 ) : 356 - 60 , 377 , quotation on 358 ; H . L . Hibbard , " Problems in Fast Air - Transport Design , " Mechanical Engineering 55 ( October 1933 ) : 611 - 17 , quotations on 614 . 17 18 Walter G . Vincenti in [ fixed ] landing gear design with consequent reduction of parasite resistance [ i . e . , drag ] may meet every requirement . " In thus antici - pating what Hibbard would say the next year , Carter may or may not have had Northrop ' s trouser gear in mind . 29 Uncertainty about reliability , in particular , appeared in both air - planes and writings . Lee could still make his quoted statement about the lack of a " reliable retracting mechanism " despite experience since the mid - 1920s with ( mostly externally ) retractable gear on amphibian aircraft , such as designed by Grover Loening and Igor Sikorsky . ( This experience will need to be assessed in any full history of landing - gear retraction . ) The Boeing Monomail gave evidence of fears about what might occur if malfunction of the mechanism forced a landing with gear retracted ; the drawn - up wheels ( see fig . 1 ) were made to protrude below the wing to cushion the impact and ensuing slide . On the other hand , experience with the Lockheed Orion ( fig . 2 ) , which had wheels that disappeared flush inside the wing , suggested that such fears might be uncalled - for ; Hibbard in his article of 1933 reported six wheel - up landings with no injuries to occupants and only minor damage to the airplane . Thus , " instead of being dangerous , retractable gears have become a safety feature [ for emergency land - ings on questionable natural terrain ] and transport operators are demanding them from that standpoint . " Uneasiness about reliability apparently persisted , however . The DC - 1 , which was designed by Douglas to meet the requirements of TWA , appeared in the same year as Hibbard ' s article , with its retracted wheels protruding below the engine nacelles . This feature appeared also on the DC - 2 and - 3 ( though it vanished from the scene as time went by ) . 30 Within the world of landing gear , the context for Northrop ' s trouser design was thus hardly simple or certain . Though the purely aerodynamic advantages of retraction could not be doubted , the ultimate solution in a practical engineering sense that took account of all requirements appeared far from clear . The landing - gear problem , moreover , occurred within similarly diverse and uncertain environ - ments of experimentation concerning propellers , wing flaps , metal construction , and improved engines . 3 ' Engineers in the opening years 2Smith ( n . 12 above ) , p . 149 ; Carter ( n . 12 above ) , p . 191 . 30For Loening and Sikorsky amphibians , see Loftin ( n . 4 above ) , pp . 183 - 87 ; and G . Loening , Amphibian : The Story of the Loening Biplane ( Greenwich , Conn . , 1973 ) , pp . 14 - 15 , passim ; quotation from Hibbard ( n . 28 above ) , p . 614 ; for photos of DC - 1 and - 3 with wheels retracted , see Miller and Sawers ( n . 3 above ) , opposite pp . 112 and 113 . " For an excellent summary of the overall " environment of innovation , " see Miller and Sawers , pp . 50 - 51 . The Retractable Airplane Landing Gear of the 1930s agreed in their goal of higher speeds ; their crystal ball for how best to get there , however , was unavoidably clouded . Airplanes today exhibit different kinds of landing gear in an ordered way , and the topic no longer arouses discussion . Fixed gear , either unstreamlined or with wheel pants , predominate at low speeds and retractable gear at high , with the changeover occurring around 200 - 250 mph . ( The fact that aircraft in the first half of the 1930s were moving into this range may have helped foster the observed diversity . ) When very low drag is at a premium at low speeds , as on sailplanes , retractable gear do appear , but the exception is a minor one . Trouser gear like Northrop ' s are apparently not found worth the trouble anywhere . The complex variety observed in our account has long been a thing of the past . How the present situation came into being after 1935 would need examination in the imagined book . That it did not happen immedi - ately is suggested by the following contrast regarding racing planes : The Hughes H - 1 monoplane , in which Howard Hughes set a land - plane straightaway speed record of 352 mph in 1935 , had a highly refined retractable gear . As late as 1938 , the Thompson Trophy Race , the blue - ribbon event of American closed - course racing , was won at 283 mph by a Turner Laird racer with fixed gear incorporating wheel pants . 3 Other examples for both racing and nonracing planes could easily be cited , both in the United States and abroad . A further matter warrants recording here , lest it be overlooked . The earliest retractable gear were designed to be raised and lowered by slow and laborious hand cranking by the pilot . In later gear , the task was taken over by an electric motor or , more commonly - for reasons of weight in relation to the required power - by a hydraulic cylinder . Unfortunately , the latter solution raised another difficulty ; the sliding leather packings used to seal the piston of the hydraulic actuators tended to leak fluid , causing troublesome and costly prob - lems of maintenance . Solution of this problem came with introduction at the start of the 1940s of the hard - rubber O - ring , invented by Niels Christensen in 1933 and patented in 1937 . The success of this timely device , which is used in the millions in all kinds of applications today , depends critically on the proportions of the straight - sided groove that houses the doughnut - shaped ring . The importance of the O - ring for retractable gear was pointed out to me by Ed Heinemann , who took over design responsibility when the second Northrop company be - came the El Segundo Division of Douglas in 1937 and Northrop 32Jane ' s All the World ' s Aircraft , 1935 ( n . 23 above ) , p . 31 Ic ; C . Caldwell , " Review of the National Air Races , " Aero Digest 33 ( October 1939 ) : 34 - 35 , 153 , photo on 35 . 19 20 Walter G . Vincenti resigned to form his third company . Heinemann went over entirely to a flush , inwardly retracting gear on the Douglas SBD - series of dive bombers , which he developed based on earlier Northrop - company designs . He said , however , that he did not feel completely comfortable with retractable gear until the O - ring appeared and that other designers felt the same . Thus did a seemingly minor component play an important role in the success of a much larger and more visible device . This kind of situation may be present invisibly in many cases . 33 What , then , can we say by way of answer to our question from the introduction ? Certainly - and contrary to my earlier supposition - to recast the question in terms of an aberration from a rationally self - evident path misreads the issue . To the design community at the time , retraction was far from " so clearly the way to go . " Northrop ' s trouser gear , conspicuous for a while , was in no way an anomaly in an otherwise linearly ordered pattern ( hence the quotation marks in this article ' s title ) . Designers experimented with various kinds of fixed gear along with retraction , and the outcome seemed far from preordained at the time . I shall contend later that the retractable gear had a kind of technical imperative in light of the large , overall increase in speed that a combination of advances would eventually open up - no high - performance airplane is imaginable today without it . Designers in the early 1930s , however , lived in a world of small , progressive speed increments coming from loosely related changes in various components of the vehicle . Northrop , when he adopted the trouser gear , did not see it as a stopgap measure . Hall Hibbard , despite encouraging experience with retractable gear at Lockheed , did not regard his competitor ' s solution as misconceived or unprom - ising for development . The community of designers was feeling its way into the future in a state of knowledge in which engineering assessment was , at best , problematic . The technical imperative of the retractable gear is knowledge after the fact . We see the outcome ; designers at the time , by their own testimony , did notforesee it . Having said that , we can return to the original question . The events we have traced , however , suggest that it be broadened : how was it that Northrop - and his fellow designers - proceeded as they did in adopt - ing retraction ? The answer to this question , which emerges also from our account , has general implications for the processes of learning 33This paragraph depends on information from the following sources : Loening , p . 15 ; Kimball ( n . 23 above ) , p . 16 ; G . Wise , " Ring Master , " American Heritage of Invention and Technology 7 ( Spring / Summer 1991 ) : 58 - 63 ; Heinemann interview ( n . 15 above ) ; Allen , Northrop ( n . 6 above ) , p . 157 ; Wagner ( n . 20 above ) , pp . 355 - 56 . For leather packings , see J . N . Smith , " Design and Materials for Hydraulic Packings , " Aero Digest 40 ( April 1942 ) : 119 - 22 . The Retractable Airplane Landing Gear and change in engineering . It falls naturally within the framework of the variation - selection model mentioned in the introduction . 34 Variation and Selection The variation - selection model , as put forth in the final chapter of my book , grows out of fundamental ideas by Donald Campbell and their initial application to technology by Edward Constant . It is , in Campbell ' s description , one of blind variation and selective retention , a terminology that highlights the two basic elements of the learning process . Though I attempt a brief outline of the model below , a theoretically minded reader may want to consult the book for elaboration . 35 A detail of semantics , however , needs attention . For Campbell , the modifier " blind " denotes that in any search for knowledge that is truly new - that is , not arrived at before - candidate variants must , almost by definition , go " beyond the limits of foresight or prescience . " 36 I think of the seeker for knowledge as rather like a blind person trying to reach a desired destination by going down an unfamiliar passage - way , using tactile input from a cane and the constraint available from the passage ' s sidewall . Though the person is not without guidance , whether the passage goes where desired or turns out a blind alley cannot be foreseen ; it can be learned only by proceeding along " blindly " ( though , note , not " randomly " or " unpremeditatedly " or " unconstrainedly " ) to the end . Though not without virtues , this use of " blind " causes problems . Some readers seem determined to equate it with " random . " Others feel , with some justification , that when applied to technology ( or science ) , it denies the characteristic goal orientation and " directedness " of such activity . As a reader of these materials has pointed out , designers such as Northrop are not entirely blind ; they see where they want to go and by what means they propose to get there . What they cannot do , if their idea is novel , is foresee with 34Theoretical questions about the growth of knowledge and the evolution of artifacts play an increasing role in the study of technology by both sociologists and historians . For argument about the resulting tension for the history of technology , see the article , response , and comment by , respectively , R . A . Buchanan , J . Law , and P . Scranton under the common title " Theory and Narrative in the History of Technology , " Technology and Culture 32 ( April 1991 ) : 365 - 93 . 35Vincenti , What Engineers Know ( n . 2 above ) , chap . 8 ; for references to the work of Constant and Campbell , see , in particular , pp . 269 and 316 - 17 . For a general review of evolutionary epistemology , of which Campbell ' s is one form , see M . Bradie , " Assessing Evolutionary Epistemology " Biology and Philosophy 1 ( 1986 ) : 401 - 59 . 36D . T . Campbell , " Blind Variation and Selective Retention in Creative Thought as in Other Knowledge Processes , " Psychological Review 67 ( November 1960 ) : 380 - 400 , quotation on 381 . 21 22 Walter G . Vincenti certainty whether it will work in the sense of meeting all the relevant requirements . 37 To make this distinction clear , I will here describe new technological variants as " unforesighted " rather than " blind . " Though less than felicitous , this may avoid distraction from the central argument . The variation - selection model pertains to both the generation of knowledge and the devising of artifacts ( which is itself a kind of generation of knowledge , specifically , of how to arrange and propor - tion a device to accomplish a given task ) . It thus applies to both engineering research and engineering design . In the story at hand the concern is mainly with design , though , in the end , knowledge will also be seen to be at issue . The overall model also comprises two rather different phases , the first involving variation and selection and the second mainly selection . Though I describe them here in order , in practice they occur intertwined , and developments go on typically back and forth between them . The phases can be denoted , respectively , as hidden and overt . ( The jargon is regrettable , but the distinctions are fundamental . ) As always , both phases were present necessarily in the landing - gear story . The hidden phase , as the name implies , takes place out of sight in the designer ' s mind . How imagined variants arise in this phase raises the usual difficult questions about the creative process . In engineer - ing , it presumably includes search of past experience for solutions that have proved useful in comparable situations , mental incorpora - tion of whatever novel features come to mind as desirable in the current circumstances , plus a certain amount of serendipitous mental brainstorming . The selection activity in this phase entails a mental winnowing of the conceived variants to pick out those that seem most promising . Here thought trials and judgment distilled from experi - ence come into play . Though nominally separate , variation and selection in the hidden phase go on concurrently in a more or less disordered way in the designer ' s mind , much of it probably at an unconscious level . Out of the hidden phase come visible variants for overt examination . 38 We can only infer , of course , what went through the minds of Northrop and his contemporaries in the hidden phase of their landing - gear work . From his actions and writings concerning the " flying wing , " Northrop obviously gave consideration to the gains from retraction . Whether he weighed and discarded the idea of wheel 37E . T . Layton , personal correspondence . 38My book ( n . 2 above , pp . 244 and 248 ) identified the hidden phase entirely with variation ( except for a minor qualifying observation ) and the overt phase with selection . Inclusion of selection also in the hidden phase strikes me now as more sensible . The Retractable Airplane Landing Gear pants , the evidence does not say . Such thought , likely given the considerable use of that device at the time , could have led to his notion for the more streamlined trouser gear . From the evidence of their airplanes , other designers conceived a variety of variants . Whether they thought of and immediately rejected as harebrained some that we do not even imagine , we most likely will never know . The visible variants that we do know of included trouser gear , retractable gear of various kinds , and a wide variety of gear with wheel pants , some cantilever and some braced , either independently or as part of a wing - support structure . To the extent that variants from the hidden phase involve novelty , they ( as well as those mentally discarded ) must be unforesighted in some degree . Activities in the overt phase then seek to deal with this unforesightedness through some kind of visible trial . The designer or design community thus attempts to select from the overt variants those that best ( or at least satisfactorily ) achieve their goal . The trial may be vicarious , through some representation of the artifact , or direct , through the artifact itself . These trials also subdivide in turn . Vicari - ous trial can take place by experiment with models or other repro - ductions of the artifact or by analytical " tests " - that is , theoretical calculations - on paper . 39 Direct trial can be supplied deliberately by proof test of the completed artifact and will come inevitably through everyday use . Usually in combination , these types of trial provide the means for overt selection . Northrop and the design community followed such selection pro - cedure as best they could for the landing gear . As we have seen , the trade - off between aerodynamic performance and weight could have been tested vicariously by theoretical calculation . Whether designers actually did so cannot be known . ( Given the general level of design sophistication at the time , I am inclined to doubt it . ) The relative aerodynamic merits of different overt variants - retraction versus trouser gear - were tested vicariously by experiments conducted for Northrop in the Caltech wind tunnel ; other designers may well have done likewise . Assessment of cost , reliability , and maintenance had to come from construction ( a kind of trial ) and direct trial of the completed device . Such trial was supplied in the course of the proof tests to which the prototypes were necessarily subjected and - especially and rigorously - by the everyday use to which the aircraft were put ( witness Hibbard ' s report of the wheel - up landings with the 39For the real sense in which such calculations are " tests , " see Vincenti , What Engineers Know , p . 248 ; and H . Petroski , To Engineer Is Human : The Role of Failure in Successful Design ( New York , 1985 ) , p . 44 . 23 24 Walter G . Vincenti Orion ) . Largely on the basis of the wind - tunnel trials , Northrop selected trouser gear for his Greek - letter aircraft , a choice that proved short - lived . As experience accumulated from everyday use - and speeds went up steeply from a synergistic combination of engine and airframe innovations - - the design community , including Northrop himself , departed permanently from trouser and other fixed gear ; using a combination of vicarious and direct trial , it selected retractable gear for the long - term solution . Unforesighted variation and selective retention thus appear clearly - of necessity , apparently - in the landing - gear story . Design - ers , coping with day - to - day problems , thought up a variety of solutions in a process that could not help but be unforesighted as to its eventual outcome . No one in the early 1930s , including as prescient an innovator as Northrop , could know how much airplane speeds would increase from other causes or how constructional and opera - tional experience would work out . Through a complex collective process , the design community nonetheless arrived at a solution . By the late 1930s , it had selected the retractable gear for permanent retention . Within the variation - selection framework , Northrop ' s trouser gear , far from an anomaly , was part of the necessary learning process . By their unforesighted nature , different variants oftentimes have to be tried . Some will fail outright , some will work well enough for a while , and some may be selected to have a permanent place in engineering practice . All help engineers to learn . When the future is largely unforeseeable , as it always is to the participants , no other way is possible ( short of revelation , which engineers cannot count on ) . In the end , the variation - selection process produced more than a type of artifact . As airplane speeds continued to increase , the need to reduce drag became overwhelming in the design trade - offs . One can , of course , propel a fixed gear through the air at any speed with sufficient power . The design community learned , however , that , all things considered , the problem is best solved by retraction . The variation - selection process thus provided in the end a piece of fundamental engineering knowledge - that an airplane for the speed range above , say , 250 mph should have a retractable landing gear . This injunction constitutes engineering knowledge in the sense , noted by Herbert Simon , that it describes how an artifact ought to be to perform its task ( in contrast to scientific knowledge , which describes how something innately is ) . 40 Though engineers nowadays take it for granted , it had to be learned at some time . 40H . J . Simon , The Sciences of the Artificial , 2d ed . ( Cambridge , Mass . , 1981 ) , pp . 132 - 33 . The Retractable Airplane Landing Gear Looked at from the present - day realization that drag turned out to be determinative , the injunction for retractable gear can be seen to embody a kind of technical imperative ( or logic ) . 41 Such an imperative , however , though real in light of the eventual increase in flight speeds , was not evident to designers at the time , who could not foresee for sure how far airplane development would lead or how the nonaero - dynamic requirements would work out . That is not to say that certain people did not anticipate the outcome earlier than others . Research and design engineers can be found in the early 1930s , I am sure , who thought and stated that adoption of retractable gear was inevitable . Esteem for heroes , however , should not cause us to neglect or gloss over the necessity for and nature of the variation - selection process - would - be prophets do not always turn out to be correct . I recall that circa 1970 some capable and experienced engineers held the view , on apparently rational grounds , that the rotary internal - combustion engine ( the Wankel engine ) would replace the piston engine for much automotive use . Because of air pollution and other practical problems that were not foreseen and had to be found through trial , things have not worked out that way . Today the views are forgotten , and the engine finds little application . That the prophets for retractable gear were more prescient than those for the rotary engine is true , but we see this after the fact . Since engineers had never been down either passageway before , neither group could foresee for sure what the outcome would be . If today we see the retractable gear as having a technical imperative , it is because of the learning process the design community went through . 42 As illustrated by the landing - gear story , the variation - selection process serves for two sorts of problems , specific and generic . Northrop used the process in selecting his trouser gear from the variants that occurred to him and , later , in shifting to retraction ; he did so to solve specific problems for particular airplanes . The design community followed the process to find out whether high - speed airplanes as a whole ought or ought not to have retractable gear ; by doing so it solved a generic problem for a class of aircraft . In the generation of 41For discussion of the internal logic of technology , see Vincenti , What Engineers Know ( n . 2 above ) , p . 204 . 42Bernard Carlson and Michael Gorman put forward an alternative and illuminating framework from their continuing studies of the particular activity of invention ( W . B . Carlson and M . E . Gorman , " Understanding Invention as a Cognitive Process : The Case of Thomas Edison and Early Motion Pictures , 1888 - 91 , " Social Studies of Science 20 [ August 1990 ] : 387 - 430 ) . Though I have not thought the matter through carefully , I suspect that their formulation and the one in this section are complementary rather than opposed . 25 26 Walter G . Vincenti variants for both sorts of problems ( the selfsame variants in fact serve both ) , the work of individuals is central - every variant must originate from the mind of an individual , even when that individual is part of a closely knit design team . In selection , at least in the crucial overt phase , matters are different . Here , for a specific problem , an indi - vidual or design team still suffices to make the necessary choice . For a generic problem , however , such choice can come about only through replication , over time and in a number of specific cases , of the same decision by a cumulation of designers . The locus of selection for the generic solution must thus lie in the design community . 43 The exact nature of the process , which makes the solution part of normal engineering practice , may be difficult to sort out in a given case . As we have seen for the retractable landing gear , however , it takes place as a communal activity . 4 The Shaping of Technology The preceding section , like the material in my book , looks at the mechanics and ( to some extent ) the technical considerations involved in the variation - selection process . A full examination must involve social considerations as well . This raises the kinds of issues discussed by sociologists and historians in recent years under the heading of the social shaping ( or construction ) of technology . Readers of Technology and Culture will be aware of the social - shaping point of view from citations of The Social Construction of Technological Systems , a volume of articles edited by Wiebe Bijker , Thomas Hughes , and Trevor Pinch . I also find useful a recent overview entitled " The Social Shaping of Technology " by Robin Williams and David Edge . Williams and Edge see studies under the social - shaping rubric as stemming from the realization that " new technologies [ involve ] a set of choices between different technical options " and that " ' social ' factors , as well as narrowly ' technical ' considerations , affect which options are selected . " These remarks clearly imply a variation - selection process , an identification made explicitly by Pinch and Bijker in an article in the aforementioned volume ( though neither source employs variation - selection terminology or formalism ) . Williams and Edge go on to see social shaping as bearing on three essential aspects 43A related difference is that special circumstances , like Northrop ' s concern for his multicellular wing structure , are likely to have a greater role in specific than generic solutions . ' The process here is an example of what social - constructivist writers ( whose work will figure in the next section ) refer to as " closure " and " stabilization . " See W . E . Bijker , T . P . Hughes , and T . J . Pinch , eds . , " Introduction " to The Social Construction of Technological Systems ( Cambridge , Mass . , 1987 ) , pp . 9 - 15 , esp . pp . 12 - 13 . The Retractable Airplane Landing Gear of technology : the direction of technological innovation , the form of technological artifacts , and the outcomes for society of technological change . It is the first two concerns that occupy us here . The landing - gear example speaks explicitly to the question of form and implicitly to the question of direction . 45 In shaping of form , the design process is central . Decisions taken in design , in both variation and selection , fix the features of the artifact - how it operates , how it is arranged , and what is called for in the shop drawings from which it is built . The place to discern the shaping of technological form , therefore , is in the considerations on which design decisions depend . Do such considerations in a given case stem primarily from social or technical concerns or some combination of both ? To address this question in the landing - gear story , decisions there can be summarized as follows : Design of a landing gear depends on knowledge of the projected weight , landing speed , and general arrangement of the airplane , which are set at the levels of project definition and conceptual design for the overall vehicle . The landing gear must conform to these fixed constraints . Within such specifica - tions , the looser constraints of aerodynamic drag , weight , cost , reliability , and maintenance are subject to trade - offs ( on technical grounds if the designer is wise ) . Given such considerations and the level of flight speed anticipated for their airplanes , designers in the early 1930s opted for a variety of gear , some fixed and some retractable . With the added constraint of his multicellular wing , Northrop saw the trade - offs differently from most and decided on trouser gear . As time went by and speeds increased from other causes , he changed his assessment and went over to retraction . In the end , with accumulation of experience with weight , cost , reliability , and maintenance ( including introduction of the O - ring ) , the design com - munity , including Northrop , made a collective decision that , all things considered , the landing gear of a high - speed airplane should retract if the vehicle is to perform as desired . Few , if any , social considerations figure in these decisions . It may be tempting to see Northrop ' s unease at cutting into his multicellular wing as emotional and thus " social , " but the evidence points to a hard - headed concern for structural weight . Reliability and maintenance 45Bijker , Hughes , and Pinch , eds . ; R . Williams and D . Edge , " The Social Shaping of Technology : A Review of UK Research Concepts , Findings , Programmes and Centres , " in Verbund Sozialwissenschaftliche Technikforschung ( Berlin , 1991 ) , pp . 152 - 205 , esp . pp . 153 and 155 ; T . J . Pinch and W . E . Bijker , " The Social Construction of Facts and Artifacts : Or How the Sociology of Science and the Sociology of Technology Might Benefit Each Other , " in Bijker , Hughes , and Pinch , eds . , p . 28 . 27 28 Walter G . Vincenti might be defined in a tenuous sense as " social , " but engineers experience them as just as much technical as weight and aerodynamic performance . Cost , an economic and thus a social factor , may have had influence in specific cases early on ; it shows no evidence of being a serious problem , however , and apparently played no role in the generic decision for retraction . Nothing appears either of the kinds of concerns that Pinch and Bijker find in different social groups involved in the variation - selection process leading to the normal configuration for the bicycle in the late 1800s - antagonism to the device , alternative societal uses , moral conflicts , attitudes toward and requirements of the sexes , and so forth . One looks also in vain for what those authors call " interpretive flexibility , " that is , the different ways that different social groups think of or construe the device , which can play a role in design decisions . 46 To designers , as well as users of the device , the landing gear was simply a means for getting the airplane on and off the ground , and that was that . I think it fair to conclude that social considerations had little or nothing to do with shaping the form of the solution to the landing - gear problem . Not so with regard to direction . A prime consideration pushing designers in the course they took was clearly the value put on speed by modern society , both to get people from place to place as quickly as possible and to maximize return on capital invested in the vehicle . Speed also has its obvious military uses . The direction of the variation - selection process leading to retractable gear was thus socially shaped . Once the direction had been set , however , technical considerations took over in shaping the form of the outcome , that is , in leading the design community to settle in the end on retraction . The fact that the imperative for retractable gear was not known ahead of time , but had to be learned in the course of the variation - selection process , does not alter this conclusion . For the landing - gear problem of the 1930s , the direction for design was shaped by social considerations ; the form of the resulting artifact by technical . The situation for the landing gear is fairly straightforward . For other devices , it may ( or may not ) be less so . As I have pointed out elsewhere , for a contrivance like the airplane , which is in reality a complex system , the structure of design is inherently hierarchical . 47 46Pinch and Bijker , pp . 17 - 50 . These authors also include under interpretive flexibility the different material ways in which an artifact can be designed ( i . e . , arranged ) . I think it more realistic and meaningful to regard these as technical possibilities or options rather than instances of " interpretive flexibility " ( though the two categories are not completely unrelated ) . 47W . G . Vincenti , " The Scope for Social Impact in Engineering Outcomes : A Diagrammatic Aid to Analysis , " Social Studies of Science 21 ( November 1991 ) : 761 - 67 , The Retractable Airplane Landing Gear 29 Design of a major component like the landing gear falls at a middle level in the hierarchy . Project definition and overall ( or conceptual ) design of the vehicle occupy higher levels . ( By project definition we mean the initiating translation of some ill - defined , usually qualitative need into concrete specifications for the hardware . ) Design of a subcomponent , such as a hydraulic actuator for a retractable gear , takes place at a lower level . Such a multilevel , hierarchical relation - ship , which is typical of complex devices , has unavoidable consequences for designers . Decisions at one level place technical constraints ( or requirements ) on design at lower levels , and these constraints tend to become more numerous and rigid the farther down the hierarchy one goes ; that is , the degree of technical constraint becomes higher . 48 I have argued that , as a consequence , the scope for - and hence like - lihood of - - social considerations shaping the form of the engineering outcome tend correspondingly to decrease . The retractable landing gear fits this pattern . Indeed , at this middle level of hierarchy , technical considerations took over completely in fixing the form of the solution . The day - to - day interactions of the design community were highly social , as they invariably are . These interactions , however , like the social concerns mentioned earlier , did not generate the considerations on which design decisions depended . 49 The situation for other airplane components and at other levels of hierarchy invites conjecture . Among the components involved in the airframe revolution , wing flaps and the controllable - pitch propeller would , I suspect , prove much the same as here , as would the stressed - skin aspect of the new aluminum structure . The move to metal itself , however - since stressed skin can be and was accomplished with wood - is a different matter . Eric Schatzberg contends , convincingly I believe , that an existing cultural ideology for the superiority of metal and " Engineering Knowledge , Type of Design , and Level of Hierarchy : Further Thoughts about What Engineers Know . . . , " in Technological Development and Science in the Industrial Age , ed . P . Kroes and M . Bakker ( Dordrecht , 1992 ) , pp . 17 - 34 . 48Analogous ideas have been expressed in an archaeological context , also , curiously enough , in connection with airplanes : P . Lemonnier , " Bark Capes , Arrowheads , and Concorde : On Social Representations of Technology , " in The Meanings of Things , ed . I . Hodder ( London , 1989 ) , pp . 156 - 71 , esp . p . 168 . 49In my earlier work ( n . 47 above ) , I explained how the degree of technical constraint increases also as the type of design at a given level of hierarchy changes from radical to normal ( suitably defined ) . This and the effect of hierarchy can be combined into what I hope is a helpful three - dimensional diagram ( " Scope for Social Impact , " p . 764 ) . I have not discussed the role of radical - to - normal design here ; in view of the absence of social shaping already observed , any differences between landing - gear variants in regard to this role must be insignificant for present concerns . 30 Walter G . Vincenti over wood figured prominently in airplane design . 50 For reasons that Schatzberg traces , objective technical criteria could not dictate the choice of materials - in Schatzberg ' s words , " the technical evidence favored neither wood nor metal overall . " This low degree of technical constraint , in contrast to the situation for retractable gear , gave scope for social considerations ( i . e . , ideology ) to take over . ( Cultural bias could not yet have come into being , of course , for such novel things as retractable gear , wing flaps , and controllable - pitch propellers . ) In its relation to the degree of technical constraint , the introduction of metal thus fits , in its own way , with the ideas discussed here . 5 ' The situation at the levels of project definition and overall design will require study . 52 For the former , as for all levels , the social value of speed obviously shaped the direction of design in the 1930s ; so also did a socially motivated desire for increased carrying capacity and therefore size . Even in project definition , however , the resulting specifications ( the equivalent here of form ) had to be limited by technical considerations of what was realistically possible . 53 In concep - tual design , where overall form of the vehicle was set , the situation probably reached greatest complexity . Requirements of structural integrity , high - speed movement in three dimensions , and , most of all , weight - plus the natural hazards of flying - put more numerous and more rigid technical requirements on airplanes than on most devices . These impose severe constraints at all levels of design , including conceptual . In the airframe revolution , changes in middle - level components in the interest of greater vehicle speed and size also influenced conceptual design strongly from below . Such constraint from lower levels is typical in periods of radical change , when the normal configuration for a device is in flux . 54 How much room social shaping could and did have to affect form at the level of conceptual design will need investigation . A full reassessment of the airframe 5 ? E . Schatzberg , " Ideology and Technical Choice : The Decline of the Wooden Airplane in the United States , 1920 - 1945 , " Technology and Culture , in this issue , pp . 34 - 69 . ~ 5Since structure pertains to the entire airplane , structural design can be taken to lie at a higher level of hierarchy than that of a specific component . The change to metal also constituted ( see n . 49 above ) a definitely radical design departure . A low degree of technical constraint is thus consistent with the diagram cited in that note ( though the precise reasons would need examination ) . 52In the early stages of a technological change , levels may not divide so neatly in practice . They can still serve as framework for analysis , however . 53 " Aspirations " might be more accurate than " specifications " in the instance of a revolution . 54For the concept of normal configuration , see Vincenti , What Engineers Know ( n . 2 above ) , pp . 209 - 11 , 243 . The Retractable Airplane Landing Gear 31 revolution in terms of design decisions and how they were arrived at by the design community offers a worthy project . 55 For devices less technically demanding than the airplane , the notion of technical constraint suggests that social shaping of form may extend farther down the hierarchy . As indicated earlier , Pinch and Bijker find interpretive flexibility by different social groups playing a central role in shaping the normal configuration of the bicycle ( an example at the level of conceptual design ) . They also make a case that interpretive flexibility regarding purpose had influence in adoption of even such a low - level subcomponent as the pneumatic tire . 56 We can expect as a general trend , I believe , that social shaping of form will diminish in systemic devices as the level of design moves lower in the hierarchy . At what levels and how suddenly the decrease occurs , however , may be very different for different devices . As with the pneumatic bicycle tire , departures from the trend also doubtless exist . Fortunately for historians , the situation is fascinatingly complex . 57 In light of this complexity - and the findings for the retractable gear - caution may be wise . In the current enthusiasm for the social shaping of technology , we could be in danger of forgetting or downplaying the fact that there is such a thing as technical shaping . Perhaps we should speak of the technosocial shaping of technology and visualize the range of considerations in design as a kind of spectrum , with purely social at one end , purely technical at the other , and a varying mixture between . A challenge would then be to assess where in the spectrum a given case falls . To do this , the realities of hierarchy and the distinction between direction of design and form of engineer - ing outcome may be useful . Distinguishing between specific and generic problems may also help . Epilogue The Northrop episode and its context thus fall clearly within the framework of the variation - selection model . Northrop , Bellanca , and their fellow designers , struggling with specific design problems ( Northrop and presumably others by following their individual " 5The statement of Richard Nelson and Sidney Winter regarding continued innova - tion following the DC - 3 could equally well apply to the airframe revolution leading to it : " Engineers had notions regarding the potential of this regime [ i . e . , combination ] . " The engineers could not foresee ahead of time , however , just what the combination would contain or where it would lead . See R . R . Nelson and S . G . Winter , An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change ( Cambridge , Mass . , 1982 ) , p . 259 . 56Pinch and Bijker ( n . 45 above ) , pp . 28 - 41 . 57My book , since it focuses on the epistemology of technical engineering knowledge , may give the impression that I regard all design decisions as being made purely or predominately on technical grounds . If so , the impression is incorrect . 32 Walter G . Vincenti variation - selection procedures ) , devised trouser gear , wheel pants , and retractable gear . In doing so , they provided at the same time variants for the generic landing - gear problem . The variants , by the nature of things , could not help but be unforesighted ; though some designers might view drag as theoretically controlling , no one could foresee for sure how practical requirements would work out . As speeds went up and reduction in drag became overriding , the design community in the end , through practical ingenuity and cumulative decision , selected retraction for the long - term generic solution . Though the social desire for speed shaped the direction for this change , a technical imperative can now be seen to have shaped its form . In solving the generic problem , Northrop ' s trouser gear , far from an anomaly , was an integral part of the learning process . Variation - selection in more or less such pattern , I suggest , supplies the methodology for long - term solution of general engineering problems . Where an overriding technical imperative does not exist ( which may constitute even the majority of cases ) , social shaping may well be crucial , but still within a variation - selection framework when the problem is new to engineering experience . 58 Pinch and Bijker , in their social - constructivist discussion of the bicycle , point to the importance of including all relevant variants in analyzing a variation - selection episode ; the quotations cited earlier from Williams and Edge imply the same . To find all , one must look , not only for the successes and failures , but also for the also - rans . These last , which were brought home to me initially by examination of the Davis wing , 59 are the variants that work well enough for a while but , for one reason or another , disappear from the scene . Northrop ' s trouser gear was of this sort . All play a role in the technological learning process . This implication of the variation - selection model may have value for historians of technology . A pitfall for all historians , of course , is that we know the outcome of the events we study . This knowledge cannot help but color our selection and interpretation of those events . Historians of technology need to be especially alert to this pitfall since technological problems , to a greater degree than social ones , often find solutions that a majority of people regard as in some sense " correct . " As in the usual view of the retractable landing gear , the 58The narrative of this article may appear to some as simply another in the many historical examples of a new technology ( retractable gear ) displacing an old one ( fixed gear ) . The analysis should then be seen as a not - so - customary attempt to sort out what goes on epistemologically - or at least went on in this case - in the complex learning period when the old technology competes side by side with the new . 9gVincenti , What Engineers Know ( n . 2 above ) , pp . 16 - 50 , esp . p . 49 . The Retractable Airplane Landing Gear temptation exists to see these as foresightedly preordained solutions toward which everyone was working , perhaps even knowingly , at the time . It is all too easy to overlook the variants that accompanied the long - term preferred solution and thus distort and misread the learning process . 6 The variation - selection model can be useful - as it was for me with regard to the Northrop " anomaly " - by inspiring search for the variants and emphasizing the role of unforesightedness . If this tale has a moral , perhaps it is this : cherchez la variation . 60These thoughts also relate to Herbert Butterfield ' s concept of the " Whig interpre - tation of history " and the discussion it has engendered . See H . Butterfield , The Whig Interpretation of History ( London , 1931 ) ; and , e . g . , E . H . Carr , What Is History ? ( New York , 1961 ) , pp . 25 , 50 - 51 ; and D . H . Fischer , Historians ' Fallacies ( New York , 1970 ) , p . 139 . 33