Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1980 , Vol . 39 , No . 6 , 1037 - 1049 Perseverance of Social Theories : The Role of Explanation in the Persistence of Discredited Information Craig A . Anderson , Mark R . Lepper , and Lee Ross Stanford University The perseverance of social theories was examined in two experiments within a debriefing paradigm . Subjects were initially given two case studies suggestive of either a positive or a negative relationship between risk taking and success as a firefighter . Some subjects were asked to provide a written explanation of the relationship ; others were not . In addition , experimental subjects were thoroughly debriefed concerning the fictitious nature of the initial case studies . Subsequent assessments of subjects ' personal beliefs about the relationship indicated that even when initially based on weak data , social theories can survive the total discrediting of that initial evidential base . Both correlational and experimental results suggested that such unwarranted theory perseverance may be mediated , in part , by the cognitive process of formulating causal scenarios or explanations . Normative issues and the cognitive processes underlying perseverance were ex - amined in detail , and possible techniques for overcoming unwarranted theory perseverance were discussed . All of us have tried to change a friend ' s view about some social , political or scientific issue—from the efficacy of capital punishment as a deterrent to crime to the validity of the IQ test—only to experience frustrating fail - ure . We offer seemingly compelling evidence or thoroughly rebut opposing arguments but produce little if any change in our friend ' s beliefs . Indeed , we suspect that we ourselves frequently may be guilty of similar intransi - gence when our views come under attack . From such everyday observations , two obvious questions arise that form the focus of the present article : Are we , in fact , prone to per - sist in our beliefs and theories about the world to a degree that is normatively inde - fensible , and if so , why ? This research was supported in part by Research Grants MH - 26736 from the National Institute of Mental Health and BNS - 78 - 01211 from the National Science Foundation to the second and third authors , and by a National Science Foundation Fellowship to the first author . The authors wish to express their thanks to Mark Zanna for his insightful comments on an earlier draft of this article and to Dan Boeriu for his assistance in conducting Experiment 2 . Requests for reprints should be sent to Craig Anderson , who is now at the Department of Psy - chology , Rice University , Houston , Texas 77001 . The first , " normativeness , " question inevi - tably proves to be a complex and subtle one , and we shall postpone much of our discussion of this question until we have presented de - tails about the present procedures and results . For now let us simply note that any consider - ation of the proposition that our beliefs are less responsive to empirical or logical attacks than they " ought to be " requires that one be able to specify how much change in our beliefs would be warranted by any particular chal - lenge to those beliefs . Everyday observations , however , rarely permit such specification . Generally , all one can say with certainty is that some change is warranted whenever the empirical or logical attacks seem to have merit . Nevertheless one case does arise in which normative standards seem less flexible . We refer to circumstances in which all of the evi - dence that initially gave rise to a particular theory is thoroughly and completely dis - credited . When all of the evidence on which I have based a belief , or based a change in be - lief , is shown to my satisfaction to be totally without evidential value—if , for example , all of it is shown to be fictitious—then most Copyright 1980 by the American Psychological Association , Inc . 0022 - 3514 / 80 / 390fi - 1037 $ 00 . 7S 1037 1038 C . ANDERSON , M . LEPPER , AND L . ROSS arbiters of normativeness would agree that my belief ought to revert to its original state . To date , there is no experimental research concerning the perseverance of theories in the face of total evidential discrediting . Some per - tinent evidence exists , however , for one class of less abstract beliefs . It appears that spe - cific personal impressions in a given domain concerning one ' s own abilities or those of a peer may survive even the complete invalida - tion of the evidence on which the impressions initially were based . Ross , Lepper , and Hub - bard ( 1975 ) , for example , provided subjects with false feedback indicating their apparent success or failure at discriminating authentic suicide notes from inauthentic ones , a task purported to assess their social sensitivity and empathetic ability . For half of the subjects the probative value of this feedback was sub - sequently completely negated by a thorough " debriefing " procedure . Although subjects understood and accepted this " debriefing , " their predictions of future task success and ratings of their own abilities continued to be heavily influenced by the discredited prior success or failure feedback . Similar perse - verance effects were also apparent in the social impressions and predictions made by ob - servers who had witnessed the subjects ' origi - nal outcomes and subsequent debriefings . Other experiments , carried out in more ap - plied contexts and with more naturalistic discrediting procedures , have shown that er - roneous first impressions about other abilities such as ' ' ' personal persuasiveness " ( Jennings , Lepper , & Ross , Note 1 ) and " logical reason - ing " ( Lepper , Ross , & Lau , Note 2 ) can like - wise survive the removal of their initial evi - dential basis . A first major objective of the present ex - periments on theory perseverance , therefore , was to extend these previous findings regard - ing the unwarranted perseverance of initial beliefs . On the one hand , we sought to show that the perseverance phenomenon would ap - ply beyond the limited domain of highly specific personal and social impressions . On the other , we sought to demonstrate that per - severance effects may occur even when sub - jects ' theories are initially based on minimal , and indeed logically inadequate , evidence— when their beliefs are of exactly the tenta - tive , hastily - formed , and ill - founded variety most likely to face subsequent logical or evi - dential discrediting in everyday experience . By focusing on tentative social theories , the studies to be reported attempted to examine the perseverance of beliefs that may occur even in the absence of strong emotional or behavioral commitments , or logically com - pelling prior evidence . At the same time , we also sought to address a second major question , concerning the mechanisms that may underlie theory per - severance , through a direct examination of one cognitive process hypothesized to foster belief perseverance . This process involves the formulation of relevant causal scripts or ex - planations , and derives from people ' s pro - pensity to seek or construct explanations to account for salient events or relationships among events that one has noted ( cf . Kelley , 1967 , 1973 ) . Such causal accounts provide the perceiver with an important and efficient means of organizing and understanding the social world . Yet , because such accounts may become independent of the data that originally gave rise to them , they may contribute to the unwarranted persistence of initial impressions and theories as well . Once a causal account has been generated , it will continue to imply the likelihood of the " explained " state of af - fairs even after the original basis for believing in that state of affairs has been eliminated ( Ross & Anderson , in press ; Ross & Lepper , in press ) . For example , the scientist who has explained why early humans might have in - habitated a particular region will continue to believe such inhabitation is likely even after the fossil evidence that originally prompted the explanation has been thoroughly dis - credited . Consistent with this analysis , Ross , Lepper , Strack , & Steinmetz ( 1977 ) have shown that providing an explanation for some possible outcome in an individual ' s life in - creases the subjective likelihood of that out - come . Fischhoff s provocative investigations of hindsight phenomena ( e . g . , Fischhoff , 1975 ) similarly suggest the power of causal explana - tions to influence expressions of likelihood or even inevitability . The role of such explana - tion processes in the perseverance of social PERSEVERANCE OF SOCIAL THEORIES 1039 theories , however , has not received previous study . The two studies that follow , therefore , examine the operation of this explanation mechanism in the perseverance of theories based on inadequate initial evidence . In both experiments subjects were asked to explain an empirical relationship—that existing be - tween success in the occupation of firefighter and preference for risk as measured by a paper and pencil test—just before learning that the " evidence " that initially had led them to believe in that relationship was en - tirely fictitious . In Experiment 1 , the explana - tion task was introduced for all subjects ; it was designed primarily to enhance the likeli - hood of belief perseverance , but it also per - mitted us to correlate the quality of an ex - planation with its impact on the subject ' s postdiscrediting beliefs . In Experiment 2 in - clusion versus exclusion of the explanation task was deliberately manipulated , allowing us to contrast directly the magnitude of theory perseverance in the presence and ab - sence of the interpolated explanation task . Our interest in these studies thus focused on two main questions : First , would subjects continue to hold a given theory about an em - pirical relationship between variables after the meager evidential basis for that theory had been invalidated ? Second , would . the process of providing an explanation for a given rela - tionship increase subjects ' tendency to per - severe in their theories following this dis - crediting procedure ? Experiment 1 In our initial experiment , subjects were first led to believe that either a positive or negative relationship existed between a trainee ' s preference for risky versus conserva - tive choices and his subsequent success as a firefighter , and were asked to provide a writ - ten explanation of this relationship . Subjects in " debriefing " conditions were then explicitly informed that the initial information they had been asked to consider was bogus and of ab - solutely no probative value . This debriefing was omitted for a group of " no debriefing " subjects . All subjects then completed several dependent measures assessing their beliefs concerning the true relationship between these two variables and the predictive power of the relationship . A baseline control group re - ceived no information about the relationship between the two variables but completed the various dependent measures . The final design was thus a 2 x 2 factorial ( Positive vs . Negative Relationship X Debriefing vs . No Debriefing ) , with an added baseline control group . Method Subjects Seventy Stanford undergraduates , participating in groups of two to eight , took part in the experiment , for which they received course credit . Since sub - jects in the experimental groups were to receive in - structions that differed slightly from those in the baseline control group , these latter subjects partici - pated in separate sessions . Within the experimental conditions , subject assignment was randomized in blocks of 12 , and the experimenter remained blind to subjects ' conditions . Procedure Experimental subjects were told that the experi - ment was concerned with how well people are able to discover and explain relationships between per - sonal characteristics of people and their behavioral outcomes . They were informed that they would be asked to examine some data and to see if they could d ' scover and subsequently explain underlying rela - tionships between general traits and specific be - haviors . Control subjects were told simply that they would be asked to make predictions concerning the abilities of persons as a function of their perform - ance on a test of risk preference . After answering any questions about these general instructions , the experimenter gave subjects booklets containing the experimental materials . Manipulation of initial theories . Booklets for sub - jects in the experimental conditions first stated that the subject ' s task was to examine the relationship between eventual success or failure as a firefighter and prior performance on a " Risky - Conservative Choice Test " ( RCC test ) . Next , nondiagnostic back - ground information ( age , marital status , hobbies , etc . ) for one successful and one unsuccessful fire - fighter was presented , along with each firefighter ' s responses to the five " most representative " risky - conservative choice problems . Subjects were in - structed to examine this information about riskiness and ability , to attempt to discover the underlying relationship , and to provide a written explanation of any relationship they uncovered . 1040 C . ANDERSON , M . LEPPER , AND L . ROSS In all conditions the RCC test items were similar to items used previously in research on group - induced shifts to risk taking . Each item presented a dilemma and two possible behavioral alternatives , one risky and one conservative . Each response was a short paragraph , purportedly written by the fire - fighter , that gave his choice of action and explana - tion of the choice . For half the subjects , the pur - ported responses were arranged to demonstrate a positive relationship between risky choices and later success as a firefighter ; for the remaining subjects , these responses were arranged to demonstrate a negative relationship between risky choices and suc - cess as a firefighter . To ascertain that subjects had indeed " discovered " different relationships in these two conditions , a manipulation check was included immediately before the explanation task . The results from this measure— a 101 - point scale anchored at " Highly Positive Re - lationship " ( 50 ) , " No Relationship " ( 0 ) , and " Highly Negative Relationship " ( —50 ) —indicated that sub - jects in the positive relationship conditions did " dis - cover " a positive relationship , M = 33 . 87 , i ( S4 ) = 9 . 99 , p < . 0001 , whereas subjects in negative rela - tionship conditions " discovered " a negative rela - tionship , M = - 20 . 57 , i ( 54 ) = - 6 . 01 , p < . 0001 . After completing these measures , all subjects were asked to provide a one - page , written explanation of the relationship they had uncovered in the two case studies . Debriefing manipulations . Within the two rela - tionship conditions , two thirds of the experimental subjects were assigned , at random , to the debriefing conditions . 1 These subjects received a detailed , writ - ten debriefing following the explanation task inform - ing them that they had been randomly assigned the task of discovering and explaining either a positive or a negative relationship between risk preference and success as a firefighter . To insure that subjects did not still perceive the case data they had re - ceived to be representative of a true relationship , subjects were also explicitly informed that the ex - perimenters had provided fictitious information con - sistent with a positive relationship or a negative relationship to subjects in different conditions , and that the experimenters did not know the nature or strength of the " true " relationship . The last section of the debriefing materials ex - plained to subjects that the prediction and estima - tion tasks to follow were for " control purposes , " to see if their personal theories about the relationship in question had influenced their discovery of a rela - tionship or the quality of their explanations . Sub - jects were urged to make all their judgments based on their personal beliefs and not the fictitious infor - mation initially presented . During final postexperi - mental debriefing sessions , all subjects indicated an awareness and understanding of these critical in - structions . Subjects in the no - debriefing conditions received no such information . After completing their explana - tions , these subjects proceeded directly to the de - pendent measures . Control subjects received book - lets informing them that their task was to examine the information within , and they were also asked to make their predictions and estimates based on their personal beliefs . These subjects were given no in - formation about the relative success of the two case study firefighters , nor were they asked to ex - plain any relationship between risk preference and task success . In all other respects , all subjects re - ceived identical materials and completed identical measures . Dependent measures . Several dependent measures were employed , each designed to assess subjects ' be - liefs concerning the true relationship between a preference for risky choices and ability as a fire - fighter . To minimize the relevance of social evalu - ation concerns , these measures were collected under conditions of anonymity . The first of these measures asked subjects to judge directly the " criterion validity " of the risk preference scale as an index of firefighting ability . Subjects were asked to estimate the average percentage of risky choices for two groups of firefighters—those who had subsequently become highly successful and those who had been failures at the job . The per - ceived criterion validity of the RCC test was as - sessed by subtracting the expected percentage of risky responses among failure firefighters from the expected percentage of such choices among success - ful firefighters , yielding a difference score that could range from 100 ( a maximally strong positive rela - tionship ) to —100 ( a maximally strong negative relationship ) . A second set of measures dealt with subjects ' willingness to generalize , on the basis of their beliefs about the riskiness - success relationship , in making predictions about new cases and new items . For the former measure , subjects were presented with infor - mation on four new trainees , including both non - diagnostic background evidence ( e . g . , father ' s occu - pation , marital status , etc . ) and the individual ' s response to one RCC Test item . Subjects then pre - dicted each trainee ' s subsequent success , allowing a 1 Two types of debriefing were used , both of which fully invalidated the " evidence " initially presented . In " ability debriefing " groups , subjects were in - formed that the relative abilities of the two sample firefighters had been manufactured but that the re - mainder of the information about them ( i . e . , their riskiness responses ) had been authentic . In the " trait debriefing " groups , the riskiness information was discredited , but the ability information was allowed to stand . This variation was introduced to see whether subjects would be more responsive to dis - counting of one type of information than another . Preliminary analyses yielded no consistent effects of the two variants of the debriefing . Hence , the data were collapsed across this dimension in all tables , and in all further analyses equal contrast weights were assigned to the two debriefing conditions within the positive or negative relationship manipulations ( see Winer , 1971 ) . PERSEVERANCE OF SOCIAL THEORIES 1041 Table 1 Mean Postexperimental Beliefs Concerning Relationship Between Risk Preference and Firefighter Success : Experiment 1 Dependent measure Positive relationship No debrief Debrief Negative relationship No debrief Debrief Control Perceived criterion validity 1 GeneralizationGeneralization n toto newnew cases b items " 51 . 1 . 41 , 10 . 8 , 4 . 8 36 . 1 . 31 . 20 01 . 7 - 14 . 2 - 2 . 0 - 10 . 9 10 - 1 . — 1 , - 5 . 20 . 3 , 3 , 5 25 . 5 . 2 19 . 4 10 Note . Positive scores indicate belief in a positive relationship ; negative scores indicate belief in a negative relationship . * Predicted percentage of risky responses on the risky - conservative choice test for superior minus unsuccess - ful firefighters . Range of possible scores is 100 to —100 . b ( Number of success - risky + number of failure - conservative ) — ( number of success - conservative + num - ber of failure - risky ) predictions to four new cases . Range of possible scores is 4 to —4 . 0 Predicted percentage of risky responses on five new items for superior minus unsuccessful firefighters . Range of possible scores is 100 to —100 . test of the extent to which their predictions con - formed to those that would follow from beliefs in a positive or a negative relationship between RCC scores and occupational success . For the latter mea - sure , subjects were presented with five novel hypo - thetical - choice items in the same general format as those in the RCC test , and were asked to indicate the percentage of risky choices that superior and inferior firefighters would make on these items . A difference score served as an index of the subjects ' willingness to generalize to new test items on the basis of their correlational theory . At the completion of the experiment , subjects were probed for sus - picion and given a thorough explanation of the procedures and purposes of the study and of the processes that may mediate the unwarranted per - severance of initial beliefs . Results and Discussion The results for each of these three measures are presented by condition in Table 1 . As one might expect , the three measures proved to be highly intercorrelated ( average r = . 73 ) . Thus , the data on each were transformed into Z scores and summed to provide a com - posite measure of subjects ' beliefs concerning the true relationship between risk preferences and subsequent success as a firefighter . The data from these composite scores are pre - sented in Figure 1 , and it is on these data that our primary analyses were performed . 2 We should first note , perhaps , that al - though the " data " to which subjects had been initially exposed were objectively quite weak ( consisting of only two cases ) and in a domain of little personal relevance , this initial ostensible evidence clearly exerted a strong effect on subjects ' theories about the true relationship between the two variables . Thus , in the no - debriefing conditions , subjects ex - posed to a positive relationship saw risky responses as highly diagnostic of later suc - cess , whereas subjects exposed to an apparent negative relationship believed the opposite to be true , F ( l , 63 ) = 20 . 21 , p < . 0001 . Given these clear effects of initial informa - tion on subjects ' beliefs prior to debriefing , it is possible to examine the perseverance of these beliefs in the debriefing conditions , after subjects learned that the two case studies were fictitious . As is evident in Figure 1 , the total discrediting of the evidence on which subjects ' initial theories had been based had only a minimal impact on subjects ' beliefs concerning the relationship between risk preference and firefighting ability . Within the debriefing conditions , subjects initially exposed to data indicative of a positive rela - tionship continued to believe that a positive relationship existed , whereas subjects in the negative relationship condition continued to 2 Separate analyses parallel to those to be reported below were also performed for each of the three component measures . In all cases , effects that proved statistically significant in the combined analyses were individually significant ( p < . 05 ) for each of the three component measures as well . 1042 C . ANDERSON , M . LEPPER , AND L . ROSS z o ct o - 2 •I POSITIVERELATIONSHIP J CONDITIONS NEGATIVERELATIONSHIPCONDITIONS NO DEBRIEFING DEBRIEFING CONTROL TREATMENT CONDITIONS Figure 1 . Mean composite indices ( Z scores summed across the three measures ) of subjects ' personal estimates of the true relationship between risk prefer - ence and firefighter success , Experiment 1 . ( Positive scores indicate belief in a positive relationship ; negative scores indicate belief in a negative relation - ship . ) believe in a negative relationship , F ( l , 63 ) = 17 . 43 , p < . 0001 . In fact , the slight decrease in the strength of subjects ' beliefs following debriefing , as assessed by the Relationship X Debriefing interaction , was not statistically significant , F ( l , 63 ) = 1 . 59 . These effects , moreover , were roughly sym - metrical with respect to the responses of con - trol subjects not initially exposed to the two case studies , who tended to believe that there would be a slight positive relationship be - tween a preference for risky choices and later success as a firefighter . Consideration of the debriefed groups and the control group in a one - way analysis of variance yielded strong evidence of a monotonic relationship between initial information and subsequent beliefs , monotonic contrast F ( l , 45 ) = 16 . 13 , p < . 0005 , with a nonsignificant residual , F ( 3 , 45 ) = 1 . 24 . In sum , the results strongly support the hypothesis that even after the initial evi - dential basis for their beliefs has been totally refuted , people fail to make appropriate re - visions in those beliefs . That subjects ' theories survived virtually intact is particularly im - pressive when one contrasts the minimal nature of the evidential base from which subjects ' initial beliefs were derived ( i . e . , two " data points " ) , with the decisiveness of the discrediting to which that evidence was sub - jected . In everyday experience our intuitive theories and beliefs are sometimes based on just such inconclusive data , but challenges to such beliefs and the formative data for those beliefs are rarely as decisive as the discredit - ing procedures employed in this study . If our speculations about underlying mech - anisms are correct , however , the design of Experiment 1 also included one feature that is only occasionally present in everyday experience , but that should have served to aug - ment any perseverance effects—the require - ment that subjects provide an explicit ex - planation for the relationship they had ob - served . While Experiment 1 contains no direct evidence on this issue , some indirect support for this hypothesized perseverance - enhancing effect of explanation is provided by an in - ternal analysis of the relationship between the nature of subjects ' explanations and the per - sistence of their initial theories following debriefing . Although an unintended source of variance in our procedure , the explanations subjects provided proved to be of two distinct types . Some subjects responded to the request as intended , offering some general causal account that explained the specific case studies they had read . These accounts typically focused on the risks inherent in fighting fires and the importance , depending on condition , of either a willingness to take necessary risks or the need to avoid foolhardy and impulsive action as a determinant of successful performance . Other subjects apparently construed the task differently . These subjects simply " explained " how the specific information contained in the two particular case studies they had read illustrated either a positive or a negative re - lationship—they basically restated the fact that the more successful candidate had se - lected considerably more risky , or more con - servative , alternatives than his less successful counterpart . Theoretically , the effects of these two sorts of explanations on belief perseverance should PERSEVERANCE OF SOCIAL THEORIES 1043 differ , since only subjects in the former case have generated principles that should con - tinue , even after debriefing , to imply the existence of the relationship they had initially observed . Only in this first case should ex - planations enhance theory perseverance . Con - sistent with this analysis , the data revealed a highly significant point - biserial correlation be - tween the presence or absence of general ex - planatory principles in subjects ' explanations and the degree of postdebriefing belief per - severance , r = . 54 , p < . 0005 . Experiment 2 Experiment 1 demonstrated that a theory concerning the relationship between two vari - ables—generated through exposure to a mini - mal data set—can survive even a complete refutation of the formative evidence on which the theory was initially based . Questions re - main , however , concerning the role of the explanation processes in mediating these per - severance effects—an issue to which Experi - ment 2 was directed . Specifically , Experiment 2 addressed two primary questions : Whether explicit explana - tion is a necessary precondition for the post - discrediting perseverance of a theory or , if not , whether it nevertheless increases the magnitude of such perseverance . To address these issues , Experiment 2 compared six con - ditions . As in Experiment 1 , all subjects were first presented with information on illustra - tive cases involving one highly successful and one clearly unsuccessful firefighter and were asked to discover the relationship between risk preference and firefighting ability—either positive or negative—contained in these case data . Within these conditions , one third of the subjects were next asked to write an ex - planation of the discovered relationships and were then debriefed concerning the fictitious nature of the case study materials , as in Ex - periment 1 . No mention of explanation was made in the remaining four conditions . In these no explanation conditions , half of the subjects were debriefed concerning the fic - titious nature of the experimental materials ; the remainder were not debriefed . The effects of exposure to initial evidence illustrating either a positive or a negative relationship were thus examined under three variations of debriefing and explanation : debriefing - ex - planation , debriefing - no explanation , and no debriefing - no explanation . Finally , as before , all subjects completed a set of dependent measures assessing their beliefs concerning the nature of the actual relationship between the two critical variables . Method Subjects in Experiment 2 were 62 Stanford Uni - versity undergraduates , who received credit toward an introductory psychology class requirement or $ 2 . 00 for their participation in the study . Data from two subjects who failed to complete the test materials were not used . Procedures , booklets , and instructions were basically identical to those of Experiment 1 , with only those changes necessary to accommodate the new design of this second study . Thus , all subjects were initially presented with the same case study materials used in Experiment 1 , suggesting either a positive relationship between risk preference and subsequent success or a negative relationship between these variables . Orthogonally , subjects in two sets of debriefing conditions were fully debriefed concerning the fictitious nature of these putative initial data . 3 Prior to debriefing , however , half of these subjects were asked to pro - vide an explicit explanation of the relationship they had uncovered in the case studies ; half were not given this explanation task . For purposes of com - parison , subjects in the no - debriefing conditions were exposed to the initial data but were neither de - briefed concerning its fictitious character nor asked to explain the relationship they had uncovered . Following these procedures , as before , three mea - sures of subjects ' personal beliefs concerning the true relationship between these variables—the per - ceived criterion validity of the RCC Test and gen - eralization to new case studies and new test items— were anonymously assessed . Finally , all subjects were probed for suspicion and given a complete explana - tion of the procedures and purposes of the study and the processes that may mediate the unwarranted perseverance of initial beliefs . Results The results from these three measures of subjects ' subsequent beliefs concerning the 3 To provide an even more complete discrediting of the data on which subjects ' initial beliefs rested , subjects in Experiment 2 were informed that the two case studies were entirely fictitious , that is , that both the ability ratings and the risk preference information had been manufactured by the experi - menters and had been randomly assigned to them . 1044 C . ANDERSON , M . LEPPER , AND L . ROSS Table 2 Mean Postexperimental Beliefs Concerning Relationship Between Risk Preference and Firefighter Success : Experiment 2 Positive relationship Dependent measure Perceived criterion validity 8 Generalizationto new cases b Generalization to new items 0 n No debrief - no explain 54 . 0 2 . 2 42 . 1 10 Debrief - explain 39 . 0 1 . 0 37 . 1 10 Debrief - no explain 39 . 5 0 . 2 26 . 1 10 Negative relationship No debrief - no explain - 57 . 4 - 3 . 0 - 38 . 5 10 Debrief - explain - 35 . 3 - 2 . 8 - 30 . 5 10 Debrief - no explain - 14 . 0 - . 6 - 9 . 9 10 Note . Positive scores indicate belief in a positive relationship ; negative scores indicate belief in a negative relationship . • Subjects ' predicted percentage of risky responses on the risky - conservative choice test for superior minus unsuccessful firefighters . Range of possible scores is 100 to —100 . b ( Number of success - risky + number of failure - conservative ) — ( number of success - conservative + num - ber of failure - risky ) predictions to four new cases . Range of possible scores is 4 to —4 . 0 Subjects ' predicted percentage of risky responses on five new items for superior minus unsuccessful fire - fighters . Range of possible scores is 100 to —100 . relationship between risk preference and sub - sequent job success are presented in Table 2 . As in Experiment 1 , these measures proved to be highly intercorrelated ( average r = . 7 4 ) . Hence composite Z scores summing across three measures were again calculated , and analyses were conducted on these composite scores , illustrated in Figure 2 . 4 From these data , it is clear that exposure to the two initial case studies again exerted a powerful effect on subjects ' later beliefs ; no - debriefing subjects exposed to a positive rela - tionship saw risky responses as indicative of future success , whereas those exposed to a negative relationship believed the opposite to be true , F ( l , 54 ) = 125 . 76 , p < . 0001 . These initial differences in beliefs between the posi - tive and negative relationship conditions per - sisted even after subjects had been thoroughly debriefed in both the debriefing - explanation , F ( l , 54 ) = 69 . 74 , p < . 0001 , and the debrief - ing - no - explanation , F ( l , 54 ) = 19 . 24 , p < . 0001 , conditions . At the same time , it is also apparent that subjects ' beliefs were not wholly unaffected by the debriefing manipulation . Within the no - explanation conditions , de - briefed subjects endorsed less extreme theories than did nondebriefed subjects , as indicated by a significant Relationship X Debriefing interaction within these four cells , F ( l , 54 ) = 23 . 31 , p < . 0001 . To test our further hypothesis that theory perseverance would be enhanced when sub - jects had been specifically induced to provide an explanation of the theory required a con - sideration of the interaction between the ex - planation and relationship manipulations within the four debriefing conditions of this study . The relevant interaction term , as pre - dicted , showed that the process of explaining the relationship observed in the initial case studies significantly enhanced the perseverance 4 As in Experiment 1 , separate analyses parallel to those performed on the composite belief measure were again performed for each of the three com - ponent measures separately . All effects to be reported below proved individually significant ( p < . OS ) for each of the three measures , with two exceptions : For the perceived criterion validity measure , the Explanation X Relationship interaction term was not individually significant , F ( l , 54 ) = 1 . 71 , and for the generalization to new cases measure , the post - debrief - ing perseverance effect within the no - explanation conditions was not significant ( F < I ) . As is evident from Table 2 , however , even in these cases the means fall in the predicted direction . PERSEVERANCE OF SOCIAL THEORIES 1045 Q . I i * 2 HI a . - 2 - 6 - f / / y / l POSITIVE KXXX / d RELATIONSHIP t ^ " - J CONDITIONS n NEGATIVERELATIONSHIPCONDITIONS NO DEBRIEFING DEBRIEFING NO EXPLANATION EXPLANATION DEBRIEFINGNO EXPLANATION TREATMENT CONDITIONS Figure 2 . Mean composite indices ( Z scores summed across the three measures ) of subjects ' personal estimates of the true relationship between risk prefer - ence and firefighter success , Experiment 2 . ( Positive scores indicate belief in a positive relationship ; nega - tive scores indicate belief in a negative relationship . ) of subjects ' beliefs in the relationship they had discovered , F ( l , 54 ) = 7 . 86 , p < . Ol . 5 General Discussion The results of these two experiments pro - vide support for three general conclusions . First , they offer further evidence for the basic hypothesis that people often cling to their beliefs to a considerably greater extent than is logically or normatively warranted . The experiments thus extend previous research on the perseverance of specific self - assessments and interpersonal judgments to the more general domain of theories concerning rela - tionships among social variables . Second , these studies also extend prior research by suggest - ing that initial beliefs may persevere in the face of a subsequent invalidation of the evi - dence on which they are based , even when this initial evidence is itself as weak and in - conclusive as a single pair of dubiously repre - sentative cases . Finally , the current results provide support for the hypothesis that belief perseverance effects may be mediated , in part , by the generation of causal explanations or scenarios that continue to imply the correct - ness of one ' s initial beliefs even in the later absence of any directly relevant evidence . Before considering the implications of these findings in greater detail , however , it is im - portant to consider two potential alternative explanations of these results . A first possibil - ity is that subjects in the debriefing condi - tions simply failed to understand or believe the discrediting information provided during debriefing . Some presumptive evidence against this argument , of course , is provided by the fact that the debriefing procedure did seem to affect subjects ' subsequent beliefs . De - briefed subjects consistently reported less strong beliefs than subjects who were not debriefed , an effect that proved individually significant in the second experiment . Perhaps more persuasive , however , were the results of postexperimental discussions with subjects in which they indicated that they were neither confused about nor suspicious of the debrief - ing manipulation : In all cases , during this final debriefing period , subjects seemed able to describe accurately the content of the dis - crediting procedure , and in no case did sub - jects voice any suspicion that this information may have been untrue . Instead , they simply felt that the relationship they had examined— whether positive or negative—appeared to be the correct one and that the discrediting of the evidential value of the initial cases was largely irrelevant to their personal beliefs concerning the " true " relationship existing between these variables . Interestingly , in their attempts to aid us as experimenters , several subjects expressed concern over the implausibility of the relationship given to 5 The difference between the designs of Experi - ments 1 and 2 meant that only half as many subjects in the latter experiment were called on to provide explanations prior to debriefing . Nevertheless , in - ternal analysis examining the relationship between the presence of some generalized explanatory scenario or principle in subjects ' explanations and the per - severance of subjects ' beliefs following debriefing was again performed . Although in the same direction as in the first experiment , this correlation was not significant , r = . 21 ( nor was it significantly different from the comparable correlation obtained in Experi - ment 1 ) . The weighted average of these correlations ( McNemar , 1962 ) , we should note , remains highly significant , r , v = . 44 , p < . OOOS . 1046 C . ANDERSON , M . LEPPER , AND L . ROSS subjects in the opposite relationship condi - tion . As one subject in a positive relationship condition commented , " I don ' t think your experiment will work , since it will be im - possible to convince anybody that the true relationship is negative . " In short , we are led to discount any alternative account of the present results that rests on an alleged failure of subjects to comprehend or accept the dis - crediting information provided . A second alternative explanation involves the possibility that the check on our manipu - lation of subjects ' initial theories in these studies , because it required subjects to state explicitly their beliefs prior to debriefing , may have introduced a potential artifact whereby subjects subsequently reported be - liefs consistent with their prior statements , via classic dissonance or self - perception pro - cesses . This appears improbable for two rea - sons . First , subjects ' responses to the manipu - lation check were obtained under precisely the type of conditions—high justification , low choice , and little consequence—that should theoretically have minimized any ex - perience of dissonance or conviction that their responses reflected their enduring beliefs . In fact , subjects at this point were asked only to describe the relationship that they had detected in the two case studies at hand , not their beliefs about the relationship that might exist between the two variables in general . Second , available data suggest that the present effects do not depend on the presence of such a manipulation check . If this proposed al - ternative were correct , a condition in which subjects were not asked to state their beliefs prior to debriefing should not show a perse - verance effect . In a previous study that made use of the same experimental materials and basic procedures as the present experiments ( Anderson & Ross , Note 3 ) , however , signifi - cant perseverance effects , paralleling those re - ported here , were obtained in the absence of such manipulation checks . In light of the apparent clarity of our re - sults , then , let us consider further the impli - cations of belief perseverance effects . We should make clear that a tendency to per - severe in one ' s previous beliefs is not always detrimental , or even illogical . Indeed , in cases where our existing theories have already re - ceived significant support from different sources , it might be more irrational not to view subsequent challenges to those beliefs , or the evidence on which they were initially based , with an appropriately jaundiced eye ( cf . Lord , Ross , & Lepper , 1979 ; Nisbett & Ross , 1980 ; Ross & Lepper , in press ) . To be buffeted about by every random piece of dis - confirming data or every challenge to the evi - dential basis for one ' s beliefs , whether in the course of scientific inquiry or in our daily lives , will frequently prove less adaptive than a tendency to persist in theories that have proven effective over time . What is particu - larly striking in the present study , therefore , is the demonstration of perseverance biases in a situation where subjects ' theories were initially grounded in the most minimal of data sets—only two . case studies . That subjects will persevere in beliefs with such weak em - pirical grounding in the face of a complete refutation of the formative evidence for those beliefs seems eloquent testimony to the per - vasiveness of our propensity to resist chang - ing our attitudes or beliefs . Even under these relatively extreme cir - cumstances , however , it is not clear that every particular instance of belief perseverance should be viewed as unreasonable or counter - normative . For example , exposure to even a demonstrably inadequate data set might lead one to appreciate the role of potential causal mechanisms that might have produced such a data set . Or it might lead one to recall or recognize additional evidence that is not sub - sequently undermined and that had hereto - fore been given insufficient weight in one ' s formulation of beliefs . Under such circum - stances persistent changes in belief in the direction suggested by ultimately discredited data may be quite appropriate . In any given case , therefore , the rationality of such changes will depend on the status of the indi - vidual ' s own prior beliefs and of the evidence and reasoning that originally underlay those beliefs . These caveats about overly quick and facile charges of " counternormativeness , " however , should not obscure an essential feature of the present findings . Specifically , we demonstrated PERSEVERANCE OF SOCIAL THEORIES 1047 that different subjects—and , by inference , the same subject , if placed in different experi - mental conditions—can be led , with equal ease through exposure to one data set or the other , to adopt and persevere in beliefs that are conceptually opposite to each other . The actual relationship between the two variables considered cannot be simultaneously both more positive and more negative than our sub - jects initially believed it to be . Our argument , then , is not that the mechanisms underlying belief perseverance are inherently irrational or inevitably dysfunctional . Rather , we are sug - gesting that these mechanisms , like many other processes underlying human inference ( cf . Nisbett & Ross , 1980 ; Ross & Anderson , in press ; Ross & Lepper , in press ) , may lead in certain contexts to a normatively unwar - ranted judgment , belief , and behavior . Perhaps most importantly , the present findings provide some direct evidence con - cerning the processes postulated to underlie belief perseverance . Our research demon - strated that belief perseverance is enhanced when subjects are explicitly induced to ex - plain the evidence they have been shown . Clearly , it is a central postulate of current attribution models that people often engage in informal causal analyses in attempting to make sense of their social worlds ( Heider , 1958 ; Kelley , 1967 , 1973 ) . The likelihood of such attribution processes presumably varies with the novelty , complexity , and personal relevance of the events or outcomes one is at - tempting to understand ( as well as with the direct instructional manipulations of the sort employed in the present studies ) . Such ex - planations may differ dramatically in their logical and formal properties , and may range from the postulation of a set of antecedent conditions necessary or sufficient to produce a given effect or outcome to a more simple imagination of some relatively concrete scenario in which the event or outcome fol - lows some previous state or condition . In the present studies , for example , subjects made frequent use of one or another of two basic scenarios to explain either a positive or a negative relationship between risk preference and firefighting ability . In the positive rela - tionship conditions , subjects ' explanations often included some contrast between the successful firefighter braving enormous per - sonal risks to save the occupants of a burning building and his unsuccessful counterpart , playing it safe , who stands by helplessly as lives are lost . In the negative relationship conditions , by contrast , subjects ' explanations often made reference to an alternative scenario in which the successful firefighter carefully weights the relevant risks before taking ap - propriate and decisive action , while the un - successful trainee plunges headlong into danger , risking both his own and others ' lives by foolhardy actions . That such explanatory scripts or more formal and abstract explanations—whether generated spontaneously by subjects or pro - duced in response to direct experimental in - structions—should increase belief perseverance seems an obvious consequence of two proper - ties of these explanatory accounts . First , such explanations are , by definition , selectively constructed to fit the evidence or outcome observed . Second , once created , such explana - tions become largely autonomous of the initial data that led to their postulation . Hence , they may remain available and continue to imply the existence of particular relationships or outcomes even if the data on which they were initially based subsequently prove to be com - pletely devoid of evidential value . Evidence of a positive relationship between the presence of some general explanatory principle or script in subjects ' explanations and the magnitude of subsequent belief perseverance effects , moreover , provides some direct evidence for such processes . Subjects who devoted equal time and effort to the explanation task but who focused solely on the specifics of the two subsequently discredited case studies did not seem to show increased perseverance . There is , of course , one further assumption implicit in the foregoing account of our find - ings—that subjects , having explained the ap - parent existence of a particular relationship , are not led by our debriefing procedure to generate any corresponding counterexplana - tion to account for an opposite pattern of data that might have been observed ( Ross & Lepper , in press ; Slovic & Fischhoff , 1977 ) . 1048 C . ANDERSON , M . LEPPER , AND L . ROSS Such an assumption is consistent with the proposition that people are likely to engage in the cognitive effort required to generate an explanation only when provided with some salient or unexpected event or outcome ( Fischhoff , 1977 ; Kanouse , 1971 ; Lepper , Zanna , & Abelson , 1970 ) . It suggests , in addition , an interesting potential antidote for unwarranted belief perseverance in the face of later challenges to the evidence on which our beliefs were based . Would such perseverance effects be eliminated or attenuated , for ex - ample , if subjects could be led , after debrief - ing , to consider explicitly the explanations that might be offered to support a contention in opposition to their initial beliefs ? Alterna - tively , could subjects be " innoculated " against perseverance effects if they had been asked , at the outset of the study , to list all of the possible reasons they could imagine that might have produced either a positive or a negative relationship between the two variables being studied ( cf . Slovic & Fischhoff , 1977 ) ? In view of the pervasive significance of our social theories in decision - making contexts ( cf . Abelson , 1976 ; Janis & Mann , 1977 ) , and the demonstrable adverse effects of unwar - ranted belief perseverance in applied and clinical contexts ( Allport , 1954 ; Chapman & Chapman , 1969 ; Janis & Mann , 1977 ; Lep - per , Ross , & Lau , Note 2 ) , the effectiveness of such debiasing techniques clearly merits fur - ther investigation . Reference Notes 1 . Jennings , D . L . , Lepper , M . R . , & Ross , L . Per - sistence of impressions of personal persuasiveness : Perseverance of erroneous self - assessments outside the debriefing paradigm . Unpublished manuscript , Stanford University , 1980 . 2 . Lepper , M . R . , Ross , L . , & Lau , R . Persistence of inaccurate and discredited personal impressions : A field demonstration of attributional persever - ance . Unpublished manuscript , Stanford Univer - sity , 1980 . 3 . Anderson , C . A . , & Ross , L . The survival of the - ories in the absence of evidence . Paper presented at the Meeting of the Western Psychological As - sociation , San Francisco , 1978 . References Abelson , R . P . Script processing in attitude forma - tion and decision - making . In J . S . Carroll & J . W . Payne ( Eds . ) , Cognition and social behavior . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum , 1976 . Allport , G . W . The nature of prejudice . Reading , Mass . : Addison - Wesley , 1954 . Chapman , L . J . , & Chapman , J . P . Illusory corre - lation as an obstacle to the use of valid psycho - diagnostic signs . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 1969 , 74 , 271 - 280 . Fischhoff , B . Hindsight = £ foresight : The effect of outcome knowledge on judgment under uncer - tainty . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 197S , 1 , 288 - 299 . Fischhoff , B . Perceived informativeness of facts . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 1977 , 3 , 349 - 358 . Heider , F . The psychology of interpersonal relations . New York : Wiley , 1958 . Janis , I . L . , & Mann , L . Decision making : A psy - chological analysis of conflict , choice , and com - mitment . New York : Free Press , 1977 . Kanouse , D . E . Language , labeling , and attribution . In E . E . Jones , et al . ( Eds . ) , Attribution : Per - ceiving the causes of behavior . Morristown , N . J . : General Learning Press , 1971 . Kelley , H . H . Attribution theory in social psychol - ogy . In D . Levine ( Ed . ) , Nebraska symposium on motivation ( Vol . 15 ) . Lincoln : University of Nebraska Press , 19o7 . Kelley , H . H . The processes of causal attribution . American Psychologist , 1973 , 28 , 107 - 128 . Lepper , M . R . , Zanna , M . P . , & Abelson , R . P . Cognitive irreversibility in a dissonance - reduction situation . Journal of Personality and Social Psy - chology , 1970 , 16 , 191 - 198 . Lord , C . , Ross , L . , & Lepper , M . R . Biased assimila - tion and attitude polarization : The effects of prior theories on subsequently considered evidence . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1979 , 37 , 2098 - 2109 . McNemar , Q . Psychological statistics . New York : Wiley , 1962 . Nisbett , R . E . , & Ross , L . Human inference : Strate - gies and shortcomings of social judgment . Engle - wood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice - Hall , 1980 . Ross , L . , & Anderson , C . Shortcomings in the attri - bution process : On the origins and maintenance of erroneous social assessments . In D . Kahneman , P . Slovic , & A . Tversky ( Eds . ) , Judgment under uncertainty : Heuristics and biases . New York : Cambridge University Press , in press . Ross , L . , & Lepper , M . R . The perseverance of be - liefs : Empirical and normative considerations . In R . A . Shweder & D . Fiske ( Eds . ) , New directions for methodology of behavioral sciences : Fallible judgment in behavioral research . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass , in press . Ross , L . , Lepper , M . R . , & Hubbard , M . Perse - verance in self - perception and social perception : PERSEVERANCE OF SOCIAL THEORIES 1049 Biased attributional processes in the debriefing Slovic , P . , & Fischhoff , B . On the psychology of paradigm . Journal of Personality and Social Psy - experimental surprises . Journal of Experimental chology , 1975 , 32 , 880 - 892 . Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , Ross , L . , Lepper , M . R . , Strack , F . , & Steinmetz , J 1977 , 3 , S44 - SS1 . « Social explanation and social expectation : Effects Winer , B . J . Statistical principles in experimental of real and hypothetical explanations on subjective desi £ n - New York : McGraw - Hill , 1971 . likelihood . Journal of Personality and Social Psy - chology , 1977 , 3S , 817 - 829 . Received August 20 , 1979 •