Explore with caution : mapping the evolution of scientiﬁc interest in Physics Alberto Aleta , 1 , 2 Sandro Meloni , 2 , 3 Nicola Perra , 4 , 5 and Yamir Moreno 1 , 2 , 5 1 Department of Theoretical Physics , University of Zaragoza , Zaragoza 50009 , Spain 2 Institute for Biocomputation and Physics of Complex Systems ( BIFI ) , University of Zaragoza , 50018 , Zaragoza , Spain 3 IFISC , Institute for Cross - Disciplinary Physics and Complex Systems ( CSIC - UIB ) , 07122 Palma de Mallorca , Spain 4 Centre for Business Networks Analysis , University of Greenwich , London , UK 5 Institute for Scientiﬁc Interchange , ISI Foundation , Turin , Italy ( Dated : April 15 , 2019 ) In the book The Essential Tension [ 1 ] Thomas Kuhn described the conﬂict between tradition and innovation in scientiﬁc research – i . e . , the desire to explore new promising areas , counterposed to the need to capitalize on the work done in the past . While it is true that along their careers many scientists probably felt this tension , only few works have tried to quantify it . Here , we address this question by analyzing a large - scale dataset , containing all the papers published by the American Physical Society ( APS ) in more than 25 years , which allows for a better understanding of scientists’ careers evolution in Physics . We employ the Physics and Astronomy Classiﬁcation Scheme ( PACS ) present in each paper to map the scientiﬁc interests of 181 , 397 authors and their evolution along the years . Our results indeed conﬁrm the existence of the “essential tension” with scientists balancing between exploring the boundaries of their area and exploiting previous work . In particular , we found that although the majority of physicists change the topics of their research , they stay within the same broader area thus exploring with caution new scientiﬁc endeavors . Furthermore , we quantify the ﬂows of authors moving between diﬀerent subﬁelds and pinpoint which areas are more likely to attract or donate researchers to the other ones . Overall , our results depict a very distinctive portrait of the evolution of research interests in Physics and can help in designing speciﬁc policies for the future . Take a second and think of the main topic of your latest publication . Is it the same of the paper you are currently working on ? If you are in the academic business , chances are that the answer to this question is yes . In the case , instead , the answer is no , how far the two topics are ? What does far , in this context , even mean ? It is long been acknowledged that researchers are constantly pulled by two opposite forces : the exploration of new directions and the exploitations of an established research agenda [ 1 – 5 ] . The former can lead to ground breaking results , radical new knowledge , acclaim and success , but it is a risky strategy often linked to failure , decrease in productivity and challenges in pushing forward ideas in new academic circles [ 6 , 7 ] . The latter , instead , is a conservative strategy associated to high chances of steady publications outputs , fair visibility , but it is typically linked to incremental and low - impact as well as low originality outputs [ 2 ] . Thomas Kuhn eloquently deﬁned this conﬂictual situation as “the essential tension” between risky and conservative strategies [ 1 ] . In speciﬁc ﬁelds such tension has been deﬁned as the perennial ﬁght between conformity and dissent ( philosophy of science [ 8 ] ) , succession and subversion ( sociology of science [ 9 ] ) or reﬁnement and risk taking ( innovation [ 3 ] ) . Societal progress , academic success , policies , and funding allocation are the complex outcome of scientists reactions and interactions with this tension . Therefore , it is of crucial importance to quantify and understand how scientiﬁc interest , and consequently science , evolves in time . To this end , the digitalisation of publication records is of great help [ 10 , 11 ] . Authors , aﬃliations , references , text , and various tags of virtually any publication are now digitally collected ( also retrospectively ) and stored in databases . The access to such data , often limited to speciﬁc journals and / or ﬁelds , has boosted the number of studies investigating publication / citation patterns of authors [ 12 – 18 ] , pa - pers [ 19 , 20 ] , journals [ 21 , 22 ] , institutions [ 18 , 23 , 24 ] , cities [ 25 ] , or countries [ 18 , 26 , 27 ] . Arguably , the most popular area of investigation is the development of metrics aimed at ranking scientiﬁc outputs at diﬀerent granularities ( from single authors to countries ) [ 12 , 28 – 36 ] . Instead , studies aimed at quantifying or understanding the eﬀects of the “essential tension” mentioned above received far less attention . Before moving to describe our contribution in this underdeveloped area , we believe that it is important to brieﬂy summarise four recent papers that did focus on such topic and are close to our aims . Foster et al [ 2 ] , studied researchers strategies in the area of biomedical chemistry . Using tools from Network Science , they studied the evolution of knowledge in the ﬁeld and found that i ) despite the growth of the ﬁeld in time the distribution of strategies remains constant ii ) exploration ( high - risk strategies ) is less prevalent than exploitation ( low - risk strategies ) iii ) exploration is more likely to be ignored , but when it is not , it is linked to high impact and success . Pan et al [ 37 ] , considered the papers published by the American Physical Society ( APS ) and use tools from Network Science to map the evolution of scientiﬁc progress and thus interest in speciﬁc topics across time . They built annual networks connecting topics , deﬁned via the Physics and Astronomy Classiﬁcation Scheme ( PACS ) , if two were listed in the same paper . By studying the properties of such networks they characterised the systemic eﬀects of research strategies of exploration and / or exploitation . They found that i ) the statistical features of such networks are quite a r X i v : 1 9 04 . 06306v1 [ phy s i c s . s o c - ph ] 12 A p r 2019 2 stationary across time ii ) there is an overall increase in connectivity between diﬀerent ﬁelds iii ) the unfolding of such increase is hierarchical ( closer topics get connected ﬁrst than far ones ) iv ) the networks are dominated by topics belonging to subﬁelds of Condense Matter and General Physics , and v ) there is an increase in the importance of Interdisciplinary Physics . Jia et al [ 5 ] also studied the APS dataset focusing on PACS . However , they considered the evolution of interest between topics in the careers of single authors . They found that the empirical patterns can be explained by an interplay between exploration and exploitation modulated by three factors : heterogeneity , recency , and subject proximity . Very recently , Battiston et al [ 38 ] presented the most comprehensive analysis ( to the best of our knowledge ) of Physics to the date . Using tools from Network and Data Science , they analysed the Web of Science and reconstructed the career of about 135 , 000 physicists by considering 294 Physics journals and many more interdisciplinary venues . They adopted PACS to classify the topic ( s ) and thus the ﬁeld ( s ) of Physics represented in each publication . By leveraging this dataset they provided the “census” of diﬀerent ﬁelds of Physics , studied the movement and transition of physicists between them , studied the role of chaperones , quantiﬁed diﬀerences between ﬁelds ( considering frequency of publication , collaboration size , and citations ) , and studied the recognition ( i . e . Nobel prizes ) of each area of Physics . Although , the focus of their research was not the tension between exploration and exploitation , their analysis of the transitions between ﬁelds highlighted interesting patterns : i ) Condensed Matter is the starting ﬁeld of many physicists that then move to Interdisciplinary , Classical , and General Physics , ii ) High Energy and Nuclear Physics tend to “swap” scientists that might also move towards As - trophysics , and iii ) Plasma and Astrophysics are the ﬁelds that “welcome” more physicists from diﬀerent backgrounds . In this context , we study the APS dataset considering the period between 1980 and 2006 . We use the PACS associated to each paper and investigate the evolution of interest between topics in the careers of scientists . To this end , we ﬁrst quantify the tendency towards exploration and exploitation measuring the similarity , in terms of topics , between the production during the ﬁrst and last year of activity of each author . We then deepen the analysis characterizing the transition patterns between sub - ﬁelds . In particular , we build source ( ﬁrst year of activity ) - destination ( last year of activity ) matrices and study the networks ﬂows between them . Finally , we study the transitions between ﬁelds as a function of time considering the entire career of each author . Our results depict a peculiar landscape with authors balancing between the desire to explore new topics and the need of exploiting the acquired knowledge . These trends seem also to be stable in the last 30 years allowing us to highlight the future evolution paths of the distinct areas of Physics . It is important to mention that although our objectives are aligned with the four papers mentioned above , here we develop / adopt diﬀerent and complementary metrics . Thus , our results contribute to uncover the complex dynamics of scientiﬁc production in time focusing on the tension between exploration and exploitation that any researcher likely faces . I . DATASET We consider the APS dataset which includes all papers published by the Society from 1893 to 2009 . As we are interested in the evolution of interest between topics , we use PACS . This classiﬁcation scheme has been developed since 1970 . The ﬁnal PACS classiﬁcation has been released in 2010 and it has been in use in the APS journals till 2016 , when the APS introduced a new classiﬁcation scheme called PhySH ( Physics Subject Headings ) that is substituting PACS . Our raw piece of information is the evolution of interest of each single author measured through the use of PACS . Thus , we need to know which author published which paper . Given that the process of disambiguation of authors names is per se a scientiﬁc challenge , we decided to use the dataset outcome of Ref . [ 31 ] ( we invite the interested reader to the original paper for all the details of the process ) . Considering the various constrains ( both in terms of PACS and authors disambiguation availability ) in the following we analysed all the papers published between 1980 and 2006 . This includes 270 , 781 papers , published in 9 journals , by 181 , 409 authors . The PACS classiﬁcation scheme is organised as a tree composed by four levels . To better understand its structure let us consider the following PACS number 05 . 70 . Ce which indicates papers dealing with “thermodynamic functions and equations of state” . The ﬁrst digit ( 0 ) describes the ﬁrst level : General Physics . This can be chosen among 10 ( from 0 to 9 ) . The ﬁrst and second digit ( 05 ) describe the second level : Statistical Physics , Thermodynamics , and Nonlinear Dynamical Systems . There are 68 ids at depth 2 in the classiﬁcation tree in our dataset . The third level is constituted by the ﬁrst two digits and by the second number ( 05 . 70 ) , Thermodynamics in this case . At the more granular level we need to add the two letters and get the complete description of the PACS given before . To guide the reader to understand what follows , in Table I we report the ids and names associated to the ﬁrst level of the classiﬁcation tree . 3 Id Description 0 General Physics 1 The Physics of Elementary Particles and Fields 2 Nuclear Physics 3 Atomic and Molecular Physics 4 Electromagnetism , Optics , Acoustics , Heat Transfer , Classical Mechanics , and Fluid Dynamics 5 Physics of Gases , Plasmas , and Electric Discharges 6 Condensed Matter : Structural , Mechanical and Thermal Properties 7 Condensed Matter : Electronic Structure , Electrical , Magnetic , and Optical Properties 8 Interdisciplinary Physics and Related Areas of Science and Technology 9 Geophysics , Astronomy , and Astrophysics TABLE I : Description of the ﬁrst level of the classiﬁcation scheme FIG . 1 : Cosine similarity distribution of authors’ interest who started their careers ( published their ﬁrst paper ) in 1980 . We compare their interest vectors of their ﬁrst year of publication and their last . Interest vectors x i , S were built using the second level of the classiﬁcation scheme with 69 PACS . II . RESULTS How does the scientiﬁc interest of researchers change across time ? To provide answers to this question let us ﬁrst measure the similarity of scientiﬁc production at diﬀerent careers stages . For simplicity , we consider the ﬁrst ( f ) and the last ( l ) year of activity in our dataset . Then , for each career stage S , S ∈ [ f , l ] , and author i we build a vector x i , S of size equal to the number of PACS at the classiﬁcation level under consideration , i . e . , 10 at the ﬁrst and 69 at the second level , etc . The vectors are constructed so that the generic component , x i , S , α , describes the fraction between the number of times the PACS α has been used and the total number of PACS adopted . Thus , the components quantify the share of interest , in a speciﬁc year , towards the various PACS . In order to determine the similarity between vectors we use the cosine similarity , θ = cos ( γ ) = A · B | | A | | 2 | | B | | 2 , deﬁned for each pair of vectors A and B . To start getting a feeling about the distribution of the similarities , we ﬁrst consider all authors that published their ﬁrst papers in 1980 and compare the ﬁrst year of publication with their last , using the 69 second level PACS . As it is clearly seen in Figure 1 , two tendencies are followed by the largest number of authors : θ > 0 . 9 and θ < 0 . 1 . Thus , authors were more likely to keep working in the same topics potentially exploring few others , or instead change almost completely the subject of investigation . It is important to notice how the tendency towards a substantial change in research interests is embraced by a higher number of authors while the second , third and forth more likely values are concentred for high values of θ which describe authors covering similar topics during their career . These ﬁrst results demonstrate that exploration seems to be the preferred strategy . Does this apply also to authors that started their career in diﬀerent years ? Also , how does θ depend on the career duration ? In Figure 2 we answer to these questions . In particular , in Figure 2A we show the similarity as a function of the starting year for the second level PACS . Interestingly , we see a similar trend . Strong exploration ( cosine similarity < 0 . 1 ) seems to be the preferred strategy with strong exploitation ( cosine similarity > 0 . 9 ) the second most abundant trend . The only exception are younger scientists – who published their ﬁrst paper in the 00 s – that seem to prefer exploitation . The reason behind this result could be given by the fact that younger scientists are usually pursuing their mentors research line and have not outlined their own research agenda yet . Moreover , our dataset is limited to 2006 thus for authors that 4 FIG . 2 : Cosine similarity distribution of authors’ interest between the ﬁrst and last years of their careers measured using the second level of the classiﬁcation scheme . On the left , ﬁgure A , distribution as a function of when they started their careers . On the right , ﬁgure B , distribution as a function of the duration of their careers . In both cases there is a clear tendency towards exploration . started working in the early 2000s we have access to only the initial phase of their careers . To test this hypothesis , in Figure 2B we show the similarity as a function of the career duration . The plot shows an interesting trend . Short career durations ( less than 4 years ) show a higher propensity to exploitation , while longer careers usually mean a tendency to exploration . This reinforces our idea that younger scientists tend to follow the research interests of their mentors and that the shift in the research line occurs after the Ph . D . – the crossover in Figure 2B takes place around 4 or 5 years of career , the usual duration of Ph . D . studies in many countries – . This ﬁnding is in line with the analyses done by Battiston et al [ 38 ] that showed how the average time of the ﬁrst transition between ﬁelds is around 3 − 7 years depending on the ﬁeld . However , we also note that an alternative and plausible hypothesis is that this result reﬂects a change in the way science is done : the culture of “publish or perish” indeed enforces incremental publications at the cost of undermining exploration or more risky career paths . In the future , when we will have more data about the evolution of younger authors , we would be in a better position to discriminate among these two scenarios . As a way to consolidate all the previous observations , in Figure 3 we plot the average similarity as a function of the ﬁrst year of publication and the career duration . Interestingly , we don’t see any clear dependence on the starting year . The crucial diﬀerence is instead on the career duration . Indeed , the largest values of similarity are concentrated in the region of short careers . Authors with long careers instead are more prone to exploration . By using the same vectors we can measure , more directly , the share of interest kept towards a set of PACS previously used ( exploitation ) and towards a set of new PACS ( exploration ) . For each author we quantify the fraction of new and old PACS comparing the diﬀerent career stages . In particular , we deﬁne the exploration share ( ES ) of author i at stage l or her career as : ES li = (cid:88) α x i , lα ( 1 − H [ x i , fα ] ) ( 1 ) where H [ n ] is a step function such that H [ n ] = 1 for n ≥ 0 . In words , ES li is the sum of the components of x i , l that were zero in x i , f , thus the share of research activity towards new PACS . As vectors are normalised , the exploitation share is instead 1 − ES li . By studying the exploration share of each author we can go a step further in our analysis and explore diﬀerences between diﬀerent subﬁelds . In Figure 4 we plot the average exploration value as a function of the ﬁrst topic used by each author . In other words , we observe the tendency towards exploration diﬀerentiating between users starting in diﬀerent ﬁelds and sub - ﬁelds . We note that Particle Physics , Nuclear Physics , Geology Astronomy and Astrophysics are less prone , on average , to explore diﬀerent topics while the two Condensed Matter and Atomic and Molecular Physics are the ones with the highest exploration . We can speculate that this is due to the fact Particle , Nuclear and Astro Physics are very specialized and usually require large infrastructures while methods employed in other areas are more general . Looking inside each area we can see in some cases a large variability , e . g . in General Physics . Some sub - topics have a high ES like Mathematical methods in Physics ( id . 02 ) or Metrology , measurements , and laboratory procedures ( id . 06 ) while General relativity and gravitation shows one of the lowest propensity to exploration of the entire dataset . Along this line , an interesting example is topic id . 35 Experimentally derived information on atoms and molecules ; instrumentation and techniques that , despite a large proportion of papers ( more than 800 ) , also presents the largest ES . This is probably due to the fact that PACS id . 35 has been deleted 5 FIG . 3 : Average similarity of authors’ interest between the ﬁrst and last years of their careers measured using the second level of the classiﬁcation scheme . Regardless of the ﬁrst year of publication the tendency towards exploration is higher the larger the duration of a career is . FIG . 4 : Average exploration share ( ES ) as a function of the ﬁrst topic used by each author . from the 1995 edition of the classiﬁcation [ 39 ] forcing all the scientists working on the topic to move to other PACS . So far we have quantiﬁed the tendency of authors towards exploration and exploitation . However , when authors explore new topics which ones do they consider ? Are there exploration patterns more likely than others ? How do these depend of the starting set of interests ? To answer these questions , we ﬁrst build origin - destination matrices by considering the ﬂow of researchers from PACS to PACS comparing the ﬁrst and last year of activity . Clearly , this analysis neglects trajectories between the two periods , but it oﬀers a ﬁrst indication of the general trends in scientiﬁc 6 interest contrasting two distinct career phases . Let’s deﬁne the ﬂow from PACS α to PACS β as : M α , β = (cid:88) i (cid:32) H [ x i , lα ] H [ x i , fβ ] δ α , β + ( 1 − δ α , β ) H [ x i , lβ ] H [ x i , fα ] ( 1 − H [ x i , fβ ] ) (cid:80) γ H [ x i , fγ ] (cid:33) . ( 2 ) Each element of the matrix considers all the authors ( thus the sum over i ) . Furthermore , we have two types of elements : inside and outside the diagonal . The ﬁrst term contributes to the diagonal elements ( δ α , β is the Kronecker delta ) and it assumes a value of 1 for all the authors that kept working on the PACS α in the ﬁrst ( f ) and last ( l ) year of career . Thus , the term counts how many authors kept interest in the same PACS . The second term instead contributes to the oﬀ - diagonal elements . The numerator is equal to 1 for all the α − β pairs that respect the following conditions : the author i i ) did not use β in the ﬁrst year , ii ) used β in the last year , iii ) used α in the ﬁrst year . The denominator instead is equal to the number of diﬀerent PACS used in the ﬁrst year . Thus , we connect each PACS used in the ﬁrst year with those used only in the last year as a way to map the evolution in interest and a transition from a set of topics to another set . In Figure 5 we report the results considering the ﬁrst level of the classiﬁcation . The ﬁrst panel is obtained considering all the authors in the dataset . The other three instead are obtained distinguishing the researchers by the year of ﬁrst activity . Some important observations are in order . In general , the diagonal , for all the years , contains the largest values . This result , combined with Figs . 1 , 2 and 3 , highlights an interesting phenomenon . While most of the authors after 4 or 5 years of career almost totally change their interests , they usually remain in the larger area of Physics where they started . In a sense , in each author there is a strong tendency to explore but only within sight from their initial topic . This latter result is the empirical conﬁrmation of the “essential tension” between risky and conservative strategies . Looking at how physicists move outside their original area , other interesting trends emerge too . One of them is that the tendency towards exploitation is particular strong for scientists starting their career in Physics of Elementary Particles , Nuclear Physics , and Condensed Matter ( Electronic Structure , Electrical , Magnetic , and Optical Properties ) while another interesting observation concerns the sub - ﬁeld of Physics of Gases , Plasmas and Electric Discharges ( id 5 ) . Indeed , across years we can observe that , with respect to all the other topics , this is the one that is less likely to “attract” researchers from other areas . A similar result holds , although more nuanced , for the ﬁeld of Geophysics , Astrophysics , and Astronomy . On the other hand , as far as exploration is concerned , the ﬁeld that is able to attract more authors that initiated their publication record in other subjects is General Physics , which is by construction one of the most interdisciplinary ﬁelds . Moreover , from the matrices two clusters are clearly visible . The ﬁrst is formed by Particle and Nuclear Physics . The second instead is formed by the two ﬁelds of Condensed Matter and Interdisciplinary Physics . The presence of such cluster implies that , for example , authors starting in Particle Physics are more likely , in case they explore new topics , to move towards Nuclear Physics . Finally , it is interesting to note how these patterns are preserved across diﬀerent generations of researchers that started publishing in diﬀerent decades . Overall , the results showed so far can be summarised as follows : i ) even if exploration is the preferred strategy , usually it is conﬁned within the ﬁrst level of the classiﬁcation , probably oﬀering the right mix between exploration and exploitation , ii ) exploration outside the ﬁrst level is not random as the transition from some ﬁelds to others is more likely . These observations are in line with previous work done with diﬀerent measures and metrics [ 37 , 38 ] . However , they are in contrast with the work done by Foster et al [ 2 ] and Jia et al [ 5 ] . The ﬁrst group focused on a diﬀerent research area ( Biomedical Chemistry ) and studied 133 awardees of scientiﬁc prizes . In that ﬁeld , scientists seem to prefer exploitation than exploration . This opposite trend highlights how the essential tension might be a function of the area of study . The second group studied , as we do here , the APS dataset . However , they considered a subset of authors that published at least 16 papers ( their results do not change considering 12 or 20 ) . Furthermore , they considered event time rather than real time ( i . e . years ) . Thus the sequence of publication of each authors does not have gaps ( years of inactivity are not accounted for ) . While this approach is quite useful to eliminate possible issues associated to burstiness , it mixes individuals with very diﬀerent publication rates and at diﬀerent career stages . The last point is particularly relevant as the scientiﬁc maturity and independence , often necessary for exploration , are not necessarily a function of the number of papers published ( especially in some disciplines that feature large collaborations ) . Indeed , our results , as well as those by Battiston et al [ 38 ] , show that periods before and after the typical PhD duration ( 3 − 7 years ) are characterized by very diﬀerent tendencies toward exploration . The contrast between the two results highlights a very important point : the inclusion principle used to select the sample of scientists under study , and the approach used to account for time , might inﬂuence the results . It is important to notice how each methodology features diﬀerent pros / cons and eﬀectively select a diﬀerent sample ( with possible overlaps ) . Cleary , more work needs to be done to explore the eﬀects of diﬀerent approaches aimed at deﬁne which publication record should be considered as signature of a professional scientist . Up to now we have mapped the transitions , that is ﬂows between topics , comparing the ﬁrst and last year of activity in our database . Next , we deepen our investigation by mapping the ﬂows as a function of time . To this end , we consider all authors that published a paper in year t and / or t + 1 . Note that we adopted a two years window to 7 FIG . 5 : Interest ﬂow across decades : A , all decades ; B , authors who started publishing in the 80’s ; C , authors who started publishing in the 90’s ; D , authors who started publishing in the 00’s . Authors who start studying y PACS end up sharing their interest across x PACS . Each row is normalized over the number of authors who started using that PACS so that the diagonal represents the fraction of authors that kept some interest ( see equation 2 ) in that PACS at the end of their career . increase the statistics . Then , we consider the fraction of such authors that published a paper also in year t + 2 and / or t + 3 . For each bi - annual time window , we dispose PACS in a circle and connect them with links proportionally to how many authors used PACS α and then PACS β . The width of each arc is a measure of popularity . Aggregating the normalised ﬂows built considering each author , we obtain a systemic map of the dynamics of interests between ﬁelds . In Figure 6 we show the results considering only the ﬁrst level of the classiﬁcation . Several observations are in order . During the ﬁrst years we don’t see much ﬂow between ﬁelds . The authors that published in contiguous time windows did not change topics as much as in later times . In the period 1984 − 1986 , instead , we start seeing an increase in connectivity between ﬁelds signaling either the publication of multidisciplinary papers ( articles containing PACS from diﬀerent ﬁelds ) and / or authors exploring diﬀerent ﬁelds . In particular , we see a more intense mixing between the two diﬀerent branches of Condensed Matter ( 6 and 7 ) as well as an out ﬂow from General Physics ( 0 ) towards these two ﬁelds . The same patterns are repeated from 1986 to 1988 . Note also that since the ﬁrst time window , there is some mixing between Elementary Particle and Nuclear Physics ( 1 and 2 ) . However , from 1990 − 1992 on , the mixing between ﬁelds become more evident . Condensed Matter : Electronic Structure , Electrical , Magnetic , and Optical Properties ( number 7 ) , is the ﬁeld with the largest out - ﬂow towards others . Furthermore , interestingly enough , we observe a the raise in popularity of General , Interdisciplinary , and Astro Physics . Such increase is balanced by a decrease in popularity of Physics of Gases and Plasmas , Elementary Particles and Nuclear Physics . It is important to note that , by deﬁnition , the popularity is not a single measure of the number of papers written each year in each ﬁeld . Indeed , it is modulated by the number of authors that wrote papers in two consecutive years . Our results are in line with the Physics “census” recently conducted by Battiston et al [ 38 ] with a much larger sample of publication venues . We also mention that our dataset does not allow us to see later trends that Battiston et al [ 38 ] observed , such as spikes of productivity in 2010 in Elementary Particle Physics or the relative reduction of Condense Matter in the last years . III . CONCLUSIONS In this work , we have analysed the diﬀerent strategies adopted by researchers , during their career in the Physics com - munity , and test the presence of “the essential tension” between exploration and exploitation described by Kuhn [ 1 ] . To do so , we mapped the evolution of interests in Physics in the last 30 years relying on a dataset containing all 8 FIG . 6 : Authors ﬂow across ﬁelds . For each time window ( 2 years ) , PACS are disposed in a circle . The width of each arc is proportional to the number of authors who published at least one paper in that ﬁeld ( and that published at least another one the year after ) . Each ﬁeld is represented by its PACS number , see table I . Links represent the number of authors who , having published at least one paper in the source ﬁeld on the right , also publish at least one paper in the target ﬁeld on the left ( at seen from outside the circle ) . Note that an author can publish papers in several ﬁelds in a given time window so that a link does not mean that she changed her ﬁeld but that , at least , she has some interest on it . The plots are made using circlize [ 40 ] . the papers published in the APS journals in the period 1980 − 2006 . Deﬁning a set of individual and global metrics we quantiﬁed the change in the PACS used by authors along their careers . Furthermore , we analyzed the source - destination matrices of authors and the network ﬂows between diﬀerent topics . We were able to detect which areas of Physics serve as “donors” of scientists to other areas and which ones are more likely to “receive” a researcher . Even if our analysis has several limitations − e . g . , our dataset is limited to year 2006 and do not cover Physics papers published in multidisciplinary journals − , we indeed conﬁrm the existence of such “tension” between exploring new ﬁelds and exploiting the knowledge acquired during previous years . Our results demonstrate that , even if the vast majority of the authors almost completely change their research interests during their career , they remain in the broader area of Physics – i . e . the ﬁrst level of the PACS classiﬁcation – where they started . This “explore with caution” strategy seems to be the best tradeoﬀ between the risk of moving to new ﬁelds and taking advance of the work done in the past . These ﬁndings are in line with , and complement , previous research that focused on Physics as scientiﬁc area . In fact , Jia et al [ 5 ] have clearly identiﬁed subject proximity as a critical factor inﬂuencing authors’ production . Pan et al [ 37 ] have shown how the networks constructed by using the co - occurrence between PACS densify in time and that such increase in connectivity is hierarchical : close sub - ﬁelds connect ﬁrst . Our results , together with the work by Jia et al [ 5 ] , suggest that such temporal dynamics might be indeed driven by the essential tension between exploration and exploitation faced by each author . It is important to notice however how our results are opposite 9 to those presented by Foster et al [ 2 ] . As mentioned in the introduction , these authors found that in the area of Biomedical Chemistry exploitation is instead the preferred strategy . This contrasts with what we found in Physics , and raises an important question for future research : how does the essential tension aﬀect diﬀerent scientiﬁc areas ? As mentioned above , our results are also opposite to the ﬁndings ( in terms of the tendency towards exploration ) of Jia et al [ 5 ] . Despite that we used the same dataset , we adopted a very diﬀerent inclusion principle ( to select the sample of authors to study ) and measured the career duration not in terms of papers published but in years . This raises another important question for future work : what constitutes a professional scientist and how should we study her career progression ? Indeed , the literature is quite divided in this point . Battiston et al [ 38 ] for example considered only authors that published at least ﬁve papers . Jia et al [ 5 ] studied only authors that published at least 16 articles and Pan et al [ 37 ] did not impose any restrictions ( although they did not focus on the evolution of single authors but rather on the evolution of disciplines ) . Another interesting result stemming from our analysis is that the tendency towards exploration is more marked for scientists with longer careers , with a minimum of 4 or 5 years to start exploring . While this minimum value is probably related to the length of Ph . D . studies , it also highlights that , unlike exploitation , exploration requires longer time to payback . This conclusion is in line with the work by Battiston et al [ 38 ] who , with diﬀerent metrics , have shown that the average time for the ﬁrst transition between ﬁelds to take place , is within 3 − 7 years , depending on the starting area . Additionally , by deﬁning the “migration ﬂows” of authors between topics , we identiﬁed the areas of Physics with the larger vocation to explore and the most probable paths for scientists leaving each area . Physics of Elementary Particles and Nuclear Physics turned out to be the areas with the lowest tendency for exploration but , interestingly , they form a closed cluster with an almost balanced interchange of scientists – probably due to the relatedness of topics and methodology used – . Another tight cluster is the one including the two Condensed Matter and Interdisciplinary Physics . In this case Cond . Mat . ( Electronic Structure , Electrical , Magnetic , and Optical Properties ) is also a very closed area but with a steady ﬂow of researchers from and to the other two areas . Interestingly , these ﬁndings are in line with the work by Battiston et al [ 38 ] that , however , studied a much larger set of Physics journals and papers well beyond those published by the APS . In a nutshell , our results , even if largely in line with previous research , depict a more nuanced portrait of the evolution of research interests than previously thought [ 2 , 5 , 37 , 38 ] . Taking into account the ﬁrst and second levels of the PACS classiﬁcation we demonstrated that physicists indeed explore during their career but only in the proximity of their initial research topic . In some sense we can say that the area of the ﬁrst year of a researcher marks the rest of her career but that inside each area there is ample space to explore new interests . Taken together , our results highlight the high dynamism of the Physics community and the lines of evolution of the ﬁeld . Finally , we believe that the results presented in this work can help the design of speciﬁc policies to foster the future advancement of Physics and related scientiﬁc disciplines . IV . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This material is based upon work supported by , or in part by , the U . S . Army Research Laboratory and the U . S . Army Research Oﬃce under contract / grant number W911NF - 18 - 1 - 0376 . A . A . acknowledges support from Santander via the “Universities International Mobility Awards“ program and of the FPI doctoral fellowship program from MINECO ( Spain ) . S . M . acknowledges support from the Spanish State Research Agency , through the Mar´ıa de Maeztu Program for Units of Excellence in R & D ( MDM - 2017 - 0711 to the IFISC Institute ) . Y . M . acknowledges partial support from the Government of Arag´on , Spain through a grant to the group FENOL ( E36 - 17R ) , by MINECO and FEDER funds ( grant FIS2017 - 87519 - P ) and by Intesa Sanpaolo Innovation Center . The funders had no role in study design , data collection and analysis , decision to publish , or preparation of the manuscript . V . AUTHORS CONTRIBUTIONS Designed the research : SM , NP , YM . Performed the analysis : AL . Analyzed the results : AL , SM , NP , YM . Wrote the manuscript : AL , SM , NP , YM . All authors read and approved the ﬁnal version of the manuscript . 10 VI . CONFLICT OF INTERESTS All the authors declare no conﬂict of interests . [ 1 ] T . S . Kuhn and J . Epstein , The essential tension ( 1979 ) . [ 2 ] J . G . Foster , A . Rzhetsky , and J . A . Evans , American Sociological Review 80 , 875 ( 2015 ) . [ 3 ] J . G . March , Organization science 2 , 71 ( 1991 ) . [ 4 ] A . Rzhetsky , J . G . Foster , I . T . Foster , and J . A . Evans , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112 , 14569 ( 2015 ) . [ 5 ] T . Jia , D . Wang , and B . K . Szymanski , Nature Human Behaviour 1 , 0078 ( 2017 ) . [ 6 ] R . K . Merton , American sociological review 22 , 635 ( 1957 ) . [ 7 ] T . S . Kuhn , The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions , 2nd enl . ed ( University of Chicago Press , 1970 ) . [ 8 ] M . Polanyi and M . G . Grene ( 1969 ) . [ 9 ] R . Whitley , The intellectual and social organization of the sciences ( Oxford University Press on Demand , 2000 ) . [ 10 ] S . Fortunato , C . T . Bergstrom , K . B¨orner , J . A . Evans , D . Helbing , S . Milojevi´c , A . M . Petersen , F . Radicchi , R . Sinatra , B . Uzzi , et al . , Science 359 , eaao0185 ( 2018 ) . [ 11 ] A . Clauset , D . B . Larremore , and R . Sinatra , Science 355 , 477 ( 2017 ) . [ 12 ] J . E . Hirsch , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 102 , 16569 ( 2005 ) . [ 13 ] L . Egghe , Scientometrics 69 , 131 ( 2006 ) . [ 14 ] J . E . Hirsch , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 104 , 19193 ( 2007 ) . [ 15 ] S . Mukherjee , D . M . Romero , B . Jones , and B . Uzzi , Science Advances 3 , e1601315 ( 2017 ) . [ 16 ] P . Deville , D . Wang , R . Sinatra , C . Song , V . D . Blondel , and A . - L . Barab´asi , Scientiﬁc reports 4 ( 2014 ) . [ 17 ] A . M . Petersen , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112 , E4671 ( 2015 ) . [ 18 ] M . R . Guevara , D . Hartmann , M . Aristar´an , M . Mendoza , and C . A . Hidalgo , Scientometrics 109 , 1695 ( 2016 ) . [ 19 ] S . Redner , Eur . Phys . J . B 4 , 131 ( 1998 ) . [ 20 ] P . Chen , H . Xie , S . Maslov , and S . Redner , Journal of Informetrics 1 , 8 ( 2007 ) . [ 21 ] E . Garﬁeld , Science 178 , 471 ( 1972 ) . [ 22 ] C . Bergstrom , College & Research Libraries News 68 , 314 ( 2007 ) . [ 23 ] K . B¨orner , S . Penumarthy , M . Meiss , and W . Ke , Scientometrics 68 , 415 ( 2006 ) . [ 24 ] B . F . Jones , S . Wuchty , and B . Uzzi , science 322 , 1259 ( 2008 ) . [ 25 ] L . Bornmann , L . Leydesdorﬀ , C . Walch - Solimena , and C . Ettl , Journal of Informetrics 5 , 537 ( 2011 ) . [ 26 ] D . K . King , Nature 430 , 311 ( 204 ) . [ 27 ] Q . Zhang , N . Perra , B . Gon¸calves , F . Ciulla , and A . Vespignani , Scientiﬁc reports 3 ( 2013 ) . [ 28 ] L . Waltman , Journal of informetrics 10 , 365 ( 2016 ) . [ 29 ] J . Kaur , F . Radicchi , and F . Menczer , Journal of Informetrics 7 , 924 ( 2013 ) . [ 30 ] R . Sinatra , D . Wang , P . Deville , C . Song , and A . - L . Barab´asi , Science 354 , aaf5239 ( 2016 ) . [ 31 ] F . Radicchi , S . Fortunato , B . Markines , and A . Vespignani , Phys . Rev . E 80 , 056103 ( 2009 ) . [ 32 ] D . Wang , C . Song , and A . - L . Barab´asi , Science 342 , 127 ( 2013 ) . [ 33 ] F . Radicchi , S . Fortunato , and C . Castellano , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105 , 17268 ( 2008 ) . [ 34 ] S . P . Fraiberger , R . Sinatra , M . Resch , C . Riedl , and A . - L . Barab´asi , Science 362 , 825 ( 2018 ) . [ 35 ] L . Liu , Y . Wang , R . Sinatra , C . L . Giles , C . Song , and D . Wang , Nature 559 , 396 ( 2018 ) . [ 36 ] S . Lehmann , A . Jackson , and B . Lautrup , Scientometrics 76 , 369 ( 2008 ) . [ 37 ] R . K . Pan , S . Sinha , K . Kaski , and J . Saram¨aki , Scientiﬁc reports 2 ( 2012 ) . [ 38 ] F . Battiston , F . Musciotto , D . Wang , A . - L . Barab´asi , M . Szell , and R . Sinatra , Nature Reviews Physics 1 , 89 ( 2019 ) . [ 39 ] APS , Changes made in the 1995 PACS Scheme , https : / / journals . aps . org / PACS / pacschg95 . html ( 2019 ) , [ Online ; ac - cessed 19 - January - 2019 ] . [ 40 ] Z . Gu , L . Gu , R . Eils , M . Schlesner , and B . Brors , Bioinformatics 30 , 2811 ( 2014 ) .