Current Biology 18 , 1288 – 1294 , September 9 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2008 . 07 . 046 Report Self - Organized Podosomes Are Dynamic Mechanosensors Olivier Collin , 1 Sungsoo Na , 1 Farhan Chowdhury , 1 Michael Hong , 1 Myung Eun Shin , 2 Fei Wang , 2 and Ning Wang 1 , * 1 Department of Mechanical Science and Engineering 2 Department of Cell and Developmental Biology University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign Urbana , IL 61801 Summary Podosomes are self - organized , dynamic , actin - containing structures that adhere to the extracellular matrix via integ - rins [ 1 – 5 ] . Yet , it is not clear what regulates podosome dy - namics and whether podosomes can function as direct me - chanosensors , like focal adhesions [ 6 – 9 ] . We show here that myosin - II proteins form circular structures outside and at the podosome actin ring to regulate podosome dynamics . Inhibiting myosin - II - dependent tension dissipated podo - some actin rings before dissipating the myosin - ring struc - ture . As podosome rings changed size or shape , tractions underneath the podosomes were exerted onto the substrate and were abolished when myosin - light - chain activity was inhibited . The magnitudes of tractions were comparable to those generated underneath focal adhesions , and they in - creased with substrate stiffness . The dynamics of podo - somes and of focal adhesions were different . Torsional trac - tions underneath the podosome rings were generated with rotations of podosome rings in a nonmotile , nonrotating cell , suggesting a unique feature of these circular structures . Stresses applied via integrins at the apical surface directly displaced podosomes near the basal surface . Stress - in - duced podosome displacements increased nonlinearly with applied stresses . Our results suggest that podosomes are dynamic mechanosensors in which interactions of myo - sin tension and actin dynamics are crucial for regulating these self - organized structures in living cells . Results and Discussion It is well established that actins play important roles in forma - tion of the core of the podosomes [ 3 ] . However , the role of my - osin motor proteins is less clear . To determine the role of my - osins , we treated the cells with blebbistatin , a speciﬁc myosin inhibitor . Within 8 min of blebbistatin treatment , podosome rings ( a superstructure consisting of numerous individual podosomes , very dynamic [ lifespan of 2 – 12 min ] and small [ w 0 . 5 – 1 m m ] dot - like adhesions ) disappeared ( Figure S1A , available online ) . Similarly , ML7 , an inhibitor of myosin - light - chain kinase of myosin - II , inhibited large podosome bands within 8 min of treatment ( Figure S1B ) . Furthermore , inhibiting Rho - associated kinase ( ROCK ) with Y27632 abolished podo - some rings within 20 min ( Figure S1C ) . Importantly , no de novo formation of podosome rings was observed once the rings were inhibited by one of these drugs . These results suggest that active myosin - II proteins are necessary for the appropriate ring - like or band - like structures of podosomes . When the cell was treated with Jasplakinolide ( 0 . 5 m M ) , an actin polymerizer and stabilizer , the dynamic feature of the podosome rings was abolished ( Figure S1D ) . No apparent changes in the podosome rings were observed up to 40 min after the drug treatment , although there was a slight decrease in the projected area of the cell ( Figure S1D ) . In contrast , po - dosome rings in control conditions undergo rapid , dynamic shape changes within the 40 min period [ 5 ] . This result sug - gests that podosome - ring dynamics are tightly controlled by the dynamics of the actins , consistent with previously pub - lished results [ 5 ] . To better understand the structural basis of podosome - ring regulation , we cotransfected mCherry - actin and GPF - myosin light chain ( MLC ) into the same cell . Just outside the podo - some actin ring ( Figure 1A , Actin , arrow ) , there was a thick my - osin ring that formed bundles ( Figure 1A , MLC , arrow ) . At the site of the podosome actin ring , there was a small , faint myosin ring ( Figure 1B ) . When the two images were superimposed , the actin ring colocalized largely with the thin myosin ring ( Figure 1B , overlay ) , consistent with a recent report that myo - sin - IIA colocalizes with podosomes [ 4 ] . Interestingly , when myosin - II proteins were inhibited with ML7 ( 25 m M ) , the podo - some actin ring disappeared within 1 min of ML7 treatment , al - though the two myosin - ring - like structures were still present ( Figure 1B ) . Moreover , the inner myosin ring appeared to be smaller and denser at 1 min of ML7 treatment . After 10 min of ML7 treatment , the larger myosin ring started to disassem - ble somewhat and the smaller myosin ring turned into a dense myosin aggregate at the center ( Figure 1B ) . Quantitative anal - yses of ﬂuorescence intensity of actin and of MLC before and after ML7 treatment in eight different cells ( shown in Figures 1C and 1D ) conﬁrmed the conclusion from the qualitative im - ages shown in Figures 1A and 1B . Importantly , the disappear - ance of the podosome actin ring occurred at the time of the cell relaxation ( Movies S1 , S2 , and S3 ) , suggesting that myosin - dependent tension in these myosin - ring structures might be essential for the dynamics and relative stability of podosome actin rings . To ﬁnd out whether a subcellular structure is a direct mecha - nosensor or not , one needs to determine whether the speciﬁc structure can directly transmit mechanical forces both inside - out and outside - in . Although there is active discussion in the ﬁeld concerning the idea that podosomes are possible candi - dates for mechanosensors because they share many mole - cules with focal adhesions , some suggest that podosomes are not a strong candidate for mechanosensors , given that they are self - organized , dynamic structures that move around extensively inside the cytoplasm within minutes . Furthermore , podosome rings can be generated de novo in the cytoplasm in a nonmigrating cell with a life span of 2 – 12 min . Therefore , the conventional wisdom is that these podosome structures are not likely to be force - sensing structures , which should be sta - ble enough to transmit forces across molecular structures . Surprisingly , when a podosome ring moved inside the cyto - plasm within a few minutes and generated an apparent actin ‘‘ﬂow’’ ( Figures 2A and 2B ) , strong tractions were exerted on * Correspondence : nwangrw @ uiuc . edu the ﬂexible substrate , deforming the substrate just underneath the podosomes ( Figures 2C and 2D ) . It is interesting that peak tractions were generated just underneath the two ends of the actin semi - ring - like structure , suggesting that the endogenous forces that move the podosomes around are strongly local - ized . These data also suggest that not all podosomes in a ring structure are capable of exerting forces to the substrate . It is important to note that these tractions are the increases in stresses associated with podosome movements , not the trac - tions generated by the focal adhesions , which are the stresses necessary for the adhesion - dependent anchorage and the shape stability of the whole cell . Because local tractions de - crease as the reciprocal of the distance squared in the sub - strate , these ‘‘actin - ﬂow’’ - associated tractions just under - neath the podosomes cannot be due to the dynamic traction changes at focal adhesions that are several m ms or tens of m ms away from these podosomes ( see Figure 3 ) . Some podo - somes even underwent rotational movements in the cyto - plasm ( Figures 2E and 2F ) to generate considerable apparent actin ﬂows in just a few minutes . This rotation of the podosome ring generated signiﬁcant torsional tractions and deformations on the ﬂexible substrate ( Figures 2G and 2H ) . Given that there was no rotation of the whole cell , these torsional tractions un - derneath the podosomes are likely to be a unique feature of the podosome - ring structures , because it is well known that focal - adhesion movements are strictly linear in a nonmotile cell [ 10 ] . Importantly , tractions generated underneath the podosome ring were almost completely abolished when MLC activities Figure 1 . Myosin Tension Regulates Podosome - Ring Dynamics Cells were cotransfected with mCherry - actin ( red ) and GFP - MLC ( green ) . ( A ) BHK cells displayed podosome actin rings ( Actin , arrow ) ; myosin net - works exhibited a circular ﬁbrillar network ( MLC , arrow ) . The overlay revealed a complex circular network of myosin ﬁbers ( green ) surrounding the actin ring ( red ) . Scale bar represents 10 m m . ( B ) For abettervisualization , the whitesquare intheleftimage of ( A ) iscrop - ped and enlarged . In the control cell ( Cont ) , the actin ring ( left image ) is sur - roundedbythelarge , circularmyosinnetwork , andasmall , faintmyosinring islocatedintheinnerregion ( middleimage ) . Theoverlay ( rightimage ) shows that the actin ring colocalizes with the small myosin ring in a majority of locations . ML7 ( 25 m M ) induced a very rapid ( 1 min ) and sustained ( 10 min ) disappearance of the actin ring ( left images ) ; however , the circular myosin ﬁbers were still present after 1 min and decreased slightly at 10 min ( middle images ) . The small myosin ring shrank after 1 min of ML7 myosin treatment ( middle image ) , and a myosin aggregate appeared at the center after 10min of ML7 treatment ( lower middle image ) . The overlay shows that the stress ﬁbers at the cell periphery were still present despite a relaxation of the cell ( Movie S3 ) and a concurrent disassembly of the podosome actin ring , suggesting that myosin tension is crucial in regulating podosome - ring dynamics . ( C ) The control level of actin ﬂuorescence is normalized by the quantiﬁca - tion of the average ﬂuorescence of the cell outside the ring ( Non - POD ) . The ﬂuorescence of the podosome rings was 187 6 13 % of the control ﬂuorescence in the absence of ML7 ( POD , ML7 2 [ minus ] ) and rapidly decreased to 112 6 3 . 7 % after 1 min of ML7 treatment ( 25 m M ) and to 107 6 3 % after 10 min of ML7 treatment ( asterisk indicates p < 0 . 01 ; n = 8 different cells ; mean 6 SE ) . ( D ) The control level of MLC ﬂuorescence is normalized by the quantiﬁca - tion of the average ﬂuorescence in the center of the large myosin ring ( MLC Center , ML7 2 [ minus ] ) . The ﬂuorescence of the large myosin ring surrounding the actin ring was 172 6 11 . 6 % of the control ﬂuorescence and remained relatively constant after 1 min of ML7 ( 25 m M ) , and then de - creased somewhat to 152 6 9 . 1 % after 10 min of ML7 . Although the level of ﬂuorescence of the large myosin ring did not signiﬁcantly decrease with ML7 treatment , the level of myosin in the center rapidly increased to 116 . 5 6 9 . 2 % after 1 min and to 148 6 4 . 3 % after 10 min of ML7 ( asterisk indicates p < 0 . 01 ; n = 8 cells ; mean 6 SE ) , probably largely due to the shrinkage of the small myosin ring . Podosomes Are Mechanosensors 1289 Current Biology Vol 18 No 17 1290 were inhibited with ML7 ( Figure S2 ) . All these data demon - strate that podosomes do transmit endogenous forces to the outside ECM proteins . In order for a subcellular structure to be a mechanosensor , it must be sensitive to substrate rigidity [ 9 , 11 – 13 ] . For testing of this possibility for the podosomes , cells were plated on sub - strates of different stiffnesses . When the substrate stiffness varied from 2 . 0 to 3 . 5 kPa and to 6 . 5 kPa , the peak tractions generated beneath the podosomes increased from 251 Pa to 356 Pa ( a 42 % increase ) and 672 Pa ( a 168 % increase ) , respec - tively ( Figure 2I ) . These results demonstrate that the molecular structures in the podosomes and / or in the vicinity of the podo - somes are sensitive to changes in substrate rigidity . Our ﬁnd - ings are in accordance with those by Y . L . Wang et al . , who have demonstrated that when substrate stiffness doubles , the tractions increase by w 50 % [ 14 ] , most likely from primary contributions of focal adhesions [ 9 ] , a major cell - matrix me - chanosensor . Considering that podosomes are similar to focal adhesions in sensitivity to substrate stiffness , our result strongly suggests that podosomes are indeed mechano - sensors . It is well known that focal adhesions function to anchor an anchorage - dependent cell , to sense substrate rigidity and transmit forces , to stabilize a cell’s cytoskeleton , and to de - form the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) [ 6 – 15 ] . In contrast , podo - somes are dynamic microstructures whose known functions are those of local matrix degradation and invasion [ 1 ] . To de - termine whether dynamics of podosomes and dynamics of focal adhesions are different , we examined them in the same cell . In a cell that was double transfected with mCherry - actin and EGFP - zyxin and plated on a collagen - 1 - coated rigid glass dish , podosome rings exhibited signiﬁcant movements within an 8 min period ; in contrast , there were little observable move - ments associated with focal adhesions during the same period ( Figures 3A and 3B ) . These data suggest that podosomes and focal adhesions have very different dynamics on rigid sub - strates . To further compare changes in tractions under podosomes with those under focal adhesions , we plated EGFP - zyxin - transfected cells on a collagen - 1 - coated substrate of 5 kPa ( Figure 3C ) . The podosome zyxin ring exhibited signiﬁcant movements and dynamics during a 4 min period ( Figure 3D ) . Importantly , tractions up to 200 Pa were exerted onto the sub - strate just underneath the podosome zyxin ring ; the tractions were in the same direction of the podosome movements and at sites far from any focal adhesions ( Figure 3E ) . Most focal ad - hesions did not exhibit traction changes during this period , although a few focal adhesions exhibited traction changes at the cell periphery , ranging from 150 – 350 Pa ( Figure 3E ) . Be - cause the magnitudes of tractions underneath the podosomes are comparable to those generated under focal adhesions— the well - established mechanosensors—these results suggest that , like focal adhesions , podosomes are mechanosensors . What might be responsible for generation of these tractions underneath the podosomes ? Myosin motor proteins are found right at or near podosomes [ 4 ] ( Figure 1 ) , which suggests that they are a strong candidate for the generation of tractions un - derneath the podosomes , although we cannot rule out the possibility that forces are generated outside the podosomes and transmitted to the substrate through the cytoskeleton via podosomes . To explore the possibility of outside - in transmission of force by podosomes , we applied a localized stress to the apical surface of the cell via integrins and quantiﬁed the induced de - formations in the podosome actin rings ( Figures S3A and S3B ) . It is clear that stresses applied at the cell apex resulted in ap - preciable deformations in the podosomes ( Figures S3A and S3B ) . A mechanosensor that senses direct mechanical stresses should be sensitive to the magnitudes of the applied stresses . To test this possibility in podosomes , we transfected EGFP - a - actinin into the cells that form podosome - like rings and then applied varying stresses via the magnetic bead on the cell top ( Figures 4A and 4B ) . Elevating the magnitudes of the applied stresses from 8 . 7 Pa to 17 . 5 Pa and to 26 . 2 Pa increased the peak displacements of the podosome a - actinin rings from 48 6 18 . 7 nm to 53 . 2 6 14 . 6 nm and to 87 . 4 6 17 . 7 nm , respectively ( Figures 4C and 4D ) . It is interesting that the relationship between the applied stress and the maximum in - duced a - actinin displacements was nonlinear , a typical feature found when focal adhesions are probed [ 6 , 7 ] . However , our recent published data show that biochemical activities of enzymes such as Src can increase rapidly within 300 ms at re - mote cytoplasmic sites after stress application [ 16 ] , suggest - ing that some of the induced displacements of podosomes at different magnitudes of stresses in the same cell could be due to indirect biochemical changes and associated structural changes ( remodeling ) at or near podosomes . If this were true , it would be another piece of evidence that podosomes act as mechanosensors . Detailed biochemical studies are needed for testing of this idea in the future . Of four different integrin - dependent adhesions ( focal adhe - sions , focal complexes , ﬁbrilar adhesions , and podosomes ) , podosomes are the least understood in terms of dynamics and physical features . Previous reports show that inhibition Figure 2 . Podosome Rings Exert Tractions on the Matrix when They Undergo Movements in the Cytoplasm ( A ) Cells transfected with mCherry - actin were seeded on a 6 . 5 kPa polyacrylamide - gel substrate ( top left inset : a podosome actin ring , the same as in [ B ] ) . Scale bar represents 20 m m . ( B ) The cell displayed an actin ring that expands to the left of the image within two minutes . To better visualize the movement of the ring , time - lapse se - quenceswereanalyzedwiththeoptical - ﬂowmethod . Thedarkandblueregionscorrespondtothelocationofthepodosomeringattimezero , andthegreen and red regions correspond to the location of the podosome ring at 2 min . ( CandD ) Thepodosome ring exertstractionsupto800Painthedirectionofthemovementofthewave ( C ) . Duringthepodosome - bandextension , thepeak tractions are exerted at the extremities of the actin band , and they generated a peak gel deformation up to 0 . 3 m m ( D ) . ( E ) A BHK cell , transfected with mCherry - actin , was plated on a 3 . 5 kPa polyacrylamide - gel substrate ( top left inset : a podosome actin ring , the same as in [ F ] ) . Scale bar represents 20 m m . ( F ) Althoughthesizeandshapeofthepodosome ringdidnotchangeduringa4minperiod , theoptical - ﬂowanalysisshowedthattheringrotatedclockwise , with a major actin ﬂow that went from the left of the ring ( dark regions ) to the upper side of the ring ( red regions ) . ( GandH ) Theringrotationexertedtorsionaltractionsonthesubstrateupto600Pawheretheactinﬂowwasthehighest ( G ) , resultingatorsionaldeformation of the substrate up to 0 . 6 m m ( H ) . ( I ) Thepeaktractionsduringpodosome - ringmovementswerecomputedforcellsonsubstratesofdifferentstiffnesses ( n = 4cellseachon2 , 3 . 5 , and6 . 5kPa gels , respectively ) . Average peak tractions were 251 6 26Pa on a2 kPa gel , 356 6 109 Paon 3 . 5 kPa gel , and 672 6 100Pa on 6 . 5 kPa gel ( p < 0 . 01 between 2 kPa and 3 . 5 kPa gels ; p < 0 . 038 between 3 . 5 kPa and 6 . 5 kPa gels ; mean 6 SE ) . Podosomes Are Mechanosensors 1291 of myosin activity promotes formation of podosomes [ 4 , 17 ] . In contrast , we ﬁnd that myosin inhibition leads to podosome disassembly . We do not know why our data are different from those published data , but all three different inhibitors of myo - sin - dependent tension ( blebbistatin , ML7 , and Y - 27832 ) dis - assembled podosomes and prevented formation of new po - dosomes , results which are consistent with our previous report [ 5 ] . We wonder whether these are cell - type - and / or Figure 3 . Movements and Tractions by Podo - some Rings and Focal Adhesions ( A ) BHKcellsarecotransfectedwithmCherry - ac - tin ( left image ) and EGFP - zyxin ( central image ) and seeded on collagen - 1 - coated rigid glass . The zyxin is located in the focal adhesions at the tip of the actin stress ﬁbers and also colocal - izes with the actin in the podosome rings ( left image ) . ( B ) The focal adhesions and the podosome ring werevisualizedinEGFP - zyxinataregionofinter - est ( white square in [ A ] ) in a time - lapse sequence of8min ( leftimageandcentralimage ) . Theimage at the initial time is artiﬁcially colored in green , and the image after 8 min is artiﬁcially colored in red . The overlay of the two images allows the determination of the movement of the podo - somes and the focal adhesions ( right image ) . The zyxin located in the focal adhesions before and after 8 min completely colocalizes ( yellow dots ) , thus showing little movement of the focal adhesions during this period . However , during thesameperiod , thepodosomezyxinringmoved substantially within 8 min ( red band and green band ) . ( C ) A BHK cell was transfected with EGFP - zyxin and seeded on a substrate of 5 kPa . The dynam - ics of a podosome ring and of focal adhesions were recorded during a 4 min period . During thisperiod , thefocal adhesions exhibitverysmall movements , while the podosome ring displays expansion . ( D ) A close visualization of the podosome ring is shownatthebeginningofthesequenceandafter 4 min . Analysis of the ring movement with optical ﬂow shows in blue and green ( the position of the ring at the beginning of the sequence ) and in red ( the position at 4 min ) . The ring exhibited an ex - pansion to the left on its left part , an expansion to the right in its center , and a formation or rein - forcement of podosomes on its right part . ( E ) Thetractionsexertedbythecellarecomputed during the time - lapse sequence of 4 min . A ma - jority of focal adhesions did not exhibit traction changes at all during this period , although a few focal adhesions exhibited traction changes at the cell periphery , ranging from 150 to 350 Pa . In contrast , the podosome ring exerted tractions up to 200 Pa , in the same direction of its move - ments , at sites far from any focal adhesions . Another cell exhibited similar behavior . species - related differences or whether they depend on how podosomes are initiated . Alternatively , it is possible that dependence of podosome dy - namics on myosin activity is tightly regulated . No matter what , it is clear that podosome dynamics depend not only on actin dynamics but also on myosin activity . In the current study , we present evidence for podosomes as bona ﬁde mechanosensors capable of transmitting mechani - cal stresses inside - out and outside - in . These results are sur - prising , because one would not expect to observe such a high magnitude of tractions by these small , very dynamic , dot - like structures ( w 0 . 5 – 1 m m ) or to ﬁnd that they are so sen - sitive to substrate rigidity and to applied stresses . At this time , we do not know what exact molecule ( s ) inside the podosomes Current Biology Vol 18 No 17 1292 is responsible for sensing forces , but integrins , zyxin , paxillin , a - actinin , and vinculin are all candidates for early sensing . It is likely that myosin - II motor proteins in the podosomes or close to the podosomes are the primary component of the sensing apparatus . Our ﬁndings on the vital role of myosin - dependent tension in self - organized podosome formation suggest that local interactions between myosin - II motor proteins [ 18 ] and actins might be crucial for the provision of global order to these self - organized structures in living cells . Our current work extends the previously published work [ 5 ] . In light of a previous paper that quantiﬁes only tractions generated by fo - cal adhesions [ 9 ] , our work suggests that one may not be able Figure 4 . Mechanical Stresses Are Transmitted Outside - In to the Podosomes ( A ) An RGD - coated 4 . 5 m m bead ( arrow ) was attached to the apical surface of a BHK cell transfected with EGFP - a - actinin . ( B ) The cell exhibited a large podosome a - actinin ring at the basal surface at its periphery and a small faint ring inside . ( C ) Direct displacements of podosome rings were quantiﬁed with a sensitive , synchronous detection method [ 21 , 22 ] in response to varying oscillatory stresses ( 0 . 8 Hz ) . Maximum displacements of the podosomes increased from w 30 nm at 8 . 7 Pa and 17 . 5 Pa to w 50 nm at 26 . 2 Pa . Displacements at sites other than the rings are due to stress - induced diaplacements of a - actinin associated with other cytoskeletal structures . The pink dot represents the bead’s center position . ( D ) Quantitative analyses of podosome maximum displacements . Average peak displacements were 48 6 18 . 7 nm , 53 . 2 6 14 . 6 nm , and 87 . 4 6 17 . 7 nm , respectively , with increasing stresses . ( asterisk indicates p < 0 . 01 ; n = 5 cells ; mean 6 SE ) Note that the relationship between the applied stress and the maximum a - actinin displacements was nonlinear . Podosomes Are Mechanosensors 1293 to ignore those tractions generated by dynamic adhesion structures such as podosomes . A report shows that tractions in ﬁbroblasts are regulated by Rho - dependent kinase but not by MLC kinase [ 19 ] . Our current data that show that MLC - ki - nase inhibition by ML7 can also lead to disappearance of po - dosome rings and inhibition of podosome tractions suggest that tractions exerted by these dynamic structures may be controlled by different myosin - II isoforms [ 4 , 18 ] as compared to those controlled by more stable and large adhesion struc - tures such as focal adhesions . The exact physiological signif - icance of the mechanosensing capability of podosomes is not clear at the present time , but it might be related to the need for the cell to rapidly probe the local physical properties of the substrate in order to adjust its intracellular mechanical and / or biochemical activities for adaptation to its physical micro - environment . More work is needed for elucidating how individ - ual signaling molecules [ 20 ] interact with myosin motor pro - teins in regulating podosome dynamics and mechanics , which may play important roles in cell invasion . Supplemental Data Supplemental Data include Supplemental Experimental Procedures , three ﬁgures , and three movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / www . current - biology . com / cgi / content / full / 18 / 17 / 1288 / DC1 / . Acknowledgments We thank R . Tsien of the University of California at San Diego for the gift of mCherry - actin . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grant GM072744 ( to N . W . ) and the University of Illinois ( N . W . ) . Received : March 20 , 2008 Revised : July 3 , 2008 Accepted : July 7 , 2008 Published online : August 28 , 2008 References 1 . Linder , S . ( 2007 ) . The matrix corroded : podosomes and invadopodia in extracellular matrix degradation . Trends Cell Biol . 17 , 107 – 117 . 2 . Badowski , C . , Pawlak , G . , Grichine , A . , Chabadel , A . , Oddou , C . , Jurdic , P . , Pfaff , M . , Albige ` s - Rizo , C . , andBlock , M . R . ( 2008 ) . PaxillinPhosphor - ylation Controls Invadopodia / Podosomes Spatiotemporal Organiza - tion . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 633 – 645 . 3 . Samanna , V . , Ma , T . , Mak , T . W . , Rogers , M . , and Chellaiah , M . A . ( 2007 ) . Actin polymerization modulates CD44 surface expression , MMP - 9 acti - vation , and osteoclast function . J . Cell . Physiol . 213 , 710 – 720 . 4 . van Helden , S . F . , Oud , M . M . , Joosten , B . , Peterse , N . , Figdor , C . G . , and van Leeuwen , F . N . ( 2008 ) . PGE2 - mediated podosome loss in dendritic cells is dependent on actomyosin contraction downstream of the RhoA - Rho - kinase axis . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 1096 – 1106 . 5 . Collin , O . , Tracqui , P . , Stephanou , A . , Usson , Y . , Cle´ment - Lacroix , J . , and Planus , E . ( 2006 ) . Spatiotemporal dynamics of actin - rich adhesion microdomains : inﬂuence of substrate ﬂexibility . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 1914 – 1925 . 6 . Wang , N . , Butler , J . P . , and Ingber , D . E . ( 1993 ) . Mechanotransduction across the cell surface and through the cytoskeleton . Science 260 , 1124 – 1127 . 7 . Choquet , D . , Felsenfeld , D . P . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1997 ) . Extracellular matrix rigidity causes strengthening of integrin - cytoskeleton linkages . Cell 88 , 39 – 48 . 8 . Pelham , R . J . , Jr . , and Wang , Y . ( 1997 ) . Cell locomotion and focal adhe - sions are regulated by substrate ﬂexibility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 13661 – 13665 . 9 . Balaban , N . Q . , Schwarz , U . S . , Riveline , D . , Goichberg , P . , Tzur , G . , Sa - banay , I . , Mahalu , D . , Safran , S . , Bershadsky , A . , Addadi , L . , andGeiger , B . ( 2001 ) . Forceandfocaladhesionassembly : acloserelationshipstud - ied using elastic micropatterned substrates . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 466 – 472 . 10 . Smilenov , L . B . , Mikhailov , A . , Pelham , R . J . , Marcantonio , E . E . , andGun - dersen , G . G . ( 1999 ) . Focal adhesion motility revealed instationary ﬁbro - blasts . Science 286 , 1172 – 1174 . 11 . Discher , D . E . , Janmey , P . , and Wang , Y . L . ( 2005 ) . Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of their substrate . Science 310 , 1139 – 1143 . 12 . Bershadsky , A . , Kozlov , M . , and Geiger , B . ( 2006 ) . Adhesion - mediated mechanosensitivity : a time to experiment , and a time to theorize . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 472 – 481 . 13 . Vogel , V . , and Sheetz , M . ( 2006 ) . Local force and geometry sensing regulate cell functions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 265 – 275 . 14 . Wang , H . B . , Dembo , M . , and Wang , Y . L . ( 2000 ) . Substrate ﬂexibility reg - ulates growthandapoptosisofnormalbutnot transformedcells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 279 , 1345 – 1350 . 15 . Ingber , D . E . ( 2006 ) . Cellularmechanotransduction : putting allthepieces together again . FASEB J . 20 , 811 – 827 . 16 . Na , S . , Collin , O . , Chowdhury , F . , Tay , B . , Ouyang , M . , Wang , Y . , and Wang , N . ( 2008 ) . Rapid signal transduction in living cells is a unique feature of mechanotransduction . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 6626 – 6631 . 17 . Clark , K . , Langeslag , M . , van Leeuwen , B . , Ran , L . , Ryazanov , A . G . , Fig - dor , C . G . , Moolenaar , W . H . , Jalink , K . , and van Leeuwen , F . N . ( 2006 ) . TRPM7 , a novel regulator of actomyosin contractility and cell adhesion . EMBO J . 25 , 290 – 301 . 18 . Vicente - Manzanares , M . , Zareno , J . , Whitmore , L . , Choi , C . K . , and Hor - witz , A . F . ( 2007 ) . Regulation of protrusion , adhesion dynamics , and po - larity by myosins IIA andIIB inmigrating cells . J . Cell Biol . 176 , 573 – 580 . 19 . Beningo , K . A . , Hamao , K . , Dembo , M . , Wang , Y . L . , and Hosoya , H . ( 2006 ) . Traction forces of ﬁbroblasts are regulated by the Rho - depen - dent kinase but not by the myosin light chain kinase . Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 456 , 224 – 231 . 20 . Luxenburg , C . , Parsons , J . T . , Addadi , L . , and Geiger , B . ( 2006 ) . Involve - ment of the Src - cortactin pathway in podosome formation and turnover during polarization of cultured osteoclasts . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 4878 – 4888 . 21 . Hu , S . , Chen , J . , Fabry , B . , Numaguchi , Y . , Gouldstone , A . , Ingber , D . E . , Fredberg , J . J . , Butler , J . P . , and Wang , N . ( 2003 ) . Intracellular stress tomography reveals stress focusing and structural anisotropy in the cytoskeleton of living cells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell 285 , C1082 – C1090 . 22 . Wang , N . , Hu , S . , and Bulter , J . P . ( 2007 ) . Imaging stress propagation in the cytoplasm of a living cell . Methods in Cell Biology : Cell Mechanics . Eds . Y . L . Wang and D . Discher . 83 , 179 – 198 . Current Biology Vol 18 No 17 1294