Bietz , M , et al . 2019 . Data Donation as a Model for Citizen Science Health Research . Citizen Science : Theory and Practice , 4 ( 1 ) : 6 , pp . 1 – 11 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5334 / cstp . 178 ESSAY Data Donation as a Model for Citizen Science Health Research Matthew Bietz * , Kevin Patrick † and Cinnamon Bloss † New computational and sensing innovations , coupled with increasingly affordable access to consumer health technologies , allow individuals to generate personal health information that they are then able to submit to a shared archive or repository . This paper presents data donation as a model for health - focused citizen science , with special attention to the ethical challenges and opportunities that this model presents . We also highlight some existing data donation projects curated by citizen scientists . After describing data donation in more detail , including its relationship to movements like the Quantified Self and research in personalized medicine , we report findings from the Health Data Exploration ( HDE ) Project’s second annual Network Meeting , which was focused on data donation . These findings include identification of four challenges for the ethical conduct of health - focused data donation research : Par - ticipant protection , representativeness , incentives to participate , and governance . We use these insights as a springboard for further discussion of specific issues , pointing both to the current state of the field and our suggestions about potential pathways for addressing some of the challenges . Keywords : citizen science ; data donation ; informed consent ; data access ; privacy ; data governance * University of California , Irvine , US † University of California , San Diego , US Corresponding author : Cinnamon Bloss ( cbloss @ ucsd . edu ) Introduction The field of citizen science is showing an increasing interest in the domain of human health and wellness , which have not been as well represented as topics like non - human biology , ecology , earth sciences , and astronomy . The expertise , resources , and technologies for the production of health - related research have been sequestered within the professional , regulatory , and market frameworks of clinical medicine and public health . However , movements like the Quantified Self have encouraged individuals to investigate their own bodies , behaviors , and conditions , often using new computational and sensing technolo - gies . Access to medical - grade and “prosumer” health equipment and services ( like wearable devices that meas - ure vital signs , or direct - to - consumer genetic testing ) is becoming easier and less expensive . The Internet can be a platform for sharing expertise , collating and managing data , and the collective conduct of science . Opportunities abound for health - focused citizen science . Data donation is receiving significant attention as a form of citizen participation in health - related research . In a data donation study , participants create a federated dataset by submitting their own personal health data to a shared archive or repository . In some cases , the data may have been collected by the participants themselves . The data can be generated from digital technologies such as wearable devices , traces of online activity such as social media posts , or a patient’s medical tests or electronic health records . The key point is that the dataset is cre - ated collaboratively by the people who are represented within it . This paper explores data donation as a model for citizen science research in health , with special attention to the ethical challenges and opportunities that this model presents . We also highlight some existing data donation projects curated by citizen scientists . After describing data donation in some detail , including its relationship to movements like the Quantified Self and research in per - sonalized medicine , we report findings from the Health Data Exploration ( HDE ) Project’s second annual Network Meeting , which was focused on data donation . We use insights from this session as a springboard for further discussion of specific issues , pointing both to the current state of the field and our suggestions about potential pathways for addressing some of the challenges . A Model for Citizen Science Health Research The focus of this paper is on the concept of data donation as a form of public participation in health research . At the outset , it is important to define what is meant by data donation in this context . Data donation research is research in which people voluntarily contribute their own personal data that was generated for a different purpose to a collective dataset . In the context of citizen science Bietz et al : Data Donation as a Model for Citizen Science Health Research Art . 6 , page 2 of 11 and health research , these data may directly or indirectly contribute to an understanding of humans , and they are contributed by the individuals to whom the data refer . Some of the terms in this definition require further explanation and clarification . First , we must clarify what we mean by “voluntarily contribute . ” In this case , we are focusing on those instances in which a “data subject” makes a clear choice to allow data about themselves to be used in a research study . In other words , participants “opt in” to the research . So , for example , when individuals have their DNA analyzed by the personal genomics company 23andMe , the company then presents them with a free choice of whether to contribute their genetic data for use in research studies ( 23andMe 2018 ) . We consider this to be included in the definition of data donation research . On the other hand , some companies compel data shar - ing in their terms of service , and use data collected from users for internal research , to drive advertising , or to sell to third parties . This does not meet the criteria of volun - tary contribution and is not considered data donation research . For example , a fitness device company selling users’ data to a third party for research would not be con - sidered data donation research . On the other hand , if a user of that device downloaded their data and contributed it for research on their own , this would be considered data donation . Another important aspect of our definition is that the data that get donated are often originally generated for purposes other than the research study itself . Imagine , for example , someone who for years has worn a fitness tracker to help understand their wellness and used a GPS - enabled mapping service on their phone to help them navigate when they drive . This GPS tracker also inciden - tally captures data from the user when they exercise . At some point , they discover a data donation project that is about understanding the impact of location on exercise patterns and decide to contribute their activity level and GPS - location history data from which the researchers can extract locations of episodes of exercise . The research represents a secondary use of these data . In this example the data may be generated intentionally ( as with a fitness tracker ) , but also can be generated passively as a byprod - uct of other activities ( as with location history being a by - product of GPS navigation tracking ) . Even when the data collection is closely related to the research itself , there is often an individual benefit from the data collection that is separate from the study purposes . For example , personal genomics companies like 23andMe may provide oppor - tunities to contribute genetic data for research , but the initial impetus for individuals to get genetic sequencing is often to understand their health or ancestry . The development of a collective dataset can allow individuals to compare themselves to others and can yield population - level generalizations . The form of the dataset and the mode of integration are highly diverse . Some pro - jects may federate datasets in a way that focuses on each individual’s particular story ( like a collection of n - of - 1 studies ) , while others may create new comprehensive and integrative databases that allow for comparisons across specific variables . Similarly , some projects may develop databases that are open to the public and carry few if any restrictions , while others may place tight restrictions on access and use . It is also important to note some areas that are not covered by our definition of data donation research . For example , we do not make a distinction about whether the research is for - profit or not - for - profit . We do not make a distinction about the scope or intent of the research itself . We also do not make a distinction about how or by whom the data are collected ; that is , we do not distinguish between a participant taking measurements manually and writing them in a personal journal versus using a commercial device that automatically uploads personal sensor data to a company’s server , as long as the user of such devices or services has the ability to access and share the data with a research project . Throughout this paper we use a number of terms to refer to the people involved in research . Sometimes we use the general labels of “people” or “individuals . ” Other terms reflect specific roles and positions within the spectrum of research . A “subject” is the object of research – the things being studied . “Human subject” is the term most associated with academic research ethics , and simply means that the subject of research is human ( as opposed to being rocks or rabbits , for example ) . The term “data sub - ject” is used to highlight the fact that sometimes research is not done on the human directly ( like in medical trials or psychology experiments ) , but only on the data traces that have been generated from their online activity . The term “participant” is more specific than “subject , ” referring to an individual who not only is a human subject of research but also has some level of intentional involvement in the research study . It is possible ( although often unethical ) to study individuals without their participation . At a mini - mum , “participation” implies that the individual has made an informed and autonomous decision to become a sub - ject of the research , and this is how the term is used in traditional research ethics conversations . In the context of citizen science , it is hoped that participant involvement will go further , perhaps to include activities like shaping research plans , managing and analyzing data , or writing up results . Finally , the term “patients” includes people who are involved in some sort of medical care . Patients are an important category within health research because a large amount of data is often generated from medical procedures that could be of interest for health research . However , not all patients are research subjects , and not all research subjects are patients . Data donation could serve as a productive model for citizen science research in health and human behavior . However , not all data donation research is necessarily citizen science . For example , data donation is also a model that can be used in traditional academic and corporate research projects . The definition of data donation research outlined above suggests that these projects represent , at a minimum , contributory forms of public participation in scientific research ( Bonney et al . 2009 ; Shirk et al . 2012 ) . Bonney et al . outline three levels of public participation in research : Contributory projects where members of the public primarily contribute data ; collaborative projects Bietz et al : Data Donation as a Model for Citizen Science Health Research Art . 6 , page 3 of 11 where members of the public may assist with research design , analysis , or dissemination ; and co - created projects in which members of the public and scientists work together on a more equal footing . Data donation could be used in all of these levels of participation . When brought into a citizen science context , data donation has the potential to empower individuals to reuse and repurpose data that have been collected within a commercial con - text ( e . g . , through apps or devices ) for projects that they decide are important . Vignette : A ( Fictional ) Data Donation Citizen Science Project This vignette provides a fictional example that describes how an individual ( “Jada” ) might experience data dona - tion in the course of participating in a citizen science project . In a discussion with one of her friends , Jada hears about a citizen science project investigating whether there is a genetic component that could explain sleep quality . Jada visits the project website and discovers that she meets the minimum qualifications : She has had genetic testing con - ducted by 23andMe and also uses a sleep tracking device . She clicks on the “Join the Project” link , reads through some information about the project , agrees to the research consent form , and fills out a personal profile . She is then taken to a page where she can share data for the study . First Jada needs to supply her genetic data . 23andMe makes raw data available to participants in downloadable files , so the project website provides instructions on how to retrieve those data and then upload them to the study databank . After finishing the upload , Jada needs to provide her sleep data . Because she uses a popular wearable fitness device that tracks her sleep , and because the company that makes the device also provides an API ( application programming interface ) that allows for a direct data trans - fer , donating these data is a simpler process . Jada clicks the “Link My Device” button , which opens a new window asking for her device username and password . After sign - ing in , she then confirms that she wants to allow the pro - ject to access her device data and clicks OK . She can share other kinds of data that might be useful using the same processes . She also decides to share her level of physical activity ( collected by the same fitness device ) , a food diary ( that she keeps using a smartphone app ) , and some medi - cal test results ( that she downloads from her healthcare provider’s electronic health record portal ) . She also keeps track of her mood on a daily basis in a spreadsheet and decides to upload that as well . Depending on the kind of data , each file would automatically or manually have iden - tifying information removed before being integrated into the dataset collected from all the project members . Jada is looking forward to joining in the online project discus - sions and helping to analyze these data as the repository grows in size . Data Donation , Human Subjects , and Health Research When we are discussing data donation for health research , it is important to first note that these data are about people . Some data are obviously “health data” ( e . g . , a log of an individual’s blood pressure or glucose levels ) , while other data may not be so obviously human related . One potential source of data that could inform studies of human health is the “Internet of Things” ( IoT ) , including “smart” devices that we might have in our homes . The Nest Thermostat , for example , uses a variety of sensors and artificial intelligence to optimize heating and cooling in the home while conserving energy . To do this , the device collects data not only about temperature but also about humidity , light levels , and movement in the house ( Nest Labs 2018 ) . These data are ostensibly about the house but could potentially be used to study such things as sleep patterns or level of individual activity . Second , as a citizen science project , these data are being contributed by the people they are about . This is especially important when so many data sources today involve consumer devices and commercial organizations . Thus , excluded here are projects that involve obtaining a dataset of many users’ data directly from a company . In citizen science health research , individuals who are the subjects are not simply allowing data to be collected about them but are actively participating in the donation and curation of the data . Interestingly , the roots of data donation research can be found not so much in the realm of other citizen sci - ence projects but instead in the practices of traditional biology and genetics research . Ankeny and Leonelli ( 2015 ) trace the origins of data donation as a model for scien - tific research to changes in scientific publication in the genomic era . In particular , while early genomic databases ( e . g . , GenBank [ NCBI n . d . ] ) began by harvesting genomic data from published scientific literature , they quickly found that they simply could not keep up with the rate at which genomic data were being produced . Instead , they changed procedures so that scientists could submit their own data directly to the databases ( Hilgartner 1995 ) . Around the same time , journals and funders began requir - ing that scientists “donate” their data to public databases ( McCain 1995 ; Contreras 2011 ) . In more recent years , the push toward open data sharing has become more perva - sive in academic research broadly , but comprehensive data donation to shared databases is still most pronounced in the genomic sciences . Thus , it is not particularly surprising that some of the first large - scale citizen data donation projects revolved around genomic data . Given that those involved had worked with collaborative databases populated with data donated by academic researchers , creating databases of publicly donated data perhaps felt familiar to them . One of the first large - scale moves in the direction of citizen data donation was the Personal Genome Project ( PGP ) , in which participants would provide samples for whole - genome sequencing ( OHF n . d . b . ) . Participants’ sequence data would be donated to a public database , which could be used by any researchers and for any purpose . The American Gut Project ( AGP ) took a similar approach , but with gut microbiome sequencing and data sharing ( American Gut n . d . ) . The AGP also used a crowdfund - ing model in which participants paid a fee to join the project and have their samples sequenced . Unlike many Bietz et al : Data Donation as a Model for Citizen Science Health Research Art . 6 , page 4 of 11 traditional genomic research projects , both the PGP and the AGP participants are provided with full access to their own data . These genomic examples also demonstrate that the data donation model described in the previous section may not be fully realized in all projects that use it . For example , data donation projects typically involve data where the research is not the primary purpose for data collection . In such cases , the research may have been a primary reason for participation . The kind of sequencing conducted in the PGP and AGP was available only because the data would be used for research , and contributing to open science was a key selling point for the projects ( and the science has been quite successful , see McDonald et al . [ 2018 ] ) . On the other hand , both projects also promised that partici - pants would gain access to their own results that could ( potentially ) be used to better understand themselves , and individuals would also be free to donate the data generated to other research projects . It is not possible to fully untangle participants’ motivations in these projects . However , both projects have been characterized as “data donation” rather than traditional participant recruitment ( Harvard PGP n . d . ; Liu et al . 2017 ) . It is also important to note that while the PGP and AGP may not in themselves completely conform to the definition of data donation research that we have proposed here , these projects have both enabled further data donation by providing partici - pants with personal genomic data that they can donate to other projects as well . In addition to these projects focused on genomic data , there is also increased interest in using new forms of personal data in health research ( Bietz et al . 2015 ) . Most health research data were traditionally generated from clinical or epidemiological studies . New wearable and per - vasive technologies ( like IoT or “smart” devices ) , however , generate data that have potential value for health research . Consumer - level wearable devices collect data like activity levels and vital signs ( heart rate , blood pressure , galvanic skin response ) and transmit those data wirelessly through apps on users’ smart phones . Other devices in our homes and personal spaces can provide streams of data about indi - viduals ( e . g . , sleep quality ) , their lifestyles ( technology use , eating habits ) , and other environmental factors ( e . g . , air quality ) . The digital traces that we leave online both inten - tionally ( like social media posts ) and unintentionally ( web browsing histories ) may reveal both behaviors and states of mind . The HDE Project , described in more detail below focuses on the feasibility and opportunities for using these new forms of data in health research ( Figure 1 ) . This work is also aligned with the goals of the Quantified Self ( QS ) movement ( QS Labs 2015 ; Wolf 2009 ) . QS brings together people who are interested in using data col - lection and technology to quantify and analyze various aspects of their bodies and lives . Individuals participate through local “Meetups” where they discuss their data collection and findings , demonstrate tools and methods , and network with like - minded individuals ( Nafus and Sherman 2014 ) . While QS is often focused on individual - level data and self - quantification , there is significant inter - est within the movement in conducting larger collective citizen - driven research with the kinds of data that indi - viduals collect about themselves ( Barrett et al . 2013 ) . At present , one of the most comprehensive approaches to citizen data donation for health and social research is the Open Humans Project . The Open Humans Foundation was created by some of the same individuals who ran the PGP , and is a non - profit organization funded by grants from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation , Knight Foundation , and the Shuttleworth Foundation . Open Humans functions as a clearinghouse to support citizen science through data donation : Open Humans is a platform that allows you to upload , connect , and privately store your personal data – such as genetic , activity , or social media data . Once you’ve added data , you can choose to donate it : You might choose to share some publicly , and you can join and contribute to diverse research projects . Thus , we turn the traditional research pipeline on its head : you are at the center and in control of when you share your data . We want to empower you to explore your data – for exam - ple , enabling you to analyze your genome or your Twitter data ( OHF n . d . a ) . At the same time , Open Humans also provides research - ers and citizen scientists with “a toolbox to easily create new projects that can efficiently ask an engaged audi - ence of participants to join and contribute” ( OHF n . d . a ) . Open Humans extends the data donation models from the PGP and AGP studies to a much wider set of data types and sources . As a community - driven platform , they also welcome the donation of new tools as well as data . This pushes the data donation model beyond just contribution of data into more co - created and participant - led science . Human Subjects Research Ethics Practices As citizen science projects increasingly study humans , this raises a number of ethical considerations , especially for the treatment of research subjects . Academic research has predominantly dealt with the ethical issues surround - ing human subjects research by developing institutional mechanisms ( often mandated by funders ) to ensure that research is conducted ethically . For example , in the United States ( US ) , most academic research is governed by a set of ethical guidelines known as “the Common Rule” ( USDHHS n . d . ) . While the Common Rule is subject to interpretation ( and indeed , its operationalization can vary dramatically ) , it codifies the ethical responsibilities and institutional mechanisms to govern human subjects research in the US . Similar ethics review processes are mandated in other parts of the world , for example , in the European Commis - sion Horizons 2020 funding process ( European Commis - sion n . d . ) . Data donation as a form of citizen science presents two fundamental challenges to our current set of human subjects ethics practices . First , the Common Rule oper - ates through a logic of institutional research , targeting organizations like universities as the bearers of respon - sibility for operating in an ethical manner . With these Bietz et al : Data Donation as a Model for Citizen Science Health Research Art . 6 , page 5 of 11 organizations , ethics are managed through a set of insti - tutional practices , most commonly systematic IRB review . Citizen science tends to de - institutionalize or disrupt the traditional institutional research infrastructure , however . Even if projects have some academic affiliation , many of the researchers involved in a citizen science project may not have institutional connections and are thus outside the regulatory regime of the Common Rule . Also , projects that do not have a direct academic affiliation may not be able to draw on the ethical support structures that are in place in academic environments . Second , traditional human subjects research protec - tions are ill - suited to deal with decentralized , personal - datacentric research . The Common Rule and related guidelines are built on a certain set of conceptions about academic research . For example , they tend to assume that research will be conducted by an identifiable research team , usually distinct from the subjects of the research . That research team is assumed to be directly responsible for conducting any necessary research procedures and for generating the data on which the research is based . Except in extraordinary circumstances , it is assumed that the human subjects of the research should be informed about the research and give their consent to participation before any intervention or data collection is undertaken . In a citizen science data donation context , assumptions like these may not hold true . For example , data donation projects ask participants to submit data about themselves , breaking down the distinction between researcher and subject . In many data donation projects , the machinery of data production is outside the hands of the research - ers . It also may have been in operation for a significant time before the research ( and associated ethical review ) was initiated , and often depends on commercial devices and services that may be resistant to ethical regulation . Others have begun to address ethical challenges in related areas with a focus on how new forms of pervasive data are being generated at a scale and level of detail that challenge ethical norms and thus generate new concerns for participant protection , data access , and research legiti - macy ( Rothstein et al . 2015 ; Vayena et al . 2012 ; Vayena et al . 2015 ; Weibel et al . 2017 ) . For example , some have sug - gested that these new forms of data require a rethinking of traditional ethical review structures within academia ( Bloss et al . 2016 ) . Vayena and Tasioulas ( 2013 ) suggest a set of three categories of participant - led research for determining appropriate ethical oversight mechanisms . They refer to their first category as “institution - plus , ” which includes projects that are affiliated with a state - recognized or profit - making institution . Projects in this category have identical oversight obligations as standard research . The second category involves research that has no institutional affiliation but involves more than mini - mal risk . These projects require external ethics review that may be of a non - standard form ; for example , a crowd - sourced review ( Swan 2012 ) . The third category is projects Figure 1 : The Health Data Exploration Network brings together innovators in Personal Health Data to catalyze the use of personal data for the public good . Bietz et al : Data Donation as a Model for Citizen Science Health Research Art . 6 , page 6 of 11 with no affiliations that present no more than minimal risk , thus no formal review is necessary . While these proposals cover some of the challenges raised by new forms of data and participant - led research , they have not addressed data donation . Citizen science projects that study humans and rely on data donation cannot rely solely on an ethical framework that is both institutionally based and ill - suited for the modalities of this kind of science . To add to this prior work , we next present results from a stakeholder - driven brainstorming session focused on addressing some of these issues in data donation research . HDE Network Meeting Methods and Results The HDE Network comprises approximately 300 individuals interested in the opportunities and chal - lenges for using new forms of personal data for health and behavior research . This network was developed by the Health Data Exploration ( HDE ) Project , a Robert Wood Johnson Foundation - funded research project , which is led by the co - authors ( PI Patrick ) . The network includes academic and corporate researchers , developers of new personal health technologies , citizen scientists , and other interested stakeholders . The HDE Annual Network Meet - ing convened on May 17 , 2016 in San Diego , California with the theme “Enabling Personal Data Donation for Public Good Research . ” This meeting brought together a diverse group of approximately 150 scientists ( academic , corporate , and citizen ) , developers , and industry partners representing several disciplines including design , public health , bioinformatics , technology , big data , citizen sci - ence , and bioethics . As part of the meeting , a brainstorm - ing session was facilitated in which attendees joined one of 10 small breakout discussion groups . Each group had a pre - assigned facilitator and a specific prompt focused on a particular barrier or facilitator to personal health data donation . Participants were free to join whichever group they wished . Participants worked in these breakout groups to evaluate specific themes related to data donation in the ever - evolving context of emerging technologies and big data . Furthermore , participants made recommendations for future actions toward methods for appropriate stew - ardship and governance of personal health data donation . The brainstorming discussions were intended to gener - ate a stakeholder - driven set of priorities . In other words , the goal of these discussions was not to generate solutions but instead to identify areas that need to be addressed to enable and improve data donation research . The partici - pants in those discussions are people who have developed expertise in this area . Four prominent themes emerged from the small group discussions ( Figure 2 ) : 1 . Participant Protections . There is a need to explore new models and procedures for informed consent . The risks associated with donation of personal health data are not well understood . Such data may reveal information about others who may not nec - essarily be study participants ( for example , genetic test results may reveal the presence of a disease in other family members ) . 2 . Representativeness of Data . Datasets compiled from data donation may not be representative of populations . Some groups of people may be more or less likely to donate their data . We need to understand the potential sources of bias in the dataset of a self - selected sample . 3 . Incentives for Participation . What are the benefits for participating in data donation research ? How do projects build longer - term engagement with participants ? Conference attendees were concerned with the implementation of a compelling incentive system that would appeal to a wide range of poten - tial research participants . 4 . Governance . Health research has tended to rely heavily on standardization of research practices , methods , and metrics , as well as the scientific , cultural , and ethical norms that guide them . Partici - pants felt that the issue of data heterogeneity and stewardship could not be disentangled from ques - tions about standardization and governance . How should standards be enforced , and what is the role of existing institutions in building , maintaining , and enforcing those standards ? Discussion This section discusses and extends each of the themes generated by the participants at the HDE Network Meeting and outlines a set of challenges we believe must be addressed if data donation citizen science is to emerge as an important contributor to health research . Participant Protections One of the most important aspects of ethical human subjects research is the protection of research partici - pants . There are many well - known examples of unethical research studies that have resulted in physical , psycho - logical , or social harm to participants , including the Tuskegee Syphilis study , the Milgram Experiment , and the Stanford Prison Experiment ( CDC 2015 ; Milgram 1974 ; Zimbardo 2018 ) . In the US , systematic ethical regu - lation of research arose in part in response to these ethi - cal lapses . Practices aimed at participant protection tend to focus on two primary areas : Accounting for and mini - mizing the risks posed by a research study , and obtaining consent from participants who are well informed of those risks . Both aspects are complicated for data donation citi - zen science . Specifically , characterizing the risks associated with data donation can be quite difficult . Data that may seem rela - tively innocuous on their own could be used to make unin - tended inferences about personal routines or behaviors . Even something as simple as the number of steps walked in a day could reveal whether an employee who took a day off from work was really home sick in bed . Similarly , the risks associated with individual data may increase when compared to other individuals or combined with other sources of data . In one recent case , the release of aggre - gate data about user locations revealed sensitive informa - tion about US military bases ( De Mooy 2018 ) . Bietz et al : Data Donation as a Model for Citizen Science Health Research Art . 6 , page 7 of 11 Data donation projects also may involve the creation of a public or semi - public dataset . For example , the PGP and AGP both create public datasets of genomic data . These data are anonymous , but it may be possible to recover identities from these kinds of data , especially if they are linked to other forms of data ( like health records , demo - graphics , or location information ) . In these cases , it may be impossible at the beginning of the project to say how the data will be used , and thus what risks are present . This concern is evident , for example , in the training and informed consent documentation that the PGP provides to participants . These materials warn of the potential for nefarious uses of the data , including using the PGP data - base to synthesize DNA evidence to plant at a crime scene . This raises the issue of the role and practice of informed consent for data donation citizen science . There are very practical questions to be addressed about how to man - age a consent process that takes place entirely over the Internet and without face - to - face interaction with a study team . There are also deeper questions about what it means to give consent when a dataset is going to be public and can be used for any purpose . Data donation projects also highlight issues of time and duration with regard to research datasets . While data donation may be a one - time event , some forms of per - sonal data are generated as streams rather than as discrete events . Technologies like APIs allow for direct computa - tional access to data sources and make it possible that the data donation may involve providing access to an ongoing data stream . In these cases , it will be important to con - sider how long this authorization will remain active and what ability the participant has to revoke access in the future . Researchers have an ethical responsibility to con - sider and plan for the eventual fate of datasets , either by ensuring that they are destroyed after a certain amount of time or planning for longer - term disposition and curation . Participant - led efforts , especially if they lack institutional partners , may not have the resources to properly manage the data over longer time scales . Representativeness of Data One concern with data donation - based research is ensuring that the datasets provide adequate representa - tion of the populations under study . Several factors may result in a biased dataset . Traditional health studies often have recruitment efforts and targets aimed at ensuring that the study participants are a representative sample of a larger population of concern . Recruitment by race , eth - nicity , and gender is monitored to prevent the kinds of dis - crimination in medical research that has occurred in the past ( NIH 2018 ) . Data donation faces all of the issues that traditional research faces around issues of recruitment and representation , but also presents several specific chal - lenges to representativeness of the sample . One challenge is that not everyone has data available to donate . The technologies and practices of data gen - eration are unevenly spread through society . “Billions of people worldwide remain on big data’s periphery . Their information is not regularly collected or analyzed , because they do not routinely engage in activities that big data are designed to capture” ( Lerman 2013 ) . Data donation often asks individuals to donate data that they have collected themselves , often with the assistance of commercial tech - nologies . But this requires individuals to purchase “smart” technologies like activity monitors , sleep monitors , and bathroom scales , which transmit data over the Internet to databases run by the manufacturer . Users are then able to access their data through a website or mobile app , Figure 2 : Participants in the Health Data Exploration Network Meeting identified four prominent themes for data donation citizen science . Bietz et al : Data Donation as a Model for Citizen Science Health Research Art . 6 , page 8 of 11 sometimes after paying a subscription fee . In other words , even if someone has produced data , financial or other demographic barriers may prevent accessing the informa - tion in ways that are necessary to participate in data dona - tion research ( Anderson 2017 ) . For example , iPhone users tend to be more affluent , more educated , and more racially and ethnically homogenous than Android mobile phone users ( Smith 2013 ) . Donating data may also demand a cer - tain level of technical expertise to access , manipulate , and upload data in appropriate formats . Other concerns , like privacy , may have demographic or cultural features that result in unequal participation in data donation projects , resulting in nonrepresentative samples . Incentives and Value for Participation To develop robust data donation projects , it is critical to consider how the participants will relate to the project . Especially if there is a goal of fostering ongoing donation over a longer term , participants need to see value in par - ticipating . This is important for recruiting participants , but there is also an ethical dimension : While altruism may be a motivator for some , providing more immediate or tangible benefits may also matter . In some cases , sim - ply providing tools with which to explore or analyze data may be enough . Engaging in more than just donation , for example , in the development of research questions and methods , the analysis of data , or the presentation of results can also be a strong motivator . It is also important to think carefully about how credit ( like being listed as an author or recognized as a contributor ) should be assigned for data donation studies . Providing appropriate incen - tive systems can also help to reduce the potential biases in the datasets by appealing to a wider range of potential research participants . One common way to provide value to participants in data donation research is to provide some form of data analysis , visualization , or other return of research results to participants . Tools developed for the research may be able to provide participants with new insights or understand - ings of their data . However , returning research results to participants presents several ethical questions . In many cases , the results may be inconsequential . However , it is possible that returning a significant finding ( for example , the presence of a harmful genetic mutation ) , especially without institutional support structures in place , could lead to participant harm ( Fabsitz et al . 2010 ) . At the same time , others have argued that it would be an ethical lapse to withhold results from participants ( Knoppers et al . 2006 ) . Deciding how to support both the research and participants’ own exploration of their data is a key ethical challenge for data donation projects . The Need for Governance Participants at the HDE Network Meeting recognized a need to identify and develop appropriate governance mechanisms . One aspect of this governance is , of course , thinking through how to manage the ethical issues that have been discussed above . Vayena and Tasioulas ( 2013 ) identified a taxonomy of participant - led research types that could help to identify when existing institutional governance is enough , or when new or adapted proce - dures need to be developed . The HDE Network Meeting brainstorming session also focused on questions of data heterogeneity and stewardship as an opportunity for com - munity - level governance and standards - making . There is a need for standards and practices to better support flows and controls of personal data . Similarly , stronger data standards would make it easier to integrate data from dif - ferent sources , but these standards require buy - in from a wide array of stakeholders , including researchers , individu - als with personal data ( who may or may not be involved in conducting the research ) , and the companies and others who develop data generation and collection technologies . Participants in the HDE Network Meeting brought up one model that is common in large - scale research , in which a centralized body or coalition of stakeholders develop and enforce data standards that allow for fed - eration of activities and databases . This approach can be seen , for example , in multi - site cancer studies where data from many different projects and countries are brought together to make stronger claims ( Rolland et al . 2017 ) . This model could be appropriate for large - scale data dona - tion studies . Even without a goal of creating larger data - sets , however , standardization of data formats can make the development of and participation in data donation studies much easier . Standardization of ethical norms and practices can also be a powerful way to ensure that the project is conducted in an ethical manner . However , it is not clear whether this level of standardization and gov - ernance is the best approach for smaller , community - led data donation projects where data federation is less of a concern . Regardless of the size of the project , governance remains a concern . How will projects decide what data to accept or not accept ; what are appropriate methods ; what are appropriate questions to ask and uses for the data ; and what are appropriate ethical standards for the project and the communities that are involved ? Because the citizen scientists are also the research subjects , there is both a greater need and stronger direct incentives for the com - munity to be involved in setting policies and discussing governance matters . For data donation projects , it will be important to consider issues surrounding the long - term fate of the data collected . This has already become an issue for Data Donors , a former data donation project run by the Wikilife Foundation . The project simply deleted all of its data when it closed ( Wikilife Foundation n . d . ) . Many data donation projects hope to create longer - lived archives , but long - term data retention raises a number of ques - tions : Will individual participants be able to restrict use of their data in the future ? How long will data be kept , and how widely will they be distributed ? Are any restric - tions placed on how the data can be used or what kinds of studies are acceptable ? What responsibilities and con - ditions should be imposed on those who use the data in the future ( e . g . , with respect to return of research results or notification to the original participants ) ? Bietz et al : Data Donation as a Model for Citizen Science Health Research Art . 6 , page 9 of 11 Conclusion This paper presents data donation as a model for health - focused citizen science and identifies challenges for the ethical conduct of this research : Participant protection , representativeness , incentives to participate , and govern - ance . Returning to the fictional vignette offered above allows consideration of how each of these challenges might apply to the study that Jada joined . For example , it is important to ask how the study protects the sensitive information like genetic data and medical test results that it collects from Jada . In our vignette , Jada seems excited about participating in the study , but it is not clear that initial enthusiasm will be a sufficient motivator to draw enough participants or sustain their engagement over time . Also , Jada seemed to come across the study seren - dipitously , and she just happened to have the right data available to participate ; however , it is important to ask if everyone would have equal access to the study prereq - uisites , and if not , how unequal access might produce a biased dataset . Finally , it is not clear in the vignette how the project is governed , or what might happen to the pro - ject and its data over the long term . Donating personal data for research remains a relatively new form of health - related citizen science , and as it devel - ops , it will be important to address these ethical concerns . Encouraging developments happening in this space such as the Open Humans platform , which builds consent mechanisms into the data donation process and prompts project creators to create consent materials as part of pro - ject setup , will be important . Moreover , new models for consent and governance for citizen science projects are also being explored , such as the “Blood Testers” project , conducted by members of the Quantified Self community focusing on high - frequency self - testing of blood lipids . This group developed a form of “self - consent” to address ethical issues in participant - led research ( Quantified Self 2018 ) . Health data generation is becoming pervasive . Individuals are creating data traces as they use social media and other online services , the IoT , wearable devices , smartphones , and various other environmental and per - sonal sensors . If these data can be made available for research , they could transform the study of human health and behavior . Individual donation of personal data to a collaborative database can enable a new and , with ongo - ing care , ethical form of citizen science . Moreover , this model of research also has economic implications , and may ultimately offer more cost - effective and sustainable modes for conducting research . Data donation as a form of health - related citizen science is a field in its infancy , however , and all the points that we raise here warrant further study . Acknowledgements The authors thank Cynthia Cheung , M . P . H . , M . A . and Rasheed Al Kotob for their assistance with aspects of this project . We also thank the attendees of our Health Data Exploration Network Meeting who participated in the workshop that we describe in this paper . Funding Information This work was supported by a grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation entitled “The Health Data Explora - tion ( HDE ) project” ( PI : Patrick , # 71693 , 2013 – 2017 ) ; a grant from the National Human Genome Research Insti - tute entitled “Impact of Privacy Environments for Per - sonal Health Data on Patients” ( PI : Bloss , R01 HG008753 , 2015 – 2018 ) ; and a grant from the National Science Foun - dation entitled “Pervasive Data Ethics for Computational Research” ( PI : Bietz , # 1704598 , 2017 – 2021 ) . Competing Interests The authors have no competing interests to declare . Author Contributions MJB made substantial contributions to the acquisition of data for the work ; contributed to drafting the work ; provided final approval of the version to be published ; and agrees to be held accountable for all aspects of the work . KP made substantial contributions to the acquisition of data for the work ; critically revised the work for important intellectual content ; provided final approval of the version to be published ; and agrees to be held accountable for all aspects of the work . CB made substantial contributions to the acquisition of data for the work ; contributed to drafting the work ; provided final approval of the version to be published ; and agrees to be held accountable for all aspects of the work . References 23andMe . 2018 . Research – 23andMe . Available at : https : / / www . 23andme . com / research / [ Last accessed 15 October 2018 ] . American Gut . n . d . American Gut Overview . Available at : http : / / americangut . org / american - gut - overview / [ Last accessed 15 October 2018 ] . Anderson , M . 2017 . Digital divide persists even as lower - income Americans make gains in tech adoption . Available at : http : / / www . pewresearch . org / fact - tank / 2017 / 03 / 22 / digital - divide - persists - even - as - lower - income - americans - make - gains - in - tech - adop - tion / [ Last accessed 15 October 2018 ] . Ankeny , R and Leonelli , S . 2015 . Valuing data in postgenomic biology : How data donation and curation practices challenge the scientific publication system . In : Stevens , H and Richardson , S ( eds . ) , Postgenomics : Perspectives on biology after the genome , 126 – 149 . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . Barrett , MA , Humblet , O , Hiatt , RA and Adler , NE . 2013 . Big data and disease prevention : From quantified self to quantified communities . Big Data , 1 ( 3 ) : 168 – 175 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / big . 2013 . 0027 Bietz , MJ , Bloss , CS , Calvert , S , Godino , JG , Gregory , J , Claffey , MP , Sheehan , J and Patrick , K . 2015 . Opportunities and challenges in the use of personal health data for health research . Journal of the Ameri - can Medical Informatics Association , 23 ( e1 ) : e42 – e48 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / jamia / ocv118 Bietz et al : Data Donation as a Model for Citizen Science Health Research Art . 6 , page 10 of 11 Bloss , C , Nebeker , C , Bietz , M , Bae , D , Bigby , B , Devereaux , M , Fowler , J , Waldo , A , Weibel , N , Patrick , K , Klemmer , S and Melichar , L . 2016 . Reim - agining human research protections for 21st century science . Journal of Medical Internet Research , 18 ( 12 ) : e329 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / jmir . 6634 Bonney , R , Ballard , H , Jordan , R , McCallie , E , Phillips , T , Shirk , J and Wilderman , CC . 2009 . Public Partici - pation in Scientific Research : Defining the Field and Assessing Its Potential for Informal Science Education . A CAISE Inquiry Group Report . Available at : https : / / eric . ed . gov / ? id = ED519688 [ Last accessed 15 October 2018 ] . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . 2015 . The Tuskegee Timeline . Available at : https : / / www . cdc . gov / tuskegee / timeline . htm [ Last accessed 15 October 2018 ] . Contreras , JL . 2011 . Bermuda’s legacy : Policy , patents , and the design of the genome commons . Minnesota Journal of Law , Science & Technology , 12 ( 1 ) : 61 – 125 . De Mooy , M . 2018 . The ethics of design : Unintended ( but foreseeable ) consequences . Available at : https : / / cdt . org / blog / the - ethics - of - design - unintended - but - foreseeable - consequences / [ Last accessed 15 October 2018 ] . European Commission . n . d . Participant Portal H2020 Online Manual : Ethics . Available at : http : / / ec . europa . eu / research / participants / docs / h2020 - funding - guide / cross - cutting - issues / ethics _ en . htm [ Last accessed 15 October 2018 ] . Fabsitz , RR , McGuire , A , Sharp , RR , Puggal , M , Beskow , LM , Biesecker , LG , Bookman , E , Burke , W , Burchard , EG , Church , G , Clayton , EW , Eckfeldt , JH , Fernandez , CV , Fisher , R , Fullerton , SM , Gabriel , S , Gachupin , F , James , C , Jarvik , GP , Kittles , R , Leib , JR , O’Donnell , C , O’Rourke , PP , Rodriguez , LL , Schully , SD , Shuldiner , AR , Sze , RKF , Thakuria , JV , Wolf , SM and Burke , GL . 2010 . Ethical and practical guidelines for reporting genetic research results to study participants : Updated guidelines from an NHLBI working group . Circulation : Cardiovascular Genetics , 3 ( 6 ) : 574 – 580 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1161 / CIRCGE - NETICS . 110 . 958827 Harvard PGP . n . d . The Harvard Personal Genome Project ( PGP ) – enabling Participant - driven Science [ Online ] . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Medical School . Available : https : / / pgp . med . harvard . edu / [ Accessed 14 October 2018 ] . Hilgartner , S . 1995 . Biomolecular databases : New communication regimes for biology ? Science Communication , 17 ( 2 ) : 240 – 263 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1075547095017002009 Knoppers , BM , Joly , Y , Simard , J and Durocher , F . 2006 . The emergence of an ethical duty to disclose genetic research results : International perspectives . European Journal of Human Genetics , 14 ( 11 ) : 1170 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / sj . ejhg . 5201690 Lerman , J . 2013 . Big data and its exclusions . Stanford Law Review Online , 66 : 55 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2139 / ssrn . 2293765 Liu , Y , Ferreira , D , Goncalves , J , Hosio , S , Pandab , P and Kostakos , V . 2017 . Donating context data to science : The effects of social signals and perceptions on action - taking . Interacting with Computers , 29 ( 2 ) : 132 – 146 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / iwc / iww013 McCain , KW . 1995 . Mandating sharing : Jour - nal policies in the natural sciences . Science Communication , 16 ( 4 ) : 403 – 431 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1075547095016004003 McDonald , D , Hyde , E , Debelius , JW , Morton , JT , Gonzalez , A , Ackermann , G , Aksenov , AA , Behsaz , B , Brennan , C , Chen , Y , DeRight Goldasich , L , Dorrestein , PC , Dunn , RR , Fahimipour , AK , Gaffney , J , Gilbert , JA , Gogul , G , Green , JL , Hugenholtz , P , Humphrey , G , Huttenhower , C , Jackson , MA , Janssen , S , Jeste , DV , Jiang , L , Kelley , ST , Knights , D , Kosciolek , T , Ladau , J , Leach , J , Marotz , C , Meleshko , D , Melnik , AV , Metcalf , JL , Mohimani , H , Montassier , E , Navas - Molina , J , Nguyen , TT , Peddada , S , Pevzner , P , Pollard , KS , Rahnavard , G , Robbins - Pianka , A , Sangwan , N , Shorenstein , J , Smarr , L , Song , SJ , Spector , T , Swafford , AD , Thackray , VG , Thompson , LR , Tripathi , A , Vázquez - Baeza , Y , Vrbanac , A , Wischmeyer , P , Wolfe , E , Zhu , Q and Knight , R . 2018 . American Gut : An Open Platform for Citizen Science Microbiome Research . mSystems , 3 ( 3 ) . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / mSystems . 00031 - 18 Milgram , S . 1974 . Obedience to authority : An experimental view . New York , Harper & Row . Nafus , D and Sherman , J . 2014 . Big data , big questions | This one does not go up to 11 : The quantified self movement as an alternative big data practice . International Journal of Communication , 8 : 1784 – 1794 . National Center for Biotechnology Information , U . S . National Library of Medicine . n . d . GenBank Overview . Available at : https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / genbank / [ Last accessed 15 October 2018 ] . National Institutes of Health . 2018 . Inclusion of women and minorities as participants in research involv - ing human subjects – policy implementation page . Available at : https : / / grants . nih . gov / grants / funding / women _ min / women _ min . htm [ Last accessed 15 October 2018 ] . Nest Labs . 2018 . Privacy statement for Nest products and services . Available at : https : / / nest . com / legal / pri - vacy - statement - for - nest - products - and - services / [ Last accessed 15 October 2018 ] . Open Humans Foundation . n . d . a About Open Humans . [ Online ] . Available at : https : / / www . openhumans . org / about / [ Last accessed 15 October 2018 ] . Open Humans Foundation . n . d . b The Personal Genome Project . Available at : https : / / www . personalgenomes . org / us [ Last accessed 15 October 2018 ] . Quantified Self . 2018 . Camille Nebeker : Informed Con - sent , Self - Consent . Available at : https : / / medium . com / quantified - self - public - health / camille - nebeker - informed - consent - self - consent - db63b842276e [ Last accessed 15 October 2018 ] . Bietz et al : Data Donation as a Model for Citizen Science Health Research Art . 6 , page 11 of 11 How to cite this article : Bietz , M , Patrick , K and Bloss , C . 2019 . Data Donation as a Model for Citizen Science Health Research . Citizen Science : Theory and Practice , 4 ( 1 ) : 6 , pp . 1 – 11 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5334 / cstp . 178 Submitted : 18 May 2018 Accepted : 22 September 2018 Published : 08 March 2019 Copyright : © 2019 The Author ( s ) . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International License ( CC - BY 4 . 0 ) , which permits unrestricted use , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original author and source are credited . See https : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . OPEN ACCESS Citizen Science : Theory and Practice is a peer - reviewed open access journal published by Ubiquity Press . Quantified Self Labs . 2015 . Quantified Self : Self Knowl - edge Through Numbers . Available at : http : / / quanti - fiedself . com / [ Last accessed 15 October 2018 ] . Rolland , B , Lee , CP and Potter , JD . 2017 . Greater than the sum of its parts : A qualitative study of the role of the Coordinating Center in facilitating Coordinated Collaborative Science . Journal of Research Administra - tion , 48 ( 1 ) : 65 – 85 . Rothstein , MA , Wilbanks , JT and Brothers , KB . 2015 . Citizen science on your smartphone : An ELSI research agenda . The Journal of Law , Medicine & Ethics , 43 ( 4 ) : 897 – 903 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / Fjlme . 12327 Shirk , JL , Ballard , HL , Wilderman , CC , Phillips , T , Wiggins , A , Jordan , R , McCallie , E , Minarchek , M , Lewenstein , BV , Krasny , ME and Bonney , R . 2012 . Public participation in scientific research : A frame - work for deliberate design . Ecology and Society , 17 ( 2 ) : 29 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5751 / ES - 04705 - 170229 Smith , A . 2013 . Smartphone ownership - 2013 update . Washington , DC : Pew Research Center . Available at : http : / / www . pewinternet . org / 2013 / 06 / 05 / smartphone - ownership - 2013 / [ Last accessed 15 October 2018 ] . Swan , M . 2012 . Crowdsourced health research studies : An important emerging complement to clinical trials in the public health research ecosystem . Journal of Medical Internet Research , 14 ( 2 ) : e46 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / Fjmir . 1988 U . S . Department of Health and Human Services . n . d . Federal policy for the protection of human subjects ( ‘Common Rule’ ) . Available at : https : / / www . hhs . gov / ohrp / regulations - and - policy / regulations / common - rule / index . html [ Last accessed 15 October 2018 ] . Vayena , E , Mastroianni , A and Kahn , J . 2012 . Ethical issues in health research with novel online sources . American Journal of Public Health , 102 ( 12 ) : 2225 – 30 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2105 / AJPH . 2012 . 300813 Vayena , E , Salathe , M , Madoff , LC and Brownstein , JS . 2015 . Ethical challenges of big data in public health . PLoS Computaional Biology , 11 ( 2 ) : e1003904 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1003904 Vayena , E and Tasioulas , J . 2013 . Adapting standards : Ethical oversight of participant - led health research . PLoS Medicine , 10 ( 3 ) : e1001402 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pmed . 1001402 Weibel , N , Desai , P , Saul , L , Gupta , A and Little , S . 2017 . HIV risk on twitter : The ethical dimension of social media evidence - based prevention for vulnerable populations . Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii Interna - tional Conference on System Sciences , 1775 – 1784 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 24251 / HICSS . 2017 . 216 Wikilife Foundation . n . d . Datadonors | Bye bye ! Available at : http : / / datadonors . org / [ Last accessed 15 October 2018 ] . Wolf , G . 2009 . Know thyself : Tracking every face of life , from sleep to mood to pain , 24 / 7 / 365 . Wired , 22 June [ online access at : https : / / www . wired . com / 2009 / 06 / lbnp - knowthyself / last accessed 15 October 2018 ] . Zimbardo , PG . 2018 . Stanford Prison Experiment . Avail - able at : http : / / www . prisonexp . org / [ Last accessed 15 October 2018 ] .