Adoption of Mobile and Wearable Technology for Older Adults ’ Physical Activity : A Preliminary Model Sapphire H . Lin Wee Kim Wee School of Communication and Information , Nanyang Technological University , Singapore , Singapore ABSTRACT This study explores the adoption of mobile and wearable technology in the physical activity of older adults . The data arose from qualitative ethnographic observations and inter - views ( N ¼ 7 ) . Findings led to the conceptualization of a model describing interviewees ’ decision - making processes for adop - tion . The model outlines these phases : awareness ; attitudes ; appraisals ; initial use , which could lead to abandonment or adoption ; and post - trial abandonment , which could lead to rejection or probable adoption through redeveloping aware - ness and attitudes , and reappraising the technology . The find - ings highlight the need to consider for age - specific barriers to adoption and to understand adoption as a stage - wise process with intricate layers . Certain well - formed habits and the lack of understanding of the parameters provided by these tech - nologies can lead to older adults ’ rejection of tools that are potentially useful for physical activity motivation . The paper suggests practical ways for promoting mobile and wearable technology to older adults . ARTICLE HISTORY Received 16 November 2022 Accepted 13 April 2023 KEYWORDS Health apps ; mobile health ; technology acceptance ; wearable sensors Adoption of mobile and wearable technology for older adults ’ physical activity : a preliminary model Many countries are having aging populations . It is imperative to find pre - emptive solutions to health issues faced by older adults due to the potential increase in chronic conditions and the related load on healthcare systems ( King and King 2010 ) . Physical activity brings about many health benefits for older adults and improves their physiological indicators ( Andrieieva et al . 2019 ) . However , the lack of physical activity remains a pertinent problem in many countries and is a leading risk factor for global mortality ( World Health Organization 2021 ) . People ’ s health can be positively influenced by increased physical activity and monitoring of health conditions , both of which can be more efficiently managed with modern technologies such as mobile phone applications and CONTACT Sapphire H . Lin linh0029 @ e . ntu . edu . sg Wee Kim Wee School of Communication and Information , Nanyang Technological University , Singapore , Singapore . (cid:1) 2023 The Author ( s ) . Published with license by Taylor & Francis Group , LLC JOURNAL OF CONSUMER HEALTH ON THE INTERNET 2023 , VOL . 27 , NO . 2 , 139 – 155 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15398285 . 2023 . 2203580 wearable trackers ( Brickwood et al . 2019 ) . As these tools afford users mobility , they will henceforth be termed mobile health ( mHealth ) technol - ogy in this paper . For older adults to reap the full benefits of mHealth technology , it is necessary to understand their openness to adopt and use these technologies while engaging in physical activity . This study seeks to understand the adoption process of mHealth technol - ogy by older adults for engagement in physical activity . Such insight holds practical value in aiding development of policy and technological tools for the target audience , and theoretical value in contributing to technology acceptance concepts in context of mHealth for older adults . Role of mHealth technology in physical activity Mobile apps and wearable trackers are two examples of commercialized mHealth technology made easily available to public audiences . These tech - nologies mostly employ behavior change techniques and motivational methods with the aim of initiating or maintaining physical activity among users ( Balbim et al . 2021 ) . Literature on mHealth technologies for physical activity illuminate three main points . First , these tools have become more prevalent and ubiquitous ( Hoy 2016 ) . Second , they are typically associated with increase in physical activity when used in interventions ( Brickwood et al . 2019 ) . Third , this positive correlation , however , does not stand true all the time . This could be due to variants in each study , such as other additional interventions that obscure its effect ( Jakicic et al . 2016 ) or ineffective application of behavior change techniques ( Direito et al . 2015 ) . Despite this , literature shows that there remains potential in using mHealth technology to boost physical activity , especially when it is adopted and used successfully . Older adults adoption and use of mHealth technology Mobile health interventions can only be feasible and relevant if the target audience first uses them . Many researchers have tried to explain adoption of new technologies . One of the most frequently used models is the Technology Acceptance Model ( TAM ) ( Davis 1989 ) , which posits that per - ceived usefulness and perceived ease of use predict user acceptance of new technologies . The TAM has been used to predict adoption of wearable fit - ness technology ( Lazaro et al . 2020 ; Yau and Hsiao 2022 ) . However , models like the TAM focus on the technical aspects of technol - ogy , and alone cannot explain older adults ’ adoption patterns ( Nikou 2015 ) . Other researchers have pointed out age - specific barriers , including older adults ’ sense of anxiety and self - efficacy with regards to the technology and 140 S . H . LIN their anxiety with regards to the process of aging were significant barriers to crossing the digital divide ( Jung et al . 2010 ) . Older adults favored more traditional methods of healthcare , appreciating printed interventions over web - based interventions ( Peels et al . 2013 ) . They also could not see how health - related technology could improve their quality of life ( Heart and Kalderon 2013 ) . With all such barriers in view , older adults might not always be able to fully exploit the benefits that health technology could potentially deliver . This study attempts explore the psychosocial factors relating to adop - tion of mHealth technology from an age - specific angle . RQ1 : How do older adults decide whether or not to adopt the use of mHealth technology ? Though older adults tended to face more barriers in adoption of innova - tions ( Jimison et al . 2008 ) , more recent literature suggests that older adults are now more open to modern technology . Despite a lack of familiarity with technology , they reported positive perceptions of using technology for their physical activity ( Campelo and Katz 2020 ) . In fact , a meta - analysis of 22 studies applying digital interventions ( e . g . , websites , mHealth , and exergam - ing ) for motivating physical activity amongst older adults found that these interventions significantly increased physical activity and reduced sedentary behavior ( Stockwell et al . 2019 ) . Despite evidence of positive outcomes , only 30 % of mHealth intervention studies involved older adults as participants ( Cajamarca , Herskovic , and Rossel 2019 ) , indicating there is still much room for growth in related literature . To this end , this paper focuses on the rela - tionship between mHealth technology and older adults , and aims to shed light on how these tools contribute to the physical activity of older adults . RQ2 : What role does mHealth technology currently play in motivating older adults to engage in physical activity ? Method Data collection This study aims to understand the uptake and use of mHealth technology by older adults in Singapore and other similar populations . To obtain data for the study , I employed qualitative methods , specifically participant obser - vations and interviews at two public parks in Singapore , one in Central Singapore , one in East Singapore . The interviews aimed at answering RQ1 , as conversation with participants would reveal decision - making processes relating to adoption that might not be visually noticeable . The observations were purposed toward answering RQ2 , as observations were more appro - priate for describing how older adults were using , or not using , mHealth technology when they engaged in physical activity in their naturalistic JOURNAL OF CONSUMER HEALTH ON THE INTERNET 141 environments . The procedures for data collection and handling were approved by the institutional review board at Nanyang Technological University . I conducted my observations at public parks in Singapore because it is one of the spaces where people usually engage in physical activity . I chose the two specific public parks because they were bigger parks in Singapore , so more respondents could be located and more observations made . Also , they were located at different parts of Singapore where demographics of respondents would vary . This helped in keeping a lookout for possible demographic differ - ences . I visited these parks in the early morning hours , around 6 – 9 a . m . , and in the evening , around 5 – 6 p . m . I dressed casually , like I was going for a walk in the park , to blend in with the environment and the people in the park . I obtained a convenience sample from the parks . To be included in the inter - view , participants had to be visibly 60years or older . They had to be able to con - verse in Basic English or Mandarin , and be able to engage in physical activity without external aid ( e . g . , wheelchairs , synthetic limbs ) . The interviewees ( N ¼ 7 ) agreed to participate in the study and signed a consent form . They were given the option to stop the interview at any time if they did not feel comfortable . I conducted semi - structured interviews loosely guided by an interview guide ( see Appendix A ) containing questions relating to current use or non - use of mHealth technology and related attitudes . In addition , I observed the interviewees engaging in physical activity in their naturalistic environments , jogging or cycling behind them at times . I paid special attention to whether they utilized fitness trackers or mobile devices while they participated in physical activity . I also casually conversed with them to confirm that my observations were accurate and to refine and sharpen my visual observations . To maintain the confidentiality promised to participants , only pseudo - nyms were used in the data reported from the interviews . The assigned pseudonyms end with “ - bert ” for male interviewees and “ - belle ” for female interviewees . Table 1 lists the interviewees . Data analysis After collecting the data , I transcribed the interviews and field notes that I had collected on my voice recorder . I had recorded memos of different Table 1 . List of interviewees . Pseudonym Sex Ethnicity Age Experience with mHealth technology Lisbelle Female Chinese 62 Yes , wearable fitness tracker Mirbelle Female Chinese 70 Yes , wearable fitness tracker Nasbelle Female Chinese 70 Nil Oribelle Female Chinese 70 Nil Philbert Male Chinese 80 Yes , tracking apps Quebelle Female Chinese 62 Nil Robelle Female Chinese 70 Nil 142 S . H . LIN categories . These included operation memos , coding memos , and theoret - ical memos ( Patton 2002 ) . These memos were recorded from conception of the idea , through data gathering , right up to writing the report ( Tracy 2013 ) . They tracked the procedural and analytical progress of the study for greater credibility . I performed thematic analysis ( Braun and Clarke 2006 ) on both the field notes and the interview transcripts after data collection . Primary - level a posteriori coding for each participant ’ s responses started as soon as the transcriptions were completed . I conducted collective secondary - level ana - lysis and further interpretation of data after completing primary - level ana - lysis . All analyses were conducted using the constant comparative method ( Glaser and Strauss 1967 ; Boeije 2002 ) , where new data were compared with old data , and matched against the relevance of the topic of study , and themes were distilled and redefined to a point of saturation and no new themes emerged from the data . Findings This study revealed that the current adoption of mHealth technology amongst interviewees was low . Thematic analysis of the interview data fur - ther led to the conception of an adoption process model ( see Figure 1 ) with the following stages : ( 1 ) awareness ; ( 2 ) attitudes ; ( 3 ) appraisal ; ( 4 ) ini - tial use , which could lead to ( 5 ) abandonment or adoption . Figure 1 . Process model of older adults ’ adoption of mHealth technology . JOURNAL OF CONSUMER HEALTH ON THE INTERNET 143 Awareness There were two types of awareness that interviewees had concerning mHealth technology : awareness of its existence and awareness of its func - tions and purpose . Most interviewees were aware of the presence of mHealth technology due to its ubiquity in Singapore , yet it remained pos - sible to find people completely unaware about it . When asked about mHealth technology and when prompted with examples of the technology , Robelle answered , “ No , I have not heard of it before . ” Other interviewees had at least heard of such technology and had a brief idea of its functions . Most interviewees had a somewhat superficial under - standing of what mHealth technology can do . They knew of the basic pur - poses of mHealth technology and could articulate its functions , like measuring and monitoring of heart rate , distance walked , and duration of exercise . Only one interviewee gave a more abstract answer concerning the purpose of mHealth technology . Philbert said , “ The intention is good , the goal is to check whether you ’ re improving or deteriorating . ” Among the interviewees who knew about mHealth technology , most rec - ognized that its functions were to provide users with personalized feedback on their level of activity . However , not many recognized the purpose of that feedback . Philbert ’ s answer pointed to the higher - level function of per - sonalized feedback , that of finding meaning from the information by view - ing their past records and determining if they are improving or deteriorating . Attitudes Interviewees who were aware of the existence and basic purposes of mHealth technology tended to form an attitude toward it . While attitudes ranged from nonchalance to positive openness , none had negative attitudes toward mHealth technology . This finding corroborates recent research on how older adults are now more open to adopting health technology and are able to experience its benefits ( Campelo and Katz 2020 ) . Interviewees who held nonchalant attitudes did not consider attempts to adopt the technology . One example is Oribelle , who said , “ I heard of it , but never tried and never used it . No reason why . ” She knew about the tech - nology , but simply did not even consider using it and could not explain why . On the other hand , there were positive attitudes expressed . Some inter - viewees viewed mHealth technology as something that could possibly be useful . Quebelle said , “ It is useful and convenient . ” Even Robelle , who did not know about mHealth technology until I explained it to her , said , “ Of course , it is better to have it . ” Most interviewees were interested to learn 144 S . H . LIN more and were open to adopt the technology . Nasbelle and Quebelle both lacked technical knowledge on how to use mHealth technology , but were similarly open to attempt adoption if proper guidance was available . Nasbelle said , “ If there is someone to guide me , I think I will give it a try . ” Quebelle gave a similar response , “ If I know how to use it , I think I will start using . ” Appraisal Despite the favorable attitudes , I observed that uptake of mHealth technol - ogy was still relatively low amongst interviewees . This third stage of the process model explains why adoption rates among interviewees remained low despite openness to the technology . Interviewees reported assessing if they have the ability to use the technol - ogy and if they want to adopt it . In line with the technology acceptance model ( TAM ; Davis 1989 ) , the findings from this study show that per - ceived ease of use and perceived usefulness remain important criteria for adoption decisions . Interviewees reported poor appraisals of perceived use - fulness and perceived ease of use . Some perceived that they would not know how to use the technology , while others did not consider the technol - ogy useful since they performed their activities through other means such as regularity and habit . These posed as barriers to trial use and eventual adoption . Some interviewees considered that they might not have the needed capa - bilities to use the technology , citing lack of technical knowledge as a reason for nonuse . Nasbelle said , “ I don ’ t really know how to use mobile technol - ogy to exercise . ” Quebelle gave a similar response , “ I don ’ t use [ mHealth technology ] because I don ’ t know how to use it . ” They were aware of the presence and basic functions of mHealth technology , but lacked technical awareness of how to use the technology , and were resultantly less moti - vated toward adoption . Contrary to what Davis ( 1989 ) posit about perceived ease of use being a causal antecedent for perceived usefulness , the findings from this study suggest that the lack of perceived ease of use did not necessarily precede the lack of perceived usefulness for older adults . In fact , adoption amongst this group of interviewees appeared to be hindered more by the lack of perceived usefulness than the lack of perceived ease of use . They could not see how the technology could improve their current activities or lifestyles . Many interviewees did not use mHealth technology because they considered the technology unnecessary , unhelpful , or inapplicable in their personal contexts . For example , Philbert knew how to use mHealth JOURNAL OF CONSUMER HEALTH ON THE INTERNET 145 technology , but appraised that it was not a practical choice for him as he participated in activities like ball games and cycling . He said : It [ mHealth technology ] does help , depending on what type of activity you do . If you play ball , you cannot use any mobile app . You play ball , how to use mobile app ? It ’ s not applicable for my exercise . If running , then it is good , you need timing , you need heartbeat [ measurements ] , but for my case , it is not applicable , I should say . In addition , the role of structures and habitus ( Bourdieu 1990 ) inhibiting appraisals of usefulness was clear . Interviewees already had a structured way of life , tracking themselves by regularity and habit , going to a specific place , on a specific day , at a specific time . Some joined regular Tai Chi or Qi Gong classes in the morning hours ; some came to the park at regular hours for their brisk walks or jogs . They therefore considered that mHealth technology would not be useful for their activities . Nasbelle said , “ I use my own methods [ to track my activity ] . I wake up earlier in the morning to exercise and brisk walk . ” Robelle had a similar habit of engaging in phys - ical activity at a fixed time , “ After my meals , I ’ ll rest , and then go and take a walk . ” Lisbelle exercised on fixed days and used the duration of her activ - ities to manage herself , “ I will go to the park on Monday , Wednesday , and Friday . I go by timing . [ After ] one hour , I will stop . ” Philbert also expressed that he monitored himself through regular habits and personal sensing : I have regular sports , and depend on my own feeling . If you ’ re good , you feel good . If you ’ re no good , you feel tired . You can tell it by yourself . It depends on your own feeling and not on [ … ] devices . Older adults tended to make their gauges by their own means which did not require the use of technology . Despite being aware and having favor - able attitudes toward mHealth technology , many interviewees did not per - ceive the usefulness of mHealth technology for themselves . They had been living their life in a certain way for decades by now , and could not see how adopting this innovation would serve to better their lives . Initial use Some interviewees reported engaging in trial usage of mHealth technology . For those who tried using these tools , experienced usefulness and experi - enced ease of use cemented or changed their perceptions from the apprais - als . In other words , actual experiences superseded earlier perceptions . Based on their personal lived experiences , they determined whether to adopt or abandon the technology . Abandonment was clearly a post - trial rejection of the technology . In contrast , adoption included the processes of developing or redeveloping awareness , attitudes , and appraisals . 146 S . H . LIN Despite weak appraisals , a few interviewees possessed and used mHealth technology . For them , initial use of technology began for various reasons — if not from intrapersonal factors such as individual appraisals and decision , then by interpersonal factors such as recommendations from close ones . One of the strategies to market innovations to older adults is by exposing older adults to the product through their children ( Lunsford and Burnett 1992 ) . This was also demonstrated in this study . Lisbelle used a fitness tracker and the accompanying app that came with it , and Mirbelle only used the fitness tracker without the app , as she only had a feature phone , not a smartphone . Both Lisbelle and Mirbelle had received their fitness trackers as gifts from their daughters . Mirbelle explained that she was using her tracker as her daughter “ bought this for me to see my heart rate , whether it is good or not . ” In similar vein , while Quebelle had not begun initial use , she said , “ Maybe when my family members introduce it to me and teach me how to use , then I will start to use . ” Her response indicated that her step toward initial use would also begin with recommendation and help from close ones . With initial use came experienced ease of use and experienced usefulness , which further determined whether the technology is adopted or abandoned . If initial use leads to a fulfilling experience , the technology is likely adopted . If initial use leads to an unfulfilling experience , the technology is likely abandoned . Adoption After initial use , interviewees decided whether to adopt the technology or not . Even then , the level of adoption varied in levels of sophistication . Mirbelle adopted mHealth technology after initial use . However , she said , “ I do not know what is the use , but if I wear , it is to see the time and the heart rate . ” Furthermore , she did not use the accompanying app and could only see her heart rate at specific moments . This demonstrated how she actually did not have full comprehension of how mHealth technology works and could not benefit from its larger repertoire of features though she possessed the technology . Based on my observations at the park , very few older adults appeared to be using any mHealth technology . There were a few older adults with fit - ness trackers around their wrists , but they appeared to be the younger old , perhaps in their 50s or early 60s . There were two older adults who used mHealth apps and not fitness trackers . I saw one of them starting a tracker in his fitness app as he began his run . The other one had his mobile phone reporting the number of kilometers he had run when he finished his run . He stopped the tracking on his mobile app and looked at the summary JOURNAL OF CONSUMER HEALTH ON THE INTERNET 147 after his exercise . The level of adoption amongst adopters can vary greatly . This may lead to the technology bringing about many benefits for the group of users that is more involved with the technology and almost no benefit for group that is less involved . Abandonment The data showed that initial use might lead to abandonment of the tech - nology when interviewees perceived that the costs outweighed the benefits . This perception is usually derived from a lack of experienced usefulness and a lack of experienced ease of use . Lisbelle , the participant who used both fitness tracker and mobile app , abandoned the use of both because it was “ troublesome . ” She did not experience ease of use . She explained how she came to give up the use of the fitness tracker her daughter gave to her , It is troublesome to wear . Sometimes I forget to take out , and sometimes I ’ ve got to put it on again , things like that . Especially if I go to the toilet to bathe , I have to take it out , then sometimes I put it somewhere , then I forget where I put it . In the end , I just put it at one corner . Abandonment is not just caused by experiencing the lack of ease of use , but also a lack of awareness of the functions of mHealth technology and how to utilize these functions . Apart from finding the fitness tracker troublesome , Lisbelle did not experience the benefits of the technology from her initial use . She said , [ I use it ] to keep track of my heartbeat , to keep track of how long I walk . I also do not know actually . I have it , but I do not really know . Perhaps when my heart beats fast or my blood pressure is high , I think I have to alarm myself . I ’ m not sure . Other than that , don ’ t think I really need it . So far , I ’ m quite healthy . I have it but I don ’ t really need it . After the stage of abandonment , interviewees came to either reject the technology completely or had to go through the processes of gaining fur - ther knowledge , better attitudes , and more positive appraisals before suc - cessful adoption . Preusse et al . ( 2017 ) suggest that acceptance of mHealth technology can be increased by addressing adoption barriers during deploy - ment . In similar vein , this study finds that without barriers being first addressed , engaging in initial use just because interviewees received a rec - ommendation from loved ones cannot ensure adoption and continued use . Interviewees had to themselves be personally aware and convinced of what mHealth technology can do for them , and learn how to apply these func - tions for personal use . Correspondingly , the process model ( see Figure 1 ) shows that upon abandonment , adoption remains plausible if awareness , attitudes , and appraisals are redeveloped . 148 S . H . LIN Discussion This study aims to describe the barriers and motivators for older adults ’ adoption of mHealth technology , and through the process model , give a holistic picture on how the various factors and stages of adoption interact to bring about the final outcome . As this study is a qualitative study with a small sample , the conclusions drawn from the study are still in the explora - tory phase and the process model is a preliminary one that would require further study with a larger , more diverse , sample or testing in a quantitative study . Nonetheless , the preliminary process model developed from this study contributes theoretical understanding of older adults ’ adoption of mHealth technology in Singapore and other similar populations . This study shows that adoption is not a simple process that occurs over - night . It is instead a protracted string of intermingled processes , cognitions , attitudes , perceptions and experiences . Further , adoption is complex as it may interfere with adopters ’ present lifestyles and habits . This is particu - larly true for older adults who may have developed set ways of going about their activities . Future studies should consider adoption as a stage - wise development and pay attention to age - specific barriers , such as older adults ’ tendency to have poorer perceptions of and experiences with the technol - ogy . It is also important to note that certain well - formed , and perhaps well - engrained , habits can lead to the post - trial rejection of mHealth tools . The model that arose from the findings was consistent with several established models of behavior adoption . For instance , the precaution adop - tion process model ( Weinstein and Sandman 1992 ) posits that people begin to take precautions by first becoming aware of the issue , then engaged with the issue , followed by deciding whether to act or not , and finally exiting the loop by deciding not to act , or alternatively deciding to act and then maintaining the behavior . The same is noted in the transtheoretical model of behavior change ( Prochaska and Velicer 1997 ) , where people go through a process of precontemplation , contemplation , determination , action , and maintenance . Further , they can exit and reenter the process at any stage . Through analysis of the qualitative data , I noted a similar pattern in older adults ’ adoption of mHealth technology , which could lead to behav - iors of integrating the device into their lifestyles or of rejecting the device . However , unlike the foregoing models of behavior adoption , this model applies specifically to technology adoption , where appraisals and initial use of the device are integral to users ’ adoption decisions . To this end , I incor - porated the elements of the TAM ( Davis , Bagozzi , and Warshaw 1989 ) , noting its relevance in interviewees ’ appraisals of the technology . This study further adds a layer of depth to the TAM by highlighting that lived experi - ences during the initial trial phase could change or cement these percep - tions , for better or for worse . After initial use , when interviewees JOURNAL OF CONSUMER HEALTH ON THE INTERNET 149 determined that the technology is not worth re - uptake , they were unwilling to go through the processes of adoption again . As such , initial use without proper awareness and knowledge may be detrimental for users who think that they have already experienced all that mHealth technology has to offer and decided to abandon or reject it for good . The crux for adoption lies in the successful integration into a lifestyle . To be effective , mHealth interventions should address related barriers . Interventions applying the use of such tools should first consider taking steps to overcome these barriers that older adults face . First , the interviewees were mostly aware of the existence of fitness track - ers and mHealth technology . They further knew that such technology served the purpose of health monitoring . However , the prospect of learning to use a fitness tracker felt intimidating for them . They thought that the devices would be difficult to use . Despite this , none of the interviewees had negative attitudes toward fitness trackers , and they were open toward adopting the technology if they knew how to use it or received proper guidance from family members . This parallels Mercer et al . ’ s ( 2016 ) recom - mendations for improving older adults ’ acceptance of fitness trackers , which includes helping them set up the device and teaching them to inter - pret the data . To sharpen older adults ’ awareness of how to use mHealth technology , I propose that fitness trackers develop accompanying apps that are user - friendlier or have a separate line of apps for older adults ’ use . As can be seen from this study , interviewees know that the technology can measure their heart rate , step count , and exercise duration , but despite knowing that , many still said they do not exactly know how it works and what the measured values mean for their overall health . Attitudes and appraisals are somewhat linked to the kind of knowledge and awareness one has about the technology , so it is important to build up awareness and knowledge from the start . Technology measures heart rates , but what heart rate is con - sidered healthy and what heart rate is considered alarming ? Technology measures step counts , but what is enough and what is insufficient ? Technology tracks sleep , but what is good sleep and what is unproductive sleep ? There can be better and clearer ways for apps and wearable sensors to communicate contextualized feedback to older users . Addressing these issues can help older adults overcome the barrier of low perceived and experienced ease of use . Second , perceived usefulness of fitness trackers was low among the inter - viewees . For this group of older adults , preexisting structures and habits ( Atchley 1989 ; Bourdieu 1990 ) inhibited appraisals of usefulness . Many interviewees already had a structured way of life , tracking themselves by regularity and habit , for example , going to a specific place , on a specific 150 S . H . LIN day , at a specific time . They , therefore , had the perception that mHealth technology would not improve their lifestyles or help in their physical activity . However , without objective measurement , it was difficult to tell if their preexisting routines met the recommended activity guidelines . Despite established routines , going by a gut feel as to what is sufficient activity is unlikely to yield accurate measurements . Objectively - measured feedback can reverse inaccurate estimations that in turn impede physical activity ( Watkinson et al . 2010 ) . It is important for the academic field and related industries to address how these preexisting structures play into older adults ’ adoption of new technology and communicate how these devices can complement and be integrated into their lifestyles . Further , educating older adults on the fea - tures of fitness trackers and highlighting its usefulness to them can increase acceptance ( Preusse et al . 2017 ) . These will help to overcome the barrier of low perceived and experienced usefulness . Lastly , another key point derived from this study is that initial use does not always lead to adoption , and even in adoption , there are varying levels of sophistication . For example , possessing a smartphone just to make phone calls as one would do with a feature phone or a landline does not imply true adoption of the technology . Similarly , possessing a fitness tracker just to tell the time does not imply true adoption of the technology . As researchers continue to study adoption , such considerations have to be made if in - depth understanding is aimed for . The findings suggest that it may not provide an accurate picture to simply count the number of people using mHealth technology and simply term that as the rate of adoption . As learnt in this study , initial use may even lead to rejection and adoption may only be for very primal functions . This study suggests that adoption be measured in a more intricate way , so as to move users up the ladder of adoption for more technology - related benefits to be reaped . Researchers should measure participants ’ acceptance of the technology as it as an important determinant of adoption and can interfere with efficacy outcomes . Acknowledgements The author thanks Dr . Edson C . Tandoc Jr . for his guidance in this project . Ethics approval The ethics committee of Nanyang Technological University approved this study ( Nanyang Technological University IRB - 2016 - 09 - 038 & IRB - 2016 - 09 - 038 - 02 ) . Interviewees signed informed consent forms before participating in the study . JOURNAL OF CONSUMER HEALTH ON THE INTERNET 151 Disclosure statement No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author . ORCID Sapphire H . Lin http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 9430 - 1239 References Andrieieva , Olena , Anna Hakman , Vitalii Kashuba , Maryna Vasylenko , Kostiantyn Patsaliuk , Andrii Koshura , and Iryna Istyniuk . 2019 . Effects of physical activity on aging processes in elderly persons . Journal of Physical Education and Sport 19 , no . Suppl . 4 : 1308 – 1314 . doi : 10 . 7752 / jpes . 2019 . s4190 . Atchley , Robert C . 1989 . A continuity theory of normal aging . The Gerontologist 29 , no . 2 : 183 – 190 . doi : 10 . 1093 / geront / 29 . 2 . 183 . Balbim , Guilherme M . , Isabela G . Marques , David X . Marquez , Darshilmukesh Patel , Lisa K . Sharp , Spyros Kitsiou , and Sharmilee M . Nyenhuis . 2021 . Using fitbit as an MHealth intervention tool to promote physical activity : Potential challenges and solu - tions . JMIR mHealth and uHealth 9 , no . 3 : e25289 . doi : 10 . 2196 / 25289 . Boeije , Hennie . 2002 . A purposeful approach to the constant comparative method in the analysis of qualitative interviews . Quality and Quantity 36 , no . 4 : 391 – 409 . doi : 10 . 1023 / A : 1020909529486 . Bourdieu , Pierre . 1990 . The logic of practice . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press . Braun , Virginia , and Victoria Clarke . 2006 . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative Research in Psychology 3 , no . 2 : 77 – 101 . doi : 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa . Brickwood , Katie - Jane , Greig Watson , Jane O ’ Brien , and Andrew D . Williams . 2019 . Consumer - based wearable activity trackers increase physical activity participation : Systematic review and meta - analysis . JMIR mHealth and uHealth 7 , no . 4 : e11819 . doi : 10 . 2196 / 11819 . Cajamarca , Gabriela , Valeria Herskovic , and Pedro O . Rossel . 2019 . Monitoring older adults ’ health information using mobile technology : A systematic literature review . Proceedings 31 , no . 1 : 62 . doi : 10 . 3390 / proceedings2019031062 . Campelo , Alexandre Monte , and Larry Katz . 2020 . Older adults ’ perceptions of the useful - ness of technologies for engaging in physical activity : Using focus groups to explore physical literacy . International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 17 , no . 4 : 1144 . doi : 10 . 3390 / ijerph17041144 . Davis , Fred D . 1989 . Perceived usefulness , perceived ease of use , and user acceptance of information technology . MIS Quarterly 13 , no . 3 : 319 – 340 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 249008 . Davis , Fred D . , Richard P . Bagozzi , and Paul R . Warshaw . 1989 . User acceptance of com - puter technology : A comparison of two theoretical models . Management Science 35 , no . 8 : 982 – 1003 . doi : 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 35 . 8 . 982 . Direito , Artur , Yannan Jiang , Robyn Whittaker , and Ralph Maddison . 2015 . Apps for IMproving FITness and increasing physical activity among young people : The AIMFIT pragmatic randomized controlled trial . Journal of Medical Internet Research 17 , no . 8 : e210 . doi : 10 . 2196 / jmir . 4568 . Glaser , Barney G . , and Anselm L . Strauss . 1967 . The discovery of grounded theory : strategies for qualitative research observations . London , UK : Aldine . http : / / www . amazon . com / dp / 0202302601 . 152 S . H . LIN Heart , Tsipi , and Efrat Kalderon . 2013 . Older adults : Are they ready to adopt health - related ICT ? International Journal of Medical Informatics 82 , no . 11 : e209 – e231 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijmedinf . 2011 . 03 . 002 . Hoy , Matthew B . 2016 . Personal activity trackers and the quantified self . Medical Reference Services Quarterly 35 , no . 1 : 94 – 100 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 02763869 . 2016 . 1117300 . Jakicic , John M . , Kelliann K . Davis , Renee J . Rogers , Wendy C . King , Marsha D . Marcus , Diane Helsel , Amy D . Rickman , Abdus S . Wahed , and Steven H . Belle . 2016 . Effect of wearable technology combined with a lifestyle intervention on long - term weight loss : The IDEA randomized clinical trial . Jama 316 , no . 11 : 1161 – 1171 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jama . 2016 . 12858 . Jimison , Holly Brugge , Paul Gorman , Susan Woods , Peggy Nygren , Miranda Walker , Susan Norris , and William Hersh . 2008 . Barriers and drivers of health information technology use for the elderly , chronically ill , and underserved . Evidence Report / Technology Assessment ( 175 ) : 1 – 1422 . Jung , Younbo , Wei Peng , Meghan Moran , Seung - A Annie Jin , Margaret McLaughlin , Michael Cody , Maryalice Jordan - Marsh , Julie Albright , and Merril Silverstein . 2010 . Low - income minority seniors ’ enrollment in a cybercaf (cid:1) e : Psychological barriers to cross - ing the digital divide . Educational Gerontology 36 , no . 3 : 193 – 212 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 03601270903183313 . King , Abby C . , and Diane K . King . 2010 . Physical activity for an aging population . Public Health Reviews 32 , no . 2 : 401 – 426 . doi : 10 . 1007 / BF03391609 . Lazaro , May Jorella S . , Jaeseo Lim , Sung Ho Kim , and Myung Hwan Yun . 2020 . “ Wearable technologies : Acceptance model for smartwatch adoption among older adults . ” In Human aspects of IT for the aged population . Technologies , design and user experience , 303 – 15 . Verlag : Springer International Publishing . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 50252 - 2 _ 23 . Lunsford , Dale A . , and Melissa S . Burnett . 1992 . Marketing product innovations to the eld - erly : Understanding the barriers to adoption . Journal of Consumer Marketing 9 , no . 4 : 53 – 62 . doi : 10 . 1108 / 07363769210037097 . Mercer , Kathryn , Lora Giangregorio , Eric Schneider , Parmit Chilana , Melissa Li , and Kelly Grindrod . 2016 . Acceptance of commercially available wearable activity trackers among adults aged over 50 and with chronic illness : A mixed - methods evaluation . JMIR mHealth and uHealth 4 , no . 1 : e7 . doi : 10 . 2196 / mhealth . 4225 . Nikou , Shahrokh . 2015 . Mobile technology and forgotten consumers : The young - elderly . International Journal of Consumer Studies 39 , no . 4 : 294 – 304 . doi : 10 . 1111 / ijcs . 12187 . Patton , Michael Quinn . 2002 . Qualitative research and evaluation methods . 3rd ed . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Peels , D . A . , H . de Vries , C . Bolman , R . H . J . Golsteijn , M . M . van Stralen , A . N . Mudde , and L . Lechner . 2013 . Differences in the use and appreciation of a web - based or printed computer - tailored physical activity intervention for people aged over 50 years . Health Education Research 28 , no . 4 : 715 – 731 . doi : 10 . 1093 / her / cyt065 . Preusse , Kimberly C . , Tracy L . Mitzner , Cara B . Fausset , and Wendy A . Rogers . 2017 . Older adults ’ acceptance of activity trackers . Journal of Applied Gerontology : The Official Journal of the Southern Gerontological Society 36 , no . 2 : 127 – 155 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0733464 815624151 . Prochaska , James O . , and Wayne F . Velicer . 1997 . The transtheoretical model of health behavior change . American Journal of Health Promotion : AJHP 12 , no . 1 : 38 – 48 . doi : 10 . 4278 / 0890 - 1171 - 12 . 1 . 38 . Stockwell , Stephanie , Patricia Schofield , Abi Fisher , Joseph Firth , Sarah E . Jackson , Brendon Stubbs , and Lee Smith . 2019 . Digital behavior change interventions to promote physical JOURNAL OF CONSUMER HEALTH ON THE INTERNET 153 activity and / or reduce sedentary behavior in older adults : A systematic review and meta - analysis . Experimental Gerontology 120 , no . June : 68 – 87 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . exger . 2019 . 02 . 020 . Tracy , Sarah J . 2013 . Qualitative research methods : Collecting evidence , crafting analysis , communicating impact . 1st ed . Malden , MA : Wiley . Watkinson , Clare , Esther M . F . van Sluijs , Stephen Sutton , Wendy Hardeman , Kirsten Corder , and Simon J . Griffin . 2010 . Overestimation of physical activity level is associated with lower BMI : A cross - sectional analysis . International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 7 , no . 1 : 68 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1479 - 5868 - 7 - 68 . Weinstein , Neil D . , and Peter M . Sandman . 1992 . A model of the precaution adoption pro - cess : Evidence from home radon testing . Health Psychology : Official Journal of the Division of Health Psychology , American Psychological Association 11 , no . 3 : 170 – 180 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0278 - 6133 . 11 . 3 . 170 . World Health Organization . 2021 . “ Physical Activity . ” https : / / www . who . int / . Yau , Yi . , and Chia - Huei Hsiao . 2022 . The technology acceptance model and older adults ’ exercise intentions — a systematic literature review . Geriatrics 7 , no . 6 : 124 . doi : 10 . 3390 / geriatrics7060124 . About the author Sapphire H . Lin ( linh0029 @ e . ntu . edu . sg ) is in Wee Kim Wee School of Communication and Information , Nanyang Technological University , Singapore , Singapore . Appendix A . Interview guide These are introductory questions that will partially guide the interview . Depending on the flow of the conversation , different questions may be asked , or some questions may be skipped if they are irrelevant to the interviewee . 1 . Opening Questions a . May I know if you have retired ? b . Please walk me through the activities of your typical week ( draw out their ‘ physical activities ’ here and establish common understanding of physical activity ) . 2 . General Health & Physical Activity a . Do you feel that you engage in physical activity as much as you would want to ? b . How do you feel about your level of physical activity ? c . Can you please explain to me the differences in your physical activity before and after retirement , if ( you foresee ) any ? d . How do you feel about your health in general ? e . How do you feel about using physical activity to keep yourself healthy ? 3 . Use of mobile technology a . Can you please tell me what comes to mind when you think of mobile technology for fitness ? ( Establish common understanding of mobile apps and trackers . Explain it to those who don ’ t know what they are ) b . What do you think is the role of mobile technology ( e . g . , mobile apps , or wearable trackers ) in physical activity ? c . How do you feel about the use of mobile technology for physical activity ? d . What are the reasons for your use / nonuse of mobile technology for physical activity ? 154 S . H . LIN e . Please tell me what caused you to start using mobile technology for your physical activity ? OR What do you think will cause you to start using mobile technology for your physical activity ? f . Can you please tell me how you use these technologies for your physical activity ? OR Can you please tell me what other methods to keep track of your physical activity ? ( The role of habitus ) 4 . Closing Questions a . Have you heard about the government ’ s recommendation of 150 minutes of phys - ical activity per week ? b . Is there anything else that you wish to tell me in relation to the things we have discussed today ? c . May I know your age please ? Thank you very much for your time and invaluable inputs . JOURNAL OF CONSUMER HEALTH ON THE INTERNET 155