Merging Sketches for Creative Design Exploration : An Evaluation of Physical and Cognitive Operations Senthil Chandrasegaran 1 , * , Sriram Karthik Badam 2 , † , Ninger Zhou 3 , ‡ , Zhenpeng Zhao 2 , § , Lorraine Kisselburgh 4 , ¶ , Kylie Peppler 5 , | | , Niklas Elmqvist 1 , 2 , * * , Karthik Ramani 6 , 7 , †† 1 College of Information Studies , 2 Department of Computer Science , University of Maryland , College Park , MD 3 School of Education , University of California , Irvine , CA 4 CERIAS , 6 School of Mechanical Engineering , 7 School of Electrical & Computer Engineering , Purdue University , West Lafayette , IN 5 School of Education , Indiana University , Bloomington , IN brush  stove ( repurpose ) saucepan  saucepan ( reuse ) brush  brush ( reuse ) clip wheel  monorail ( refactor ) COOKING POT MONORAIL CLEANER ROBOT LUNAR LANDER saucepan handle  shoe ( reinterpret ) brush  landing gear ( repurpose ) spoon handle  hull ( reinterpret ) SHOE SCRUBBER AUTOMATIC TUB SCRUBBER POT STIRRER Figure 1 : A sample of sketches merged by participants of our study . The two sketches to the left were the inputs to the participants , and the four sketches within the curly braces were created by merging components of these two source sketches . The source and merge sketches are colored post - hoc to indicate the components that were used in the merge . The sketches are labelled by coders to indicate the kinds of cognitive operations ( deﬁned in this paper ) used in each of the merged sketches . A BSTRACT Despite its grounding in creativity techniques , merging multiple source sketches to create new ideas has received scant attention in design literature . In this paper , we identify the physical operations that in merging sketch components . We also introduce cognitive operations of reuse , repurpose , refactor , and reinterpret , and ex - plore their relevance to creative design . To examine the relationship of cognitive operations , physical techniques , and creative sketch outcomes , we conducted a qualitative user study where student de - signers merged existing sketches to generate either an alternative design , or an unrelated new design . We compared two digital se - lection techniques : freeform selection , and a stroke - cluster - based “object select” technique . The resulting merge sketches were sub - jected to crowdsourced evaluation of these sketches , and manual coding for the use of cognitive operations . Our ﬁndings establish a ﬁrm connection between the proposed cognitive operations and * e - mail : senthilc @ umd . edu † e - mail : sbadam @ umd . edu ‡ e - mail : ninger @ uci . edu § e - mail : zhaoz @ umd . edu ¶ e - mail : lorraine @ purdue . edu | | e - mail : kpeppler @ indiana . edu * * e - mail : elm @ umd . edu †† e - mail : ramani @ purdue . edu the context and outcome of creative tasks . Key ﬁndings indicate that reinterpret cognitive operations correlate strongly with creativity in merged sketches , while reuse operations correlate negatively with creativity . Furthermore , freeform selection techniques are preferred signiﬁcantly by designers . We discuss the empirical contributions of understanding the use of cognitive operations during design ex - ploration , and the practical implications for designing interfaces in digital tools that facilitate creativity in merging sketches . Index Terms : H . 5 . 2 [ Information Interfaces and Presentation ] : User Interfaces—Interaction Styles ; I . 3 . 6 [ Computer Graphics ] : Methodology and Techniques—Interaction Techniques 1 I NTRODUCTION The act of designing is often characterized as a combination of di - vergent and convergent thinking [ 26 ] . Divergent or creative thinking involves the generation of several ideas that address the design prob - lem at hand , while convergent or analytical thinking involves the evaluation of these ideas to choose the best candidates . A sound de - sign practice invovles multiple iterations of divergent and convergent processes until a satisfactory solution is found . Designers often draw from existing sources of inspiration when generating ideas or synthe - sizing variations . Several techniques have been proposed for aiding divergent thinking by drawing inspiration from one’s surroundings and making connections between them [ 19 ] , or combining or modi - fying parts of existing ideas [ 22 ] . Such techniques help reframe the design problem and use existing designs to generate new ones . The concept of borrowing and adapting existing content to cre - ate one’s own—what is often called the “remix culture” [ 18 ] —has existed for some time , and has particular relevance in digital con - texts . This notion has also been supported in CAD systems through parametric design practices [ 7 ] , in programming through software versioning systems , and more recently , in Maker cultures through online communities [ 24 ] . Computational support for combining and modifying content has been limited to content that has a clearly deﬁned syntax ( e . g . programming , 2D drafting ) , or form ( e . g . im - ages , 3D models ) . However , the design sketch , often seen as an intentionally ambiguous representation of an idea , does not lend itself readily to combination or modiﬁcation . Our goal in this paper is to explore the process of creating new ideas by combining components of existing sketches of ideas . We study the physical act of merging sketches of existing ideas , as well as the cognitive aspects of changing the function and / or context of these components to create new ideas . In a traditional paper - based design scenario , the merge operation may be performed by re - drawing a new sketch that incorporates themes from source sketches , or by physically cutting and pasting together the new sketch from its source materials . The latter approach is adapted to digital sce - narios using digital ‘cut’ , ‘copy’ , and ‘paste’ operations . Digital settings thus do not require completely redrawing or physically de - stroying the source materials , and are thus signiﬁcantly more time - and resource - efﬁcient . Digital media also support the transformation of sketch components through translation , rotation , and scaling . Furthermore , few digital design tools provide support for merging design elements from the source sketches to create entirely new ideas and concepts . The support for efﬁcient merging of sketch components is more critical in collaborative design , where quick access of visualized ideas from multiple sources is important . In this paper , we remedy this gap by examining the physical and cognitive aspects of selecting and merging parts of existing sketches . In the same way that sketching , a physically expressed process , acts as an extension for the designer’s memory , reducing their cognitive load , we propose cognitive operations involved in merging sketches , namely reuse , refactor , repurpose , and reinterpret , based on the preservation or change of context and function . We identiﬁed connections between the physical and cognitive aspects of merging through a three - stage study . First , we conduct an in - depth qualitative user study involving 19 designers combining sequences of two pre - drawn source sketches into a single output sketch . The study involved the divergent process in two forms . The ﬁrst was a context - preserving functional merge , where participants were asked to combine the source sketches into an output sketch that incorporated ideas from both . A context - changing exploratory merge task required them to use elements from both source sketches to create an output sketch with entirely new ideas . We compared the qualitative performance for this merge operation in both phases for paper as well as digital settings . We tested two digital selection techniques : free - form selection where users could “cut” and use parts of a sketch as they do with paper , and an object - selection technique that used sketch clustering [ 39 ] to support the selection of composite sketch elements . To better elicit the effect of these differences from participants , we also asked them to perform one merge task with paper using traditional cut / paste methods . Second , we conducted crowdsourced evaluations to determine the originality , and in the case of the context - changing tasks , the dissimilarity of the merged sketches . In the third stage , we coded the merged sketches to identify the cognitive operations used in each merge task . We identiﬁed a signiﬁcant correlation between originality and the use of reinterpret operations ( changing both context and function ) in merged sketches from exploratory merge tasks . However , negative correlations were found between the use of reuse operations ( preserv - ing both context and function ) and the originality and dissimilarity scores . We also found that participants used reuse signiﬁcantly more during functional merges , and repurpose during exploratory merges . Finally , participants who used the object select method had signiﬁcantly higher instances of repurpose operations . Our ﬁndings establish a ﬁrm connection between our proposed cognitive opera - tions and the context and outcome of creative tasks . Finally , while the selection technique based on sketch clustering was not preferred by the participants , their comments suggest that exploration of this technique with different clustering metrics holds promise for aiding creative design exploration . 2 B ACKGROUND Resolving and combining ideas , concepts , and content from multiple designers is a canonical operation in any collaborative process in - volving the creation of new artifacts [ 28 ] . In this paper , we limit our scope to creative design , where the goal is to generate and develop ideas—for any area concerning the constructed world , including products , visuals , and interfaces—and where the sketch is the pri - mary medium of communication . In its basic form , a sketch is a rapidly created freehand drawing intended for visually exploring ideas [ 20 , 34 ] . In this section , we review the literature on sketching and perception , collaboration for design , and collaborative editing . 2 . 1 Inspiration vs . Fixation Design is often seen as a search for solutions to a problem by drawing analogies or inspiration from one’s surroundings [ 10 ] . Designers often create new ideas by combining existing ones [ 2 ] . However , inspiration is a double - edged - sword : pictorial sources of inspiration often limit the designer’s thinking to the extent that they are unable to think beyond a given example to reach a solution . This barrier , termed “design ﬁxation” [ 14 ] , is a major barrier to creative output , inhibiting the exploration of the design space [ 14 ] . There exist several techniques to delay ﬁxation and support creativity , such as SCAMPER [ 22 ] , a mnemonic of a set of techniques to abstract or change ideas , or the abstraction of solutions to a general domain before re - applying them [ 37 ] , or collaboratively developing other’s ideas rather than ones own [ 32 , 35 ] . At the digital end , computational models have been proposed to abstract design patterns from one domain and analogically transfer them to another [ 9 ] . Another approach is the utilization of shape grammars to suggest new or alternate abstract conﬁgurations to the designer [ 23 ] . However , surpassing the domain - speciﬁc knowledge and analogical thinking of the human designer is yet to be achieved . Computational tools should enable the designer in the reinterpreta - tion of structures and functions , allowing them to transform existing ideas into new ones through the combination , modiﬁcation , and extension of existing ideas . 2 . 2 Visual Perceptions in Sketching Sketches play an important role in externalizing ideas during early design by providing a visual database of generated ideas that inspires new ones [ 20 ] . In fact , sketches in particular have been shown to be more effective than any other medium , including text and cross - representational techniques , for the early phases of ideation and creativity [ 21 ] . Sketches serve to inform the design process , both for building on existing ideas as well as exploring new parts of the solution space . The act of sketching is simultaneously a physical and mental process , with the sketch not only serving as an extension of the designer’s mind , but also a medium with which to communicate , regroup , and reinterpret ideas [ 34 ] . Designers have also been known to make unexpected discoveries in the act of sketching when they interpret their own sketches in ways they had not originally intended [ 17 ] . The idea of multiple perceptions of the same sketch is important to creative support . Prats et al . [ 25 ] categorize the different levels of shape transformations that occur when designers sketch , into general rules with which to interpret the changes to a sketch . Just as the act of sketching helps the designer think , the ability to manipulate sketches , or parts of sketches can help the designer discover new … freeform selection object selection expanding the selection Figure 2 : The two selection types considered for this study . Freeform or area - based selection is seen in image editors and other graphical applications . The object selection type is a stroke - based selection that extends the initial selection of one stroke to include other temporally clustered strokes . Figure 3 details the clustering mechanism . ideas . Supporting visual regrouping of ideas using digital sketch editors that incorporate Gestalt - like rules has been proposed ear - lier [ 30 , 31 ] . Using the sketching process itself to organize and group strokes to cohesive units has also been proposed [ 39 ] . In this paper , we will explore the selection and reorganization of sketch strokes using conventional freeform and stroke - clustering based techniques on a pen - and - touch interface to aid the designer in selecting and transforming existing sketches to form new ideas . 2 . 3 Digital Support for Creativity Pen and paper has long been the gold standard for sketching [ 3 , 34 ] , but the emergence of high - quality pen - input devices is starting to make the digital medium more attractive in a wide range of domains , including automotive design [ 16 ] , architecture [ 5 ] , and software de - sign [ 4 ] . Several studies have explored how to replicate the strengths of paper—familiarity , precision , and accessibility—even on digital devices [ 1 , 36 ] in order to harness the strengths of the digital medium , such as persistence , replication , and composition . When suggesting design guidelines for creating creativity support tools for sketching and composition , the focus has been on supporting exploration [ 27 ] , especially the ability to move forward with an idea , backtrack , try alternatives , and support the inclusion of multiple people and tools . Given the prominence of sketches as a natural communication medium for collaborative design , many digital creativity platforms are centered on these artifacts . TEAM STORM [ 13 ] is a groupware system for co - located sketching , where designers have both private and group workspaces and mechanisms for exchanging artifacts between them . IdeaVis [ 8 ] combines the strengths of both paper and digital media using a hybrid workﬂow that incorporates both high - resolution displays and Anoto pens for collaborative sketching . GAMBIT [ 29 ] is a web - based system for sketching user interfaces in co - located collaboration involving multiple devices and displays . Fi - nally , skWiki [ 38 ] is a collaborative sketching platform that enables collaborators to branch from any sketch . While digital creativity platforms offer means to generate dif - ferent alternatives to existing sketches , there needs to be a better understanding of the various physical and cognitive processes that are involved in merging sketches , instead of borrowing processes from similar operations in coding and document editing . The goal of this paper is to understand these processes and how they , through digital sketching and merging tools , can support design exploration . 3 D ESIGN F RAMEWORK : M ERGING S KETCHES We call the operation to combine two 1 source sketches A and B into a new resulting sketch C a merge ( or “sketch merge” ) . To understand 1 We limit our treatment here to two source sketches , but these ideas should generalize to a higher number of source sketches . expand selection 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 clustering sequence sketching sequence . . . select stroke Figure 3 : An illustration of the sketch history - based clustering tech - nique for grouping strokes into objects , and the expansion of selection by traversing to the parent nodes of a stroke ( cluster ) in the tree layout . what happens in the sketch merge operation , we need to separate the physical aspects of the process from its cognitive aspects . By physi - cal aspects , we mean the parts of the operation that are expressed externally by the designer : operations such as select , cut / copy , paste , rearrange , and compose . By cognitive aspects , we mean the parts of the operations that occur internally , in the designer’s mind . This involves the designer’s internal representation of what the sketches denote : the ideas expressed in the source sketches , or newer ideas that are formed in the designer’s mind when parts of these source sketches are isolated or combined . These two aspects of merging are intricately connected : sketches are external representations of the designer’s evolving thought process [ 12 ] , and identifying these aspects may help understand how they come together . 3 . 1 Physical Operations in Merging The physical operations that come into play when merging sketches can be categorized into two kinds of processes : • Selection : This is the process by which a part or parts of source sketches are selected . • Transformation : Translating , rotating , and scaling the selected parts to form the merged sketch . 3 . 1 . 1 Selection At a physical level , selection involves identifying and demarcating areas of interest from the source sketches . We identify two forms of selection in the context of sketching : • Freeform selection : Commonly known as “lasso select” in ex - isting drawing and photo manipulation editors , this requires the marking of a freeform shape depicting the area of interest , and selecting everything that lies in this area . • Object selection : While freeform selection is a natural choice for most image - based media , sketches are also collections of strokes , and it makes sense to have a selection mechanism that is aware of this . This idea is not new : drafting applications allow the selection and manipulation of lines or groups of lines , either directly , or by chaining connected lines / curves . This allows selecting coherent “objects” inferred in the sketch . These two forms are shown in Figure 2 . Note that sketches consist of unorganized strokes and not discrete objects . Contrast this with traditional vector editors , where illustrations are created using geometric shapes and paths . To implement object selection , we addressed the issue of stroke organization by using an agglomerative stroke clustering method based on the time and order in which the strokes were created [ 39 ] . The strokes in a sketch are thus combined into clusters based on a proximity measure and temporal order , and these clusters ( a group of strokes ) are further combined with other strokes or clusters using the same approach . This recursively builds a tree - like structure ( a dendrogram ) representing the clustered sketch ( stroke ) histories ( as illustrated in Figure 3 . Note that the root cluster on this tree represents the entire sketch , while the leaves represent individual strokes . Selecting a particular stroke allows us to expand the selection using the cluster hierarchy ( by moving to the closest parent in the tree ) ; by giving users control over this , they can smoothly expand or shrink their selection . This is just one automated clustering algorithm that can used for this purpose ; there are many other alternatives from the data analytics domain including k - means and k - d trees . Our approach uses agglomerative clustering as it creates a hierarchy of stroke clusters , which is amenable to the process of “expanding” a stroke selection . Overall , selecting a speciﬁc sketch part that conceptually belongs together—such as a wheel on a car , a person in a room , or a part in a schematic—becomes signiﬁcantly more efﬁcient than freeform selection . 3 . 1 . 2 Transformation Once the designer has selected a visual element to transfer from one of the source sketches to the resulting sketch , they may want to trans - form the element in the ﬁnal result . Examples include changing the location , size , or orientation of a selected element in the composition . To accommodate this , the merge operation incorporates translation , freeform scaling ( with non - ﬁxed aspect ratios ) , and rotation for each individual element . 3 . 2 Cognitive Operations in Merging In conceptual design , shapes represented in sketches are ambigu - ous , leading to multiple interpretations that support design explo - ration [ 15 ] . Such exploration can be used to delay ﬁxation by ab - stracting a concept and re - representing it in a different domain [ 37 ] , or by the use of techniques such as SCAMPER [ 22 ] to change cer - tain components , functions , or the domain of an existing concept . These methods form the basis of the cognitive operations that we introduce in this paper , that we categorize along two dimensions : function and context . Function is the role a component plays in the original or source sketch , whereas context is the domain in which the component or its parent sketch exists . When a designer performs a merge , components that go into the merged sketch can either have the same or different function , and can exist in the same or different context , as in the source sketch . Just as sketching is a physical ex - pression of the designer’s thought process , we posit that the physical acts of selection and transformation express the designer’s cognitive processes of abstraction and re - representation . We identify four cognitive operations that can occur when a sketch C is created by merging elements from sketches A and B . Reuse : The use of a component from A or B in C where both the function and the context of this component in C is the same as in the source sketch . Reuse is often seen when generating alternatives for a design problem by choosing parts of existing design solutions . This is illustrated in Figure 4 as the use of the tank tread on the un - dercarriage of the helicopter . The tread performs the same function as it did for the tank . This can be seen as a representation of Goel’s lateral transformation [ 11 ] , where a sketch undergoes a modiﬁcation to one that is similar to , yet distinct from , its earlier version . Refactor : In computer science , refactoring is the process of reor - ganizing a program’s internal structure without altering its external behavior . We interpret the term here as the use of a component from A or B such that it performs the same function in C as it did in the source , but in a different context . This is illustrated in Figure 4 by the use of the tank’s armored body as the fuselage of the helicopter . It performs a similar function as it did earlier ( protect and house the occupants ) , but in this case , it is now in the context of aviation . Refactoring can help in design space exploration by abstracting the function represented by a part of the sketch . support t r a n s p o r t a t i o n t r a n s p o r t a t i o n  d e f e n s e FUNCTION C O N T E X T reuse reinterpret refactor + repurpose t r a n s p o r t a t i o n  c r a f t w o r k t r a n s p o r t a t i o n housing passengers support  housing support  cutting same different s a m e d i ff e r e n t Figure 4 : The cognitive operations identiﬁed when merging two sketches to create a new idea . “Reuse” operations use the merged components in the same context and function as in the source sketches . “Reinterpret” operations change both the context and func - tions of merged components are changed , and the merged idea is very different from the sources . “Repurpose” and “Refactor” occupy the remaining positions in the function - context matrix . Repurpose : Here a component from sketches A or B is used in C in a way that it occupies the same context or domain as the original sketch , but performs a different function . This operation often uses the form of a component of a sketch to replace a different component . For example , in Figure 4 , the outline of the tank tread is repurposed to now play the role of the fuselage of the helicopter . Reinterpret : Finally , reinterpretation is when an element from A or B is used in the merged sketch C such that it performs a different function in a different context from the source sketches . This oper - ation could be particularly useful in design space exploration as it creates results that are the most different from the source sketches . In the example shown in Figure 4 , components of the tank and the he - licopter are completely reinterpreted to create a pair of scissors . Our deﬁnition of reinterpretation is derived from Suwa et al . ’s [ 33 ] per - ceptual reorganization , where regrouping parts of sketches provides new interpretations . 3 . 3 Paper vs . Digital Media In traditional design settings conducted using paper , merging two source sketches often happens in many different ways . For instance , the designer can combine ideas from source sketches by simply drawing a new sketch from scratch . Other options include tracing over parts of the source sketches , or cutting out copies of the source sketches to create a collage - like merged sketch . Note that when sketching on paper , transforming the selected parts of the sketch is not trivial . Paper allows for only rotation and translation , but for scale , it would need additional mechanisms such as pantographs ( for tracing a larger shape ) , or photocopiers ( for creating a larger sketch to cut out ) . The recreate from scratch option does allow for all transformations , but is dependent on sketching skill . Digital sketching platforms have both strengths and weaknesses compared to traditional paper - based sketching [ 1 , 38 ] ; one of the oft - cited strengths is the possibility to effortlessly reproduce a sketch without consuming the original . We performed a study of such merging operations under two different design situations , in order to understand the physical and cognitive operations involved , and the role of the medium in supporting these operations . 4 S TUDY M ETHODS In the previous section , we outlined the physical and cognitive operations of merging sketches , with possible implications on the outcome . To understand how these operations affect the results , we conducted our study in three stages : 1 . User Study : We examined how designers merged two sketches using a merging interface we created speciﬁcally for this study . The goal was to understand how designers use merging tech - niques under different design scenarios . 2 . Evaluation of Sketches : We performed a crowdsourced survey where respondents were shown a set of sketches created from the same pair of source sketches by participants from ( 1 ) . They were asked to choose sketches that were ( a ) the most different from the sources , and ( b ) represented the most original idea . 3 . Coding of Cognitive Operations : We coded each merged sketch to identify the number of unique occurrences of each of the four cognitive operations . 4 . 1 User Study The focus of this study was to understand divergent thinking under two conditions : ( 1 ) a “functional” merge , where the source sketches are possible solutions to the same design problem , and ( 2 ) an “ex - ploratory” merge , where the source sketches are unrelated to each other . In the case of the functional merge , the design task was to generate a merged sketch that addresses the same design problem as the source sketches , while in the case of the exploratory merge , the design task was to generate a merged sketch that is completely dif - ferent from the source sketches . These tasks represent the extremes of design exploration : the functional merge focused the exploration of alternatives to a speciﬁc domain , and exploratory merge removes all constraints . They also serve as a check for our cognitive opera - tions : functional merge should require more reuse operations , while exploratory merge , more reinterpret operations . 4 . 1 . 1 Participants & Materials We recruited 19 paid participants ( 4 female , 15 male ) , 16 of whom were students of a senior course on toy design , while three were graduate mechanical engineering design majors . With an age range of 21 to 28 years , all had novice to intermediate level skill in sketch - ing on paper . Seventeen were right - handed , and 13 were comfortable using tablets and styli . All demographics were self - reported . The digital parts of the experiment used a Samsung Galaxy Note 10 . 1 2014 edition tablet using the S - Pen™ with a < 1 mm tip . For paper , we opted for the “cut and paste” among the options discussed in Section 3 . 3 , because it was practically feasible within the time limits of the study . Source sketches were printed on different - colored letter - size papers ( 8 . 5 × 11 in . ) , and participants were provided with scissors , glue , and a blank sheet of white letter paper for the merged sketch . The goal was to give participants a reference point of merging practices , using the most common medium to assist them when reﬂecting on the digital techniques . 4 . 1 . 2 Tasks In the digital medium , participants used two selection techniques ( freeform and object ) while performing two merge tasks ( functional and exploratory ) . We developed an Android application for each of these techniques . The visual space on the Android device display was divided into two main areas corresponding to the physical oper - ations discussed earlier : a selection view where two source sketches were displayed from which the participants could select elements , and a transformation view where they could apply transformation operations to the selected elements . Participants were free to orient the tablet or paper to their comfort . Each merge operation outcome was stored on the tablet before the participant moved on to the next task . At the end of each task , the participants’ brief description of their creation was recorded . The participants also conducted one merge task ( assigned randomly ) on paper with the given materials . In both the functional merge and exploratory merge tasks , par - ticipants performed tasks using two different merge techniques on the tablet : freeform selection and object selection . All transforma - tions discussed earlier were enabled , with standard tools for scaling , translating , and rotating the selections . transform / compose area controls for freeform select controls for object select controls source sketches Figure 5 : The interfaces of the applications used for the freeform and object select methods . The two source sketches are placed in juxtaposition to the “merge area” , where the selected sketch segments can be placed , transformed , and composed for the merged sketch . We used eight pairs of annotated sketches , created by two expert designers , as the source sketches for these tasks . Four pairs were used for the functional merge task , where each pair presented two solutions to the same design problem . The remaining four pairs , used in the exploratory merge task , presented sketches that addressed different design problems . The source sketches were processed to have similar visual appearance in terms of the stroke width , colors used , and perspective of view to minimize the effects of sketch quality on the merge outcome . 4 . 1 . 3 Experimental Design We manipulated two factors in the experiment : Situation ( S ) rep - resented the design task ( functional or exploratory merge ) , and Technique ( T ) represented the selection method used ( freeform or object selection ) . We used a full - factorial within - subjects design , with 2 situations ( S ) , 2 techniques ( T ) , and 2 repetitions with differ - ent source sketches , for 19 participants , yielding 152 total trials ( 8 per participant , training excluded ) . This does not include the paper task , which had only one trial . We counterbalanced the order of both situation S and technique T to minimize learning effects . We chose to not analyze medium ( digital vs . paper ) as a factor because our aim was to identify and compare merge techniques used in the digital medium . However , using a paper - based task expands our understanding of the beneﬁts of the digital merge techniques compared to the paper - based merge , which is familiar to participants . 4 . 1 . 4 Procedure The participants were introduced to the purpose of the study and the data to be recorded . They completed a pre - survey on their demographic data , design background , and their experience with sketching on tablets . We then provided instructions for the ﬁrst stage of tasks ( functional or exploratory merge ) and gave them time to practice the assigned selection technique and the transformation operations . Training time ranged from 3 to 5 minutes per technique . This was followed by a set of four merge tasks ( for situation S ) with two merge techniques ( T ) . Participants were given 5 minutes to complete each task . We determined this time limit through a dis - cussion with the expert designers who created the original sketches ; the purpose was to pick a short duration amenable to quick ideation . Prior to each task , the source sketches were brieﬂy explained . The participants were asked to infer more detail from the annotations and ask questions if necessary . At the end of each task , the participants were asked to explain the idea represented by the merged outcome . After using each technique T , they also completed a survey about their experience with the merge technique they used . A ﬁve - point Likert scale was used to understand aspects such as ease and success in selection / transformation , while open - ended questions explored preferences of selection and transformation techniques . Participants then repeated the process for the next situation S . Finally , the paper - based merge task was explained to the partici - pants , after which they were given ﬁve minutes to create the merged paper sketch by cutting and pasting parts of the source sketches . The administrator was present throughout the session to monitor the tasks and provide any clariﬁcations if needed . The sessions were also video recorded . A typical study session lasted 70 minutes . 4 . 2 Crowdsourced Evaluation of Sketches Keeping in mind our original goal of understanding the effect of the selection technique on the ﬁnal outcome of the merge , we evaluated the participant - generated ideas on their originality . Additionally , to determine the extent of how different the outcomes from the exploratory merge tasks were from the source sketches , we also de - cided to evaluate the merged sketches on their dissimilarity from the source . We therefore collected the merged sketches and performed a crowdsourced online survey ( voluntary ) via university mailing lists . A total of 167 sketches were obtained ( 4 lost trials ) , where each of the 8 sets contained on average 21 merged sketches . Respondents to the crowdsourced survey were asked eight questions concerned the originality of the sketches merged from all 8 pairs of source sketches . Four more questions concerned the dissimilarity from source sketches of the outcomes from the exploratory merge tasks . Each question had the same format : the two source sketches were shown along with their descriptions , and 4 options were pre - sented , along with descriptions of each merged sketch . For each respondent , these 4 options were generated randomly from the pool of 21 merged sketches ( from each pair of source sketches ) . The respondent was asked to select from the options , the most original idea ( for the ﬁrst 8 questions ) , or the one most dissimilar from the sources ( for the remaining 4 questions ) . We showed only 4 choices , instead of all 21 , to make it easier for the respondent to choose . With enough participants , the randomization would ensure that each merged sketch received sufﬁcient representation . The options shown to each respondent and their choice were both recorded . Respondents were also required to brieﬂy explain the rationale for their choice for each question in a text ﬁeld provided . This served as a means for eliminating spurious responses : if a rationale was not provided , that response was removed from our evaluation . A total of 175 initial respondents were thus pruned down to 120 people ( 60 % female , 39 % male , 1 % unidentiﬁed ) , chieﬂy university students and faculty ( 49 % engineering , 19 % information sciences , 8 % education , and 23 % from other ﬁelds ) . Not all participants answered all questions . The valid responses ranged from 88 for the most - answered question to 40 for the least - answered question . On average , we received 53 responses per question . Since each question was independent of the others , we could still consider each of the valid responses . We calculated the following score for each sketch : M score = ( # sel ) − ( # nsel ) ( # sel ) + ( # nsel ) ( 1 ) Here # sel is the number of times a particular sketch is selected by the crowd , while # nsel is the number of times a particular sketch is shown as an option , but not selected . This normalizes the score for each sketch based on the number of times it appears as a choice . 4 . 3 Coding Cognitive Operations As discussed in Section 3 . 2 , we identiﬁed four cognitive opera - tions that are possible when a component from a source sketch is incorporated into the merged sketch : reuse , refactor , repurpose , and reinterpret . We analyzed each merged sketch , and used the corresponding participant descriptions to interpret the role of each component used from the source sketches . Once the role was iden - tiﬁed , we coded this element as an instance of one of the above four cognitive operations . Each merged sketch could thus have at least one instance of these four operations . We did this only for unique roles : e . g . , if a component was reused as a wheel 3 times , it counted as only one instance of reuse . We recorded the number and kind of each cognitive operation used in each merged sketch . A sample of the coded sketches is shown in Figure 1 . This coding was conducted by three of the investigators of the experiment after anonymizing the sketches , and obfuscating the crowdsourced results from the sketches . Their inter - rater reliability was calculated to be 0 . 82 ( Cronbach’s alpha test ) . A total of 560 operations ( 32 . 1 % reuse , 31 . 1 % refactor , 4 . 5 % repurpose , 32 . 3 % reinterpret ) were identiﬁed for 167 merged sketches . 5 R ESULTS We ﬁrst computed the difference in participants’ experience with the selection techniques . To assess the impact of selection techniques and cognitive operations on the outcome , we calculated correla - tions , ( 1 ) between the crowdsourced originality / dissimilarity sketch scores and the selection methods ( lasso / object ) , and ( 2 ) between the crowdsourced scores and the number of cognitive operations in each merged sketch . 5 . 1 Feedback on Selection Techniques Participants’ feedback on the selection techniques did not follow a normal distribution . We thus conducted a non - parametric Wilcoxon signed rank test , which showed that for the functional merge tasks , participants rated the freeform select technique as signiﬁcantly easier ( Z = 3 . 69 , p < . 001 ) and more successful ( Z = 2 . 95 , p = . 002 ) than the object select technique . The test also showed that for the exploratory merge tasks , participants considered the freeform select technique signiﬁcantly easier to use than the object select technique ( Z = 3 . 01 , p = . 002 ) . However , participants did not rate the freeform select technique as signiﬁcantly more successful than the object select technique ( Z = 1 . 33 , p = . 19 ) . A comparison with paper was not performed as each participant used paper only once , and for only one of the two merge tasks . 5 . 2 Correlations between Operations and Outcomes We detail below the kinds of correlations calculated and obtained between the merge situations ( functional / exploratory ) , merge tech - niques ( freeform / object ) , cognitive operations ( reuse , refactor , repur - pose , reinterpret ) , and the crowdsourced study scores for originality and dissimilarity calculated using Eq . 1 . Originality & Cognitive Operations : For sketches generated with functional merge , no signiﬁcant correlation was found be - tween the originality scores and the cognitive operations . For the exploratory merge tasks , there was a signiﬁcant negative correla - tion between originality and the number of reuse operations ( Pear - son’s r = − 0 . 23 , p = . 033 ) , and a signiﬁcant positive correlation between the originality score and the number of reinterpret opera - tions ( r = 0 . 28 , p = . 011 ) . Dissimilarity & Cognitive Operations : There was a signiﬁ - cant negative correlation between dissimilarity scores of exploratory merge sketches and the number of reuse operations ( r = − 0 . 53 , p < . 001 ) , and a signiﬁcant positive correlation with the number of reinterpret operations ( r = 0 . 41 , p < . 001 ) . Merge Situation ( S ) & Cognitive Operations : To examine the relationship between the four cognitive operations and the two merge task conditions , we conducted a multivariate test . The results showed that participants used signiﬁcantly greater number of reuse opera - tions ( F ( 1 , 157 ) = 4 . 28 , p = . 04 , partial η 2 = 0 . 03 ) and repurpose operations ( F ( 1 , 157 ) = 13 . 71 , p < . 001 , partial η 2 = 0 . 08 ) in func - tional merge tasks than in exploratory merge tasks . The participants used signiﬁcantly more reinterpret operations for exploratory tasks than function tasks ( F ( 1 , 157 ) = 46 . 69 , p < . 001 , partial η 2 = 0 . 23 ) . Selection Technique ( T ) & Cognitive Operations : To exam - ine the relationship between the four cognitive operations and the two selection techniques ( freeform & object ) , we ran correlation tests that showed signiﬁcant correlation between selection methods ( freeform select , object select ) and the repurpose operation ( Kendall τ = − 0 . 17 , p = 0 . 02 ) . This suggests that participants who used the cluster method are more likely to use repurpose . There were no signiﬁcant correlations between selection methods and the three other cognitive operations . 6 D ISCUSSION We discuss here the ﬁndings regarding cognitive and physical opera - tions used during sketch merging , and their implications . 6 . 1 Cognitive Operations during Merge We posited that reuse represented an exploration of design alter - natives rather than of original ideas . This was conﬁrmed by the negative correlation between the number of reuse operations during sketch merging , and the originality and dissimilarity ratings . How - ever , this correlation was only observed for exploratory merge tasks , and not during functional merge . This may be due to the nature of the functional merge task : participants were constrained to stay in the same context , i . e . to address the same problem as the source sketches . The signiﬁcantly higher numbers of reuse and repurpose operations in functional merge tasks support this argument . We also posited that the reinterpret operation represented a reorga - nization of the designer’s perception of the existing sketch [ 33 ] . This was conﬁrmed by the positive correlation between the dissimilarity and originality scores and the number of reinterpret operations , and by the signiﬁcantly higher number of reinterpret operations in the exploratory design task . While signiﬁcant correlations were not observed between the merge tasks and the refactor and repurpose operations , a more nuanced selection of merge tasks designed to elicit more varied instances of ‘lateral transformations’ [ 11 ] would further explain the relevance of these tasks to design ideation . 6 . 2 Selection Techniques Participants clearly preferred the freeform select techniques over object select and paper - based techniques . One reason is because the freeform selection technique is standard in most graphical editing tools , and thus familiar to participants . However , 15 participants reported that there were portions of the sketches they were unable to avoid with freeform selection when they were trying to select something else . One participant observed , “ It was sometimes difﬁcult to exclude internal shapes ; strange lasso patterns were necessary to avoid them . ” This is because freeform select interprets the sketch as an image , not as a collection of strokes representing ideas expressed over time . In most graphical editors , this issue is side - stepped by using layers or selection ﬁlters . The number of tasks on paper was not enough for a statistical comparison , though doing this task at the end provided participants perspective to reﬂect on the digital techniques . Participants liked the paper - based selection technique more than object select , but were less impressed with the irreversibility of this medium , stating “ I did destroy some parts getting to the pieces I wanted ” , “ I really wish I could duplicate some of the parts like in the tablet version ” , and “ no undo ” as issues . The object - based selection technique was the least preferred , and participants cited issues with control and predictability using this technique . Twelve participants found it difﬁcult to select speciﬁc parts of the sketches , and one participant reported : “ I had no way of knowing what would be selected next , so I spent most of the time blindly adding and selecting new starting points to avoid what I did not want . ” However , some participants found it useful , stating , “ Sometimes the object select mode has better results . I can select the contour of a sketch and avoid the things inside for once . ” Our intent with the object select technique was to explore an alternative that would suit sketching applications by grouping strokes into objects that could be interpreted , abstracted , and changed . While this technique could potentially provide access to semantic structures in the sketch , the problems seemed to stem from the distance metric for stroke clustering . This metric made it sensitive to the context in which the sketch was created , but was not ﬂexible enough to accommodate the participants’ mental “chunking” of the strokes . On the other hand , unpredictability sometimes led to serendipitous discoveries , as a participant observed , “ although sometime [ sic ] the selection wasn’t your original idea , it may inspire you with other ideas that would also work . ” Further analysis with different clustering techniques is needed to determine which approaches can ﬂexibly support the way designers mentally chunk parts of sketches . 6 . 3 Design Implications Existing tools for modiﬁcation and merging , as stated earlier , typ - ically do not differentiate between sketches and images . Drafting technical drawing tools do a better job of approaching drawings as collections of strokes and symbols , but are aided by the rigid syn - tactic elements of such drawings . The “thinking sketch” created by the designer as a nonverbal accompaniment to their thought process is very different from the “prescriptive sketch” of the draftsman [ 6 ] . We sought to understand how parts of the thinking sketch can be abstracted and re - represented to support design exploration . The object - based selection technique , though unpopular , opens up possibilities for grouping strokes that might be amenable to ab - straction . It is likely that a designer , when creating a thinking sketch , sketches the rough idea ﬁrst , and ﬁlls in details later . Appropriate clustering metrics based on spatial and temporal proximity may help separate the rough idea from the detail , something that may not be possible through lasso selection or even manual grouping . On the other hand , for reusing an idea in the same , or a related context , simple lasso selection may sufﬁce . There is thus a need for more ﬂexible means to cluster strokes , using different distance metrics , allow the user to intervene and guide the clustering process , and adapt to different design scenarios . This can begin with incorpo - rating the ability to switch between object and freeform selection , or incorporate a hybrid : use freeform selection to deﬁne an area of interest , and use object selection to abstract out the ideas in this area . Further work is needed on more open - ended studies using combinations of distance metrics for clustering could hold the key to an appropriate mechanism for selection and composition . 7 L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK This study is not intended to be an exhaustive exploration of the design space of sketch - merging in creative design . We restricted the scope of our work to stroke - based sketches as the only form of design output . While the literature suggests such sketches as the primary communication medium in collaborative design [ 21 ] , there are other media such as text , annotations , and scrapbooks where our work cannot be applied . Additionally , the close interaction between physical and cognitive operations complicates the understanding of the merge process . However , we contribute empirically by reveal - ing the affordances of different physical operations and patterns of cognitive operations in different scenarios of sketch merging . Our interaction design was guided by discussions with our pro - fessional design collaborators , and is not an attempt to reach an optimal layout , visual representation , and workﬂow . As we mention in our discussion on selection operations , the object - select tech - nique has the potential to better tune selection operations to how designers “chunk” sketches . Future research is need to explore a more exhaustive study of clustering techniques to achieve a grouping that mimics this chunking . For example , we are exploring hybrid sketch summarization methods that attempt to combine both tempo - ral and spatial clustering . Finally , because sketching is a meaningful way for designers to engage in dialogue with their ideas , we intend to study how selection and transformation operations suggest new interpretations to the designer . 8 C ONCLUSION In this paper , we studied the physical and cognitive operations in - volved in merging parts of existing sketches into a new sketch . In ad - dition to the physical operations of selection and transformation , we identiﬁed four cognitive operations : reuse , refactor , repurpose and reinterpret that inﬂuence divergent thinking . We studied selection operations through a freeform selection tool and an object - select tool that uses a stroke - level aggregation method that combines strokes based on their temporal order . To study the effects of these factors on divergent thinking , we conducted a user study where participants were given a set of design tasks that involved functional and ex - ploratory merge tasks . We scored the merged sketches through a crowdsourced survey , and coded each sketch with the cognitive oper - ations used . Though the freeform selection technique was preferred by participants , we also identiﬁed potential uses of object selection , with an appropriate clustering metric . The scores from the survey for sketches produced in exploratory merge tasks were negatively correlated with the number of reuse operations , and positively corre - lated with the number of reinterpret operations . These results show that these cognitive operations determine the extent of exploration of the design space . We close with suggestions on further analyses and outline implications of our ﬁndings for HCI in sketching . A CKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank Joran Booth and Lauren Kretsch for creating the source sketches for the user study . This work is supported by National Science Foundation grants IIS - 1227639 & IIS - 1422341 . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] S . K . Badam , S . Chandrasegaran , N . Elmqvist , and K . Ramani . Tracing and sketching performance using blunt - tipped styli on direct - touch tablets . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces , pp . 193 – 200 , 2014 . [ 2 ] M . A . Boden . Dimensions of creativity . MIT Press , 1996 . [ 3 ] B . Buxton . Sketching User Experiences : Getting the Design Right and the Right Design . Morgan Kaufmann , 2007 . [ 4 ] Q . Chen , J . Grundy , and J . Hosking . An e - whiteboard application to support early design - stage sketching of UML diagrams . In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Human Centric Computing Languages and Environments , pp . 219 – 226 , 2003 . [ 5 ] J . Dorsey , S . Xu , G . Smedresman , H . Rushmeier , and L . McMillan . The mental canvas : A tool for conceptual architectural design and analysis . In Proceedings of the Paciﬁc Conference on Computer Graphics and Applications , pp . 201 – 210 , 2007 . [ 6 ] E . S . Ferguson . Engineering and the Mind’s Eye . MIT press , 1994 . [ 7 ] M . Gantt and B . A . Nardi . Gardeners and gurus : patterns of cooperation among cad users . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 107 – 117 , 1992 . [ 8 ] F . Geyer , J . Budzinski , and H . Reiterer . IdeaVis : a hybrid workspace and interactive visualization for paper - based collaborative sketch - ing sessions . In Proceedings of the Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction , pp . 331 – 340 , 2012 . [ 9 ] A . K . Goel and S . R . Bhatta . Use of design patterns in analogy - based design . Advanced Engineering Informatics , 18 ( 2 ) : 85 – 94 , 2004 . [ 10 ] A . K . Goel and S . Craw . Design , innovation and case - based reasoning . The Knowledge Engineering Review , 20 ( 03 ) : 271 – 276 , 2005 . [ 11 ] V . Goel . Sketches of thought . MIT Press , 1995 . [ 12 ] G . Goldschmidt . The dialectics of sketching . Creativity Research Journal , 4 ( 2 ) : 123 – 143 , 1991 . [ 13 ] J . Hailpern , E . Hinterbichler , C . Leppert , D . Cook , and B . P . Bailey . TEAM STORM : demonstrating an interaction model for working with multiple ideas during creative group work . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Creativity & Cognition , pp . 193 – 202 , 2007 . [ 14 ] D . G . Jansson and S . M . Smith . Design ﬁxation . Design studies , 12 ( 1 ) : 3 – 11 , 1991 . [ 15 ] I . Jowers and C . Earl . Shape interpretation with design computing . In J . Gero , ed . , Design Computing and Cognition’12 , pp . 343 – 360 . 2014 . [ 16 ] L . B . Kara and K . Shimada . Supporting early styling design of auto - mobiles using sketch - based 3D shape construction . Computer - Aided Design & Applications , 5 ( 6 ) : 867—876 , 2008 . [ 17 ] N . Kelly and J . S . Gero . Generate and situated transformation as a paradigm for models of computational creativity . International Journal of Design Creativity and Innovation , pp . 1 – 19 , 2016 . [ 18 ] M . Knobel and C . Lankshear . Remix : The art and craft of endless hybridization . Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy , 52 ( 1 ) : 22 – 33 , 2008 . [ 19 ] J . Kolko . Abductive thinking and sensemaking : The drivers of design synthesis . Design Issues , 26 ( 1 ) : 15 – 28 , 2010 . [ 20 ] R . H . McKim . Experiences in Visual Thinking . Brooks / Cole Pub . Co , Monterey , CA , 1972 . [ 21 ] F . L . McKoy , N . Vargas - Hern´andez , J . D . Summers , and J . J . Shah . Inﬂuence of design representation on effectiveness of idea generation . In Proceedings of the ASME Design Engineering Technical Conference , pp . 39 – 48 , 2001 . [ 22 ] M . Michalko . Thinkertoys : A Handbook of Creative - Thinking Tech - niques . Ten Speed Press , 2010 . [ 23 ] W . J . Mitchell . A computational view of design creativity . Modeling Creativity and Knowledge - Base Creative Design , pp . 25 – 42 , 1993 . [ 24 ] L . Oehlberg , W . Willett , and W . E . Mackay . Patterns of physical design remixing in online maker communities . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 639 – 648 , 2015 . [ 25 ] M . Prats , S . Lim , I . Jowers , S . W . Garner , and S . Chase . Transforming shape in design : observations from studies of sketching . Design Studies , 30 ( 5 ) : 503 – 520 , 2009 . [ 26 ] S . Pugh . Concept selection : a method that works . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Engineering Design , pp . 497 – 506 , 1981 . [ 27 ] M . Resnick , B . Myers , K . Nakakoji , B . Shneiderman , R . Pausch , T . Selker , and M . Eisenberg . Design principles for tools to support creative thinking . In NSF Workshop Report on Creativity Support Tools . , pp . 25 – 35 . 2005 . [ 28 ] T . Salvador , J . Scholtz , and J . Larson . The Denver model for groupware design . SIGCHI Bulletin , 28 ( 1 ) : 52 – 58 , 1996 . [ 29 ] U . B . Sangiorgi , F . Beuvens , and J . Vanderdonckt . User interface design by collaborative sketching . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems , pp . 378 – 387 , 2012 . [ 30 ] E . Saund , J . Mahoney , D . Fleet , D . Larner , and E . Lank . Perceptual organization as a foundation for intelligent sketch editing . In AAAI Spring Symposium on Sketch Understanding , pp . 118 – 125 , 2002 . [ 31 ] E . Saund and T . P . Moran . A perceptually - supported sketch editor . In Proceedings of the ACM symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , pp . 175 – 184 , 1994 . [ 32 ] J . J . Shah , N . Vargas - Hernandez , J . D . Summers , and S . Kulkarni . Collaborative sketching ( c - sketch ) – an idea generation technique for engineering design . Creative Behavior , 35 ( 3 ) : 168 – 198 , 2001 . [ 33 ] M . Suwa , B . Tversky , J . Gero , and T . Purcell . Seeing into sketches : Regrouping parts encourages new interpretations . In Visual and Spatial Reasoning in Design , pp . 207 – 219 . 2001 . [ 34 ] D . G . Ullman , S . Wood , and D . Craig . The importance of drawing in the mechanical design process . Computers & Graphics , 14 ( 2 ) : 263 – 274 , 1990 . [ 35 ] A . B . VanGundy . Techniques of structured problem solving . Springer , 1988 . [ 36 ] S . Zabramski and S . Neelakannan . Paper equals screen : a comparison of a pen - based ﬁgural creativity test in computerized and paper form . In Proceedings of the Conference on Creativity and Innovation in Design , pp . 47 – 50 , 2011 . [ 37 ] D . Zahner , J . V . Nickerson , B . Tversky , J . E . Corter , and J . Ma . A ﬁx for ﬁxation ? rerepresenting and abstracting as creative processes in the design of information systems . Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , 24 ( 02 ) : 231 – 244 , 2010 . [ 38 ] Z . Zhao , S . K . Badam , S . Chandrasegaran , D . G . Park , N . Elmqvist , L . Kisselburgh , and K . Ramani . skWiki : A multimedia sketching sys - tem for collaborative creativity . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1235 – 1244 , 2014 . [ 39 ] Z . Zhao , W . Benjamin , N . Elmqvist , and K . Ramani . Sketcholution : Interaction histories for sketching . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 82 : 11 – 20 , 2015 .