Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 12 , 1131 – 1145 , April 2001 Coﬁlin Phosphorylation by Protein Kinase Testicular Protein Kinase 1 and Its Role in Integrin - mediated Actin Reorganization and Focal Adhesion Formation Jiro Toshima , * † Junko Y . Toshima , * Toru Amano , * † Neng Yang , †‡ Shuh Narumiya , § and Kensaku Mizuno * † zz * Biological Institute , Graduate School of Science , Tohoku University , Sendai 980 - 8578 , Japan ; † Department of Biology , Kyushu University Graduate School of Science , Fukuoka 812 - 8581 , Japan ; and § Department of Pharmacology , Kyoto University Faculty of Medicine , Kyoto 606 - 8315 , Japan Submitted June 22 , 2000 ; Revised January 24 , 2001 ; Accepted February 15 , 2001 Monitoring Editor : Tony Hunter Testicular protein kinase 1 ( TESK1 ) is a serine / threonine kinase with a structure composed of a kinase domain related to those of LIM - kinases and a unique C - terminal proline - rich domain . Like LIM - kinases , TESK1 phosphorylated coﬁlin speciﬁcally at Ser - 3 , both in vitro and in vivo . When expressed in HeLa cells , TESK1 stimulated the formation of actin stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions . In contrast to LIM - kinases , the kinase activity of TESK1 was not enhanced by Rho - associated kinase ( ROCK ) or p21 - activated kinase , indicating that TESK1 is not their downstream effector . Both the kinase activity of TESK1 and the level of coﬁlin phosphorylation increased by plating cells on ﬁbronectin . Y - 27632 , a speciﬁc inhibitor of ROCK , inhibited LIM - kinase - induced coﬁlin phosphorylation but did not affect ﬁbronectin - induced or TESK1 - induced coﬁlin phosphorylation in HeLa cells . Expression of a kinase - negative TESK1 suppressed coﬁlin phosphorylation and formation of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions induced in cells plated on ﬁbronectin . These results suggest that TESK1 functions downstream of integrins and plays a key role in integrin - mediated actin reorganization , presumably through phosphorylating and inactivating coﬁlin . We propose that TESK1 and LIM - kinases commonly phosphorylate coﬁlin but are regulated in different ways and play distinct roles in actin reorganization in living cells . INTRODUCTION Actin cytoskeletal reorganization plays important roles in many basic cell activities , including cell movement , adhe - sion , morphogenesis , and cytokinesis . Actin reorganization is often triggered in response to extracellular stimuli , such as binding of growth factors and chemoattractants to cell sur - face receptors and ECM proteins to integrin receptors . To better understand the mechanisms of stimulus - induced ac - tin reorganization , it is important to elucidate the signaling pathways that transduce external stimuli to the machinery controlling the dynamics and organization of actin ﬁla - ments . Actin ﬁlament dynamics , which underlie the actin reorga - nization , are coordinately regulated by several types of ac - tin - binding proteins ( Chen et al . , 2000 ) . Among them , coﬁlin and its close relative , actin - depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) , bind to actin monomers and ﬁlaments and have the poten - tial to depolymerize and sever actin ﬁlaments ; hence they seem to play an essential role in the rapid turnover of actin ﬁlaments ( Moon and Drubin , 1995 ; Bamburg et al . , 1999 ) . The activity of coﬁlin is reversibly regulated by phosphory - lation and dephosphorylation at Ser - 3 , with the phosphory - lated form being inactive ( Agnew et al . , 1995 ; Moriyama et al . , 1996 ) . Coﬁlin phosphorylation is stimulated by lysophos - phatidic acid in N1E - 115 neuroblastoma cells ( Maekawa et al . , 1999 ) , whereas it is down - regulated by thrombin in plate - lets , chemoattractants in neutrophils , and other stimuli ( Moon and Drubin , 1995 ) . We and other investigators pro - vided evidence that LIM - kinase 1 ( LIMK1 ) and LIM - kinase 2 ( LIMK2 ) ( Mizuno et al . , 1994 ; Okano et al . , 1995 ) phosphor - ylate coﬁlin speciﬁcally at Ser - 3 , both in vitro and in vivo , and regulate actin cytoskeletal reorganization by phosphor - ‡ Present address : Department of Cell Biology , The Scripps Re - search Institute , 10550 North Torrey Pines Road , La Jolla , CA 92037 . uu Correspondingauthor . E - mailaddress : kmizuno @ biology . tohoku . ac . jp . Abbreviations used : ADF , actin depolymerizing factor ; GFP , green ﬂuorescence protein ; LIMK1 , LIM - kinase 1 ; LIMK2 , LIM - kinase 2 ; PAK , p21 - activated kinase ; ROCK , Rho - associated coiled - coil – forming protein kinase ; TESK1 , testicular protein ki - nase 1 © 2001 by The American Society for Cell Biology 1131 ylating and inactivating coﬁlin ( Arber et al . , 1998 ; Yang et al . , 1998 ) . LIM - kinases are activated in cultured cells by Rho family small GTPases , Rac , Rho , and Cdc42 , albeit the acti - vation is indirect ( Arber et al . , 1998 ; Yang et al . , 1998 ; Sumi et al . , 1999 ) . Furthermore , serine / threonine kinases , p21 - acti - vated kinase ( PAK ) , and Rho - associated kinase ( ROCK ) , which are downstream effectors of Rac and Rho , respec - tively , directly phosphorylate a threonine residue ( Thr - 508 ) within the activation loop in the kinase domain of LIMK1 and signiﬁcantly enhance the kinase activity ( Edwards et al . , 1999 ; Maekawa et al . , 1999 ; Ohashi et al . , 2000 ; Amano et al . , 2001 ) . These observations suggest that both Rac - PAK and Rho - ROCK signaling pathways can activate LIM - kinases , an event that in turn induces phosphorylation and inactivation of coﬁlin . Considering the signiﬁcant role of coﬁlin in actin ﬁlament dynamics and its predicted important functions in diverse cell activities , it is conceivable that protein kinases other than LIM - kinases are involved in coﬁlin phosphoryla - tion and play roles in signaling pathways distinct from those of LIM - kinases . Testicular protein kinase 1 ( TESK1 ) is a protein kinase with a unique structure composed of an N - terminal protein kinase domain and a C - terminal proline - rich domain ( Toshima et al . , 1995 ) . TESK1 was named after its higher expression in the testis ( Toshima et al . , 1995 , 1998 ) , but we recently found its expression in various tissues and cell lines , albeit at a relatively low level ; hence we assumed that TESK1 has general cellular functions rather than a speciﬁc function in the testis ( Toshima et al . , 1999 ) . The protein kinase domain of TESK1 is closely related to those of LIM - kinases , with ; 50 % amino acid identity , although their overall domain structures do differ ( Toshima et al . , 1995 ) . Phylogenetic anal - ysis of the protein kinase domains further revealed that TESK1 and LIM - kinases constitute a novel subfamily within a serine / threonine kinase family ( Toshima et al . , 1995 ) . These observations led to the notion that TESK1 can phos - phorylate coﬁlin / ADF family proteins and that it plays a role in the actin reorganization , as do LIM - kinases . We now provide evidence that TESK1 phosphorylates coﬁlin and stimulates the formation of actin stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions . In contrast to LIM - kinases , the kinase activ - ity of TESK1 is not stimulated by either ROCK or PAK but can be stimulated by plating cells on a ﬁbronectin - coated surface . We propose that TESK1 has a role in integrin - mediated actin cytoskeletal reorganization through the phosphorylation of coﬁlin . MATERIALS AND METHODS Plasmid Construction Expression plasmids coding for rat TESK1 , TESK1 ( D170A ) , and C - terminally Myc epitope - tagged human LIMK2 in pUC - SR a vector and human LIMK1 in pUcD2 - SR a vector were constructed , as de - scribed ( Okano et al . , 1995 ; Toshima et al . , 1999 ; Ohashi et al . , 2000 ) . Expression plasmids coding for Myc epitope - tagged human ROCK D 3 and ROCK ( KD - IA ) in pCAG vector were constructed , as described ( Ishizaki et al . , 1997 ) . Expression plasmid coding for N - terminally Myc epitope - tagged TESK1 was constructed by inserting an Nco I – Not I fragment of rat TESK1 cDNA ( nucleotides 1129 – 3600 ) into the Not I site of pCAG - Myc - stop vector containing the Myc epitope sequence ( EQKLISEEDL ) and three frame stop codons ( Ish - izaki et al . , 1997 ) . Expression plasmids coding for Myc - tagged PAK D N were constructed by inserting PCR - ampliﬁed human PAK3 fragment ( corresponding to amino acid residues 161 – 544 ) into Not I site of pCAG - Myc - stop vector ( Frost et al . , 1998 ) . Expression plas - mid ( pEGFP - C1 ) coding for green ﬂuorescence protein ( GFP ) was purchased from Clontech ( Cambridge , UK ) . Expression plasmid coding for C3 exoenzyme was constructed into pEF - BOS vector . Expression plasmids coding for N - terminally hemagglutinin ( HA ) epitope ( YPYDVPDYAGSRS ) - tagged mouse coﬁlin and its S3A mu - tant , and plasmids for C - terminally Sky - peptide ( QQGLLPHSSC ) - tagged human ADF and its S3A mutant , were constructed by in - serting PCR - ampliﬁed coﬁlin and ADF cDNAs into the Bgl II site of pcDL - SR a vector ( Moriyama et al . , 1996 ; Yang et al . , 1998 ) . The authenticity of plasmids was veriﬁed by nucleotide sequencing with a 373A DNA sequencer ( PE Biosystems , Tokyo , Japan ) . Antibodies An antibody speciﬁc to Ser - 3 - phosphorylated coﬁlin ( P - coﬁlin ) was prepared by immunizing rabbits with keyhole lympet hemocyanin conjugated with the phosphopeptide acetyl - A ( pS ) GVAVSDC , which was synthesized by Dr . S . Aimoto ( Osaka University ) . The antiserum was puriﬁed by the antigenic peptide - conjugated col - umn . Anticoﬁlin monoclonal antibody MAB - 22 was provided from Dr . T . Obinata ( Chiba University ) ( Abe et al . , 1989 ) . Rabbit anti - TESK1 antibody ( TK - C21 ) was raised against the C - terminal peptide of rat TESK1 , as described ( Toshima et al . , 1998 ) . Rabbit anti - LIMK1 antibody ( C - 10 ) was raised against the C - terminal peptide of human LIMK1 , as described ( Okano et al . , 1995 ) . They were puriﬁed by antigenic peptide - conjugated columns , as described ( Toshima et al . , 1995 ) . Rabbit anti - Sky antibody was prepared , as described ( Ohashi et al . , 1995 ) . Anti - Myc epitope monoclonal antibody ( 9E10 ) and anti - HA epitope monoclonal antibody ( 12CA5 ) were purchased from Roche Diagnostics ( Tokyo , Japan ) . Anti - His - tag polyclonal antibody and anti - vinculin monoclonal antibody ( hVIN - 1 ) were purchased from MBL ( Nagoya , Japan ) and Sigma ( St . Louis , MO ) , respectively . To determine the speciﬁcity of anti - P - coﬁlin antibody , two - dimensional gel electrophoresis was performed , as described ( Agnew et al . , 1995 ) . C - terminally ( His ) 6 - tagged coﬁlin and ADF were expressed in COS - 7 cells , puriﬁed with Ni - NTA agarose , in - cubated for 60 min at 37°C with 40 U of calf intestinal phosphatase ( CIP ) in 50 mM Tris - HCl ( pH 8 . 0 ) buffer containing 100 mM NaCl and 10 mM MgCl 2 , and then subjected to in vitro kinase reaction with TESK1 . Cell Culture and Transfection HeLa and COS - 7 cells were obtained from American Type Culture Collection . These cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum in a 5 % CO 2 incubator at 37°C . For transfection , 5 3 10 5 cells were grown in 100 - mm culture dishes and transfected with 15 m g of plasmid DNA / 100 - mm dish , following the modiﬁed calcium phosphate method ( Chen and Okayama , 1987 ) or Lipo - fectamine ( Life Technologies - BRL , Gaithersburg , MD ) method . HeLa cells stably expressing TESK1 or TESK1 ( D170A ) ( HeLa / TESK1 or HeLa / TESK1 [ DA ] cells ) were isolated by transfection with pUcD2 - SR a plasmids coding for TESK1 or TESK1 ( D170A ) and selection with 400 m g / ml G418 ( Sigma ) . Cell Staining Cells were plated on 24 - mm glass coverslips and transfected with the plasmid DNA by the Lipofectamine ( Life Technologies - BRL ) method . After 24 h , cells were ﬁxed in 4 % formaldehyde in phos - phate buffer ( 80 mM K 2 HPO 4 , 20 mM KH 2 PO 4 , pH 7 . 4 ) for 15 min and permeabilized in 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 in PBS containing 2 % fetal calf serum . After blocking with PBS containing 2 % fetal calf serum for 30 min , cells were incubated with a primary antibody for 2 h at room temperature . After washing with PBS containing 2 % fetal calf serum for 15 min , cells were incubated with a ﬂuorescein - isothio - cyanate – labeled anti - rabbit IgG antibody ( Chemicon , Temecula , J . Toshima et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 1132 CA ) or rhodamine - labeled anti - mouse IgG antibody ( Chemicon ) for 1 h at room temperature . Cells were also stained for F - actin with rhodamine - conjugated phalloidin ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) . Cells were photographed on a DMLB ﬂuorescence microscope ( Leica Microsystems , Tokyo , Japan ) . Immunoprecipitation Cells were washed three times with ice - cold PBS , suspended in RIPA buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM dithio - threitol , 10 % glycerol , 1 % NP - 40 , 1 % sodium deoxycholate , 0 . 1 % SDS , 1 mM PMSF , 10 m g / ml leupeptin ) , and incubated on ice for 30 min . After centrifugation , lysates were precleared with Protein A - Sepharose ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech , Tokyo , Japan ) ( 20 m l of 50 % slurry ) for 2 h at 4°C . The precleared supernatants were incu - bated with anti - TESK1 antibody ( TK - C21 ) , anti - LIMK1 antibody ( C - 10 ) or 9E10 anti - Myc monoclonal antibody , and Protein A - Sepha - rose ( 20 m l of 50 % slurry ) overnight at 4°C . After centrifugation , the immunoprecipitates were washed three times with wash buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , 0 . 5 % NP - 40 ) and used for in vitro kinase reaction and immunoblot analysis . Immunoblot Analysis For immunoblot analysis , cell lysates or immunoprecipitated pro - teins were separated on SDS - PAGE and transferred onto polyvinyli - dene diﬂuoride membranes ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) . The mem - brane was blocked overnight with 4 % nonfat dry milk in PBS containing 0 . 05 % Tween 20 and incubated for 2 h at room temper - ature with anti - TESK1 antibody ( TK - C21 ) , anti - LIMK1 antibody ( C - 10 ) , anti - P - coﬁlin antibody , or 9E10 anti - Myc epitope antibody diluted in PBS containing 1 % nonfat dry milk and 0 . 05 % Tween 20 . After washing in PBS containing 0 . 05 % Tween 20 , the membrane was incubated with horseradish peroxidase - conjugated donkey an - ti - rabbit IgG or sheep anti - mouse IgG ( Amersham Pharmacia Bio - tech ) . Immunoreactive protein bands were visualized by exposing the membrane for 10 s to 2 min to an ECL chemiluminescence reagent ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) . In Vitro Kinase Assay Immunoprecipitates were washed twice with kinase reaction buffer ( 50 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 2 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM dithiothreitol , 2 mM NaF , 1 mM sodium vanadate , 5 mM MnCl 2 , 5 mM MgCl 2 ) and incubated for 30 min at 30°C in 40 m l of kinase reaction buffer containing 10 m M ATP and 10 m Ci of [ g - 32 P ] ATP ( 3000 Ci / mmol ; Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) in the presence of 50 m g / ml ( His ) 6 - tagged coﬁlin , ADF , or their S3A mutants . ( His ) 6 - tagged coﬁlin , ADF , and their mutants were expressed in Escherichia coli and puriﬁed , as described ( Moriyama et al . , 1996 ) . The reaction mixture was solubilized in Laemmli’s sample buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 6 . 8 , 10 % glycerol , 1 mM dithiothreitol , 1 % SDS , 0 . 002 % bromophe - nol blue ) for 5 min at 95°C , and aliquots were separated on SDS - PAGE , using 15 and 9 % gels . Proteins were transferred onto poly - vinylidene diﬂuoride membranes ( Bio - Rad ) . The membrane from a 15 % gel was analyzed by autoradiography to measure 32 P - labeled coﬁlin or ADF , using the BAS1800 Bio - Image Analyzer ( Fuji Film , Tokyo , Japan ) and Amido - black staining . The membrane from the 9 % gel was analyzed by immunoblotting with 9E10 anti - Myc anti - body or anti - TESK1 antibody . In Vivo Kinase Assay In vivo kinase assay was performed using HA - tagged coﬁlin or ADF , as described ( Yang et al . , 1998 ) . COS - 7 cells were cotransfected with plasmid coding for HA - tagged coﬁlin , ADF , or S3A - coﬁlin , and plasmid for TESK1 . Cells were labeled in DMEM containing 500 m Ci / ml [ 32 P ] phosphoric acid for 4 h , washed three times with ice - cold PBS , and suspended in RIPA buffer . After incubation on ice for 1 h , lysates were precleared with Protein A - Sepharose ( 20 m l of 50 % slurry ) for 3 h at 4°C . The precleared supernatants were incu - bated with 12CA5 anti - HA - tag antibody ( Roche Diagnostics ) and Protein A - Sepharose ( 20 m l of 50 % slurry ) overnight at 4°C . After centrifugation , the immunoprecipitates were washed three times with wash buffer and subjected to SDS - PAGE in 15 and 9 % gels . Proteins were transferred onto polyvinylidene diﬂuoride mem - branes . The membrane from a 15 % gel was analyzed by autoradiog - raphy to measure 32 P - labeled coﬁlin or ADF , using the BAS1800 Bio - Image Analyzer ( Fuji Film ) and immunoblotting with 12CA5 anti - HA or anti - Sky - peptide antibody . The membrane from 9 % gel was analyzed by immunoblotting with anti - TESK1 antibody . Adhesion and Spreading Assay For cell adhesion assay , 35 - or 100 - mm culture dishes were coated overnight at 37°C with 20 m g / ml ﬁbronectin ( purchased from Sigma ) or 50 m g / ml poly - l - lysine ( Sigma ) in TBS buffer ( 25 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl ) and blocked with 1 % bovine serum albumin ( Fraction V , Sigma ) in TBS buffer before cells are plated . HeLa cells ( 3 3 10 6 cells ) cultured for 24 h in serum - free DMEM were trypsinized , suspended in 5 ml DMEM , then plated on ﬁ - bronectin - or poly - l - lysine – coated and bovine serum albumin - blocked 100 - mm dishes . After incubation for 0 – 60 min at 37°C , adherent cells were washed twice with cold PBS and lysed in RIPA buffer . Endogenous TESK1 and LIMK1 were immunoprecipitated from cell lysates , using anti - TESK1 ( TK - C21 ) or anti - LIMK1 anti - body ( C - 10 ) , and immunoprecipitates were subjected to in vitro kinase reaction . To determine the level of P - coﬁlin , cells were lysed with hot SDS buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 6 . 5 , 10 % glycerol , 2 % SDS , 2 % 2 - mercaptoethanol ) at 95°C for 5 min and sonicated . After cen - trifugation , supernatants were subjected to SDS - PAGE and ana - lyzed by immunoblotting with anti - P - coﬁlin antibody . For cell stain - ing , HeLa cells were transfected with plasmids coding for TESK1 or TESK1 ( D170A ) and cultured for 24 h in serum - free DMEM . Approx - imately 2 3 10 5 cells were trypsinized , suspended in 1 ml DMEM , and then replated on ﬁbronectin - coated 35 - mm dishes . After incu - bation for 90 min at 37°C , cells were washed twice with PBS , ﬁxed in 4 % formaldehyde in phosphate buffer , and costained with TK - C21 anti - TESK1 antibody and rhodamine - phalloidin or anti - vincu - lin antibody . RESULTS Expression of TESK1 Protein in Various Cell Lines We previously showed the expression of TESK1 mRNA in various tissues and cell lines , although the level of expres - sion is lower than that in the testis ( Toshima et al . , 1999 ) . To examine the expression of TESK1 protein in cell lines , lysates from various cell lines were subjected to immunoprecipita - tion and immunoblot analysis , using TK - C21 anti - TESK1 antibody . In our previous studies , we could not detect the expression of endogenous TESK1 protein in COS - 7 cell ly - sates , under conditions in which we used lysates from 5 3 10 5 COS - 7 cells ( Toshima et al . , 1995 , 1999 ) . In this study , we therefore used 10 times more cell lysates ( 5 3 10 6 cells ) , and the immunoblot membrane was exposed eightfold longer ( 2 min ) to the ECL detection reagent , compared with the con - ditions used in the previous studies . As shown in Figure 1A , the one major immunoreactive band migrating at ; 68 kDa , similar to the calculated mass for TESK1 protein , was de - tected in various cell lines , including COS - 7 cells , HeLa epithelial carcinoma cells , Rat1A and Swiss 3T3 ﬁbroblasts , Jurkat T cell leukemia , N1E - 115 neuroblastoma , and PC12 pheochromocytoma cells . This band was not detected when COS - 7 cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with preim - mune serum or with anti - TESK1 antibody preincubated Actin Reorganization by TESK1 Vol . 12 , April 2001 1133 with antigenic peptide ( Figure 1B ) , which suggests that the 68 - kDa band represents the endogenously expressed TESK1 protein . The wide expression of TESK1 mRNA and protein in various tissues and cell lines suggests general cellular functions of TESK1 . TESK1 Induces the Formation of Stress Fibers and Focal Adhesions LIM - kinases induce actin reorganization in cultured cells . Because the kinase domain of TESK1 is similar to those of LIM - kinases , we asked whether TESK1 can induce changes in actin organization . When HeLa cells were transfected with plasmids coding for TESK1 and then stained with rhodamine - phalloidin to visualize actin ﬁlaments , marked induction of actin stress ﬁbers was observed in TESK1 - transfected cells , compared with ﬁndings with TESK1 - non - transfected cells ( Figure 2A , top panels ) . In contrast , expres - sion of a kinase - inactive mutant of TESK1 , TESK1 ( D170A ) , in which the presumptive catalytic residue Asp - 170 is re - placed by alanine , failed to induce stress ﬁbers and seemed to partially reduce naturally occurring stress ﬁbers ( Figure 2A , middle panels ) . These results suggest that TESK1 can induce the formation of actin stress ﬁbers , the function of which depends on its kinase catalytic activity . As reported ( Yang et al . , 1998 ) , expression of LIMK1 induced the actin reorganization in HeLa cells , but the morphology of poly - merized actin structures induced by LIMK1 was distinct from that induced by TESK1 ; in most of the LIMK1 - express - ing cells , actin ﬁlaments accumulated in the cell periphery ( Figure 2A , bottom panels ) . Thus , TESK1 seems to play a role distinct from that of LIMK1 in actin reorganization . In addition , we observed that both TESK1 and its kinase - inac - tive mutant expressed in HeLa cells were localized diffusely in the cytoplasm , with dense staining at the perinuclear region ; the pattern was distinct from that of LIMK1 , which was enriched in the region of polymerized actin at the cell periphery ( Figure 2A ) . The formation of stress ﬁbers is usually accompanied by assembly of focal adhesions at cell margins . To determine whether TESK1 would induce focal adhesions , we trans - fected the TESK1 plasmid into HeLa cells , and the formation of focal adhesions was visualized by immunostaining vin - culin , a major component of focal adhesions . Expression of TESK1 signiﬁcantly induced the formation of focal adhe - sions , because vinculin staining was speciﬁcally enhanced at the margins of TESK1 - expressing cells ( Figure 2B , top pan - els ) . In contrast , expression of a kinase - inactive TESK1 ( D170A ) failed to induce focal adhesions ( Figure 2B , bottom panels ) . These ﬁndings suggest that TESK1 plays a role in the formation of actin stress ﬁbers and focal adhe - sions , both of which depend on its protein kinase activity . TESK1 Phosphorylates Coﬁlin and ADF In Vitro and In Vivo To elucidate the mechanism by which TESK1 induces stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions , we searched for the kinase sub - strate ( s ) for TESK1 . Structural similarity of the kinase do - mains of TESK1 and LIM - kinases suggests that the cellular substrate ( s ) of these kinases may be similar or even identi - cal . Because LIM - kinases phosphorylate coﬁlin speciﬁcally at Ser - 3 , the site of its inactivation , we examined whether TESK1 could phosphorylate coﬁlin in vitro and in vivo . Wild - type TESK1 and its kinase - inactive D170A mutant were expressed in COS - 7 cells , immunoprecipitated , and subjected to in vitro kinase reaction , using recombinant ( His ) 6 - tagged coﬁlin as a substrate . As shown in Figure 3A , wild - type TESK1 phosphorylated wild - type coﬁlin , but not S3A - coﬁlin , in which Ser - 3 is replaced by alanine . TESK1 ( D170A ) did not phosphorylate either one . These re - sults suggest that TESK1 phosphorylates coﬁlin speciﬁcally at Ser - 3 in vitro . We also examined the kinase activity of TESK1 toward ADF , a protein closely related to coﬁlin . TESK1 phosphorylated ADF to an extent similar to that seen with coﬁlin , but not its S3A mutant ( Figure 3A ) . Accord - ingly , TESK1 phosphorylates both coﬁlin and ADF speciﬁ - cally at Ser - 3 . We next asked whether TESK1 could phosphorylate coﬁ - lin and ADF in cultured cells . HA - tagged coﬁlin or its S3A mutant was expressed with wild - type or the kinase - inactive form of TESK1 in COS - 7 cells , and then the cells were labeled with [ 32 P ] orthophosphate . 32 P - incorporation into co - ﬁlin was evident when coexpressed with wild - type TESK1 Figure 1 . ( A ) Immunoblot analysis of en - dogenous TESK1 protein expressed in var - ious cell lines . Lysates prepared from ap - proximately 5 3 10 6 cells of each cell line were immunoprecipitated with anti - TESK1 antibody ( TK - C21 ) , run on SDS - PAGE , and immunoblotted with the same antibody . To detect endogenous TESK1 protein , the im - munoblot membrane was exposed for 2 min in an ECL detection system . ( B ) Cell lysates of COS - 7 cells were immunoprecipi - tated with an immunoglobulin G fraction of preimmune serum ( Pre ) or anti - TESK1 an - tibody ( T ) and immunoblotted with anti - TESK1 antibody . In the third lane , anti - TESK1 antibody was preincubated with excess amounts of antigenic C21 peptide . Positions of molecular size markers are in - dicated on the left . IgH , immunoglobulin heavy chain ; IP , immunoprecipitation . J . Toshima et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 1134 but not with TESK1 ( D170A ) ( Figure 3B , left panel ) . 32 P - incorporation into S3A - coﬁlin was nil by coexpression with either TESK1 or TESK1 ( D170A ) . In a similar manner , we observed 32 P - incorporation into wild - type ADF but not into its S3A mutant , when they were coexpressed with TESK1 ( Figure 3B , right panel ) . Thus TESK1 can phosphorylate coﬁlin and ADF speciﬁcally at Ser - 3 in vivo as well as in vitro . Coﬁlin and S3A - coﬁlin , when expressed in HeLa cells , induced marked decrease in rhodamine - phalloidin staining , which was caused by the actin - binding and - depolymerizing activity of coﬁlin ( Figure 3C , left panels ) . When TESK1 was coexpressed with coﬁlin , the decrease in phalloidin staining induced by coﬁlin was reversed , and phalloidin staining of actin ﬁlaments was observed ( Figure 3C , top right panel ) . In contrast , the decrease in phalloidin staining induced by nonphosphorylatable S3A - coﬁlin was not affected by coex - pression with TESK1 ( Figure 3C , bottom - right panels ) . Co - expression with a kinase - inactive TESK1 ( D170A ) did not reverse the coﬁlin - induced loss of phalloidin staining ( our unpublished results ) . These results further support the idea that TESK1 , like LIM - kinases , can phosphorylate coﬁlin at Ser - 3 and thereby inhibit the actin binding / depolymerizing activity of coﬁlin in cultured cells . Effects of ROCK and PAK on the Kinase Activity of TESK1 Rho and Rac regulate actin reorganization : Rho induces actin stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions , whereas Rac induces lamellipodia ( Narumiya et al . , 1997 ; Hall , 1998 ) . ROCK and PAK , downstream effectors of Rho and Rac , respectively , directly phosphorylate and activate LIM - kinases . Because TESK1 induces stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions , this kinase may act as a downstream effector of Rho and ROCK . We therefore tested the effect of Rho - ROCK pathway activation on the kinase activity of TESK1 . When TESK1 was coex - pressed in COS - 7 cells with either an active form of Rho ( RhoV14 ) or an active form of ROCK ( ROCK D 3 ) , no increase in the kinase activity of TESK1 was observed ( our unpub - lished results ) . This ﬁnding is in contrast to cases of LIM - kinases , the kinase activities of which were increased by coexpression with ROCK D 3 or RhoV14 ( Maekawa et al . , 1999 ; Sumi et al . , 1999 ; Ohashi et al . , 2000 ; Amano et al . , 2001 ) . The kinase activity of TESK1 was not affected when it was coexpressed with an active form of Rac ( RacV12 ) or Cdc42 ( Cdc42V12 ) ( our unpublished results ) . In addition , expres - sion of a kinase - inactive mutant TESK1 ( D170A ) had no ap - parent effect on RhoV14 - or ROCK D 3 - induced stress ﬁber formation or RacV12 - induced lamellipodium formation ( our unpublished results ) . In vitro kinase reaction further re - vealed that the kinase activity of TESK1 was not affected by treatment with either ROCK D 3 or an active form of PAK ( PAK D N ) , whereas the kinase activity of LIMK2 was signif - icantly enhanced by ROCK D 3 or PAK D N ( Figure 4 ) . It is noted that TESK1 and TESK1 ( D170A ) were evidently phos - phorylated by PAK D N ( Figure 4B , third panel ) , but the physiological meaning of this phosphorylation remains to be determined . Taken together , these results suggest that in contrast to LIM - kinases , TESK1 is not a downstream effector of either ROCK or PAK . Effects of Rho - ROCK Signaling on TESK1 - induced Stress Fiber and Focal Adhesion Formation To further investigate the relationship between the Rho - ROCK signaling and TESK1 - induced actin stress ﬁbers , we examined the effects of Rho - ROCK inhibitors on TESK1 - Figure 2 . Stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions induced by TESK1 . ( A ) Actin organization induced by TESK1 and LIMK1 . HeLa cells trans - fected with plasmids encoding TESK1 , TESK1 ( D170A ) , or LIMK1 were stained with anti - TESK1 or anti - LIMK1 antibody ( left ) and rhodamine - labeled phalloidin for F - actin ( right ) . ( B ) Focal adhesions induced by TESK1 . HeLa cells transfected with plasmids encoding TESK1 or TESK1 ( D170A ) were stained with anti - TESK1 ( left ) and anti - vinculin antibody ( right ) . Arrowheads indicate cells expressing TESK1 , TESK1 ( D170A ) , or LIMK1 . Bar , 15 m m . Actin Reorganization by TESK1 Vol . 12 , April 2001 1135 induced stress ﬁbers . As shown in Figure 5A , TESK1 - in - duced stress ﬁbers were repressed by coexpression with C3 exoenzyme , a botulinum toxin that speciﬁcally inactivates Rho by ADP - ribosylation ( Sekine et al . , 1989 ) , or ROCK ( KD - IA ) , a dominant - negative mutant of ROCK ( Ishizaki et al . , 1997 ) . Focal adhesions induced by TESK1 were also re - pressed by coexpression with C3 or ROCK ( KD - IA ) ( our unpublished results ) . Thus , TESK1 , albeit not a direct target of ROCK , does require activity of the Rho - ROCK signaling pathway for the formation of stress ﬁbers and focal adhe - sions . In addition , we also found that coexpression of ROCK ( KD - IA ) with TESK1 ( D170A ) in HeLa cells induced an almost complete loss of actin ﬁlaments and remarkable changes in cell morphology ( cell shrinkage leaving process - like structures ) ( Figure 5B ) . Although ROCK ( KD - IA ) alone also induced such shrinking phenotype in 20 % of the trans - fected cells , coexpression with TESK1 ( D170A ) signiﬁcantly augmented the ratio of shrinking cells to 58 % ( Figure 5C ) . On the other hand , coexpression of a kinase - inactive mutant of LIMK1 , LIMK1 ( D460A ) , had no apparent effect , which further suggests that LIMK1 , but not TESK1 , acts as a down - stream effector of ROCK and that LIMK1 and TESK1 play distinct roles in the organization of actin ﬁlaments and cell morphology . Coexpression of wild - type TESK1 with ROCK ( KD - IA ) reduced the ratio of shrinking cells . These results suggest that both TESK1 and ROCK have an impor - tant role in maintaining normal cell morphology and adhe - sion by supporting the formation of actin stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions . We next investigated the effects of Y - 27632 , a speciﬁc inhibitor of ROCK ( Uehata et al . , 1997 ) , on TESK1 - induced actin reorganization , to determine the short - term effects of ROCK inhibition . As reported ( Uehata et al . , 1997 ) , stress ﬁbers induced by RhoV14 were suppressed by a 30 min treatment of cells with Y - 27632 . Similarly , stress ﬁbers in TESK1 - transfected cells were reduced by treatment with Y - 27632 , but interestingly most of the TESK1 - expressing cells showed polymerized actin structures and vinculin as - semblies at cell peripheries ( Figure 6 , A and B ) . In TESK1 ( D170A ) - expressing cells , no such structure but rather a signiﬁcant loss of actin ﬁlaments was observed ( Figure Figure 3 . In vitro and in vivo phos - phorylation of coﬁlin and ADF by TESK1 . ( A ) In vitro kinase assay . ( His ) 6 - tagged wild - type ( WT ) coﬁlin , ADF , or their S3A mutants were in - cubated with [ g - 32 P ] ATP and Myc - tagged wild - type ( WT ) TESK1 or its D170A mutant ( DA ) prepared from COS - 7 cells , separated on SDS - PAGE , and analyzed using autora - diography , Amido - black staining , and immunoblotting with anti - Myc antibody . ( B ) In vivo kinase assay . Plasmids coding for either HA - tagged coﬁlin ( WT ) , its S3A mutant , Sky - tagged ADF ( WT ) , or its S3A mutant were cotransfected into COS - 7 cells with plasmids for either TESK1 ( WT ) or TESK1 ( D170A ) ( DA ) . Cells were labeled with [ 32 P ] phos - phoric acid , and cell lysates were im - munoprecipitated with anti - HA , an - ti - Sky , or anti - TESK1 antibody , run on SDS - PAGE , and analyzed by au - toradiography and immunoblotting , as indicated . ( C ) TESK1 inhibits actin binding / depolymerizing activity of coﬁlin but not of S3A - coﬁlin in HeLa cells . HeLa cells were transfected with plasmids coding for HA - tagged coﬁlin or S3A - coﬁlin , with or with - out plasmids for TESK1 . Cells were stained with anti - HA and anti - TESK1 antibody and rhoda - mine - phalloidin . Arrowheads indi - cate cells expressing coﬁlin ( top panels ) or S3A - coﬁlin ( bottom pan - els ) , as assigned by immunostaining with anti - HA antibody . Bar , 15 m m . J . Toshima et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 1136 6A ) . TESK1 was enriched in the region of polymerized actin structures at cell peripheries in the presence of Y - 27632 ( Figure 6A ) . Costaining with anti - TESK1 and anti - vinculin antibodies further revealed colocalization of TESK1 with vinculin at peripheries of Y - 27632 – treated cells ( Figure 6B ) . Thus , under conditions that ROCK signaling was tempo - rarily blocked by Y - 27632 , TESK1 induced polymerized actin structures and vinculin assemblies that are distinct from stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions , at the cell periphery . To - gether with ﬁndings that ROCK does not activate TESK1 , these observations suggest that TESK1 has a potential to induce actin reorganization independently on ROCK . Activation of Endogenous TESK1 by Integrin Signaling During cell adhesion and spreading on the ﬁbronectin - coated surface , actin stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions are induced by signaling mediated by integrin receptors ( Clark and Brugge , 1995 ) . Because TESK1 can induce assembly of actin stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions , it may play a role in integrin signaling . We therefore examined changes in kinase activity of endogenous TESK1 during adhesion and spread - ing of HeLa cells on ﬁbronectin . Suspended cells were plated onto ﬁbronectin - coated dishes and cultured under the se - rum - free conditions . At indicated times , endogenous TESK1 was prepared by immunoprecipitation , and its kinase activ - ity was measured in vitro , using recombinant coﬁlin as a substrate . The kinase activity of TESK1 gradually increased with time , reaching a maximum level at 30 min after plating ( Figure 7A ) . A longer plating on ﬁbronectin did not further promote the activity of TESK1 . When we examined the kinase activity of endogenous LIMK1 in HeLa cells under similar conditions , only a small increase in LIMK1 activity was observed during cell spreading ( Figure 7A ) . The activity of TESK1 was not stimulated when the cells were plated on a surface coated with poly - l - lysine ( Figure 7B ) . These results suggest that the kinase activity of TESK1 is up - regulated by ﬁbronectin - induced stimulation of integrin signaling path - ways . Increase in the Level of Coﬁlin Phosphorylation by Integrin Signaling To determine the level of coﬁlin phosphorylation after plat - ing cells on ﬁbronectin , we prepared the antibody that spe - ciﬁcally recognized the phosphorylated form of coﬁlin ( P - coﬁlin ) . The speciﬁcity of the antibody was determined by immunoblot analysis of a two - dimensional gel of COS - 7 cell lysates . The antibody reacted with P - coﬁlin ( and also the phosphorylated form of ADF as a minor spot ) but not with the dephosphorylated form of coﬁlin ( Figure 8A ) . On one - dimensional gels of lysates of COS - 7 cells transfected with plasmids for C - terminally ( His ) 6 - tagged coﬁlin and ADF , immunoreactive bands with the sizes corresponding to ( His ) 6 - tagged coﬁlin and ADF were detected with anti - P - coﬁlin antibody , but they disappeared during CIP treatment and recovered during rephosphorylation reaction with TESK1 ( Figure 8B ) . These results suggest that the anti - P - coﬁlin antibody speciﬁcally recognizes the phosphorylated form of coﬁlin and ADF . Using this antibody , we examined changes in the level of endogenous P - coﬁlin during adhesion and spreading of HeLa cells on ﬁbronectin - coated dishes . The level of P - coﬁlin gradually increased and reached a maximum level at 30 min after plating on ﬁbronectin but did not change after plating on poly - l - lysine , which indicates that integrin sig - naling stimulates coﬁlin phosphorylation ( Figure 8C ) . We next examined the effects of Y - 27632 on the P - coﬁlin level before and after plating cells on ﬁbronectin . The level of P - coﬁlin markedly decreased in Y - 27632 – treated suspended cells but increased gradually after plating on ﬁbronectin in a time course similar to that of Y - 27632 – untreated cells ( Fig - ure 8 , D and E ) . These results suggest that ROCK signiﬁ - cantly contributes to the basal level of coﬁlin phosphoryla - tion in HeLa cells before plating , but the integrin - mediated increase in coﬁlin phosphorylation is primarily regulated by a pathway ( s ) not related to ROCK . Similar patterns of time - dependent changes in TESK1 activation and P - coﬁlin level in response to plating cells on ﬁbronectin , together with the ﬁnding that TESK1 kinase activity is independent of ROCK , Figure 4 . ROCK and PAK activate LIMK but not TESK1 . Lysates from COS - 7 cells trans - fectedwithvectoralone ( mock ) orplasmidsfor Myc - taggedTESK1 , TESK1 ( D170A ) , orLIMK2 were immunoprecipitated with anti - Myc anti - body and incubated with [ g - 32 P ] ATP and ( His ) 6 - coﬁlinintheabsence ( 2 ) orpresence ( 1 ) of Myc - tagged ROCK D 3 ( A ) or PAK D N ( B ) . Reaction mixtures were run on SDS - PAGE on 9 and 15 % gels . In both A and B , the 15 % gel was analyzed by autoradiography ( top panel ) and Amido - black staining for coﬁlin ( second panel ) . The 9 % gel was analyzed by autora - diographytodetectphosphorylationofTESK1andLIMK2 ( third panel ) and by immunoblot - ting with anti - Myc antibody ( bottom panel ) . 32 P - incorporation into TESK1 is due to auto - phosphorylation . Relative kinase activities of TESK1 and LIMK2 treated with or without ROCK D 3 or PAK D N are indicated under the top panel , with the activity of wild - type TESK1 and LIMK2 without ROCK D 3 or PAK D N taken as 1 . 0 , respectively . Actin Reorganization by TESK1 Vol . 12 , April 2001 1137 suggest that TESK1 but not LIMK is responsible for integrin - mediated coﬁlin phosphorylation . To further examine the role of TESK1 in integrin - mediated coﬁlin phosphorylation , we prepared HeLa cells stably ex - pressing exogenous TESK1 ( HeLa / TESK1 ) and TESK1 ( D170A ) [ HeLa / TESK1 ( DA ) ] . The levels of expression of TESK1 and TESK1 ( D170A ) in these cells were approximately three - to fourfold higher than the level of endogenous TESK1 , as esti - mated by immunoblotting ( Figure 9A ) . The level of P - coﬁlin increased approximately threefold in HeLa / TESK1 cells and decreased to approximately half in HeLa / TESK1 ( DA ) cells , compared with that in parental HeLa cells , whereas the levels of total coﬁlin in these cells were similar ( Figure 9A ) . When HeLa / TESK1 cells were plated onto ﬁbronectin - coated dishes , the level of P - coﬁlin increased and reached a maximum level at 30 min after plating ( Figure 9B ) . On the other hand , the level of P - coﬁlin in HeLa / TESK1 ( DA ) cells remained low even after plating on ﬁbronectin ( Figure 9B ) . These results further suggest that TESK1 is involved in coﬁlin phosphorylation stimulated by integrin signaling . We also examined the level of P - coﬁlin in HeLa cells expressing wild - type LIMK1 ( HeLa / LIMK1 ) . The level of P - coﬁlin in HeLa / LIMK1 cells was approximately threefold higher than the level in parental HeLa cells before plating ( Figure 9D ) . However , in contrast to HeLa / TESK1 cells , the level of P - coﬁlin in HeLa / LIMK1 cells was not changed after cells were plated on ﬁbronectin ( Figure 9 , D and E ) . Thus , it is likely that LIMK1 is involved in coﬁlin phosphor - ylation but does not signiﬁcantly contribute to the increase in P - coﬁlin level induced by plating cells on ﬁbronectin . In addi - tion , treatment with Y - 27632 reduced the level of P - coﬁlin in HeLa / LIMK1 cells before and after cells were plated on ﬁ - bronectin but had no effect on the level of P - coﬁlin in HeLa / TESK1 cells before and after plating on ﬁbronectin ( Figure 9 , C – E ) . Taken together these results suggest that TESK1 but not LIMK1 is involved in integrin - mediated coﬁlin phosphoryla - tion during cell spreading and that integrin - mediated TESK1 Figure 5 . ( A ) Suppression of TESK1 - induced stress ﬁbers by C3 or ROCK ( KD - IA ) . HeLa cells were transfected with plasmids for TESK1 with vector alone or plasmids for C3 or ROCK ( KD - IA ) and stained with anti - TESK1 antibody ( left panels ) and rhodamine - phalloidin ( right panels ) . Arrowheads indicate the cells expressing TESK1 . Bar , 15 m m . ( B ) Cell shrinkage induced by coexpression of ROCK ( KD - IA ) and TESK1 ( D170A ) . HeLa cells were cotransfected with plasmids for ROCK ( KD - IA ) with TESK1 ( D170A ) ( top panels ) or vector ( bottom panels ) and stained with anti - TESK1 or anti - Myc antibody and rhodamine - phalloidin . Bar , 15 m m . ( C ) Quantiﬁcation of the ratio of shrinking cells in ROCK ( KD - IA ) - expressing cells , when cotransfected with vector ( 2 ) , plasmids for LIMK1 ( D460A ) , TESK1 ( D170A ) , or wild - type ( WT ) TESK1 . GFP indicates cells expressing control GFP alone . The results of three experiments are shown as means 6 SEM . J . Toshima et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 1138 activation and coﬁlin phosphorylation are mostly independent of ROCK . Effects of TESK1 and TESK1 ( D170A ) Expression on Integrin - mediated Stress Fiber and Focal Adhesion Formation To further investigate the role of TESK1 in inte - grin - mediated signaling pathways , we next examined the effect of expression of wild - type or a kinase - inactive form of TESK1 on integrin - mediated stress ﬁber and focal adhesion formation . HeLa cells transfected with plasmids for TESK1 or TESK1 ( D170A ) were suspended and then replated on ﬁbronectin - coateddishes . Whencellswerestainedwithrhoda - mine - phalloidin 1 . 5 h after plating , stress ﬁbers were mark - edly enhanced in TESK1 - expressing cells ( Figure 10A , top panel ) . In contrast , stress ﬁbers were signiﬁcantly weakened in TESK1 ( D170A ) - expressing cells , compared with sur - rounding nontransfected cells ( Figure 10A , bottom panel ) , which strongly suggests that endogenous TESK1 is involved in the stress ﬁber formation induced by integrin signaling . We also examined the effect of expression of wild - type or a kinase - dead form of TESK1 on focal adhesion formation by vinculin immunostaining . Formation of focal adhesions was substantially enhanced in wild - type TESK1 - transfected cells but was reduced in TESK1 ( D170A ) - transfected cells ( Figure 10B ) . As summarized in Figure 10C , by plating cells on ﬁbronectin , stress ﬁbers were induced in 79 % of the cells expressing control GFP and in 95 % of cells expressing wild - type TESK1 , but in only 44 % of cells expressing TESK1 ( D170A ) . Similarly , focal adhesions were induced in 82 % of cells expressing control GFP and in 98 % of cells expressing wild - type TESK1 , but in only 43 % of cells ex - pressing TESK1 ( D170A ) . Cells expressing a kinase - inactive form of LIMK1 , LIMK1 ( D460A ) , induced stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions by plating on ﬁbronectin , to an extent seen with cells expressing control GFP ( our unpublished results ) . Suppression of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions by TESK1 ( D170A ) but not by LIMK1 ( D460A ) strongly suggests that endogenous TESK1 but not LIMK1 plays an important role in the integrin - mediated signaling pathway to induce stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions . DISCUSSION Coﬁlin Phosphorylation by TESK1 and LIM - kinases Coﬁlin plays an essential role in actin ﬁlament dynamics by enhancing depolymerization and severance of actin ﬁlaments ( Bamburg et al . , 1999 ) . These activities of coﬁlin are abolished by phosphorylation at Ser - 3 ; therefore , phosphorylation / dephosphorylation of coﬁlin at Ser - 3 is regarded as one of the important mechanisms for regu - lating coﬁlin activities and actin ﬁlament dynamics . LIM - kinases were shown to be responsible enzymes for coﬁlin phosphorylation ( Arber et al . , 1998 ; Yang et al . , 1998 ) . Here we provide evidence that TESK1 also has an ability to phosphorylate coﬁlin speciﬁcally at Ser - 3 in vitro and in vivo and induce actin reorganization by phosphorylating coﬁlin . Thus , these ﬁndings suggest that coﬁlin phosphor - ylation in living cells is regulated by at least two path - ways in which distinct types of protein kinases , LIM - kinases and TESK1 , are involved . Considering the essential role of coﬁlin in actin ﬁlament dynamics , these kinases probably play important roles in regulating actin cytoskeletal remodeling and thereby in many cell activi - ties , including cell motility , adhesion , and cytokinesis , by phosphorylating and inactivating coﬁlin . Most interest - ingly , we found that TESK1 is stimulated by an integrin - mediated signaling pathway but not by either ROCK or PAK , in contrast to LIM - kinases that are stimulated by Rho - ROCK and Rac - Pak pathways ( Figure 11 ) . Together with the total difference in extracatalytic structures , these results strongly suggest that LIM - kinases and TESK1 , al - though they commonly phosphorylate coﬁlin , are regu - lated in different ways and play distinct roles in actin reorganization in living cells . Figure 6 . Effect of Y - 27632 on TESK1 - induced actin organization . HeLa cells transfected with plasmids encoding TESK1 or TESK1 ( D170A ) were treated with 10 m M Y - 27632 for 30 min , then ﬁxed and stained with anti - TESK1 antibody and rhoda - mine - phalloidin ( A ) or anti - vinculin antibody ( B ) . Arrowheads in - dicate cells expressing TESK1 or TESK1 ( D170A ) . Bar , 15 m m . Actin Reorganization by TESK1 Vol . 12 , April 2001 1139 TESK1 - induced Stress Fibers and Rho - ROCK Signaling Pathway Rho and its downstream ROCK play a key role in the for - mation of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions ( Ridley and Hall , 1992 ; Leung et al . , 1996 ; Amano et al . , 1997 ; Ishizaki et al . , 1997 ) . ROCK induces stress ﬁbers by increasing myosin light chain ( MLC ) phosphorylation through phosphorylating and inactivating MLC phosphatase and thereby increasing acto - myosin - based contractility ( Kimura et al . , 1996 ) . ROCK also phosphorylates and activates LIM - kinases , events that lead to phosphorylation and inactivation of coﬁlin and actin ﬁl - ament stabilization ( Maekawa et al . , 1999 ) . Because TESK1 stimulates the formation of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions , we extensively examined the relationships between TESK1 and the Rho - ROCK signaling pathway and obtained evi - dence that distinct from LIM - kinases , TESK1 is not down - stream of ROCK . However , one cannot exclude the possibil - ity that the kinase activity of TESK1 might be regulated by downstream effectors of Rho other than ROCK , such as rhophilin , rhotekin , and p160mDia , because in our assay systems we may overlook activation of TESK1 in cultured cells if activated by noncovalent association of activator proteins . TESK1 - induced stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions were repressed by coexpression of C3 exoenzyme or ROCK ( KD - IA ) , which suggests that the Rho - ROCK signaling pathway is required for the formation of stress ﬁbers and focal adhe - sions , although ROCK does not stimulate TESK1 . Most likely , the ROCK - induced increase in MLC phosphorylation and actomyosin contractility is required for formation of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions ( Kimura et al . , 1996 ) . Inter - estingly , Y - 27632 treatment of TESK1 - expressing cells led to the formation of lamellipodium - like actin organization and vinculin - assembled structures at cell margins , in place of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions . TESK1 therefore seems to have the potential to induce distinct patterns of actin orga - nization , under conditions that ROCK signaling is abro - gated . Several studies suggest that Rho and Rac mutually antagonize cellular activity , and the balance between Rho and Rac activity in cells determines the patterns of actin organization and substrate contact site morphology ( Hirose et al . , 1998 ; Rottner et al . , 1999 ; Sander et al . , 1999 ) . Thus , it could be that lamellipodium - like actin organization and vin - culin assembly in TESK1 - expressing cells treated with Y - 27632 are brought about by the preference of Rac activity against Rho activity as the result of inhibition of ROCK by Y - 27632 treatment . We also found that coexpression of TESK1 ( D170A ) and ROCK ( KD - IA ) induces an almost complete loss of actin stress ﬁbers and shrinking cell morphology . Because TESK1 ( D170A ) and ROCK ( KD - IA ) are thought to function as dominant - negative forms against endogenous TESK1 and ROCK , respectively , both TESK1 and ROCK probably play an important role in maintaining cell morphology and cell adhesion by retaining certain levels of actin stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions . Manser et al . ( 1997 ) reported a similar shrinking cell morphology induced by expression of an ac - tive form of PAK . Such morphological change may be due to the PAK activity to phosphorylate and inactivate MLC - ki - nase ( Sanders et al . , 1999 ) , which leads to loss of actomyosin - based contractility and dissolution of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions , an event opposite that induced by ROCK / TESK1 activation . Thus , we assume that formation of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions are oppositely regulated by ROCK / TESK1 and PAK , and inhibition of both ROCK and TESK1 or excessive activation of PAK results in similar shrinking cell morphology . Roles of TESK1 in Integrin - mediated Signaling Pathway Integrins bind to ECM proteins such as ﬁbronectin and transduce signals to control cell survival , proliferation , dif - Figure 7 . Adhesion to ﬁbronectin increases the kinase activity of TESK1 . ( A ) HeLa cells were sus - pended and replated on ﬁbronec - tin - coated dishes . At indicated times , cells were lysed , and endog - enous TESK1 and LIMK1 were im - munoprecipitated and subjected to in vitro kinase reaction , using ( His ) 6 - coﬁlin as a substrate . Reac - tion mixtures were run on SDS - PAGE and analyzed using autora - diography and Amido - black staining . Arrowheads indicate the position of coﬁlin . TESK1 and LIMK1 were analyzed by immuno - blotting with anti - TESK1 and anti - LIMK1 antibodies . Relative kinase activities of TESK1 and LIMK1 are shown as means 6 SEM of tripli - cate experiments , with the activity of TESK1 and LIMK1 at zero time of plating taken as 1 . 0 . ( B ) HeLa cells were plated on poly - l - lysine – coated dishes , and the kinase activ - ity of TESK1 was analyzed as in A . J . Toshima et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 1140 ferentiation , and migration ( Clark and Brugge , 1995 ; Gian - cotti and Ruoslahti , 1999 ) . On binding to ECM proteins , integrins become clustered and form large protein com - plexes known as focal adhesions , through which integrins link to actin ﬁlaments ( Burridge et al . , 1997 ) . Previous studies identiﬁed a number of proteins that are assembled into focal adhesions on integrin stimulation , but little is known about signaling pathways of integrin - mediated actin reorganiza - tion . In the present study we have found that the kinase activity of TESK1 as well as the level of coﬁlin phosphory - lation are elevated by plating cells on ﬁbronectin . Time courses of changes in TESK1 activity and P - coﬁlin level after plating are similar , and the level of P - coﬁlin increased in cells stably expressing TESK1 but decreased in cells express - ing TESK1 ( D170A ) . We have also found that wild - type TESK1 enhanced and a kinase - inactive form of TESK1 sup - pressed the ﬁbronectin - induced formation of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions . Taken together , these results suggest that TESK1 plays a key role in coﬁlin phosphorylation and actin reorganization stimulated by integrin signaling . In con - trast , only a small increase in the kinase activity of LIMK1 was detected after plating cells on ﬁbronectin , and a kinase - inactive form of LIMK1 had no apparent effect on integrin - mediated stress ﬁber and focal adhesion formation . Further - more , the level of P - coﬁlin in HeLa / LIMK1 cells increased before plating but did not change after plating cells on ﬁbronectin . Accordingly , it is presumable that LIMK does not signiﬁcantly contribute to integrin - mediated coﬁlin phosphorylation and actin reorganization . Treatment with Y - 27632 signiﬁcantly reduced the level of P - coﬁlin before plating but had no apparent effect on the ﬁbronectin - stimulated coﬁlin phosphorylation , which indi - cates that ROCK is involved in maintaining the basal level of P - coﬁlin but has little effect on integrin - mediated coﬁlin phosphorylation . In addition , treatment with Y - 27632 re - duced the level of P - coﬁlin in HeLa / LIMK1 cells before and after plating cells on ﬁbronectin but did not affect the level of P - coﬁlin in HeLa / TESK1 cells . Together with the ﬁnding that ROCK activates LIMK1 but not TESK1 in in vitro and in vivo reactions , these results suggest that TESK1 principally contributes to the integrin - mediated coﬁlin phosphoryla - tion , which is independent of ROCK , whereas LIMK1 con - tributes to coﬁlin phosphorylation before plating that is dependent on ROCK activity . Previous studies implicated Rho and Rac in inte - grin - mediated cell adhesion and spreading ( Clark et al . , 1998 ; Price et al . , 1998 ; Ren et al . , 1999 ) . Rho was signiﬁcantly activated by plating cells on ﬁbronectin when cells were maintained in 1 % serum , but its activation was very modest under serum - free conditions ( Ren et al . , 1999 ) . Only a small increase in LIMK1 activity and Y - 27632 insensitivity of co - ﬁlin phosphorylation after cells were plated on ﬁbronectin in our assays may be explained by our assay conditions in which serum was depleted . It could be that under serum - Figure 8 . Adhesion to ﬁbronectin increases the level of phosphorylated form of coﬁlin . ( A ) Speciﬁcity of anti - P - coﬁlin antibody . Two - dimensional gel electrophoresis of lysates of COS - 7 cells was immunoblotted with anti - P - coﬁlin and anti - coﬁlin antibody . ( B ) The C - terminally ( His ) 6 - tagged coﬁlin and ADF were expressed in COS - 7 cells and puriﬁed with Ni - NTA agarose . They were run directly on SDS - PAGE ( lanes 1 and 4 ) , after treatment with CIP phosphatase ( lanes 2 and 5 ) or after CIP treatment followed by kinase reaction with TESK1 ( lanes 3 and 6 ) , and then immunoblotted with anti - P - coﬁlin and anti - His - tag antibody . ( C ) HeLa cells were suspended and replated on ﬁbronectin - or poly - l - lysine – coated dishes . At indicated times , cells were lysed and the lysates were run on SDS - PAGE and analyzed by immunoblotting with anti - P - coﬁlin and anti - coﬁlin antibody . ( D ) HeLa cells were suspended , incubated for 30 min with or without 10 m M Y - 27632 , and replated on ﬁbronectin - coated dishes . At indicated times , cells were lysed , and the level of P - coﬁlin was analyzed as in C . ( E ) Relative amounts of P - coﬁlin in HeLa cells treated with or without Y - 27632 were plotted against the time after plating cells on ﬁbronectin , with the amount of P - coﬁlin in HeLa cells without Y - 27632 at zero time of plating taken as 1 . 0 . Each value represents the mean of duplicate measurements . Actin Reorganization by TESK1 Vol . 12 , April 2001 1141 supplemented conditions TESK1 and Rho signals coopera - tively function in integrin - mediated stress ﬁber and focal adhesion formation . In ﬁbroblasts , plating cells on ﬁbronec - tin led to the rapid activation of PAK with the maximal activity at 5 – 10 min after plating ( Price et al . , 1998 ) . If this is also the case in HeLa cells , PAK activation may contribute to the early phase of integrin - mediated coﬁlin phosphorylation through activation of LIMK , but activation of LIMK1 was barely detectable at 15 min after plating in our assay . Further studies are needed to elucidate the role of the Rac - PAK pathway in integrin - mediated coﬁlin phosphorylation in re - spective cells . The C - terminal region of TESK1 is rich in proline residues and contains several ProX - X - Pro motifs , known to be recog - nized by SH3 domains . TESK1 may be localized and acti - vated at the sites of cell adhesion by interaction with SH3 - containing focal adhesion proteins , such as Crk , Nck , and CAS , through its C - terminal proline - rich region . Focal adhe - sion proteins , such as CAS and paxillin , are phosphorylated on serine , threonine , and tyrosine residues integrin during stimulation ( Schlaepfer et al . , 1997 ; Brown et al . , 1998 ) . Be - cause TESK1 is activated by integrin stimulation , TESK1 may play a role in actin reorganization and focal adhesion formation by phosphorylating these focal adhesion proteins , in addition to phosphorylating coﬁlin . Physiological Roles of TESK1 TESK1 mRNA is predominantly expressed in testicular germ cells at stages of late pachytene spermatocytes to round spermatids , which suggests a role of TESK1 in sper - matogenesis ( Toshima et al . , 1995 , 1998 ) . However , the actual function of TESK1 in testicular germ cells remains unknown . Drosophila null mutants of the center divider ( cdi ) gene , which encodes an orthologue of TESK1 , are larval lethal , suggest - ing an important role for the cdi gene product in ﬂy devel - opment ( Matthews and Crews , 1999 ) . The cdi gene is prom - inently expressed in midline cells of the ﬂy embryonic CNS . Because we observed that TESK1 gene is expressed in spe - ciﬁc regions of the mouse embryonic CNS ( our unpublished data ) , there may be functional relationships between ﬂy cdi and mammalian TESK1 during neuronal development . On the other hand , whether the cdi gene is expressed in ﬂy testes or whether mutation of the cdi gene affects ﬂy spermatogen - Figure 9 . In vivo phosphorylation of coﬁlin by TESK1 is independent of Rho - ROCK signaling pathway . ( A ) HeLa cells stably expressing TESK1 ( HeLa / TESK1 ) or TESK1 ( D170A ) [ HeLa / TESK1 ( DA ) ] were lysed , and the lysates were run on SDS - PAGE and analyzed by immunoblotting with anti - P - coﬁlin , anti - coﬁlin , and anti - TESK1 antibody . ( B ) HeLa / TESK1 or HeLa / TESK1 ( DA ) cells were suspended and replated on ﬁbronectin - coated dishes . At indicated times , cell lysates were prepared and analyzed by immunoblotting with anti - P - coﬁlin , anti - coﬁlin , and anti - TESK1 antibody . ( C and D ) HeLa / TESK1 or HeLa / LIMK1 cells were suspended , incubated for 30 min with or without 10 m M Y - 27632 , and replated on ﬁbronectin - coated dishes . At indicated times , cell lysates were prepared and analyzed by immunoblotting with anti - P - coﬁlin , anti - coﬁlin , and anti - TESK1 ( or anti - LIMK1 ) antibody . ( E ) Relative amounts of P - coﬁlin in HeLa / TESK1 or HeLa / LIMK1 cells treated with or without Y - 27632 were plotted against the time after plating cells on ﬁbronectin , with the amount of P - coﬁlin in HeLa / TESK1 or HeLa / LIMK1 cells without Y - 27632 at zero time of plating taken as 1 . 0 . Each value represents the mean of duplicate measurements . J . Toshima et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 1142 esis remains to be determined . Using Drosophila genetics to explore the functions of TESK1 in spermatogenesis and neu - rogenesis is a challenging theme . Drosophila twinstar ( tsr ) mutants , in which expression of the tsr gene encoding a Drosophila coﬁlin orthologue is re - duced , are lethal in late larval or pupal stages ( Gunsalus et al . , 1995 ) . Cytological studies revealed frequent failures in cytokinesis in larval neuroblasts and testicular meiotic cells . Mutant spermatocytes exhibited delayed centrosome migra - tion and a defect in contractile ring disassembly of two meiotic cell divisions ( Gunsalus et al . , 1995 ) . A similar phe - notype was seen in testes treated with cytochalasin B , an inhibitor of actin polymerization . These phenotypes in mu - tant spermatocytes are regarded as the aberrant actin cy - toskeletal reorganization , and the properly regulated actin assembly and disassembly are likely important for normal centrosome migration and normal contractile ring formation and dissolution during cytokinesis . TESK1 in testes may play a role in these processes during spermatogensis by regulating the activity of coﬁlin . On the basis of activity of TESK1 to phosphorylate coﬁlin , it seems appropriate to de - termine physiological functions of TESK1 , as related to actin cytoskeletal reorganization . In conclusion , our evidence shows that coﬁlin phosphor - ylation is regulated by at least two distinct types of protein kinases : LIM - kinases and TESK1 . Although LIM - kinases are activated by Rac - PAK and Rho - ROCK signaling pathways , TESK1 is stimulated by integrin - mediated signaling path - ways and signiﬁcantly contributes integrin - mediated coﬁlin phosphorylation and actin reorganization ( Figure 11 ) . Our ﬁndings will provide new insights into the inte - grin - mediated signaling pathways to induce actin cytoskel - etal remodeling and focal adhesion formation . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Dr . Saburo Aimoto ( Osaka University ) for phosphopep - tide synthesis , Dr . Takashi Obinata ( Chiba University ) for providing MAB - 22 anticoﬁlin monoclonal antibody , Dr . Kyoko Ohashi ( To - hoku University ) for two - dimensional gel analysis , and Dr . Yukio Fujiki ( Kyushu University ) for advice and encouragement . This work was supported by research grants from the Ministry of Edu - cation , Science , Sports , and Culture of Japan , and the Japan Society of the Promotion of Science Research for the Future , and grants from Naito Foundation , Welﬁde Foundation , and Uehara Memorial Foundation ( to K . M . ) . Figure 10 . Effects of TESK1 and TESK1 ( D170A ) on ﬁbronectin - induced stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions . HeLa cells were trans - fected with plasmid coding for TESK1 or TESK1 ( D170A ) and cul - tured for 24 h in serum - free medium . Cells were trypsinized and replated on ﬁbronectin - coated dishes . After 1 . 5 h , cells were ﬁxed and stained with anti - TESK1 antibody and rhodamine - phalloidin ( A ) or anti - vinculin antibody ( B ) . Arrowheads indicate cells express - ing TESK1 or TESK1 ( D170A ) . Bar , 15 m m . ( C ) Ratio of cells contain - ing stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions induced by plating on ﬁbronec - tin . Results are shown as means 6 SEM of triplicate experiments . Cells expressing GFP were used as control . Figure 11 . Proposed scheme for multiple pathways for coﬁlin phosphorylation . TESK1 is activated downstream of integrin signal - ing pathways , whereas LIM - kinases are activated downstream of Rho - ROCK and Rac - PAK pathways . See text for details . Actin Reorganization by TESK1 Vol . 12 , April 2001 1143 REFERENCES Abe , H . , Ohshima , S . , and Obinata , T . ( 1989 ) . A coﬁlin - like protein is involved in the regulation of actin assembly in developing skel - etal muscle . J . Biochem . 106 , 696 – 702 . Agnew , B . J . , Minamide , L . S . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 1995 ) . Reactivation of phosphorylated actin depolymerizing factor and identiﬁcation of the regulatory site . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 17582 – 17587 . Amano , M . , Chihara , K . , Kimura , K . , Fukata , Y . , Nakamura , N . , Matsuura , Y . , and Kaibuchi , K . ( 1997 ) . Formation of actin stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions enhanced by Rho - kinase . Science 275 , 1308 – 1311 . Amano , T . , Tanabe , K . , Eto , T . , Narumiya , S . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2001 ) . LIM - kinase 2 induces formation of stress ﬁbers , focal adhesions and membrane blebs , dependent on its activation by Rho - associated kinase - catalyzed phosphorylation at threonine - 505 . Biochem . J . 354 , 149 – 159 . Arber , S . , Barbayannis , F . A . , Hanser , H . , Schneider , C . , Stanyon , C . A . , Bernard , O . , and Caroni , P . ( 1998 ) . Regulation of actin dynam - ics through phosphorylation of coﬁlin by LIM - kinase . Nature 393 , 805 – 809 . Bamburg , J . R . , McGough , A . , and Ono , S . ( 1999 ) . Putting a new twist on actin : ADF / coﬁlins modulate actin dynamics . Trends Cell . Biol . 9 , 364 – 370 . Brown , M . C . , Perrotta , J . A . , and Turner , C . E . ( 1998 ) . Serine and threonine phosphorylation of the paxillin LIM domains regulates paxillin focal adhesion localization and cell adhesion to ﬁbronectin . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 1803 – 1816 . Burridge , K . , Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , M . , and Zhong , C . ( 1997 ) . Focal adhesion assembly . Trends Cell . Biol . 7 , 342 – 347 . Chen , C . , and Okayama , H . ( 1987 ) . High - efﬁciency transformation of mammalian cells by plasmid DNA . Mol . Cell . Biol . 7 , 2745 – 2752 . Chen , H . , Bernstein , B . W . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2000 ) . Regulating actin - ﬁlament dynamics in vivo . Trends . Biochem . Sci . 25 , 19 – 23 . Clark , E . A . , and Brugge , J . S . ( 1995 ) . Integrins and signal transduc - tion pathways : the road taken . Science 268 , 233 – 239 . Clark , E . A . , King , W . G . , Brugge , J . S . , Symons , M . , and Hynes , R . O . ( 1998 ) . Integrin - mediated signals regulated by members of the Rho family of GTPases . J . Cell . Biol . 142 , 573 – 586 . Edwards , D . C . , Sanders , L . C . , Bokoch , G . M . , and Gill , G . N . ( 1999 ) . Activation of LIM - kinase by Pak1 couples Rac / Cdc42 GTPase sig - naling to actin cytoskeletal dynamics . Nat . Cell . Biol . 1 , 253 – 259 . Frost , J . A . , Khokhlatchev , A . , Stippec , S . , White , M . A . , and Cobb , M . H . ( 1998 ) . Differential effects of PAK1 - activating mutations reveal activity - dependent and - independent effects on cytoskeletal regula - tion . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 28191 – 28198 . Giancotti , F . G . , and Ruoslahti , E . ( 1999 ) . Integrin signaling . Science 285 , 1028 – 1032 . Gunsalus , K . C . , Bonaccorsi , S . , Williams , E . , Verni , F . , Gatti , M . , and Goldberg , M . L . ( 1995 ) . Mutations in twinstar , a Drosophila gene encoding a coﬁlin / ADF homologue , result in defects in centrosome migration and cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 1243 – 1259 . Hall , A . ( 1998 ) . Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton . Science 279 , 509 – 514 . Hirose , M . , Ishizaki , T . , Watanabe , N . , Uehata , M . , Kranenburg , O . , Moolenaar , W . H . , Matsumura , F . , Maekawa , M . , Bito , H . , and Na - rumiya , S . ( 1998 ) . Molecular dissection of the Rho - associated protein kinase ( p160ROCK ) - regulated neurite remodeling in neuroblastoma N1E - 115 cells . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 1625 – 1636 . Ishizaki , T . , Naito , M . , Fujisawa , K . , Maekawa , M . , Watanabe , N . , Saito , Y . , and Narumiya , S . ( 1997 ) . p160ROCK , a Rho - associated coiled - coil forming protein kinase , works downstream of Rho and induces focal adhesions . FEBS Lett . 404 , 118 – 124 . Kimura , K . , et al . ( 1996 ) . Regulation of myosin phosphatase by Rho and Rho - associated kinase ( Rho - kinase ) . Science 273 , 245 – 248 . Leung , T . , Chen , X . - Q . , Manser , E . , and Lim , L . ( 1996 ) . The p160 RhoA - binding kinase ROK a is a member of a kinase family and is involved in the reorganization of the cytoskeleton . Mol . Cell . Biol . 16 , 5313 – 5327 . Maekawa , M . , Ishizaki , T . , Boku , S . , Watanabe , N . , Fujita , A . , Iwamatsu , A . , Obinata , T . , Ohashi , K . , Mizuno , K . , and Narumiya , S . ( 1999 ) . Signaling from Rho to the actin cytoskeleton through protein kinases ROCK and LIM - kinase . Science 285 , 895 – 898 . Manser , E . , Huang , H . - Y . , Loo , T . - H . , Chen , X . - Q . , Dong , J . - M . , Leung , T . , and Lim , L . ( 1997 ) . Expression of constitutively active a - PAK reveals effects of the kinase on actin and focal complexes . Mol . Cell . Biol . 17 , 1129 – 1143 . Matthews , B . B . , and Crews , S . T . ( 1999 ) . Drosophila center divider gene is expressed in CNS midline cells and encodes a developmentally regulated protein kinase orthologous to human TESK1 DNA . Cell Biol . 18 , 435 – 448 . Mizuno , K . , Okano , I . , Ohashi , K . , Nunoue , K . , Kuma , K . , Miyata , T . , and Nakamura , T . ( 1994 ) . Identiﬁcation of a human cDNA encoding a novel protein kinase with two repeats of the LIM / double zinc ﬁnger motif . Oncogene 9 , 1605 – 1612 . Moon , A . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 1995 ) . The ADF / coﬁlin proteins : stim - ulus - responsive modulators of actin dynamics . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 , 1423 – 1431 . Moriyama , K . , Iida , K . , and Yahara , I . ( 1996 ) . Phosphorylation of Ser - 3 of coﬁlin regulates its essential function on actin . Genes Cells 1 , 73 – 86 . Narumiya , S . , Ishizaki , T . , and Watanabe , N . ( 1997 ) . Rho effectors and reorganization of actin cytoskeleton . FEBS Lett . 410 , 68 – 72 . Ohashi , K . , Nagata , K . , Maekawa , M . , Ishizaki , T . , Narumiya , S . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2000 ) . Rho - associated kinase ROCK activates LIM - kinase 1 by phosphorylation at threonine 508 within the activation loop . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 3577 – 3582 . Ohashi , K . , Nagata , K . , Toshima , J . , Nakano , T . , Arita , H . , Tsuda , H . , Suzuki , K . , and Mizuno , K . ( 1995 ) . Stimulation of Sky receptor tyrosine kinase by the product of growth arrest - speciﬁc gene 6 . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 22681 – 22684 . Okano , I . , Hiraoka , J . , Otera , H . , Nunoue , K . , Ohashi , K . , Iwashita , S . , Hirai , M . , and Mizuno , K . ( 1995 ) . Identiﬁcation and characteriza - tion of a novel family of serine / threonine kinases containing two N - terminal LIM motifs . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 31321 – 31330 . Price , L . S . , Leng , J . , Schwartz , M . A . , and Bokoch , G . M . ( 1998 ) . Ac - tivation of Rac and Cdc42 by integrins mediates cell spreading . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 1863 – 1871 . Ren , X . - D . , Kiosses , W . B . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 1999 ) . Regulation of the small GTP - binding protein Rho by cell adhesion and the cy - toskeleton . EMBO J . 18 , 578 – 585 . Ridley , A . J . , and Hall , A . ( 1992 ) . The small GTP - binding protein rho regulates the assembly of focal adhesions and actin stress ﬁbers in response to growth factors . Cell 70 , 389 – 399 . Rottner , K . , Hall , A . , and Small , J . V . ( 1999 ) . Interplay between Rac and Rho in the control of substrate contact dynamics . Curr . Biol . 9 , 640 – 648 . Sander , E . E . , ten Klooster , J . P . , van Delft , S . , van der Kammen , R . A . , and Collard , J . G . ( 1999 ) . Rac downregulates Rho activity : reciprocal balance between both GTPases determines cellular morphology and migratory behavior . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 1009 – 1021 . J . Toshima et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 1144 Sanders , L . C . , Matsumura , F . , Bokoch , G . M . , and de Lanerolle , P . ( 1999 ) . Inhibition of myosin light chain kinase by p21 - activated kinase . Science 283 , 2083 – 2085 . Schlaepfer , D . D . , Broome , M . A . , and Hunter , T . ( 1997 ) . Fibronectin - stimulated signaling from a focal adhesion kinase - c - Src complex : involvement of the Grb2 , p130CAS , and Nck adaptor proteins . Mol . Cell . Biol . 17 , 1702 – 1713 . Sekine , A . , Fujiwara , M . , and Narumiya , S . ( 1989 ) . Asparagine res - idue in the rho gene product is the modiﬁcation site for botulinum ADP - ribosyltransferase . J . Biol . Chem . 264 , 8602 – 8605 . Sumi , T . , Matsumoto , K . , Takai , Y . , and Nakamura , T . ( 1999 ) . Coﬁlin phosphorylation and actin cytoskeletal dynamics regulated by Rho - and Cdc42 - activated LIM - kinase 2 . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 1519 – 1532 . Toshima , J . , Koji , T . , and Mizuno , K . ( 1998 ) . Stage - speciﬁc expres - sion of testis - speciﬁc protein kinase 1 ( TESK1 ) in rat spermatogenic cells . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 249 , 107 – 112 . Toshima , J . , Ohashi , K . , Okano , I . , Nunoue , K . , Kishioka , M . , Kuma , K . , Miyata , T . , Hirai , M . , Baba , T . , and Mizuno , K . ( 1995 ) . Identiﬁ - cation and characterization of a novel protein kinase , TESK1 , spe - ciﬁcally expressed in testicular germ cells . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 31331 – 31337 . Toshima , J . , Tanaka , T . , and Mizuno , K . ( 1999 ) . Dual speciﬁcity protein kinase activity of testis - speciﬁc protein kinase 1 and its regulation by autophosphorylation of serine - 215 within the activa - tion loop . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 12171 – 12176 . Uehata , M . , et al . ( 1997 ) . Calcium sensitization of smooth muscle mediated by a Rho - associated protein kinase in hypertension . Na - ture 389 , 990 – 994 . Yang , N . , Higuchi , O . , Ohashi , K . , Nagata , K . , Wada , A . , Kangawa , K . , Nishida , E . , and Mizuno , K . ( 1998 ) . Coﬁlin phosphorylation by LIM - kinase 1 and its role in Rac - mediated actin reorganization . Nature 393 , 809 – 812 . Actin Reorganization by TESK1 Vol . 12 , April 2001 1145