1 Title : Exploring cell surface - nanopillar interactions with 3D super - resolution microscopy Authors : Anish R . Roy 1 , Wei Zhang 1 , Zeinab Jahed 1 , 2 , Ching - Ting Tsai 1 , Bianxiao Cui 1 , and W . E . Moerner 1 , * 1 Department of Chemistry , Stanford University , Stanford , CA 94305 2 present address : Department of Nanoengineering , Jacobs School of Engineering , University of California , San Diego , CA 92039 , USA * Corresponding author : wmoerner @ stanford . edu Abstract Plasma membrane topography has been shown to strongly influence the behavior of many cellular processes such as clathrin - mediated endocytosis , actin rearrangements , and others . Recent studies have used 3D nanostructures such as nanopillars to imprint well - defined membrane curvatures ( the “nano - bio interface” ) . In these studies , proteins and their interactions were probed by 2D fluorescence microscopy . However , the low resolution and limited axial detail of such methods are not optimal to determine the relative spatial position and distribution of proteins along a 100 nm - diameter object , which is below the optical diffraction limit . Here , we introduce a general method to explore the nanoscale distribution of proteins at the nano - bio interface with 10 - 20 nm precision using 3D single - molecule super - resolution ( SR ) localization microscopy . This is achieved by combining a silicone oil immersion objective and 3D double - helix point - spread function microscopy . We carefully optimize the objective to minimize spherical aberrations between quartz nanopillars and the cell . To validate the 3D SR method , we imaged the 3D shape of surface - labeled nanopillars and compared the results with electron microscopy measurements . Turning to transmembrane - anchored labels in cells , the high quality 3D SR reconstructions reveal the membrane tightly wrapping around the nanopillars . Interestingly , the cytoplasmic protein AP - 2 involved in clathrin - mediated endocytosis accumulates along the nanopillar above a specific threshold of 1 / R membrane curvature . Finally , we observe that AP - 2 and actin preferentially accumulate at positive Gaussian curvature near the pillar caps . Our results establish a general method to investigate the nanoscale distribution of proteins at the nano - bio interface using 3D SR microscopy . Keywords 3D super - resolution fluorescence microscopy , single - molecule imaging , nanopillars , membrane curvature , nano - bio interface , endocytosis , cell - material interface Introduction The cell - to - material interface is often a key determinant of successful applications for tissue engineering and biomedical implants . Material properties , including chemical functionalization , surface topography , and bulk stiffness , collectively set instructive signals for cell behavior 1 , 2 Nanoscale surface topography is particularly interesting as it is widely tunable and has been shown to significantly affect cellular responses . In the last decades , nanofabrication 2 emerged as a powerful tool to precisely engineer nanostructures , i . e . the nano - bio interface , to control cell behavior . For example , nanopillars have been shown to reduce focal adhesions and membrane tension 3 , 4 ; nanogratings and nanofibers induce cell alignment and neural development 5 , 6 ; and nanopores accelerate stem cell differentiation 7 , 8 . Nanopillars made of different materials were also developed into electrical and optical sensors for measuring live cell activities 9 , 10 . Due to its biological significance , there is great interest to visualize the nano - bio interface , especially with respect to the membrane shape around nanotopography and intracellular proteins at the interface . By varying the diameter of nanopillars that changes the shape of the membrane at the interface , recent studies show that nanopillars locally activate clathrin - mediated endocytosis and the polymerization of actin fibers in a curvature dependent manner 11 , 12 . However , visualizing the membrane shape at the interface and quantifying the curvature values are technically challenging , especially in three dimensions ( 3D ) . Ultrastructural analysis by electron microscopy remains a powerful approach for visualizing the nano - bio interface . Transmission Electron Microscopy ( TEM ) has been used to visualize the membrane shape around nanopillars and to measure the gap distance at the interface . Focused - ion - beam milling and scanning electron microscopy imaging ( FIB - SEM ) can be more advantageous by allowing selective opening and imaging of the interface at desired locations 13 . However , as is well - known , electron microscopy gives a snapshot of the physical effects with very high spatial resolution and general cellular context , but without specific identification of non - discernable proteins , while fluorescence microscopy gives molecular specificity without going beyond the optical diffraction limit ( DL ) of 250 - 300 nm . Recent work in correlated single - molecule localization and cryogenic electron tomography has shown important progress in combining these two modalities 14 . Previous studies have used fluorescence 2D DL experiments to study the behavior of specific proteins at the nano - bio interface . However , analyzing the nanoscale distribution of the proteins around and along the entire nanopillar in 3D and at 10 - 20 nm resolution is not possible from to the low resolution 2D DL images . While some experiments have probed the nano - bio interface at higher resolutions than the DL , more information would be obtained about the nanoscale distribution along the pillars with 10 - 20 nm resolution in 3D 15 , 16 . To address this optically , we describe a method to use super - resolution fluorescence microscopy ( SR ) in three dimensions ( 3D ) to precisely explore the positions of probe molecules down to ~ 10 nm in cells interacting with fabricated quartz nanopillars . Our approach required optical optimization and the use of control imaging tests to validate the procedures . We show that membrane - anchored labels as well as proteins that preferentially accumulate on curved membranes such as AP - 2 and actin interact with the curvature constraints of the nanopillar substrate in different ways . This work shows the utility of the 3D SR approach and should stimulate further use of the method to quantitatively characterize the nano - bio interface . Results and discussion Nanopillar imaging strategy to mitigate spherical aberrations Recent studies used a standard oil immersion objective ( OIO ) in 2D DL fluorescence imaging experiments to image the behavior of cytoplasmic proteins such as AP - 2 and actin on quartz nanopillars 11 , 12 . Moving from 2D DL to 3D SR imaging on the quartz nanopillar substrate is not straightforward . The standard OIO is optimized for imaging through glass rather 3 than quartz substrates because the refractive index of the immersion oil matches the glass refractive index . In general , any refractive index mismatch between the cover slip and the sample will lead to spherical aberrations that deteriorate image quality . Specifically , the problem at hand can be affected by the refractive index mismatches between the cell ( n ~ 1 . 40 ) , the quartz substrate and nanopillars ( n = 1 . 45 ) , and the immersion oil ( n = 1 . 52 ) . Due to the limited spatial resolution of 2D DL , the effect on image quality or the resolution is not very significant or observable in most images of the interface . However , the 3D localization precision and localization accuracy will degrade rapidly in the presence of spherical aberrations and will deteriorate the final SR reconstruction image quality 17 - 23 . To mitigate spherical aberrations arising from imaging cells on quartz nanopillar substrates with 3D SR , we repurposed a silicone OIO with a correction collar in order to more carefully match the refractive index mismatches . Similar to water immersion ( WI ) objectives that index match to aqueous media with a carefully chosen glass substrate thickness , the silicone OIOs strive to use the approximate match between the silicone oil ( n = 1 . 40 ) and the index in the cell cytoplasm . As a result of the objective design , the optical path mismatch induced by a glass coverslip can be reduced by carefully adjusting the correction collar . The silicone OIO has been employed successfully in various microscopy methods 24 , 25 . Here we show that the adjustable silicone OIO can also work well with the cells - on - quartz nanopillar 3D SR imaging problem . Figure 1A depicts the advantages of using a silicone OIO compared to the standard OIO for a simple case where a cell is imaged on a flat quartz coverslip . With the standard OIO , light refracts between the cell cytoplasm and the coverslip and between the coverslip and oil . Ultimately , the wavefront distortion from the refraction results in the spherical aberrations 26 that degrade localization precision and accuracy . However , with the calibrated silicone oil objective , the light experiences minimal refraction at the interfaces , and there is less wavefront distortion , less spherical aberration , and higher image quality . The only issue here is whether the silicone OIO can be corrected sufficiently for our quartz substrate , given the objective design assumes glass coverslips . The correction collar of the silicone OIO is first carefully tested on a 200 micron thick quartz coverslip , the thickness used to fabricate nanopillars in later experiments . To do this , we imaged 200 nm poly ( styrene ) fluorescent beads immobilized in 5 % agarose on 200 micron thick quartz coverslips at various collar adjustments , and the extent of spherical aberrations at each adjustment was assessed by quantifying the peak intensity of the bead image spots . Spherical aberrations will reduce peak intensity because the photon distribution is spread over a larger spatial scale 27 , 28 . The peak intensity of the observed spot is a common metric used to assess the extent of spherical aberrations present in the image and has been used in approaches such as adaptive optics 29 , 30 . We set the correction collar to the adjustment with the maximum peak intensity ( Methods and Figure S1A ) . This adjustment was used for all imaging experiments involving the 200 micron thick quartz substrate . Figure 1B depicts representative beads on 200 micron thick quartz substrates imaged with both the standard and silicone OIOs . The bead imaged with the silicone OIO has a more tightly focused photon distribution and thus higher peak intensity compared to the bead imaged with the standard OIO . Horizontal cross sections fit to a Gaussian ( plots below bead images ) also show that the full width half maximum is smaller for the bead imaged with the silicone OIO . We conclude that fewer spherical aberrations are present leading to expected superior performance 4 with the silicone OIO compared to the standard oil OIO . Quantifying the spherical aberrations over many beads imaged with both objectives further confirms the approach ( Figure S1B ) . Figure 1 : Comparison of silicone OIO standard OIO ( std . ) . ( A ) Cartoon schematic depicting how light rays refract using the std . OIO ( left ) and the silicone OIO on quartz ( Qtz ) substrates . ( B ) . Images of 200 nm beads immobilized in 5 % agarose on quartz coverslips imaged with both objectives ( top ) . Calibration bar depicts ADC counts on the EMCCD camera . Cross sections ( orange and blue lines ) are fit to a Gaussian ( bottom ) . The full width half maximum ( purple double arrow ) is clearly smaller for the case with the silicone OIO ( C ) DL ( left ) and 2D SR reconstructions ( middle and right ) of FBP - 17 labeled cells imaged with the std . OIO and silicone OIOs grown on glass and quartz substrates respectively . Calibration bar depicts number of localizations in each bin of the histogram reconstruction ( bin size 32 nm ) . Orange and blue boxes are magnified images of the 2D SR reconstructions . White arrows show examples of tubule invaginations . 5 Imaging on quartz substrates with a silicone OIO can then be extended to cellular SR imaging . We first chose to verify that the SR image quality from cells adhering to quartz substrates using the silicone OIO are comparable to the quality from standard imaging approaches : imaging cells on glass substrates with the standard OIO . We overexpressed the protein Formin - binding protein 17 ( FBP17 ) in U2OS cells and grew cells on glass and quartz substrates . FBP17 is a Bin / amphiphysin / Rvs ( BAR ) domain protein , a class of proteins that are banana - shaped , bind preferentially to regions of membrane curvature , and can also induce membrane curvature 31 - 33 . When overexpressed in cells , FBP17 forms tubule invaginations that are not resolvable using DL imaging 34 . The ability to resolve the tubule invaginations will be used to compare the image quality of both imaging modalities . FBP17 was expressed with a green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) domain fusion and was labeled with GFP nanobodies covalently labeled with Alexa Fluor 647 ( AF647 , Figure S1C for controls ) . 2D Stochastic Optical Resolution Microscopy ( STORM 35 , dSTORM 36 ) SR data was acquired by imaging fixed cells close to the coverslip with high laser intensity in a blinking buffer . We also call this type of SR microscopy SMACM for single - molecule active control microscopy 37 as a more general term for any mechanism that forces the concentration of emitting molecules in single frames down to a sparse level allowing for single - molecule localizations and subsequent SR reconstruction . The data was then processed to yield 2D SR reconstructions . Figure 1C ( first column ) depicts the DL images of labeled FBP17 cells in both objective / substrate combinations . Due to the diffraction limit , the features of the invaginations are not easily apparent . The second and third columns show the 2D SR reconstructions of the cells first on a large scale and then as magnified images , respectively . The features of the tubule invaginations in the SR reconstructions are much more clearly observed and , qualitatively , the invaginations appear similar in both situations . In addition , the median localization precision is 10 nm ( Figure S1D for distributions ) for both cases , and quantification of the diameters of the invaginations ( Figure S1E ) is similar for both configurations and is in close agreement to literature 38 , 39 . Thus , as the image quality is both qualitatively and quantitatively similar for both imaging configurations , 2D SR imaging of cells on quartz substrates with the silicone immersion objectives retains the image quality found using standard SR imaging approaches . 3D SR microscopy of surface - labeled nanopillars using a double - helix PSF microscope Next , the imaging configuration combing a quartz substrate and silicone OIO must be adapted for 3D SR imaging of the nano - bio interface . Even with standard open - aperture widefield microscopy , the shape of the detected single - molecule spots , regarded here as the point spread function ( PSF ) , changes as a function of defocus . However , extracting 3D position from the shape changes is challenging . The shape of the standard PSF is symmetric above and below focus , resulting in potential redundancy of the Z position . In addition , the shape quickly blurs 400 nm away from focus in both directions , and determining Z requires high signal - to - noise 40 . As cells and the nanopillars may extend in the axial direction several microns , the relatively short imaging range of ~ 800 nm is not desirable . To circumvent these issues , we used PSF engineering approaches to more optimally extract Z - position , as described in many previous studies 41 - 43 . In PSF engineering , we insert a simple transmissive phase mask in the Fourier plane ( conjugate to the back focal plane ) of the microscope . As the Fourier plane is usually found close to the back of the objective in many microscopes , it can be challenging to access . Thus , we used simple 4f emission processing optics 6 outside the microscope to relay the collected fluorescence light from the usual image plane to a new image plane four focal lengths away . Now there is easy access to the Fourier plane as illustrated in Fig . 2A . The phase mask imparts a phase delay in the collected fluorescence light that modulates the shape of the PSF after the light is focused on the camera detector . Here we chose to insert a double - helix phase mask 41 in the Fourier plane of our microscope ( phase pattern Fig 2A inset ) , which has been used in previous 3D SR imaging experiments with cells 21 , 44 , 45 . The modified PSF now has two lobes and is termed the double - helix PSF ( DHPSF ) 41 . The axial range of this DHPSF design is 2 microns , the shape is asymmetric above and below focus , and it changes rapidly with Z , circumventing the issues of the standard PSF for 3D imaging and facilitating precise Z position estimation . The XY position is extracted by fitting the DHPSF spot on the camera ( see Fig 2D for examples ) to a double - Gaussian function and finding the midpoint of the fit . As the angle between the lobes rotates as a function of the Z position of the emitter , a carefully calibrated curve measured prior to data acquisition connects the lobe angle to Z position . We note that no scanning of the objective or the stage occurs during data acquisition . The focus is simply set to one position , and we acquire DHPSF images of all emitters over the entire axial range of the DHPSF and extract the Z position in post processing . This localization estimation procedure has been shown to provide localization errors independent of Z , as opposed to other approaches to 3D such as astigmatism 43 . Using the silicone OIO and a DHPSF microscope , in principle we can now image proteins in 3D near the quartz nanopillars . However , a certain degree of spherical aberration may still be present and may potentially be Z - dependent . For instance , the light closer to the top of nanopillars experiences more refraction than the light near the bottom of the pillars . Therefore , we chose a model system to first benchmark the image quality of our 3D SR reconstructions . We will compare the dimensions and shapes extracted from 3D SR reconstructions of covalently surface - labeled nanopillars and from scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) images of the nanopillars . If the image quality is high , the shapes and dimensions of the 3D SR reconstructions should be similar to the shapes and dimensions from the SEM images . Fabrication of the nanopillars is described in the next paragraph , so we continue with 3D SR DHPSF imaging of covalently labeled quartz nanopillars here . To optically image these pillars , we first surface - labeled them by modifying the surface with free amine groups and then covalently attaching AF647 fluorophores using NHS chemistry with low nonspecific binding ( Methods and Figure S2C for controls ) . We then collected many frames containing emitters bound to many pillars and within the axial range of the DHPSF . Figure 2B is a representative small field of view ( FOV ) in a frame of our acquired data where we see three emitters with various lobe angles and thus , different Z - positions . Figure 2C ( top ) depicts the calibration curve that connects the lobe angle to Z position of a poly ( styrene ) fluorescent bead on the surface ; this was acquired by moving to known Z positions using a precise motorized piezo stage prior to SMACM data acquisition . Using this curve and double - Gaussian fits , we extract the 3D position of the emitter along the nanopillars for all the blinking single molecules from the camera image stack . Figure 2D showcases selected emitters at different Z positions . As the heights of the pillars are 884  72 nm ( mean  standard deviation ) , the entire axial range of the DHPSF is not fully utilized here . The total axial range of the emitters in Figure 2D covers the entire height of the pillar selected . The other crucial aspect of our experiments is the fabrication of the quartz nanopillars , which follows previous work with some modifications . One modification utilized nanopillars fabricated with photolithography and chemical etching methods rather than electron beam 7 lithography , in order to easily add a design containing a reference marker in an array pattern ( Fig . 3A , described in Methods and Figure S2A ) . The reference marker allowed specific correlation between a pillar in the 3D SR reconstructions and the same pillar in the SEM image . To reduce the diameter of nanopillars to below the optical diffraction limit , we employed wet etching after the dry etching step . We used buffer oxide etchant for quartz substrate , which provides a generally isotropic process to remove material from the substrate and shrink material to a given dimension . This fabrication process resulted in tapering elliptical pillars ( see Figure S2B for details on height and diameter measurements ) that have an indentation or dimple close to the coverslip . The tapering stems from differences in the rate of chemical etching along the pillar while the dimple is a residual from the photolithography step of the fabrication process . 8 Figure 2 : Schematic of microscope and representative images of single molecules imaged with the DHPSF . ( A ) Cartoon depiction of our DHPSF microscope . Excitation light entering the objective in the epifluorescence configuration is used to image surface labeled nanopillars . The emission is relayed through 4f emission optics onto the camera detector . The DHPSF mask ( mask shown by arrow ) is inserted in the Fourier plane for 3D imaging . Calibration bar in units of radians . ( B ) Representative field of view of experimental data showing three emitters . As the lobe angles for all three emitters is varied , the Z positions are different . ( C ) This plot depicts the calibration curve that correlates the lobe angle to the Z position . ( D ) Selected images reveal experimental DHPSFs extracted from a SMACM dataset of the surface - labeled nanopillars . The emitters were fit to extract the Z position ( Z position shown in top right of image ) . 9 Comparing SEM images and 3D SR reconstructions With the fabricated and labeled nanopillars and the 3D DHPSF SR imaging in hand , the two imaging modalities may be directly compared as shown in Figure 3 . Figure 3B depicts the DL and 3D SR reconstructions of the same nanopillar array in 3A . The DL image shows bright spots in the same array pattern as the SEM image . As the molecules along the shaft of the fluorescently labeled 3D nanopillar pillar will all project onto a 2D image corresponding to the focal depth of ~ 700 - 800 nm , the apparent density of fluorophore at the nanopillars will be higher compared to the coverslip . Thus , the bright spots in the DL image correspond to the positions of labeled nanopillars . At the right of Figure 3B , the surface - labeled nanopillars were then imaged with the DHPSF 3D microscope . Any emitters that were poorly localized ( XY precisions > 30 nm and Z precisions > 40 nm ) were filtered and removed . Further , we merged molecules to correct for overcounting ( Methods and Figure S3A ) . After filtering , the median XY localization precision is 12 nm while the median Z precision is 27 nm , both precisions an order of magnitude better than that possible in DL imaging ( Figure S3B for histograms of localization precisions ) . The XY projection of the 3D SR reconstructions ( Figure 3B first of two right images ) show an array pattern of regions containing a high density of localizations showing the location of the nanopillars . The color scale encodes the Z position in the reconstruction . As the coverslip is also labeled , the teal color in the reconstruction indicates the location of the coverslip ( see Figure S3C for an additional 3D SR reconstruction ) . Critically , the array patterns of the nanopillars from the DL image and the 3D SR reconstructions are in good agreement with the same pattern from the SEM images . In addition , rotating the 3D SR reconstruction to show a 3D perspective ( far right Figure 3B ) shows cylindrical , pillar - like structures similar to that in the SEM images . Figure 3C shows a magnification of one specific pillar at four different orientations ( pillar zoomed in marked with * in Figure 3B ) . Qualitatively , the 3D SR results are quite similar to the SEM image . The pillar is straight and does not have any distorting shapes . As only the outer surface of the nanopillars are labeled with fluorophores , XY projections at various Z positions should appear as hollow elliptical rings given sufficiently high 3D precision . Figure 3D depicts 100 nm Z - slices from the bottom to the top of the nanopillar illustrated in Figure 3C . For all these slices except at the top of the nanopillar , elliptical hollow rings are evident . As the top cap of the pillar is also labeled , the top slice , as expected , is not a hollow ring but an ellipse filled with localizations . These Z - slices further underscore the high image quality in our 3D SR reconstructions . Furthermore , the Z - slices at the bottom ( Z = - 0 . 7 microns ) show a dense number of localizations that surround the pillars . At Z = - 0 . 6 microns , we observe a dark void roughly ~ 1 um in diameter surrounding the labeled nanopillar . Interestingly , this dark void is surrounded by localizations that do not stem from the nanopillar . These localizations are from the coverslip , and the appearance of the dark void 100 nm away from the bottom arises due to the dimple found at the bottom of the nanopillar . The many qualitative observations described here establish that the nanopillars from the 3D SR reconstructions have the same features and shapes as the pillars in the SEM images . 10 To quantitatively verify the high image quality , we compared the measured diameters of the pillars in the 3D SR reconstructions and the SEM images . First , we extracted the diameter at the axial half - way point in the SEM images by inspection of the SEM micrograph . To extract the diameters in the 3D SR reconstructions , we found the center of the pillars along z , and then took a 250 nm thick Z slice at the center ( see Methods and Figure S4A for details ) . We then fit the XY projection of the localizations in this slice to an ellipse ( Figure 3E ) , and used the major and minor axes of the ellipse fit as estimations for the diameter . Only the diameter from the fit that Figure 3 : Comparison between 3D SR reconstructions of surface - labeled nanopillars and SEM images . ( A ) SEM images of a patterned array of nanopillars . The reference marker ( E9 ) is clearly visible in the top left image of the nanopillars with a 30 ° tilt . The magnified images to the right of the image show an individual nanopillar ; top with the tilt and bottom a top - down view . The dimple at the coverslip and elliptical shape of the pillars are clearly visible . ( B ) Top left is a cartoon depiction demonstrating imaging surface - labeled nanopillars . Below , the bright puncta in an array of surface - labeled nanopillars is visible in the DL image . Right : Two orientations of the 3D SR reconstructions show an array of nanopillars . Color encodes Z position . CS in calibration bar refers to the position of the coverslip . ( C ) Magnified images of an individual pillar ( * in B ) at various orientations . ( D ) 100 nm Z - slices of the pillar ( C ) from the bottom of the coverslip to the top of the nanopillar . Clear elliptical - shaped rings are visible . ( E ) 250 nm Z - slices of the 3D data shown as an XY projection at the center of an individual nanopillar fit to an ellipse . The orange dotted line is one axis extracted from the fit and may be compared to diameters extracted from SEM images . ( F ) . Histogram depicts the difference in diameter between the 3D SR reconstructions and the SEM images of the nanopillars . 11 was at the same orientation of the SEM image in Figure 3A was used . Using the SEM reference marker as a guide , we then took the difference between the diameters from the 3D SR reconstruction and the SEM image of the same pillar for all the pillars analyzed ( Figure 3F , n = 31 pillars analyzed ) . The mean difference was 8 . 0  4 . 7 nm ( mean  standard error of the mean ) , indicating the diameters of our 3D SR reconstruction do not differ strongly from the SEM measurement , now benchmarked by correlative imaging . As the pillars taper , we hypothesized the density of 3D single - molecule localizations would decrease as a function of distance away from the coverslip . To test this , we extracted 50 nm thick Z - slices from the bottom of the coverslip to the top of the pillar ( Figure 4A and Figure 4 : Quantification of density of molecules along nanopillars . ( A ) . Cartoon depiction demonstration the protocol to extract the density of molecules along nanopillars form the 3D SR reconstructions of surface - labeled nanopillars . Localizations are projected onto the Z axis in 50 nm Z - slices from the bottom to the top of the nanopillar . ( B ) . Compiled histogram of n = 16 nanopillars demonstrating how the density varies along the nanopillar . As the pillars taper , we see the density decrease closer to the top . ( C ) . 3D density plot of a simulated tapering nanopillar . Each localization is colored based on the local density . ( D ) . Compiled histogram of n = 16 simulated nanopillars . Distribution very similar to the experimental distribution in B . Values in bins of histogram are mean  standard error of the mean ( SEM ) . 12 Methods for more details ) . The 50 nm Z - slices over many pillars ( n = 16 ) were binned into a histogram ( Figure 4B ) , which shows that as the distance away from the coverslip increases , the density of localizations decreases , as we expect . To verify the behavior of this distribution , we simulated nanopillars with single - molecule localizations randomly decorating the surface of the pillars ( Fig . 4C ) . The extent of tapering , the diameters , and the heights of the nanopillars were similar to the experimentally measured dimensions ( see Methods for details ) . Critically , the probability that a localization was found at a specific region of the pillar was determined by the surface area at that section of the pillar to mimic the expected local behavior of the surface attachment . The positions of the simulated localizations were distorted in the XY and Z direction by Gaussian kicks with sigmas equivalent to the median XY and Z localization precisions to simulate realistic experimental conditions . Figure 4C depicts a 3D scatter plot of simulated nanopillar molecule localizations ( see Figure S4B for an additional orientation ) where the color encodes the number of nearest neighbors to each point . Qualitatively , the 3D scatter plot reveals that the number of localizations decreases closer to the top for the simulated nanopillar , similar to the experimental nanopillars . We then extracted 50 nm Z - slices along the pillar using the same methodology as the experimental measurement . Compiling the Z - slices over 16 simulated pillars ( same number of experimental pillars used in this analysis ) and binning the data into a histogram leads to the distribution in Figure 4D ( see Figure S4C for distribution of simulated pillars without Gaussian kicks added ) . The shape of the distribution of the simulated pillars very closely resembles the shape of the distribution from the experimental data . This analysis verifies that the pillars taper with the measured localization density decreasing in an expected manner . Cell membrane - nanopillar interactions revealed from 3D SR reconstructions Turning to cellular imaging , we first applied our method on a simple cellular system : the plasma membrane itself . Previous FIB - SEM and TEM approaches have imaged the membrane - nanopillar interface to reveal that the membrane can wrap around the pillars tightly 12 , 13 . Thus , unlike proteins which may exhibit biologically more complex behavior near the nanopillars , the membrane is a relatively simple cellular system to first demonstrate that our 3D SR method is applicable to imaging the nano - bio interface in cells . To label the membrane , we overexpressed a transmembrane domain of platelet - derived growth factor receptor ( PDGFR ) linked to a SNAP tag ( Methods ) in U - 2 OS cells that were seeded onto the nanopillar substrate . The SNAP tag reaction was then used to attach AF647 with low nonspecific binding ( see Figure S5A for controls ) . With this approach , the transmembrane domain is a single alpha helix that simply serves to anchor the fluorophore to the membrane . DL images ( Figure 5A ) show a labeled membrane with bright spots that are the nanopillars in the expected array pattern . After 3D DHPSF imaging , post - processing , filtering , and merging the data , the XY projection of the 3D SR reconstruction ( Figure 5A , middle and right columns ) also shows highly dense regions of localizations in an array corresponding to the locations of the nanopillars ( median XY precision : 10 nm and median Z precision : 20 nm , see Figure S5B for distributions ) . This allows us to conclude that the area surrounding the nanopillar is the cellular membrane . As we image near the growing edge of the adhering cell whose membrane spreads on the substrate , we can observe many membrane protrusions . Projecting the reconstruction at a different orientation , the nanopillars appear as cylindrical pillar like structures , as expected ( Figure 5A , see Figure S5C for an additional 3D SR reconstruction ) . 13 Figure 5B shows various perspective orientations of an individual pillar in the 3D reconstruction from 5A ( denoted by the * in Figure 5A ) . We clearly see that the membrane wraps around the pillar tightly as it appears contiguous with the nanopillar . The membrane imaging also shows that the nanopillar is elliptical in cross section and is perpendicular to the surface . To benchmark the image quality of the reconstructions , we extracted 100 nm Z - slices from the bottom to the top of the membrane - wrapped nanopillar ( Figure 5C ) . Similar to the surface - labeled nanopillar reconstructions , with sufficiently high 3D precision , the Z - slices appear as hollow elliptical rings as we labeled the membrane surrounding the outer surface of the pillar . Figure 5C also shows that the hollow elliptical rings change at the top cap region where we observe an ellipse filled with localizations . These Z - slices confirm the capability to observe membrane - labeled cells hugging the nanopillars . Interestingly , for several nanopillars , we observed a bulge - like feature at certain Z positions along the pillar . Figure 3D ( white arrow on left panel ) shows one such example where a bulge is prominently protruding out from the membrane wrapped nanopillar . A 100 nm Z slice of the image on the right shows a hollow elliptical ring , the membrane wrapped - nanopillar , attached to another hollow ring . We hypothesize this attached hollow ring may be a vesicle forming and budding off from the nanopillar . Vesicles have previously been observed to bud off nanopillars from TEM images 12 , but observing such an effect is not easily possible with 2D DL imaging approaches . Next , we probed how tightly the membrane wraps around the nanopillars . In previous work , some investigators have assumed that the membrane wraps tightly around the nanopillar , so that measurement of the membrane diameter is equivalent to the diameter of the nanopillar itself 11 , 12 . Those studies have probed the influence of membrane curvature on the cell and curvature - sensing proteins indirectly by using nanopillar diameter as a proxy . In fact , studying how the membrane wraps around the nanopillars with EM imaging can be extremely challenging . For instance , while FIB - SEM methods have investigated the interaction between the membrane and nanopillars 13 , successful FIB - SEM imaging involves cross sectioning the interface between a hard ( pillars ) and soft ( cell ) materials . Cross sectioning between materials of different physical properties may induce artifacts . With the 3D SR method presented here , a fluorescence imaging technique can now be applied to directly probe the difference in the measured diameters between the nanopillar and the membrane . To compare and extract the diameters by the two approaches , similar to Figures 3E and 3F , we found the center axial positions of the nanopillar regions in our surface - labeled and membrane - labeled 3D SR reconstructions . From this location , a 250 nm Z - slice was projected onto the XY plane and fit to an ellipse . In our previous analysis , we extracted a diameter derived from a single axis of the fit to match the SEM orientation ( see Methods for more details ) . Here , we now simply average the diameters extracted from the two axes of the fit . The averaged diameters over many nanopillars ( n = 31 for surface - labeled nanopillars and n = 27 for membrane label ) are shown in the histogram of Figure 5E . The distributions show that the membrane labeled distribution is shifted towards larger diameters . The membrane labeled reconstructions have diameters of 302  4 . 2 nm ( mean  SEM ) while the surface - labeled nanopillars have diameters of 250 . 7  3 . 9 nm . This roughly 50 nm difference suggests ~ 25 nm gap distance between the cell membrane and the nanopillar surface , which agrees very well with previous measurements from FIB - SEM images 13 . Thus , our 3D SR method allows for relatively fast and simple imaging of the membrane at the nano - bio interface and illustrates that the difference between the diameters of the membrane and that of the underlying nanopillar can be observed . 14 Figure 5 : 3D SR reconstructions of transmembrane - labeled cells . ( A ) Top left depicts a cartoon where we image the membrane at the nanopillars . Below the cartoon , the DL image shows bright puncta corresponding to the positions of the nanopillars in the DL image . The two 3D SR reconstructions at the right at different orientations reveal the membrane wrapping around the nanopillar array . Color encodes Z position and CS refers to the coverslip axial position . ( B ) Magnified images of a single pillar ( * in A ) at various orientations . The membrane is visibly wrapping around this pillar . ( C ) 100 nm Z - slices from the bottom to the top of the nanopillar in C . Bottom right values indicate Z position . Clear hollow elliptical rings are visible in the slices . ( D ) Two orientations of an individual pillar with a possible endocytosis event at the pillar . The white arrow points to the possible vesicle in both orientations . ( E ) Diameters at the center of the nanopillars extracted from surface - labeled and transmembrane labeled 3D SR reconstructions . The distribution from the transmembrane labeled cells is shifted towards higher values . 15 3D SR reconstructions find that AP - 2 distributes away from the nanopillar base With successful application of our 3D SR method to the labeled plasma membrane , we next imaged a more complex biological system at the nano - bio interface : the spatial distribution of an intracellular protein AP - 2 . AP - 2 is a multi - subunit protein complex that is s critical adaptor protein for clathrin - mediated endocytosis 46 - 48 . AP - 2 has previously been shown to accumulate near nanopillars fabricated with high degrees of curvature 12 . To image AP - 2 , we used primary and secondary antibodies ( see Methods and Figure S6A for controls ) where the secondary has a blinking AF647 dye attached . Figure 6A shows the DL image of AP - 2 labeled cells grown on the quartz nanopillars . Similar to our previous results , the bright puncta in a specific patterned array show the location of the nanopillar and reveals that AP - 2 accumulates at the nanopillars . The bright puncta are resolved as elliptical rings as shown in the XY projection of the 3D SR reconstruction in Figure 6A , middle image , and in the magnified images ( see Figure S6B for additional reconstructions ) . In addition , we observe unstructured features colored with teal in the reconstruction . The magnified image ( Figure 6A ) shows an example of one unstructured feature more clearly . These structures , also termed plaques , form on the cellular surface next to the coverslip and have been observed in previous SR experiments imaging AP - 2 49 . Thus , these plaques give us a reference to the coverslip position . 16 Strikingly , AP2 does not distribute uniformly on the surface of nanopillars like the membrane marker . The rings at the location of the nanopillars do not have AP - 2 localizations encoded in the color teal , indicating that AP - 2 does not localize around or near the bottom of the pillar . Figure 6B is a XZ projection of a region close to one nanopillar demonstrating the behavior of AP - 2 along the pillar . Adjacent to the pillar , there is plaque locating the coverslip . However , on the pillar ( depicted with the dotted white lines ) , we observe that the majority of AP - Figure 6 : 3D SR reconstructions of cells grown on nanopillars containing labeled AP - 2 proteins . ( A ) Cartoon in the top left depicts imaging the cytoplasmic curvature - sensing protein AP - 2 at the nano - bio interface . Below the cartoon , we see bright puncta corresponding to the positions of the nanopillars in the DL image . The 3D SR reconstruction to the right shows a large field , and AP - 2 distributing around the pillars ( orange inset ) and also on the coverslip ( magenta inset ) . Z position encoded by color and CS refers to position of coverslip in calibration bar . ( B ) . XZ projection of an individual pillar . Dotted white line was manually drawn to indicate pillar shape and location . White arrow points to AP - 2 distributing on the coverslip . AP - 2 on the pillar appears to distribute away from the pillar bottom . ( C ) 100 nm Z - slices from the bottom to the top of the nanopillars . Red dots indicate positions of the nanopillar . AP - 2 protein appear to form sectors of rings near the pillars and with few localizations at the pillar bottom ( coverslip ) . 17 2 are distributed at a higher axial position on the nanopillar compared to the position of the plaque . Figure 6C further confirms this result by showing 100 nm Z - slices from the bottom to the top of various nanopillars , where the red dots indicate the positions of the nanopillars . Close to the bottom ( z = - 0 . 4 to - 0 . 2  m ) , we observe very few AP - 2 molecules distributed at the pillars . Instead , we observe the plaques that adhere to the coverslip . As the distance away from the coverslip increases , AP - 2 molecules start to localize on the nanopillars forming rings and sectors of rings . Again , 3D SR imaging at the nano - bio interface shows features not observable with conventional 2D DL imaging . Only with sufficient resolution and 3D information can we observe that AP - 2 prefers to distribute away from the coverslip at higher Z - positions along the nanopillar shaft . This result will be explored in more quantitative detail below . 3D SR reconstructions of actin molecules , fibers , and bundles distributing at the nanopillars Next , we investigated the nanoscale distribution of actin molecules at the nano - bio interface . Actin is a well - known cytoskeletal protein with many functions , for example polymerization to form fibers that are critical for processes such as cell motility 50 , cell division 51 , and clathrin - mediated endocytosis 52 . In addition , the polymerization of actin fiber is curvature sensitive and has been shown to reorganize upon changes in membrane curvature 11 . To label actin , we used phalloidin , a small molecule that binds specifically to actin fibers , linked with AF647 ( see Methods and Figure S7A for controls ) . Figure 7A , left , shows the DL image of an actin - labeled cell . We observe bright puncta organized in an array corresponding to actin fibers distributing at the nanopillars as previously reported . We also observe actin fibers throughout the cell . Figure 7A ( middle and right ) shows an XY projection of the 3D SR reconstruction ( see Figure S7B for an additional reconstruction ) . We clearly observe actin fibers that are located at various Z positions in the reconstruction . In addition , we see regions where actin is accumulating around the nanopillars . To observe these features more clearly , Figure 7A , right , also shows a 300 nm thick Z slice at the coverslip . The white arrows depict the actin fibers and the regions where actin accumulates around the nanopillars . 18 We extracted 100 nm Z - slices from the 3D SR data from the bottom to the top of various nanopillars to more clearly visualize the behavior of actin around the pillars . As expected , in these Z - slices , we see hollow rings that are generally surrounded by actin molecules . Nearby actin fibers are prominently seen located by the pillars at Z = 0 . 15 microns . Strikingly , a few of the nanopillars appear to be surrounded by a hair - like structure as well . Potentially this hair - like structure arises from actin bundles accumulating at the nanopillars or from fibers that wrap around the pillars ( Figure 7C ) . These hair - like features on the pillars are large ( 1 - 2 microns ) but the fine features and are much more challenging to clearly observe in the DL image because they seem to occur only at certain Z - positions . Figure 7 : 3D SR reconstructions of labeled actin in cells incubated on nanopillars . ( A ) DL image ( top left ) shows a cell where the bright puncta correspond to regions of the nanopillars . The XY projection of the 3D SR reconstruction ( middle ) shows nanopillar regions and actin fibers . The 300 nm Z - slice close to the coverslip ( right ) more clearly shows the nanopillar regions and actin fibers ( white arrows ) . ( B ) 100 nm Z - slices from the bottom to the top of the nanopillars . We observe the actin fibers and elliptical hollow rings at the nanopillars . ( C ) Magnified images of actin at specific pillars and Z - positions shown in B ( magenta , teal , and orange boxes ) . The actin at these locations appears to form hair - like structures that are difficult to observe with DL imaging . 19 AP - 2 molecules distribute along nanopillars at increased 1 / R membrane curvature regions The 3D SR reconstructions of the membrane , AP - 2 , and actin , all reveal features that now may be quantified . We consider the density of molecules along the pillars and compare the behavior of the various labels and biomolecules . For instance , AP - 2 appears to distribute closer to the top of the pillars . In contrast , the membrane appears to have a more homogenous density of molecules along the entire pillar . To quantify the density of localizations for membrane , AP - 2 , and actin reconstructions , we projected 3D localizations of the molecules surrounding the nanopillars into 50 nm thick Z - slices , similar to our previous analysis with the surface - labeled nanopillars ( Figure 4A depicts a cartoon describing the analysis ) . For each of the labeled targets , the 50 nm Z - slices over many pillars were binned into histograms . Figure 8A shows the distribution of molecules along the nanopillars for the membrane ( n = 37 pillars analyzed ) . Given that the pillars taper , the surface area available to the membrane will thereby decrease and thus , we would expect that the number of molecules would gradually decrease towards the top of the pillar , maximizing near the bottom of the pillar . While the density of molecules does gradually decrease closer to the top of the nanopillar , we observe that the number of molecules near the very bottom ( Z = 0 - 100 nm ) is low and progressively increases to a maximum around Z = 200 nm . This result is consistent with previous findings 53 where the membrane did not fully wrap near the bottom of the nanopillar . Instead , the membrane rises from flat regions near the coverslip until the membrane encounters a nanopillar where it then wraps around the pillar . Figure 8B is the histogram for the AP - 2 labeled cells ( n = 49 pillars analyzed ) . The distribution significantly differs from the membrane - labeled distribution and reflects the behavior we observed in the 3D SR reconstructions of AP - 2 labeled cells ( Figure 6 ) . We observe that the density is very low from Z = 0 to Z = 200 nm . From Z = 200 nm , the density gradually rises until it reaches a maximum at Z = 500 nm . Further up the nanopillar , we would expect that the density of molecules might decrease above Z = 700 nm as the cap is approached . While the density does indeed decrease , strikingly , the density decreases at a rate much smaller than the rate found in the distribution derived from membrane labeled cells . This result reveals that AP - 2 does not homogenously distribute on the membrane along nanopillars . Instead , AP - 2 appears to prefer the middle and top of rather than the bottom of the nanopillars . Figure 8C depicts the histogram for actin labeled cells ( n = 27 pillars analyzed ) . Similar to the membrane , the density of molecules from Z = 0 to Z = 100 nm is low . The density gradually increases until a maximum is reached around Z = 450 nm . The density of molecules decreases from the maximum , although , similar to the AP - 2 labeled cells , the rate of decrease is much slower compared to the rate for membrane - labeled cells in Figure 8A . In general , the actin and membrane distributions are similar except the rate decreases closer to the top of the nanopillars . As the nanopillars taper , their 2 - dimensional curvature , the reciprocal of the radius of a cross section at fixed Z ( which we term 1 / R curvature ) , increases from the bottom to the top . ( For the nearly cylindrical structure of the pillar shaft , the axial curvature is approximately zero . ) Thus , we hypothesized that it is this strong variation in 1 / R curvature along the pillars that drives AP - 2 to preferentially accumulate at regions away from the bottom of the nanopillar . To first assess the extent of tapering , we extracted the diameter along the pillars from the SEM images to calculate the 1 / R curvature ( see Methods and Figure S8A for additional details ) . For simplicity , we only extracted the diameters at the orientation shown in the side view magnification in Figure 20 3A . As the very top or the cap of the nanopillar is approximately shaped as a hemisphere , the 2D 1 / R curvature metric is not well suited for the 3D surface at the top . Thus , we have excluded calculations of 1 / R curvature near the top of the nanopillar for all our results . Figure 8D shows how the 1 / R curvature changes along the pillar . We clearly observe that as the Z position increases , the curvature increases as well . However , as we described earlier , the pillar curvature is not exactly equivalent to the membrane curvature . Before extracting the membrane curvature , as a positive control , we first extracted the 1 / R curvature along the pillar for our surface - labeled 3D SR reconstructions to compare to the 1 / R curvature measurements from the SEM images ( left and middle panels ) . To extract the curvature , we first measured the diameters of the pillars by fitting ellipses to projected 250 nm Z - slices that were centered at various axial points along the pillar ( see Methods and Figure S8B ) similar to our analysis above . From the ellipse fit , we extracted the diameter that was the same diameter measured in the side view SEM images in Figure 3A . Using the diameters and repeating this analysis procedure over many pillars , the 1 / R curvature was calculated and plotted as a function of position along the pillar in Figure 8D ( middle ) . We can clearly see that the plots and absolute values of 1 / R curvature from the SEM images and SR reconstructions are reasonably similar underscoring the good correspondence between the two methods . 21 Next , we calculated the 1 / R plasma membrane curvature at the nano - bio interface using the same analysis protocol used to calculate the plot in Figure 8D with slight modification . Instead of selecting for a diameter from either the major or minor axes of the ellipse fit , the diameters were simply averaged to calculate the 1 / R curvature for the membrane . Figure 8D ( right ) reveals how the membrane curvature varies along the pillar , increasing near the top due to the tapering . In addition , the 1 / R membrane curvature is also larger than the 1 / R curvature of the nanopillars themselves , as expected from the separation between the nanopillar and the membrane in Figure 3E . Critically , the membrane curvature plot reveals that AP - 2 , in particular , does not appear to preferentially accumulate at low degrees of membrane curvature near the Figure 8 : Quantifying molecular positions and the variation of 1 / R curvature along the nanopillars . ( A ) Distribution of molecules along nanopillars for transmembrane labeled cells quantified by projecting localizations in 50 nm Z - slices along pillar . We observe very few molecules near the bottom of the pillar and the distribution peaks around Z = 200 nm . As the pillars taper , the density decreases closer to the top . ( B ) . Distribution of molecules along nanopillars for AP - 2 . The density peaks around 500 nm and begins to decrease . Very few molecules are observed from Z = 0 to Z = 200 nm . ( C ) Distribution of molecules along nanopillars for actin . Similar to the membrane distribution , very few molecules are found near the coverslip . The distributions seem to peak near the middle and the density decreases closer to the top . ( D ) The 1 / R curvature along the nanopillars is calculated using the SEM images ( left ) , the surface - labeled 3D SR reconstructions ( middle ) , and the transmembrane labeled 3D SR reconstructions ( right ) . The curves for the SEM and surface - labeled nanopillar panels are similar . The double red arrows on the membrane curvature panel shows the regions where AP - 2 preferentially distributes at the nanopillar . The dotted black line shows where the nanopillar cap is located and 1 / R curvature was not analyzed in this region . Values in curves are mean  SEM . 22 bottom of the pillar ( Figure 8B ) . Only after the membrane curvature increases its value above a specific threshold ( shown by the red line in the right panel ) , we observe AP - 2 beginning to preferentially accumulate at the nanopillar . Positive Gaussian curvature at pillar caps increases relative density of AP - 2 and actin molecules The analysis presented above clearly reveals that increased 1 / R curvature leads to a higher density of AP - 2 molecules at higher axial positions along the pillar . While the curvature analysis at the cap of the nanopillar was excluded , the distributions in Figure 8B and 8C near the cap differ from the membrane distribution . Thus , we investigated how AP - 2 and actin behave at the cap more closely . The behavior near the cap , however , is obfuscated by variations in the membrane surface area , which may be regarded as the property that is locally sensed by these proteins . For instance , closer to the top of the pillar , the membrane surface area is smaller and thus , the density of molecules will decrease . To account for these effects , we normalized the distributions in Figures 8B and 8C by the membrane surface area found at each Z position of the histograms . To do this , we first assumed that the number of molecules in each Z position in the membrane distribution in Figure 8A is proportional to the membrane surface which can also be calculated at the cap region . Then , each Z position along the pillar in the AP - 2 and actin distributions was divided by the molecular count found at each Z position in the membrane distribution . The distribution in Figure 9A depicts the normalized distribution for AP - 2 along the entire pillar . Similar to the unnormalized distribution the relative density of AP - 2 molecules is close to zero from z = 0 to z = 200 nm , rises to a local maximum at z = 500 nm , and then plateaus until Z = 750 nm with the relative density of molecules being nearly double the density found in the membrane labeled cells . Strikingly , after Z = 750 nm , the distribution rapidly increases and maximizes at the cap of the nanopillar where the relative density is now nearly 8 times larger than the density found in the membrane . In addition , Figure 9B depicts the normalized histogram for actin which is similar , but with variations . First , from Z = 0 nm to Z = 750 nm , the density of actin molecules is roughly equivalent to the density of membrane molecules at these positions . However , past 750 nm , the relative density increases sharply until it maximizes at the top of the pillar . At the cap of the pillar , density of actin molecules is five times greater than the density of membrane molecules . 23 The rapid increase in the density of AP - 2 and actin molecules at the cap of the nanopillar indicates that the 3D shape of the pillar near the top influences the behavior of these proteins . We hypothesize that since the hemielliptical shape of the cap induces positive Gaussian curvature , it is this property that influences the behavior of AP - 2 and actin near the cap region . Gaussian curvature is a mathematical metric that is used to describe the curvature of 3D surfaces ( see Methods ) . Spherical objects such as spheres and ellipsoids have positive Gaussian curvature while saddle surfaces feature negative Gaussian curvature . The surfaces of cylinders have zero Gaussian curvature . For our nanopillars , we would expect that as the body of the pillar is a truncated cone , the Gaussian curvature is 0 along the shaft of the nanopillar while the hemielliptical cap has positive Gaussian curvature . Figure 9 : Quantifying density of molecules normalized to membrane surface area and Gaussian curvature analysis along nanopillars . ( A ) Distribution of molecules of AP - 2 in cells along nanopillars normalized to membrane surface area . We observe very few relative molecules near the bottom of the coverslip . The density is nearly twice that density found at the membrane from Z = 400 to Z = 800 nm . Near the top of the pillars , the relative density increases substantially . ( B ) . Distribution of actin molecules in cells near nanopillars normalized to membrane surface area . The density relative to the membrane is nearly constant until around Z = 800 nm . The density increases greatly after this point . ( C ) . Representative mesh surface derived from 3D localization data from the transmembrane labeled 3D SR reconstruction . ( D ) . Gaussian curvature along the nanopillar . Curvature is nearly 0 until 0 . 8 where it increases to relatively large positive values . Values are mean  SEM . 24 We used approaches previously described to extract the Gaussian curvature along the nanopillars 45 . Briefly , the screened Poisson surface reconstruction 54 algorithm was applied to the 3D localizations of the nanopillars to create a 3D triangulated surface mesh using the software MeshLab 55 ( Methods and Figure S9A ) . We created surfaces meshes using both the surface - labeled ( n = 15 ) and membrane labeled ( n = 14 ) 3D SR reconstructions . Figure 9C shows a surface mesh derived from the membrane labeled reconstructions ( see S9B for surface meshes from surface labeled reconstructions ) . From the surface , we can clearly see a pillar structure that has a hemielliptical cap , as expected . The surface mesh additionally reflects the positions of the 3D localizations and is hollow ( Figure S9C ) . Gaussian curvature was then calculated along the nanopillar as described previously 56 . The Gaussian curvature values along the mesh was projected into Z slices spaced equidistant along the pillar . The average Gaussian curvature in slices along the pillar was then calculated . As expected , the Gaussian curvature from the meshes of the surface labeled pillars ( Figure S9D ) is zero along the body and increases to positive values at the cap . In addition , we analyzed the Gaussian curvature from our simulated nanopillars and find ( n = 15 , Figure S9E ) similar behavior to the results from the surface - labeled nanopillars , further confirming our hypothesis that the Gaussian curvature would be highly positive near the cap . Finally , Figure 9D reveals the variation in Gaussian curvature from surfaces of the membrane labeled reconstructions . We clearly see close to zero Gaussian curvature along the body and highly positive Gaussian curvature near the cap . The highly positive values at the cap correlate well with the increased relative density of AP - 2 and actin molecules near the cap in Figures 9A and 9B . This result indicates that the positive Gaussian curvature may be the driver which increases the density of curvature - sensing proteins . Our results show that 2D and 3D variants of membrane curvature metrics , 1 / R curvature and Gaussian curvature , may influence the behavior of specific curvature - sensing proteins . Previous studies have assumed that the 1 / R curvature is critical for the behavior of curvature - sensing proteins at the nano - bio interface . Here , we show that the shape of the pillar is also critical for the behavior of these proteins . The positive Gaussian curvature at the top induces changes that may increase the density and behavior of the curvature - sensing proteins at the cap . Thus , future studies should systematically study the effects of 1 / R and Gaussian curvature separately for various curvature - sensing proteins to understand the contribution of each variant of curvature . This conclusion is enabled by using our described 3D SR method that allows probing 3D localizations of specific proteins at the nanoscale on nanofabricated quartz surfaces . Conclusion We have shown that having 3D SR information about the positions of the plasma membrane and various curvature - sensing proteins can lead to new insight about the cellular behaviors near nanopillars seeking to define a particular nano - bio interface . This arises from several factors : first the higher spatial resolution , second the 3D character of the information , and finally , since the acquisition method involves measuring the localization of many single molecules sampling the object of interest , it is then possible to apply powerful statistical methods from point - based image analysis to extract further insight . While previous studies were mostly focused on the importance of 1 / R curvature effects , here , we show distinct effects of 1 / R curvature vs . Gaussian curvature in affecting protein localizations . This ability can then be applied in future studies in 25 combination with assessment of cellular signaling changes . By directly demonstrating the power of the technique on realistic cellular imaging problems , we expect this approach to be widely applicable to other cellular imaging problems where nanoscale objects nearby drive the cellular response and behavior . Methods Nanopillar fabrication Quartz substrates were ordered from Technical Glass Products with dimension of 1 inch x 1 inch and 200 um thickness ( Technical Glass Product 1x1x0 . 2 ) . The substrates were cleaned by isopropyl alcohol and sonication to remove any surface particles . The substrates were then dehydrated at 180C on a hotplate for two minutes and then coated with hexamethyldisilazane ( HMDS ) to promote resist adhesion . Arrays of nanopillars were fabricated on these prepared substrates using a photolithography and wet etching technique . In the photolithography step , a positive photoresist ( Shipley 3612 ) was spin coated on the substrate and exposed by a mask - less aligner ( Heidelberg MLA - 150 ) to form arrays of circular holes . A chromium mask was later deposited onto the patterned substrates using electron - beam evaporation , and excess resist was removed by acetone , resulting in arrays of circular chromium disks for pillar fabrication . Vertical pillars were subsequently fabricated by anisotropic reactive ion etching with a mixture of CHF3 , C4F8 , and Ar ( Versaline LL - ICP Oxford etcher ) to produce a tapering vertical profile . The substrates were then immersed in Chromium Etchant 1020 ( Transene ) to remove the chrome mask . Nanopillars were subsequently modified through a wet etching technique to shrink the pillar diameters . The final nanopillar dimensions were precisely controlled by submerging the substrates in a Buffered Oxide Etchant 20 : 1 ( Transene ) . The final nanopillars were characterized with scanning electron microscopy . SEM imaging of nanopillars The SEM images were taken using a FEI Nova ( NanoSEM 450 ) . Since quartz is a non - conductive substrate , the imaging was operated with very low voltage ( 2kV ) . The images were taken with an Everhart - Thornley Detector in the Field - free mode at lower magnification , and in the immersion mode with Through - lens detector for high resolution imaging at high magnification . DNA vectors The vector for the eGFP - FBP17 protein fusion , pEGFP - C1 - FBP17 , was a gift from Pietro De Camilli ( Addgene plasmid # 22229 ) . To construct the vector for cell surface tethered SnapTag expression , the DNA fragment encoding SnapTag is cloned into pDisplay ( Invitrogen , V66020 ) between restriction sites BglII and SalI . 26 Cell culture and transfection U - 2 OS cells ( ATCC® HTB - 96™ ) were maintained at 37°C , 5 % of CO 2 atmosphere in complete cell culture medium ( Dulbecco ' s Modified Eagle ' s Medium , DMEM ) ( Sigma - Aldrich , D6429 ) supplied with 10 % ( v / v ) Fetal Bovine Serum ( FBS ) ( Sigma - Aldrich , F4135 ) , 100 units / mL of penicillin and 100 µg / mL of streptomycin ( Gibco , 15140122 ) . For microscopic imaging , U - 2 OS cells were detached using TrypLE Express enzyme ( Gibco , 12604013 ) and plated on gelatin ( Sigma - Aldrich , G9391 ) - coated nanopillar substrates in complete cell culture medium . Before cell plating , quartz nanopillar substrates were first treated by air plasma ( Harrick Plasma ) for 15 minutes and then incubated in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) with 0 . 1 mg / mL poly - L - lysine ( Sigma - Aldrich , P5899 ) for 1 hour . Afterward , the nanopillar substrates were washed with PBS three times and incubated in PBS with 0 . 5 % ( v / v ) glutaraldehyde ( Sigma - Aldrich , G6257 ) . After further washing with PBS ( 3X ) , the substrates were then incubated in PBS with 0 . 5 % gelatin ( Sigma - Aldrich , G9391 ) for 1 hour at 37°C . The coated substrates were finally washed with PBS ( 3X ) and treated with 1 mg / ml sodium borohydride ( Sigma - Aldrich , 452882 ) in PBS for 5 minutes to eliminate autofluorescence . For the expression of GFP - FBP17 and cell surface - tethered SnapTag , cells were transfected with DNA vectors by electroporation . U - 2 OS cells were grown in 6 - well plates ( Corning , 353046 ) . For transfection , one well of cells were detached from the culture plate using TrypLE Express enzyme and spun down at 300 relative centrifugal force ( RCF ) for 3 minutes . The supernatants were removed as completely as possible , leaving cell pellets which were then resuspended in electroporation mix containing 100 uL Electroporation buffer II ( 88mM KH 2 PO 4 and 14 mM NaHCO 3 , pH 7 . 4 ) , 2uL Electroporation buffer I ( 360mM ATP + 600mM MgCl 2 ) and 1ug DNA vector . The electroporation was executed in a 2 mm - gap electroporation cuvette ( Invitrogen , P45050 ) by Amaxa Nucleofector II following manufacturer’s protocol . The cells recovered from electroporation in 650 µL complete cell culture medium for 5 minutes at room temperature ( RT ) and were plated on nanopillar substrates . The cells were grown for 24 hours before next treatment . Labeling Surface labeling of nanopillars The nanopillar substrates were cleaned with 1M potassium hydroxide ( Sigma - Aldrich , 221473 ) solution for 15 minutes at RT . The substrates were washed with nanopure water five times and air dried . The substrates were then treated with air plasma for 15 minutes and attached to plastic dishes , which have a hole punched in the bottom , with silicone sealant . The substrates were rinsed with anhydrous methanol ( Sigma - Aldrich , 322415 ) and incubated in 2 ml of a mixture containing anhydrous methanol , glacial acetic acid ( Sigma - Aldrich , 695092 ) and ( 3 - Aminopropyl ) triethoxysilane ( Sigma - Aldrich , A3648 ) in a v : v : v ratio of 100 : 5 : 3 , for 30 min . The substrates were washed with anhydrous methanol five times and then with nanopure water for three times . Afterward , the substrates were rinsed with 0 . 1M sodium bicarbonate ( Sigma - Aldrich , S5761 ) solution ( pH 8 ) and incubated in 0 . 1M sodium bicarbonate solution ( pH 8 ) with 2 uM Alexa Fluor™ 647 NHS Ester ( Invitrogen , A37573 ) for 30 minutes . The substrates were washed with PBS five times before imaging . 27 Membrane labeling The pDislay - SnapTag transfected cells were cultured in complete cell culture medium for 24 hours before labeling . The cells were incubated in labeling solution , 5 % CO 2 - balanced complete cell culture medium with 5 µM SNAP - Surface Alexa Fluor 647 ( NEB , S9136S ) , for 15 minutes at 37°C . Before being added to the cells , the dye and medium were mixed thoroughly by pipetting up and down ten times . The cells were then quickly washed with CO 2 - balanced complete cell culture medium five times and fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) ( Sigma - Aldrich , 158127 ) in PBS for 15 minutes at RT . The samples were washed with PBS three times before imaging . GFP nanobody labeling Anti - GFP nanobody ( Chromotek , gt - 250 ) was diluted in 0 . 2 M sodium bicarbonate solution at pH 8 . 2 , to a final concentration of ~ 60 uM . Alexa Fluor 647 NHS Ester stock solution ( 1mg / ml in DMSO ) was added into diluted anti - GFP nanobody to a final dye concentration of ~ 120 uM . The mixture of nanobody and dye was incubated for 1 hours at 25°C . Then , free dyes were removed from the solution using a Zeba spin desalting column ( Thermo Scientific , 89882 ) . As the extinction coefficients are known , the concentrations of purified nanobody and conjugated AF647 dye were determined using light absorption at 280 - nm wavelength and 647 - nm wavelength , respectively . The degree of labeling ( the average number of dye molecules per protein ) was calculated to be 1 . 08 . Immunofluorescence labeling The cells were fixed with 4 % PFA in PBS for 15 minutes at RT . The fixed cells were washed with PBS three times and permeabilized with 0 . 1 % triton - X ( Sigma - Aldrich , T9284 ) in PBS for 15 minutes at RT . The samples were washed with PBS three times and then blocked in PBS with 5 % ( w / v ) bovine serum albumin ( BSA , Sigma - Aldrich A3059 ) overnight at 4°C . To label GFP - FBP17 , the samples were incubated in PBS with 5 % BSA and 1 nM AF647 - conjugated GFP nanobody for 2 hours at RT . The samples were then washed with PBS containing 0 . 1 % triton - X and 5 % BSA three times for 15 minutes each and PBS five times for 2 minutes each before imaging . To label endogenous AP2 complexes , the samples were incubated in PBS with 5 % BSA and Anti - alpha Adaptin primary antibody ( Abcam , ab2730 , 1 : 250 ) for 2 hours at RT , and washed with PBS containing 0 . 1 % triton - X and 5 % BSA three times for 15 minutes each . The samples were then incubated with goat anti - mouse secondary antibody , Alexa Fluor 647 ( Invitrogen A32728 , 1 : 500 ) in PBS with 5 % BSA for 2 hours at RT . The samples were finally washed with 0 . 1 % triton - X and 5 % BSA in PBS five times for 5 minutes each , and with PBS three times before imaging . Actin labeling with phalloidin 28 Cells seeded on chips were fixed with 4 % PFA for 15 minutes and subsequently washed three times with PBS . Cells were incubated with 5 % BSA in PBS for 1 hour . Following incubation , 330 nM of phalloidin conjugated AF647 ( Cell Signaling Technology , 8940 ) was added to the solution for 15 minutes . Then , samples were washed once with PBS before imaging . Super resolution microscopy Optical setup All data and images were acquired using our custom built widefield double - helix PSF inverted microscope . We imaged our samples using a 1 W 647 nm continuous wave ( CW ) laser ( MPB Communications ) for 3D SR imaging and a 100 mW 641 nm CW ( Coherent Cube ) for 2D SR imaging and calibration of the silicone oil objective . In our setup , the 647 nm excitation laser was first passed through a clean - up excitation bandpass ( 631 / 36 ) filter ( Semrock , FF01 - 631 / 36 - 25 ) and then a quarter wave plate ( Thorlabs , WPQSM05 - 633 ) for circular polarization . The size of the laser beam was then magnified twice using a two pairs of lenses before entering the backport of the microscope ( Olympus IX71 ) . A Köhler lens placed before the backport was used to focus the light at the back focal plane of the objective for widefield imaging . Inside the microscope , a dichroic mirror ( Semrock , Di01 - R405 / 488 / 561 / 635 - 25x36 ) was used to relay the light through the objective . The standard oil immersion objective ( UPlanSAPo 100x / 1 . 4 oil , Olympus ) with immersion oil ( Zeiss , 444960 - 0000 - 000 ) was used for imaging samples on glass substrates . The silicone oil immersion objective ( UPlanSAPo 100x / 1 . 35 silicone oil , Olympus ) with silicone immersion oil ( Olympus , Z - 81114 ) was used for imaging samples on quartz substrates and for imaging nanopillar samples . The samples were mounted on a motorized XY stage ( Physik Instrumente , U - 780 . DOS ) and a precision XYZ piezo stage ( Physik Instrumente , P - 545 . 3C8 ) . The emitted fluorescence light was collected using the objective , transmitted through the dichroic and then focused using the tube lens ( f = 180 mm ) inside the microscope to the standard intermediate image plane position . The emitted fluorescence was relayed using two lenses ( f = 90 mm for both lenses ) in a 4f optical configuration to access the Fourier plane of the microscope , enabling insertion of the double - helix phase mask for 3D SR imaging . The double - helix phase mask ( emission wavelength 665 nm , diameter 2 . 8 mm , fabricated with fused silica , Double - Helix Optics LLC ) was removed for DL imaging or 2D SR experiments . Emission filters ( ET700 / 75 bandpass filter , Chroma , ZET647 notch filter , Chroma , 680 / 60 bandpass filter , Omega ) for imaging with the 647 nm laser were placed in the 4f emission pathway to remove reflected laser light and Raman scattering . The emission filters for imaging with the 641 nm laser were changed slightly ( 680 / 60 bandpass filter , Omega , 655 longpass , Chroma ) . The light was eventually focused by the second lens in the 4f optical pathway onto a Si electron multiplying charged - coupled device camera for data and image acquisition ( iXon897 , Andor ) . Calibration of silicone oil objective and comparison with standard oil objective To calibrate the correction collar of the silicone OIO , a dilute concentration of 200 nm poly ( styrene ) fluorescent beads ( Thermo Scientific , T7280 ) were immobilized in 5 % ( weight / volume ) agarose ( Invitrogen , 16520050 ) on a flat 200 um thick quartz coverslip ( same substrate used to fabricate nanopillars ) . The beads were imaged in our microscope without the 29 DHPSF mask inserted . The bead images were collected at an exposure of 50 ms and an EM gain of 200 on our microscope at ~ 1W / cm 2 . We fit each bead image to a 2D Gaussian with least squares regression using Matlab and extracted the peak intensity . The correction collar was set to the adjustment yielding the highest peak intensity . Although this was at the end of the adjustment range , the results were good . For comparison between objective performances , beads were immobilized in 5 % agarose on the 200 um thick quartz coverslip and a 160 um thick glass substrate . 2D SR data acquisition and image reconstruction FBP17 - labeled U - 2 OS cells were imaged on flat glass and quartz coverslips using the standard and silicone OIOs , respectively . For both imaging configurations , the exposure time was 50 ms and the EM gain was 200 . Both samples were imaged in an oxygen scavenger reductant blinking buffer to allow emitters to be confined to a long lived dark state in order to ensure sparsity . The buffer consists of 100 mM tri ( hydroxymethyl ) aminomethane - HCl ( Thermo Fisher ) , 10 % ( weight / volume ) glucose ( BD Difco ) , 2  L / mL catalase , 560  g / mL glucose oxidase , and 10 mM of cysteamine ( all Sigma Aldrich ) . The focus was set close to the coverslip near the thin edge of a cell whose membrane was spreading on the substrate in order to reduce background from out of focus emitters . A DL image at lower intensity ( ~ 1W / cm 2 ) was acquired before data acquisition . After increasing the laser intensity to ~ 1 . 8 kW / cm 2 , emitters were shelved to the dark state for roughly 30 seconds . After this time period , blinking single molecules that were not overlapping were observed and data acquisition began . Roughly 40 , 000 frames were acquired for one cellular sample . The data was processed in ThunderSTORM , a free ImageJ plugin . The emitters were coarsely detected with a standard maximum intensity approach . Each emitter was fit to a 2D Gaussian . The precision was calculated using Mortensen’s equation 40 . Any emitters with poor precision ( > 20 nm ) and whose sigma from the Gaussian fit was poor ( > 200 nm ) were removed . The localizations were binned in 2D histograms with a bin width of 32 nm for visualization . The widths of the tubules in the reconstructions were calculated using approaches previously described 44 . 3D SR data acquisition and image reconstruction Prior to 3D SR imaging of the samples , 200 nm poly ( styrene ) fluorescent beads immobilized on the surface of a flat 200 um thick quartz coverslip with 1 % ( weight / volume ) polyvinyl alcohol ( PVA ) were imaged with our DHPSF microscope with the phase mask installed in the Fourier plane . The beads were imaged over an axial range of 2 um in step sizes of 50 nm at 50 ms exposure time and an EM gain of 200 . We used our fine piezo XYZ stage and custom Matlab code to move the stage . This Z - scan calibration yields a curve relating lobe angle to Z position that is later used to extract Z position of emitters . Samples were incubated with dilute 200 nm poly ( styrene ) fluorescent beads for 8 minutes prior to imaging . The bead solution was removed and the sample was washed three times . These beads typically stick to the coverslip and provide fiducials for drift correction in post processing . The samples were then incubated in a modified blinking buffer solution consisting of 100 mM Tris - HCL , 10 % glucose , 2  L / mL catalase , 560  g / mL glucose oxidase , and 40 mM of cysteamine and imaged . Nanopillar regions were first 30 found by illuminating the sample with white light without the phase mask installed . In this configuration , the reference markers and arrays of pillars were clearly visible . Then , we fluorescently imaged the sample at low intensity until well - labeled samples ( either nanopillars or cells on nanopillars ) were visible with a fiducial in the field of view . A DL image was first taken at ~ 1W / cm 2 . Then the focus was set at the coverslip using a fiducial on the cover slip as a reference . From that point , we moved the focus 500 nm upward using the XYZ piezo stage . We inserted the phase mask , and set the laser intensity between 2 . 86 kW / cm 2 and 15 . 9 kW / cm 2 . After 30 seconds of shelving , we acquired data of blinking DHPSFs . The exposure time was 35 ms and the EM gain was 200 . We acquired approximately 70 , 000 - 100 , 000 frames of data . The data was processed by fitting the emitters to a double - Gaussian function using easy - dhpsf 57 , a freely - available software in Matlab designed for localizing DHPSF emitters . The calibration curve described above was used to extract the Z positions . The precision was calculated from the detected photons using a formula calibrated for our microscope using previously described approaches 58 . After processing , poorly localized emitters ( XY precision > 30 nm , Z precision > 40 nm , and lobe distance > 8 pixels ) were removed . The localized single - molecule positions were rendered with the Vutara SRX program ( Bruker ) , a software package designed for 3D SR visualization . Localizations were merged to correct for over counting ( see description below ) . In the reconstruction , each localization was blurred by a Gaussian with a sigma of 50 nm in X , Y , and Z to reflect the localization precision in the measurements . The Z position was encoded by the color . Correction of overcounting Overcounting was corrected by first isolating clusters where the localizations in the clusters were temporally adjacent to one another . These clusters were identified by encoding the temporal information in each localization by color . Then , clusters were extracted if all the localizations in the clusters were encoded in a similar color . As the localizations in these clusters are neighboring to each other both temporally and spatially , these clusters ( termed pseudo - clusters ) are indicative of emitters being in consecutive frames or blinking on and off over the data acquisition . The mean off frames ( number of frames between two localizations adjacent temporally ) for all the clusters was 8 . 9 . To correct for overcounting as exhibited by these pseudo - clusters , we applied a spatial and temporal threshold . This threshold ensured that any molecules within a certain spatial radius and temporal distance are merged into one molecule . We varied both the temporal and spatial threshold and observed the effect on the percentage of molecules that were merged for the surface labeled nanopillar reconstructions . After 20 off frames , the percentage of merged molecules did not change significantly , so we set the temporal threshold for all our reconstructions at 20 frames . Setting the XY distance at 50 nm and Z distance at 100 nm , we observed that the majority of the pseudo - clusters disappeared and were merged . Setting the spatial thresholds to larger values degraded the image quality as localization density throughout the reconstruction decreased . Spatial thresholds that were set lower resulted in the appearance of the pseudo - clusters . Therefore , we set the spatial thresholds to a XY distance of 50 nm and a Z distance of 100 nm for all our 3D SR reconstructions . Quantification and analysis 31 Diameter and curvature measurements Using ImageJ , diameters at the center of the nanopillars were extracted from SEM images by measuring the distance of a cross section through the pillar . Only one side of the elliptical pillars was imaged for these measurements . For the surface - labeled nanopillars , individual pillars were isolated in Vutara SRX . The center of the pillar was found , and a 250 nm projection of the localizations onto the XY plane was computed . These projections were fit to an ellipse using least squares regression . The axes of the ellipse fit were used as estimations for pillar diameter . The axis of the fit that was on the same side as that for the SEM image was extracted to compare to the SEM measurements . Note , not all surface - labeled nanopillar reconstructions were analyzed . Occasionally , the fitting of the ellipse failed as there were not a sufficient number of localizations in the projection to obtain a good fit . These pillars from the surface - labeled reconstructions and SEM images were excluded in the analysis . The membrane diameter from the 3D SR reconstructions was measured with the same protocol described above . The diameters from axes of the fit of the ellipse for the membrane and surface - labeled reconstructions were averaged . Then , these averaged diameters were compared with each other yielding the results in Figure 3F . To extract curvature from the SEM images , cross sections were measured from the bottom to the top of the nanopillars . These cross sections provided the diameters of the pillars , and the reciprocal of the radius was calculated to extract ( 1 / R ) curvature along the pillars . To calculate the curvature from the 3D SR reconstructions , points along individual nanopillars spaced evenly apart were found . These points served as the center for a 250 nm projection of the localization onto the XY plane . The projection was fit to an ellipse to extract the diameters and hence the curvature . For the surface - labeled nanopillars reconstructions , only the diameter found at the same side as the SEM image was used to calculate curvature . For the membrane reconstructions , the diameters of the fit from both axes were averaged before curvature was calculated . Density calculations along nanopillars To calculate the density of molecules along the nanopillars in our 3D SR reconstructions , we first determined the axial position of the coverslip . The coverslip was clearly apparent in the surface - labeled reconstructions . The bottom section of the membrane , the plaques , and the actin fibers were used as reference axial position of the coverslip for the cellular reconstructions . The reconstruction was then cropped from the coverslip to 1000 nm away from the coverslip axially . Then , isolated nanopillars were also cropped . These pillars were exported to custom written python code where the localizations on the pillars were projected onto the Z axis and binned in 50 nm bin widths . Nanopillar simulations To simulate the nanopillars ( Figure 4D ) , we treated a tapering cylinder as a truncated hollow cone . The cylinder was capped with a hemi ellipsoid with a radius of 80 nm in XY and 100 nm axially . The total height of the pillar was sampled from a Gaussian distribution where the mean 32 was 884 nm and the standard deviation was set at 71 nm , approximating the distribution of heights extracted from the SEM images of the nanopillars . The bottom diameter was set at 280 nm and the top diameter was set at 160 nm . The bottom and top diameters were chosen based on averaged values of the bottom and top diameters extracted from the top down SEM images as shown in Figure 3A ( bottom right ) . The probability that a localization is found along the pillar was determined by the surface area of the pillar at that region . 700 localizations , roughly the average number of localizations for each nanopillar , were scattered randomly along the pillar . A Gaussian kick was added to the position of each localization laterally and axially to reflect the localization precision in our experimental measurements . The Gaussian kick distribution used a lateral sigma of 12 nm and an axial sigma of 20 nm ( median experimental precisions in XY and Z ) . 16 total nanopillars were simulated ( equivalent to the number of nanopillars experimentally analyzed in density calculations ) . To calculate the density of molecules along the pillar , the same analysis described in the preceding section was followed for the simulated pillars . Gaussian curvature 3D localizations of isolated nanopillars from surface - labeled and membrane - labeled reconstructions were imported to the freely available package MeshLab 55 . The screened Poisson surface reconstruction 54 was used to create a surface mesh of the imported data ( see Figure S9A for a table of parameters for generating the surface ) . The surface was then exported as a . STL file . This file was imported to Matlab , and the Gaussian curvature was extracted along the pillar using an approach previously described 45 using a mathematical formulation for Gaussian curvature on unstructured triangulated surfaces 56 . The Gaussian curvature along the pillar was projected into Z slices equidistant from one another . The average Gaussian curvature over all pillars was then calculated . The previous analysis was additionally used to calculate the Gaussian curvature along the simulated nanopillars . Software SEM height and diameter measurements were acquired using ImageJ . ImageJ was also used to process DL images and the 2D SR reconstructions . 3D SR reconstructions were rendered using Vutara SRX . Emitters were localized for 2D SR reconstructions using ThunderSTORM , an ImageJ plugin . Emitters were localized for 3D SR reconstructions using easy - dhpsf in Matlab . Fitting immobilized beads for objective comparison and correction collar adjustment was achieved using custom written Matlab scripts . Custom written python scripts were used for diameter and curvature measurements from SR reconstructions , for simulating the nanopillars , and for the density calculations . MeshLab was used to produce the surface meshes from the 3D localization data . Matlab was used to extract the Gaussian curvature along the surfaces . Supporting Information  Correction collar calibration details , further validation of 2D and 3D SR image quality , additional 3D SR reconstructions of labeled structures , fluorescence labeling controls , localization precision distributions , figures describing methods to quantify diameters and curvature , surface meshes extracted from 3D localizations of surface - labeled 33 reconstructions , and Gaussian curvature analysis of surface - labeled and simulated nanopillars Author contributions A . R . R , W . E . M , and B . C designed experiments . A . R . R . performed all microscopy experiments and analyzed data . A . R . R . and W . Z . optimized and performed fluorescent labeling . W . Z . performed transfection and cell culture procedures . Z . J and C . T . T fabricated the nanopillars and imaged them with SEM . A . R . R . and W . E . M . wrote the initial draft . All authors edited the manuscript . W . E . M and B . C . provided conceptualization and supervision . Notes W . E . M . is on the advisory board of Double - Helix Optics . Acknowledgments We thank Pietro De Camilli for gifting the vector for the eGFP - FBP17 protein fusion ( pEGFP - C1 - FBP17 ) . This work was supported by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences Grants R35GM118067 ( to W . E . M . ) , R01GM128142 and R35GM141598 ( to B . C . ) . BC grant , any fellowships ADD SNF GRANT FOR FAB References 1 . Chen , W . ; Shao , Y . ; Li , X . ; Zhao , G . ; Fu , J . , Nanotopographical surfaces for stem cell fate control : engineering mechanobiology from the bottom . Nano today 2014 , 9 ( 6 ) , 759 - 784 . 2 . Dalby , M . J . ; Gadegaard , N . ; Oreffo , R . O . , Harnessing nanotopography and integrin – matrix interactions to influence stem cell fate . Nature materials 2014 , 13 ( 6 ) , 558 - 569 . 3 . Li , X . ; Matino , L . ; Zhang , W . ; Klausen , L . ; McGuire , A . F . ; Lubrano , C . ; Zhao , W . ; Santoro , F . ; Cui , B . , A nanostructure platform for live - cell manipulation of membrane curvature . Nature protocols 2019 , 14 ( 6 ) , 1772 - 1802 . 4 . Yang , K . ; Jung , K . ; Ko , E . ; Kim , J . ; Park , K . I . ; Kim , J . ; Cho , S . - W . , Nanotopographical manipulation of focal adhesion formation for enhanced differentiation of human neural stem cells . ACS applied materials & interfaces 2013 , 5 ( 21 ) , 10529 - 10540 . 5 . Ding , Y . ; Sun , J . ; Ro , H . W . ; Wang , Z . ; Zhou , J . ; Lin , N . J . ; Cicerone , M . T . ; Soles , C . L . ; Lin‐Gibson , S . , Thermodynamic underpinnings of cell alignment on controlled topographies . Advanced Materials 2011 , 23 ( 3 ) , 421 - 425 . 6 . Micholt , L . ; Gärtner , A . ; Prodanov , D . ; Braeken , D . ; Dotti , C . G . ; Bartic , C . , Substrate topography determines neuronal polarization and growth in vitro . PloS one 2013 , 8 ( 6 ) , e66170 . 7 . Lavenus , S . ; Berreur , M . ; Trichet , V . ; Pilet , P . ; Louarn , G . ; Layrolle , P . , Adhesion and osteogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells on titanium nanopores . Eur Cell Mater 2011 , 22 ( 1 ) , 84 - 96 . 8 . Jung , A . R . ; Kim , R . Y . ; Kim , H . W . ; Shrestha , K . R . ; Jeon , S . H . ; Cha , K . J . ; Park , Y . H . ; Kim , D . S . ; Lee , J . Y . , Nanoengineered polystyrene surfaces with nanopore array pattern alters cytoskeleton organization and enhances induction of neural differentiation of human adipose - derived stem cells . Tissue Engineering Part A 2015 , 21 ( 13 - 14 ) , 2115 - 2124 . 34 9 . Xie , C . ; Hanson , L . ; Cui , Y . ; Cui , B . , Vertical nanopillars for highly localized fluorescence imaging . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011 , 108 ( 10 ) , 3894 - 9 . 10 . Xie , C . ; Lin , Z . ; Hanson , L . ; Cui , Y . ; Cui , B . , Intracellular recording of action potentials by nanopillar electroporation . Nat Nanotechnol 2012 , 7 ( 3 ) , 185 - 90 . 11 . Lou , H . - Y . ; Zhao , W . ; Li , X . ; Duan , L . ; Powers , A . ; Akamatsu , M . ; Santoro , F . ; McGuire , A . F . ; Cui , Y . ; Drubin , D . G . ; Cui , B . , Membrane curvature underlies actin reorganization in response to nanoscale surface topography . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2019 , 116 ( 46 ) , 23143 - 23151 . 12 . Zhao , W . ; Hanson , L . ; Lou , H . - Y . ; Akamatsu , M . ; Chowdary , P . D . ; Santoro , F . ; Marks , J . R . ; Grassart , A . ; Drubin , D . G . ; Cui , Y . ; Cui , B . , Nanoscale manipulation of membrane curvature for probing endocytosis in live cells . Nature nanotechnology 2017 , 12 ( 8 ) , 750 . 13 . Santoro , F . ; Zhao , W . ; Joubert , L . - M . ; Duan , L . ; Schnitker , J . ; van de Burgt , Y . ; Lou , H . - Y . ; Liu , B . ; Salleo , A . ; Cui , L . , Revealing the cell – material interface with nanometer resolution by focused ion beam / scanning electron microscopy . ACS nano 2017 , 11 ( 8 ) , 8320 - 8328 . 14 . Dahlberg , P . D . ; Saurabh , S . ; Sartor , A . M . ; Wang , J . ; Mitchell , P . G . ; Chiu , W . ; Shapiro , L . ; Moerner , W . E . , Cryogenic single - molecule fluorescence annotations for electron tomography reveal in situ organization of key proteins in Caulobacter . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2020 , 117 ( 25 ) , 13937 - 13944 . 15 . Hansel , C . S . ; Holme , M . N . ; Gopal , S . ; Stevens , M . M . , Advances in high - resolution microscopy for the study of intracellular interactions with biomaterials . Biomaterials 2020 , 226 , 119406 . 16 . Sansen , T . ; Sanchez - Fuentes , D . ; Rathar , R . ; Colom - Diego , A . ; Alaoui , F . ; de Rossi , S . ; Viaud , J . ; Macchione , M . ; Matile , S . ; Gaudin , R . , Nanoscale topography templates the organization of stable clathrin / AP - 2 structures . 2019 . 17 . Huang , B . ; Jones , S . A . ; Brandenburg , B . ; Zhuang , X . , Whole - cell 3D STORM reveals interactions between cellular structures with nanometer - scale resolution . Nat . Methods 2008 , 5 ( 12 ) , 1047 - 1052 . 18 . Maalouf , E . ; Colicchio , B . ; Dieterlen , A . , Fluorescence microscopy three - dimensional depth variant point spread function interpolation using Zernike moments . J . Opt . Soc . Am . A 2011 , 28 , 1864 - 1870 . 19 . Liu , S . ; Kromann , E . B . ; Krueger , W . D . ; Bewersdorf , J . ; Lidke , K . A . , Three dimensional single molecule localization using a phase retrieved pupil function . Opt . Express 2013 , 21 ( 24 ) , 29462 - 29487 . 20 . McGorty , R . ; Schnitzbauer , J . ; Zhang , W . ; Huang , B . , Correction of depth - dependent aberrations in 3D single - molecule localization and super - resolution microscopy . Opt . Lett . 2014 , 39 , 275 - 278 . 21 . Gustavsson , A . K . ; Petrov , P . N . ; Lee , M . Y . ; Shechtman , Y . ; Moerner , W . E . , 3D single - molecule super - resolution microscopy with a tilted light sheet . Nat . Commun . 2018 , 9 ( 123 ) , 1 - 8 . 22 . Li , Y . ; Wu , Y . - L . ; Hoess , P . ; Mund , M . ; Ries , J . , Depth - dependent PSF calibration and aberration correction for 3D single - molecule localization . Biomed . Opt . Express 2019 , 10 ( 6 ) , 2708 - 2718 . 23 . Petrov , P . N . ; Moerner , W . E . , Addressing systematic errors in axial distance measurements in single - emitter localization microscopy . Opt . Express 2020 , 28 , 18616 - 18632 . 35 24 . Wang , J . ; Allgeyer , E . S . ; Sirinakis , G . ; Zhang , Y . ; Hu , K . ; Lessard , M . D . ; Li , Y . ; Diekmann , R . ; Phillips , M . A . ; Dobbie , I . M . , Implementation of a 4Pi - SMS super - resolution microscope . Nature Protocols 2021 , 16 ( 2 ) , 677 - 727 . 25 . Hayashi , S . ; Okada , Y . , Ultrafast superresolution fluorescence imaging with spinning disk confocal microscope optics . Molecular biology of the cell 2015 , 26 ( 9 ) , 1743 - 1751 . 26 . Ji , N . ; Milkie , D . E . ; Betzig , E . , Adaptive optics via pupil segmentation for high - resolution imaging in biological tissues . Nat . Methods 2010 , 7 ( 2 ) , 141 - 147 . 27 . Hell , S . W . ; Reiner , G . ; Cremer , C . ; Stelzer , E . H . K . , Aberrations in confocal fluorescence microscopy induced by mismatches in refractive index . J . Microsc . 1993 , 169 ( 3 ) , 391 - 405 . 28 . Egner , A . ; Schrader , M . ; Hell , S . W . , Refractive index mismatch induced intensity and phase variations in fluorescence confocal , multiphoton , and 4Pi - microscopy . Opt . Commun . 1998 , 153 , 211 - 217 . 29 . Turcotte , R . ; Liang , Y . ; Ji , N . , Adaptive optical versus spherical aberration corrections for in vivo brain imaging . Biomedical optics express 2017 , 8 ( 8 ) , 3891 - 3902 . 30 . Gould , T . J . ; Burke , D . ; Bewersdorf , J . ; Booth , M . J . , Adaptive optics enables 3D STED microscopy in aberrating specimens . Optics Express 2012 , 20 ( 19 ) , 20998 - 21009 . 31 . Simunovic , M . ; Voth , G . A . ; Callan - Jones , A . ; Bassereau , P . , When physics takes over : BAR proteins and membrane curvature . Trends in cell biology 2015 , 25 ( 12 ) , 780 - 792 . 32 . Mim , C . ; Cui , H . ; Gawronski - Salerno , J . A . ; Frost , A . ; Lyman , E . ; Voth , G . A . ; Unger , V . M . , Structural basis of membrane bending by the N - BAR protein endophilin . Cell 2012 , 149 ( 1 ) , 137 - 145 . 33 . Saarikangas , J . ; Zhao , H . ; Pykäläinen , A . ; Laurinmäki , P . ; Mattila , P . K . ; Kinnunen , P . K . ; Butcher , S . J . ; Lappalainen , P . , Molecular mechanisms of membrane deformation by I - BAR domain proteins . Current biology 2009 , 19 ( 2 ) , 95 - 107 . 34 . Frost , A . ; Perera , R . ; Roux , A . ; Spasov , K . ; Destaing , O . ; Egelman , E . H . ; De Camilli , P . ; Unger , V . M . , Structural basis of membrane invagination by F - BAR domains . Cell 2008 , 132 ( 5 ) , 807 - 817 . 35 . Rust , M . J . ; Bates , M . ; Zhuang , X . , Sub - diffraction - limit imaging by stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM ) . Nat . Methods 2006 , 3 ( 10 ) , 793 - 796 . 36 . van de Linde , S . ; Loeschberger , A . ; Klein , T . ; Heidbreder , M . ; Wolter , S . ; Heilemann , M . ; Sauer , M . , Direct stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy with standard fluorescent probes . Nature Protocols 2011 , 6 ( 7 ) , 991 - 1009 . 37 . Moerner , W . E . , Microscopy beyond the diffraction limit using actively controlled single molecules . Journal of Microscopy 2012 , 246 ( 3 ) , 213 - 220 . 38 . Tsujita , K . ; Suetsugu , S . ; Sasaki , N . ; Furutani , M . ; Oikawa , T . ; Takenawa , T . , Coordination between the actin cytoskeleton and membrane deformation by a novel membrane tubulation domain of PCH proteins is involved in endocytosis . The Journal of cell biology 2006 , 172 ( 2 ) , 269 - 279 . 39 . Shimada , A . ; Niwa , H . ; Tsujita , K . ; Suetsugu , S . ; Nitta , K . ; Hanawa - Suetsugu , K . ; Akasaka , R . ; Nishino , Y . ; Toyama , M . ; Chen , L . , Curved EFC / F - BAR - domain dimers are joined end to end into a filament for membrane invagination in endocytosis . Cell 2007 , 129 ( 4 ) , 761 - 772 . 40 . Mortensen , K . I . ; Churchman , L . S . ; Spudich , J . A . ; Flyvbjerg , H . , Optimized localization analysis for single - molecule tracking and super - resolution microscopy . Nat . Methods 2010 , 7 ( 5 ) , 377 - 381 . 36 41 . Pavani , S . R . P . ; Thompson , M . A . ; Biteen , J . S . ; Lord , S . J . ; Liu , N . ; Twieg , R . J . ; Piestun , R . ; Moerner , W . E . , Three - dimensional , single - molecule fluorescence imaging beyond the diffraction limit by using a double - helix point spread function . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009 , 106 ( 9 ) , 2995 - 2999 . 42 . Shechtman , Y . ; Sahl , S . J . ; Backer , A . S . ; Moerner , W . E . , Optimal Point Spread Function Design for 3D Imaging . Physical Review Letters 2014 , 113 ( 13 ) , 133902 . 43 . von Diezmann , A . ; Shechtman , Y . ; Moerner , W . E . , Three - Dimensional Localization of Single Molecules for Super - Resolution Imaging and Single - Particle Tracking . Chemical reviews 2017 , 117 ( 11 ) , 7244 - 7275 . 44 . Möckl , L . ; Pedram , K . ; Roy , A . R . ; Krishnan , V . ; Gustavsson , A . K . ; Dorigo , O . ; Bertozzi , C . R . ; Moerner , W . E . , Quantitative Super - Resolution Microscopy of the Mammalian Glycocalyx . Developmental Cell 2019 , 50 ( 1 ) , 57 - 72 . 45 . Yoon , J . ; Comerci , C . J . ; Weiss , L . E . ; Milenkovic , L . ; Stearns , T . ; Moerner , W . E . , Revealing Nanoscale Morphology of the Primary Cilium Using Super - Resolution Fluorescence Microscopy . Biophysical journal 2019 , 116 ( 2 ) , 319 - 329 . 46 . Motley , A . ; Bright , N . A . ; Seaman , M . N . ; Robinson , M . S . , Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in AP - 2 – depleted cells . The Journal of cell biology 2003 , 162 ( 5 ) , 909 - 918 . 47 . Conner , S . D . ; Schmid , S . L . , Differential requirements for AP - 2 in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . The Journal of cell biology 2003 , 162 ( 5 ) , 773 - 780 . 48 . Boucrot , E . ; Saffarian , S . ; Zhang , R . ; Kirchhausen , T . , Roles of AP - 2 in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PloS one 2010 , 5 ( 5 ) , e10597 . 49 . Leyton - Puig , D . ; Isogai , T . ; Argenzio , E . ; Van Den Broek , B . ; Klarenbeek , J . ; Janssen , H . ; Jalink , K . ; Innocenti , M . , Flat clathrin lattices are dynamic actin - controlled hubs for clathrin - mediated endocytosis and signalling of specific receptors . Nature communications 2017 , 8 ( 1 ) , 1 - 14 . 50 . Mitchison , T . ; Cramer , L . , Actin - based cell motility and cell locomotion . Cell 1996 , 84 ( 3 ) , 371 - 379 . 51 . Heng , Y . - W . ; Koh , C . - G . , Actin cytoskeleton dynamics and the cell division cycle . The international journal of biochemistry & cell biology 2010 , 42 ( 10 ) , 1622 - 1633 . 52 . Kaksonen , M . ; Toret , C . P . ; Drubin , D . G . , Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nature reviews Molecular cell biology 2006 , 7 ( 6 ) , 404 - 414 . 53 . Hanson , L . ; Lin , Z . C . ; Xie , C . ; Cui , Y . ; Cui , B . , Characterization of the cell – nanopillar interface by transmission electron microscopy . Nano letters 2012 , 12 ( 11 ) , 5815 - 5820 . 54 . Kazhdan , M . ; Hoppe , H . , Screened poisson surface reconstruction . ACM Transactions on Graphics ( ToG ) 2013 , 32 ( 3 ) , 1 - 13 . 55 . Cignoni , P . ; Callieri , M . ; Corsini , M . ; Dellepiane , M . ; Ganovelli , F . ; Ranzuglia , G . In Meshlab : an open - source mesh processing tool , Eurographics Italian chapter conference , Salerno , Italy : 2008 ; pp 129 - 136 . 56 . Garimella , R . V . ; Swartz , B . K . , Curvature estimation for unstructured triangulations of surfaces . Los Alamos National Laboratory 2003 . 57 . Bayas , C . ; von Diezmann , A . ; Gustavsson , A . - K . ; Moerner , W . E . , Easy - DHPSF 2 . 0 : open - source software for three - dimensional localization and two - color registration of single molecules with nanoscale accuracy . Prot . Exch . 2019 , https : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 21203 / rs . 2 . 9151 / v2 . 58 . Gahlmann , A . ; Ptacin , J . L . ; Grover , G . ; Quirin , S . ; von Diezmann , A . R . S . ; Lee , M . K . ; Backlund , M . P . ; Shapiro , L . ; Piestun , R . ; Moerner , W . E . , Quantitative Multicolor 37 Subdiffraction Imaging of Bacterial Protein Ultrastructures in Three Dimensions . Nano Letters 2013 , 13 ( 3 ) , 987 - 993 .