489 (cid:1) 2001 by JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH , Inc . ● Vol . 27 ● March 2001 All rights reserved . 0093 - 5301 / 2001 / 2704 - 0007 $ 03 . 00 “What Is It ? ” Categorization Flexibility and Consumers’ Responses to Really New Products C . PAGE MOREAU ARTHUR B . MARKMAN DONALD R . LEHMANN * To understand really new products , consumers face the challenge of constructing new knowledge structures rather simply changing existing ones . Recent research in categorization suggests that one strategy for creating representations for these new products is to use information already contained in familiar productcategories . While knowledge from multiple existing categories may be relevant , little research has examined how ( and if ) consumers process information drawn from more than one domain . We use two experiments to demonstrate how consumers use cues from multiple categories to develop expectations about and preferences for new products . Our ﬁndings suggest that the ﬁrst plausible category label provided to the consumer signiﬁcantly inﬂuences their categorizations , expectations , and pref - erences . Only when advertisers place limits on the type of information to transfer from each existing category can consumers use information from multiple cate - gories effectively . H ow do consumers learn about and develop preferences for new products that do not ﬁt neatly into any exis - ting category ? These so - called really new products ( Leh - mann 1994 ) are innovations that defy straightforward classiﬁcation in terms of existing product concepts ( Gregan - Paxton and Roedder John 1997 , p . 275 ) and thus “create , or at least substantially expand , a category rather than reallocate shares” within an existing one ( Marketing Science Institute 1994 , p . 6 ) . From a marketer’s perspective , the signiﬁcant learning costs that these innovations impose on consumers present not only a challenge , but also an opportunity . In the process of educating consumers about a new product , marketers have the chance to inﬂuence how consumers structure their representations of it . * C . Page Moreau is assistant professor of marketing , Edwin L . Cox School of Business , Southern Methodist University , P . O . Box 750333 , Dallas , TX 75275 - 0333 ( pmoreau @ mail . cox . smu . edu ) . ArthurB . Markman is associate professor of psychology , University of Texas at Austin , 303 Mezes Hall , Austin , TX 78712 ( markman @ psy . utexas . edu ) . Donald R . Lehmann is the George E . Warren Professor of Marketing , Columbia Uni - versity Graduate School of Business , Uris Hall , 3022 Broadway , NewYork , NY 10027 ( drl2 @ columbia . edu ) . This article , based on the ﬁrst author’s dissertation , was supported by the Procter and Gamble Marketing Inno - vation Research Fund , the Institute for Marketing Studies at Columbia University , and by National Science Foundation grant SBR - 9905013 given to the second author . The authors thank the current and previous editors , the associate editor , the reviewers , Gita Johar , Bernd Schmitt , MichelPham , Dan Howard , Steve Brown , and Amna Kirmani for their helpful comments . Recent research in marketing and psychology suggests that consumers often use information already contained in existing product categories to learn about new products ( Gregan - Paxton 1999 ; Gregan - Paxton and Roedder John 1997 ; Markman , Yamauchi , and Makin 1997 ; Yamauchi and Markman 2000 ) . Because many novel innovations share properties with members of multiple existing product categories , however , it is critical for marketers to understand how consumers use information from more than one category to learn about a new product . For example , Febreze , an “innovative new product designed to eliminate odor on fabrics , ” claims to create a new category ( Febreze 1998 , quote on home page ) . However , Febreze is similar to laundry detergents because it works directly on fabric and is also similar to air fresheners because it eliminates odors . How do consumers use their prior knowledge in both of these categories to understand this innovation ? In this article , we focus speciﬁcally on how and under what conditions consumers use knowledge from multiple categories to understand and develop preferences for new products . CATEGORIZATION - BASED KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER The extensive categorization literature in both marketing and psychology has traditionally focused on how people organize knowledge in memory and how they classify novel 490 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH objects ( see , e . g . , Cohen and Basu 1987 ; Loken and Ward 1990 ; Sujan and Bettman 1989 ; see also Ross and Spalding 1994 ) . More recently , however , researchers have focused on the use of categories in making inferences about ( i . e . , learn - ing about ) new items ( Gregan - Paxton 1999 ; Markman et al . 1997 ; Murphy and Ross 1994 ; Ross 1997 ; Thomas 1998 ) . When a novel item is classiﬁed as a member of an existing category , information in that category is transferred to the novel item and used to structure the new representation ( Gregan - Paxton 1999 ; Waldmann , Holyoak , and Fratianne 1995 ) . Few researchers , however , have examined the con - ditions under which knowledge is transferred from multiple categories . Research in knowledge transfer suggests that knowledge from a familiar domain ( e . g . , an existing category ) is trans - ferred to an unfamiliar target in three stages : access , map - ping , and transfer ( Gentner 1989 ; Gregan - Paxton and Roed - der John 1997 ; Holyoak and Thagard 1989 ; Markman and Wisniewski 1997 ) . Once a category has been accessed , prop - erties of that category are placed in one - to - one correspon - dence with ( i . e . , mapped onto ) properties of the target to facilitate the transfer of knowledge ( Gentner 1983 ; Gentner and Markman 1997 ) . For example , as illustrated in Figure 1 , when mapping information from the ﬁlm - based camera category to the digital camera , the objects “button” and “ﬂash” can be mapped onto their counterparts in the digital camera representation . Once these mappings have been con - structed , additional information about ﬁlm - based cameras ( e . g . , “button opens shutter” ) is then transferred from the category to the digital camera , with the initial mappings serving as “pathways” for the additional knowledge ( Gre - gan - Paxton and Roedder John 1997 , p . 267 ) . Marketers can encourage categorization - based transfer by giving consumers a plausible category label that suggests a new product’s category membership . When a category label is provided , consumers are encouraged to make more ex - tensive mappings from the category to the target than when no label is present ( Gregan - Paxton 1999 ) . There are three reasons for this effect . First , a category label encourages people to think of the object as a whole ( e . g . , “this object is a _ _ _ ” ) , because the goal of categorization is to maximize within - category similarity while reducing the similarity across categories ( Medin and Schaeffer 1978 ; Rosch and Mervis 1975 ) . Thus , consumers given a category label are likely to transfer information from the existing category to the new product in order to maximize the perceived simi - larity of the new product to the existing category ( Gregan - Paxton 1999 ; Yamauchi and Markman 2000 ) . Second , a category label guides attention , focusing people on the fea - tures within the category while discouraging attention to the features of other categories ( Murphy and Ross 1994 ; Ross and Murphy 1996 ) . This guided attention leads people to use feature information from a single category when making inductive inferences about a new object rather than using feature information from multiple categories ( Murphy and Ross 1994 ; Yamauchi and Markman 2000 ) . Third , category labels have been shown to override feature similarity as a factor predicting the type of inferences made about missing information ( Gelman and Markman 1986 ) . Even children as young as three years old preferred to base their inferences about a new object on its stated category membership rather than on its appearance ( Gelman and Markman 1987 ) . Taken together , these ﬁndings suggest that when a plausible cat - egory label is present , extensive mappings and knowledge transfer between a category and a target are likely to occur . When extensive knowledge is transferred from a category to a target new product , consumers are likely to categorize the new product into the category that was ﬁrst cued . Once this categorization occurs , consumers then use the category to make inferences about the product , and these inferences inﬂuence consumers’ preferences for the new product . More formally , H1a : The product category cued by an ad will signiﬁ - cantly inﬂuence consumers’ categorization of the new product in the direction of the cue and away from other plausible categorizations . H1b : Consumers’ expectations of a new product’s per - formance will be inferred from the performance of products in the category into which the new product is categorized . H1c : Consumers’ expectations of a new product’s per - formance will affect their preferences for the new product ( i . e . , higher expectations will lead to higher preferences ) . However , simple priming could also explain these pre - dictions . Thus , to rule out priming as an explanation , a stronger test of categorization - based knowledge transfer re - quires that subjects be exposed to multiple category cues . Markman ( 1987 , 1989 ) proposed the mutual exclusivity con - straint on word learning that suggests that people resist giv - ing a second category label to an object after they have acquired a ﬁrst label for it . This constraint implies that cat - egory labels encourage people to use the category named by the new label as a basis for structuring the target rep - resentation . Consequently , the ﬁrst plausible category label provided should induce extensive knowledge transfer . Once this extensive transfer has occurred , a person’s ability to map information from a second category onto that target may be impaired . For example , a digital camera could be plausibly cate - gorized as either a camera or as a computer peripheral . As shown in Figure 1 , both the ﬁlm - based camera representa - tion and the scanner representation are initially compatible with the rather impoverished digital camera representation because mappings from either category to the target are possible . However , on being told that the digital camera ( Figure 1 C ) is like a ﬁlm - based camera ( Figure 1 A ) , con - sumers may transfer the bulk of the properties contained in their representation of ﬁlm - based cameras into their repre - sentation of the digital camera . Once this transfer has oc - curred , consumers’ representations of the digital camera will look much like their representations of ﬁlm - based cameras . CATEGORIZATION FLEXIBILITY 491 FIGURE 1 PRODUCT CATEGORY REPRESENTATIONS With fewer common elements between the new digital cam - era representation and the existing scanner category , much of the relevant information contained in the scanner rep - resentation ( Figure 1 B ) may not be transferred because con - sumers will have difﬁculty in ﬁnding common elements on which to make an initial mapping . Thus , we propose the following : H2a : When given two consecutive and plausible category labels , consumers will rely primarily on the ﬁrst label provided when categorizing a really new product . H2b : When given two consecutive and plausible category labels , consumers will rely primarily on the ﬁrst label provided when making inferences about a re - ally new product’s performance . We test these hypotheses in experiment 1 . 492 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH FIGURE 2 DIGITAL CAMERA AD EXPERIMENT 1 Product Class A digital camera was chosen to operationalize the really new product because a pretest revealed that none of the 40 subjects had ever used or seen one at the time of the study . This lack of familiarity in the target population insured that subjects’ existing representations of the digital camera would be limited ( i . e . , impoverished ) . Further , research has shown that a digital camera does not ﬁt unequivocally into any existing product class , and thus , the digital camera is not automatically categorized as a camera ( Moreau , Leh - mann , and Markman 2001 ) . Finally , because the digital cam - era deﬁes straightforward classiﬁcation , knowledge in dif - ferent existing categories can be used to structure an initial representation of the new product . Design and Stimuli Two versions of an ad for a digital camera were created to cue different category labels ( traditional ﬁlm - based cam - eras vs . computer scanners ) . Both versions of the ad showed the same picture of a digital camera with body copy reading , “With the click of a button , you capture high - quality color images , then publish or transmit them right from your com - puter ! ” To avoid obvious demand effects , the body copy contained information from both the camera domain and the computer accessory domain and provided no explicit map - pings to any given category . Rather , the copy encouraged subjects to think of the digital camera as a whole product , not as a collection of different attributes and functions . The speciﬁc category cued by the ad was manipulated in the headline , “Picture ( Scan ) Your World ! ” and in the sub - headline , “The DX - 250 Works Like A Camera ( Scanner ) ! ” To strengthen the manipulation , a “thought bubble” was shown rising from the digital camera , and it contained a picture of a traditional camera ( scanner ) ( Fig . 2 ) . A pretest ( ) revealed no signiﬁcant differences between the ads n p 88 in terms of subjects’ ( a ) evaluation of the ad , ( b ) attitude toward the ad , ( c ) perceived realism of the ad , and ( d ) per - ceived effectiveness of the ad ( one - way ANOVAs ; all ) . p ’s 1 . 30 Design and Procedure Two factors were manipulated between - subjects : ( 1 ) the order of exposure to the ads ( camera ﬁrst vs . scanner ﬁrst ) and ( 2 ) the timing of the categorization task ( after one ad vs . after both ads ) . The procedure for this two - by - two design is summarized in Figure 3 . Subjects were 128 undergraduates from a southwestern university who participated in this “marketing research study” for course credit . The average age of the sample was 19 . 8 years , and 42 percent of the subjects were female . Subjects were randomly assigned to an experimental con - dition and given a packet containing both manipulations . The ﬁrst ad appeared on the ﬁrst page of each packet . Subjects were given 45 seconds to “think about the product advertised” and were then instructed to turn the page to answer seven questions regarding the ad’s effectiveness . Subjects in the “categorization task ﬁrst” condition then completed the categorization task while the other subjects CATEGORIZATION FLEXIBILITY 493 FIGURE 3 PROCEDURE FOR EXPERIMENTS 1 AND 2 answered ﬁve straightforward demographic questions . When all subjects had completed this ﬁrst set of questions , they were told to turn the page and were given another 45 seconds to “think about the product advertised” in the second ad . After responding to the second set of ad - effectiveness questions , subjects then completed either the demographic questions or the categorization task ( depending on their con - dition ) and then responded to the performance expectation task and preference measures ( ) . On a seven - alpha p . 85 item scale ( ) , subjects reported no differences alpha p . 80 in the effectiveness of the two ads in each of the order conditions ( within - subjects ANOVA : , F ( 1 , 87 ) p . 08 p 1 ) . . 50 Dependent Measures Categorization . Subjects were given the layout of a hypothetical electronics store with several departments , in - cluding computers and computer accessories ; cameras ; tel - evisions and VCRs ; and audio equipment . Subjects were asked , “If you were shopping for the DX - 250 in the store shown below , where is the FIRST place in the store you would go to ﬁnd the product ? ” and were instructed to use an X to indicate the location . The department in which each subject placed the X indicated their categorization of the digital camera . 1 Performance Expectations . The measure of perform - ance expectations required subjects to indicate their expec - tations of the picture quality produced by the digital camera . Subjects were given a printed set of three pictures of the same object ( a ﬂowering tree ) purportedly taken by a digital camera . The three pictures were actually created by using a photo software package to manipulate only the pixel den - sity and thus the clarity of the picture . The pixel densities used were 100 dots per inch ( dpi ) , 600 dpi , and 1 , 200 dpi . 2 Subjects selected the picture that they thought best rep - resented the quality of the output they would expect from the DX - 250 . Because higher picture quality is associated more closely with ﬁlm - based cameras than with computer accessories ( Burrows 1997 , p . 106 ; McCarthy 1996 , p . 117 ) , Hypothesis 1b predicts that subjects categorizing the DX - 250 as a camera will have higher picture quality expectations than those categorizing it as a computer accessory . Preferences . A ﬁve - item scale was used to assess sub - jects’ preferences for the product . On ﬁve seven - point scales , subjects indicated their attitude toward and overall evalua - tion of the product . Additionally , subjects were given a list of seven situations and asked whether or not they would use this product in each situation . Subjects’ responses to each situation were then summed to create an intended - use measure . The ﬁve scale measures and the intended - use mea - sure were then standardized and summed to create a measure of overall preference ( ) . alpha p . 76 Results Categorization . Subjects completing the categorization task after seeing only one ad provided the data to test Hy - pothesis 1a , and the results from these subjects support this hypothesis . Of those subjects seeing the camera ad ﬁrst , 74 percent categorized the DX - 250 as a camera , compared to only 32 percent of the subjects who saw the scanner ad ﬁrst ( , ) . 2 x ( 1 ) p 6 . 76 p ! . 01 1 A categorization of the digital camera as a computer accessory was coded zero and a categorization as a ﬁlm - based camera was coded one . No subject placed the DX - 250 into any other category . 2 Manipulation checks revealed signiﬁcant differences between the three pictures , with the 1 , 200 dpi picture having the highest clarity , followed by the 600 dpi picture , and then the 100 dpi picture . Expectations were coded as follows : 3 , the 1 , 200 dpi picture ; 2 , the 600 dpi picture ; and 1 , the 100 dpi picture . 494 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH Hypothesis 2a predicts that this pattern will also hold for subjects completing the categorization task after exposure to both ads , and the results also support this hypothesis ( , ) . Fifty - nine percent of subjects see - 2 x ( 1 ) p 5 . 16 p ! . 05 ing the camera ad ﬁrst categorized the DX - 250 as a camera , compared to only 35 percent of subjects seeing the scanner ad ﬁrst ( , ) . While not as dramatic in this z p 1 . 99 p ! . 05 categorization - after - both - ads condition as compared to the categorization - after - one - ad condition , the pattern demon - strates the dominant inﬂuence of the ﬁrst category label cued . Note that because subjects saw the ads sequentially , the second ad could have had a more pronounced inﬂuence on subjects’ categorization since it was more proximally related to the task . However , our results indicate that the ﬁrst ad has the greatest inﬂuence on the categorization de - cision . This difference cannot be explained by differences in ad effectiveness . Performance Expectations . Hypothesis 1b predicts that subjects’ categorizations of a new product should be correlated with their performance expectations , and we would expect that relationship for subjects categorizing the new product after seeing both ads . Consistent with this ex - pectation , subjects categorizing the DX - 250 as a camera reported higher performance expectations than did those cat - egorizing it as a computer accessory ( vs . M p 1 . 79 camera ; , ) . The correlation be - M p 1 . 41 t p 2 . 10 p ! . 05 computer tween categorization and performance expectations for these subjects was both positive and signiﬁcant , 5 ) . ( r p . 24 p ! . 0 Subjects categorizing the new product after seeing only one ad provide the data to test Hypothesis 2b , which predicts that subjects will rely heavily on the ﬁrst category cued when inferring performance . These subjects were exposed to only one of the category labels at the time of making their categorization decision . Between making their cate - gorization decision and reporting their performance expec - tations , these subjects were exposed to the second ad and category label . Information stored in this second category could potentially be used to restructure the representation of the DX - 250 and to infer its performance . Were this to happen , the correlation between the categorization decision and performance expectations for these subjects would be lower than the . 24 obtained in the categorization - after - both condition . However , as Hypothesis 2b predicts , subjects based their inferences primarily on the ﬁrst category , and the correlation between categorization and performance ex - pectations in this group is actually numerically higher than the correlation found in the categorization - after - both con - dition ( , ) . Moreover , the performance ex - r p . 34 p ! . 05 pectations of these subjects also differed signiﬁcantly ac - cording to categorization , with means nearly identical to those reported in the categorization - after - both condition ( 2 vs . ; 1 , ) . M p 1 . 8 M p 1 . 37 t p 2 . 2 p ! . 05 camera computer Preferences . A three - way ANOVA was used to test Hypothesis 1c , with ad order ( camera ﬁrst vs . scanner ﬁrst ) , categorization decision , and performance expectations serv - ing as the independent factors . Consistent with Hypothesis 1c , only performance expectations signiﬁcantly affected consumers’ preferences ( , ) . As F ( 2 , 117 ) p 9 . 91 p ! . 001 predicted , high expectations of picture quality were related to higher preferences for the DX - 250 ( , M p . 35 high , ) . Subjects’ categorization of M p (cid:1) . 38 M p (cid:1) . 50 medium low the DX - 250 also had a marginally signiﬁcant inﬂuence on preferences , with those categorizing the DX - 250 as a camera having higher preferences than those categorizing it as a computer accessory ( vs . , M p . 29 M p (cid:1) . 25 camera computer ) . F ( 1 , 117 ) p 3 . 34 , p ! . 10 Discussion In experiment 1 , all subjects saw exactly the same in - formation , yet the order in which they saw the information had signiﬁcant effects on where they would shop for the DX - 250 , how they expected it to perform , and on their overall preferences for the new product . Speciﬁcally , sub - jects relied heavily on information from the ﬁrst category when forming their representations of the new product . Given that useful information about really new products can often be found in multiple categories , it is important for marketers to understand how to facilitate the transfer of information from multiple domains . Evidence suggests that when people are focused on a speciﬁc correspondence , the inferences they draw from the category to the target are likely to be constrained to information directly related to the focal correspondence ( Clement and Gentner 1991 ) . For example , a digital camera manufacturer could assert that its product was like a ﬁlm - based camera in the way that the consumer takes pictures ( e . g . , “push the button to capture an image” ) . The manufacturer could also assert that the digital camera was like a scanner in the way that the con - sumer processes the pictures ( e . g . , “hook it up to a computer to download an image” ) . In this case , consumers could ef - fectively use information from both categories to achieve a higher level of understanding about the new product while making fewer erroneous inferences . Under these conditions , the new product representation can be structured using in - formation from both categories . Thus , H3a : When given two consecutive and plausible category labels and explicit mappings from each category , consumers will rely on both the ﬁrst and second labels when categorizing a really new product . H3b : When given two consecutive and plausible category labels and explicit mappings from each category , consumers will use information from both the ﬁrst and second categories when inferring the perform - ance of a really new product . We test these hypotheses in experiment 2 . CATEGORIZATION FLEXIBILITY 495 EXPERIMENT 2 Experimental Stimuli The stimuli used in this experiment were identical to those used in experiment 1 with one exception : the body copy for each ad was rewritten in order to provide explicit mappings from each cued category to the target . Speciﬁcally , the copy in the ad cuing the camera ( computer scanner ) category read , “The New DX - 250 is Like a Camera ( Scanner ) ! You can take ( process ) pictures with the DX - 250 in the same way you would with a camera ( scanner ) . ” All other aspects of the ad remained the same . Method and Procedure The design and procedure for experiment 2 is identical to that of experiment 1 . In this two - by - two design , two factors were manipulated between subjects : ( 1 ) the order of exposure to the ads ( camera ﬁrst vs . scanner ﬁrst ) and ( 2 ) the timing of the categorization task ( after the ﬁrst ad vs . after both ads ) . Eighty - three undergraduates from a south - western university participated in this “marketing research study , ” were randomly assigned to an experimental condi - tion , and were given a packet containing both manipulations . Coefﬁcient alpha for the preference measures was . 82 . Results Categorization . While the explicit mappings may limit the amount of knowledge transferred from the ﬁrst category , the inﬂuence of the ﬁrst category label on subjects’ cate - gorization decisions should still exist for subjects in the categorization - after - the - ﬁrst - ad condition . As expected , the ﬁrst ad cued had a signiﬁcant effect on the categorization decisions made by these subjects ( , ) . 2 x ( 1 ) p 5 . 60 p ! . 05 Speciﬁcally , 66 percent of subjects seeing the camera ad ﬁrst categorized the DX - 250 as a camera , while only 25 percent of those seeing the scanner ad ﬁrst categorized it as a camera ( , ) . z p 2 . 92 p ! . 01 If explicit mappings do enable subjects to use information from both categories , as Hypothesis 3a predicts , the inﬂu - ence of the ﬁrst ad on subjects’ categorization of the DX - 250 should dissipate as subjects begin to rely on information cued by the second ad . Thus , subjects categorizing the DX - 250 after seeing both ads should not be signiﬁcantly inﬂu - enced by the order in which the ads are presented , and in fact , presentation order did not signiﬁcantly inﬂuence these subjects’ categorization decisions ( , ) . 2 x ( 1 ) p 2 . 47 p 1 . 10 Despite the lack of signiﬁcance , however , the pattern of results was directionally consistent with the results obtained in experiment 1 . Speciﬁcally , 57 percent of subjects who saw the camera ad ﬁrst categorized the DX - 250 as a camera , compared to 31 percent of subjects who saw the scanner ad ﬁrst . Based on this ﬁnding , it is hard to conclude that the explicit mappings enable subjects to use information from both categories when reasoning about the new product . Thus , we highlight further evidence in the performance ex - pectation results to suggest that subjects are using infor - mation from both base domains in this experiment . Performance Expectations . A two - way ANOVA , with categorization and the order of the dependent variables in - cluded as independent factors , revealed both a main effect of categorization on expectations ( , F ( 1 , 80 ) p 5 . 84 p ! ) and an interaction between order and categorization . 01 ( , ) . F ( 1 , 80 ) p 7 . 22 p ! . 01 For subjects making their categorization decision after seeing both ads , we again expect a positive correlation be - tween subjects’ categorization decisions and their perform - ance expectations because these subjects had been exposed to both category cues at the time they reported both their categorization decision and their performance expectations . Thus , these subjects’ representations of the DX - 250 were ostensibly the same when they made both judgments . The data support this prediction ( Table 1 ) . Subjects categorizing the DX - 250 as a camera reported signiﬁcantly higher per - formance expectations than did those categorizing it as a computer accessory ( vs . , M p 2 . 00 M p 1 . 21 camera computer , ) . The correlation between categorization t p 3 . 14 p ! . 01 and performance expectations was both positive and sig - niﬁcant ( , ) . r p . 49 p ! . 01 For subjects making their categorization decision after seeing only one ad , however , their representations of the new product ( including their expectations of performance ) could be altered by the second ad between the time they make their categorization decision and when they report their expectations of the DX - 250’s performance . If infor - mation from the second category is transferred and used , as Hypothesis 3b predicts , the correlation between subjects’ categorization decisions and their performance expectations should be lower than the . 49 obtained from subjects making the categorization decision after seeing both ads . The results support Hypothesis 3b . The correlation between categori - zation and performance expectations in this group is close to zero ( , ) . Speciﬁcally , subjects catego - r p (cid:1) . 04 p 1 . 82 rizing the DX - 250 as a camera expected about the same level of performance as those categorizing it as a computer accessory ( vs . , , M p 1 . 55 M p 1 . 50 t p . 23 camera computer ) . p 1 . 80 Preferences . Again , a three - way ANOVA was used to test Hypothesis 1c , with ad order ( camera ﬁrst vs . scanner ﬁrst ) , categorization decision , and performance expectations serving as the independent factors . Performance expecta - tions were again a signiﬁcant predictor of preferences ( , , ; M p . 18 M p (cid:1) . 08 M p (cid:1) . 83 F ( 2 , 72 ) p high medium low , ) . 4 . 22 p ! . 05 GENERAL DISCUSSION The ability to selectively transfer information from mul - tiple categories is critical for consumers who are learning about innovations . Because really new products often con - tain features and relations derived from multiple existing categories , consumers will learn about these products more 496 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH TABLE 1 SUMMARY OF RESULTS FROM EXPERIMENTS 1 AND 2 Experiment 1 Experiment 2 Categorization after one ad Categorization after both ads Categorization after one ad Categorization after both ads Percentage who saw the camera ad ﬁrst and cat - egorized it as a camera 74 59 66 57 Percentage who saw the camera ad second and categorized it as a camera 32 35 25 31 Difference in percentages . 42 * * . 24 * . 41 * * . 26 Correlationbetween catego - rization and expectations r p . 34 * r p . 24 * r p (cid:1) . 04 r p . 49 * * Picture quality expectations ( 3 p best , 1 p worst ) : Camera 1 . 82 1 . 79 1 . 55 2 . 00 Computer 1 . 37 * 1 . 41 * 1 . 50 1 . 21 * * * Signiﬁcant at . 05 . * * Signiﬁcant at . 01 . quickly and with fewer mistakes if marketers delineate the appropriate information that should be transferred from each domain . The two studies in this article were designed to examine how and under what conditions consumers use in - formation from multiple categories to develop their pref - erences for new products . The ﬁndings from experiment 1 suggest that when two plausible category labels are activated sequentially , the label presented ﬁrst has a dominant inﬂuence on consumers’ per - ceptions of a new product . However , experiment 2 dem - onstrates that this primacy effect can be somewhat mitigated by providing consumers with explicit mappings from each of the two categories . Theoretical Contributions While prior research in marketing has examined how con - sumers integrate new products into their existing category structures ( Meyers - Levy and Tybout 1989 ; Ozanne , Brucks , and Grewal 1992 ; Sujan and Bettman 1989 ) , these studies have examined how consumers cope with incrementally new products ( i . e . , a new kind of soft drink , car , and single reﬂex lens camera , respectively ) . In each case , the researchers ex - pected consumers to use multiple levels ( i . e . , superordinate , basic , and subordinate ) of a single existing category to rea - son about the product . By deﬁnition , innovative products defy straightforward categorization . Thus , consumers must integrate knowledge from multiple sources in order to com - prehend them . Our research begins an examination of how and under what conditions consumers access and use knowl - edge from multiple domains ( see Moreau et al . [ 2001 ] on how experts integrate information from multiple knowledge bases ) . Our focus on the use of information itself is also a the - oretical contribution . Historically , categorization research in both marketing and psychology has focused on how con - sumers organize knowledge in memory and classify novel objects . Only recently has categorization research examined how people use categories to learn and make inferences about novel objects , and little empirical work has examined how these inferences are made when multiple category la - bels are both plausible and accessible . Our research was designed to address this gap . Our work also extends recent research highlighting the crucial role that category labels play in predictive inference . We demonstrate that relating the category label of a known category to a new product leads people to take the structure of the known category and apply it to the new one . Previ - ous research by Yamauchi and Markman ( 1998 , 2000 ) has shown that category labels focus consumers on relationships among features within a category when making feature pre - dictions . This work is also consistent with research by Gel - man and Heyman ( 1999 ) that demonstrates that even chil - dren act as though category labels denote a cluster of stable properties of an object . We extend these ﬁndings by showing that when two competing category labels are provided , the ﬁrst label has a disproportionate inﬂuence on consumers’ inferences about and preferences for a new product . CATEGORIZATION FLEXIBILITY 497 This research has focused on categorization - based knowl - edge transfer . However , the recent interest in analogical - based knowledge transfer ( e . g . , Gregan - Paxton and Roedder John 1997 ) and its growing applications to the marketing area suggest that future research needs to be done to more clearly distinguish categorization - based knowledge transfer from analogical knowledge transfer . Managerial Implications Because really new products can be plausibly categorized into more than one existing product class , marketers have options when positioning these novel products . Firms can choose a positioning strategy that will enable them to op - timize both their in - store placement and distribution strat - egies . This is important since where consumers shop for a new product can inﬂuence both their choice decision and , if the product is purchased , their ensuing satisfaction . For example , a consumer shopping in the camera de - partment of a store is likely to compare the price of a digital camera to the price of traditional , ﬁlm - based cameras whereas a consumer shopping in the computer department is likely to compare its price to that of scanners , printers , and other computer accessories . This difference in context could inﬂuence subjects’ perceptions of the digital camera’s value and , therefore , inﬂuence their choice decision . Our studies showed that the category ( i . e . , aisle ) where consumers expected to ﬁnd the product inﬂuenced their per - formance expectations , which , in turn , affected their pref - erences . Consumers looking for the digital camera in the camera aisle reported higher performance expectations than those shopping in the computer aisle . Thus , a ﬁrm can choose a positioning strategy that positively inﬂuences con - sumers’ inferences about the product’s performance . How - ever , because expectations are a major determinant of sat - isfaction , the product’s positioning should not overly inﬂate consumers’ expectations . Conclusion As technology continues to facilitate the rapid creation of innovative new products , it is critical for marketers to leverage the power of consumers’ existing knowledge to help them learn . Because many of these innovative products contain both attributes and relations contained in disparate categories , a better understanding of how consumers com - bine information from multiple domains is important . Future research is needed to better understand the mechanisms un - derlying this type of dynamic knowledge transfer . This work should also trace the alignment , mapping , and transfer stages to document how consumers’ representations of new prod - ucts develop . In this way , we can differentiate between cat - egorization - based and analogy - based knowledge transfer , a necessary step in gaining a better understanding of how consumers integrate information from multiple existing domains . [ Received August 1999 . Revised May 2000 . David Glen Mick served as editor , and Richard Yalch served as asso - ciate editor for this article . ] REFERENCES Burrows , Peter ( 1997 ) , “HP Pictures the Future , ” Business Week ( July 7 ) , 100 – 109 . Clement , Catherine and Dedre Gentner ( 1991 ) , “Systematicity as a Selection Constraint in Analogical Mapping , ” Cognitive Sci - ence , 15 ( January – March ) , 89 – 132 . Cohen , Joel B . and Kunal Basu ( 1987 ) , “Alternative Models of Categorization : Toward a Contingent Processing Framework , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 13 ( March ) , 455 – 472 . Febreze ( 1998 ) , product Web site , http : / / www . febreze . com ( August 12 ) . Gelman , Susan and Gail Heyman ( 1999 ) , “Carrot - Eaters and Crea - ture - Believers : The Effects of Lexicalization on Children’s Inferences about Social Categories , ” Psychological Science , 10 ( November ) , 489 – 493 . ——— and Ellen Markman ( 1986 ) , “Categories and Induction in Young Children , ” Cognition , 23 ( August ) , 183 – 209 . ——— and Ellen Markman ( 1987 ) , “Young Children’s Inductions from Natural Kinds : The Role of Categories and Appear - ances , ” Child Development , 58 ( December ) , 1532 – 1541 . Gentner , Dedre ( 1983 ) , “Structure - Mapping : A Theoretical Frame - work for Analogy , ” Cognitive Science , 7 ( April – June ) , 155 – 170 . ——— ( 1989 ) , “The Mechanisms of Analogical Learning , ” in Similarity and Analogical Reasoning , ed . Stella Vosniadou and Andrew Ortony , New York : Cambridge University Press , 199 – 241 . ——— and Arthur B . Markman ( 1997 ) , “Structural Alignment in Analogy and Similarity , ” American Psychologist , 52 ( 1 ) , 45 – 56 . Gregan - Paxton , Jennifer ( 1999 ) , “How Does Prior Knowledge In - ﬂuence Consumer Learning ? A Study of Analogy and Cat - egorization Effects , ” working paper , Department of Business Administration , University of Delaware , Newark , DE 19716 . ——— and Deborah Roedder John ( 1997 ) , “Consumer Learning by Analogy : A Model of Internal Knowledge Transfer , ” Jour - nal of Consumer Research , 24 ( December ) , 266 – 284 . Holyoak , Keith and Paul Thagard ( 1989 ) , “A Computational Model of Analogical Learning , ” in Similarity and Analogical Rea - soning , ed . Stella Vosniadou and Andrew Ortony , New York : Cambridge University Press , 242 – 266 . Lehmann , Donald ( 1994 ) , “Characteristics of ‘Really’ New Prod - ucts , ” paper presented at the Marketing Science Institute Con - ference , Boston . Loken , Barbara and James Ward ( 1990 ) , “Alternative Approaches to Understanding the Determinants of Typicality , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 17 ( September ) , 111 – 126 . Marketing Science Institute ( 1994 ) , “Research Priorities : A Guide to MSI Research Programs and Procedures , ” Marketing Sci - ence Institute , Cambridge , MA . Markman , Arthur B . and Edward Wisniewski ( 1997 ) , “Similar and Different : The Differentiation of Basic - Level Categories , ” Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 23 ( January ) , 54 – 70 . ——— , Takashi Yamauchi , and Valerie Makin ( 1997 ) , “The Cre - ation of New Concepts : A Multifaceted Approach to Category Learning , ” in Conceptual Structures and Processes : Emer - gence , Discovery , and Change , ed . Thomas B . Ward , Steven 498 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH M . Smith , and Jyotsna Vaid , Washington , DC : American Psy - chological Association , 179 – 208 . Markman , Ellen M . ( 1987 ) , “How Children Constrain the Possible Meanings of Words , ” in Concepts and Conceptual Devel - opment : Ecological and Intellectual Factors in Categoriza - tion , ed . Ulrich Neisser , Cambridge , MA : Cambridge Uni - versity Press , 255 – 287 . ——— ( 1989 ) , Categorization and Naming in Children : Problems of Induction , Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . McCarthy , Keith ( 1996 ) , “A Bit about Photographs , ” Economist , ( December 21 ) , 117 – 118 . Medin , Douglas L . and Marguerite M . Schaffer ( 1978 ) , “Context Theory of Classiﬁcation , ” Psychological Review , 85 ( May ) , 207 – 238 . Meyers - Levy , Joan and Alice Tybout ( 1989 ) , “Schema Congruity as a Basis for Product Evaluation , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 16 ( June ) , 39 – 55 . Moreau , C . Page , Donald R . Lehmann , and Arthur B . Markman ( 2001 ) , “Entrenched Category Structures and Resistance to New Products , ” Journal of Marketing Research 38 ( Febru - ary ) , in press . Murphy , George and Brian Ross ( 1994 ) , “Predictions from Un - certain Categorizations , ” Cognitive Psychology , 27 ( October ) , 148 – 193 . Ozanne , Julie L . , Merrie Brucks , and Dhruv Grewal ( 1992 ) , “A Study of Information Search Behavior during the Categori - zation of New Products , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 18 ( March ) , 452 – 463 . Rosch , Eleanor and Carolyn B . Mervis ( 1975 ) , “Family Resem - blances : Studies in the Internal Structure of Categories , ” Cog - nitive Psychology , 7 ( October ) , 573 – 605 . Ross , Brian ( 1997 ) , “The Use of Categories AffectsClassiﬁcation , ” Journal of Memory and Language , 37 ( August ) , 240 – 267 . ——— and George Murphy ( 1996 ) , “Category - Based Predictions : Inﬂuence of Uncertainty and Feature Associations , ” Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cog - nition , 22 ( May ) , 753 – 763 . ——— and Thomas L . Spalding ( 1994 ) , “Concepts and Catego - ries , ” in Handbook of Perception and Cognition , ed . R . Stern - berg , San Diego , CA : Academic Press , 119 - 148 . Sujan , Mita and James Bettman ( 1989 ) , “The Effects of Brand Positioning Strategies on Consumers’ Brand and Category Perceptions : Some Insights from Schema Research , ” Journal of Marketing Research , 26 ( November ) , 454 – 468 . Thomas , Robin D . ( 1998 ) , “Learning Correlations in Categoriza - tion Tasks Using Large , Ill Deﬁned Categories , ” Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 24 ( 1 ) , 119 – 143 . Waldmann , Michael , Keith J . Holyoak , and Angela Fratianne ( 1995 ) , “Causal Models and the Acquisition of Category Structure , ” Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 124 ( June ) , 181 – 206 . Yamauchi , Takashi and Arthur B . Markman ( 1998 ) , “Category Learning by Inference and Classiﬁcation , ” Journal of Memory and Language , 39 ( July ) , 124 – 148 . ——— and Arthur B . Markman ( 2000 ) , “Inference Using Cate - gories , ” Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 26 ( May ) , 776 – 795 .