A general framework for analysing diversity in science , technology and society Andy Stirling * SPRU—Science and Technology Policy Research , Freeman Centre , University of Sussex , Brighton , East Sussex BN1 9QE , UK This paper addresses the scope for more integrated general analysis of diversity in science , technology and society . It proposes a framework recognizing three necessary but individually insufﬁcient properties of diversity . Based on 10 quality criteria , it suggests a general quantitative non - parametric diversity heuristic . This allows the systematic exploration of diversity under different perspectives , including divergent conceptions of relevant attributes and contrasting weightings on different diversity properties . It is shown how this heuristic may be used to explore different possible trade - offs between diversity and other aspects of interest , including portfolio interactions . The resulting approach offers a way to be more systematic and transparent in the treatment of scientiﬁc and technological diversity in a range of ﬁelds , including conservation management , research governance , energy policy and sustainable innovation . Keywords : diversity ; disparity ; variety ; uncertainty ; portfolio analysis 1 . INTRODUCTION ‘Diversity’ is a concept that features prominently in a variety of disparate disciplines . Alongside the main focus in ecology ( Odum 1953 ; May 1975 ; McCann 2000 ) , the term arises repeatedly in the physical ( Shevchenko et al . 1996 ) , life ( Maynard Smith 1989 ) and information sciences ( Kauffman 1993 ) , as well as in social ( Grabher & Stark 1997 ) , economic ( Geroski 1989 ) and policy ( Gillett 2003 ) studies . In particular , diversity is a prominent theme in science and tech - nology policy ( Nowotny et al . 2001 ) . That this should be so is not unusual in itself . Whether for substantive or superﬁcial reasons , tech - nical terms like this are constantly being adapted to new applications . What is interesting about the concept of diversity is that , across radically different contexts , it refers repeatedly to a remarkably similar and particular set of properties . Despite much pertinent work ( Hill 1973 ; Peet 1974 ; Pielou 1977 ; May 1981 ; Weitzman 1992 a ; Solow & Polasky 1994 a ) , there is presently relatively little cross - disciplinary research on the general characterization of diversity . The present paper seeks to address this challenge . It begins by identifying the general properties of diversity that are common to the many contrasting ﬁelds in which it arises . It moves on to explore how these properties relate to each other and discuss the issues that emerge in trying to articulate them . It then proposes a novel general diversity heuristic with which systematically to characterize diversity across a variety of ﬁelds , and with particular reference to conservation management and technology policy . The paper ends by illustrating the practical application of this framework in examining relationships between diversity and other issues of interest . 2 . WHY IS DIVERSITY OF INTEREST ? Before embarking on this analysis , it is worth asking why we might want to address diversity in such general terms at all ? There already exists a host of specialized approaches in particular disciplines ( Stirling 2006 a ) . The answer here is twofold . First , it will be argued that— even in many specialist applications—well - established understandings of diversity can sometimes be circum - scribed or challengeable . In such cases , a more general diversity heuristic may be useful as a reference , comp - lement or catalyst . Second , there are ﬁelds—such as science and technology policy—where diversity is promi - nent in discussion , but remains undeﬁned or analytically neglected . Here , ageneralheuristicoffersvalueasameans to more systematic or robust understandings . Policy debates in many areas of science and technology yield numerous reasons for an interest in diversity . In the history , philosophy and sociology of science , interactions among a diversity of disciplinary perspectives are held to be important means to enhancing rigour ( Merton 1973 ) and creativity ( Kuhn 1970 ) . In research strategy , diverse portfolios offer ﬂexibility in the face of uncertain future progress ( Rosenberg 1996 ) and promote learning across pro - grammes ( David & Rothwell 1996 ) . More broadly , institutional and technological diversity are seen as J . R . Soc . Interface ( 2007 ) 4 , 707 – 719 doi : 10 . 1098 / rsif . 2007 . 0213 Published online 27 February 2007 Electronic supplementary material is available at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rsif . 2007 . 0213 or via http : / / www . journals . royalsoc . ac . uk . * a . c . stirling @ sussex . ac . uk Received 3 November 2006 Accepted 7 January 2007 707 This journal is q 2007 The Royal Society stimuli for innovation ( Rosenberg 1982 ; Landau et al . 1996 ; Grabher & Stark 1997 ) and productivity ( Aoki 1996 ) . Accordingly , it is repeatedly urged ( including by Nature ( Gibbons 1999 ; Anon . 2004 ) and the Treasury ( Treasury 2006 ) ) that the governance of science be ‘opened up’ ( Stirling 2005 ) to include more diverse public constituencies and interests ( Wynne 1995 ) . In risk regulation , the inclusion of diverse views is likewise cited as a way to inform more robust policy decisions ( Fineberg 1996 ; Hong & Page 1998 ; Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution 1998 ) . Similarly , in debates over precaution ( Stirling 2006 b ) and sustainability ( Brooks 1986 ) , the pursuit of diverse technology strategies is highlighted as a ‘resource pool’ ( Breznitz 1986 ) providing ﬂexibility ( Collingridge 1983 ) and resilience ( Folke et al . 2002 ) in the face of ignorance ( Stirling 2006 c ) and surprise ( Norgaard 1989 ) . This is also true in ﬁelds like energy policy , where technological and fuel diversity have long been a major focus in discussions of supply security ( Willrich 1975 ; International Energy Agency 1985 ; Kaijser et al . 1991 ; Stirling 1994 ; Grubb et al . 2006 ) . In a world where choice among scientiﬁc and technological pathways is often a matter of intense political conten - tion , then , diversity features both as an input and an output—pursuing a mix of strategies informed by a variety of perspectives can help accommodate other - wise irreconcilable social interests and values ( James 1990 ; Grabher & Stark 1997 ) . Looking at innovation more widely , diversity is a key focus of attention in economics ( Gatsios & Seabright 1989 ; Geroski 1989 ) , yielding many varieties of portfolio theory ( Lumby 1984 ; Brealey & Myers 1988 ) . Less - formalized notions of diversity are promi - nent in strategies for addressing wider challenges , like market concentration ( Finkelstein & Friedman 1967 ) , institutional momentum ( Hughes 1983 ) , autonomy ( Winner 1977 ) , entrapment ( Walker 2000 ) and lock - in ( Arthur 1989 ) . Diversity is consequently a major theme in systems ( Johnson & Longmeyer 1999 ) and organization ( Grabher & Stark 1997 ) theory , biblio - metrics ( Axarloglou & Theoharakis 2003 ) , evaluation ( Rafols & Meyer 2006 ) , engineering ( Cohen 1985 ) and regional ( Dosi 1992 ) , development ( Norgaard 1994 ) and employment ( Blackaby et al . 2002 ) policy . Beyond this , diversity is prominent in crucial efforts to promote religious , cultural , racial , and gender equality ( Atkinson 1970 ) and pluralism ( US Department of Agriculture Subcommittee on Extension Diversity of the Personnel and Organization Development Committee 1998 ) . The concept of diversity is truly of pervasive interest . 3 . POTENTIAL DOWNSIDES OF DIVERSITY Of course , it must be noted that—in all these areas and despite the beneﬁts—appeals to diversity sometimes represent little more than rhetoric ( Matthews & McGowan 1992 ) . Although diversity is an irreducible property of a system ( rather than of its individual elements ) , it is repeatedly invoked in policy debates as if it were a unique quality of a particular system element or ‘option’ ( Stirling 1994 ) —sometimes one that might actually be favoured for rather different reasons ( Lawson 1992 ) . Exploiting the ‘apple pie’ connotations of diversity can be useful in advocating otherwise weak or marginalized positions . Even where the beneﬁts are substantive , it is rare indeed that diversity offers a ‘free lunch’ ( Weitzman 1992 a ) . Indeed , by deﬁnition , deliberate diversiﬁcation involves prioritizing options that are otherwise assigned relatively low performance ( Brooks 1986 ; David & Rothwell 1996 ) . In addition , there are typically trade - offs between diversity and transaction costs ( Williamson 1993 ) and with foregone beneﬁts like accountability ( Grabher & Stark 1997 ) , standardization ( Cowan 1991 ) and economies of scale ( Matthews & McGowan 1992 ) . The value of the diversity premium ( Ulph 1988 ) that is warranted in any context will be a function of the relative performance attributed to individual options and the contributions that each makes to diversity ( Stirling 1994 ) . Both are subjective judgements , offering ample scope for disagreement . What is needed , then , is a systematic framework for exploring the implications of—and relationships between—different perspectives on the implications of diversity ( Bruno et al . 1991 ; Mercier & McGowan 1996 ) . Such a framework should ideally be applicable equally across the range of contexts in which diversity is of interest . It istothis taskthatthediscussion willnowturn . 4 . THE UBIQUITY OF DIVERSITY At root , diversity is an attribute of any system whose elementsmaybeapportionedintocategories ( Leonard & Jones 1989 ) . Science comprises diverse disciplines ( Gomez et al . 1996 ) ; compounds diverse isomers ( J . Bradshaw 1996 , unpublished work ) ; crystals diverse structures ( Shevchenko et al . 2006 ) ; amino acids diverse sequences ( Wright et al . 2005 ) ; phyla diverse taxa ( Sneath & Sokal 1973 ) ; ecologies diverse species ( Forey et al . 1994 ) ; agronomies diverse crops ( Pimm 2004 ) ; technologies diverse forms ( Anon . 2003 ) ; investments diverse shares ( Brealey & Myers 1988 ) ; products diverse attributes ( Lancaster 1979 ) ; archae - ologies diverse assemblages ( Leonard & Jones 1989 ) ; cultures diverse communities ( Haughton & Mukerjee 1995 ) ; literatures diverse perspectives ( Serebnick & Quinn 1995 ) ; networks diverse actors ( Callon 1992 ) ; and individuals diverse psychologies ( Junge 1994 ) . In all these areas ( and others ) , we ﬁnd ostensibly different but convergent concepts of diversity . In many of these ﬁelds , the properties of diversity are most usefully addressed in relation to some speciﬁc empiricallyortheoreticallygroundedparametersthatareparticulartothestructuresofthesystemsinquestion ( Magurran 1988 ) . In ﬁnance theory , for instance , the parameters of interest are the covariance coefﬁcients reﬂecting past patterns in the movements of stock prices ( Brealey & Myers 1988 ) . In characterizing chemical diversity , fundamental combinatorial rules play crucial roles ( J . Bradshaw 1996 , unpublished work ) . In palaeon - tology and conservation biology , the strictly bifurcating structure of phylogenetic trees provides a useful framework ( Humphries et al . 1995 ) . The discipline of mathematical ecology is an area in which diversity 708 A general framework for analysing diversity A . Stirling J . R . Soc . Interface ( 2007 ) concepts have been particularly thoroughly investigated ( Magurran 1988 ) . Here , a family of parametric diversity measures derive from the pervasive power - law structures displayed by species - abundance distributions within and between real ecosystems ( Southwood 1978 ) . Yet , even in these ﬁelds where diversity is relatively well parameterized , non - parametric diversity measures are often still applied . Examples developed in ecology and applied elsewhere include species counting ( MacArthur 1965 ) and various mathematical functions of the proportional representations of relevant species ( Magurran 1988 ; table 1 ) . Even in some of the most mature ﬁelds of development , then , parametric measures of diversity are often substituted by more generally applicable non - parametric indices ( May 1981 ) . Such approaches are even more relevant in the majority of ﬁelds discussed previously , where there exists no uniquely plausible parametric basis for structuring understandings of diversity . 5 . A COMMON FRAMEWORK It is when viewed in a non - parametric fashion , simply as a property of the apportioning of elements or options in any system , that the remarkable similarity and particularity of interdisciplinary understandings of diversity becomes clear . Inshort , diversityconceptsemployedacrossthefull range of sciences mentioned previously display some combination of just three basic properties . These I will call ‘variety’ , ‘balance’ and ‘disparity’ ( Stirling 1994 ) . Each is a necessary but insufﬁcient property of diversity ( Sokal & Sneath 1970 ; Clarke 1978 ; Stirling 2006 d ) . Although addressed in different vocabularies , each is applicable across a range of disciplines and aggregated in various permutations in quantitative indices ( Hill 1973 ) . Despite the multiple disciplines and divergent contexts , there seems no other obvious candidate for a fourth important general property of diversity beyond these three ( Stirling 2006 e ) . Variety is the number of categories into which system elements are apportioned . It is the answer to the question : ‘how many types of thing do we have ? ’ This aspect of diversity is highlighted ( for instance ) in the use of species - number indices in ecology ( McIntosh 1967 ) ; the simple enumeration of ﬁrms or products in economics ( Cohendet et al . 1992 ; Kauffman 1993 ; Llerena & Llerena 1993 ; Saviotti & Mani 1995 ) or the counting of fuels or technologies in energy policy ( UK Department of Energy 1988 ) . All else being equal , the greater the variety , the greater the diversity . Balance is a function of the pattern of apportionment of elements across categories . It is the answer to the question : ‘how much of each type of thing do we have ? ’ Analogous to statistical variance ( Pielou 1977 ) , this can be represented by a set of positive fractions , which sum to unity ( Laxton 1978 a ) . Referred to as ‘evenness’ in ecology ( Pielou 1969 ) and ‘concentration’ in economics ( Finkelstein & Friedman 1967 ) , this is captured by the Shannon – Wiener ( 1962 ) , Gini ( 1912 ) and Simpson ( 1949 ) indices ( table 1 ) . As the Herﬁndahl – Hirschman index , the latter is used in the US to regulate market share ( US Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission 1992 ) . All else being equal , the more even is the balance , the greater the diversity . Disparity refers to the manner and degree in which the elements may be distinguished ( Runnegar 1987 ) . It is the answer to the question : ‘how different from each other are the types of thing that we have ? ’ It is judgements over disparity , which ( often implicitly ) necessarily govern the resolving of categories used to characterize variety and balance . This is addressed by an array of taxonomic indices in palaeontology ( Williams & Humphries 1994 ) , conservation biology ( Solow et al . 1993 ) and economics ( Nguyen et al . 2005 ) —usually based on some form of distance measure . All else being equal , the more disparate are the represented elements , the greater the diversity . 6 . SOME GENERAL CHALLENGES The consequence of this threefold understanding of diversity is a recognition that each property constitutes the other two ( Stirling 2006 g ) . This in turn highlights difﬁculties with diversity concepts and associated indices—in whatever discipline—that focus exclusively Table 1 . Selected non - parametric measures of diversity properties ( Stirling 2006 f , o ) . N , number of categories of elements ; ln , logarithm ( usually natural ) ; p i , proportion of system comprises category i ; n , number of attributes displayed by elements ; s , standard deviation of attributes within categories ; m , mean of attributes within categories ; f ( d ij ) , function of distance in disparity space between categories i and j ; D W ( S ) , aggregate disparity of system S ; d W ( i , S \ i ) , distance in disparity space between category i and the nearest remaining element in S if i is excluded . property addressed name form variety category count ( MacArthur 1965 ) N balance Shannon evenness ( Pielou 1969 ) K X i p i ln p i (cid:1) (cid:2) = ln N disparity Weitzman ( 1992 a ) ( Solow & Polasky ( 1994 a ) ) max i 2 S { D W ( S \ i ) C d W ( i , S \ i ) } f ( d ij ) variety / balance Shannon & Weaver ( 1962 ) (cid:1) X i p i ln p i Simpson ( 1949 ) X i p 2 i Gini ( 1912 ) 1 K X i p 2 i variety / balance / disparity Junge ( 1994 ) s = m $ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ n K 1 p (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:2) $ 1 = ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ N p (cid:1) (cid:2) $ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ N K 1 p K ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ N X i p 2 i K 1 q (cid:4) (cid:5) A general framework for analysing diversity A . Stirling 709 J . R . Soc . Interface ( 2007 ) on subsets of these properties ( Eldredge 1992 ) . This is a matter of signiﬁcant , but relatively neglected , scientiﬁc importance . The relevance is ampliﬁed by the tendency for apparently technical questions over diversity to acquire high proﬁle policy salience—as in ﬁelds like ecological conservation ( Forey et al . 1994 ) , market regulation ( US Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission 1992 ) , energy policy ( UK Department of Trade and Industry 1995 ) and research ( Nowotny etal . 2001 ) strategies . Insuchareas , aswehave seen , ostensibly arcane scientiﬁc questions over the deﬁnition and measurement of diversity are laden with ( and conditioned by ) large - scale institutional , economic and political interests ( Lawson 1992 ) . Variety and balance , for instance , cannot be characterized without ﬁrst considering disparity . It is on this basis that a taxonomy of elements is deﬁned and partitioned ( May 1990 ) . An ecological community comprising 20 varieties of beetle is less diverse than the one comprising less than 20 species drawn from different insect , reptile and mammalian taxa ( May 1990 ) . Likewise , an electricity system is less diverse if it comprises equal contributions from lignite , brown coal , oil and gas than if it is an equal mix of coal , nuclear and renewable energy ( Stirling 1994 ) . However , a category like ‘renewable energy’ might itself be judged highly diverse if it is equally apportioned into wind , solar , hydro , tidal , biomass , landﬁll gas , etc . The focus of attention in each case is neither on variety nor balance , but on disparity ( Stirling 1995 ) . Taking variety or balance as proxies for diversity can thus be highly sensitive to subjective construction and partitioning of taxonomies and to arbitrary linguistic conventions concerning the implicit bounding of categories . Conversely , the relevance of disparity to diversity often depends on the pattern of apportionment across categories . Yet , such apportionment may sometimes be neglected . This is necessarily so in palaeontology due to limited evidence on species abundance ( Gould 1991 ) . Ecological structures and the reproductive potential of germplasm can likewise make interest in genetic diversity quite independent from questions of abun - dance ( Solow et al . 1993 ) . Yet , problems can arise if disparity is taken as a complete representation of diversity in conservation biology . This is because , used on their own , disparity measures fail to discriminate between species represented by viable or non - viable populations ( Forey et al . 1994 ) . Similarly , an energy portfolio comprising a 90 % contribution from one of three highly disparate resources might reasonably be judged less diverse than a portfolio comprising an equal contribution from three less disparate options ( Stirling 2006 h ) . This crucial feature is not addressed by understandings of diversity in terms of disparity alone . Taking disparity as a proxy for diversity ignores the balance with which a system is apportioned . 7 . AGGREGATION , ACCOMMODATION AND ARTICULATION It is rare indeed that a concept as pervasive as the notion of diversity should display such similar proper - ties across such disparate ﬁelds . Despite the high proﬁle attention , the scientiﬁc and policy challenges remain relatively underexplored . This is curious , since the present threefold non - parametric understanding of diversity is relatively tractable . In particular , it is striking that—for given categories of elements—all the three properties are quite readily amenable to quantiﬁ - cation : variety is an integer ( enumerating categories ) ; balance is a function of a set of fractions summing to unity ( apportioning elements ) ; and disparity a function of a matrix of distances ( differentiating elements ) . This said , it is difﬁcult indeed to contemplate any single general index of diversity that could aggregate properties of variety , balance and disparity in a uniquely robust fashion . Even where these properties are already integrated in existing indices , there remain serious queries over the different weightings to apply in aggregation . This is true , for instance , of the families of ‘dual concept’ ( Junge 1994 ) indices used in ecology and economics to aggregate variety and balance ( table 1 ) . The logarithm base taken in Shannon and the value of the exponent taken in Simpson – Herﬁndahl ( Stirling 2006 i ) can each have implications for the relative weightings assigned to variety and balance ( Hill 1973 ) . Yet , the consequences for analysis are rarely explored in practice ( Stirling 2006 j ) . In short , even popular ‘non - parametric’ indices like these are nonetheless para - meterized at a fundamental ( if implicit ) conceptual level . These underlying parameter values might reason - ably be varied , yielding differing pictures of diversity ( Kempton 1979 ) . Beyond this problem of aggregation , there lies the further challenge of accommodating different possible understandings of disparity . Here , the picture will necessarily depend on whatever are seen as the salient dimensions of difference . In some cases , there may exist some well - established ( or even objectively determined ) criteria . This is the case , for instance , with taxonomies of genetic distance in evolutionary ecology , which can be assumed to display a strict branching form ( Weitzman 1992 a ) . It is also true where differences between diverse options can usefully be reduced to a single factor , such as historic covariance in ﬁnancial stock ( Brealey & Myers 1988 ) or fuel ( Awerbuch et al . 2006 ) prices . Even in these areas , however , the assumptions necessary for such parameterization are sometimes heroic ( Myers 1984 ; Malkiel 1989 ) . Where categorization and variance are more complex , as in Junge’s ( Junge 1994 ) proposed application in psychology ( table 1 ) , such approaches are lacking in applicability and robustness ( Stirling 2006 k ) . Generally speaking , notions of difference determin - ing characterizations of diversity will depend on perspective and context . For instance , understandings of diversity in the ﬁeld of conservation biology may reasonably refer not just to species abundance and genetic distance , but also to notions of ecological , agronomic or cultural value ( Norton 1987 ; Solow & Polasky 1994 a ) . Likewise , notions of energy diversity may reﬂect contrasting criteria , such as the form and provenance of fuels or equipment , geographical pat - terns in extraction and transport or key features of associated infrastructures ( Stirling 1994 ) . In general , these kinds of disparities in science and technology 710 A general framework for analysing diversity A . Stirling J . R . Soc . Interface ( 2007 ) reﬂect complex webs of relationships , and so cannot readily be reduced to discrete branching taxonomies , as assumed , for instance , in Weitzman’s index ( table 1 ; Weitzman 1992 a ) . Beyond the aggregation of different properties of diversity and the accommodation of different perspec - tives on disparity , there remains a third and ﬁnal challenge of articulating diversity with other properties of interest in analysis or evaluation . Alongside diversity , for instance , the different species or habitats constitut - ing ecosystems may also be assessed in terms of their conservation , agronomic , socio - cultural or aesthetic landscape qualities and values . Likewise , an energy portfolio may also be assessed in terms of criteria , such as operational efﬁcacy , ﬁnancial performance , security of supply , employment intensity or environmental impacts . These other aspects may to some extent be independent from diversity , but will also interlink in various ways—reﬂecting the structure and composition of the system and interactions between its elements . In particular , they may deﬁne many different criteria under which diversiﬁcation could have positive or negative implications , of a kind that should be included in appraisal . Rather than being isolated as a narrow consideration in its own right , then , any useful frame - work for analysing diversity should ideally allow for ready articulation of these kinds of wider aspects . These challenges of aggregation , accommodation and articulation conspire against aspirations deﬁni - tively to capture diversity , even within a single discipline . They are all the more formidable as obstacles to a general framework for understanding diversity , of a kind that might be applicable across different empirical ﬁelds . However , this is not a challenge that is speciﬁc to the threefold characterization of diversity described here . Instead , it is a more pervasive problem that is intrinsic to any general notion of diversity—irrespec - tive of whether or not this is acknowledged . 8 . A SYSTEMATIC RESPONSE To take seriously these problems of aggregation , accommodation and articulation does not necessarily lead to a counsel of despair over the potential for systematic general characterizations—or even quantiﬁ - cations—of diversity . A more positive starting point is the observation that the futility of seeking to derive a single deﬁnitive diversity index need not preclude the possibility of a ﬂexible general heuristic . Like an index , a heuristic may be quantitative . But rather than aiming to measure diversity in some unconditional objective fashion , it offers an explicit , systematic basis for exploring sensitivities to the assumptions conditioning aggregation , accommodation and articulation . For any particular perspective on the appropriate weightings for variety and balance and the salient dimensions of disparity , such a heuristic would behave as an index . It would accommodate different views on the salient attributes of disparity , aggregate these with consideration of variety and balance and allow systematic articulation with important system - level properties other than diversity . For applications invol - ving a range of perspectives , this heuristic would allow systematic comparisons to be made between the implications of contending judgements . In other words , a heuristic characterization of diversity aims to combine the rigour , transparency and speciﬁcity of quantiﬁcation with the applicability , ﬂexibility and symmetry of qualitative approaches . The real challenge lies in achieving this , while minimizing the introduction of further complexity and contingency . No existing diversity index addresses all three proper - ties of variety , balance and disparity in an unproblematic way . However—based partly on criteria applied to the treatment of these individual diversity properties by researchers , such as Hill ( 1973 ) , Pielou ( 1977 ) , Laxton ( 1978 a ) , Weitzman ( 1992 a ) and Solow & Polasky ( 1994 a ) —a series of non - trivial requirements are quite readily developed . One such set of desirable features of a general diversity heuristic ( D ) that help explicitly to address challenges of aggregation , accommodation and articulation as deﬁned here are as follows . ( i ) Scaling of variety . Where variety is equal to 1 , D takes a value of zero ( Laxton 1978 b ) . ( ii ) Monotonicity of variety . Where elements are evenly balanced and equally disparate , D increases monotonically with variety ( Solow & Polasky 1994 b ) . ( iii ) Monotonicity of balance . For given variety and disparity , D increases monotonically with bal - ance ( i . e . D is maximal for equal representation ; Laxton 1978 c ) . ( iv ) Monotonicity of disparity . For given variety and balance , D increases monotonically with the aggregate disparity between elements ( Solow & Polasky 1994 c ) . ( v ) Scaling ofdisparity . Where aggregate disparityis 0 ( i . e . where all elements are effectively iden - tical ) , D takes a value of zero ( Weitzman 1992 a ) . ( vi ) Open accommodation . D symmetrically accom - modatesany perspectiveonsalient dimensions of difference under which elements can be differ - entiated ( Solow & Polasky 1994 d ) . ( vii ) Insensitivity to partitioning . For any given perspective on taxonomy , D is insensitive to alternative partitionings of elements into categories ( Weitzman 1992 b ) . ( viii ) Parsimony of form . D is as uncomplicated in structure and parsimonious in form as necessary to fulﬁl the above conditions . ( ix ) Explicit aggregation . D permits explicit aggrega - tion of variety , balance and disparity , by reﬂecting divergent contexts or perspectives using weightings . ( x ) Ready articulation . D allows unconstrained articulations of diversity with other salient properties of the system as a whole or of its individual elements . 9 . A GENERAL DIVERSITY HEURISTIC No established diversity index satisﬁes all these criteria . Yet , there is one relatively straightforward quantitative heuristic , which is not speciﬁcally discussed in the literature reviewed thus far ( table 1 ) , but which does A general framework for analysing diversity A . Stirling 711 J . R . Soc . Interface ( 2007 ) offer a starting point . This is the sum of pairwise disparities , weighted in proportion to contributions of individual system elements ( D ) , D Z X ij ð i s j Þ d ij $ p i $ p j ; ð 9 : 1 Þ where p i and p j are proportional representations of elements i and j in the system ( balance ) and d ij is the degree of difference ( disparity ) attributed to elements i and j . The summation is across the half - matrix of ( N 2 K N ) / 2 non - identical pairs of N elements ( i s j ) . In the special case where all d ij are equal ( scaleable to unity ) , D reduces to half Gini ( table 1 ) . In the special case where one element dominates the system ( p i / 1 ) , D is a member of the family of measures introduced by Polasky & Solow ( table 1 ) . In the absence of deﬁnitive parametric understand - ings of system structure , the simplest way to conceive of disparities between elements is as a distance between points in disparity space ( Solow & Polasky 1994 a ) . Each perspective will yield a unique n - dimensional disparity space , representing judgements over the salience of n different attributes of system elements . The attributes can be rated in cardinal , interval or binary yes / no terms . Here , a Euclidean n - space offers the most parsimonious and generally applicable framework . With suitable normalization and weighting , the relative magnitudes of the resulting distances can be scaled to reﬂect divergent notions of speciﬁc disparities or different geometries in disparity space ( Kruskal 1964 ) . In particular , a Euclidean n - space involves less restrictive assumptions and greater consistency than the ultra - metric space required by the Weitzman index ( table 1 ; Solow & Polasky 1994 a ; Stirling 2006 l ) . It is readily demonstrated that this heuristic , D , complieswithcriteria ( i ) – ( vii ) . Compliancewithcriterion ( viii ) remains a matter of judgement , but it is difﬁcult to imagine a solution to these criteria that is simpler or more parsimonious . As to criterion ( ix ) , this raises a ﬁnal notable feature of D , which can be illustrated by introducing just two further terms that are as follows : D Z X ij ð i s j Þ ð d ij Þ a $ ð p i $ p j Þ b : ð 9 : 2 Þ If exponents a and b are allowed to take all possible permutations of the values 0 and 1 , this yields four variantsofthe heuristic D . Eachoftheseusefully captures one of the four properties of interest : variety ; balance ; disparity ; and diversity ( table 2 ) . Shifting the value of exponents a yields further variants of D , collectively addressing all the possible relative weightings on balance and variety / disparity . Of these , the reference case D ( a Z b Z 1 ) does the same job as other widely used non - parametric measures like Gini , Shannon and Simpson , but with the major additional feature that it also captures disparity . Unlike the disparity measures proposed by Weitzman or Solow and Polasky ( table 1 ) , D also addresses variety and balance . Unlike the measure proposed by Junge ( Junge 1994 ; table 1 ) , D accommodates radically divergent perspectives on disparity and is relatively parsimonious in form . An entirely novel feature of D is that it systematically addresses alternative possible aggrega - tions of these subordinate properties , according to perspective and context . 10 . ARTICULATING DIVERSITY WITH OTHER SYSTEM PROPERTIES This leaves unaddressed only criterion ( x ) concerning the articulation of diversity with other relevant system - level properties . As already mentioned , diversity is rarely a free lunch in decision making . Whether in ﬁelds like conservation management , research strategy or energy policy , the total value of any system will be a function not only of system diversity but of other properties of the system and its individual elements as well . In economics , for instance , diversity may provide an effective response to challenges like hedging ignorance , fostering innovation , mitigating lock - in and accommodating pluralism . But it will often require some compromise on other aspects of performance—such as cost , equity , environment or ethics . There will typically be constraints on the contributions of individual elements and portfolio effects resulting from their interactions ( Geroski 1989 ) . In conservation management , Solow and Polasky show how their own proposed disparity function ( table 1 ) can be adopted in a utilitarian fashion , articulating the value of ecological diversity with that attached to other possible evaluative criteria , such as possible medical applications that may be discovered in relation to individual species ( Solow & Polasky 1994 a ) . Other ecological system properties might also be included in this way , perhaps to address the importance of trophic webs or the value of keystone species ( May 1975 ) . In this vein , for example , Karr’s index of biotic integrity articulates—with explicit subjectivity— further system - level considerations of ecological and biological health ( Karr 1991 ) . In these terms , then , the value assigned under a given perspective to any particular system under speciﬁc conditions ( V { S } ) can be expressed as the sum of the value due to the aggregate performance of individual Table 2 . Four variants of D and links with diversity properties and measures . property a b equation ( 9 . 2 ) : D Z equivalents ( cf . table 1 ) interpretation variety 0 0 P ij d 0 ij ( N 2 K N ) / 2 scaled variety balance 0 1 P ij p i $ p j ( Gini ) / 2 balance - weighted variety disparity 1 0 P ij d ij ( Solow & Polasky 1994 a ) disparity - weighted variety diversity 1 1 P ij d ij $ p i $ p j D balance / disparity - weighted variety 712 A general framework for analysing diversity A . Stirling J . R . Soc . Interface ( 2007 ) system elements ( V { E } ) and an incremental value attached to irreducible portfolio - level properties includ - ing diversity ( V { P } ) . If the net implications of diversity are adverse , then V { P } can be negative , V f S g Z V f E g C V f P g : ð 10 : 1 Þ Long experience in the ﬁeld of decision analysis ( Vincke et al . 1992 ) shows that—just as divergent notions of difference can be represented as coordinates in an n - dimensional Euclidean disparity space—divergent valuations of individual system elements can hence be represented as coordinates in an m - dimensional Eucli - dean performance space ( Stirling 2006 m ) . The dimen - sions of this space represent any set of m performance criteria , each weighted to reﬂect their respective importance ( Stirling 2006 n ) . As with disparity , the selection , characterization and scaling of these criteria will vary across context and perspective ( Stirling 1997 ) . Although it is difﬁcult to justify any single approach to aggregating performance across perspectives , decision analysis has shown that any single perspective can be uniquely captured by means of the following expression for the overall value attached to the performance of individual system elements V { E } : V f E g Z X i X c ð w c $ s ic Þ $ p i ; ð 10 : 2 Þ where s ic is the value attached to the performance of element i under criterion c ; w c is a scalar weighting reﬂecting the relative importance of criterion c ( under the perspective and context in question ) and p i is ( as in equations ( 9 . 1 ) and ( 9 . 2 ) ) the proportional represen - tation of element i in the system . It follows from equation ( 9 . 2 ) that the corresponding value attached to irredu - cible portfolio - level properties including diversity ( V { P } ) can then be expressed as follows : V f P g Z d $ D 0 Z d $ X ij ð i s j Þ ð d ij Þ a $ ð p i $ p j Þ b $ i ij ; ð 10 : 3 Þ where D 0 represents an augmented form of the diversity heuristic D given in equation ( 9 . 2 ) , which includes an additional term to reﬂect portfolio interactions ( i ij ) . This is an array of scalar multipliers exploiting the pairwise structure of D 0 to express the effect on system value of synergies or tensions between elements i and j , respect - ively , as marginal positive or negative departures from a default of unity ( i ij Z 1 G v i : for most systems , v i / 1 ) . This serves as a means to capture a variety of system - level properties that—like diversity—are irreducible to individual elements . The coefﬁcient d scales expressions of portfolio value to render them commensurable with aggregate values of individualoptions in equation ( 10 . 2 ) . For positive assessments of portfolio value , 0 ! d ! N . From equations ( 10 . 1 ) – ( 10 . 3 ) , we therefore obtain the following heuristic system - level articulation ( V { S } ) of the value attached to diversity , together with that assigned to other portfolio properties ( V { P } ) and to the performance of individual system elements ( V { E } ) , V f S g Z X i X c ð w c $ s ic Þ $ p i C d $ X ij ð i s j Þ ð d ij Þ a $ ð p i $ p j Þ b $ i ij : ð 10 : 4 Þ It is in V { S } that we have a means to address the ﬁnal criterion ( x ) developed in § 8 , in that a diversity heuristic should allow systematic , unconstrained articulation of diversity with alternative characterizations of other salient properties of the system as a whole . 11 . EXPLORING RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN DIVERSITY AND SYSTEM VALUE The interest of the heuristic V { S } lies not in any attempt to derive some unconditional ‘optimal’ balance between the performance of individual elements , system interactions and diversity . Instead , with sensitivity analysis , V { S } can be used systematically to explore different possible perspectives and assumptions concern - ing the contributions of these components to overall system value . For each perspective on the performance and interactions of individual elements , their disparities , theaggregationofdiversitypropertiesand the scaleofthe performance – diversity trade - off , there exists a particular apportionment of elements that yields some maximum overall value . By varying d between zero and inﬁnity , resolving the set of p i that give a maximal value for V { S } yields a continuum of all possible conditionally optimal systems . These range ( respectively ) from those that maximize value due to aggregate performance of indi - vidual elements ( low d ) to those that maximize value due to portfolio interactions and system diversity ( high d ) . For schematic data provided in the electronic supplementary material , annex A , ﬁgure 1 presents an illustration of this heuristic usage of V { S } . These data reﬂect one hypothetical perspective on the challenges associated with ﬁnding an appropriate balance between diversity and other aspects of landscape value in conservation management ( Southwood 1977 ) . Here , the focus of attention is not directly on species diversity , but on the contributions that might be made to this end by habitat diversity in the landscape ( Gray 1997 ) . This bears in mind that certain individual habitats may be seen to hold greater intrinsic conservation value than others and that there exist other economic , socio - cultural and aesthetic criteria for informing decisions over landscape management ( Franklin 1993 ) . Consider , for the sake of illustration , a schematic case in which each of a series of habitat types ( A , B , C and D ) offers viable options across a discrete , contiguous land - scape for which long - term land - use policy commitments are being made subject to a consultative process at a particular point in time . Under one hypothetical perspec - tive , these habitats are mutually distinguishable under a set offour disparity attributes : ( i ) commercially managed mixed woodland , ( ii ) low - input mixed arable farming with wide ﬁeld margins , ( iii ) close - grazed bryophyte - rich grassland , and ( iv ) low - intensity grazing of wildﬂower meadows . Depending on the perspective , it is these kinds ofattributethatmightconstitute the distancemetric ( d ij ) in applying the heuristic D 0 in equation ( 10 . 4 ) . Criteria applied in the evaluation of the individual habitat types might include a number of general ecological considerations , values attached to particular endangered species endemic to each habitat , the internal biodiversity of the habitat itself , as well as economic revenues for sustaining local livelihoods , aesthetic and A general framework for analysing diversity A . Stirling 713 J . R . Soc . Interface ( 2007 ) cultural – historical issues ( of relevance also in indirect tourism revenues ; Norton 1987 ) . These constitute the basis for the performance measures ( s ic ) and their respective weightings ( w c ) in equation ( 10 . 4 ) . Even if one of the four habitat types is evaluated much more positively than others , there may nonetheless be a beneﬁt in sustaining habitat diversity as a means to support certain species and communities spanning different habitats and to address the conservation value of ‘mosaics’ as well as other landscape - scale economic and socio - cultural issues ( Jennings 2000 ) . Likewise , some system - level aspects of landscape value will derive from the presence of particular combinations of habitats—and their interfaces—in the mix ( Ray 1991 ) . These constitute the basis , respectively , for the diversity coefﬁcient ( d ) and the interaction term ( i ij ) in equation ( 10 . 4 ) . For the purposes of the present illustrative exercise , the perspective in question is assumed to favour an aggregation of diversity properties in equation ( 10 . 4 ) , in which both a and b take a value of 1 ( thus , D Z D in equations ( 9 . 1 ) and ( 9 . 2 ) ) . Figure 1 displays the sort of outcome that can readily be derived from these kinds of input , as a heuristic articulation of the overall value attached to individual habitats with that deriving from their interactions and from diversity in the landscape . The shaded areas represent the composition of an optimal frontier ( obtained using iterative optimization procedures pro - vided in the M ATLAB software ) , maximizing V { S } for this dataset at varying values of d ( equation ( 10 . 4 ) ) . It shows the way in which the proportion of the landscape assigned to each of the four schematic habitat types ( vertical axis , p i , p j in equation ( 10 . 4 ) ) varies as progressively greater weight is attached to maintaining a diversity of habitats ( horizontal axis , d in equation ( 10 . 4 ) ) . The vertical dotted line shows the value of d at which V { E } Z V { P } ( equation ( 10 . 1 ) ) . Of course , for the purposes of exposition , the present example is highly stylized . It is very simple and omits many important features—such as those relating to the geographical structure of the landscape in question ( Mace et al . 1998 ) . However , by repeating such an exercise iteratively as a way of exploring the implications of different assumptions or interpretations of uncer - tainty , this heuristic framework may therefore be used to assist the formulation of individual perspectives or to inform effective deliberation between contending dis - ciplinary or stakeholder positions on this kind of decision over habitat diversity in the landscape . To substantiate the more general applicability of this heuristic framework , ﬁgure 2 provides one further schematic in the rather different , but currently highly topical , ﬁeld of energy policy ( UK Department of Trade and Industry 2005 ) . Here , the interest lies in construct - ing a mix of generating technologies at the level of an electricity system like that of the UK , such as to reconcile different possibilities and perspectives in the economic , environmental , energy security and wider social performance of the supply mix ( Stirling 1994 ) . Disparities here may be conceived in terms of the nature A : mixed woodland B : arable farming C : intensive grazing D : extensive grazing max habitat value V { E } ( eq : 10 . 2 ) trade - off ( d ) max landscape diversity V { P } ( eq : 10 . 3 ) 10 – 1 10 0 10 1 10 2 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 100 90 l a nd - u s e c o m po s iti on ( % ) perspective Q perspective R habitat type deliberation perspective P Figure 1 . Schematic relationship between habitat diversity and other aspects of landscape value . 714 A general framework for analysing diversity A . Stirling J . R . Soc . Interface ( 2007 ) and origins of the fuels and technologies concerned , as well as salient features of their respective institutional , commercial or socio - political contexts ( Stirling 1996 ) . Positive and negative economic , organizational and operational synergies between different technologies inform the modelling of interactions . Certain options are tightly constrained in terms of the available resource , or display reductions ( from learning or scale ) or increases ( from depletion ) in costs or impacts as the contributions rise . For illustrative data on all these aspects provided in the electronic supplementary material , annex B , ﬁgure 2 shows—for a particular hypothetical perspective—how the resulting con - ditionally optimal electricity portfolios vary as greater or lesser priority is placed on diversity . Low values of d in ﬁgure 1 may express high conﬁdence in performance appraisals of individual technologies , with little concern over deep uncertainties to which diversity is a reasonable response . Likewise , low values of d may imply that priority is attached to maximizing this performance , rather than the other beneﬁts of diversity ( in fostering innovation , mitigating lock - in or accommodating pluralism ) . On the other hand , high values of d reﬂect a dominant interest in these beneﬁts of diversity , with little concern over the resulting compromises on performance . Again , the value of this kind of heuristic framework is as a means more explicitly and systematically to inform analysis under individual perspectives , and to provide a basis for more effective and transparent deliberation between contending positions . 12 . CONCLUSION The present paper has outlined a framework for interdisciplinary analysis of diversity . The discussion began by noting many different reasons for an interest in diversity , not least in high proﬁle areas of science and technology policy . Here , diversity offers a means to promote innovation , hedge ignorance , mitigate lock - in and accommodate pluralism . It offers one important strategy for achieving qualities of precaution , resilience and robustness that are central to sustainability . To these ends , the paper identiﬁes a general framework for understanding diversity in a range of different contexts and specialisms . This involves recognition of diversity as a function of three necessary but individually insufﬁcient properties : variety ; bal - ance and disparity . Existing non - parametric diversity indices address only subsets of these three properties and / or raise questions over their underlying assumptions . By reference to 10 quality criteria , the paper proposes a novel general diversity heuristic , D . A more general formulation ( D ) serves not just as a heuristic for diversity , but for each of the three subordinate properties as well , thus permitting sys - tematic exploration of different possible weightings on variety , balance and disparity . As such , D may prove applicable in any ﬁelds in which diversity is presently discussed , irrespective of whether it has been deﬁni - tively parameterized . One way of using this heuristic is to systematically explore relationships between diversity and other perspective X perspective Y perspective Z deliberation po r t f o li o c o m po s iti on ( % ) 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 10010 0 10 1 10 2 electricity option existing coal IGCC coal C - capture coal existing gas new gas microgen gas existing nuclear nuclear at existing sites 1 nuclear at existing sites 2 new nuclear sites existing hydro existing wind new wind 1 new wind 2 microgen wind marine wind 1 marine wind 2 small tidal large tidal tidal stream shoreline wave offshore wave rooftop PV 1 rooftop PV 2 new hydro MSW CHP landfill gas biomass 1 biomass 2 max option performance V { E } ( eq : 10 . 2 ) trade - off ( d ) max system diversity V { P } ( eq : 10 . 3 ) Figure 2 . Illustrative performance – diversity trade - offs for the UK’s energy portfolios . A general framework for analysing diversity A . Stirling 715 J . R . Soc . Interface ( 2007 ) aspects of portfolio performance . For instance , the framework might be used to elicit perspectives on probable performance and salient differences between contending research and development programmes , energy technology investments or habitat types in conservation management . By allowing exploration of trade - offs between diversity and performance—includ - ing consideration of system constraints and interactions—this offers a means to frame more effective policy deliberation . Similar applications suggest themselves in other areas , such as ecological analysis , research governance , innovation policy , urban planning , agricultural strategy and regional development . Indeed , the approach seems applicable anywhere where there is an interest in analysing system diversity—particularly , as a means to promote more inclusive , precautionary , resilient and sustain - able applications of science and technology . I am grateful to my colleague Ismael Rafols who drew my attention after acceptance of the present paper for publication to a recent discussion ( Ricotta & Szeidl 2006 ) of an early rigorous derivation of the basic concept D in equation ( 9 . 1 ) under somewhat different criteria by Rao ( 1982 ) , of which I was previously unaware . Over the embarrassingly long gestation of this work , I have accumulated too many debts to acknowledge individually . More recently , Carlota Perez , Ismael Rafols , Sigrid Stagl and Ed Steinmueller all gave particular feedback on the present paper . I am especially grateful for the coding skills of David Waxman and Toby Champion , who built the M ATLAB optimization tool on which the examples were calculated . REFERENCES Anon . 2003 Diversity in food technology . Editorial . Nature 424 , 473 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / 424473a ) Anon . 2004 Going public . Editorial . Nature 431 , 883 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / 431883a ) Aoki , M . 1996 An evolutionary parable of the gains from international organisational diversity . In The mosaic of economic growth ( eds R . Landau , T . Taylor & G . Wright ) , p . 263 . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press . Arthur , W . B . 1989 Competing technologies , increasing returns , and lock - in by historical events . Econ . J . 99 , 116 – 131 . ( doi : 10 . 2307 / 2234208 ) Atkinson , A . 1970 On the measurement of inequality . J . Econ . Theory 2 , 244 – 263 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / 0022 - 0531 ( 70 ) 90039 - 6 ) Awerbuch , S . , Stirling , A . & Jansen , J . 2006 Portfolio and diversity analysis of energy technologies using full - spectrum uncertainty measures . In Understanding and managing business risk in the electric sector ( eds D . Bodde & K . Leggio ) , pp . 49 – 64 . Amsterdam , The Netherlands : Elsevier . Axarloglou , K . & Theoharakis , V . 2003 Diversity in economics : an analysis of journal quality perceptions . Eur . Econ . Assoc . 1 , 1402 – 1423 . ( doi : 10 . 1162 / 154247603322752584 ) Blackaby , D . , Leslie , D . , Murphy , P . & O’Leary , N . 2002 White / ethnic minority and employment differentials in Britain : evidence from the LFS . Oxford Econ . Papers 54 , 270 – 97 . ( doi : 10 . 1093 / oep / 54 . 2 . 270 ) Brealey , R . & Myers , S . 1988 Principles of corporate ﬁnance , 3rd edn . New York , NY : McGraw Hill . Breznitz , S . 1986 Educating for coping with change . In Ancient humans in tomorrows electronic world ( eds D . Hamburg & M . Frankenheuser ) , pp . 32 – 41 . Washington , DC : Aspen Institute . Brooks , H . 1986 The typology of surprises in technology , institutions and development . In Sustainable development of the biosphere ( eds W . Clark & R . Munn ) , pp . 325 – 348 . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Bruno , S . , Cohendet , P . , Desmartin , F . , Lierena , P . & Sorge , A . 1991 Modes of usage and diffusion of new technologies and new knowledge : a synthesis report . Project Report . FOP 227 , Prospective Dossier 1 , European Commission , Brussels . Callon , M . 1992 The dynamics of techno - economic networks . In Technological change and company strategies ( eds R . Coombs , P . Saviotti & V . Walsh ) , pp . 72 – 102 . London , UK ; San Diego , CA : Harcourt Brace Jovanovitch . Clarke , A . 1978 Analytical archaeology , pp . 35 – 36 . London , UK : Methuen . Cohen , P . 1985 Heuristic reasoning about uncertainty : an artiﬁcial intelligence approach Research notes in artiﬁcial intelligence , vol . 2 . Boston , MA : Pitman . Cohendet , P . , Llerena , P . & Sorge , A . 1992 Technological diversity and coherence in europe : an analytical overview . Revue d Economie Industrielle , 59 , 1re Trimestre 92 , CNRS , Paris . Collingridge , D . 1983 Technology in the policy process : controlling nuclear power . London , UK : Pinter . Cowan , R . 1991 Tortoises and hares : choice among tech - nologies of unknown merit . Econ . J . 101 , 801 – 814 . ( doi : 10 . 2307 / 2233856 ) David , P . & Rothwell , G . 1996 Standardisation , diversity and learning : strategies for the coevolution of technology and industrial capacity . Int . J . Ind . Organ . 14 , 181 – 201 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / 0167 - 7187 ( 95 ) 00475 - 0 ) Dosi , G . 1992 Industrial organisation , competitiveness and growth . Revue d Economie Industrielle 59 , 27 – 45 . Eldredge , N . 1992 Systematics , ecology and the biodiversity crisis . New York , NY : Columbia University Press . Fineberg , H . & Stern , P . ( eds ) 1996 Understanding risk : informing decisions in a democratic society . Washington : National Academy Press . National Research Council Committee on Risk Characterisation . Finkelstein , M . & Friedman , R . 1967 The application of an entropy theory of concentration to the Clayton Act . Yale Law J . 76 , 677 – 717 . ( doi : 10 . 2307 / 795029 ) Folke , C . et al . 2002 Resilience and sustainable development : building adaptive capacity in a world of transformations , Scientiﬁc Background Paper on Resilience for the process of The World Summit on Sustainable Development on behalf of The Environmental Advisory Council to the Swedish Government . Forey , L . , Humphries , C . & Vane - Wright , R . ( eds ) 1994 Setting objectives for conservation evaluation . Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press . Franklin , J . 1993 Preserving biodiversity : species , ecosystems or landscapes ? Ecol . Appl . 3 , 202 – 205 . ( doi : 10 . 2307 / 1941820 ) Gatsios , K . & Seabright , P . 1989 Regulation in the European community . Oxford Rev . Econ . Policy 5 , 37 – 60 . ( doi : 10 . 1093 / oxrep / 5 . 2 . 37 ) Geroski , P . 1989 The choice between diversity and scale . In 1992 : myths and realities ( ed . E . Davis ) , pp . 29 – 45 . London , UK : Centre for Business Strategy , London Business School . Gibbons , M . 1999 Science’s new social contract with society . Nature 402 , C81 – C84 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / 35011576 ) Gillett , S . 2003 In praise of policy diversity , position paper for OII Broadband Forum , Oxford , UK : Oxford Internet Institute . 716 A general framework for analysing diversity A . Stirling J . R . Soc . Interface ( 2007 ) Gini , C . 1912 Variabilita e mutabilita . Studi Economica - Giuridici della R . Universita di Cagliari 3 , 3 – 159 . Gomez , I . , Bordons , M . , Fernandez , M . & Mendez , A . 1996 Coping with the problem of subject classiﬁcation diversity . Scientometrics 2 , 223 – 235 . ( doi : 10 . 1007 / BF02018480 ) Gould , S . 1991 The disparity of the Burgess Shale arthropod fauna and the limits of cladistic analysis : why we must strive to quantify morphospace . Paleobiology 4 , 411 – 423 . Grabher , G . & Stark , D . 1997 Organizing diversity : evolution - ary theory , network analysis and postsocialism . Reg . Stud . 31 , 533 – 544 . ( doi : 10 . 1080 / 00343409750132315 ) Gray , J . 1997 Marine Biodiversity : patterns , threats and conservation needs , GESAMP Reports And Studies No . 62 , IMO / FAO / UNESCO - IOC / WMO / WHO / IAEA / UN / UNEP Joint Group of Experts on the Scientiﬁc Aspects of Marine Environmental Protection , International Maritime Organization , London , UK . Grubb , M . , Butler , L . & Twomey , P . 2006 Diversity and security in UK electricity generation : the inﬂuence of low - carbon objectives . Energy Policy 34 , 4050 – 4062 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . enpol . 2005 . 09 . 004 ) Haughton , A . & Mukerjee , S . 1995 The economic measurement and determinants of diversity . Soc . Indic . Res . 36 , 201 – 225 . ( doi : 10 . 1007 / BF01078814 ) Hill , M . 1973Diversityandevenness : aunifyingnotation andits consequences . Ecology 54 , 427 – 432 . ( doi : 10 . 2307 / 1934352 ) Hong , L . & Page , S . 1998 Problem solving by heterogeneous agents , Syracuse University . Hughes , T . 1983 Networks of power : electriﬁcation in western society . Baltimore , MD : Johns Hopkins University Press . Humphries , A . , Williams , P . & Vane - Wright , R . 1995 Measuring biodiversity value for conservation . Annu . Rev . Ecol . Syst . 26 , 93 – 111 . ( doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . es . 26 . 110195 . 000521 ) International Energy Agency 1985 Energy technology policy . ( 1985 ) . Paris , France : IEA . James , P . 1990 Energy , environment and rationality . Energy Environ , 114 – 123 . Jennings , M . 2000 Gap analysis : concepts , methods , and recent results . Landscape Ecol . 15 , 5 – 20 . ( doi : 10 . 1023 / A : 1008184 408300 ) Johnson , N . & Longmeyer , S . 1999 The science of social diversity . Los Alamos National Laboratory . Report LA - UR - 99 - 336 . USDOE . Junge , K . 1994 Diversity of ideas about diversity measurement . Scand . J . Psychol . 35 , 16 – 26 . Kaijser , A . , Mogren , A . & Steen , P . 1991 Changing direction : energy policy and new technology . Stockholm , UK : Statens Energiverk . Karr , J . 1991 Biological integrity : a long - neglected aspect of water resource management . Ecol . Appl . 1 , 66 – 84 . ( doi : 10 . 2307 / 1941848 ) Kauffman , S . 1993 The origins of order : self organization and selection in evolution . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Kempton , R . 1979 The structure of species abundance and measurement of diversity . Biometrics 35 , 307 – 321 . ( doi : 10 . 2307 / 2529952 ) Kruskal , J . 1964 Nonmetric multidimensional scaling of a numerical method . Psychometrika 29 , 115 – 129 . ( doi : 10 . 1007 / BF02289694 ) Kuhn , T . 1970 The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions . Chicago , IL : Chicago University Press . Lancaster , K . 1979 Variety , equity and efﬁciency : product variety in an industrial society . New York , NY : Columbia University Press . Landau , R . , Taylor , T . & Wright , G . 1996 The mosaic of economic growth , p . 17 . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press . Lawson , N . 1992 The view from number 11 , p . 5 . London , UK : Chatto and Windus . Laxton , R . 1978 a The measure of diversity . J . Theor . Biol . 70 , 51 – 67 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / 0022 - 5193 ( 78 ) 90302 - 8 ) This relates , for instance , to the ‘non - negativity’ axiom Laxton , R . 1978 b The measure of diversity . J . Theor . Biol . 70 , 51 – 67 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / 0022 - 5193 ( 78 ) 90302 - 8 ) This relates , for instance , to the ‘monotonicity’ axiom Laxton , R . 1978 c The measure of diversity . J . Theor . Biol . 70 , 51 – 67 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / 0022 - 5193 ( 78 ) 90302 - 8 ) Leonard , R . & Jones , G . 1989 Quantifying diversity in archaeology . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Llerena , D . & Llerena , P . 1993 Diversity and valorization of the electricity - generation technologies in the European com - munity . Utilities Policy 3 , 223 – 232 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / 0957 - 1787 ( 93 ) 90047 - Z ) Lumby , S . 1984 Investment appraisal , 2nd edn . London , UK : Van Nostrand . MacArthur , R . 1965 Patterns of species diversity . Biol . Rev . 40 , 510 – 33 . Mace , A . , Balmford , A . & Ginsberg , J . 1998 Conservation in a changing world Conservation biology series , vol . 1 . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Magurran , A . 1988 Ecological diversity and its measurement . London , UK : Croom Helm . Malkiel , B . 1989 Is the stock market efﬁcient ? Science 243 , 1313 – 1318 . ( doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 243 . 4896 . 1313 ) Matthews , M . & McGowan , F . 1992 Reconciling diversity and scale : some questions of method in the assessment of the costs and beneﬁts of European integration . Revue d Economie Industrielle 59 , 313 – 327 . May , R . 1975 Patterns of species abundance and diversity . In Ecology and the evolution of communities ( eds M . Cody & J . Diamond ) , pp . 81 – 120 . Cambridge , MA : Belknap Press / Harvard University Press . May , R . 1981 Theoretical ecology : principles and application . Oxford , UK : Blackwell . May , R . 1990 Taxonomy as destiny . Nature 347 , 129 – 130 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / 347129a0 ) Maynard Smith , J . 1989 Trees , bundles or nets ? Trends Ecol . Evol . 4 , 302 – 304 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / 0169 - 5347 ( 89 ) 90026 - 8 ) McCann , K . 2000 The diversity – stability debate . Nature 405 , 228 – 233 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / 35012234 ) McIntosh , R . 1967 An index of diversity and the relation of certain concepts to diversity . Ecology 48 , 392 – 404 . ( doi : 10 . 2307 / 1932674 ) Mercier , J . & McGowan , R . 1996 The greening of organis - ations . Adm . Soc . 27 , 459 – 482 . Merton , R . 1973 The normative structure of science . In The sociology of science ( ed . N . Storer ) , pp . 267 – 278 . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Myers , S . 1984 Finance theory and ﬁnancial strategy . Interfaces 14 , 126 – 137 . Nguyen , P . , Saviotti , P . , Trommetter , M . & Bourgeouis , B . 2005 Variety and the evolution of reﬁnery processing . Ind . Corporate Change 14 , 469 – 500 . ( doi : 10 . 1093 / icc / dth059 ) Norgaard , R . 1989 The case for methodological pluralism . Ecol . Econ . 1 , 37 – 57 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / 0921 - 8009 ( 89 ) 90023 - 2 ) Norgaard , R . 1994 Development betrayed : the end of progress and a coevolutionary revisioning of the future . London , UK : Routledge . Norton , A . 1987 Why preserve natural variety ? Princeton , NJ : Studies in Moral , Political and Legal Philosophy , Princeton University Press . Nowotny , H . , Scott , P . & Gibbons , M . 2001 Re - thinking science : knowledge and the public in an age of uncertainty . London , UK : Polity Press . Odum , E . 1953 Fundamentals of ecology . Philadelphia , PA : Saunders . A general framework for analysing diversity A . Stirling 717 J . R . Soc . Interface ( 2007 ) Peet , R . 1974 The measurement of species diversity . Annu . Rev . Ecol . Syst . 5 , 285 – 307 . ( doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . es . 05 . 110174 . 001441 ) Pielou , E . 1969 An introduction to mathematical ecology . New York , NY : Wiley . Pielou , E . 1977 Mathematical ecology . New York , NY : Wiley . Pimm , S . 2004 Farmers’ bounty : locating crop diversity in the contemporary world . Nature 430 , 967 – 968 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / 430967a ) Rafols , I . & Meyer , M . 2006 Diversity measures and network centralities as indicators of interdisciplinarity : case studies in bionanoscience , SPRU working paper , November 30th . Rao , C . R . 1982 Diversity and dissimilarity coefﬁcients : a uniﬁed approach . Theor . Popul . Biol . 21 , 24 – 43 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / 0040 - 5809 ( 82 ) 90004 - 1 ) Ray , A . 1991 Coastal - zone biodiversity patterns . Bioscience 41 , 490 – 498 . ( doi : 10 . 2307 / 1311807 ) Ricotta , C . & Szeidl , L . 2006 Towards a unifying approach to diversity measures : bridging the gap between the Shannon entropy and Rao’s quadratic index . Theor . Popul . Biol . 70 , 237 – 243 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tpb . 2006 . 06 . 003 ) Rosenberg , N . 1982 Inside the black box : technology and economics . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Rosenberg , N . 1996 Uncertainty and technological change . In The mosaic of economic growth ( eds R . Landau , T . Taylor & G . Wright ) . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press . Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution . 1998 Setting environmental standards , Twenty - ﬁrst Report , HMSO , London . Runnegar , B . 1987 Rates and modes of evolution in the Mollusca . In Ratesofevolution ( edsM . Campbell & R . May ) . London , UK : Allen and Unwin . Saviotti , P . & Mani , G . 1995 Competition , variety and technological evolution : a replicator dynamics model . J . Evol . Econ . 5 , 369 – 392 . ( doi : 10 . 1007 / BF01194367 ) Serebnick , J . & Quinn , F . 1995 Measuring diversity of opinion in public library collections . Libr . Q . 65 , 1 – 38 . Shannon , A . & Weaver , W . 1962 The mathematical theory of communication . Urbana , IL : University of Illinois Press . Shevchenko , E . , Talapin , D . , Kotov , N . , O’Brien , S . & Murray , C . 2006 Structural diversity in binary nanoparticle super - lattices . Nature 439 , 55 – 59 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nature04414 ) Simpson , A . 1949 Measurement of diversity . Nature 163 , 4148 . Sneath , P . & Sokal , R . 1973 Numerical taxonomy : the principles and practice of numerical classiﬁcation . San Francisco , CA : Freeman . Sokal , R . & Sneath , P . 1970 Principles of numerical taxonomy , pp . 20 – 22 . San Francisco , CA : Freeman . Solow , A . & Polasky , S . 1994 a Measuring biological diversity . Environ . Ecol . Stat . 1 , 95 – 107 . ( doi : 10 . 1007 / BF02426650 ) This relates , for instance , to the ‘monotonicity of species’ condition : Solow , A . & Polasky , S . 1994 b Measuring biological diversity . Environ . Ecol . Stat . 1 , 95 – 107 . ( doi : 10 . 1007 / BF02426650 ) This relates , for instance , to the ‘ monotonicity in distance’ condition : Solow , A . & Polasky , S . 1994 c Measuring biological diversity . Environ . Ecol . Stat . 1 , 95 – 107 . ( doi : 10 . 1007 / BF02426650 ) This relates , for instance , to the discussion of a ‘pure diversity’ measure : Solow , A . & Polasky , S . 1994 d Measuring biological diversity . Environ . Ecol . Stat . 1 , 95 – 107 . ( doi : 10 . 1007 / BF02426650 ) Solow , A . , Polasky , S . & Broadus , J . 1993 On the measurement of biological diversity . J . Environ . Econ . Manage . 24 , 60 – 68 . ( doi : 10 . 1006 / jeem . 1993 . 1004 ) Southwood , T . 1977 Habitat , the template for ecological strategies ? J . Anim . Ecol . 1 , 1 – 8 . Southwood , T . 1978 The components of diversity . In The diversity of insect faunas ( eds M . Mound & G . Waloff ) . London , UK : Blackwell . Stirling , A . 1994 Diversity and ignorance in electricity supply investment : addressing the solution rather than the problem . Energy Policy 22 , 195 – 216 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / 0301 - 4215 ( 94 ) 90159 - 7 ) Stirling , A . 1995 Optimising UK electricity portfolio diversity . In The UK energy experience : a model or a warning ? ( eds G MacKerron & P . Pearson ) , pp . 157 – 181 . London , UK : Imperial College Press . Stirling , A . 1997 Multicriteria mapping : mitigating the problems of environmental valuation ? In Valuing nature : economics , ethics and environment ( ed . J . Foster ) . London , UK : Routledge . Stirling , A . 2005 Opening up or closing down : analysis , participation and power in the social appraisal of tech - nology . In Science and citizens : globalization and the challenge of engagement ( eds M . Leach , I . Scoones & B . Wynne ) , pp . 218 – 231 . London , UK : Zed . Stirling , A . 2006 a On the economics and analysis of diversity . SPRU Electronic Working Paper Number 28 . University of Sussex , October 1998 . At ( May 2006 ) : http : / / www . sussex . ac . uk / Units / spru / publications / imprint / sewps / sewp28 / sewp28 . pdf . Stirling , A . 2006 b On science and precaution in the manage - ment of technological risk : volume I — a synthesis report of casestudies , EuropeanCommissionInstituteforProspective Technological Studies , Seville , EUR 19056 EN , May 1999 , At ( May 2006 ) : / / ftp . jrc . es / pub / EURdoc / eur19056en . pdf , July 2000 . Stirling , A . 2006 c The precautionary approach to risk appraisal , Background Brieﬁng 1 . 2 for the Canadian Nuclear Waste Management Organisation , September 2003 . At ( May 2006 ) : http : / / www . nwmo . ca / adx / asp / adxGetMedia . asp ? DocID Z 217 , 206 , 199 , 20 , 1 , Documents & MediaID Z 787 & Filename Z 12 _ NWMO _ background _ paper . pdf . Stirling , A . 2006 d On the economics and analysis of diversity . SPRU Electronic Working Paper Number 28 . University of Sussex , October 1998 . At ( May 2006 ) : http : / / www . sussex . ac . uk / Units / spru / publications / imprint / sewps / sewp28 / sewp28 . pdf , page 40 footnote 259 . Stirling , A . 2006 e On the economics and analysis of diversity . SPRU Electronic Working Paper Number 28 . University of Sussex , October 1998 . At ( May 2006 ) : http : / / www . sussex . ac . uk / Units / spru / publications / imprint / sewps / sewp28 / sewp28 . pdf , page 47 footnote 283 . Stirling , A . 2006 f On the economics and analysis of diversity . SPRU Electronic Working Paper Number 28 . University of Sussex , October 1998 . At ( May 2006 ) : http : / / www . sussex . ac . uk / Units / spru / publications / imprint / sewps / sewp28 / sewp28 . pdf , pages 49 , 63 , 75 . Stirling , A . 2006 g On the economics and analysis of diversity . SPRU Electronic Working Paper Number 28 . University of Sussex , October 1998 . At ( May 2006 ) : http : / / www . sussex . ac . uk / Units / spru / publications / imprint / sewps / sewp28 / sewp28 . pdf , page 42 . Stirling , A . 2006 h On the economics and analysis of diversity . SPRU Electronic Working Paper Number 28 . University of Sussex , October 1998 . At ( May 45 2006 ) : http : / / www . sussex . ac . uk / Units / spru / publications / imprint / sewps / sewp28 / sewp28 . pdf , page 51 . Stirling , A . 2006 i On the Economics and Analysis of Diversity . SPRU Electronic Working Paper Number 28 . University of Sussex , October 1998 . At ( May 2006 ) : http : / / www . sussex . ac . uk / Units / spru / publications / imprint / sewps / sewp28 / sewp28 . pdf , page 56 . 718 A general framework for analysing diversity A . Stirling J . R . Soc . Interface ( 2007 ) Stirling , A . 2006 j On the economics and analysis of diversity . SPRU Electronic Working Paper Number 28 . University of Sussex , October 1998 . At ( May 2006 ) : http : / / www . sussex . ac . uk / Units / spru / publications / imprint / sewps / sewp28 / sewp28 . pdf , pages 55 – 56 . Stirling , A . 2006 k On the Economics and Analysis of Diversity . SPRU Electronic Working Paper Number 28 . University of Sussex , October 1998 . At ( May 2006 ) : http : / / www . sussex . ac . uk / Units / spru / publications / imprint / sewps / sewp28 / sewp28 . pdf , pages 63 - 4 . Stirling , A . 2006 l On the economics and analysis of diversity . SPRU Electronic Working Paper Number 28 . University of Sussex , October 1998 . At ( May 2006 ) : http : / / www . sussex . ac . uk / Units / spru / publications / imprint / sewps / sewp28 / sewp28 . pdf , page 75 . Stirling , A . 2006 m Analysis , participation and power : justiﬁca - tion and closure in participatory multi - criteria analysis . Land Use Policy 23 , 95 – 107 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . landusepol . 2004 . 08 . 010 ) Stirling , A . 2006 n On the economics and analysis of diversity . SPRU Electronic Working Paper Number 28 . University of Sussex , October 1998 . At ( May 2006 ) : http : / / www . sussex . ac . uk / Units / spru / publications / imprint / sewps / sewp28 / sewp28 . pdf , page 81 . Stirling , A . 2006 o On the economics and analysis of diversity . SPRU Electronic Working Paper Number 28 . University of Sussex , October 1998 . At ( May 2006 ) : http : / / www . sussex . ac . uk / Units / spru / publications / imprint / sewps / sewp28 / sewp28 . pdf , pages 49 , 63 , 75 . UK Treasury , Science & innovation investment framework 2004 – 2014 , London : HM Treasury , 2004 . At ( May 2006 ) : http : / / www . hmtreasury . gov . uk / spending _ review / spen d _ sr04 / associateddocuments / spending _ sr04 _ scien ce . cfm . UK Department of Energy . 1988 Privatising Electricity , Command322 , HMSO , London , UK . UK Department of Trade and Industry . 1995 The Prospects for Nuclear Power in the UK : conclusions of the Government s Nuclear Review , Cmnd 2860 , HMSO , London . UK Department of Trade and Industry , Our Energy Future— Creating a Low Carbon Economy , Energy White Paper , 2005 . US Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission 1992 Horizontal Merger Guidelines , US Department of Justice , Washington DC , 1992 . At ( May 2006 ) : http : / / www . ftc . gov / bc / docs / horizmer . htm . US Department of Agriculture Subcommittee on Extension Diversity of the Personnel and Organization Development Committee . 1998 Diversity and Pluralism : Beneﬁts of Diversity in Cooperative Extension , US Department of Agriculture , Washington , DC . Ulph , A . 1988 Quantiﬁcation of beneﬁts of diversity from reducing exposure to volatility of fossil fuel prices , evidence to Hinkley Point C Planning Enquiry for Central Electricity Generating Board , 25 . Vincke , P . , Gassner , M . & Roy , B . 1992 Multicriteria decision - aid . Chichester , UK ; New York , NY ; Brisbane , Australia ; Toronto , Canada ; Singapore : Wiley . Walker , W . 2000 Entrapment in large technical systems : institutional commitment and power relations . Res . Policy 29 , 833 – 846 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / S0048 - 7333 ( 00 ) 00108 - 6 ) Weitzman , M . 1992 a On diversity . Q . J . Econ . 107 , 363 – 405 . ( doi : 10 . 2307 / 2118476 ) This relates , for instance , to the ‘twinning’ condition Weitzman , M . 1992 b On diversity . Q . J . Econ . 107 , 363 – 405 . ( doi : 10 . 2307 / 2118476 ) Williams , P . & Humphries , C . 1994 Biodiversity , taxonomic relatedness and endemism in conservation . In Systematics and conservation evaluation ( eds L . Forey , C . Humphries & R . Vane - Wright ) , pp . 269 – 287 . Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press . Williamson , O . 1993 Transaction cost economics and organis - ation theory . Ind . Econ . Corporate Change 2 , 107 – 156 . ( doi : 10 . 1093 / icc / 2 . 1 . 107 ) Willrich , M . 1975 Energy and world politics . New York , NY : Macmillan . Winner , L . 1977 Autonomous technology : technics out of control as a theme in political thought . Cambridge , UK : MIT Press . Wright , A . , Teichmann , S . & Clarke , J . 2005 The importance of sequence diversity in the aggregation and evolution of proteins . Nature 438 , 878 – 881 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nature04195 ) Wynne , A . 1995 The public understanding of science . In Handbook of science and technology studies ( eds S . Jasanoff , G . Markle , J . Peterson & T . Pinch ) , pp . 361 – 388 . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . A general framework for analysing diversity A . Stirling 719 J . R . Soc . Interface ( 2007 )