Developing a Visual Taxonomy : Children’s Views on Aesthetics Andrew Large , Jamshid Beheshti , Nahid Tabatabaei , and Valerie Nesset ∗ School of Information Studies , McGill University , 3459 McTavish Street , Montreal , Quebec , Canada H3A 1Y2 . E - mail : { andrew . large , jamshid . behesti } @ mcgill . ca , nahid . tabatabaei @ mail . mcgill . ca This article explores the aesthetic design criteria that should be incorporated into the information visualiza - tion of a taxonomy intended for use by children . Seven elementary - school students were each asked to rep - resent their ideas in drawings for visualizing a taxon - omy . Their drawings were analyzed according to six criteria—balance , equilibrium , symmetry , unity , rhythm , and economy—identiﬁed as aesthetic measures in pre - vious research . The drawings revealed the presence of all six measures , and three—unity , equilibrium , and rhythm—were found to play an especially important role . It is therefore concluded that an aesthetic design for an information visualization for young users should incor - porate all six measures . Introduction Informationvisualizationrepresentsoneofthemostrecent attempts to improve user interface design . Bederson and Shneiderman ( 2003 , p . 83 ) identiﬁed a basic and recurring problem for interface designers : “Users lose context as they navigate to speciﬁc pages of information” because , typi - cally , information sets extend beyond one screen . Korfhage ( 1991 ) suggested that visualization tools can offer the user enhanced control over the information - retrieval process by allowing users , among other things , to view interrelationships for browsing purposes . One category of users which might beneﬁt from such tools are elementary students , who use the Web to ﬁnd information for school assignments but can encounter a variety of retrieval problems when using digital information systems , such as lack of sophistication in lan - guagemanipulationandsearch - queryformulation ( Borgman , Hirsh , Walter , & Gallagher , 1995 ; Hirsh , 1997 , 1999 ; Large , Beheshti , & Breuleux , 1998 ; Schacter , Chung , & Dorr , 1998 ; Wallace , Kupperman , & Krajcik , 2000 ) . One way to reduce Received October 21 , 2008 ; revised March 13 , 2009 ; accepted March 13 , 2009 ∗ Valerie Nesset’s current address : Department of Library and Information Studies , University of Buffalo , Buffalo , NY . E - mail : vnesset @ buffalo . edu © 2009 ASIS & T • Published online 14 May 2009 in Wiley InterScience ( www . interscience . wiley . com ) . DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi . 21095 such problems has been to provide a taxonomy , a subject directory with hierarchically arranged categories ( i . e . , nodes ) that progress from general to speciﬁc and where each node is a subset of the higher level node ( Blackburn , 2006 ) . A menu of top - level terms is offered to the user ; clicking on a term displays a second level , and so on , until the last term selected leads via the portal’s database and search engine to Web pages indexed by that term . This allows children to rec - ognize concepts in the taxonomy that are relevant to their information needs , potentially involving less cognitive effort than retrieving from memory terms to be used in a keyword search ( Bilal , 1999 , 2000 , 2001 , 2002a ; Large & Beheshti , 2000 ; Large , Beheshti , & Moukdad , 1999 ; Schacter et al . , 1998 ; Watson , 1998 ) . However , taxonomies in children’s Web portals such as Yahooligans ! ( http : / / www . squirrelnet . com / search / yk / yahooligans . asp ) , KidsClick ! ( http : / / www . kidsclick . org / ) , andHistoryTrek ( http : / / www . historytrek . ca ) , use hierarchically structured taxonomies that may in practice impose considerable cognitive loads because only a part of the hierarchy is displayed at any one time , and users must guess which route might eventually take them to the relevant termwithinthehierarchy ( Large , Beheshti , Nesset , & Bowler , 2005 , 2006 ) . One counter to this problem may be to increase the breadth of the taxonomy and reduce its depth , present - ing at fewer hierarchical levels correspondingly longer lists of terms to be browsed ( Hutchinson , Druin , & Bederson , 2007 ) . Unfortunately , children seem to ﬁnd browsing long lists a slow and error - prone task ( Shenton & Dixon , 2004 ) . Visualization presents itself as an alternative solution to such display problems by revealing relationships within a taxon - omy through unfolding the complete structure in the interface display so that it can be browsed as an entity . Bilal and Wang ( 2005 ) , for example , concluded from their study of seventh graders that “the design of an optimal visual inter - face that displays the hierarchical structure of concepts in navigational maps of some form would certainly facilitate children’s browsing” ( p . 1311 ) ( also see Druin , 2005 ) . This raises the question as to exactly how a taxonomy might best be visualized for young users . Any such visual - ization must allow children to locate relevant terms in the taxonomy as quickly and effectively as possible , but it also JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY , 60 ( 9 ) : 1808 – 1822 , 2009 must prove attractive visually to young people if it is to be successful . What kind of aesthetic design should be imposed upon an information visualization such that it captures chil - dren’s initial attention as well as encourages repeat visits ? The question of engineering aesthetics into information visu - alizationforChen ( 2005 ) remainsachallenge , andconstitutes for him one of the top - 10 unsolved information - visualization problems . Chen ( 2005 ) argued that : The purpose of information visualization is the insights into data that it provides , not just pretty pictures . But what makes a picture pretty ? . . . . There is a lack of holistic empirical studiestocharacterizewhatvisualpropertiesmakeusersthinkagraphisprettyorvisuallyappealing . ( p . 15 ) Cawthon and Vande Moere ( 2007 ) believed that “there is a need to understand why users ﬁnd speciﬁc visualizations visual [ sic ] attractive” ( p . 637 ) . If these assertions are valid for users in general , it must certainly be the case for young users who inhabit a world where visual stimuli are especially important . Onewaytoexploretheaestheticdesigncriteriaofinforma - tion visualizations intended for young users is to ask children themselves for their design ideas . This article presents the design concepts of 7 sixth graders ( aged 11 and 12 years ) as expressed in individual drawings undertaken as part of a larger project to design a low - tech prototype of a visual taxonomy . Information Visualization Visualization has been deﬁned as the graphical represen - tation of data or concepts to support decision making ( Ware , 2004 ) . Visualizationforinformationretrievalisaspeciﬁcarea within visualization that focuses upon the representation in an abstract information space of items from document col - lections , and especially from the Web . The strong visual cues that indicate paths and regions can help users understand the structure of a virtual space ( Darken & Sibert , 1996 ) . Visual navigation relies on the construction of a cognitive map , and the extent to which users can readily connect the structure of their cognitive maps to the visual representations of an underlying information space ( Chen , 2006 ) . From a cogni - tive perspective , visualization capitalizes on the ability of the human brain to rapidly perceive visual information ( Keller & Keller , 1993 ) . It appeals to users because it draws upon the efﬁciency of human visual processing ( Koshman , 2006 ) . KandoganandShneiderman ( 2003 ) believedthatcurrentWeb browsersdonotprovideanoverviewofandasenseoflocationwithinaninformationstructurewhileBedersonandShnei - derman ( 2003 ) argued that information visualization tools allow users to see phenomena that were previously hidden . Researchers have investigated a variety of tools to support exploratory browsing , ﬁnd patterns , map concepts ( Carnot , Dunn , Alberto , Gram , & Muldoon , n . d . ; Carvalho , Hewett , & Canas , 2001 ) , and “even make browsing fun” ( Ahlberg & Shneiderman , 2003 , p . 7 ) . These include color coding ( Gevers , 2001 ) , dynamic query ﬁlters and starﬁeld displays ( Ahlberg & Shneiderman , 2003 ) , zooming ( Bederson & Shneiderman , 2003 ; Sacco , 2006 ) , tree maps ( Nation , Plaisant , Marchionini , & Komlodi , 2003 ) , scroll bars ( Asahi , Turo , & Shneiderman , 2003 ) , animations ( Bederson & Boltman , 2003 ; Hearst & Karadi , 1997 ) , metaphors ( Kandogan & Shneiderman , 2003 ; Koshman , 2006 ) , often based on the metaphor of the cartographic map ( Parr , Lee , Campbell , & Bederson , 2004 ) , and virtual environments ( Beheshti , Large , & Clement , 2008 ) . Of particular relevance to this study are the different ways in which hierarchies might be visualized , one of the most mature and active branches of information visualiza - tion ( Chen , 2006 ) . Two - dimensional tree - branching struc - tures have been used to represent hierarchical data long before information visualizations appeared ( as in biological or library classiﬁcation schemes ) , and they can be utilized effectively in information visualizations to present complex structures . Therearemanyalgorithmsthatcanbeemployedto visualize hierarchical structures . One well - known approach is to use cone trees , as originally proposed by researchers at Xerox PARC ( Robertson , Mackinlay , & Card , 1991 ) . Other approaches are the space ﬁller ( Shneiderman , 1992 ) , the tree map ( Shneiderman , 1992 ) , and the hyperbolic tree ( Kobsa , 2004 ) . A second way to visualize relationships between con - cepts in a taxonomy is to employ the metaphor of the network , with its nodes and interconnections . Third , spatial metaphors can be employed to visually represent information , using the universe , the solar system , galaxies , and so on through which the user navigates to locate information ( Chen , 2006 ) . In all three cases , it is possible to incorporate a function to allow users to zoom in and out of different levels of detail within the visualization . Although various algorithms have been devised to visualize hierarchies using these approaches , there remains a dearth of evidence about users’ aesthetic reactions to the resulting designs , and this is especially true when the users are young . Aesthetics The American Heritage Dictionary ( 2000 ) deﬁned the term “aesthetics” as the study of the psychological responses to beauty and artistic experiences . Aesthetics has been inves - tigated in relation to product design and human – computer interaction ( Cawthon & Vande Moere , 2007 ; Lau & Vande Moere , 2007 ) , and can improve the efﬁciency and the effec - tiveness of task performance when measured by time and error rates ( Kurosu & Kashimura , 1995 ; Ngo & Byrne , 2001 ) . It also has generated some interest in certain areas of informa - tion visualization , and especially in the use of graph drawings and the automatic generation of network diagrams ( Purchase , Allder , & Carrington , 2002 ; Ware , Purchase , Colpoys , & McGill , 2002 ) , but as a measurable entity rather than per - sonal judgment . Cawthon and Vande Moere ( 2007 ) believed that aesthetics plays a role in a system’s overall attractiveness and as a signiﬁcant incentive , at least for initial use . Norman ( 2004 ) argued that aesthetics could be more inﬂuential in user preferences than is usability . Byron and Wattenberg ( 2008 ) acceptedthataestheticallypleasingqualitiescanbeinconﬂict JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2009 1809 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi with utilitarian considerations such as legibility , but argued that the relative importance of aesthetic and utilitarian factors depend on context : Where users do not constitute a captive audience for a software product but must be enticed and then retained by it , the balance may well swing towards aes - thetic appeal ( also see Viegas , Wattenberg , van Ham , Kriss , & McKeon , 2007 ) . Christensen ( 2004 ) promoted the notion that aesthetics should be broadened to include “excitability . ” He believed that aesthetics is an orientation towards sim - plicity and beauty primarily to promote usability whereas he thought that some situations may be too usability inclined , leading to tedium . Excitability , according to Christensen , is the ability to create and facilitate excitement in use , eliciting emotional responses . Relatively little research has been conducted into the relationship between aesthetics and usability . Laarni ( 2004 ) stated that the evaluation of aesthetic preferences and emo - tional experiences have played a marginal role in human - computer interaction ( HCI ) research , and one reason is that they are difﬁcult to measure . Larni ( Laarni , 2003 ; Laarni , Ravaja , Saari , & Liukkonen , 2004 ) himself investigated the effect of color , shape , and texture on aesthetic reactions to Web sites . Users prefer certain colors and geometrical ﬁgures over others . Tractinsky ( 1997 ) found that user perception of aesthetic aspects of usability was important in the case of automated teller machine ( ATM ) interfaces , but again , he only looked at certain aspects such as color and layout . Lindgaard and Dudek ( 2003 ) found thatWeb sites with highly rated aesthetic appeal but low perceived usability provided high overall satisfaction , suggesting that what is considered beautiful need not be considered usable ; the inference from this ﬁnding is that designers need to take account of aesthetic as well as usability factors . In contrast , several studies have identiﬁed only a weak or no correlation between aesthetic qualities and usability ( e . g . , Hassenzahl , 2004 ) . Several authors have tried to identify speciﬁc design fea - tures that offer a positive aesthetic experience to users . For example , Kim , Lee , and Choi 2003 ) related features such as color , texture , and layout to aesthetic responses and identi - ﬁed 13 relevant emotional dimensions . Ngo , Teo , and Byrne ( 2003 ) incorporated 14 aesthetic measures in their model of interface aesthetics along with a methodology for calculating precise values for each measure ( discussed later ) . Parizotto - Ribeiro and Hammond ( 2004 ) applied 5 of these 14 measures in their study , ﬁnding that all inﬂuenced users’ appreciation of an interface , though some measures were more signiﬁcant than others . Hartmann , Sutcliffe , and DeAngeli ( 2008 , p . 26 ) found a link between aesthetics and usability : Positively per - ceived aesthetics overrode users’ poor usability experience , suggesting that “aesthetics could be an important determinant of user satisfaction and system acceptability , overcoming poor usability experience . ” Furthermore , they argued that the relative importance of aesthetics is related to the user’s back - ground and task : When use is more serious , then usability factors are more likely to outweigh aesthetic considerations ; in less critical situations , users choose designs based on a general impression of aesthetics and engagement . Note that none of these studies involved children , although the undergraduate students in Hartmann et al . ’s study believed that a metaphor - based interface style ( considered more aes - thetically pleasing and engaging ) was likely to be better for children than would a menu - based style when they were inter - acting with it in their leisure time ; they were undecided about this if the interface was to be used in the classroom within a formal educational context . Their reason for this assump - tion was that a metaphor - based style would likely prove more engaging but perhaps at the expense of usability . Methods One way to explore the kinds of information visualization designs that might be aesthetically pleasing is to ask users for their own design ideas rather than merely inviting them to comment upon existing designs . In this case , the poten - tial users were young students in elementary - school grades , and therefore the designers were drawn from this target group . Several researchers have worked closely and suc - cessfully with children in technology design ( Bilal , 2002b , 2003 ; Druin , 2002 , 2005 ; Druin et al . , 2003 ; Large , Nesset , Beheshti , & Bowler , 2006 ) , and their technique of encourag - ing children to express their design ideas through drawings was used in this project . The children were introduced to the nature and purpose of taxonomies by having them use the one providedintheHistoryTrekportalthatwasdesignedbyapre - vious intergenerational team of elementary - school students and researchers and is intended primarily for young users to ﬁnd Web - based information on Canadian history ( Large , Beheshti , Nesset , & Bowler , 2004 ) . The 7 ( 5 boys , 2 girls ) volunteer students were aged 11 to 12 years and were from Grade 6 of an English - language ele - mentary school in Montreal , Canada . Based on the results of a preliminary biographical questionnaire , all 7 students ( whose names have been changed to safeguard their anonymity ) were very familiar with computers and used them most days or every day from school , home , or both for school work and for entertainment . When asked to list their favorite search engines , all 7 cited Google , 2 also cited Yahoo ! , and 1 each cited MSN and AltaVista . All the children were computer - game players ; 4 of the 5 boys claimed daily use , and the remaining 3 children said they played most days . The 5 boys cited a total of 19 games as being their favorites while the 2 girls cited seven favorites ; only one game was cited by both boys and girls . None of the children were familiar with information visualization tools . The 7 children worked alongside 3 adult researchers as a design team over 12 sessions , each roughly of 75 min’ duration , to reach a consensus on one low - tech visualiza - tion prototype . This article , however , focused as it is upon just one part of this process—the children’s own visualiza - tion ideas as expressed through their drawings—reports only on the activities accomplished in Sessions 3 through 6 ( In Session 1 , the team members introduced themselves , and the objective of the design team was discussed . In Session 2 , children discussed browsing taxonomies as an alternative to 1810 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2009 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi keyword searching , and used and critiqued the taxonomy in the History Trek portal . ) In Session 3 , the 10 members of the design team divided into three groups , each including 1 adult and 2 or 3 chil - dren . Each group had the task of sorting 60 terms written on cards into a taxonomy . The 60 terms had been randomly selectedfromthe1 , 200termsfoundintheHistoryTrektaxon - omy , 15 from each of four ( of eight ) top - level topics : People , Places , Transportation , and Science and Technology ( From an earlier study , we had determined that children were able to undertake such a task ; see Large , Beheshti , Nesset , & Bowler , 2007 ) . This card - sorting activity was undertaken for three reasons . First , the activity helped the children to understand the concept of a taxonomy . Second , it demonstrated to them that there is more than one way to sort terms into a taxon - omy , as the three resulting structures differed from one to another . Third , once the three groups had discussed these three schemes and agreed upon one consensus scheme ( dis - cussed later ) , the structure provided the example to be used in the children’s designs of their individual visualizations ( discussed later ) . After Session 3 , one of the research assistants built in PowerPoint a working version of each scheme . In Ses - sion 4 , each team’s version was discussed , and members of the other two teams tried to ﬁnd several individual terms embedded in it . This was done to demonstrate not only that taxonomies can have different structures but that users may not be able to locate without some difﬁculty individual terms within the structure . This was an important point to empha - size as information visualization was being proposed as a possible solution to this problem . Following this evalua - tion , in Session 5 , the design team members—researchers and children—reached agreement on one structure , which was subsequently used by the children in their information visualization designs . During the ﬁrst ﬁve sessions , the team as a whole had used , discussed , and critiqued a variety of visualization tools accessible on the Web , regardless of whether they were explicitly intended for information retrieval . These had been selected by the researchers based on their popularity as well as the variety of visualization approaches that they illustrated . These tools included Kartoo , VisuWords , Quintura Kids , Webbrain , GNod , mnemomap , Mooter , ThinkmapVisual The - saurus , Touchgraph Google Browser , Grokker , Marumushi , the GapminderWorld 2006 , LivePlasma , Kooltorch , and Next Generation Foundation’s Map of Creativity . The team exper - imented with each tool for an average of 5 min , discussing the different components and identifying likes and dislikes . Then in Session 6 , the 7 children were invited to formulate their own individual idea on how a taxonomy for one topic , Transportation , might be visualized using paper drawings . Web - Based Visualization Examples Although the team viewed and critiqued 16 Web - based information visualizations , an analysis of their drawings indicates that their designs were inﬂuenced mostly by four examples . As a prelude to looking at their own designs , it is useful to quickly review these four visualization tools . Kooltorch ( www . kooltorch . com ) Kooltorch takes results from Web search engines and visually displays them . They are grouped by category , each categoryinitsowncircle . Colorisusedtodistinguishbetween categories ( see Figure 1 ) . Big circles represent main topics , and small circles represent Web sites . Ovals in the middle of big circles connect each main topic to other main topics . The children were not especially impressed by this , mak - ing comments such as “it’s a good idea with subtopics , but I think it’s very , very annoying having just the numbers ; you don’t know which one is which until you click on it” and “I don’t think that it’s a great idea because you have to type it in and then it goes back to Google ; you could easily do it yourself . ” Nevertheless , the children thought it a possible way to display relationships within a taxonomy . Visuwords ( www . visuwords . com ) Visuwords is an online graphical dictionary that allows users to look up words to ﬁnd their meanings and their asso - ciations with other words ( Figure 2 ) . By entering a word in the search box , that word is displayed within a network of nodes , and the network can be explored by zooming as well as by dragging nodes to ﬁnd related concepts . Color is used to convey information such as a word’s part of speech ( noun , adjective , etc . ) or the kind of relationship that exists between one word and another ( is similar to , is a kind of ) . The children noted that Visuwords “makes a lot of bub - bles ; ” “it’s bouncing around and it keeps growing ; ” “I love this one , I love that idea , it’s so creative ; it’s awesome , the most attractive one . I like it . It explodes . ”The children carried into their own designs the ideas of dynamic ( i . e . , exploding ) concepts and of color coding as well as the notion that dis - tance from the center of the screen signiﬁes a reduction in importance . As one girl stated , “I think in the middle of the thing , it has more to do with it . And as it goes exploding , it doesn’t have that much to do . ” Grokker ( www . grokker . com ) Grokker ( Figure3 ) dynamicallyclustersandprovidesnon - linear ways of displaying large numbers of search results . Circles represent categories , and their size reﬂects the amount of content within them . Zooming is used to display different levels of detail . Grokker uses only two colors : blue circles on a green , circular background . The children’s ﬁrst reaction to Grokker was “it’s cool , it goes zoom in , ” but they suggested that it should be more colorful and that “instead of just having it appear , having like it explode . . . so make a circle pop up spinning , and another circle spinning to make it look kind of a cool . ” They also suggested that “instead of just some blank papers , you could have some pictures of what the topic is about . ” They did JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2009 1811 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi FIG . 1 . Kooltorch . not view or experiment with the alternative Grokker visual display which employs polygons rather than circles , but their attraction more generally by circles suggests that the latter would have been their preference . The Map of Creativity ( www . ngf . org . uk / map / map . html ) The Map of Creativity from the Next Generation Founda - tion ( Figure 4 ) displays hundreds of projects recommended by educators around the world . Main topics are arranged on theperimeterofthecircle ; projectcontentisexploredbydrag - ging the cursor around this perimeter , which expands topics outward . It makes little use of color , with a black background and a circle whose circumference is in white and various shades of gray . The children reacted very enthusiastically to the Map of Creativity : “That’s awesome ; ” “that’s so good ; ” “that could keep me entertained ; it’s like a video game . ” They found it the most impressive of all the Web visualizations viewed . Nevertheless , they did have some suggestions for improve - ment . They found it rather gray and would have liked more color ; they also found the small typeface difﬁcult to read . What design concepts as incorporated into these fourWeb - based information visualizations most appealed to the chil - dren ? The prevalent overall metaphor was that of a network , based on stars , rings , and spokes . Kooltorch and Grokker represent search results as circles within larger circles or rings . Visuwords opts for a star shape ( described by 1 student as being “like a solar system” ) , and the Map of Creativity employs a ring from which terms burst out like sunspots . The children were impressed by movement , and particularly favored rapid screen activity which they characterized as explosions : Visuwords , for example , “explodes—things pop up . ” The Map of Creativity was even ( positively ) likened to a video game . They liked the idea of traveling through a cloud of concepts either by zooming or by screen navi - gation . They also liked to see lots of color ( Grokker was criticized for not being sufﬁciently colorful . ) , not gratuitously 1812 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2009 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi FIG . 2 . Visuwords . FIG . 3 . Grokker . JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2009 1813 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi FIG . 4 . The Map of Creativity . but to indicate , for example , concept relationships . Size also could be used to represent main or subordinate topics ( as in Kooltorch ) . Individual Student Drawings Each of the 7 student members of the team was asked to present design ideas for a visualization of the taxonomy based on the consensus structure that had emerged from the card - sorting activity . These ideas took the form of paper - based drawings . Colin Colin was the only student not to give a role to color in his design ( Figure 5 ) . The main topics are arranged in a circle and represented by elongated oblong shapes ( Only one , Transport , is actually named . ) Within each main topic , second - level topics are represented by small circles . When a circleisclicked , itexplodestorevealitsnameandthesubordi - nate levels of the hierarchy . The topics are linked by a straight line to their subordinate and superordinate levels . He demon - strates this using the main topic , Transport . The second - level topic , “Moving , ” is exploded , with links extending out to [ unidentiﬁed ] third - level topics . This drawing has been inﬂuenced by the Map of Cre - ativity , with its arrangement of main topics in a circle , each main topic being represented by an oblong , the location of second - level topics within the main topic oblong , and the subordinate - topic levels exploding outward . Anthony The main topics in Anthony’s drawing ( Figure 6 ) are rep - resented by oblong shapes , and within them , second - level topics by balls . The main topics are arranged on spokes around the circumference of a circle . Clicking on a second - level topic explodes the subordinate levels outward . Anthony himself relates his design and its exploding feature to Visu - words . But the arrangement of the main topics in a circle also suggests the inﬂuence of the Map of Creativity . Keith Keith’s drawing ( Figure 7 ) has the main topic Transport ( The other main topics are not shown . ) represented as a circle at the center of the screen . Clicking on Transport opens two second levels , “Moving” and “Non - moving , ” which also are represented as circles . In the case of “Moving , ” this circle overlaps theTransport circle . Clicking on “Moving” explodes 1814 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2009 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi FIG . 5 . Colin’s design . FIG . 6 . Anthony’s design . subordinate levels outward in smaller circles , but in the case of “Non - moving , ” its circle is further from the center than the subordinate levels ; it is not clear whether this is a mistake or whether it means something . Keith’s drawing appears to have been inﬂuenced by the Map of Creativity in the case of the exploding circles , and perhaps by Visuword in the linear nature of the outward - exploding topics . JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2009 1815 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi FIG . 7 . Keith’s design . FIG . 8 . Dennis’drawing . Dennis The main topics in Dennis’ drawing ( Figure 8 ) are dis - tributed around the circumference of a circle and are repre - sented by smaller circles . The second - level topics also are located around the circumference of the main circle and are represented as smaller circles . It is not clear exactly how Dennis envisaged them being used or how subsequent hierarchical levels would be displayed . This drawing may be inﬂuenced by Kooltorch in its distri - butionoftopicsaroundthecircumferenceofacircle , although in Kooltorch the “topics” are record numbers that are located within rather than around the edge of the circle . It also may be inﬂuenced by the Map of Creativity , with its distribution of topics in a circle , but the drawing gives no indication of topics exploding outward as in the Map of Creativity . Steven In Steven’s drawing ( Figure 9 ) , all the main topics are dis - played within a large circle . The main topics are represented by a series of circles within star shapes , linked by lines . Click - ing on one topic results in the subordinate topics “popping up ; ” one such topic is shown in the drawing . This drawing is one of two that overtly tries to assign a semantic value to size : The bigger the circle , the greater the number of hits that the represented concept would produce . This drawing is inﬂuenced by Visuwords where the topics explode outward from the center , and by Grokker where the size of a circle is related to the number of results the topic would elicit . Catherine Catherine’s drawing ( Figure 10 ) is the most intricate of the seven drawings . The large outer circle contains on its circumference all the main topics . In this example , one topic—Transportation—has been activated . Within the outer circle and represented by smaller circles are the two second - level topics “Moving” and “Non - moving . ” Each of these has subordinate - level topics exploding outward , but still retained within the circumference of the larger outer circle . Color seems to be used to indicate to which second - level topic the subordinate - level topics belong . This drawing is inﬂuenced by Visuwords in its incorpora - tion of exploding topics , by Grokker in its representation of subordinate topics within a broader topic in the outer circle , and by the Map of Creativity in that the main topics are dis - tributed around the circle’s circumference , but the explosion is within the circle , as in Grokker , and not as in the Map of Creativity . Brenda Brenda’s drawing ( Figure 11 ) shows one main topic , Transportation . From it , in a tree structure , the hierarchical terms expand outward in exploded bent spokes . They are rep - resented by “bubbles . ” The size of the bubble is related to the number of hits linked to the term . This drawing is inﬂuenced by Visuwords in its use of exploding hierarchical concepts and by Grokker with its bubble - size representations of results . Discussion Although all the children were familiar with Web search engines and with looking for information on the Web , none of them previously had encountered visualizations nor had they ever considered the role that a taxonomy might play in 1816 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2009 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi FIG . 9 . Steven’s drawing . FIG . 10 . Catherine’s drawing . retrieving information . Nevertheless , after analyzing and dis - cussing several information visualizations of various kinds , they quickly grasped the role that a taxonomy could play and how it compared with keyword searching . They also easily grasped the nature and purpose of a taxonomy after con - structing their own using card - sorting techniques . This newly acquired information was then transferred into their ideas for visualizing a taxonomy as represented in their diagrams . JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2009 1817 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi FIG . 11 . Brenda’s design . At the outset , it must be conceded that the 7 children were inﬂuenced by information visualization examples they had seen previously on the Web , as described earlier . However , note that they were more inﬂuenced by some visualiza - tions they looked at and discussed than they were by others . When deciding whether a particular information visualiza - tion was worthy of further consideration , aesthetic rather thanfunctionalcharacteristicswereuppermostintheirminds , even though the researchers were careful to show the chil - drenhowthevisualizationworkedandencourageddiscussionofitsfunctionalattributesorshortcomings . The more static designs such as Mnemomap ( www . mnemo . org ) and the Visual Thesaurus ( www . visualthesaurus . com ) simply did not capture the children’ interest . The former was described as “boring , ” “not colorful enough , ” and having an unpro - nounceable name ; the latter was simply deemed “dull . ”These comments emphasize the importance of movement and color in any visualization designed for children . It might be argued that such characteristics do not necessarily inﬂuence pos - itively the effectiveness of a taxonomy , but the affective reaction of users , and especially children , should never be underestimated . If the presentation is not interesting and fails to catch the attention of users , it is unlikely to invite their repeat visits . It also might be argued that intrinsic to visual - ization schemes is the ability to provoke interest and even fun . If the children’s designs were inﬂuenced to one degree or another by four Web - based information visualizations— Grokker , Kooltorch , the Map of Creativity , and Visuword— also note that their individual designs do differ . Six are based on a circular structure , but the seventh design ( Brenda ) has the form of a tree structure . Even the six circular designs differ considerably , with several relying upon a central axis ( Anthony , Dennis ) while others concentrated activity around the circle perimeter ( Colin , Catherine ) . The designs all envisaged some kind of a taxonomy in which the user could acquire an overview of the entire taxonomy by navigating through a two - dimensional space . Increasing detail would be revealed by exploding higher level terms to reveal subordinate levels . Typically , this was to be achieved by a network approach : expanding sets of circles radiating outward from either a central axis or an inner cir - cle . Brenda’s design was the one exception to this design approach ; she envisaged the explosion taking the form of a tree structure , with branches snaking outward from a central trunk . There can be little doubt , based both upon their own designs as well as their comments on others’Web - based visu - alizations , that visualizations should include intrinsic motion within the design as well as motion induced by the user’s zooming or dragging activities . There was less unanimity on the importance of indicating the importance of a term within the taxonomy ( as measured by the size of the set that would be retrieved by select - ing that term ) by either its size ( e . g . , a larger circle within which the term is located to indicate a larger set ) or distance from the center ( e . g . , shorter distances from the center indi - cating a larger set ) . Nevertheless , several of the drawings ( Keith , Steven , and Brenda ) incorporated this feature . At least in the case of the drawings byAnthony and Steven , color is used to distinguish between terms at different lev - els within the hierarchy . The children were asked only to 1818 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2009 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi TABLE 1 . Application of ﬁve measures to four web visualizations and seven student visualizations . Interface Balance Equilibrium Symmetry Unity Rhythm Economy Score Kooltorch 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 Visuwords 1 1 1 1 1 1 6 Grokker 0 1 1 1 0 0 3 Map of Creativity 0 1 1 1 1 1 5 Colin 1 1 1 1 1 1 6 Anthony 1 1 1 1 1 1 6 Keith 0 0 0 1 1 0 2 Dennis 1 1 1 1 0 1 5 Steven 0 1 0 1 1 1 4 Catherine 1 1 1 1 1 1 6 Brenda 0 0 0 1 1 0 2 Score 5 8 7 11 8 7 construct a visualization of one main topic ( Transport ) , and therefore did not have an opportunity to demonstrate whether they would use color to differentiate between terms ema - nating from different main topics . However , in the designs , they subsequently elaborated in small teams ( composed of 1 researcher and 2 or 3 children ) that they did use color to indicate to which main topic the subordinate terms belonged . Such nominal information coding is often extremely effective as a way of classifying visual objects into categories ( Ware , 2004 ) . The 7 student drawings along with the four Web - based visualizations that most impressed the children are analyzed in Table 1 . This analysis is based upon the aesthetic measures elaborated for graphic displays by Ngo et al . ( 2003 ) . They identiﬁed 14 different measures for their purposes ; but in our case , we limited this to just six measures : • Balance : The distribution of optical weight in a picture ; the perception that some objects appear heavier than others : Larger objects are heavier ; smaller objects are lighter . Bal - ance is achieved through an equal weight of screen elements , left and right , top and bottom . • Equilibrium : A stabilization , a midway center of suspension that centers the layout . • Symmetry : Axialduplication—aunitononesideofthecenter line is exactly replicated on the other side . Symmetry requires vertical , horizontal , and diagonal balance . • Unity : Coherence , a totality of elements visually all in one piece , the elements all dovetailing so completely as to be seen as one thing . • Rhythm : Regular patterns of changes in elements—helps to maketheappearanceexcitingthroughmovement—expansionandcontractionofelements . • Economy : Minimizing the number of screens required to display information . The deﬁnitions by Ngo et al . ( 2003 ) of the last two measures—rhythm and economy—have been modiﬁed by us to better suit information visualization interfaces . The remaining eight measures employed by Ngo et al . — sequence , cohesion , proportion , simplicity , density , regular - ity , homogeneity , and order and complexity—have not been applied to the information visualization interfaces either because they were deemed inappropriate in this context or because they overlapped one or more of the six mea - sures used by us ( Note that Parizotto - Ribeiro and Ham - mond’s ( 2004 ) study applied only ﬁve of the measures : unity , proportion , homogeneity , balance , and rhythm . ) The measures were applied in all cases to the opening screen of the visualization ( both in the Web - based inter - faces and the student drawings ) and were based not only on the actual visual representations but also on the comments made about them by the children . Two of the researchers independentlyappliedthemeasurestoeachinterfaceandthencomparedresults . In the few cases of divergence , a discus - sion was used to arrive at a consensus . For each measure , the interfaces were deemed to display that quality ( given a “1” ) in Table 1 or not to display it ( given a “0” in Table 1 ) . The measures are not intended to be normative ; that is , there is no assumption that the presence of a measure in the interface is preferable to its absence . One Web interface , Kooltorch , did not exhibit ﬁve of the six measures while Visuwords incorporated all of them , and the Map of Cre - ativity exhibited all but one . It is a fact , however , that the children expressed the strongest support for Visuwords and the Map of Creativity , the two interfaces that best demon - strated the presence of the six measures . The three measures most prevalent in the four Web visualizations are unity , equi - librium , and symmetry . Turning to the children drawings , 3 of the 7 did incorporate all six measures , but 2 included just two measures . This emphasizes the point made earlier that the student drawings overall really did differ one from another . In one respect , however , the student drawings did exhibit almost complete consistency : Unity was present in all , and rhythm was absent from only one drawing . Overall , the student draw - ings tended to include rather than exclude the quality assessed by the six measures . In other words , on the basis of this study ofsevendrawings , itcanbesaidthatanaestheticallyattractive information visualization of a taxonomy should incorporate unity , balance , equilibrium , symmetry , rhythm , and economy . Furthermore , the one characteristic that all the visualization interfaces exhibited—the existing Web - based visualizations JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2009 1819 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi most liked by the children as well as the children’own draw - ings of an ideal interface—was unity , a coherence in the design in which all elements coalesce into one uniﬁed theme . This can be likened to an earlier ﬁnding that such unifying characteristics as the name assigned to a children’s Web site are considered by children to be extremely important ; the name should really reﬂect clearly and unequivocally the site’s content ( Large , Beheshti , & Rahman , 2002 ) . Conclusion Seven volunteer students from two classes in Grade 6 in one elementary school participated in an intergenerational team to design a low - level prototype visualization of a Web portal taxonomy in the form of a hierarchical subject direc - tory . As a part of that process the students , were asked to express their own design ideas for a visualized taxonomy through drawings . This article presents the resulting seven drawings and analyzes them using six measures to identify aesthetic characteristics that could be incorporated into the information visualization of a taxonomy to be used by chil - dren . These design ideas emanated from just 7 volunteer children , and it cannot be assumed that they are representative of all young students’ ideas on information visualization . What emerges from this research ? First , children can be consulted about their ideas on information visualization so long as they are sufﬁciently prepared . In our case , this meant allowing the children to see how a subject directory for a Web portal that has been constructed around a taxonomy can be used to ﬁnd information , and how this approach differs from keyword searching . It also meant giving them the chance to construct their own taxonomy to appreciate the problems of unambiguously assigning terms to categories , and letting them see the problems in ﬁnding the most suitable terms within a taxonomy when only a small part of that taxonomy can be viewed at any time . Examining and critiquing vari - ous information visualizations available on the Web provided them with ideas as to how a taxonomy might be visualized ; without this support , it would have been extremely difﬁcult for them to begin their own ideas because they had never encountered information visualizations . Once presented with alternative design approaches , however , they had no difﬁculty in deciding what they liked and disliked or any difﬁculty in explaining the reasons behind their decisions . In addition , all of the children were not impressed with the same design concepts ; although there are similarities in the their designs that reﬂect fundamental agreement on such matters as color , zooming , dragging , and term explosion , the detail in the designs shows originality of thought among them . Second , from the seven drawings it is possible to extract several measures that emerge as pointers to the design of aes - thetically pleasing information visualizations for children . Balance , equilibrium , symmetry , unity , rhythm , and economy should be sought in the interface . In the seven drawings , these have been achieved by techniques such as locating the main topic or topics at the center of the visualization , from which subordinate levels will be displayed in a maplike metaphor . The display should involve rapid movement that the chil - dren likened to an explosion . The exploded terms themselves would be viewed by the user dragging and / or zooming to reveal different parts of the taxonomy and at different levels of detail . These design features should be implemented in such a way to make the visualization fun as well as effective to use . All 7 children in the design team were fond of playing computer games , but it is difﬁcult to surmise how much either their reactions to the Web - based visualizations or their own visualization designs were inﬂuenced by gaming experience . Their preferences for dynamic ( i . e . , exploding ) representa - tions and plenty of color , and conversely their labeling of visualizations lacking these attributes as “boring , ” may have been inﬂuenced by the world of computer games ( The boys in particular favored games such as the Rise of Nations and theAge of Empires . ) , but of course , such attributes have long been found for young people in older applications such as comic books and animated cartoon movies . The relationship between the design of computer games and computer - based information resources such as the History Trek Web portal deserves further research . The next stage in the overall research , of which this design phase represents only the ﬁrst step , is to develop a work - ing model ( or models ) based upon these initial design ideas . This model will then be incorporated into the History Trek portal and evaluated by elementary - school students as they use it to retrieve information from the Web . From this eval - uation , it is hoped to gather a wide range of reactions to the aesthetic design features incorporated in the visualization and a set of design criteria that can be employed to produce infor - mation visualizations of taxonomies to simplify information retrieval for young users . More generally , the evaluation also is intended to shed light on the functionality of the infor - mation visualization approach to taxonomy display as it is compared to the traditional hierarchical display employed in the original HistoryTrek design . Will the application of infor - mation visualization techniques to a taxonomy enhance its navigability compared with that of a traditional , hierarchical taxonomy ? Will it encourage children looking for informa - tion more often to browse the taxonomy rather than to enter keyword searches , and if so , will this result overall in more efﬁcient information retrieval ? As Chen ( 2006 ) argued , the challenge is how to construct a network algorithmically that can display the necessary information in compliance with a set of aesthetic criteria—this challenge will be tackled in the next stage of research . Acknowledgments The authors gratefully acknowledge the cooperation of the Montreal elementary school attended by the children , and especially theAssistant Head , who greatly facilitated our research . We owe an enormous debt of gratitude to the 7 stu - dents who volunteered to give up their lunch breaks to be members of the intergenerational team . We also are grateful for the helpful comments made by the anonymous JASIST 1820 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2009 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi referees . This research is supported by funding from the SocialSciencesandHumanitiesResearchCouncilofCanada . References Ahlberg , C . , & Shneiderman , B . ( 2003 ) . Visual information seeking : Tight coupling of dynamic query ﬁlters with starﬁeld displays . In B . B . Bederson & B . Shneiderman ( Eds . ) , The craft of information visual - ization : Readings and reﬂections ( pp . 7 – 13 ) . San Francisco : Kaufmann . American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language , 4th ed . ( 2000 ) . Boston : Houghton Mifﬂin . Asahi , T . , Turo , D . , & Shneiderman , B . ( 2003 ) . Visual decision making : Using treemaps for the analytic hierarchy process . In B . B . Bederson & B . Shneiderman ( Eds . ) , The craft of information visualization : Readings and reﬂections ( pp . 235 – 236 ) . San Francisco : Kaufmann . Bederson , B . B . , & Boltman , A . ( 2003 ) . Does animation help users build mental maps of spatial information ? In B . B . Bederson & B . Shneiderman ( Eds . ) , The craft of information visualization : Readings and reﬂections ( pp . 87 – 94 ) . San Francisco : Kaufmann . Bederson , B . B . , & Shneiderman , B . ( Eds . ) . ( 2003 ) . The craft of information visualization : Readings and reﬂections . San Francisco : Kaufmann . Beheshti , J . , Large , A . , & Clement , I . ( 2008 ) . Exploring methodologies for designing a virtual reality library for children . Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the Canadian Association for Information Sci - ence . RetrievedApril28 , 2009 , fromhttp : / / www . cais - acsi . ca / proceedings / 2008 / beheshti _ 2008 . pdf Bilal , D . ( 1999 ) . Web search engines for children : A comparative study and performance evaluation of Yahooligans ! , Ask Jeeves for Kids , and Super Snooper . Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the ASIS ( pp . 70 – 83 ) , Washington , DC . Medford , NJ : Information Today . Bilal , D . ( 2000 ) . Children’s use of the Yahooligans ! Web search engine : I . Cognitive , physical and affective behaviors on fact - based search tasks . JournaloftheAmericanSocietyforInformationScience , 51 ( 7 ) , 646 – 665 . Bilal , D . ( 2001 ) . Children’s use of the Yahooligans ! Web search engine : II . Cognitive and physical behaviors on research tasks . Journal of the American Society of Information Science and Technology , 52 ( 2 ) , 118 – 136 . Bilal , D . ( 2002a ) . Children’s use of the Yahooligans ! Web search engine : III . Cognitive and physical behaviors on fully self - generated search tasks . Journal of theAmerican Society for Information Science andTechnology , 53 ( 13 ) , 1170 – 1183 . Bilal , D . ( 2002b ) . Children design their interfaces for Web search engines : A participatory approach . In L . Howarth , C . Cronin , & A . Slawek ( Eds . ) , Advancing knowledge : Expanding horizons for information science . In Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Canadian Associa - tion for Information Science ( pp . 204 – 214 ) . Toronto , Canada : Canadian Association for Information Science . Bilal , D . ( 2003 ) . Draw and tell : Children as designers of web interfaces . Proceedingsofthe66thAnnualMeetingoftheAmericanSocietyforInfor - mation Science and Technology : Humanizing Information Technology : From Ideas to Bits and Back ( pp . 135 – 141 ) . Medford , NJ : Information Today . Bilal , D . , & Wang , P . ( 2005 ) . Children’s conceptual structures of science categories and the design of web directories . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 56 ( 12 ) , 1303 – 1313 . Blackburn , B . ( 2006 ) . Taxonomy design types . AIIM E - Doc Magazine , 20 ( 3 ) , 14 , 16 . Borgman , C . L . , Hirsh , S . G . , Walter , V . A . , & Gallagher , A . L . ( 1995 ) . Chil - dren’s search behavior on browsing and keyword online catalogs : The Science Library Catalog Project . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 46 ( 9 ) , 663 – 684 . Byron , L . , & Wattenberg , M . ( 2008 ) . Stacked graphs—Geometry & aes - thetics . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 14 , 1245 – 1252 . Carnot , M . J . , Dunn , B . , Alberto , J . C . , Gram , P . , & Muldoon , J . ( n . d . ) . Concept map - based vs Web - page based interfaces in search and brows - ing . Retrieved April 28 , 2009 , from http : / / www . ihmc . us / users / acanas / Publications / CMapsVSWebPagesExp1 / CMapsVSWebPagesExp1 . htm Carvalho , M . , Hewett , R . , & Canas , A . J . ( 2001 ) . Enhancing web searching from concept map - based knowledge models . Proceedings of the 5th SCI Multi - Conference on Systems , Cybernetics and Informatics ( pp . 1 – 5 ) . Orlando , FL : International Institute of Informatics and Systematics . Cawthon , N . , & Vande Moere , A . ( 2007 ) . The effect of aesthetic on the usability of data visualization . Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Information Visualization ( pp . 637 – 648 ) . Zurich : IEEE . Retrieved April 28 , 2009 , from http : / / web . arch . usyd . edu . au / ∼ andrew / publications / iv07b . pdf Chen , C . ( 2005 ) . Toptenunsolvedinformationvisualizationproblems . IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications , July / August , 12 – 16 . Chen , C . ( 2006 ) . Information visualization : Beyond the horizon ( 2nd ed . ) . London : Springer . Christensen , M . S . ( 2004 ) . Introducing excitability ! In O . W . Bertelsen , M . G . Petersen , & S . Pold ( Eds . ) , Aesthetic approaches to human – computer interaction : Proceedings of the NordiCHI 2004 Workshop ( pp . 10 – 13 ) . Aarhus , Denmark : University of Aarhus . Darken , R . P . , & Sibert , J . L . ( 1996 ) . Wayﬁnding strategies and behaviors in large virtual worlds . In M . J . Tauber ( Ed . ) , Proceedings of the Confer - ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’96 ) ( pp . 142 – 149 ) . NewYork : ACM Press . Druin , A . ( 2002 ) . The role of children in the design of new technology . Behaviour and Information Technology , 21 , 1 – 25 . Druin , A . ( 2005 ) . What children can teach us : Developing digital libraries for children with children . Library Quarterly , 75 ( 1 ) , 20 – 41 . Druin , A . , Bederson , B . B . , Hourcade , J . P . , Sherman , L . , Revelle , G . , Platner , M . , & Weng , S . ( 2003 ) . Designing a digital library for young children : An intergenerational partnership . In B . B . Bederson & B . Shneiderman ( Eds . ) , The craft of information visualization : Readings and reﬂections ( pp . 178 – 185 ) . San Francisco : Kaufmann . Gevers , T . ( 2001 ) . Color - based retrieval . In Michael S . Lew ( Ed . ) , Principles of visual information retrieval ( pp . 11 – 49 ) . London : Springer . Hartmann , J . , Sutcliffe , A . , & DeAngeli , A . ( 2008 ) . Towards a theory of user judgment of aesthetics and user interface quality . ACM Transactions on Human – Computer Interaction , 15 ( 4 ) , 1 – 30 . Hassenzahl , M . ( 2004 ) . The interplay of beauty , goodness and usability in interactive products . Human – Computer Interaction , 19 ( 4 ) , 319 – 349 . Hearst , M . A . , & Karadi , C . ( 1997 ) . Cat - a - Cone : An interactive interface for specifying searches and viewing retrieval results using a large cat - egory hierarchy . Proceedings of the 20th Annual International ACM SIGIRConferenceonResearchandDevelopmentinInformationRetrieval ( pp . 246 – 255 ) . NewYork : ACM Press . Hirsh , S . G . ( 1997 ) . How do children ﬁnd information on different types of tasks ? Children’s use of the Science Library Catalog . Library Trends , 45 ( 4 ) , 725 – 745 . Hirsh , S . G . ( 1999 ) . Children’s relevance criteria and information seeking on electronic resources . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 50 ( 14 ) , 1265 – 1283 . Hutchinson , H . B . , Druin , A . , & Bederson , B . B . ( 2007 ) . Supporting elementary - agechildren’ssearchingandbrowsing : Designandevaluation using the international children’s digital library . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 58 ( 11 ) , 1618 – 1630 . Kandogan , E . , & Shneiderman , B . ( 2003 ) . Elastic windows : A hierarchical multi - window world - wide web browser . In B . B . Bederson & B . Shnei - derman ( Eds . ) , The craft of information visualization : Readings and reﬂections ( pp . 211 – 219 ) . San Francisco : Kaufmann . Keller , P . R . , & Keller , M . M . ( 1993 ) . Visualclues : Practicaldatavisualization . Washington , DC : IEEE . Kim , J . , Lee , J . , & Choi , D . ( 2003 ) . Designing emotionally evocative home - pages : An empirical study of the quantitative relations between design factors and emotional dimensions . International Journal of Human – Computer Studies , 59 ( 6 ) , 899 – 940 . Kobsa , A . ( 2004 ) . User experiments with tree visualization systems . IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization , Austin , TX . Retrieved April 28 , 2009 , from http : / / vis . computer . org / vis2004 / DVD / infovis / papers / kobsa . pdf Korfhage , R . ( 1991 ) . To see or not to see—Is that the query ? Proceedings of the 14th Annual International ACM / SIGIR Conference on Research and JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2009 1821 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi Development in Information Retrieval ( pp . 134 – 141 ) . New York : ACM Press . Koshman , S . ( 2006 ) . Visualization - based information retrieval on the Web . Library & Information Science Research , 28 , 192 – 207 . Kurosu , M . , & Kashimura , K . ( 1995 ) . Apparent usability vs inherent usabil - ity . InI . Katz , R . Mack , & L . Marks ( Eds . ) , ProceedingsoftheConference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’95 ) ( pp . 292 – 293 ) . NewYork : ACM Press . Laarni , J . ( 2003 ) . Effectsofcolor , fonttypeandfontstyleonuserpreferences . In C . Stephanidis ( Ed . ) , Adjunct Proceedings of HCI International 2003 ( pp . 31 – 32 ) . Heraklion , Greece : Crete University Press . Laarni , J . ( 2004 ) . Aesthetic and emotional evaluations of computer inter - faces . In O . W . Bertelsen , M . G . Petersen , & S . Pold ( Eds . ) , Aes - thetic approaches to human – computer interaction : Proceedings of the NordiCHI 2004 Workshop ( pp . 28 – 30 ) . Aarhus , Denmark : University of Aarhus . Laarni , J . , Ravaja , N . , Saari , T . , & Liukkonen , S . ( 2004 ) . Effects of color and textureonemotionalevaluations . InJ . P . Frois , P . Andrade , & J . F . Marques ( Eds . ) , Art and science : Proceedings of the IAEA 2004 XVIII Congress ( pp . 246 – 250 ) . Lisbon , Portugal : International Association of Empirical Aesthetics . Large , A . , & Beheshti , J . ( 2000 ) . TheWebasaclassroomresource : Reactions from the users . Journal of theAmerican Society for Information Science , 51 ( 12 ) , 1069 – 1080 . Large , A . , Beheshti , J . , & Breuleux , A . ( 1998 ) . Informationseekinginamul - timedia environment by primary school students . Library & Information Science Research , 20 ( 4 ) , 343 – 376 . Large , A . , Beheshti , J . , & Moukdad , H . ( 1999 ) . Information seeking on the Web : Navigational skills of grade - six primary school students . Proceed - ings of the 62nd annual meeting of theAmerican Society for Information Science ( pp . 84 – 97 ) . Washington , DC . Medford , NJ : Information Today . Large , A . , Beheshti , J . , Nesset , V . , & Bowler , L . ( 2004 ) . Designing web portals in intergenerational teams : Two prototype portals for elementary school students . Journal of theAmerican Society for Information Science and Technology , 55 ( 13 ) , 1140 – 1154 . Large , A . , Beheshti , J . , Nesset , V . , & Bowler , L . ( 2005 ) . Web portal char - acteristics : Children as designers and evaluators . Data , Information , and KnowledgeinaNetworkedWorld . ProceedingsoftheAnnualConference of the CanadianAssociation for Information Science . RetrievedApril 28 , 2009 , from http : / / www . cais - acsi . ca / proceedings / 2005 / large _ 2005 . pdf Large , A . , Beheshti , J . , Nesset , V . , & Bowler , L . ( 2006 ) . Web portal design guidelines as identiﬁed by children through the processes of design and evaluation . Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , Austin , TX . Retrieved July 16 , 2008 , from http : / / eprints . rclis . org / archive / 00008034 Large , A . , Beheshti , J . , Nesset , V . , & Bowler , L . ( 2007 ) . Children’s repre - sentations of taxonomic categories for application in a web portal : An exploratory study . Information Sharing in a Fragmented World : Cross - ing Boundaries . Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Canadian Association for Information Science . Retrieved March 12 , 2009 , from http : / / www . cais - acsi . ca / proceedings / 2007 / large _ 2007 . pdf Large , A . , Beheshti , J . , & Rahman , T . ( 2002 ) . Design criteria for children’s web portals : The users speak out . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 53 ( 2 ) , 79 – 94 . Large , A . , Nesset , V . , Beheshti , J . , & Bowler , L . ( 2006 ) . “Bonded design : ” A novel approach to intergenerational information technology design . Library and Information Science Research , 28 ( 1 ) , 64 – 82 . Lau , A . , & Vande Moere , A . ( 2007 ) . Towards a model of information aes - thetics in information visualization . Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Information Visualization ( pp . 87 – 92 ) . Zurich : IEEE . Retrieved April 28 , 2009 , from http : / / web . arch . usyd . edu . au / ∼ andrew / publications / iv07 . pdf Lindgaard , G . , & Dudek , C . ( 2003 ) . What is this evasive beast we call user satisfaction ? Interactive Computing , 15 ( 3 ) , 429 – 452 . Nation , D . A . , Plaisant , C . , Marchionini , G . , & Komlodi , A . ( 2003 ) . Visual - izing websites using a hierarchical table of contents browser : WebTOC . In B . B . Bederson & B . Shneiderman ( Eds . ) , The craft of information visualization : Readings and reﬂections ( pp . 199 – 210 ) . San Francisco : Kaufmann . Ngo , D . , & Byrne , J . G . ( 2001 ) . Another look at a model for evaluating interface aesthetics . International Journal of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science , 11 , 515 – 535 . Ngo , D . C . L . , Teo , L . S . , & Byrne , J . G . ( 2003 ) . Modellinginterfaceaesthetics . Information Sciences , 152 , 25 – 46 . Norman , D . A . ( 2004 ) . Emotional design : Why we love ( or hate ) everyday things . NewYork : Basic Books . Parr , C . S . , Lee , B . , Campbell , D . , & Bederson , B . ( 2004 ) . Visualizations for taxonomic and phylogenetic trees . Bioinformatics , 20 ( 17 ) , 2997 – 3004 . Parizotto - Ribeiro , R . , & Hammond , N . ( 2004 ) . What is aesthetics anyway ? Investigating the use of the design principles . In O . W . Bertelsen , M . G . Petersen , & S . Pold ( Eds . ) , Aesthetic approaches to human – computer interaction : Proceedings of the NordiCHI 2004 Workshop ( pp . 37 – 40 ) . Aarhus , Denmark : University of Aarhus . Purchase , H . , Allder , J . A . , & Carrington , D . ( 2002 ) . Metrics for graph drawing aesthetics . Journal of Visual Languages and Computing , 13 , 501 – 516 . Robertson , G . G . , Mackinlay , J . D . , & Card , S . K . ( 1991 ) . Cone trees : Ani - mated 3D visualizations of hierarchical information . In S . P . Robertson , G . M . Olson , & J . S . Olson ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’91 ) ( pp . 189 – 194 ) . NewYork : ACM Press . Sacco , G . M . ( 2006 ) . Dynamic taxonomies and guided searches . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 57 ( 6 ) , 792 – 796 . Schacter , J . , Chung , G . , & Dorr , A . ( 1998 ) . Children’s Internet searching on complex problems : Performance and process analysis . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 49 , 840 – 849 . Shenton , A . , & Dixon , P . ( 2004 ) . How do youngsters use public libraries to ﬁnd non - ﬁction books ? The results of a recent research study . Public Library Quarterly , 23 ( 3 / 4 ) , 77 – 98 . Shneiderman , B . ( 1992 ) . Tree visualization with tree maps : A 2D space ﬁlling approach . ACM Transactions on Graphics , 11 ( 1 ) , 92 – 99 . Tractinsky , N . ( 1997 ) . Aestheticsandapparentusability : Empiricallyassess - ing cultural and methodological issues . In S . Pemberton ( Ed . ) , Human factors in computing systems . Proceedings of the CHI ’97 Conference , SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’97 ) ( pp . 115 – 122 ) . NewYork : ACM Press . Viegas , F . B . , Wattenberg , M . , van Ham , F . , Kriss , J . , & McKeon , M . ( 2007 ) . Many eyes : A site for visualization at Internet scale . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 13 , 1121 – 1128 . Wallace , R . M . , Kupperman , J . , & Krajcik , J . ( 2000 ) . ScienceontheWeb : Stu - dents online in a sixth - grade classroom . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 9 ( 1 ) , 75 – 104 . Ware , C . ( 2004 ) . Information visualization : Perception for design ( 2nd ed . ) . San Francisco : Kaufmann . Ware , C . , Purchase , H . , Colpoys , L . , & McGill , M . ( 2002 ) . Cognitive measures of graph aesthetics . Information Visualization , 1 ( 2 ) , 103 – 110 . Watson , J . S . ( 1998 ) . “If you don’t have it , you can’t ﬁnd it . ”A close look at students’perceptionsofusingtechnology . JournaloftheAmericanSociety for Information Science , 49 ( 11 ) , 1024 – 1036 . 1822 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2009 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi