HCI , Civic Engagement & Trust Mike Harding , Bran Knowles , Nigel Davies , Mark Rounceﬁeld Lancaster University Lancaster , Lancashire , UK hardingm @ comp . lancs . ac . uk , branknowles9 @ gmail . com , nigel @ comp . lancs . ac . uk , m . rounceﬁeld @ lancaster . ac . uk ABSTRACT There is a widespread belief that pervasive technologies will encourage and facilitate partnerships between citizens and civic authorities , enabling individuals to play a greater role in civic planning , service delivery and infrastructure manage - ment . However , at present sustained use and perceived value of civic engagement technologies remains low because the design space is poorly understood by system developers who focus almost exclusively on empowering citizens rather than adopting an informed , inclusive approach that addresses the needs of both citizens and civic authorities , and helps estab - lish trusted relationships between these different stakehold - ers . We report on an extensive study of civic engagement in the domain of public infrastructure maintenance and provide insights into the civic management processes to support fu - ture design of trusted civic engagement interactions . Author Keywords Civic Engagement ; citizen participation ; crowdsourcing ; trust ; ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 4 . m Information Systems Applications : Miscellaneous INTRODUCTION This paper is concerned with understanding and encouraging citizen engagement in civic life , and , consequently , in the de - sign of trusted interactions with civic authorities . Growing populations and increasing demands on ageing civic infras - tructure [ 9 ] make this a timely topic to explore . Two largely independent streams of research have begun to focus on these issues : ( i ) smart city programs that attempt to use pervasive sensing to monitor and understand the behaviour of cities as complex systems and ( ii ) civic engagement tools that provide citizens with technologies that enable them to play a greater role in the management and maintenance of their city . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CHI 2015 , April 18 - 23 , 2015 , Seoul , Republic of Korea Copyright 2015 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3145 - 6 / 15 / 04 $ 15 . 00 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702255 Civic crowdsourcing tools have demonstrated the potential to integrate the collective knowledge of citizens [ 1 ] , empower - ing users to take an active role in civic decision - making , ur - ban management and service delivery . Maintenance of urban infrastructure [ 17 ] , monitoring of environmental noise pollu - tion and water management highlight areas of public concern where citizens have been able to collaborate with civic work - ers . However , interest in long - term civic engagement and use ; and the perceived value of civic crowdsourcing applications has remained low , so any vision of civic authorities and citi - zens acting as partners appears a considerable distance from being realised . Here , we consider opportunities , challenges and considera - tions for the HCI community in developing technologies that facilitate more effective civic engagement by addressing two contributory factors , that we argue represent important issues currently limiting the uptake of civic technology . Firstly , the current focus on a single stakeholder group ( i . e . citizens ) rather than the adoption of an inclusive design process that addresses the complex inter - relational concerns of both cit - izens and civic authority stakeholders , and secondly , a lack of appreciation of the high levels of mistrust that exist be - tween citizens and their civic authorities . Why engage with a civic process if you believe nothing is likely to happen as a consequence ? Most civic engagement tools tend to be im - plemented on mobile devices such as smartphones making them relatively easy to prototype . However , and in contrast , designing applications for civic authorities is complex and time - consuming . Civic systems tend to need to integrate with large , bespoke software platforms used to manage city in - frastructure and hence are not typically amenable to the type of rapid prototyping and experimental approaches that have proved successful in the domain of the citizen . Such factors also lead to a lack of appreciation of the importance of trusted working relationships between citizens and civic authorities , and that understanding these relationships requires signiﬁcant effort to involve each stakeholder group in the design process . In this paper we investigate two different , but clearly and es - sentially related , issues : how to design for civic engagement and how to think about trust in ICT design in the domain of civic urban maintenance . We report on an extensive participa - tory design and iterative prototyping approach involving civic authorities , private contractors and the public . Through a se - ries of formative ethnographic studies ( including workshops & in - ﬁeld observation ) we ﬁrstly , contribute an in - depth un - derstanding of urban maintenance processes , stakeholder re - HCI for Civic Engagement CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2833 lationships and perspectives on trust . Secondly , from this for - mative analysis of stakeholder perspectives and the domain we identify design considerations to inform the secondary phase of our research , the development and evaluation of a civic engagement prototype system . Finally we provide an analysis of stakeholder experiences with the deployed system prototype , and conclude by discussing future opportunities , challenges and design considerations that we have learnt from this ( generally failed ) deployment . BACKGROUND AND METHODS Our goal in this study was to understand the complex land - scape of public infrastructure maintenance from multiple stakeholder perspectives to identify opportunities , challenges and considerations for pervasive technologies that facilitate ‘trusted’ civic engagement by design . Through our work we consider two main questions : 1 . How do stakeholders rationalise their relationships ? and , relatedly , exactly how is trust manifested in civic relation - ships and operationalised by stakeholders ? 2 . How might proposed civic engagement interactions through ICT facilitate trusted relationships ? and , relatedly , how might they be integrated and experienced by public in - dividuals , local authorities and private contractor workers ? We contribute an extensive study of the complexities and inter - dependencies that impact on stakeholder relationships in the public infrastructure maintenance domain and iden - tify pragmatic considerations for researchers developing civic engagement technologies applicable beyond infrastructure maintenance . Related Work Civic engagement refers to an individual or collective ac - tion designed to identify or address a particular public con - cern such as urban maintenance that includes activities from refuse collection , upkeep of social housing , ﬂood risk man - agement through to highway repair . To most citizens ( and indeed researchers ) urban maintenance appears as a ‘black box’ , with civic authorities seeming to make arbitrary deci - sions concerning which activities to undertake and when . It is probably unreasonable to expect citizens to know or care too much about the ﬁne details of urban maintenance , but this lack of appreciation of a complex culture ( where mistrust is commonplace ) makes it challenging for citizens to under - stand or appreciate the activities of civic authorities , and difﬁ - cult for citizens to form trusted partnerships with government authorities where mistrust and suspicion is the social norm . Current efforts to empower citizens in civic life and local authority decision - making have led to a growing number of pervasive technologies that aim to encourage citizen engage - ment . We believe that current state - of - the - art civic engage - ment technologies fall short in motivating citizens to effec - tively contribute information that civic authorities are willing to trust and act upon , and will continue to remain unpopular unless inherent aspects of mistrust that exist are addressed in the design process . This requires considering both citizen and civic authority perspectives . Citizen engagement technologies [ 18 ] [ 24 ] [ 16 ] in the domain of urban maintenance such as FixMyStreet [ 17 ] , an estab - lished commercial civic crowdsourcing mobile application that enables users to exchange non - emergency , street - level is - sue reports ( e . g . potholes , ﬂooded highways ) , demonstrate a lack of understanding of the domain and interactions they aim to support . King et al . ’s analysis of FixMyStreet from the perspective of platform developers , citizens and civic work - ers highlights that , in the majority of cases the system’s de - sign placed expectations on citizens themselves ( typically the originator of the report ) to update the status after observing that the problem had been resolved in - situ . Overall , citizens positively indicated a preference to using such a pervasive civic reporting application in comparison to traditional re - porting channels ( e . g . telephone , authority website ) , citing ease of use and time saving as key beneﬁts . However , civic ofﬁcials interviewed demonstrated scepticism , highlighting a badly executed design with concerns over accountability ( i . e . citizens can post anonymously ) and negative impact on ex - isting channels for citizen engagement . Civic customer ser - vice workers noted further concern about the impact FixMyS - treet could have on public perception of service reliability , citing reported issues that potentially go unresolved for ex - tended periods of time that may have been ﬁxed or are sched - uled for completion . Critically for our research , King et al . highlighted a need to further explore requirements across all civic stakeholders in order to better inform the design to sup - port more effective two - way citizen - civic relationships and address underlying institutional and citizen mistrust . Con - sequently , through an empirical participatory design process , we undergo this exploration and provide insights in the do - main from multiple perspectives , whilst providing pragmatic considerations for addressing the inherency of mistrust in cit - izen and civic authority relationships in the public mainte - nance domain . We have identiﬁed few related works in the literature that have attempted to undertake an empirical , participatory de - sign process to understand the complexities of citizen - civic engagement in this domain ; or that have taken a nuanced ap - proach in considering trust in the design of ICT ; or have been motivated by a need to address issues of trust . Aoki et al . [ 5 ] investigated the use of participatory sensing technologies to inﬂuence environmental authority decision - making through citizen involvement by examining key stakeholder perspec - tives , but this understanding was not applied to inform the design or develop implications for design . In our own previ - ous work we have followed an empirical approach to under - stand the design of a civic system that supports the capture of accurate , ‘trusted data’ to address domain process inefﬁcien - cies . Our work in this paper focuses speciﬁcally on facilitat - ing cooperative working relationships between civic author - ities and the public , and considers how a broad understand - ing of citizen and civic relationships can inform the design of ICT to support trusted citizen - civic relationships . Exploring trust relationships between organisations , workers and public individuals through our investigation here has highlighted a need to consider our own perspective on trust in this domain . Moreover , in this work we particularly focus on aspects of hu - man vulnerability , fear and harm as more applicable measures HCI for Civic Engagement CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2834 of trust ( Rousseau et al . [ 22 ] and Baier [ 7 ] ) and provide em - pirical examples ( speciﬁcally in relation to knowledge shar - ing ) where levels of trust manifest across both civic workers and citizens rooted predominantly in the acceptability of be - ing vulnerable to another person or organisation’s expected positive behaviours ( or ill will ) . Parker et al . examined [ 19 ] models for developing citizen trust in local civic services and argue that a focus on improv - ing service performance does not necessarily correlate to in - creased levels of civic trust , referred to as the “performance paradox” . They propose a model where trust can be devel - oped in three key areas of interaction with the citizens ( i ) per - sonal , on - going two - way interaction with civic worker indi - viduals ( ii ) civic service delivery , and ( iii ) open and transpar - ent decision - making . Through ‘unwrapping’ the ‘black box’ of urban maintenance we demonstrate how considerations for the design of civic engagement technologies can be realised to support similar models of interaction to potentially formu - late trust , particularly approaches for supporting sustainable , two - way bidirectional interaction between citizen and civic worker individuals , a requirement highlighted by King et al . Studies of trust in the context of mobile crowdsourcing sys - tems have focused primarily on approaches to quantify trust metrics and mechanisms for supporting trust management across distributed devices [ 8 ] . A number of studies have in - vestigated methods for quantifying trust ( e . g . reputation ) [ 25 ] to support optimised decision - making in pervasive crowd - sourcing systems such as Amazon Mechanical Turk [ 4 ] and GeoTruCrowd [ 13 ] . While a common feature of systems that aim to provide visualise representations of trust between peo - ple , through our investigations we demonstrate ﬁndings that highlight concern where such digital representations can act to counterintuitively erode trust in citizen - civic relationships . Civic Infrastructure Maintenance In this section we provide a brief context of urban mainte - nance describing the complex processes and stakeholder re - lationships involved . Civic authorities invest signiﬁcant sums of money in managing the maintenance of our urban areas [ 3 ] . But to most citizens , urban maintenance appears as a ‘black box’ with civic authorities seeming to make arbitrary sets of decisions about which activities to undertake leading to difﬁculties in establishing trusted partnerships . For exam - ple , consider the apparently simple case of a citizen reporting a problem with a street light in their neighbourhood . While the citizen may feel that they have performed their civic duty and submitted a reasonable report of the fault , in reality a detailed inspection would be needed to comply with the rele - vant standards ( which currently runs to several hundred pages for the UK ) . As a result , the civic authority will typically send out a trained inspector which for the average citizen appears to indicate that the authority didn’t believe their re - port . Examples of this kind of disconnect are prominent in highways maintenance , particularly in road resurfacing and road - side drainage management activities . Maintenance ac - tivities related to ﬂood risk management such as gully cleans - ing regimes involve maintenance crews periodically clean - ing silt and debris from road - side drains . Over time gullies can become overrun with silt and other environmental waste causing blockages in the drainage network . If left untreated prior to a weather event , blocked gullies can contribute signif - icantly to the development of ﬂooding in urban areas . There - fore , private contractors ( common in the UK ) are employed by civic authorities to cleanse an agreed number of gullies throughout the year . However , residents often perceive that the civic authority have not performed the necessary mainte - nance of gullies to mitigate the ﬂood risk prior to a ﬂood event taking place . In earlier work [ 14 ] we identiﬁed the complex hierarchy of organisation and intra - organisational stakehold - ers involved in the process of civic highways maintenance . Indeed , citizens are often mistaken in their assumption that their local civic authorities both manage and execute repairs . More commonly , private companies are employed to perform tasks in the ﬁeld while civic personnel manage requests from citizens and internal inspectors , schedule defects to be ﬁxed and inspect the quality of the repair work once completed . Figure 1 . Highways maintenance actors and process Areas such as highways maintenance have traditionally suf - fered from high levels of mistrust both externally from cit - izens dissatisﬁed with the quality of service , and internally amongst civic authorities and private contractors [ 11 ] . Mis - trust is demonstrated in civic working practices through ex - tensive inspections and monitoring of workers and contrac - tors . Method In order to undertake an inclusive investigation of the prob - lem domain we adopted a participatory design and itera - tive prototyping approach , engaging ﬁrstly in prior ﬁeldwork with stakeholders through a series of formative ethnographic studies ( including stakeholder workshops & one - to - one semi - structured interviews ) , and a subsequent iterative design pro - cess of civic engagement technology probes and prototypes that were evaluated through three focus groups and an in - situ user trial over an 8 month period involving local residents , civic authority and private contract workers operating in an urban area of the UK . Our formative work to understand high - ways maintenance processes , stakeholder relationships and perspectives on trust spanned a one year period involving 70 interviews with over three months of observing and shadow - ing stakeholders . Through a formative analysis of stakeholder perspectives and the domain we identiﬁed design considerations to inform the secondary phase of our research , the development and eval - uation of a civic engagement prototype system . Analysis of HCI for Civic Engagement CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2835 stakeholder experiences with the technologies deployed have allowed us to perform a thematic analysis and provide an in - sightful discussion around key opportunities , challenges and implications for researchers investigating the design of future civic engagement technologies . UNDERSTANDING STAKEHOLDER PERSPECTIVES Civic Authorities & Contractors Our ﬁeldwork with civic authorities and contractors involved informal , semi - structured interviewing ( asking about work and trust incidents ) and periods of observation ( shadowing highways inspectors or highways maintenance gangs as they went about their everyday work ) . The ﬁeldwork reported here was carried out by two ethnographers at seven different sites in the UK . Our ﬁeldwork reveals instances of how trust is achieved in everyday work ; and what sort of things produce trust and trustability or distrust and suspicion . Of particular interest was the detailed explication of the work of council inspectors and road maintenance gangs and their perception of and by the public . The ﬁeldwork provided numerous instances of trust in action , in particular of how trust is part of a developing organisa - tional relationship that needs to be maintained as organisa - tions change , acquire new staff or implement new procedures . However we found tremendous variation , and much suspi - cion , in the relationships between councils , contractors and the public . There was particular concern shown about how to effectively manage information ﬂow between ofﬁcials and the public , and how public individuals would perceive feed - back ( or lack of ) from local authorities . One council ofﬁcial when asked about trust in the council amongst the public re - sponded : “If asked , most of them would say we don’t fully trust the council . The problem is we don’t get back to the public , that’s changing this year . Or another response from a council ofﬁ - cial : Ideally Mrs Smith can come into [ the council ] walk - in centre and ask what’s happening on her street . ” When we look for trust in the ﬁeldwork we ﬁnd it manifested in various ways , some of which may be more consequential for design than others . We ﬁnd aspects of trust in people ; in their interpersonal interactions ; shared histories and so on . We ﬁnd trust too in particular processes : in systems , data , routines and various forms of technology , paperwork and computer work , through which processes are accomplished . To gain a greater understanding of stakeholder perspectives in this domain we conducted a two - day workshop with 25 participants from the highways maintenance sector including civic authority , private contractor and industry ICT providers . From this session participants identiﬁed a model and visualisation of trust that emphasised the difﬁculty in gaining trust and the speed and ease with which it can be lost , raising important design challenges for citizen - civic engagement that mediates bidirectional interaction , such as , the challenge of mitigating negative experiences to avoid catastrophic impacts on trust . Overwhelmingly participants agreed openness , and methods to support detection and early warning were essential for maintaining trust relationships to soften the impact and loss of trust if expectations were not met . In terms of factors that decrease trust the group highlighted the issue of inaccurate out - of - date or missing data . In particular , participants felt it was important to have transparency and awareness of the source and ownership of the data . Citizens’ & Local Communities Our understanding of citizen perspectives were shaped by a number of interview and focus group studies which report on in this section . National Highways Transport Survey Our ﬁrst study featured semi - structured interviews with 31 citizens who had originally taken part in the UK National Highways Transport survey [ 11 ] . The goal of the survey was to understand whether public individuals felt they could trust their local authority , and whether they trusted that ser - vices where reliable . Telephone discussions last between 15 and 35 minutes and were framed around the following ques - tions : ( i ) can you remember any speciﬁc incidents that may have caused you to trust or distrust your civic authority ? , ( ii ) is there anything more generally you’d like to say about the highways in your area and how they are maintained , and ( iii ) can you think of anything your civic authority actively does to make you trust them more ? Respondents to the ﬁrst two questions focused primarily on the negative experiences where mistrust in their civic author - ity was compounded : “Yes , basically [ the problem is ] pot - holes around the village where I live . There are hundreds of them but they [ the civic authority ] don’t seem to bother to re - pair them . I’ve contacted the council and neighbours have on several occasions . They took the details but did nothing . ” Further respondents highlighted issues around highways maintenance tasks such as salting and gritting roads dur - ing adverse weather to address safety concerns . Support - ing civic service awareness poses a particular challenge in the design of civic crowdsourcing applications that typically support a unidirectional ﬂow of information from citizens to civic authorities . Traditional crowdsourcing approaches pro - vide means for a requester ( i . e . civic authority ) to utilise the crowd to perform a task ( e . g . report an issue ) . For civic au - thorities crowdsourcing can provide a heightened awareness of urban areas they would not typically gain through their in - ternal workforce . However , it is important to consider the reverse whereby citizens are often unable to be in locations where civic authorities are actively performing work . Pub - lic awareness of council activities and understanding of civic authority constraints can help mitigate mistrust by managing citizen expectations . Responses to the ﬁnal question focused around ofﬂine ‘push’ interaction from civic authorities , and the use of promotional news - sheets to help inform the pub - lic about civic services . When discussed many respondents either did not read them or believed the information to be in - accurate . HCI for Civic Engagement CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2836 Focus Groups & Workshop We further explored citizen perspectives of trust through two focus groups and a one day workshop following a similar structure to the civic authority 2 - day workshop where we asked about the extent to which they trusted either their lo - cal council or contractors ; their opinion of the information they were given and whether they were provided sufﬁcient information about the activities of their local council . The results were not inspiring , suggesting a general level of dis - trust , both for politicians in general and for the ways in which information was presented : “the information is too generalised . . . its not always easy to ﬁnd information in detail . . . its all manipulated information . . . it doesn’t mean anything to me . . . They give you information that they want you to see and think that’s great” During the workshop in particular we found the public were much better at generating visions of distrust rather than trust . This focus on the negative somewhat reﬂects Parker et al . ﬁndings [ 19 ] that demonstrate the public are more motivated to engage with civic authorities when there is a problem or issue to address . The group discussed the negative impacts of formalising trust in a digitally measurable manner . In par - ticular , participants felt moving away from ofﬂine social con - tracts , which require trust to work , to formal indicators , which require authority and punishment erodes trust and that trust is very hard to gain but very easy to lose . The group also dis - cussed the importance of personalisation and personal inter - action when considering factors that impacted on their trust in organisations . Indeed , they highlighted examples of in - teracting with their council only to be met by an automated process ( e . g . telephone IVR systems ) or a human following a script . Participations felt less scripted , personal interaction would lead to greater empathy and capabilities to form affec - tive bonds allowing parties to better formulate relational trust . TRUSTED CIVIC ENGAGEMENT THROUGH ICT Following our formative analysis of stakeholder perspectives and domain processes in this section we identify key design considerations and describe the implementation of a civic en - gagement platform . Design Considerations Identiﬁcation , Capture and Persistence of Evidence A common theme identiﬁed through our formative studies is a need to provide accurate , attributable evidence of activities . At present such evidence is typically created through a mix of electronic workﬂow systems , paper inspection trails and citizen reports . A shared , trusted repository of evidence that could be accessed by all stakeholders has the potential to sig - niﬁcantly improve trust relationships . Individual and Institutional Entity Representation Closely related to the need for evidence is the requirement to be able to accurately attribute the source of evidence . For citi - zens and institutions accountability is critical to ensure stake - holders act responsibly when performing public activities , ac - countability also provides a means for stakeholders to assess the reliability of actions by being able to associate the ac - tion with the user entity who performed it . Without appropri - ate representation of real - world entities such as physical ob - jects , citizens , road workers or civic institutions in the digital space , delivering technological capabilities to support attribu - tion , and to allow users to build trust relationships becomes difﬁcult . Indeed , the optional registration of citizen and civic users in engagement tools such as FixMyStreet highlight this problem where information is published through anonymous identities . For civic stakeholders , this limits opportunities to form relationships with citizen contributors and restricts ca - pabilities to validate the reliability of the issues reported . Explicit Support for Transparency and Trust Management Much of our early ﬁndings indicate that supporting end - to - end bidirectional ﬂow of information between citizen and civic stakeholders is essential in order to mitigate against civic mistrust . The highways maintenance stakeholder work - shop further highlighted a need for intelligence in civic en - gagement platforms that can assess and provide early warn - ing to a trusting entity of potential problems , including fea - tures to monitor citizen - civic dialogue exchanges to mediate automated triggering of system - generated information ( e . g . detecting a citizen has not received feedback regarding a re - ported issue and sending reminders to civic stakeholders to provide a response ) . Social Communication Channels Ofﬂine opportunities for explicit social interaction and shared experiences facilitates individuals to form trustworthy rela - tionships . However , traditional online interfaces for citizens to engage with civic authorities often act to depersonalise civic engagement ( e . g . digital web forms for reporting prob - lems ) and promote relationship formulation with the author - ity rather than individuals within the civic authority . By al - lowing citizens and civic individuals to communicate in more freeform social ways increases the opportunity to understand one another , to become familiar with one another , and de - velop more effective trusted relationships when addressing a particular civic concern . Analysis of the citizen workshop also suggested that a reliance on formalised digital repre - sentations of stakeholder trustworthiness has the potential to erode trust ( citizens reacted negatively to heavily scripted in - teractions with authorities ) . System Prototype Overview Our system probe comprised three core elements ( 1 ) a civic engagement platform providing functionality to support the integration and coordination of 3rd party front - end mobile citizen reporting and back - end civic management tools , ( 2 ) a mobile issue reporting application for citizens , and ( 3 ) a web based interface for civic authorities to enable civic workers to provide real - time correspondence on citizen reports . Public Mobile Application An initial public mobile application probe was developed to allow participants involved in our early public focus groups to ( 1 ) gain an awareness of the types of civic authority informa - tion that could be shared and visualised , ( 2 ) provide a tangible demonstration of how the public could interact with such in - formation to support further engagement with managing civic HCI for Civic Engagement CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2837 authorities , and ( 3 ) discuss the interaction design to elicit fur - ther user requirements prior to an in - ﬁeld deployment . The main screen of the prototype ( Figure 2 left ) provided a visu - alisation of real - time highways maintenance activities plotted on a map . Users of the prototype could view detailed infor - mation about the status of an on - going maintenance activity including start times and estimated completion times . Select - ing a map icon provided information on speciﬁc workers ( e . g . council , private contractor workers ) involved in the coordina - tion and completion of the work , providing personalised in - formation that is not readily available to the public . Figure 2 . Initial prototype design Following on from our initial probe we updated the design and implemented a functional prototype named ‘Flooder’ that supported the reporting of events related to ﬂooding , allowing users to receive & report context - sensitive real - time updates about local ﬂood issues . The public mobile application en - abled users to view real - time ﬂood data , including forecasted rainfall and gully silt level data integrated from a gully col - lection system [ 14 ] used by the council overlaid on a map and list view . Accessing information via the map allowed citizens to view ﬂood information near to their current loca - tion . Users also had the capability to deﬁne areas of interest by providing a location that could be applied to ﬁlter the cit - izen reports they received . This second iteration of the appli - Figure 3 . Flooder / SmartStreet application cation integrated with the civic engagement platform , lever - aging enhanced features to represent public user entities ( i . e . local residents ) and store public report information in the plat - form’s open data repository , enabling 3rd party applications ( i . e . web interface for civic authorities ) to access report in - formation and provide mechanisms to communicate directly with users of the Flooder application . Furthermore , this ver - sion of the mobile application included an interaction mech - anism to ‘witness’ problems that had already been reported by other members of the public . This provided a metric civic authorities could use to prioritise issues that impacted on the greatest number of residences but also provided a means for residents to validate information reported by the civic author - ity to strengthen its trustworthiness . The constraint of only allowing the reporting of ﬂood events and the impact on the perceived usability of the application from users ( highlighted in our analysis ) led to a 3rd evolution of the public applica - tion that enabled users to report about general issues such as potholes and street trash ( Figure 3 ) . Civic Authority Report Management Interface A report management web interface component was devel - oped to provide civic operators involved in the management of public complaints and issue reporting with capabilities to view reports and communicate directly with public individ - uals using the Flooder / StreetSmart mobile application . Our early investigation into existing information workﬂows and management of public reporting highlighted a reliance on email systems to manage communications between civic op - erators and public individuals . Indeed , upon receiving a re - port , typically through telephone communication , contact de - tails and the nature of the report are forwarded onto an oper - ator given the role of handling speciﬁc types of report ( e . g . street damage , waste management ) . Depending on the nature of the report it is then scheduled ( typically after a physical assessment by a council inspector ) as a works order by the managing civic authority . Based on our insights into the re - porting process we designed a web interface that could be eas - ily accessed by multiple workers from a computer with a web browser . In particular , the web interface included capabilities to view a list of Flooder / StreetSmart reports updated in real - time , and controls in the interface to allow civic operators to update the status of reports as new information regarding a particular report became available . Each report was shown in a list view that included speciﬁc details about the report including , the issue description , cause , visual evidence , number of witnesses , the time the report was submitted , status of the report and the location of the issue reported . On receiving a report the civic operator could update the status of a particular report to one of work ‘scheduled’ , ‘started’ or ‘completed’ . On a status change instigated by the civic operator the civic interface generated a request to the civic engagement platform to notify citizen users of changes related to reports they were interested in . In addition to a notiﬁcation on the mobile application , the civic interface generated a personalised message ( including the name of the civic operator ) that gave more detailed information about the status change . HCI for Civic Engagement CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2838 TRIALS & EVALUATION In order to validate our civic engagement platform design and provide additional insight into the application domain we de - ployed the system in an area of the UK that commonly experi - ence annual issues related to ﬂooding and highways degrada - tion . In particular we wanted to investigate the ways in which members of the public encounter issues such as damaged pavements , broken streetlights or roads that have become blocked with ﬂoodwater . Indeed , it is often assumed that cit - izens choose not to report such problems - either through a lack of time or because they believe their civic authority is already dealing with the problem . Over time as issues re - main unresolved members of the public may begin to ques - tion the competency of their civic authority in dealing with issues , and begin to lose trust in their ability to deliver ser - vices . In contrast , civic authorities may be unaware of partic - ular issues or are already in the process of scheduling workers to ﬁx reported problems unbeknown to the public . Therefore , through a series of system user focus groups we aimed to gain a deeper understanding of such behaviours in reporting and sharing information through the system . The civic and citi - zen facing components were trialled over an 8 - month period with a 12 participant opportunity sample . Qualitative user feedback was gathered throughout using three participant focus groups and an online social network - ing group . The ﬁrst focus group took place prior to the ap - plication being deployed in order to understand existing atti - tudes to civic reporting . Subsequently we deployed the ap - plication , provided participants with application training and then conducted a further focus group . Based on the feedback from this second focus group , and in response to a change to the needs of the users , we created a new version of the application that we then obtained feedback on from a ﬁnal focus group . This second version of the application , called StreetSmart included other forms of data than those on the Flooder application such as roadworks and a facility for our user group to post reports . Prior to the deployment of the system , participants were given a demonstration of the appli - cation to help inform the design prior to a full user deploy - ment . Participants were asked to consider a range of ques - tions related to information sharing with local authorities and personal opinions about the initial system designs . Stakeholder Experiences & Analysis In general , participants favoured an application that was multi - functional and offered a range of information sources and functions that could be customised to their own prefer - ences . In particular , participants showed a strong will to be - come active contributors : “I think you would do . If there was a pot - hole on the road that you kept hitting . . . and all you had to do was click on an app and go pothole down our road . ” However , there was some concern about the consequences of witnessing , especially being labelled a “nosey neighbour” . We next considered the question of anonymity and asked par - ticipants if this was important to them when reporting and witnessing faults . “It would be to a lot of people . . . Depends on what it is , if it is related to a person , you wouldn’t want that person to know . . . But if it is something happening then you wouldn’t mind , and if someone knows you are a trusted person , like maybe they see your name they are going to trust it . The council would trust you so they broadcast it . If you attach your name to it then they wont think it was a bogus report . So long as they don’t send it out with your name . ” Since the mobile applications depended upon people’s will - ingness to report and witness events we enquired into our par - ticipants experiences in this regard – had they ever reported anything to the council : “some yes . . . [ Interviewer ”such as” ] . . . lights out , pot holes . Online you can report . . . I put a request in to look into speed bumps where cars were speed - ing . . . I called the number on the website . . . they told me to get other people in the community to make the same request to give it more weighting . . . but nothing has been done . . . I could call up and follow it up , but I haven’t had any letter of why or why they haven’t done anything . There is no indica - tion that it is being looked into . ” The issue of feedback seemed important to our focus group and we asked when they would expect feedback : “Within 6 months you would expect some feedback to say what conclu - sion they had come to ( speed bumps ) , but it would be good to know before . . . so there could be some kind of appeal etc . I don’t like automated responses , only as some proof to say I did send the email but you didn’t reply . ” During deployment , unusually for England , we were blessed with several months of drought . In consequence , most of the social networking group discussions concerned some of the technical and administrative details of the loaned phone and application . For example , there was some concern about the maps on the application , how much information they dis - played and how up - to - date they were . There was also some concern expressed ( repeated in later fo - cus groups ) about the sheer practical difﬁculties of posting or witnessing , in particular the need to accompany a post with a photo , given that our participants were likely to be engaged in driving a car at the time they saw a reportable incident . There were also some issues connected to the amount of informa - tion appearing on screen , how useful such information was and the extent to which this merely contributed to an overall sense of clutter . After the trial had run for a couple of months without any signiﬁcant amount of rain , we held a focus group to share and discuss participant experiences . Unfortunately , and despite our participants enthusiasm for the trial , no ﬂood - ing had been witnessed . Another particularly signiﬁcant factor that impacted strongly on the trial was the difﬁculty in recruiting champions within the civic authorities . Despite signiﬁcant enthusiasm , a series of personnel changes and operational challenges meant that even when our participants witnessed events there was no - one in the council to respond . It is clear that this impacted on our participants and the trial , diminishing , to an extent , some of the strong initial enthusiasm . That said there remained a signiﬁcant level of support for the study and many of the com - ments at the focus group concerned ways in which particular features of the application could be improved . Although the HCI for Civic Engagement CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2839 application was considered easy to use and very user friendly there were some suggestions for improvements : “its quite hard if you want to be quick . . . to put an exact location . . . By the time you press it you could be 3 - 4 miles away , you want to do it , especially if you have to stop your car or something like that , it could be a bit away . . . so you want a couple of ways of notifying of when there is a ﬂood . . . One where you can just press on the location and then write a report and another one where you can’t do that because your driving at the time but when you stop further up the road you want to pin point it more accurately” “ . . . or just use . . . my location and have a drop down of reports instead of ﬁlling it in yourself have an automatic one that is already ﬁlled in so you just then go back and edit it later on . . . So you could do that and go . . . oh theres ﬂooding here with a drain . . . and then give a description of what it is when you’ve stopped the car” Reﬂecting earlier comments on their distrust of politicians in general there was also some discussion concerning the whole subject of trust and whether and how it might be impacted by using the application and the response of the council . “ . . . Im not very political , but if you don’t trust the council , just because they’re posting on the app it doesn’t mean they’re trustworthy . The app doesn’t make any difference . ” The second half of the trial involved the StreetSmart applica - tion . We held a ﬁnal focus group with our participants who generally considered the application a good idea and an easy method of communicating problems to the council and mak - ing the public aware of problems . In particular the variety of topics that were reportable using StreetSmart were consid - ered an advantage over the more limited reporting options of Flooder . Users reported a broad range of issues from the usual ﬂooding , blocked drains and standing water to ﬂy tipping and public disorder . However , much of the focus group discussion was dominated by reports of technical issues such as difﬁcul - ties of reporting whilst travelling ( so that occasionally people would make a report , of standing water or a blocked drain for example , and accompany it with a picture of something entirely unrelated ) . Other technical issues raised by our participants included oc - casional poor signal issues ; that the map would not always provide an accurate indication of their location since it was not always up - to - date with regard to street names ( this was explained as an issue with Apple maps ) and unnecessarily cluttering the map . Finally , and perhaps most signiﬁcantly , one persistent and de - motivating gripe from our participants was the lack of any feedback from the council via the sys - tem . There was little feedback noted , or indication that issues had been scheduled to reassure participants that someone was listening , and that their efforts were not entirely fruitless . DISCUSSION Patrick et al . in ‘Designing systems that people will trust’ [ 20 ] argue that ‘online users have to develop the knowledge needed to make good trust decisions , and developers must support them by making trustable designs’ and give some speciﬁc advice , six lessons , to developers who want to build a trusted service . We have considered their advice and the extent to which it might be applicable to citizen engagement services as revealed in our research . Some , such as ease of use characteristics and reducing uncertainty seem important to almost any design ; others seem especially relevant to our experiences and interest in ‘trust’ , most obviously that ‘exter - nal factors or context that may seem to be unrelated to the situation can affect trust’ and , most importantly that , ‘trust probably develops in stages . In the ﬁrst stage , superﬁcial in - terface properties , such as colours and designs , can have a large effect on initial trust decisions . Later , users may make trust decisions based on more reasoned analysis of informa - tion’ suggesting that our application may ultimately prove successful . In these ﬁnal sections , we use our broad under - standing of stakeholder experiences both within the domain and with our prototype technologies to formulate a number of common themes around key opportunities , challenges and implications for researchers investigating the design of future civic engagement technologies . Understanding both citizens and civic authorities fears & vul - nerabilities While there are a number of current commercial civic en - gagement applications available [ 17 ] [ 6 ] [ 16 ] , we would ar - gue that in most cases such systems do not prioritise trust relationship formulation as a key requirement during design ; or evaluate empirically the impact of such technologies on stakeholder perspectives towards trust . What emerged in both our initial ﬁeld studies and in the evaluation of our proto - type engagement technology was the extent of longstanding mistrust , even cynicism , between the stakeholders , with the civic authority fearing litigation and the public anticipating disinterest and inaction from the authorities ; and how quickly and easily trust and eager anticipation could change to mis - trust and suspicion . As researchers we needed to both un - derstand and manage this difﬁcult situation , hence our em - phasis on a holistic approach . Interviews with both citizens and civic workers evinced a general under - current of fear and vulnerability in the sharing of information and knowledge in a civic context . Commonly , civic workers expressed concerns of publicising internal activities because of fear of litigation , while public individuals worried over how their information would be used both by their civic authority and other mem - bers of the public . Clearly , understanding such vulnerabili - ties is essential to ensure stakeholders can reasonably begin to trust each other ( Baier [ 7 ] ) . Integrating with corporate I . T solutions While citizen applications may be effectively deployed as small mobile applications , systems designed for civic author - ities require integration with much larger corporate I . T sys - tems and workﬂows , and this represents a signiﬁcant obsta - cle to innovation . Indeed our integration with two civic plat - forms ( including a works orders platform ) was constrained to a unidirectional ﬂow of information from the civic plat - forms to our civic engagement platform . Clearly , to support greater integration between public facing and civic solutions - civic authorities must consider how such systems are opened to enable the utilisation of new forms of information gathered HCI for Civic Engagement CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2840 and shared through public civic engagement tools that deliver more effective civic engagement experiences . Supporting feedback , transparency & activity awareness All of our stakeholder engagement exercises highlighted the frustration that the different stakeholders felt with the lack of feedback and transparency in most maintenance systems . In our case , even though we recognised its importance in de - veloping and maintaining trusted relationships , the lack of feedback and transparency was largely unrelated to the tech - nology but instead a product of political and organisational factors over which we had no control . A recurring observa - tion from our ﬁeldwork and evaluation study was the lack of appreciation amongst the different stakeholders of the chal - lenges each faces . For example in most cases it was a surprise to several participants that their local civic authority did not actually perform work in the ﬁeld but outsourced work to sev - eral contractors , and therefore their suspicion of ‘the council’ was often entirely misplaced . New working practices & civic decision strategies Previous work [ 14 ] has demonstrated the impact of new tech - nology on working practices in urban maintenance . Our de - ployment of technology highlighted the challenges civic au - thorities face in adapting to new levels of citizen interaction with civic processes and suggested the need for a change in working practices - to support such applications . This is not just a concern for the contractor and authority stakeholders since citizens would also need to accustom themselves to changes in everyday working practices . A related common theme through our analysis with citizens is a perceived dis - connect between work activities observed in the ﬁeld ( e . g . re - turning to a particular area multiple times to repair potholes ) and a general lack of understanding of internal organisational decision strategies , processes and contractual constraints . To date these points have not been considered during the de - velopment of civic engagement tools and yet our research suggests that all of these are crucial to the creation of success - ful systems . Understanding and then operationalising trust in systems or trust in applications is difﬁcult , as Thatcher et al [ 23 ] indicate . Unlike Goncalves et al [ 10 ] we were not es - pecially motivated to explore psychological aspects of citizen engagement or disengagement but note their comment that ‘a successful system should allow citizens to easily express the details of the service changes they desire , this is not enough on its own , and citizens require additional motivation to ac - tively participate’ . In evaluating our civic engagement application , and its rel - ative failure , aspects of Grudin’s [ 12 ] classic analyses of why applications fail seem appropriate . With the loss of our ‘champion’ the council’s priorities were attuned to more ob - vious ‘political’ considerations . As one of our contractors said in regard to ‘smart gully services’ ( where only selected gullies are cleaned ) “the problem with the council is that the guy who was most interested has left . . . the drainage engineer said , no , we’re cleaning them all . . . I can understand why . . . autumn comes , the leaves fall and we get blocked gullies . . . if a gully sucker pulled up in a street and only cleaned one they’d ( the public ) all be on the phone” Success might have been more likely had we recruited a greater number of users - what Grudin terms ‘critical mass’ - and we could have thought more carefully about the adoption and deployment process , ( although nobody could have pre - dicted the drought ) . Certainly it could be suggested that our civic engagement application was a technical success but an organisational failure , that is , there was a need for a clearer understanding of the necessary support within the council for implementing and managing change . As Akamavi et al [ 2 ] suggest , civic engagement presents both organisations and in - dividuals with opportunities for sharing knowledge but any success is dependent on an organisational culture and trust that supports knowledge sharing . The relative failure of civic authorities to actively engage with the system underlines our much broader argument that designing for civic engagement requires a much more complex view of trust , including how it is manifested in everyday interaction and relationships within and between the different stakeholders as well as ‘through’ the technology . CONCLUSION This paper considers two different , but clearly and essentially related , issues : how to design for civic engagement and how to think about trust in IT design . There is a clear thread in research and analysis that points to technology as foster - ing and encouraging social detachment and disengagement , as in Putnam’s famous concerns about “bowling alone” [ 21 ] . This paper has pursued a rather different research agenda to consider the ways in which technology might contribute to increasing citizen engagement . This is based on a reason - able belief that we are heading towards a future that will increasingly involve partnerships between citizens and civic authorities to enable individuals to become more engaged in civic planning , service delivery and infrastructure manage - ment . But this application domain is poorly understood by most system designers who focus almost exclusively on em - powering citizens rather than considering the needs of both citizens and civic authorities and establishing trusted relation - ships between these stakeholders . Our analysis of the trust relationship between the different stakeholders highlights is - sues that appear crucial to fostering civic engagement , issues that are integral to but go well beyond the initial design of the technology to include its deployment and evaluation . In this paper we have provided detailed insights into civic management processes that we believe will beneﬁt developers of future civic engagement systems . Based on these insights we have described the design , implementation and evalua - tion of an open engagement platform to support experiments with two - way dialogues across mobile citizen and back - end civic technologies used to support a civic - engagement tool that has provided further insights into the domain of citizen - civic engagement . Olphert et al . suggest that e - government development is typically ‘characterised by a techno - centric approach with minimal engagement of citizens’ and conse - quently advocate a participatory approach ‘providing citizens with the necessary skills and capabilities to engage effectively offers the key to the successful development of systems such as e - government which impact our lives in the 21st century Information Society’ [ 15 ] . HCI for Civic Engagement CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2841 Our research suggests that part of that participatory approach involves understanding user notions of trust , as part of the de - sign , co - design and re - design of trusted technologies to sup - port civic engagement . This paper has been concerned with exactly this issue of how technology can be designed , devel - oped and utilised to encourage and facilitate active citizen in - volvement , and how this both impacts on and is impacted by different stakeholders and different manifestations of trust . REFERENCES 1 . The Wisdom of Crowds : Why the Many Are Smarter Than the Few . James Surowiecki , 2005 . 2 . Akamavi , N . , and Kimble , C . Knowledge sharing and computer supported collaborative work : the role of organisational culture and trust . In Proceedings of the 10th Conference of the United Kingdom Academy of Information Systems , Citeseer ( 2005 ) , 22 . 3 . Alliance , A . I . Annual local authority road maintenance ( alarm ) survey 2014 . http : / / www . asphaltindustryalliance . com / images / library / files / ALARM _ Survey _ 2014 . pdf . 4 . Amazon . Amazon mechanical turk website . https : / / www . mturk . com / . 5 . Aoki , P . M . , Honicky , R . J . , Mainwaring , A . , Myers , C . , Paulos , E . , Subramanian , S . , and Woodruff , A . A vehicle for research : Using street sweepers to explore the landscape of environmental community action . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’09 , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 2009 ) , 375 – 384 . 6 . Association , A . P . Nyc 311 - issue reporting mobile application . http : / / www1 . nyc . gov / connect / applications . page . Accessed : 2014 - 07 - 26 . 7 . Baier , A . Trust and antitrust . Ethics 96 , 2 ( 1986 ) , 231 – 260 . 8 . El Husseini , A . , M’hamed , A . , El Hassan , B . , and Mokhtari , M . Trust - based authentication scheme with user rating for low - resource devices in smart environments . Personal Ubiquitous Comput . 17 , 5 ( June 2013 ) , 1013 – 1023 . 9 . for an Urban Future , C . Caution ahead : Overdue nvestments for new york’s aging infrastructure . http : / / nhtsurvey2013 . econtrack . co . uk , March 2014 . 10 . Gonc¸alves , J . , Kostakos , V . , Karapanos , E . , Barreto , M . , Camacho , T . , Tomasic , A . , and Zimmerman , J . Citizen motivation on the go : The role of psychological empowerment . Interacting with Computers ( 2013 ) , iwt035 . 11 . Group , N . S . S . National highways public satisfaction survey . http : / / nhtsurvey2013 . econtrack . co . uk . 12 . Grudin , J . Why cscw applications fail : problems in the design and evaluationof organizational interfaces . In Proceedings of the 1988 ACM conference on Computer - supported cooperative work , ACM ( 1988 ) . 13 . Kazemi , L . , Shahabi , C . , and Chen , L . Geotrucrowd : Trustworthy query answering with spatial crowdsourcing . In Proceedings of the 21st ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems , SIGSPATIAL’13 , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 2013 ) , 314 – 323 . 14 . Knowles , B . , Harding , M . , Blair , L . , Davies , N . , Hannon , J . , Rounceﬁeld , M . , and Walden , J . Trustworthy by design . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work Social Computing , CSCW ’14 , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 2014 ) , 1060 – 1071 . 15 . Olphert , C . W . , and Damodaran , L . Citizen participation and engagement in the design of e - government services : The missing link in effective ict design and delivery . J . AIS 8 , 9 ( 2007 ) . 16 . openPlans Organisation . Open311 civic issue tracking speciﬁcation . http : / / open311 . org / . 17 . openSociety . Fix my street website . http : / / www . fixmystreet . com / . 18 . Org . , N . Neat streets website . www . neatstreets . com . au . 19 . Parker , S . , Spires , P . , Farook , F . , and Mean , M . State of Trust - How to Build Better Relationships Between Councils and the Public . Demos , 2008 . 20 . Patrick , A . , Marsh , S . , Briggs , P . , et al . Designing systems that people will trust . 21 . Putnam , R . D . Bowling Alone : The Collapse and Revival of American Community . Simon & Schuster , New York , 2000 . 22 . Rousseau , D . M . , Sitkin , S . B . , Burt , R . S . , and Camerer , C . Not so different after all : A cross - discipline view of trust . Academy of Management Review 23 ( 1998 ) . 23 . Thatcher , J . B . , Carter , M . , Li , X . , and Rong , G . A classiﬁcation and investigation of trustees in b - to - c e - commerce : General vs . speciﬁc trust . Communications of the Association for Information Systems 32 ( 2013 ) . 24 . Tsampoulatidis , I . , Ververidis , D . , Tsarchopoulos , P . , Nikolopoulos , S . , Kompatsiaris , I . , and Komninos , N . Improvemycity : An open source platform for direct citizen - government communication . In Proceedings of the 21st ACM International Conference on Multimedia , MM ’13 , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 2013 ) , 839 – 842 . 25 . Yu , H . , Shen , Z . , Miao , C . , and An , B . A reputation - aware decision - making approach for improving the efﬁciency of crowdsourcing systems . In Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi - agent Systems , AAMAS ’13 ( Richland , SC , 2013 ) , 1315 – 1316 . HCI for Civic Engagement CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2842