The EMBO Journal Vol . 17 No . 4 pp . 967 – 976 , 1998 In mouse brain proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II associate with regulators of the endocytic pathway and actin assembly Walter Witke 1 , Alexander V . Podtelejnikov 2 , Alessia Di Nardo , James D . Sutherland , Christine B . Gurniak , Carlos Dotti 3 and Matthias Mann 2 Mouse Biology Programme , EMBL , Monterotondo / Rome , Italy , 2 Protein & Peptide Group , EMBL , Heidelberg and 3 Cell Biology Programme , EMBL , Heidelberg , Germany 1 Corresponding author e - mail : witke @ embl - heidelberg . de Proﬁlins are thought to be essential for regulation of actin assembly . However , the functions of proﬁlins in mammalian tissues are not well understood . In mice proﬁlin I is expressed ubiquitously while proﬁlin II is expressed at high levels only in brain . In extracts from mouse brain , proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II can form complexes with regulators of endocytosis , synaptic vesicle recycling and actin assembly . Using mass spec - trometry and database searching we characterized a number of ligands for proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II from mouse brain extracts including dynamin I , clathrin , synapsin , Rho - associated coiled - coil kinase , the Rac - associated protein NAP1 and a member of the NSF / sec18 family . In vivo , proﬁlins co - localize with dynamin I and synapsin in axonal and dendritic processes . Our ﬁndings strongly suggest that in brain proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II complexes link the actin cytoskeleton and endocytic membrane ﬂow , directing actin and clathrin assembly to distinct membrane domains . Keywords : actin cytoskeleton / endocytosis / MALDI / phosphoinositides / proﬁlin ligands Introduction The actin - binding protein proﬁlin is thought to be a key regulator of actin polymerization in cells . Proﬁlin binds to G - actin in a 1 : 1 complex and thereby sequesters monomeric actin . Upon binding to actin monomers , proﬁ - lin acts as a nucleotide exchange factor , charging actin with ATP ( Mockrin and Korn , 1980 ; Goldschmidt et al . , 1992 ) . The only known physiological compounds able to release actin from the proﬁlin – actin complex are phospho - inositides ( Lassing and Lindberg , 1985 ) . Proﬁlin binds PtdInsP 2 with high afﬁnity and is able to inhibit the non - tyrosine - phosphorylated form of phospholipase C - γ suggesting that proﬁlin might also play a role in signal transduction through tyrosine kinases and phospholipids ( Goldschmidt et al . , 1990 ) . In recent years it has become clear that in vivo proﬁlin does not solely act as a sequestering protein for G - actin . Kinetic studies of actin polymerization have shown that proﬁlin can actually accelerate actin ﬁlament growth if © Oxford University Press 967 new free barbed ﬁlament ends are formed ( Pantaloni and Carlier , 1993 ) . This ﬁnding suggests that in vivo proﬁlin might be essential to promote actin polymerization . Over - expression of human proﬁlin I in CHO cells leads to an increase of ﬁlamentous actin in cells further supporting a role of proﬁlin for promoting actin polymerization rather than inhibiting it ( Finkel et al . , 1994 ) . Besides actin , proﬁlin binds with high afﬁnity to poly - L - proline stretches . This suggested that in vivo proﬁlin binds to proline - rich proteins and serves other functions beside actin binding . Recently , the proline - rich ligands VASP ( Reinhard et al . , 1995 ) , MENA ( Gertler et al . , 1996 ) , diaphanous ( Watanabe et al . , 1997 ) and the ARP2 / 3 complex ( Machesky et al . , 1994 ) were shown to associate with proﬁlin . VASP , MENA and ARP2 / 3 ( Welch et al . , 1997 ) have been found in the listeria actin tails and focal contacts and are thought to play a role in recruiting proﬁlin – actin to the site of actin polymerization at the bacteria as well as in the cell . However , it is not clear what the functions of proﬁlins are in mammalian tissues . In mammals two proﬁlins are encoded on different genes ( Kwiatkowski and Bruns , 1988 ; Honore et al . , 1993 ) . Based on RNA levels the expression of human proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II appears to be somewhat complementary with proﬁlin I being highly expressed in all tissues except skeletal muscle , heart and brain , while proﬁlin II is highly expressed in brain , skeletal muscle and kidney ( Honore et al . , 1993 ) . The biochemical properties of recombinant human proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II are very similar with respect to PtdInsP 2 and poly - L - proline - binding but the afﬁnity for actin is 4 - to 5 - fold increased for human proﬁlin I compared with human proﬁlin II ( Gieselmann et al . , 1995 ) . Using different binding assays , Lambrechts and co - workers ( 1997 ) found a higher afﬁnity of bovine proﬁlin II for PtdInsP 2 compared with proﬁlin I . Furthermore , bovine proﬁlin II appears to have a higher afﬁnity for the proﬁlin ligand VASP than bovine proﬁlin I ( Lambrechts et al . , 1997 ) . The study presented here aims to elucidate the general functions of proﬁlins in mammalian tissues and proﬁlin II - speciﬁc activities in brain . Using proﬁlin I - and proﬁlin II - speciﬁc antibodies we demonstrate that proﬁlin II is highly expressed in mouse brain while proﬁlin I is expressed ubiquitously in mouse tissues . We report that mouse proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II can form different com - plexes with proteins from mouse brain extracts . The components of the complexes were identiﬁed by high accuracy MALDI mass spectrometry followed by database searching . The components of these complexes are proteins involved in endocytosis and synaptic recycling and effector proteins of the Rac and Rho signaling pathway . In vivo , proﬁlin II and dynamin I co - localize at vesicular structures in primary hippocampal neurons , supporting the idea that in vivo the proﬁlin complexes exist and might play a role W . Witke etal . in recruiting actin during endocytosis and synaptic vesicle recycling . Results ProﬁlinIIismainlyexpressedinmousebrain The tissue distribution of proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II protein has not been investigated yet . Northern blot analysis with RNA from human tissues showed that proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II have a somewhat complementary expression pattern , with proﬁlin II expression being high in brain , skeletal muscle and kidney ( Honore et al . , 1993 ) . We raised antibodies speciﬁc for proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II and compared the relative expression of protein in different mouse tissues . Using these antibodies we can show that proﬁlin I is expressed at high levels in most tissues except skeletal muscle while proﬁlin II is expressed predominantly in brain , and at lower levels in skeletal muscle , uterus and kidney ( Figure 1 ) . Proﬁlin I is expressed in brain as well at relatively high level . Therefore , proﬁlin II is not just the brain proﬁlin isoform but might rather serve a yet unknown brain - speciﬁc function which involves other ligands beside actin . We decided to approach the question of the brain - speciﬁc functions of proﬁlins by identifying the major proﬁlin I - and proﬁlin II - binding proteins from mouse brain . The isolated proﬁlin complexes should give us some clues about the actin - dependent processes in which proﬁlins are involved , and how these functions might be regulated . ProﬁlinIandproﬁlinIIafﬁnitychromatographyyieldstwodifferentcomplexesfrommousebrainextracts We used proﬁlin afﬁnity chromatography to isolate pro - teins from brain extracts which bind speciﬁcally to proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II . To test the speciﬁcity of a direct binding assay with solid phase bound proﬁlin , we passed extracts prepared from mouse brains over proﬁlin II – Sepharose and eluted bound proteins with poly - L - proline , 1 M KCl and 8 M urea ( Figure 2A ) . Poly - L - proline released seven major proteins that were recovered in larger quantity by increasing the salt concentration . Final elution with 8 M urea yielded mainly actin . As a control we passed brain extract over a mock column which did not bind any detectable protein ( Figure 2A ) . DNase I binds monomeric actin and was used to control for proteins which bind to the columns via actin . DNase I – Sepharose bound actin and several other proteins , most of which were different from the constituents of the proﬁlin II complex ( Figure 2A ) . These results demonstrate that we can isolate proteins which bind speciﬁcally to proﬁlin II by afﬁnity chromato - graphy and that the majority of ligands can be eluted with high salt . We then isolated the proﬁlin I - and proﬁlin II - binding complexes from brain using the respective afﬁnity matrix ( Figure 2B ) . The pattern of the proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II complexes from mouse brain was highly reproducible in all experiments . An important parameter for the isolation of the complex was the presence of low concentrations of divalent cations ( see Materials and methods ) while the presence of chelators like EGTA or EDTA disrupted the interactions . Although proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II are biochemically 968 Fig . 1 . Expression of proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II protein in mouse tissues . Equal amounts ( 40 μ g / lane ) of total protein extracts from several tissues and total platelet lysate ( 20 μ g / lane ) were subjected to SDS – PAGE , transferred to Immobilon - P membrane and probed with anti - proﬁlin I - and anti - proﬁlin II - speciﬁc antibodies . The antibodies are isoform - speciﬁc as shown by their reactivity against recombinant mouse proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II ( data not shown ) . similar they bind different sets of proteins from mouse brain . The predominant proﬁlin I - binding proteins are in the range of 45 , 56 , 70 , 100 and 190 kDa . The most prominent proﬁlin II - binding proteins are 45 , 70 , 100 and 130 – 150 kDa in size . Relatively few proteins smaller than 45 kDa were found in the proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II complexes . After silver staining minor protein bands could be detected around 30 kDa which were not further characterized . CharacterizationoftheproﬁlincomplexesbyMALDI A rapid analysis of the proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II complexes by conventional microsequencing would have been difﬁ - cult . Methods for the efﬁcient microanalysis of proteins by mass spectrometry are now available and their large - scale use in characterizing multi - protein complexes has been suggested ( Lamond and Mann , 1997 ; Winter et al . , 1997 ) . For the analysis , the proﬁlin I - and proﬁlin II - binding complexes were separated by conventional one - dimensional SDS – PAGE , the most prominent protein bands excised after Coomassie Blue staining , ‘in - gel’ - digested with trypsin , and analyzed by MALDI , followed by database searching with the resulting peptide masses . Using delayed extraction reﬂector MALDI , very high mass accuracy and unambiguous protein identiﬁcation can be obtained ( Jensen et al . , 1996 ; Shevchenko et al . , 1996 ) . As an example , Figure 2C shows the MALDI peptide mass map of the 100 kDa band of the proﬁlin II complex . A search of these masses in a comprehensive sequence database showed that 35 matched to calculated tryptic peptide masses of mouse dynamin I ( accession number P21575 ) with an accuracy of (cid:2) 50 p . p . m . , covering 44 % of its sequence . The complete results of the MALDI analyses are summarized in Table I . Interestingly , the protein pattern in our complexes ( Figure 2B ) is completely different from proﬁlin - associ - ated proteins that have been described in lower eukaryotes ( Machesky et al . , 1994 ) and in human platelets ( Reinhard et al . , 1995 ) . We cannot exclude that we missed the platelet - speciﬁc proﬁlin - binding protein VASP because of Proﬁlin complexes in mouse brain Fig . 2 . Elution proﬁle of proﬁlin II - binding proteins ( A ) . The high speed supernatant of brain extracts ( 100k (cid:3) g spn ) were passed over a proﬁlin II column ( f . t . , ﬂow through ) and bound proteins eluted with ~ 50 μ M poly - L - proline ( mol . wt (cid:2) 30 000 ) , 1 M KCl , and 8 M urea . As controls , extracts were passed over a mock column and a DNase I column . DNase I is known to bind G - actin . Note that most proteins eluted from the DNase I column differ from the proteins eluted from proﬁlin II – Sepharose demonstrating that the binding of proteins to proﬁlin II is not simply mediated by G - actin . Equivalent amounts were loaded for each fraction . Proﬁlin I - and proﬁlin II - binding complexes from brain ( B ) . Brain extracts were loaded onto proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II columns and the bound proteins eluted by a high salt step elution with 1 M KCl . Proﬁlin I - and proﬁlin II - binding proteins were identiﬁed by MALDI . Peptide mass map of the prominent 100 kDa protein in the proﬁlin II complex ( C ) . The map was produced of the peptide supernatant obtained after ‘in - gel’ digestion of the band with trypsin . Database search of the measured tryptic peptide masses uniquely identiﬁed dynamin I ( accession number P21575 in SWISSPROT ) . The peaks labeled by D match calculated tryptic peptide masses from dynamin I within 50 p . p . m . Trypsin autolysis products are marked by a capital T . The other proteins isolated in the proﬁlin complexes were identiﬁed in the same way . its low abundance in brain compared with the other ligands . However , using an antibody against the VASP homolog MENA we could detect complete recruitment of MENA to the brain proﬁlin II complex ( data not shown ) . Proteinsinvolvedinsignaltransductionandendocytosisarethemajorcomponentsoftheproﬁlincomplexes The major components in the proﬁlin I complex are clathrin , valosine containing protein ( VCP ) , hsp 70 , tubulin and actin . Clathrin assembles at membranes to form coated pits and subsequently coated vesicles . VCP is an ATP - binding protein with homology to the cdc48 / sec18 / NSF family involved in vesicle transport ( Frohlich et al . , 1991 ) . Interestingly , it has been shown that VCP is tyrosine phosphorylated upon T - cell receptor activation and that it can form a complex with clathrin and hsp 70 ( Pleasure et al . , 1993 ) . Large amounts of tubulin were found tightly 969 bound in the proﬁlin I complex , while no tubulin could be identiﬁed in the proﬁlin II complex . Since tubulin by itself does not bind to proﬁlin I ( data not shown ) one of the components in the complex must provide multivalent tubulin - binding sites , or the intact complex itself is required for efﬁcient tubulin recruitment . The most prominent component of the proﬁlin II com - plex is dynamin I , a protein with an important role in clathrin - mediated vesicle formation ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . Dynamin I is a GTPase that has been shown to localize to the neck of budding vesicles and to form a collar - like structure ( Takel et al . , 1995 ) . The other abundant components in the complex are HEM 2 ( Baumgartner et al . , 1995 ) , synapsin IA / B , synapsin IIA / B , Rho - associ - ated coiled - coil kinase ( ROCK 2 ) ( Nakagawa et al . , 1996 ) , hsp 70 and a protein of unknown function which we named POP ( partner of proﬁlin ) . Mammalian HEM 2 is identical to rat NAP1 ( Kitamura et al . , 1996 ) , a protein W . Witke etal . Table I . Proteins identiﬁed by MALDI mass spectrometry Accession No . Protein Mol . wt ( kDa ) Mol . wt ( kDa ) Peptide Sequence cal gel matched coverage ( % ) Proﬁlin I complex P11442 clathrin heavy chain 193 . 3 170 42 32 Q01853 transitional endoplasmic reticulum ATPase ( VCP ) 90 . 0 98 29 42 M19141 heat shock protein 70 71 . 1 71 23 38 P04691 tubulin B - chain 50 . 4 54 21 39 X13055 actin 41 . 4 43 12 34 Proﬁlin II complex U58513 Rho - associated coil - coiled forming protein kinase , ROCK 2 161 . 7 160 18 18 D38549 POP , human ORF a ( KIAA0068 ) 148 . 8 140 33 22 P55161 membrane - associated protein HEM 2 130 . 2 125 19 17 P21575 dynamin I 96 . 3 100 35 44 P09951 synapsins IA and IB 74 . 1 82 / 78 19 35 M19141 heat shock protein 70 71 . 1 71 20 29 M27925 synapsin IIA 63 . 7 67 14 35 D30411 synapsin IIb 52 . 9 55 13 28 M12481 actin 39 . 6 43 7 25 a The protein POP was found as a homolog of a human ORF ( accession number D38549 ) with unknown function . Sequence comparison of the human ORF with the mouse EST database identiﬁed a homologous EST clone ( accession number W64430 ) . that has been identiﬁed as an nck ligand . Recently , it has been shown that NAP1 is associated with the activated G protein Rac ( Kitamura et al . , 1997 ) . ROCK 2 is a downstream effector of Rho , containing a pleckstrin homo - logy domain and a proline - rich C - terminus ( Nakagawa et al . , 1996 ) . DynaminIbindsdirectlytoproﬁlinII To analyze the interactions of the individual proteins with proﬁlins we partially puriﬁed dynamin I from mouse brain , removing the other proﬁlin ligands , and performed binding studies with this fraction . Dynamin I , the major constituent of the proﬁlin II complex , binds directly and with high afﬁnity to proﬁlin II ( Figure 3A ) . Compared with proﬁlin II , proﬁlin I has a much lower afﬁnity for dynamin I ( Figure 3B ) . The high afﬁnity of dynamin I for proﬁlin II is also demonstrated by the Western blot shown in Figure 3C . More than 80 % of dynamin I could be depleted from total brain extracts by proﬁlin II – Sepharose ( Figure 3C , top ) . The proﬁlin II column completely depleted synapsin from total mouse brain extracts ( Figure 3C , bottom ) . Synapsin was also partially retained on the DNase I column because of its afﬁnity for actin , nevertheless , the elution of synapsin from the proﬁlin II column by poly - L - proline suggests that at least a portion of the synapsin is bound directly to proﬁlin II via its proline - rich domain . We further addressed the question of direct binding of proﬁlin II to the complex components by performing blot overlays with recombinant proﬁlin II . After separation by SDS – PAGE and transfer to Immobilon - P membrane , several but not all proteins in the proﬁlin II complexes were labeled by proﬁlin II ( Figure 3D ) . It is impossible to predict which of the membrane - bound proteins renature to an extent that allows proﬁlin II binding . Labeling therefore indicates a speciﬁc interaction with this protein on the membrane while no labeling in the blot overlay does not necessarily rule out direct binding to the native protein . The best example is actin which does not bind to proﬁlin II in blot overlays because actin does not renature readily on ﬁlters . In our blot overlay experiments dynamin I was the most prominent protein that could be labeled 970 with proﬁlin II in total brain extracts , the proﬁlin II complex , and the enriched dynamin I fraction ( Figure 3D ) . Western blot conﬁrmed that the proﬁlin - binding protein is dynamin I . This result further supports that dynamin I can bind directly to proﬁlin II and shows that the binding of dynamin I to proﬁlin II – Sepharose ( Figure 3A ) is not mediated by some other protein . It is notable that even in a blot overlay on total brain extract only a limited number of proteins are labeled by proﬁlin II , with dynamin I being again the most prominent . In blot overlays of the proﬁlin II complex several other proteins can be labeled with proﬁlin II . Judged by size , the labeled proteins are most likely the synapsin isoforms , hsp 70 and POP , indicating that these proteins are able to bind directly to proﬁlin II ( Figure 3D ) . Since dynamin’s GTPase activity is important for its function in endocytosis we asked whether the binding of dynamin to proﬁlin II might be nucleotide dependent . In total brain lysate binding of dynamin I to proﬁlin II – Sepharose was inhibited by about 80 % in the presence of 2 mM GTP - γ - S and 2 mM ATP while GMP had no effect on binding . This result suggests that either dynamin I binding to proﬁlin II is inhibited in its GTP form or another protein in the cytosol regulates the binding of dynamin in a nucleotide - dependent fashion . We have no explanation for the ATP effect but it is tempting to speculate that the nucleotide bound in the proﬁlin – actin complex might inﬂuence the binding of dynamin I . DynaminIandproﬁlinIIco - localizein hippocampalneurons One question is whether the interaction of dynamin I and proﬁlin II can be observed in vivo . To address this question we performed double immunoﬂuorescence labeling of polarized rat primary hippocampal neurons which were differentiated for 14 days ( Dotti et al . , 1988 ) with antibod - ies against dynamin I and mouse proﬁlin II . In mature cultured neurons dynamin I localized to vesicular struc - tures in the cell body , the axon and the dendrites ( Figure 4e and f ) . Similar dynamin I localization has been observed in situ ( Noda et al . , 1993 ) . Most dynamin I containing Proﬁlin complexes in mouse brain Fig . 3 . Dynamin I binds directly to proﬁlin II ( A ) . Dynamin I was partially puriﬁed from mouse brain to yield a visible band on a Coomassie Blue - stained gel . The enriched fraction was passed over proﬁlin II – Sepharose , and bound proteins eluted with SDS sample buffer . Approximately 90 % of the dynamin I bound to proﬁlin II . Comparison of dynamin I binding to proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II ( B ) . The dynamin - enriched fraction was passed over proﬁlin I – and proﬁlin II – Sepharose , and bound proteins released with SDS sample buffer . Equivalent amounts were subjected to SDS – PAGE and the gel silver stained . Quantitative analysis of dynamin I and synapsin I / II binding to proﬁlin II – Sepharose ( C ) . Fractions from the proﬁlin II binding experiment from Figure 2A were analyzed by Western blot with different antibodies . Most of the dynamin I and all of the synapsin I / II present in brain extract was bound to proﬁlin II – Sepharose . No dynamin I bound to DNase I – Sepharose . Synapsin I / II was also recruited to DNase I – Sepharose via actin . Note that the synapsin antibody recognizes all synapsin isoforms . Blot overlay with proﬁlin II ( D ) . Total brain extract , the proﬁlin II complex and the dynamin I enriched fraction were subjected to SDS – PAGE and the ﬁlters used for a blot overlay with proﬁlin II ( see Materials and methods ) . The left panel shows the corresponding silver stained gel , the middle panel the overlay with proﬁlin II and the right panel the staining with the dynamin I - speciﬁc antibody . vesicles also labeled for proﬁlin II indicating that dynamin I and proﬁlin II bind to the same structures in vivo ( Figure 4c , f and i ) . Proﬁlin I staining showed a similar distribution as proﬁlin II , and both partially co - localized with synapsin - containing vesicles ( data not shown ) . Dynamin I as well as clathrin are enriched in regions of endocytosis . There - fore , it is not surprising that we ﬁnd a similar distribution for proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II at these sites . Even though co - localization by immunoﬂuorescence does not prove physical interactions of molecules it clearly shows recruit - ment of the complex components to the same sites of early endocytic vesicle formation in neuronal cells and suggests a function of the proﬁlin – ligand interaction in the endocytic process . Discussion Here we describe the isolation and characterization of proﬁlin I - and proﬁlin II - binding complexes in mouse 971 brain extracts . Because the object of our study was the functional characterization of proﬁlins via their protein interaction partners , we focused on the proteins detectable by Coomassie stain which were more likely to represent stoichiometric binding partners . As the analysis method we employed MALDI mass spectrometry followed by database searching . The use of MALDI peptide mapping , which does not involve any sequencing and uses robotics in the sample preparation , allows large scale identiﬁcation of proteins , so that complexes such as the proﬁlin com - plexes dscribed here , can be analyzed in a short time . We identiﬁed ﬁve proteins in the proﬁlin I complex and a total of nine proteins in the proﬁlin II complex . Proﬁlin - bindingproteinsfrommousebrainare differentfromtheArp2 / 3complex An interesting feature of the brain proﬁlin complexes is that they differ from the complexes which have been isolated from lower eukaryotes ( Machesky et al . , 1994 ) . W . Witke etal . Fig . 4 . Double immunoﬂuorescence of cultured hippocampal neurons with proﬁlin II and dynamin I - speciﬁc antibodies . Rat hippocampal neurons were cultured for 14 days to allow them to polarize and form axonal and dendritic processes . Cells were ﬁxed and stained using the afﬁnity puriﬁed polyclonal proﬁlin II antibody and the mouse monoclonal dynamin I antibody , Hudy - 1 . Proﬁlin II was detected using a FITC labeled secondary antibody , dynamin I was detected using a TRITC labeled secondary antibody . The left row shows the background staining of the secondary antibodies alone ( a , d and g ) , the middle and right rows show the speciﬁc staining for proﬁlin II ( b and c ) and dynamin I ( e and f ) . The right row shows a process at higher magniﬁcation ( c , f and i ) . Co - localization of proﬁlin II and dynamin I is shown in ( h ) and ( i ) . Note that dynamin I and proﬁlin II co - localize at vesicular structures . In Acanthamoeba the Arp2 / 3 complex has been found to bind to proﬁlin afﬁnity columns . The function of the complex is not clear yet but yeast mutants for the Arp2 protein show a defect in endocytosis ( Moreau et al . , 1996 ) and Arp3 mutants display disorganized actin patches ( McCollum et al . , 1996 ) suggesting a function of the Arp2 / 3 complex in endocytosis . It is tempting to speculate that the proﬁlin – Arp2 / 3 complex and the brain complex described here have analogous functions during the early steps of endocytosis even though the proteins in the complexes are very different . The Arp2 / 3 complex can be isolated through several columns as a stable complex but interestingly this complex does not contain proﬁlin and only a certain fraction of this complex can rebind to proﬁlin ( McCollum et al . , 1996 ; Mullins et al . , 1997 ) . Whether the proﬁlin - binding proteins from mouse brain described here form a stable multi - protein complex or whether most of the components interact individually with proﬁlin cannot be answered yet . We can partially purify dynamin I from mouse brain which removes the other proﬁlin - binding proteins which would argue against a stable multi - protein complex . However , we would certainly disrupt such a complex during several column 972 runs if the interactions between the components are of low afﬁnity , regulated , or sensitive to dilution . In vivo and in vitro crosslinking will be an alternative method to investigate further the question of who interacts with whom . The interaction of proﬁlin II with dynamin I are particu - lar interesting . Not only is proﬁlin II preferred over proﬁlin I but in addition , the interaction appears to be nucleotide dependent . GTP - γ - S and ATP greatly diminish the binding of only dynamin I in the complex while all the other components are apparently not affected ( not shown ) . Whether this is due to the exchange of the nucleotide on dynamin I or some other regulatory factor in the cytosol needs to be shown . The ATP effect is puzzling and needs further analysis . Although we have no evidence so far , one possible explanation might be that the nucleotide bound in the proﬁlin – actin complex plays a role in regulating dynamin I binding . Proﬁlin is known to acceler - ate the nucleotide exchange on actin ( Mockrin and Korn , 1980 ; Goldschmidt et al . , 1992 ) . Another interesting observation which we would like to stress but which we cannot explain at the moment is the ﬁnding of large amounts of tubulin in the brain proﬁlin Proﬁlin complexes in mouse brain I complex . Some of the tubulin can be eluted from the proﬁlin I – Sepharose column with high salt but most of it can only be eluted under denaturing conditions ( not shown ) . We never observed binding of tubulin in the proﬁlin II complex . We also could not detect any direct binding of puriﬁed tubulin to proﬁlin I or proﬁlin II . These ﬁndings would suggest that one of the tight binding proteins in the proﬁlin I complex recruits tubulin in non - stoichiometric amounts . Aproline - richmotifbutnotpoly - L - proline stretchesappeartoberequiredforproﬁlinbinding Proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II bind to different proteins although biochemically proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II are very similar . This raises the question about the nature of proﬁlin – ligand interactions . Traditionally it was thought that only proteins with continuous proline stretches of more than eight prolines are able to bind to proﬁlins and that the poly - L - proline interaction is the sole basis for the binding . This criteria might be true for some of the known binding proteins like VASP and MENA , however this concept does not explain our ﬁndings and might not reﬂect the actual in vivo situation . MENA has been shown to bind to proﬁlin ( Gertler et al . , 1996 ) , and in our experiments MENA was almost quantitatively depleted from brain extracts by proﬁlin II – Sepharose . In contrast , ASP56 / CAP ( Gieselmann and Mann , 1992 ) , a protein which contains a stretch of 12 prolines interrupted by one glycine , did not bind to proﬁlin II – Sepharose although one would expect binding if the poly - L - proline criteria would be the only valid one ( data not shown ) . Most of the proteins we ﬁnd in the proﬁlin complexes have proline - rich domains but do not contain long proline stretches . Comparing the sequence of the proﬁlin - binding proteins we have identiﬁed , we searched for a common proline - containing motif which could explain the binding to proﬁlin . The only consensus sequence we could identify was a ZPPX motif ( where Z generally is proline , glycine , alanine , or occasionally a charged amino acid , and X preferentially a hydrophobic residue ) . This short motif alone is unlikely to be sufﬁcient for selective proﬁlin binding since thousands of proteins in the database contain the ZPPX motif . However , POP , ROCK 2 , VCP , clathrin , synapsin and dynamin contain two or more copies of the ZPPX motif in a short amino acid stretch of not more than 100 residues . Interestingly , the ZPPX amino acid motif , is similar to the SH3 - binding motif which has been identiﬁed by peptide - binding studies ( Ren et al . , 1993 ) . From sequence comparison proﬁlin cannot be recognized as an SH3 domain - containing protein but the structural folds in proﬁlin very much resemble an SH3 domain ( Schutt et al . , 1993 ) . Dynamin I and HEM2 / NAP1 are known to bind to the SH3 domains in Grb2 and Nck respectively . In this context it is noteworthy that we did not ﬁnd Grb2 or Nck enriched in the proﬁlin complexes even though they are expressed in mouse brain . One possible explanation for this ﬁnding is that proﬁlin mimics an SH3 domain which binds to the SH3 - binding site on dynamin I and HEM2 / NAP1 , thereby competing for the binding of Grb2 and Nck . Theproﬁlincomplexesinbrainsuggestaroleofproﬁlinsinendocytosisandsignaltransduction The membrane is the key structure to regulating actin polymerization in cell protrusions as well as in endocytosis . 973 How actin polymerization is nucleated at speciﬁc mem - brane sites and how membrane ﬂow is regulated during cell motility is a fundamental problem that has not been solved yet but there is growing evidence that phospholipids might trigger these events in vivo ( Stossel , 1993 ; De Camilli et al . , 1996 ) . There is also strong evidence that the early steps of endocytosis involve actin and are dependent on actin polymerization ( Salisbury et al . , 1980 ; Gottlieb et al . , 1993 ) . Whether there are completely actin independent endocytosis mechanisms and whether intracellular vesicle trafﬁcking also depends on the actin cytoskeleton is controversial . A deeper understanding of the relation of endocytosis and actin nucleation might hold important answers to how membranes regulate and catalyze these processes . The proﬁlin complexes described here physically bring together cytoskeletal elements and proteins which are known to be important in endocytosis and synaptic recyc - ling as well as signaling molecules which play a role in regulating the actin cytoskeleton . One class of molecules in the brain proﬁlin complexes appears to play a role in signaling through the small G proteins Rac and Rho . ROCK 2 , which binds in the proﬁlin II complex , is a Rho - associated kinase which is activated by Rho and acts downstream . The targets of this kinase are not well characterized . Interestingly , Rac and Rho appear not only to function in regulating the actin cytoskeleton but have also been shown to play a role in regulating endocytosis ( Lamaze et al . , 1996 ) . HEM2 / NAP1 which also associates with the proﬁlin II complex was recently shown to interact with Rac ( Kitamura et al . , 1997 ) . NAP1 was originally identiﬁed as a ligand for Nck , a linker molecule with three SH3 and one SH2 domains ( Kitamura et al . , 1996 ) . This suggests that proﬁlin II could be part of the Rac / Rho , tyrosine kinase pathway which signals to the actin cytoskeleton , however , the exact mode of action is not clear at the moment . It is noteworthy that VCP which is found in the proﬁlin I complex is one of the major tyrosine phosphorylated proteins upon stimulation in T cells ( Egerton et al . , 1992 ) . Whether VCP is also tyrosine phosphorylated in brain , what the kinase , and what VCP’s function is , remains to be shown . How could one picture the role of proﬁlin in signal transduction ? One explanation could be that proﬁlin plays the role of a negative regulator , buffering certain effector molecules which would other - wise constitutively be recruited and activated through SH3 - domain containing linkers ( Grb2 , Nck ) . Alternatively , proﬁlins might directly inﬂuence tyrosine phosphorylation pathways . The second class of proﬁlin - binding proteins are mole - cules involved in endocytosis . We showed that dynamin I is able to bind directly and selectively to proﬁlin II and must therefore be considered as a new proﬁlin II ligand . Synapsins , clathrin and VCP are other proteins found in the proﬁlin complexes which play a role in endocytosis . How could proﬁlins be involved in the endocytic process and what might be the relation to actin polymerization ? Proﬁlins and most of the binding partners are phospholipid binding proteins . Proﬁlin – ligand interaction could serve to increase the avidity for phospholipids , to target the complex to the membrane , and induce the clustering of phospholipids at the inner leaﬂet of the membrane . Thereby , proﬁlin could recruit monomeric actin to speciﬁc W . Witke etal . Fig . 5 . Hypothetical model for the function of the proﬁlin complexes . Proﬁlin – actin can interact with phosphoinositides and the respective ligands to form larger complexes at speciﬁc membrane sites . The interaction of the complexes with the membrane causes clustering of phosphoinositides into micro domains leading to the formation of a ‘signaling membrane site’ . This signaling membrane site could be a transient aggregation of a number of signaling molecules including receptors , kinases and phospholipids . Phosphoinositide islands at this spot could trigger the release of actin from the proﬁlin – actin complexes as well as local uncapping of actin ﬁlaments , leading to actin polymerization . Actin polymerization and endocytosis might act in concert in such a way that actin polymerization and network formation at the site of endocytosis stabilizes and prolongs the lifetime of the ‘signaling membrane site’ necessary in the early stage of endocytosis . sites at the membrane and temporarily increase the mon - omer concentration sufﬁciently for nucleation and poly - merization ( Figure 5 ) . These ‘signaling membrane sites’ would represent a transient aggregation of a number of signaling molecules which could include receptors , kinases and phospholipids . According to this model , the actin cytoskeleton would function as a temporary organizer of the membrane allowing signaling to persist for a period necessary to induce endocytosis . This hypothesis would explain the only transient association of actin at sites of endocytosis and would predict that the actin - dependent endocytosis is highest in areas of the cell with high actin dynamics such as rufﬂes or the leading edge . In conclusion , actin polymerization and endocytosis have many features in common . They both appear to be regulated by small G proteins , phosphoinositides modulate proteins involved in both processes , and nucleation always takes place at the membrane . We favor the idea , that this close relation of endocytosis and actin polymerization reﬂects the use of a common mechanism to alter the membrane topology , employed for both processes . Since proﬁlin I , proﬁlin II , clathrin , ROCK 2 , dynamin I and synapsin are all able to interact with phospholipids ( Lass - ing and Lindberg , 1985 ; Seppen et al . , 1992 ; Benfenati et al . , 1993 ; Liu et al . , 1994 ; Gieselmann et al . , 1995 ; Nakagawa et al . , 1996 ) , it is tempting to speculate that clustering of phospholipids , particularly phosphoinosit - ides , into local domains by the proﬁlin complexes could be a common mechanism to regulate actin assembly as well as membrane ﬂow . 974 Materials and methods AntibodyproductionandWesternblotanalysis Recombinant human proﬁlin I and a 15 amino acid peptide from mouse proﬁlin II were used to raise polyclonal antibodies in rabbits . Polyclonal antibodies were afﬁnity - puriﬁed using recombinant proﬁlin I or the proﬁlin II - speciﬁc peptide coupled to Sepharose . The antibodies were isoform - speciﬁc as shown by their reactivity against recombinant mouse proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II . Mouse tissue extracts were prepared as follows . Individual frozen mouse organs were directly lysed in 1 ml cold protein extraction buffer ( 50 mM Tris – HCl pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 2 mM EGTA , 5 mM EDTA , 0 . 5 % TritonX - 100 , 1 mM benzamidine , 0 . 5 % PMSF ) by 20 strokes in a tight - ﬁtting Dounce homogenizer . The lysate was cleared by a 30 min spin at 4°C at 70 000 r . p . m . in a TLA100 . 2 rotor . Supernatants were mixed with SDS sample buffer , heated to 95°C for 5 min and stored frozen . Equal amounts of tissue extracts from mouse were subjected to SDS – PAGE ( 15 % acrylamide ) , transferred to Immobilon - P and probed with the two speciﬁc antibodies . Signals were detected using HRP - coupled secondary antibodies and ECL reagent ( Amersham ) . IsolationofproﬁlinI - andproﬁlinII - bindingcomplexes Recombinant mouse proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II , or DNase I was coupled to CNBr - activated Sepharose ( Pharmacia ) at a concentration of 2 mg protein per ml beads . Brains from ten mice were prepared freshly and lysed in 20 mM HEPES pH 7 . 2 , 50 mM NaCl , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 by 20 – 30 strokes in a tight - ﬁtting Dounce homogenizer . The lysates were centrifuged for 1 h at 150 000 g and equivalent amounts of the supernatant cycled over the proﬁlin , DNase I or mock column . After extensive washing of the proﬁlin I or proﬁlin II column with lysis buffer , proteins were subsequently eluted with ~ 50 μ M poly - L - proline ( mol . wt (cid:2) 30 000 ) , 1 M KCl and 8 M urea . Since the majority of proteins could be eluted with high salt , the subsequent elutions were performed with 1 M KCl only . The DNase I and mock column were washed extensively and the bound proteins eluted with SDS sample buffer . Proﬁlin complexes in mouse brain ProteinidentiﬁcationbyMALDIanalysis The proﬁlin complexes were subjected to one - dimensional SDS – PAGE ( 10 % acrylamide ) , gels stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R - 250 , and bands excised . Gel pieces were washed , ‘in - gel’ reduced , S - alkylated , and proteins enzymatically degraded with trypsin using a robot system ( Ashman et al . , 1997 ) . After 3 h , digest products were analyzed by a Bruker Reﬂex Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization ‘Time - of - Flight’ mass spectrometer equipped with delay ion extraction ( Bruker - Franzen , Bremen , Germany ) . Matrix and samples were prepared using the ‘thin ﬁlm’ method as described ( Vorm et al . , 1994 ) . Measured tryptic peptide masses were searched with PeptideSearch software developed at EMBL against a non - redundant protein sequence database ( maintained by C . Sander EBI , Hinxton Park , England ) . Dynaminbindingexperiment Dynamin I was partially puriﬁed from mouse brains by DE52 and P11 chromatography essentially as described ( Gout et al . , 1993 ) , followed by a hydroxyapatite chromatography step . The enriched fraction was cycled over proﬁlin I or proﬁlin II – Sepharose , the column washed with three column volumes of PBS and the bound protein eluted with SDS sample buffer . Equivalent amounts were subjected to SDS – PAGE , and the gel silver stained or transferred for Western blot in order to analyze the binding to the two proﬁlins . To test the nucleotide dependence of dynamin binding , cleared brain extracts were prepared as described above and incubated with 2 mM GTP - γ - S , 2 mM GMP or 2 mM ATP for 10 min on ice . The binding to proﬁlin II – Sepharose was performed in the presence of the respective nucleotides as described . Equal amounts of bound proteins were separated by SDS – PAGE and proteins visualized by silver staining . The intensities of the dynamin bands were determined by densitometry . Proﬁlinblotoverlay Protein fractions were subjected to SDS – PAGE and proteins transferred to Immobilon - P membrane . The membrane was rinsed brieﬂy in NCP buffer ( 20 mM Tris – HCl pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , 0 . 05 % Tween 20 , 0 . 02 % Na azide ) and incubated overnight at 4°C in NCP , 5 % fetal calf serum , 0 . 5 mM DTT . Filters were incubated with 30 μ g / ml proﬁlin for 4 h at 4°C , washed 3 (cid:3) 10 min with NCP , incubated with proﬁlin antisera for 45 min , washed again 3 (cid:3) 10 min , and incubated with HRP - coupled secondary antibody for 30 min . After 5 (cid:3) 5 min wash the ﬁlters were developed using ECL reagent ( Amersham ) . As a control , the secondary HRP - coupled antibody alone did not yield any signal in the blot overlay with proﬁlin II . Immunoﬂuorescence Rat hippocampal neurons were cultured for 14 days to allow them to polarize and form axonal and dendritic processes ( Dotti et al . , 1988 ) . Cells were ﬁxed in freshly prepared paraformaldehyde and stained following standard protocols , using the afﬁnity puriﬁed polyclonal proﬁlin II antibody and the mouse monoclonal dynamin I antibody , Hudy - 1 ( Upstate Biotechnology Inc . ) . Acknowledgements We are grateful to F . Gertler , M . Baehler , P . Greengart and W . Huttner for the generous gift of MENA and synapsin antibodies , to L . Toldo and H . Sto¨fﬂer for help with sequence analysis and computer work , and to K . Simons , and M . Zerial for critical reading of the manuscript . J . D . S . was supported by an EMBO long term fellowship , A . D . N . by an EMBL predoc fellowship . M . M . ’s laboratory work is partially supported by generous grants from the German Technology Ministry ( BMBF ) and Glaxo Welcome PLC . References Ashman , K . , Houthaeve , T . , Clayton , J . , Wilm , M . , Podteleynikov , A . , Jensen , O . N . and Mann , M . ( 1997 ) The application of robotics and mass spectrometry to the characterization of the Drosophila melanogaster indirect ﬂight muscle proteome . Lett . Peptide Sci . , 4 , 57 – 65 . Baumgartner , S . , Martin , D . , Chiquet Ehrismann , R . , Sutton , J . , Desai , A . , Huang , I . , Kato , K . and Hromas , R . ( 1995 ) The HEM proteins : a novel family of tissue - speciﬁc transmembrane proteins expressed from invertebrates through mammals with an essential function in oogenesis . J . Mol . Biol . , 251 , 41 – 49 . 975 Benfenati , F . , Valtorta , F . , Rossi , M . C . , Onofri , F . , Sihra , T . and Greengard , P . ( 1993 ) Interactions of synapsin I with phospholipids : possible role in synaptic vesicle clustering and in the maintenance of bilayer structures . J . Cell . Biol . , 123 , 1845 – 1855 . Damke , H . , Baba , T . , Warnock , D . E . and Schmid , S . L . ( 1994 ) Induction of mutant dynaminspeciﬁcally blocksendocytic coated vesicleformation . J . Cell . Biol . , 127 , 915 – 934 . De Camilli , P . , Emr , S . D . , McPherson , P . S . and Novick , P . ( 1996 ) Phosphoinositides as regulators in membrane trafﬁc . Science , 271 , 1533 – 1539 . Dotti , C . G . , Sullivan , C . A . and Banker , G . A . ( 1988 ) The establishment of polarity by hippocampalneurons in culture . J . Neurosci . , 8 , 1454 – 1468 . Egerton , M . , Ashe , O . R . , Chen , D . , Druker , B . J . , Burgess , W . H . and Samelson , L . E . ( 1992 ) VCP , the mammalian homolog of cdc48 , is tyrosine phosphorylated in response to T cell antigen receptor activation . EMBO J . , 11 , 3533 – 3540 . Finkel , T . , Theriot , J . A . , Dise , K . R . , Tomaselli , G . F . and Goldschmidt , C . P . ( 1994 ) Dynamic actin structures stabilized by proﬁlin . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 91 , 1510 – 1514 . Frohlich , K . U . , Fries , H . W . , Rudiger , M . , Erdmann , R . , Botstein , D . and Mecke , D . ( 1991 ) Yeast cell cycle protein CDC48p shows full - length homology to the mammalian protein VCP and is a member of a protein family involved in secretion , peroxisome formation , and gene expression . J . Cell . Biol . , 114 , 443 – 453 . Gertler , F . B . , Niebuhr , K . , Reinhard , M . , Wehland , J . and Soriano , P . ( 1996 ) Mena , a relative of VASP and Drosophila Enabled , is implicated in the control of microﬁlament dynamics . Cell , 87 , 227 – 239 . Gieselmann , R . and Mann , K . ( 1992 ) ASP – 56 , a new actin sequestering protein from pig platelets with homology to CAP , an adenylate cyclase - associated protein from yeast . FEBS Lett . , 298 , 149 – 153 . Gieselmann , R . , Kwiatkowski , D . J . , Janmey , P . A . and Witke , W . ( 1995 ) Distinctbiochemicalcharacteristicsofthetwohumanproﬁlinisoforms . Eur . J . Biochem . , 229 , 621 – 628 . Goldschmidt , C . P . , Machesky , L . M . , Baldassare , J . J . and Pollard , T . D . ( 1990 ) The actin - binding protein proﬁlin binds to PIP2 and inhibits its hydrolysis by phospholipase C . Science , 247 , 1575 – 1578 . Goldschmidt , C . P . , Furman , M . I . , Wachsstock , D . , Safer , D . , Nachmias , V . T . and Pollard , T . D . ( 1992 ) The control of actin nucleotide exchange by thymosin beta 4 and proﬁlin . A potential regulatory mechanism for actin polymerization in cells . Mol . Biol . Cell . , 3 , 1015 – 1024 . Gottlieb , T . A . , Ivanov , I . E . , Adesnik , M . and Sabatini , D . D . ( 1993 ) Actin microﬁlaments play a critical role in endocytosis at the apical but not the basolateral surface of polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell . Biol . , 120 , 695 – 710 . Gout , I . et al . ( 1993 ) The GTPase dynamin binds to and is activated by a subset of SH3 domains . Cell , 75 , 25 – 36 . Honore , B . , Madsen , P . , Andersen , A . H . and Leffers , H . ( 1993 ) Cloning and expression of a novel human proﬁlin variant , proﬁlin II . FEBS Lett . , 330 , 151 – 155 . Jensen , O . N . , Podtelejnikov , A . and Mann , N . ( 1996 ) Delayed extraction improves speciﬁcity in database searches by MALDI peptide maps . Rapid Commun . Mass Spectrom . , 10 , 1371 – 1378 . Kitamura , T . et al . ( 1996 ) Molecular cloning of p125Nap1 , a protein that associates with an SH3 domain of Nck . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . , 219 , 509 – 514 . Kitamura , Y . et al . ( 1997 ) Interaction of Nck - associated protein 1 with activated GTP - binding protein Rac . Biochem . J . , 322 ( Pt 3 ) , 873 – 878 . Kwiatkowski , D . J . and Bruns , G . A . ( 1988 ) Human proﬁlin . Molecular cloning , sequence comparison , and chromosomal analysis . J . Biol . Chem . , 263 , 5910 – 5915 . Lamaze , C . , Chuang , T . H . , Terlecky , L . J . , Bokoch , G . M . and Schmid , S . L . ( 1996 ) Regulation of receptor - mediated endocytosis by Rho and Rac . Nature , 382 , 177 – 179 . Lambrechts , A . , Verschelde , J . L . , Jonckheere , V . , Goethals , M . , Vandekerckhove , J . and Ampe , C . ( 1997 ) The mammalian proﬁlin isoforms display complementary afﬁnities for PIP2 and proline - rich sequences . EMBO J . , 16 , 484 – 494 . Lamond , A . I . and Mann , M . ( 1997 ) Cell Biology and the Genome Projects — a concerted strategy for characterizing multi - protein complexes using mass spectrometry . Trends Cell . Biol . , 7 , 139 – 142 . Lassing , I . and Lindberg , U . ( 1985 ) Speciﬁc interaction between phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate and proﬁlactin . Nature , 314 , 472 – 474 . Liu , J . P . , Powell , K . A . , Sudhof , T . C . and Robinson , P . J . ( 1994 ) Dynamin I is a Ca ( 2 (cid:4) ) - sensitive phospholipid - binding protein with very high afﬁnity for protein kinase C . J . Biol . Chem . , 269 , 21043 – 21050 . W . Witke etal . Machesky , L . M . , Atkinson , S . J . , Ampe , C . , Vandekerckhove , J . and Pollard , T . D . ( 1994 ) Puriﬁcation of a cortical complex containing two unconventional actins from Acanthamoeba by afﬁnity chromatography on proﬁlin - agarose . J . Cell . Biol . , 127 , 107 – 115 . McCollum , D . , Feoktistova , A . , Morphew , M . , Balasubramanian , M . and Gould , K . ( 1996 ) The Schizosaccharomyces pombe actin - related protein , Arp3 , is a component of the cortical actin cytoskeleton and interacts with proﬁlin . EMBO J . , 15 , 6438 – 6446 . Mockrin , S . C . and Korn , E . D . ( 1980 ) Acanthamoeba proﬁlin interacts with G - actin to increase the rate of exchange of actin - bound adenosine 5 (cid:5) - triphosphate . Biochemistry , 19 , 5359 – 5362 . Moreau , V . , Madania , A . , Martin , R . and Winson , B . ( 1996 ) The Saccharomyces cerevisiae actin - related protein Arp2 is involved in the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell . Biol . , 134 , 117 – 132 . Mullins , R . , Stafford , W . and Pollard , T . ( 1997 ) Structure , subunit topology , and actin - binding activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex from Acanthamoeba . J . Cell . Biol . , 136 , 331 – 343 . Nakagawa , O . , Fujisawa , K . , Ishizaki , T . , Saito , Y . , Nakao , K . and Narumiya , S . ( 1996 ) ROCK - I and ROCK - II , two isoforms of Rho - associated coiled - coil forming protein serine / threonine kinase in mice . FEBS Lett . , 392 , 189 – 193 . Noda , Y . , Nakata , T . and Hirokawa , N . ( 1993 ) Localization of dynamin : widespread distribution in mature neurons and association with membranous organelles . Neurosci . , 55 , 113 – 127 . Pantaloni , D . andCarlier , M . F . ( 1993 ) Howproﬁlinpromotesactinﬁlament assembly in the presence of thymosin beta 4 . Cell , 75 , 1007 – 1014 . Pleasure , I . T . , Black , M . M . and Keen , J . H . ( 1993 ) Valosin - containing protein , VCP , is a ubiquitous clathrin - binding protein . Nature , 365 , 459 – 462 . Reinhard , M . , Giehl , K . , Abel , K . , Haffner , C . , Jarchau , T . , Hoppe , V . , Jockusch , B . M . and Walter , U . ( 1995 ) The proline - rich focal adhesion and microﬁlament protein VASP is a ligand for proﬁlins . EMBO J . , 14 , 1583 – 1589 . Ren , R . , Mayer , B . J . , Cicchetti , P . and Baltimore , D . ( 1993 ) Identiﬁcation of a ten - amino acid proline - rich SH3 binding site . Science , 259 , 1157 – 1161 . Salisbury , J . L . , Condeelis , J . S . and Satir , P . ( 1980 ) Role of coated vesicles , microﬁlaments , and calmodulin in receptor - mediated endocytosis by cultured B lymphoblastoid cells . J . Cell . Biol . , 87 , 132 – 141 . Schutt , C . E . , Myslik , J . C . , Rozycki , M . D . , Goonesekere , N . C . and Lindberg , U . ( 1993 ) The structure of crystalline proﬁlin - beta - actin . Nature , 365 , 810 – 816 . Seppen , J . , Ramalho Santos , J . , de Carvalho , A . P . , ter Beest , M . , Kok , J . W . , de Lima , M . C . and Hoekstra , D . ( 1992 ) Interaction of clathrin with largeunilamellarphospholipidvesiclesatneutralpH . Lipiddependence and protein penetration . Biochim . Biophys . Acta , 1106 , 209 – 215 . Shevchenko , A . et al . ( 1996 ) Linking genome and proteome by mass spectrometry : large scale identiﬁcation of yeast proteins from two dimensional gels . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 93 , 14440 – 14445 . Stossel , T . P . ( 1993 ) On the crawling of animal cells . Science , 260 , 1086 – 1094 . Takel , K . , McPherson , P . S . , Schmid , S . L . and De Camilli , P . ( 1995 ) Tubular membrane invaginations coated by dynamin rings are induced by GTP - gamma S in nerve terminals [ see comments ] . Nature , 374 , 186 – 190 . Vorm , O . , Roepstorff , P . and Mann , M . ( 1994 ) Matrix surfaces made by fast evaporation yield improved resolution and very high sensitivity in MALDI TOF . Anal . Chem . , 66 , 3281 – 3287 . Watanabe , N . et al . ( 1997 ) p140mDia , a mammalian homolog of Drosophila diaphanous , is a target protein for Rho small GTPase and is a ligand for proﬁlin . EMBO J . , 16 , 3044 – 3056 . Welch , M . , Iwamatsu , A . and Mitchison , T . ( 1997 ) Actin polymerization is induced by Arp2 / 3 protein complex at the surface of Listeria monocytogenes . Nature , 385 , 265 – 269 . Winter , D . , Podtelejnikov , A . V . , Mann , M . and Li , R . ( 1997 ) The complex containing actin - related proteins Arp2 and Arp3 is required for the motility and integrity of yeast actin patches . Curr . Biol . , 7 , 519 – 529 . Received August 13 , 1997 ; revised and accepted December 16 , 1997 976