Designing for Intersections Marisol Wong - Villacres †‡ Arkadeep Kumar † Aditya Vishwanath † Naveena Karusala Φ Betsy DiSalvo † Neha Kumar † † Georgia Institute of Technology ‡ Escuela Superior Φ University of { lvillacr , arkadeepkumar , Politecnica del Litoral Washington adityavishwanath , bdisalvo , lvillacr naveenak neha . kumar } @ gatech . edu @ espol . edu @ cs . uw . edu ABSTRACT In response to the recent call for a more intersectionally - aware ﬁeld of human - computer interaction ( HCI ) , we aim to operationalize intersectionality for technology design in HCI . We develop our lens of intersectionality by drawing on the work of Rita Kaur Dhamoon , and use it to analyze data col - lected from a multi - sited ethnographic study of seven low - resource learning environments in the Indian states of Maha - rashtra , Tamil Nadu , and West Bengal . Our research contri - butions are threefold . First , we extend conversations in In - tersectional HCI by expanding its scope from understanding users to recognizing social processes . Second , we emphasize the importance of factoring in both penalties and privileges when conducting research in underserved contexts . Finally , we engage situated comparisons as a methodology to identify pathways for designing interactive systems across intersec - tionally diverse environments . Author Keywords Intersectionality ; HCI4D ; Education ; India ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . m . Information Interfaces and Presentation ( e . g . HCI ) : Miscellaneous INTRODUCTION The growing presence , power , and versatility of information and communication technologies ( ICTs ) in the Global South suggest tremendous potential for supporting diverse domains for development , such as health and education [ 20 , 49 , 50 ] . To harness this potential , researchers and practitioners in the ﬁeld of ICTs and Development ( ICTD ) have proposed vari - ous innovative technology - enhanced interventions with some success [ 22 , 56 , 59 , 72 , 76 ] . However , technology design for diversely disadvantaged groups in the Global South tends to fall short of targeted impact [ 65 , 72 , 80 ] . One underlying rea - son is that most initiatives operate with partial understanding , at best , of the complexities of these groups’ experiences [ 16 , 50 , 73 ] . Dwelling on constraints and deﬁcits , they disregard potential that might be harnessed for realizing technosocial Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita - tion on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or re - publish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . DIS 2018 , June 9 – 13 , 2018 , Hong Kong . © 2018 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5198 - 0 / 18 / 06 . . . $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3196709 . 3196794 opportunities towards greater equity [ 43 ] . The question is still pending : how might we study these diversely disadvantaged groups to imagine ways of integrating ICTs into the broader social and cultural fabric of their everyday contexts ? We address the question above by focusing speciﬁcally on imagining context - appropriate roles for technology within di - versely low - resource learning environments ( LRLEs ) located across India . To work towards a more holistic understand - ing that factors in the realities of learners’ homes , schools , and communities [ 50 ] , we engage deeply with the lens of in - tersectionality . Thus we focus on how “the complex , irre - ducible , varied , and variable effects which ensue when multi - ple axes of differentiation—economic , political , cultural , psy - chic , subjective , and experiential—intersect in historically speciﬁc contexts” [ 11 ] . Leveraging ﬁndings from our multi - sited ethnography across seven culturally and infrastructurally distinct LRLEs in the Indian states of Maharashtra , Tamil Nadu , and West Bengal , we unpack monolithic assumptions of what “low - resource” might entail . We analyze this data using Dhamoon’s lens on mainstreaming intersectionality [ 28 ] for an enriched under - standing of the realities of LRLEs . Dhamoon’s proposal for intersectional - type analyses allows us to go beyond identi - fying power dynamics due to intersecting axes of differentia - tion such as gender , race , and education [ 26 ] to understanding the interacting cultural and historical processes and systems underlying these differences . It is in this interaction of pro - cesses , Dhamoon argues , that we can identify the penalties that individuals and communities endure , as well as the priv - ileges they mobilize to resist modes of differentiation . Us - ing Dhamoon’s method of situated comparisons , we iden - tify pathways for design based on how experiences from one LRLE might inform technology design for others . Our research makes an important contribution to the ICTD community that routinely grapples with complex sociotechni - cal environments and multiple isms or systems of domination , engages with constraints and values assets - based approaches [ 53 ] , and targets technology interventions ( but could do so more holistically ) . We also contribute to feminist scholarship in HCI by extending recently introduced conversations on in - tersectionality in HCI that have thus far emphasized reshap - ing the collection and reporting of user data [ 71 ] . Speciﬁcally , we demonstrate how investigating and comparing sites of in - teraction between penalties and privileges can unearth novel pathways for technology design . Session 1 : Trust & Responsibility DIS 2018 , June 9 – 13 , 2018 , Hong Kong 45 RELATED WORK We now situate our research in the education literature of ICTD , highlighting the need for design to better leverage the potential of LRLEs . We then describe how intersectionality assists to this end . To do this , we cover its origins and po - sition our work within ongoing theoretical debates in fem - inist scholarship . We draw upon Yuval - Davis’ practicable approach for devising intersectional policy initiatives [ 86 ] to structure and justify a methodology for using Dhamoon’s intersectional - type analysis towards holistic design decisions for LRLEs and beyond [ 28 ] . Education and ICTD Current education research in ICTD has largely focused on identifying or overcoming constraints in the learning environ - ment , such as the lack of social infrastructure ( in the form of teachers and parents ) , physical infrastructure , and ﬁnancial resources for accessing and maintaining technology [ 83 ] . For example , several studies from 2004 onwards have engaged with the constraints of rural schools in India by deploying video - based instruction , mobile - phone based language learn - ing [ 42 , 41 ] , and various technologies such as polling sys - tems [ 23 ] and ﬂash drive learning platforms [ 18 ] . Extensive work has been done on unsupervised and group learning tech - niques , modifying ICTs to overcome the cost of technology [ 48 , 4 , 38 , 39 , 62 ] . Education research in ICTD has also scaled up to overcome constraints . Breazeal et al . presented a novel platform hosted on mobile devices with a cloud back - end to deliver educational content to marginalized children in different countries , with a focus on improving low liter - acy levels [ 12 ] . Cutrell et al . explored a blended learning initiative for an underserved context , combining online and in - person instruction as an alternative to a purely online class - room [ 25 ] . In 2016 , Kazakos et al . presented the development of an interactive voice response system that enables real - time interaction and functions as a community radio [ 46 ] . While much prior research has been careful to introduce tech - nology that is low - cost and usable in underserved commu - nities , the focus on identifying constraints in learning en - vironments presents challenges . This approach can require leapfrogging on the part of students and teachers and is not al - ways sustainable [ 16 , 24 , 81 ] . Additionally , presenting more perceived constraints , such as users being slow to adopt or learn interventions due to lack of expertise or training , re - inforce the idea that users are an obstacle to adoption [ 24 ] . Compounding this perspective , multiple studies have also emphasized that a lack of social infrastructure cannot simply be overcome by the addition of technological infrastructure to ensure learning [ 5 , 33 , 60 , 83 , 84 ] . These studies certainly caution against using ICTs as a short - term solution , but also leave us with only a partial perspective of what LRLEs might afford the agency to accomplish . Focusing on constraints also prompts the question of what action designers can actually take based on knowledge of such constraints . We sought to learn how using ethnographic data that captures the everyday constraints people face and how they resist them might be a step towards a more holistic approach to integrating ICTs into the broader sociocultural fabric of LRLEs [ 50 ] . Intersectionality : from 1989 to 2018 Crenshaw introduced the term intersectionality to feminist theory in 1989 as a label for the pressing notion that critical theory and feminism should not be siloed from conversations about racism [ 85 , 86 ] . Through the decades , intersectional - ity has been taken up widely by feminist scholars across the world and in work ranging from social movements and soci - ology to electoral behavior research [ 26 , 35 ] . However , there are ongoing debates in feminist studies about the conceptual - ization of the theory itself [ 26 ] . We now carefully consider the intense debates on what intersectionality is and position our ideas about how intersectionality might be operational - ized to inform design in HCI . From its original conception , two strands of intersectionality have developed , each with different vocabularies and mech - anisms . The ﬁrst strand , used by feminist race scholars and focused on women of color , has been associated with the sys - temic approach [ 67 ] , the additive approach [ 86 ] , and the use of categories to classify identities [ 55 ] . This strand has been most popularized in the United States ( and the ﬁeld of HCI so far ) . This approach views systems of domination as hav - ing unilateral power over how people are socially divided and how they experience identities , leading to a sole focus on how identities bear oppression in the context being studied [ 67 ] . It necessitates the naming ( black , Muslim , woman ) and cate - gorization ( race , religion , gender ) of identities to divide and then add their experiences to create an intersection . The second strand of intersectionality used more generally by postmodern feminists has been associated with the construc - tionist approach [ 67 ] , the constitutive approach [ 66 , 86 ] , and critiques of categories and classiﬁcation processes [ 10 , 55 , 67 , 77 ] . This strand problematizes the notion of static cate - gories and the systems of power that get to create them ; it fo - cuses on the construction of identity and one’s ever - changing relationship to power structures [ 51 , 67 ] . In this approach , falling into a certain category does not determine one’s ex - periences or the usefulness of intersectionality ; people con - struct their identity through conveyance of their own unique experiences , which can include privilege , oppression , and re - sistance [ 67 ] . Prins suggests that , as a result , “the scripts of gender , race , ethnicity and class play a constitutive role , but never in the same way , never as mere determining fac - tors” [ 67 ] . This strand of intersectionality aligns with Femi - nist HCI and Postcolonial Computing theories , which critique the way HCI and ICTD research tends to view culture as un - changing and generalizable across individual experience and time [ 6 , 40 ] . In relating this perspective to design , the re - jection of such categorization might make operationalization more difﬁcult because there is no predeﬁned starting point ( such as categories ) for studying people’s unique experiences of identity [ 51 ] . However , we argue that this strand of in - tersectionality is apt for taking into account complexity and agency in operationalization—we align with Suchman’s sug - gestion that we can still problematize the dominant system that creates and deploys categories [ 77 ] and the idea that we can more purposefully recognize an individual’s cultural cap - ital and ability to use it in different ways over time [ 85 ] . Session 1 : Trust & Responsibility DIS 2018 , June 9 – 13 , 2018 , Hong Kong 46 As this theoretical debate continues , there has been a growing body of work in HCI , including at recent workshops [ 31 , 32 , 74 ] , that point to a burgeoning need for the operationalization of intersectionality for design . These works have looked at problems such as the design of gendered or racialized virtual agents [ 78 ] , racial bias in technology use and creation [ 37 ] , understanding technology and media consumption among di - verse children and families [ 3 ] , or how different identities ac - cess health information online [ 58 ] . Most recently , Black - well et al . ’s work on classifying online abuse point out how important it is for technology to take into account complex - ity of experience [ 9 ] . There has been work that takes this understanding of intersectionality’s importance further [ 13 , 71 ] . Notably , Schlesinger et al . ’s call for Intersectional HCI in 2017 highlighted how we might better understand and rep - resent the “user” in terms of the static identity categories they fall into , something which they show the HCI community has not been addressing properly [ 71 ] . Their work contributes to the practical application of intersectionality by engaging with step one of Yuval - Davis’ proposed four - step method - ology : collecting diverse and desegregated data about users [ 86 ] . In the next section , we detail how we aim to complete the remaining three steps ( which we have adapted for HCI ) : contextually analyze complex experiences of identity , review systems to understand their role in users’ experiences , and implement opportunities for design based on this data [ 86 ] . Designing for Intersections To operationalize Yuval - Davis’ blueprint for engaging the lens of intersectionality towards technology design [ 86 ] , we considered the scholarship of Hancock , Prins , Ludvig , and Dhamoon [ 36 , 67 , 28 ] . In particular , we sought a constitu - tive approach that would allow us to engage with rich , multi - sited ethnographic data at the individual , community , and in - stitutional levels of analysis . Dhamoon was a good ﬁt [ 28 ] ; Hancock focused on a quantitative approach that placed con - straints on the kind of data we could analyze [ 36 ] , and Prins [ 67 ] and Ludvig [ 51 ] focused only on the individual . Dhamoon formulates an intersectional - type analysis that fo - cuses on processes of differentiation ( such as racialization and sexualization ) and systems of domination ( such as racism and patriarchy ) [ 28 ] . She sees these processes as being interre - lated ; for example , imperialism cannot exist without sexism or class exploitation [ 28 ] . She also discusses how these in - terrelated processes take place at different levels ( of the in - dividual , community , and institution ) , manifesting differently at each [ 28 ] . Dhamoon emphasizes that these processes affect individuals variously—those seen as marginalized might still exercise privilege , and those seen as beneﬁciaries of systems of domination may also incur penalties [ 28 ] . This conceptual - ization serves us well because it “denaturalizes what is taken as a given , ” allowing us to go beyond studying oppression to focus on the processes and systems “in which meanings of privilege and penalty are produced , reproduced , and resisted in contingent and relational ways” [ 28 ] . Due to the various complexities in these processes , re - searchers and practitioners must deconstruct assumptions around what differentiation looks like and the impact it might have . To this end , Dhamoon recommends conducting situated comparisons [ 28 ] . This could mean contrasting how different combinations of processes interrelate , how processes unfold at distinct societal levels , or how differentiation serves to up - hold power structures [ 28 ] . Dhamoon’s approach allows us to operationalize the last three steps of Yuval - Davis’ blueprint by enabling us to ( 1 ) analyze ethnographic data that decon - structs the penalties and privileges in the sites we studied , ( 2 ) review the existing situation of the sites by comparing them , and ( 3 ) implement change through ideas for technology de - sign that account for “the different kinds of difference” across sites [ 86 ] . RESEARCH APPROACH Our research objective was to identify pathways for technol - ogy design that might stem from an enriched understand - ing of the “different kinds of difference” [ 86 ] present across the LRLEs we studied . To attain this enriched understand - ing , we chose the lens of intersectionality . We were particu - larly informed by the practicability of Yuval - Davis’ approach towards devising implementable intersectional policy initia - tives [ 86 ] . As such , our methodology consisted of the fol - lowing : ( 1 ) collection of desegregated data through multi - sited ethnography , ( 2 ) contextual analysis of the data using Dhamoon’s intersectional - type framework [ 28 ] , and ( 3 ) situ - ated comparisons across sites for imagining points of inter - vention . Below we describe our execution of these steps . Data Collection We studied seven disparate , geographically separated LRLEs in the Indian states of Maharashtra , Tamil Nadu , and West Bengal from June 2015 to July 2017 ( see Table 1 ) . To col - lect data from these settings , we chose Marcus’ multi - sited ethnographic approach [ 52 ] , which assisted us in examining how beliefs , experiences , and discourses around LRLEs var - ied ( or not ) across India . We selected our LRLEs because of the diverse struggles they face in supporting students’ learn - ing . They represent historically , culturally , and organization - ally distinct contexts—from North to South India , public to NGO - run , rural to urban , and formal to after - school educa - tional environments . Our choice was not shaped , however , by the processes of differentiation interacting with the LRLEs’ work ; these were uncovered only later , during data collection . Our ﬁeldwork included extensive participant observation and targeted interviews with teachers , parents , children , and other stakeholders present . In June 2015 , we visited the villages of Uthiramerur , Vadanallur , and Kulathakarai in the district of Kancheepuram ( Tamil Nadu ) . There we conducted par - ticipant observations for six weeks , held semi - structured in - terviews with ﬁve instructors and ﬁve staff members , and di - rectly interacted with all 60 students ( evenly distributed from third grade to sixth grade ) . From December 2015 to July 2017 , we continued our ﬁeldwork across sites in the states of Maharashtra and West Bengal . In Powai , we conducted 120 hours of participant observations and 58 semi - structured interviews ( six staff , 12 teachers , six volunteers , 29 students , ﬁve parents ) . At Nehru Nagar , we observed and participated in four classroom sessions over two weeks . We later inter - viewed two teachers whose classrooms we had previously visited . In West Bengal , we studied two after - school centers near Kolkata : one in the suburb of Kamarhati and another Session 1 : Trust & Responsibility DIS 2018 , June 9 – 13 , 2018 , Hong Kong 47 in the suburb of Baruipur ( that catered to nearby villages ) . In Kamarhati , we interviewed six teachers and engaged with students . In Baruipur , we conducted 25 hours of participant observation and semi - structured interviews with three teach - ers , three staff members , ten mothers , and ten twelfth grade students . In addition , we conducted multiple group inter - views with 40 other students . The data we collected was in the form of ﬁeld notes , photographs , and audio recordings of interviews ( that we transcribed ) . Data Analysis Following Yuval - Davis [ 86 ] , we sought an intersectional ap - proach for engaging in contextual analysis of our data . Re - lying on an inductive thematic analysis alone had the risk of ﬂattening out the multiple dimensions of our data . A categor - ical approach to intersectionality—one that identiﬁes how the intersection of categories of difference and identity ( such as race , gender , and class ) is engendering and reinforcing sys - tems of domination and marginalization [ 55 ] —was not suit - able for our purposes . A focus on foregrounding intersect - ing categories can certainly highlight inequities and limita - tions of current approaches to relevant issues pertaining to the user ( e . g , unearthing how HCI research has acknowl - edged the user’s identity [ 71 ] and making recommendations for improvement ) . Also , the creation of a system of cate - gories can be the outcome of participatory design processes that acknowledge individual experiences and systems of so - cial oppression [ 9 ] . However , when intending to achieve a holistic understanding of individuals and groups , such an ap - proach tends to mostly emphasize the marginalized aspects of individuals and communities [ 36 , 67 , 27 ] , diminishing the visibility of people’s modes of resistance against penalties . Further , the static nature of categories can create issues for uncovering the dynamic , culturally - and historically - shaped everyday experiences of people and their contexts ; categories can tell us the current status , but cannot explain the reasons underlying that status [ 36 ] . After extensive literature review , we found Dhamoon’s ideas for mainstreaming intersectional - ity [ 28 ] more apt for our research goals , as explained earlier . Drawing on Dhamoon’s approach , we proceeded to unpack the degrees and forms of penalties and privileges already present in each LRLE [ 28 ] , which in turn illuminated con - straints for technology integration as well as assets we could mobilize for the same . We interpret penalties as the differ - ent disadvantages that individuals , communities , or organiza - tions must grapple with on an everyday basis ( e . g . , not being able to attend school due to having to work ) , and privileges as circumstances that individuals ( could ) harness to attain their goals ( e . g . , having parents who care about one’s well - being ) . The presence of privileges does not imply a lesser degree of penalties , and vice - versa ( e . g . , a child may have parents who care about their well - being but who deemed that send - ing them to work instead of to school was in their best in - terest ) . To deconstruct penalties and privileges , we followed a two - step approach . First , we conducted an inductive the - matic analysis of all data to identify common trends . Exam - ples of themes that emerged were “gender equity initiatives at school , ” “gendering of education , ” and “technology use in the classroom” . After iteratively distilling our themes , we ar - State School ( Locale , Structure ) Maharashtra Nehru Nagar ( Urban , Formal ) Powai ( Suburban , After - School ) West Bengal Baruipur ( Rural , After - School ) Kamarhati ( Suburban , After - School ) Tamil Nadu Kancheepuram ( Rural , Formal ) Table 1 . Field Sites rived at four large themes that were transversal to our data : “Issues of Gender” , “Parental Engagement” , “Everyday use of Technology” , and “Technology Adoption in the Class - room” . From there , for each theme , we crafted narratives of the LRLEs we visited and then conducted narrative analysis [ 51 , 67 ] . Our purpose was to deductively identify interacting processes of differentiation and systems of domination , and uncover how individuals ( teachers , parents , children ) , com - munities ( LRLEs ) , and organizations ( non - governmental and governmental organizations ) interacted with those , to uphold or to resist them . It was in those interactions that we were able to see the dynamically - shifting nature of penalties and privileges . This , in turn , highlighted both challenges to tech - nology adoption and supporting structures for new technol - ogy designs . To identify processes and systems , we used Matsuda’s rec - ommendation to “ask the other question” : “When I see some - thing that looks racist , I ask , ‘Where is the patriarchy in this ? ’ When I see something that looks sexist , I ask , ‘Where is the heterosexism in this ? ’ When I see something that looks homo - phobic , I ask , ‘Where are the class interests in this ? ”’ [ 54 ] . This method highlighted the processes that were salient in our data , such as those relating to gender , caste , geography , and levels of education . In our ﬁnal step of analysis , we subjected our narratives from across sites to Dhamoon’s method of situated comparisons [ 28 ] . This allowed us to better glean how the promises and pending challenges for teachers , students , parents , and LR - LEs at one site might suggest points of intervention at others . Self - Disclosure Following Schlesinger et al . ’s [ 71 ] recommendation that au - thors disclose aspects of their identity that inﬂuence their re - search , we clarify that Marisol ( ﬁrst author ) , Naveena , and Neha ( advising author ) are women of color from Ecuador , the United States , and India , with a shared commitment to femi - nist perspectives in HCI . Arkadeep and Aditya were responsi - ble for all ﬁeldwork and data collection , in the languages spo - ken at each site—also their native languages . Betsy originates from the United States ( U . S . ) and has extensive experience with researching LRLEs in the U . S . All authors worked to - gether to ensure that our assumptions were double - checked . AN INTERSECTIONAL - TYPE ANALYSIS We now execute on the steps proposed by Yuval - Davis [ 86 ] . We present our intersectional - type analysis ( as Dhamoon calls it [ 28 ] ) , and focus on foregrounding the penalties and privileges present in the LRLEs we studied . Our primary goal is to explore how these penalties and privileges might high - light constraints to account for and assets we might leverage Session 1 : Trust & Responsibility DIS 2018 , June 9 – 13 , 2018 , Hong Kong 48 to imagine points of intervention . Our analysis is organized into four themes that were transversal to our empirical data . For each theme , we present narratives from the LRLEs we visited . In particular , we describe how individuals , commu - nities , and institutions mobilize privileges to enact forms of resistance against penalties . We present four ( out of several potential ) situated comparisons that consider both challenges and forms of resistance across narratives . Finally , we propose pathways for technology design that account for both penal - ties and privileges . The Importance of Addressing Girls’ and Boys’ Needs The gendering of education was a salient process of differ - entiation across our sites , taking various forms and resulting in different penalties for girls and boys . Each of the LR - LEs we visited chose to mobilize its privileges in different ways to help students resist the effects of gendering . Below we present and contrast the gender equity initiatives orga - nized by two NGO - run after - school centers—Baruipur and Kamarhati—in rural and suburban West Bengal , respectively . Our analysis shows that , although boys are also impacted by gendering processes , LRLEs tend to focus their gender equity initiatives on girls alone . We conclude that conducting initia - tives for granting boys opportunities for resistance as well is a pending challenge for NGO - run LRLEs . We envision ways in which technology might play a role in addressing such a challenge . Baruipur is a girls - only LRLE that caters to villages near Kolkata . These villages have been historically affected by the sex trafﬁcking industry [ 70 ] , with many implications for girls’ education . When abducted by sex trafﬁckers , girls cer - tainly end up missing educational opportunities . However , as one of the mothers we spoke to explained , parents’ re - sponse to the danger of sex trafﬁcking might also limit girls’ educational opportunities : “We have to raise the girls and then we run the risk of losing them to trafﬁckers . It is bet - ter for us to marry them off as soon as possible . ” . Cognizant of the penalties inﬂicted upon girls , Baruipur mobilizes its privileges as an NGO - run organization ( such as provision of education , infrastructure , and volunteers ) to grant its students various opportunities for resistance . It ensures that girls con - tinue their education , learn to protect themselves , and imag - ine alternate futures for their lives . For example , the center sends its volunteers to nearby villages to provide girls with educational support ; this helps the girls perform better aca - demically and keeps parents motivated to send their daughters to school . Baruipur also offers the girls regular orientation on women’s issues ( e . g . , adolescent health , child marriage , teen pregnancy , and domestic violence ) to help them gain self - reliance . Moreover , the center provides girls with vocational , computer , and English training to improve their chances of securing jobs after they have completed their schooling . Baruipur’s initiatives of resistance are forms of power that , when interacting with sexist discourses such as child mar - riage , shape girls’ perspectives on their identities . Some girls we interviewed perceived marriage as restrictive and burden - some , sharing that they had discussed the topic of marriage with their parents and even changed their parents’ convic - tions . These girls told us they now felt more conﬁdent about their abilities to attain day jobs and ﬁnancially support their families and themselves . Some also expressed a desire to get a college education they could ﬁnance themselves . Baruipur’s case demonstrates how gender equity initiatives need to ac - knowledge the different processes that inﬂict penalties on stu - dents ( e . g . , gender violence , sexist discourses ) and interact with them to help students realize that they are able to change their present and future . Kamarhati , an after - school center run by an NGO in peri - urban Kolkata , struggles with boys’ low attendance rates . In - teracting processes and systems—such as the industrializa - tion of the area , families’ economic struggles due to casteism and capitalism , and the gendering of factory work as a male activity—have resulted in the burgeoning of early labor occu - pations for boys . This is a penalty that hinders boys’ opportu - nities for an education . Teachers recognize this problem and make individual efforts to help students resist this oppressive power . Rakesh , a teacher at Kamarhati , recounted how he had made sure that his students continued to attend school by regularly talking to their parents to convince them about the advantages of attaining an education . However , Kamarhati as an institution limits its gender equity initiatives that aid boys speciﬁcally in imagining future selves through educational at - tainment . Rather , the LRLE aims to harness its educational and infrastructural privileges to counteract yet another form of power : the historic violence against women in the area . The center takes initiatives to instill gender norms in students that can protect girls in the long run . For example , at Ka - marhati , boys are encouraged to challenge gender stereotypes by having them participate in traditionally feminine activities such as cooking . Our data shows that some NGO - funded after - school centers in India have educational , ﬁnancial , and infrastructural as - sets , and social capital . They can potentially mobilize these privileges to conduct gender equity initiatives that empower students to construct new , alternative futures . Baruipur is an example of how an after - school center can address the many fronts that penalize girls’ lives by providing the opportunity to grow through education . However , as our narratives show , systematically working towards granting opportunities for re - sistance to boys is still a challenge for LRLEs . Kamarhati’s focus on helping girls resist gender violence takes away from devising other kinds of initiatives for boys that could system - atically address the effects of child labor . After - school centers such as Kamarhati thus need support to ( 1 ) further explore the processes that engender penalties for both boys and girls , and ( 2 ) broaden boys’ and girls’ notions of future opportunities . We now offer examples to illustrate how a situated com - parison of the narratives above can illuminate pathways for technology design that are not only sensitive to the unique penalties boys and girls confront when imagining positive futures but also still support sensitivity to the opposite gen - der . First , constructionist technologies that foster students’ self - expression [ 63 ] can assist teachers at LRLEs to further understand the processes underlying gender - related penalties for boys and girls . From this understanding , these teachers Session 1 : Trust & Responsibility DIS 2018 , June 9 – 13 , 2018 , Hong Kong 49 could devise mechanisms for mobilizing privileges . Consid - ering that not all children attend school , one approach might involve opening co - located interaction spaces where boys and girls can engage in activities that challenge normalized per - spectives on gender , perhaps through makerspaces [ 7 ] . This could also enable boys and girls to be more aware of gender equity issues . Second , technology could help LRLEs broaden boys’ and girls’ knowledge of alternative occupational op - tions . For example , technology could play a role in connect - ing learners with professionals and students from other places ( including urban areas in India , for example ) who may have undergone similar challenges to pursue education . Learn - ing from others’ aspirations and discussing their process of constructing new identities can help learners envision greater possibilities for their futures . Parental Engagement and the Alignment of Values Across sites , we found that one of the main issues LRLEs face is in ﬁnding ways to engage parents in their children’s education . Casteism interacts with gendering processes and lack of education to prevent parents from actively participat - ing in children’s academic activities . This can lead to several problems , from hindering learning at home to withdrawing children from school so they can be put to work or married early . We analyze how the after - school centers of Powai ( sub - urban Maharashtra ) and Baruipur ( rural West Bengal ) interact with the casteism that shapes parents’ attitudes toward school . Our analysis highlights the relevance for LRLEs to under - stand parents beyond traditional assumptions around lower - caste groups and explore how to use parents’ cultural values , beliefs , and aspirations as assets to improve children’s educa - tional opportunities . We also demonstrate , however , that such exploration can be difﬁcult for LRLEs . Parents’ values can entail both potential penalties and privileges for children’s fu - tures and it is up to the LRLE to decide how to interact with those values in ways that can help the children . Our anal - ysis concludes that LRLEs need support in negotiating with parents a shared understanding of the beneﬁts of supporting children’s academic endeavors . Technology can have a key role in supporting that process . Powai , a mixed - gender after - school center near Mumbai , is exemplary of the issues that arise when LRLEs clash with the values that casteism can engender . Most of Powai’s par - ents are daily - wage laborers with limited capacity—and thus , willingness—to devote to children’s education . The follow - ing account from Ishita , a mother , demonstrates this : “I dont have time to focus on what my son does in school . I expect the school will do what it is supposed to do ; why am I expected to intervene and supervise how my child is progressing ? It’s not the parent’s job ! Isn’t that the teacher’s job ? ” How - ever , casteism interacts with capitalism in an urban setting— where there is exposure to stories of academic success—to drive these parents to value education as a vehicle for upward mobility . One of the fathers explained his expectations : “I want my son to have a different future , to do better than me . I did not have the opportunity to learn but I’m giving that op - portunity to my child , I want my child to take advantage of it . ” The expectation of moving away from their castes , thus , rep - resents an important motivation to send their children to an after - school center . However , this support is weakened by the clash of values that occurs between parents and the teachers and administrators at Powai . As an NGO - funded institution , Powai attracts instructors who hold progressive values around issues such as gender equity . These teachers’ experiences with systems such as casteism and sexism motivate them to instill change in society . For example , many of them promote learning experiences where boys and girls can interact freely and be welcoming towards each other . Such progressive initiatives , however , go against parents’ traditional values around gender , which frames the free interaction of single men and women as a social taboo [ 1 ] . A teacher explained : “Parents don’t always like this . So many parents go around with the opinion—I’m not going to send my daughter to Powai—the coordinator there gives children too much freedom or the coordinator lets boys and girls talk with each other . . . ” The case of Powai shows that by not exploring how parents interact with casteism on a daily basis , the center is unable to harness the privileges this sys - tem of oppression might produce . The center thus misses the opportunity to fully harness parents’ willingness to support education to attain a better future for their children . Further , it shows the relevance of acknowledging traditional values , for though they stem from systems of domination such as pa - triarchy , can override pragmatic values such as support for children’s education . This , in turn , represents a penalty for children when they miss out on educational opportunities . Instead of assuming the values of low - caste parents as con - straints , Baruipur tries to deconstruct the values that casteism engenders , to identify how parents’ values can be leveraged as assets to support girls’ educational attainment . There are two values that Baruipur uncovers as assets : parents’ care for their children and collectivist values that drive them to seek the support of their children later in life . We now describe how Baruipur unpacks these values towards furthering its ed - ucational initiative . At ﬁrst sight , one might conclude that parents at Baruipur do not care for the future of their daugh - ters . On one hand—and in contrast to the urban parents at Powai—parents at Baruipur often disregard the education of girls as a sign of upward mobility . This is due to several in - teracting processes . For one , being of lower caste in rural set - tings gives these parents less exposure to stories of academic success . Further , patriarchal norms drive parents to assume marriage to be the only plausible future for their daughters . One of the mothers further explained : “When [ my daughter ] started failing at school , we decided it’d be better for her to help us at home . It is safer for her and in that way she can be more prepared for when she gets married . ” . A deeper en - gagement with the interactive processes underlying parents’ actions allows us to see that , for parents at Baruipur , mar - riage is a form of protection . As we highlighted previously , the risk of sexual exploitation prevalent in the area [ 70 ] drives parents to marry their daughters earlier than laws allow . De - spite the negative connotations around child marriage , in the case of Baruipur , it is itself a form of resistance drawing from parents’ care for their children . Baruipur sees this care as a privilege parents mobilize , and , as we will show , uses it to motivate parents to support their children’s education . Session 1 : Trust & Responsibility DIS 2018 , June 9 – 13 , 2018 , Hong Kong 50 Baruipur also harnesses the collectivist values predominant in rural India . Via collectivism , parents expect to ﬁnd support in their children later on in life [ 82 ] . Collectivism interacts with patriarchy , however , to determine that it is men and not women who will have the ability to take care of their parents when they age [ 17 ] . Baruipur mobilizes its infrastructure and volunteers along with parents’ care and collectivist values to shape parents’ minds about girls’ abilities . The center offers girls vocational training for landing urban jobs to convince parents that girls can attain safe , prosperous futures and sup - port their families . Further , it sends volunteers to visit parents at home and explain the beneﬁts of supporting girls . One of the teachers shared : “If your girl ﬁnishes school she can be - come a teacher in a tutor center , she can then earn money and support herself and you in your old age . ” Kamini , a mother , explained how this changed her perspective : “I have sup - ported my child to become educated and now she is studying in a college to become a nurse . I hope she will take care of me in old age . ” Baruipur’s strategy demonstrates the relevance of further exploring the implications of being a low - caste parent . By identifying privileges within the values that casteism en - genders , Baruipur is able to devise an educational initiative that is sustainable because it aligns with parents’ values . Research on parent - school relationships advises schools to foster a two - way connection between the home and learning environment so that parents feel welcome to engage in their child’s education [ 15 , 57 ] . Our narratives highlight , however , that LRLEs in India need a different approach . These schools need to show how students receiving an education can align with parents’ values and aspirations . Baruipur’s mobilization of care and collectivism as assets demonstrates that aligning with parents’ values requires LRLEs to have a good under - standing of parents’ contexts and practices . Parents’ rejection of Powai’s gender sensitization initiative shows that LRLEs need to be able to negotiate a shared understanding with par - ents of how a change of practices can align with their values . Pathways for technology design emerge in this regard . Easy - to - share videos with stories of students’ and parents’ alterna - tive ( positive and negative ) futures can be one way to sup - port parental engagement in these scenarios . Another way could be through simple visualizations showing parents in - formation that they ﬁnd valuable , such as the ﬁnancial payoff of sending their children to school compared to how much they will make if their children go to work immediately in - stead . Technology could also help schools connect with par - ents whose children have pursued higher education so as to coordinate talks and personalized advising for those who are still supporting their children . These one - on - one interactions can help LRLEs better understand how interacting processes and systems of oppression shape parents’ actions . Learning from others while building a community can help parents en - gage in ways they ﬁnd valuable and feasible . Improving Meaningful Connectivity Previous work on digital inequities has suggested that mean - ingful digital connectivity—that is , the ability to engage tech - nology and mobilize information resources to address every - day goals and concerns [ 45 ] —is a crucial component for ad - dressing social marginalization [ 44 , 64 ] . We sought to ana - lyze the penalties and privileges students experience in terms of attaining meaningful connectivity . Our purpose was to imagine how those penalties and privileges could be trans - lated into constraints and assets for technology - enhanced in - terventions . Our analysis of urban Mumbai ( Maharashtra ) , where we visited two LRLEs , and the rural areas around Baruipur ( West Bengal ) , where we visited several villages catered by one LRLE , conﬁrm the rural / urban divide in ac - cess and meaningful connectivity . In particular , the interac - tion between two processes—the limited exposure to people and technology in rural sites and practices of sexualization— engender privacy - related penalties for young girls . These , in turn , hinder girls’ ability to devise new uses for technology . From our analysis on these interacting processes , we iden - tiﬁed , however , the following four assets for technology de - sign to improve meaningful connectivity : ( 1 ) students’ polli - nation of ideas , ( 2 ) parents’ willingness to learn from teach - ers , ( 3 ) parents’ interest in gaming apps , and ( 4 ) the transfer of knowledge between girls with limited internet access and individuals with easy access to mobile technologies . As mentioned before , the parents we studied in Mumbai were seen as low - caste , daily - wage laborers . However , life in ur - ban settings affords both parents and children a series of technology - related privileges that the children mobilize for resisting monolithic notions of being from lower caste . These forms of resistance entail different opportunities for mean - ingful connectivity . For example , we might consider that the forces of capitalist consumerism have made smartphones cheaper , engendering a privilege for low - caste families : they have now the possibility of accessing these devices and shar - ing them with children . Living in Mumbai also gives students exposure to diverse ways of using technologies , often lead - ing to new technology - enhanced learning practices . Prabhu , a student from Nehru Nagar , one of the LRLEs we visited , explained : “Outside the school I have friends who are going to other schools . They talked to me about a YouTube chan - nel for solving math problems , and when I had the chance , I used it on my Dad’s phone . ” As students grow older and gain access to their own phones , the exposure that their urban contexts afford shape their technology practices further . For example , Rohan , an eleventh grader in Powai , told us he had purchased a second - hand phone so he could join his class - mates’ WhatsApp group and chat with them . As a result of mobilizing these privileges , students in Mumbai were able to connect in meaningful ways . A teacher from Nehru Nagar shared how this connectivity took place in Mumbai : “If they are told there is this project and you can use internet , they do use it . Nowadays a lot of them ﬁrst try to use Wikipedia . They know that is a medium they can access ( for information or general knowledge ) . ” Regarding the use of other educational apps , we observed that—despite their urban exposure—parents were not aware of existing options . They preferred to use cellphones mostly for playing games ( e . g . , Fruit Ninja and Subway Surfers ) and accessing social media ( e . g . , Facebook ) instead . However , parents’ relationship with teachers usually engenders a privi - lege , for teachers often make recommendations to parents and Session 1 : Trust & Responsibility DIS 2018 , June 9 – 13 , 2018 , Hong Kong 51 children about novel uses of technology . Naresh , a parent , de - scribed further how he harnessed this privilege to learn new things : “My son’s teacher suggested I install an app for help - ing [ my son ] learn to pronounce English . I tried it out and now I use it regularly , it’s pretty good ! ” Teachers’ knowledge about technologies for learning as well as parents’ willing - ness to learn from teachers signal a key asset that technology - based interventions could leverage . In the villages near Baruipur , the processes of sex trafﬁcking , and gendering of technology access and use , interact with the technological isolation of rural sites to heavily constrain girls’ engagement with technology . To resist sex trafﬁcking and protect girls , parents and schools discourage them from using phones . Nipun , a teacher at Baruipur explained the rationale behind this practice : “You get some missed call from an unknown person , then you ring back , and you talk , develop a relationship with that boy . Then that person calls you somewhere and you go there , and fall in trouble [ alluding to sexual assault ] . Moreover , we have got so many girls who have got traf - ﬁcked due to mobiles ! ” Roughly a third of the girls we interviewed had mobile de - vices ; among them , around 15 % had smartphones . Internet costs and constrained access to cellphones limited technol - ogy use even further . Despite such issues of access , girls’ interactions with teachers from NGOs from urban sites , who regularly visited the villages , gave them opportunities to learn about Facebook and WhatsApp . In this case , teachers mobi - lized their privileged access and education to support girls in resisting existing differentiations . Despite the digital divide between rural and urban settings , our narratives highlight privileges for both kinds of locations that can be harnessed to foster meaningful connectivity . Fur - ther , juxtaposing Mumbai’s forms of use with Baruipur’s case illustrates how to grant rural children safer exposure to differ - ent technology practices . Our analysis suggests ( at least ) four pathways technology designers might take to support mean - ingful connectivity . First , drawing on students’ knowledge - sharing practices , we suggest exploring how social comput - ing can support the pollination of ideas between rural and urban students . Second , families’ willingness to learn from teachers can be harnessed to develop applications through which teachers can send parents periodic suggestions about new educational apps . Third , parents’ preference for gaming apps could also be leveraged to tailor popular mobile games for progressively leading parents and students to other kinds of technology uses . Fourth , girls’ intermediated access to technology in Baruipur signals the need to consider women’s safety when designing for intermediated internet access [ 69 ] . Towards Meaningful Technology Integration The use of technology for teaching and learning is steadily in - creasing worldwide [ 8 , 34 ] . However , achieving meaningful technology integration in learning environments—that is , us - ing technology in the classroom so that young people achieve empowered forms of learning [ 79 ] —remains a challenge [ 29 , 34 , 75 ] . To better understand where technology deployment initiatives in schools fail or succeed , we analyzed the LRLEs in Kancheepuram ( rural public schools ) , Powai , and Baruipur . These LRLEs represent a range of organizational structures , contexts ( rural , peri - urban , urban ) , and levels of technolog - ical engagement . Our analysis shows that the paternalism of the government and NGOs as a system of domination was present across failed infrastructural deployments at the schools . Paternalism interacting with other processes , such as the rural versus urban gap , takes away from the motiva - tion to enact change and ﬂexibility to appropriate initiatives . However , our analysis unearths privileges that teachers in ru - ral and urban settings harness to counteract the effects of pa - ternalism . We conclude that bottom - up approaches where in - tegrations are informed by the knowledge and needs of teach - ers and students—rather than imposed by schools or other organizations—can engender meaningful integrations for the learning environment and beyond . Kancheepuram’s case foregrounds the challenge with top - down technology integration initiatives . Further , it helps in - form the changes needed in how technology is integrated so as to properly take into account teachers’ support . In Kancheepuram , several key processes interact and often con - ﬂict with each other to shape teachers’ attitudes towards their job . On the one hand , the government’s paternalism and restricted exposure to diversity in rural settings impacts teachers’ motivation for conducting and supporting impor - tant changes in the classroom . For example , teachers are required to fulﬁll goals imposed by the government ( e . g . , a state - mandated curriculum ) while their salary and access to educational resources ( e . g . , labs , libraries ) are always con - strained by the government’s budget . On the other hand , the closeness of teachers to students and their families engenders an interest for children’s well - being , and thus , a willingness to go the extra mile for them . For example , their care for children motivates them to go around the village 30 minutes before school starts to remind parents to send their children to class , and even offer to drop children home after school ends . Teachers also expressed their care by identifying prior - ities for the school to offer a better education , such as a library and science lab . In our visit to Kancheepuram , we learned that such care for children , however , was not sufﬁcient to engage teachers in an NGO - run technology - integration initiative . In trying to un - derstand why that was the case , we identiﬁed key aspects to consider for harnessing teachers’ care towards children as an asset for future technology - integration initiatives . Again , sev - eral interacting factors led to the failure of the technology - integration initiative . Amongst them was a paternalistic ap - proach towards technology introduction . The initiative en - tailed the provision of technological infrastructure ( tablets with educational materials and a WiFi router for internet ac - cess ) and training for teachers to learn how to apply educa - tional technologies in the classroom . However , the initiative did not stem from teachers’ but from the NGO’s assessment of educational needs in rural contexts . The teachers thus felt that their perspectives and preferences in terms of what the school needed were being disregarded . Moreover , the ini - tiative disrupted teachers’ everyday lives by demanding that Session 1 : Trust & Responsibility DIS 2018 , June 9 – 13 , 2018 , Hong Kong 52 they arrive 30 minutes early to charge their devices . Given that public school teachers already operate under low moti - vation , they decided to reject the initiative entirely . Teachers’ participation ( or lack thereof ) in this process of technology in - tegration suggests two factors as key for harnessing teachers’ care for children as assets in such initiatives : ( 1 ) the initiative needs to match teachers’ assessments of what is valuable in the learning environments where they work , and ( 2 ) the new practices the initiative demands must align with teachers’ op - erational , everyday practices . As mentioned before , being in an urban environment is a priv - ilege that the students in Mumbai mobilized to counteract the effects of casteism interacting with classism . As an NGO - run after - school center , Powai ( near Mumbai ) also holds privi - leges ( e . g . , progressive teachers , ﬂexibility to design a new curriculum , and the ability to secure technology resources with more ease than a public institution ) . Motivated to help students further resist ﬁxed notions about their future , the cen - ter fosters technology use in ways that students and teach - ers value . Dr . Usha , the Powai coordinator , explained the school’s vision of technology integration : “My students should take the initiative to pursue their interests . I give them the freedom to use the WiFi , and explore the internet whenever they want . Yes , we main - tain some discipline with regards to what they browse , but we still give them that opportunity to explore . ” Powai leveraged its privileges to equip one lab with ﬁve desk - top computers , one printer , ﬁve tablets , and a WiFi network . It had two classrooms , each with a wall - mounted television and a desktop whose screen could be projected onto the TV . Support from the school allowed teachers to pursue bottom - up approaches of technology deployment in the classroom . For example , one teacher would use the TV or tablet to stream YouTube videos related to the topic she was teaching at least twice a week , to supplement her lessons . She paused each lecture at least once to Google images ( e . g . , Mount Ever - est ) related to the lesson ( e . g . , geography ) so that students could use the tablets to connect better with what they were taught . This bottom - up integration also changed students’ self - perception as technology users : now they had the ability to decide which projects to engage in . For example , we ob - served that some students started scanning YouTube for Do It Yourself ( DIY ) tutorials on topics such as movie animation and graphics , cooking recipes , and making toys . Baruipur sought a different bottom - up approach to technol - ogy integration . As mentioned before , the after - school center mobilizes its privileges to help rural girls resist the interaction of sexism , gendering , and patriarchy . Towards that pursuit , the center has helped girls develop different aspirations for their future , including using technology for furthering their careers and lives . Motivated by girls’ requests to receive com - puter training , Baruipur decided to conduct an exploratory initiative for 40 girls to receive computer and spoken English classes for one day a week through six months . The train - ing entailed learning basic computer skills such as typing and using Microsoft Ofﬁce . Due to lack of resources in rural set - tings , the Baruipur LRLE does not have computers for stu - dents , nor teachers for computer training . However , the cen - ter was able to harness its funding to rent time and space in a nearby local computer learning center and hire the training services of another center in Kolkata . Girls had to travel from different villages to Baruipur to receive this training . This initiative’s bottom - up nature—for it was motivated by the students’ interests—allowed the girls and the center to construct their own values around a technology - supported ed - ucation . It also drove them to reﬂect on ways in which it could be improved . After the training , a few of the girls had secured jobs as store attendants in retail outlets in the nearby city of Kolkata . We interviewed a few who had started work - ing . These girls were not satisﬁed with their jobs and felt strongly that a different kind of computer training could have helped further : “They taught us very basic computers , not enough for most of the work which is based on computers . If we had been given more of computer training as opposed to retail training it would have been better . They are giving us jobs at very good places but we are lagging because of our insufﬁcient computer training . ” Baruipur’s example highlights that bottom - up approaches can help resist complex interacting process and systems , includ - ing the lack of exposure to technology in rural settings . It also reveals how it is possible for modes of resistance to shape the self - perceptions of students and their sense of empowerment . Juxtaposing Baruipur’s and Powai’s bottom - up forms of resistance for students against the lack of motivation of Kancheepuram’s teachers towards paternalistic initiatives suggests the need for a new perspective on technology in - tegration . In LRLEs , integration might not necessarily entail large deployments of technology , which usually require major changes in practices and hard - to - obtain / maintain resources [ 30 , 68 ] . Instead , integration could stem from teachers , stu - dents , and LRLEs , who need support in broadening their ideas about how to harness privileges such as care , assess - ment of students’ needs , and personal technology use . One integration initiative could be to expand self - organized learn - ing [ 56 ] to structured environments such as public schools . Another idea we ﬁnd valuable—due to its special focus on teachers—could be to provide progressive , scaffolded sup - port to teachers to develop their own strategies of how to introduce technology in the classroom ( such as by regularly communicating suggestions to teachers’ phones about what might be possible in the classroom , given existing resources , technology - based or not ) . DESIGNING FOR INTERSECTIONS Our paper develops conversations in Intersectional HCI that were begun by Schlesinger et al . at CHI 2017 [ 71 ] . We propose a focus on processes rather than users when imag - ining points of intervention . We also inform research on underserved contexts by proposing an approach that holis - tically engages both penalties and privileges . Finally , our intersectional - type analysis makes a methodological contri - bution to facilitate working across multiple intersections to identify pathways for technology design . Session 1 : Trust & Responsibility DIS 2018 , June 9 – 13 , 2018 , Hong Kong 53 Intersectional HCI : From Users to Processes We extend conversations in Intersectional HCI by contribut - ing an approach that shifts focus from users’ categories of identity ( such as race or gender ) to interacting processes . Ex - amining these processes allows us to ( 1 ) challenge concep - tions of the user as a static individual without agency , ( 2 ) look beyond the user at other levels of interaction such as the so - cial and the organizational , and ( 3 ) recognize the inﬂuence of users’ cultural / historical backgrounds on their actions . The focus on dynamic processes of subject formation allows us to identify when individuals mobilize their agency to de - ploy different aspects of their identity . A focus on intersecting traits of the user’s identity—as prior work on intersectionality in HCI has adopted [ 13 , 58 , 71 ] —runs the risk of represent - ing users and their contexts as static entities with little agency [ 61 , 67 ] , needing to be “helped” . In contrast , our approach’s focus on processes lets us view users as possible creators of their own stories . Also , by recognizing how users respond to interacting processes of differentiation and systems of domi - nation , new pathways for design that support resistance may emerge . This possibility aligns with the feminist quality of advocacy that Bardzell proposed for shaping interaction de - sign [ 6 ] . In our work , exploring processes instead of users’ identities allowed us to see the girls of Baruipur as agents of change , and further explore ways in which technology might support them in their resistance . Looking at processes allowed us to go beyond identifying challenges individuals face to analyzing how—by interacting with other individuals or organizations—they resist or enact forms of power . When we focus only on individual traits , we may only see experiences of marginalization [ 19 , 14 , 67 , 86 ] , disregarding what people’s everyday interactions with others can tell us about the feasibility of change . By con - trast , our focus on processes allows us to identify what social relationships , values , and infrastructures are key for imagin - ing points of intervention . This view can enable , in turn , the design of technologies that are “ecologically appropriate” — as Bardzell discusses them in her presentation of Feminist HCI [ 6 ] ; that is , technology designed to consider the widest range of stakeholders , and the possible effects design artifacts can have in their broadest contexts . For example , by looking at the interaction between gendering practices and patriarchy affecting girls in Baruipur , we can see the importance of the NGO’s relationship with the girls and consider ways for new technologies to harness that relationship . Finally , by focusing on the dynamic nature of processes that take place in what Irani et al . call a “generative” view of culture [ 40 ] , we can recognize the inﬂuence of users’ cul - tural / historical backgrounds on their actions . We can also re - ﬂect on what interventions may be feasible for certain com - munities . For example , looking at parents’ reactions to the interaction of practices of sexism and a traditional patriarchal system in Baruipur , we are forced to think deeper about par - ents’ motives to marry their girls early , and then see that it is their care for the girls and the reliance on collectivist values that drives them to such decisions ; these values must be taken into account when designing technology for this context . A Holistic View Entails Both Privileges and Penalties In response to feminist and critical perspectives that call for a holistic understanding of the everyday contexts of marginal - ized populations [ 21 , 27 , 85 ] , we explored privileges and penalties prevalent in LRLEs across India [ 50 ] . Investigating privileges allows us to acknowledge the dignity of individuals and communities [ 2 , 53 ] . Prior research has also critiqued the idea of needs - based problem - solving , arguing that labeling a community as riddled with problems that need ﬁxing perpetu - ates the idea that problems cannot be solved from within [ 47 , 53 ] . A lens that examines the ways in which individuals ad - dress the limitations they face on an everyday basis can reveal key supporting structures for new designs [ 3 ] . Our intersectional - type analysis highlighted the importance of recognizing both penalties and privileges for devising meaningful , sustainable interventions . For example , recog - nizing that girls in Baruipur face restrictions in accessing technology for safety reasons is key to identifying a possible problem space . However , this constraint by itself does not in - dicate how an environment might mobilize itself to tackle the problem . By identifying the interactions girls have with urban instructors as privileges , we can uncover more stakeholders to be taken into account for design , and redeﬁne the problem space from “girls need access” to “how might we make in - termediated access safer for girls ? ” . A holistic understand - ing through deconstruction of privileges and penalties may also beneﬁt other ﬁelds that address concerns of vulnerable groups , such as health informatics and / or civic design . Situated Comparisons Reveal Pathways for Design By emphasizing similarities and differences across contexts , our situated comparisons—as recommended by Dhamoon [ 28 ] —allowed us to identify which processes were more salient where , and what pending challenges could be ad - dressed , also highlighting how one group’s acts of resistance could help identify design opportunities for another . For ex - ample , our comparison of gendering practices across LRLEs recommended supporting collaboration in open spaces ( e . g . , makerspaces ) as an opportunity for NGOs to explore speciﬁc gender - related needs . Makerspaces can foster mixed - gender interactions that challenge normalized perspectives of gender . Also , by juxtaposing the Mumbai children’s sharing of ideas with Baruipur’s lack of exposure to diversity , we were able to devise new roles for social computing to enable students in rural areas to participate in activities for pollinating ideas . Sit - uated comparisons thus helped us uncover penalties and priv - ileges to unearth pathways for contextually relevant technol - ogy design across intersectionally diverse contexts , enabling contributions to the ICTD , HCI , and DIS communities . REFERENCES 1 . 2015 . Engineering lesson 1 : Boys shouldn’t speak to girls . http : / / timesofindia . indiatimes . com / india / Engineering - lesson - 1 - Boys - shouldnt - speak - to - girls / articleshow / 21010464 . cms . ( 2015 ) . 2 . Antwi A Akom , Julio Cammarota , and Shawn Ginwright . 2008 . Youthtopias : Towards a new paradigm of critical youth studies . Youth Media Reporter 2 , 4 ( 2008 ) , 1 – 30 . Session 1 : Trust & Responsibility DIS 2018 , June 9 – 13 , 2018 , Hong Kong 54 3 . Meryl Alper , Vikki S Katz , and Lynn Schoﬁeld Clark . 2016 . Researching children , intersectionality , and diversity in the digital age . Journal of Children and Media 10 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 107 – 114 . 4 . Saleema Amershi , Meredith Ringel Morris , Neema Moraveji , Ravin Balakrishnan , and Kentaro Toyama . 2010 . Multiple mouse text entry for single - display groupware . In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work . ACM , 169 – 178 . 5 . Payal Arora . 2010 . Hope - in - the - Wall ? A digital promise for free learning . British Journal of Educational Technology 41 , 5 ( 2010 ) , 689 – 702 . 6 . Shaowen Bardzell . 2010 . Feminist HCI : taking stock and outlining an agenda for design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . ACM , 1301 – 1310 . 7 . Angela Calabrese Barton , Edna Tan , and Day Greenberg . 2016 . The makerspace movement : Sites of possibilities for equitable opportunities to engage underrepresented youth in STEM . Teachers College Record ( 2016 ) . 8 . Bryan Berrett , Jennifer Murphy , and Jamie Sullivan . 2012 . Administrator insights and reﬂections : Technology integration in schools . The Qualitative Report 17 , 1 ( 2012 ) , 200 . 9 . Lindsay Blackwell , Jill Dimond , Sarita Schoenebeck , and Cliff Lampe . 2017 . Classiﬁcation and Its Consequences for Online Harassment : Design Insights from HeartMob . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 1 , CSCW , Article 24 ( Dec . 2017 ) , 19 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3134659 10 . Geoffrey C Bowker and Susan Leigh Star . 2000 . Sorting things out : Classiﬁcation and its consequences . MIT press . 11 . Avtar Brah and Ann Phoenix . 2004 . Ain’t IA woman ? Revisiting intersectionality . Journal of international women’s studies 5 , 3 ( 2004 ) , 75 – 86 . 12 . Cynthia Breazeal , Robin Morris , Stephanie Gottwald , Tinsley Galyean , and Maryanne Wolf . 2016 . Mobile Devices for Early Literacy Intervention and Research with Global Reach . In Proceedings of the Third ( 2016 ) ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale . ACM , 11 – 20 . 13 . Samantha Breslin and Bimlesh Wadhwa . 2014 . EnGendering Design : Implementing Interdisciplinarity . ( 2014 ) . 14 . Wendy Brown . 2008 . The impossibility of women’s studies . Women’s Studies on the Edge ( 2008 ) , 17 – 38 . 15 . Gustavo P ´ erez Carre ´ on , Corey Drake , and Angela Calabrese Barton . 2005 . The importance of presence : Immigrant parents’ school engagement experiences . American Educational Research Journal 42 , 3 ( 2005 ) , 465 – 498 . 16 . Ruy Cervantes , Mark Warschauer , Bonnie Nardi , and Nithya Sambasivan . 2011 . Infrastructures for low - cost laptop use in Mexican schools . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 945 – 954 . 17 . Rakesh K Chadda and Koushik Sinha Deb . 2013 . Indian family systems , collectivistic society and psychotherapy . Indian Journal of Psychiatry 55 , Suppl 2 ( 2013 ) , S299 . 18 . Malolan Chetlur , Ashay Tamhane , Vinay Kumar Reddy , Bikram Sengupta , Mohit Jain , Pongsakorn Sukjunnimit , and Ramrao Wagh . 2014 . Edupal : Enabling blended learning in resource constrained environments . In Proceedings of the Fifth ACM Symposium on Computing for Development . ACM , 73 – 82 . 19 . Patricia Hill Collins . 2002 . Black feminist thought : Knowledge , consciousness , and the politics of empowerment . Routledge . 20 . Regin Joy Conejar , Haeng - Kon Kim , and Roger Y Lee . 2016 . Opportunities Ahead the Future Mobile Learning . In Software Engineering , Artiﬁcial Intelligence , Networking and Parallel / Distributed Computing . Springer , 85 – 96 . 21 . Kimberle Crenshaw . 1989 . Demarginalizing the intersection of race and sex : A black feminist critique of antidiscrimination doctrine , feminist theory and antiracist politics . U . Chi . Legal F . ( 1989 ) , 139 . 22 . Julian Cristia , Pablo Ibarrar´an , Santiago Cueto , Ana Santiago , and Eugenio Sever´ın . 2017 . Technology and child development : Evidence from the one laptop per child program . American Economic Journal : Applied Economics 9 , 3 ( 2017 ) , 295 – 320 . 23 . Andrew Cross , Edward Cutrell , and William Thies . 2012 . Low - cost audience polling using computer vision . In Proceedings of the 25th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology . ACM , 45 – 54 . 24 . Larry Cuban and Petar Jandri´c . 2015 . The dubious promise of educational technologies : Historical patterns and future challenges . E - Learning and Digital Media 12 , 3 - 4 ( 2015 ) , 425 – 439 . 25 . Edward Cutrell , Jacki O’Neill , Srinath Bala , B Nitish , Andrew Cross , Nakull Gupta , Viraj Kumar , and William Thies . 2015 . Blended learning in Indian colleges with massively empowered classroom . In Proceedings of the Second ( 2015 ) ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale . ACM , 47 – 56 . 26 . Kathy Davis . 2008 . Intersectionality as buzzword : A sociology of science perspective on what makes a feminist theory successful . Feminist theory 9 , 1 ( 2008 ) , 67 – 85 . 27 . Rita Dhamoon . 2015 . A feminist approach to decolonizing anti - racism : Rethinking transnationalism , intersectionality , and settler colonialism . Feral Feminisms 4 ( 2015 ) , 20 – 37 . Session 1 : Trust & Responsibility DIS 2018 , June 9 – 13 , 2018 , Hong Kong 55 28 . Rita Kaur Dhamoon . 2011 . Considerations on mainstreaming intersectionality . Political Research Quarterly 64 , 1 ( 2011 ) , 230 – 243 . 29 . Amandeep Dhir , Nahla M Gahwaji , and G¨ote Nyman . 2013 . The role of the iPad in the hands of the learner . J . UCS 19 , 5 ( 2013 ) , 706 – 727 . 30 . Conrado I Dotong , Evelyn L De Castro , and Joselito A Dolot . 2016 . Barriers for Educational Technology Integration in Contemporary Classroom Environment . Asia Paciﬁc Journal of Education , Arts and Sciences 3 , 2 ( 2016 ) . 31 . Sarah Fox , Mariam Asad , Katherine Lo , Jill P Dimond , Lynn S Dombrowski , and Shaowen Bardzell . 2016 . Exploring Social Justice , Design , and HCI . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 3293 – 3300 . 32 . Sarah Fox , Amanda Menking , Stephanie Steinhardt , Anna Lauren Hoffmann , and Shaowen Bardzell . 2017 . Imagining Intersectional Futures : Feminist approaches in CSCW . In Companion of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . ACM , 387 – 393 . 33 . Joseph B Giacquinta , Jo Anne Bauer , and Jane E Levin . 1993 . Beyond technology’s promise : An examination of children’s educational computing at home . Cambridge University Press . 34 . Javier Gil - Flores , Javier Rodr´ıguez - Santero , and Juan - Jes´us Torres - Gordillo . 2017 . Factors that explain the use of ICT in secondary - education classrooms : The role of teacher characteristics and school infrastructure . Computers in Human Behavior 68 ( 2017 ) , 441 – 449 . 35 . Ange - Marie Hancock . 2007 . When multiplication doesn’t equal quick addition : Examining intersectionality as a research paradigm . Perspectives on politics 5 , 1 ( 2007 ) , 63 – 79 . 36 . Ange - Marie Hancock . 2013 . Empirical intersectionality : a tale of two approaches . UC Irvine L . Rev . 3 ( 2013 ) , 259 . 37 . David Hankerson , Andrea R Marshall , Jennifer Booker , Houda El Mimouni , Imani Walker , and Jennifer A Rode . 2016 . Does Technology Have Race ? . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 473 – 486 . 38 . Kurtis Heimerl , Janani Vasudev , Kelly G Buchanan , Tapan Parikh , and Eric Brewer . 2010a . A case study on designing interfaces for multiple users in developing regions . In Proceedings of the First ACM Symposium on Computing for Development . ACM , 9 . 39 . Kurtis Heimerl , Janani Vasudev , Kelly G Buchanan , Tapan Parikh , and Eric Brewer . 2010b . Metamouse : Improving multi - user sharing of existing educational applications . In Proceedings of the 4th ACM / IEEE International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development . ACM , 19 . 40 . Lilly Irani , Janet Vertesi , Paul Dourish , Kavita Philip , and Rebecca E Grinter . 2010 . Postcolonial computing : a lens on design and development . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . ACM , 1311 – 1320 . 41 . Matthew Kam , Anuj Kumar , Shirley Jain , Akhil Mathur , and John Canny . 2009a . Improving literacy in rural India : Cellphone games in an after - school program . In Information and Communication Technologies and Development ( ICTD ) , 2009 International Conference on . IEEE , 139 – 149 . 42 . Matthew Kam , Akhil Mathur , Anuj Kumar , and John Canny . 2009b . Designing digital games for rural children : a study of traditional village games in India . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . ACM , 31 – 40 . 43 . Naveena Karusala , Aditya Vishwanath , Arkadeep Kumar , Aman Mangal , and Neha Kumar . 2017 . Care as a Resource in Underserved Learning Environments . In Proceedings of the ACM on Computer - Supported Collaborative Work , Vol . 1 . 1 – 22 . 44 . Vikki S Katz and Carmen Gonzalez . 2016a . Community variations in low - income Latino families’ technology adoption and integration . American Behavioral Scientist 60 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 59 – 80 . 45 . Vikki S Katz and Carmen Gonzalez . 2016b . Toward meaningful connectivity : using multilevel communication research to reframe digital inequality . Journal of Communication 66 , 2 ( 2016 ) , 236 – 249 . 46 . Konstantinos Kazakos , Siddhartha Asthana , Madeline Balaam , Mona Duggal , Amey Holden , Limalemla Jamir , Nanda Kishore Kannuri , Saurabh Kumar , Amarendar Reddy Manindla , Subhashini Arcot Manikam , and others . 2016 . A Real - Time IVR Platform for Community Radio . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 343 – 354 . 47 . John Kretzmann and John P McKnight . 1996 . Assets - based community development . National Civic Review 85 , 4 ( 1996 ) , 23 – 29 . 48 . Anuj Kumar , Anuj Tewari , Geeta Shroff , Deepti Chittamuru , Matthew Kam , and John Canny . 2010 . An exploratory study of unsupervised mobile learning in rural India . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 743 – 752 . 49 . Neha Kumar , Trevor Perrier , Michelle Desmond , Kiersten Israel - Ballard , Vikrant Kumar , Sudip Mahapatra , Anil Mishra , Shreya Agarwal , Rikin Gandhi , Pallavi Lal , and others . 2015 . Projecting health : Community - led video education for maternal health . In Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development . ACM , 17 . Session 1 : Trust & Responsibility DIS 2018 , June 9 – 13 , 2018 , Hong Kong 56 50 . Sonia Livingstone and Monica E Bulger . 2013 . A global agenda for children’s rights in the digital age . ( 2013 ) . 51 . Alice Ludvig . 2006 . Differences between women ? Intersecting voices in a female narrative . European Journal of Women’s Studies 13 , 3 ( 2006 ) , 245 – 258 . 52 . George E Marcus . 1995 . Ethnography in / of the world system : The emergence of multi - sited ethnography . Annual review of anthropology 24 , 1 ( 1995 ) , 95 – 117 . 53 . Alison Mathie and Gord Cunningham . 2005 . Who is driving development ? Reﬂections on the transformative potential of asset - based community development . Canadian Journal of Development Studies / Revue canadienne d’´etudes du d´eveloppement 26 , 1 ( 2005 ) , 175 – 186 . 54 . Mari J Matsuda . 1991 . Beside my sister , facing the enemy : Legal theory out of coalition . Stanford Law Review ( 1991 ) , 1183 – 1192 . 55 . Leslie McCall . 2005 . The complexity of intersectionality . Signs : Journal of women in culture and society 30 , 3 ( 2005 ) , 1771 – 1800 . 56 . Sugata Mitra . 2015 . Minimally Invasive Education : Pedagogy for Development in a Connected World . In International Perspectives on Home Education . Springer , 254 – 277 . 57 . Luis C Moll , Cathy Amanti , Deborah Neff , and Norma Gonzalez . 1992 . Funds of knowledge for teaching : Using a qualitative approach to connect homes and classrooms . Theory into practice 31 , 2 ( 1992 ) , 132 – 141 . 58 . Allison J Morgan , Yuvay Meyers Ferguson , and Eileen M Trauth . 2015 . Consumer Demographics and Internet Based Health Information Search in the United States : The Intersectionality of Gender , Race , and Class . International Journal of E - Health and Medical Communications ( IJEHMC ) 6 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 58 – 72 . 59 . Preeti Mudliar and Joyojeet Pal . 2013 . ICTD in the popular press : media discourse around Aakash , the’world’s cheapest tablet’ . In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development : Full Papers - Volume 1 . ACM , 43 – 54 . 60 . Bonnie A . Nardi and Vicki L . O’Day . 1999 . Information Ecologies : Using Technology with Heart . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , USA . 61 . Jennifer C Nash . 2008 . Re - thinking intersectionality . Feminist review 89 , 1 ( 2008 ) , 1 – 15 . 62 . Joyojeet Pal , Udai Singh Pawar , Eric A Brewer , and Kentaro Toyama . 2006 . The case for multi - user design for computer aided learning in developing regions . In Proceedings of the 15th international conference on World Wide Web . ACM , 781 – 789 . 63 . Seymour Papert and Idit Harel . 1991 . Situating constructionism . Constructionism 36 , 2 ( 1991 ) , 1 – 11 . 64 . Katy E Pearce and Ronald E Rice . 2013 . Digital divides from access to activities : Comparing mobile and personal computer Internet users . Journal of Communication 63 , 4 ( 2013 ) , 721 – 744 . 65 . Jahnavi Phalkey and Sumandro Chattapadhyay . 2015 . The Aakash tablet and technological imaginaries of mass education in contemporary India . History and Technology 31 , 4 ( 2015 ) , 452 – 481 . 66 . Ann Phoenix and Pamela Pattynama . 2006 . Intersectionality . ( 2006 ) . 67 . Baukje Prins . 2006 . Narrative accounts of origins : a blind spot in the intersectional approach ? European Journal of Women’s Studies 13 , 3 ( 2006 ) , 277 – 290 . 68 . Jayson W Richardson . 2011 . Challenges of adopting the use of technology in less developed countries : The case of Cambodia . Comparative Education Review 55 , 1 ( 2011 ) , 008 – 029 . 69 . Nithya Sambasivan , Ed Cutrell , Kentaro Toyama , and Bonnie Nardi . 2010 . Intermediated technology use in developing communities . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2583 – 2592 . 70 . Kamalesh Sarkar , Baishali Bal , Rita Mukherjee , Sekhar Chakraborty , Suman Saha , Arundhuti Ghosh , and Scott Parsons . 2008 . Sex - trafﬁcking , violence , negotiating skill , and HIV infection in brothel - based sex workers of eastern India , adjoining Nepal , Bhutan , and Bangladesh . Journal of health , population , and nutrition 26 , 2 ( 2008 ) , 223 . 71 . Ari Schlesinger , W Keith Edwards , and Rebecca E Grinter . 2017 . Intersectional HCI : Engaging Identity through Gender , Race , and Class . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 5412 – 5427 . 72 . Ariel Schwartz , Eva Kaplan , Evviva Weinraub Lajoie , Trey Terrell , and Esther Ajambo . 2015 . Using a principal agent model to explain user - centered design challenges for mother tongue reading in Kenya . In Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development . ACM , 3 . 73 . Carly Shuler , Niall Winters , and Mark West . 2013 . The future of mobile learning : Implications for policy makers and planners . United Nations Educational , Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization ( UNESCO ) ( 2013 ) , 7 – 35 . 74 . Kiley Sobel , Julie A Kientz , Tamara L Clegg , Carmen Gonzalez , and Jason C Yip . 2017 . Equity & Inclusivity at IDC . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children . ACM , 761 – 767 . 75 . J Michael Spector . 2001 . An overview of progress and problems in educational technology . Interactive educational multimedia : IEM 3 ( 2001 ) , 27 – 37 . Session 1 : Trust & Responsibility DIS 2018 , June 9 – 13 , 2018 , Hong Kong 57 76 . Roy Steiner and Duncan Hanks . 2016 . Digital Green : enabling a collective process of learning in rural development . In Harnessing the Power of Collective Learning . Routledge , 42 – 56 . 77 . Lucy Suchman . 1994 . Speech acts and voices : Response to Winogradet al . Computer supported cooperative work ( CSCW ) 3 , 1 ( 1994 ) , 85 – 95 . 78 . M Sweeney . 2016 . The intersectional interface . The intersectional internet : Race , sex , class and culture online ( 2016 ) , 215 – 228 . 79 . Jo Tondeur , Johan van Braak , PA Ertmer , and Anne Ottenbreit - Leftwich . 2016 . Understanding the relationship between teachers’ pedagogical beliefs and technology use in education : A systematic review of qualitative evidence . Educational Technology Research and Development ( 2016 ) . 80 . Kentaro Toyama . 2011 . Technology as ampliﬁer in international development . In Proceedings of the 2011 iConference . ACM , 75 – 82 . 81 . Jan van Akker and Nienke Nieveen . 2017 . The Role of Teachers in Design Research in Education . In Making Change Happen . Springer , 75 – 86 . 82 . Jyoti Verma and Harry C Triandis . 1999 . The measurement of collectivism in India . . In International Congress of the International Association for Cross - Cultural Psychology . , 14th , Aug , 1998 , Western Washington U , Bellingham , WA , US . Swets & Zeitlinger Publishers . 83 . Mark Warschauer . 2004 . Technology and social inclusion : Rethinking the digital divide . MIT press . 84 . Mark Warschauer . 2006 . Laptops and literacy : Learning in the wireless classroom . Teachers College Press . 85 . Tara J Yosso * . 2005 . Whose culture has capital ? A critical race theory discussion of community cultural wealth . Race ethnicity and education 8 , 1 ( 2005 ) , 69 – 91 . 86 . Nira Yuval - Davis . 2006 . Intersectionality and feminist politics . European Journal of Women’s Studies 13 , 3 ( 2006 ) , 193 – 209 . Session 1 : Trust & Responsibility DIS 2018 , June 9 – 13 , 2018 , Hong Kong 58