ARTICLE OPEN Identi ﬁ cation of a novel type of focal adhesion remodelling via FAK / FRNK replacement , and its contribution to cancer progression Masatsune Tsujioka 1 ✉ , Keisuke Miyazawa 2 , 3 , Masaki Ohmuraya 4 , Yoichi Nibe 1 , Tetsuya Shirokawa 2 , Haruko Hayasaka 5 , Tsunekazu Mizushima 6 , Takeshi Fukuma 2 , 3 and Shigeomi Shimizu 1 ✉ © The Author ( s ) 2023 Numerous studies have investigated the various cellular responses against genotoxic stress , including those mediated by focal adhesions . We here identi ﬁ ed a novel type of focal adhesion remodelling that occurs under genotoxic stress conditions , which involves the replacement of active focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) with FAK - related non - kinase ( FRNK ) . FRNK stabilized focal adhesions , leading to strong cell - matrix adhesion , and FRNK - depleted cells were easily detached from extracellular matrix upon genotoxic stress . This remodelling occurred in a wide variety of cells . In vivo , the stomachs of Frnk - knockout mice were severely damaged by genotoxic stress , highlighting the protective role of FRNK against genotoxic stress . FRNK was also found to play a vital role in cancer progression , because FRNK depletion signi ﬁ cantly inhibited cancer dissemination and progression in a mouse cancer model . Furthermore , in human cancers , FRNK was predominantly expressed in metastatic tissues and not in primary tissues . We hence conclude that this novel type of focal adhesion remodelling reinforces cell adhesion and acts against genotoxic stress , which results in the protection of normal tissues , but in turn facilitates cancer progression . Cell Death and Disease ( 2023 ) 14 : 256 ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41419 - 023 - 05774 - 4 INTRODUCTION Cells of living organisms are continuously exposed to various genotoxic stressors . Their DNA is damaged by endogenous stress factors , such as DNA replication errors and reactive oxygen species produced by metabolic processes , as well as by exogenous stress factors , such as ultraviolet light , ionizing radiation , and DNA - damaging agents [ 1 ] . Exposure to such factors can result in severe tissue damage and the development of serious diseases , such as cancer . Owing to their biological importance , cellular genotoxic stress responses involving diverse biological phenomena have been analysed , including DNA repair , cell cycle , and cell death , and the important underlying mechanisms appear to be almost fully elucidated [ 2 , 3 ] . In addition to the well - de ﬁ ned mechanisms of genotoxic stress responses , however , accumulating lines of evidence have also been demonstrated regarding their effects on cell - matrix adhe - sion , which is mediated by focal adhesions [ 4 – 6 ] . Focal adhesions are composed of integrins , which are heterodimeric , transmem - brane adhesion molecules , and various other proteins , such as scaffold , cytoskeletal , and signalling molecules , which directly or indirectly bind to the cytoplasmic tail of integrins [ 7 , 8 ] . More than 100 focal adhesion component proteins , including focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) , paxillin , talin , and vinculin , have been identi ﬁ ed to date . Many studies have shown that cells subjected to genotoxic stress lose their focal adhesions and detach from the matrix [ 9 , 10 ] . In contrast , however , several studies have demonstrated the enhancement of cell adhesion by moderate genotoxic stress , as follows . Bacterial genotoxins cause integrin activation in epithelial and mesenchymal cells , resulting in their spread - out morphologies [ 11 ] . Endogenous genotoxic stress caused by a mutation within a DNA ligase increases the adhesion and migration abilities of human ﬁ broblasts , and the upregulation of vinculin might be involved in these phenotypes [ 12 ] . Of particular interest is that cancer cells that survive radiation therapy have been suggested to promote cancer progression , and a considerable number of studies have demonstrated that cancer cells that have survived irradiation show enhanced invasion activities and increased adhesion abilities . Most of these cells show the increased expression and / or activation of focal adhesion components , such as increased integrin activa - tion and enhanced phosphorylation of FAK [ 13 – 16 ] . The strength of cell - matrix adhesions is based on the number and nature of the focal adhesions , which are largely affected by their compositions and the molecular states of each component . Regarding the integrins , 24 subtypes mediate cell - matrix adhesion differently by their unique selectivity and af ﬁ nities with their Received : 31 May 2022 Revised : 22 March 2023 Accepted : 24 March 2023 1 Department of Pathological Cell Biology , Medical Research Institute , Tokyo Medical and Dental University , 1 - 5 - 45 Yushima , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo 113 - 8510 , Japan . 2 Division of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science , Kanazawa University , Kakuma - machi , Kanazawa 920 - 1192 , Japan . 3 Nano Life Science Institute ( WPI - NanoLSI ) , Kanazawa University , Kakuma - machi , Kanazawa 920 - 1192 , Japan . 4 Department of Genetics , Hyogo College of Medicine , Nishinomiya , Hyogo 663 - 8501 , Japan . 5 Department of Life Science , Faculty of Science & Engineering , Kindai University , Higashi - osaka , Osaka 577 - 8502 , Japan . 6 Department of Gastroenterological Surgery , Graduate School of Medicine , Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine , 2 - 2 Yamadaoka , Suita , Osaka 565 - 0871 , Japan . ✉ email : tsumpcb @ tmd . ac . jp ; shimizu . pcb @ mri . tmd . ac . jp Edited by Professor Nickolai Barlev www . nature . com / cddis Ofﬁcial journal of CDDpress 1234567890 ( ) ; , : ligands . Talins , which are essential molecules for integrin activation , have two isoforms that show unique properties , including their tissue speci ﬁ city [ 7 ] . FAK , which is a non - receptor tyrosine kinase , is also one of the most important components for the control of cell - matrix adhesion [ 17 , 18 ] . Adhesion activity is regulated by FAK assembly / disassembly , phosphorylation / depho - sphorylation , and proteolysis . The focal adhesion targeting ( FAT ) domain of FAK directs its localization , and its subsequent autophosphorylation leads to the exposure of the kinase domain . An identical FAT domain exists in another protein , namely , FAK - related non - kinase ( FRNK ) , implicating the regulation of FAK by this protein . However , FRNK is minimally expressed in most body tissues , except for the vascular media , and FRNK - de ﬁ cient mice show only marginal abnormalities [ 19 , 20 ] . Therefore , FRNK has not been analysed in detail to date . The requirement of cell - matrix adhesion for the repair of damaged tissues as well as disease progression , such as cancer metastasis , led us to consider the potential pathophysiological importance of the genotoxic stress - induced enhancement of cell adhesion , which is the opposite to what usually occurs in damaged cells . Nevertheless , the detailed mechanisms involved in the activation of focal adhesion formation upon genotoxic stress are still largely unknown , although a number of studies have shown the increased activation of integrins and the upregulation of focal adhesion components . Therefore , in the present study , we investigated whether and how focal adhesions are modi ﬁ ed upon the enhancement of cell adhesion against genotoxic stress , and roles of the modi ﬁ cation of focal adhesions in pathophysiological contexts . From our analysis , we identi ﬁ ed the biological impor - tance of FRNK . Genotoxic stress induced the replacement of FAK with FRNK in the focal adhesions of various cell lines . This FRNK - involved remodelling reinforced cell - matrix adhesion by stabiliz - ing focal adhesions against genotoxic stress . Physiologically , the modi ﬁ cation of focal adhesions protects gastric epithelial tissues from genotoxic stress . In turn , cancer cells , which are subjected to mild genotoxic stress during their development , exploit this system for their progression . MATERIALS AND METHODS Antibodies and reagents Antibodies and reagents used in this study are listed in Supplementary Tables S1 and S2 . Generation of Frnk - KO mice using the CRISPR / Cas9 system Frnk - KO mice were generated using the CRISPR / Cas9 system by referring to a previous study that generated Frnk - KO mice by targeted disruption of the Frnk promoter [ 19 ] . hCas9 mRNA and sgRNAs were generated using pT7 - hCas9 and pT7 - sgRNA plasmids ( kindly provided by Dr . M . Ikawa , Osaka University ) , respectively [ 21 ] . After digestion of pT7 - hCas9 with EcoRI , hCas9 mRNA was synthesized using an in vitro RNA transcription kit ( mMESSAGE mMACHINE T7 Ultra Kit , Ambion ) , according to the manufacturer ’ s instructions . Two pairs of forward and reverse oligos targeting the 5 ′ - untranslated regions of the Frnk gene were annealed and inserted into the BbsI site of the pT7 - sgRNA vector . Each target sequence was as follows : Frnk - G1 ( 5 ′ - CTAGCACCACTTCTCCTT AC - 3 ′ ) and Frnk - G3 ( 5 ′ - CCACCAGGCCGCGGCAATGT - 3 ′ ) . After digestion of pT7 - sgRNA with XbaI , sgRNAs were synthesized using the MEGAshortscript Kit ( Ambion ) . The precipitated RNAs were dissolved in Opti - MEM I ( Life Technologies ) at 0 . 4µg / µL . In vitro fertilization was performed according to the protocol of the Center for Animal Resources and Development at Kumamoto University , Japan ( http : / / card . medic . kumamoto - u . ac . jp / card / english / sigen / manual / onlinemanual . html ) using C57BL / 6N female mice ( Clea - Japan Inc . ) . Brie ﬂ y , the prepared RNAs were introduced into fertilized eggs . Fifty prepared eggs were placed in the electrode gap ﬁ lled with 5 µL of Opti - MEM I containing sgRNA and hCas9 mRNA , and were subjected to electroporation ( 25 V , ﬁ ve times ) . The eggs were then cultured in KSOM medium at 37 °C and 5 % CO 2 in an incubator , and transferred the next day to the oviducts of pseudopregnant females on the day of vaginal plug detection . Frnk - KO mice were housed in a 12 - h light / 12 - h dark cycle at approximately 23 °C and 40 % relative humidity at the Laboratory for Recombinant Animals of Tokyo Medical and Dental University , Tokyo , Japan . The Tokyo Medical and Dental University Ethics Committee for Animal Experiments approved all experiments in this study , and all experiments were performed according to their regulations . Cell culture Bax / Bak - DKO MEFs and Frnk - KO MEFs were harvested from Bax / Bak - DKO and Frnk - KO mouse embryos , respectively , at embryonic day 14 . 5 , and immortalized with the SV40 T antigen . Fak - KO MEFs were kindly provided by Professor S . Aizawa of RIKEN [ 22 ] . p53 - KO - T cells were isolated from a spontaneous tumour generated in a p53 - KO mouse . The Frnk - KO clones of p53 - KO - T cells , and murine CT26 colon carcinoma cells [ 23 ] , were generated using the CRISPR / Cas9 system , as described in Supplementary Fig . S3D . All cell lines used in the present study were cultured in Dulbecco ’ s modi ﬁ ed Eagle ’ s medium ( DMEM ) supplemented with 10 % foetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , 2 mM L - glutamine , 1 mM sodium pyruvate , 0 . 1 mM nonessential amino acids , 10 mM HEPES / Na + ( pH 7 . 4 ) , 0 . 05 mM 2 - mercaptoethanol , 100 U / mL penicillin , and 100 µg / mL streptomycin at 37 °C in a humidi ﬁ ed atmosphere containing 5 % CO 2 for human cell lines and 10 % CO 2 for the other cell lines . Generation of expression constructs and transfection The transient expression of FAK , the FAK mutants of the cathepsin L cleavage site ( FRA , FAR , FAA ) , FAK deletion mutants with a disrupted enterokinase recognition site , and FRNK were driven by plasmids harbouring each cDNA , which were based on the pEGFP - C2 vector ( Clontech ) that generates GFP - fusion protein at the N - terminus . Retroviral expression of FAK and FRNK , which are fused with EGFP at the C - terminus and N - terminus , respectively , and EGFP itself was driven by the plasmids based on the modi ﬁ ed pMSCV vectors . For transient transfection of MEFs , plasmid DNA ( 3 µg ) was introduced into cells ( 1 . 5 × 10 6 ) by electroporation using the Neon TM Transfection System Kit ( Invitrogen ) according to the manufacturer ’ s instructions . Transient transfection of human colon cancer cells was performed using Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) according to the manufacturer ’ s instruc - tion . For stable transfection , 2 µg of the retroviral vectors was introduced into Plat - E retroviral packaging cells using Lipofectamine 2000 according to the supplier ’ s protocol . Virus - containing supernatant was collected at 48 , 60 , and 72 h post - transfection , and cells were infected consecutively three times every 24 h with 4 μ g / mL polybrene . Twelve h after the last infection , the medium was replaced with fresh medium . After 24 h , puromycin ( 10 μ g / mL ) was added to the medium for selection . For the experiments of gene silencing , Bax / Bak - DKO MEFs were transfected with control siRNA ( Silencer Select Negative Control # 1 , Invitrogen ) and Nrf2 siRNA ( SMARTpool 18024 , Dharmacon ) , respectively , using Lipofectamine RNAiMax ( Invitrogen ) according to the manufacturer ’ s instruction . 48 h post - transfection , the transfected cells were used for the experiments of etoposide stimulation . Immunoblot analysis Cells and tissues were lysed in SDS buffer ( 50 mM Tris - Cl [ pH 6 . 8 ] and 2 % SDS ) and RIPA buffer ( Nacalai ) , respectively , followed by sonication . The lysates were then subjected to SDS - PAGE and were transferred to PVDF membranes , which were then incubated with a primary antibody . The immune complexes were detected using an HRP - conjugated secondary antibody and Chemi - Lumi One Super reagent ( Nacalai ) . Original immuno - blots are presented in Supplementary Figs . S11 – S23 . Immuno ﬂ uorescence staining of cultured cells Cells were ﬁ xed in 4 % paraformaldehyde and permeabilised with 0 . 1 % Triton - X - 100 in PBS . After blocking with 2 % FBS in PBS ( FBS - PBS ) at 4 °C for 30 min , the samples were incubated with a primary antibody in FBS - PBS for 1 h at room temperature or overnight at 4 °C , followed by washing with FBS - PBS three times . The samples were subsequently stained with a ﬂ uorescently labelled secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature and then washed ﬁ ve times with PBS . They were then mounted with ProLong Gold Antifade Reagent with DAPI ( Invitrogen ) . Fluorescence images were observed using a conventional ﬂ uorescence microscope ( Olympus ; IX71 ) or a confocal microscope ( Zeiss ; LSM710 ) , and images were obtained using ZEN imaging software . M . Tsujioka et al . 2 Cell Death and Disease ( 2023 ) 14 : 256 RT - PCR To analyse the expression of the Frnk gene in response to genotoxic stress , Bax / Bak - DKO MEFs [ 24 ] were incubated with or without 20 μ M etoposide for 14h . Total RNA was extracted from the cells using an RNA extraction kit ( QIAGEN ) according to the manufacturer ’ s instructions . cDNA was synthesized from the total RNA using reverse transcriptase ( TOYOBO ) and a polyT primer ( 20 - mer ) , and was used as a template for PCR . The primer pairs used were as follows : the Fak mRNA speci ﬁ c region ( 5 ′ - GATGGCAGCTGCTTATCTTGACC - 3 ′ and 5 ′ - CAGTGCACCTCCTCCGATCGC - 3 ′ ) , the Frnk mRNA - speci ﬁ c region ( 5 ′ - TGTTTCCTGAGTAATTCTGGGTGG - 3 ′ and 5 ′ - TTCTTCTTGCTGCACCTTCTCCTC - 3 ′ ) , and the region common to Fak and Frnk mRNA ( 5 ′ - CCTCCAGAAGAG - TACGTCCC - 3 ′ and 5 ′ - TCAGTGTGGCCGTGTCTGCC - 3 ′ ) . The PCR products were electrophoresed using a 2 % agarose gel . The RT - PCR method described above was also used to detect the expression of the FRNK gene in human colon cancer tissues . Cancer tissues were obtained from Osaka University and from the Bioresource Research Center of Tokyo Medical and Dental University , with approval from their ethics committees , which also approved the protocol to obtain fully informed consent from all participants . Total RNAs were extracted from each tissue sample immersed in RNAprotect Tissue Reagent ( QIAGEN ) . RT - PCR was performed using cDNAs synthesized from the total RNAs and primer pairs , to amplify a speci ﬁ c region of the FRNK mRNA ( 5 ′ - CTCTTTCCTGAG - TAATTTTTGGGTGG - 3 ′ and 5 ′ - TCTTCTTGCTGAGCCTTCTCTTCC - 3 ′ ) . Cell adhesion and cell spreading assays after the induction of genotoxic stress To quantify adherent CT26 cells and their derivatives after etoposide treatment , a total of 4 × 10 4 of each cell type were individually seeded onto 12 - well culture plates ( Corning ) and incubated for 24 h . At 0 h and 24 h following the addition of 100 μ M etoposide , cells were washed twice with PBS , and those that remained attached to the surface of the well were collected using a trypsin - EDTA solution ( Nacalai ) and counted . To evaluate the cell adhesion ability of Fak - KO MEFs expressing GFP , FAK - GFP or GFP - FRNK , subcon ﬂ uent cells in 6 - cm plastic dishes were washed twice with PBS , then treated with 300 μ L trypsin - EDTA solution at 37°C for 5min . The solution was then removed and the dishes were washed twice with 500 μ L of cultured medium . The detached cells in the removed media were counted . The cells remaining attached to the dishes were also collected by pipetting with cultured medium and counted . The adhesion abilities of WT MEFs and Frnk - KO MEFs both of which express GFP or GFP - FRNK were evaluated with the same procedure , except that the detachment was induced by the trypsin - EDTA solution diluted twice with PBS for 3min and the remaining cells were collected using trypsin - EDTA solution with the original concentration . To evaluate the effects of FRNK on cell adhesion in human colon cancer cell lines ( DLD1 and HCT116 ) , 1 × 10 4 cells subjected to transfection with GFP and GFP - FRNK plasmids , respectively , were seeded onto 12 - well culture plates ( Corning ) and incubated for 24h . Those cells containing GFP - positive and GFP - negative populations were then treated with trypsin - EDTA solution with the same procedure as that of Fak - KO MEFs , except that the amount of the trypsin - EDTA solution was 100 μ L and the incubation time was 3min . The GFP signals were analysed for the cells remaining attached . To determine the initial ratios of GFP - positive cells , the seeded cells untreated with trypsin - EDTA solution were examined . To quantify the spread - out MEFs after etoposide treatment , a total of 1 × 10 4 MEFs of the Frnk - KO and WT littermate mice were seeded onto 24 - well culture plates ( Corning ) and incubated for 24 h . At 0 h and 24 h following the addition of 20 μ M etoposide with QVD - OPh , cells were washed twice with PBS , and the number of dark cells , which were judged to be spread - out cells , was counted by observation under phase - contrast microscopy . To binarise the phase - contrast images , the average intensity of a background region absent of cells ( 20 × 20 pixels ) in 8 - bit grayscale images were measured using Image J software , and the threshold value for binarisation was set at 95 % of the average intensities for the experiment using WT and Frnk - KO MEFs treated with etoposide only , and at 90 % with etoposide and QVD - OPh . These binarised images were used to measure the spread - out cell areas . To analyse cell adhesion by the staining of focal adhesions with the anti - paxillin antibody , cells showing more than ﬁ ve focal adhesions , which were de ﬁ ned as discrete signals of more than ﬁ ve pixels long , were quanti ﬁ ed . Analysis of focal adhesions The areas and numbers of focal adhesions were measured and counted by extracting focal adhesions from the ﬂ uorescence signals of FAK - GFP , GFP - FRNK , or immunostaining of an anti - paxilling antibody , using Hybrid Cell Count software . Cell areas were extracted and measured from the cytosolic ﬂ uorescence signals of GFP or immunostaining of the anti - paxilling antibody using Hybrid Cell Count software ( KEYENCE ) . To evaluate the stability of the focal adhesions via analysing cell retraction , 15 - μ m square regions containing cell peripheries with the focal adhesion signals were recorded every 3 min . When the peripheries moved out of the square regions by retraction within 30 min , it was de ﬁ ned as ‘ retraction events ’ . Quantitative measurements of cell adhesion strength using AFM Cell detachment experiments were performed referring to the protocol reported previously [ 25 – 27 ] , using JPK Nanowizard III ULTRA Speed 2 ( Bruker Nano GmbH ) equipped with a cantilever with the nominal spring constant of 85 N / m ( AC55 , Olympus ) , that was combined with inverted optical microscopy ( IX , Olympus ) . Cells in L15 medium ( gibco 21083 - 027 , Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁ c ) were adsorbed on the glass bottom dish ( 81218 - 200 , ibidi GmbH ) , and subjected to the analysis at 37 °C . The cantilever de ﬂ ection signal ( V total ) was measured in the lateral tip scanning , in which the scanning speed was 40 µm / s . The measured V total was converted to the lateral detachment force ( F lat ) using the following equation [ 26 ] . F lat ¼ kSV total sin ð Φ þ θ Þ ´ cos Φ þ θ (cid:2) 2tan (cid:2) 1 L (cid:2) ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ð V total S Þ 2 þ ð L cos Φ Þ 2 q V total S þ L sin Φ 2 4 3 5 8 < : 9 = ; in which k , S , and L are the spring constant , the sensitivity of the cantilever de ﬂ ection sensor , and the cantilever length , respectively , Φ and θ are the angles indicated in Fig . 4F , and V total is the cantilever de ﬂ ection signal . Cancer dissemination and tumour formation assay CT26 cell derivatives ( 3 × 10 5 cells ) in 150 μ L HBSS ( Nacalai ) were injected into the peritoneal cavity of syngeneic BALB / cCrSlc male mice aged 13 to 18 weeks ( Sankyo Labo Service Co . , Ltd . ) . After 10 days , the mice were sacri ﬁ ced and their mesenteries with disseminated cancer nodules and ascites were collected . To quantify the mesenteric dissemination of each cell line , the weights of mesenteries containing the disseminated cancer cell masses were measured after drying for 24 h . A total of 3 × 10 5 p53 - KO - T cells and 3 × 10 5 or 1 . 5 × 10 6 FRNK - de ﬁ cient p53 - KO - T cells were subcutaneously injected into the ﬂ anks of syngeneic B6 female mice . After 16 days , the p53 - KO - T cell tumours were excised , and their weights were measured . For FRNK - de ﬁ cient cells , tumour formation was analysed after 30 days . The in vitro sphere formation assay was performed using 3D Tumor - sphere Medium XF ( PromoCell ) according to the manufacturer ’ s instruc - tions . A total of 5 × 10 4 cells in the medium were seeded onto 24 - well cell - repellent surface plates ( Greiner ) . To count the number of cells composing the spheres , the collected spheres were dispersed by treating with a trypsin - EDTA solution ( Nacalai ) for 2 h . Mouse irradiation Anaesthetized mice were exposed to 5 Gy of X - rays using an X - ray machine ( HITACHI ; MBR - 1520R - 4 ) at 150 kVp and 20 mA with a 0 . 3 mm Cu + 0 . 5 mm Al ﬁ lter . After 24 h of irradiation , the mice were sacri ﬁ ced , and various organs and tissues were isolated . The gastric mucosa was collected by scraping the gastric wall with a coverglass ( Matsunami ; 24 mm × 60 mm ) . Analysis of gastric sections Mouse stomachs were ﬁ xed in 4 % paraformaldehyde for 3 h at 4 °C . After washing the samples once with PBS , they were immersed in a 30 % sucrose solution in PBS at 4 °C overnight . The specimens were then embedded in OCT compound ( Tissue - Tek ) in a cryomold ( Tissue - Tek ) and frozen at − 80 °C . The frozen blocks were sliced into 5 to 10 - μ m sections using a cryostat microtome , mounted on Superfrost Plus microscope slides , and stored in a − 80 °C freezer until use . For HE staining , the sections were ﬁ rst incubated in a haematoxylin solution for 15 min , followed by staining with an eosin solution for 1 min . The sections were then rehydrated by dipping them through a series of graded alcohols ( 50 % , 70 % , 80 % , 90 % , and twice in 100 % ethanol ) , followed by clearing in xylene . Immuno ﬂ uorescence staining was performed with the same procedure as that for cultured cells , except that the sections were boiled in 10 mM citric acid beforehand . M . Tsujioka et al . 3 Cell Death and Disease ( 2023 ) 14 : 256 TUNEL staining was performed using In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit ( Roch ) according to the supplier ’ s protocol . Cell invasion assay The cell invasion assay was applied to two cell lines of human colon cancer ( DLD1 and HCT116 ) transfected with GFP and GFP - FRNK vector , respectively , using Matrigel Invasion Chamber ( Corning ) . A cell culture insert ( 8 μ m pore ) containing 2 . 5 × 10 4 cells in DMEM lacking any supplements was transferred into a well of the 24 - well plate containing cultured medium , which was supplemented with 10 % FBS served as a chemoattractant . After incubation of the chamber for 24 h , non - invaded cells on the upper surface of the insert membrane were removed with a cotton swab , and the GFP signal was analysed for transmigrated cells on the lower surface , which were stained with DAPI , using Hybrid Cell Count software ( KEYENCE ) . ChIP assay Bax / Bak - DKO MEFs treated with or without 20 µM etoposide were ﬁ xed in 1 % formaldehyde , and the reaction was terminated with 125 mM glycine . The ﬁ xed cells were subsequently lysed with cell lysis buffer ( 5 mM PIPES - KOH [ pH 8 . 0 ] , 85 mM KCl , 0 . 5 % NP - 40 , and protease inhibitor cocktail [ Nacalai ] ) , followed by centrifugation at 2 , 300 g for 5 min . Then , nuclei pellets were lysed with nuclear lysis buffer ( 50 mM Tris [ pH 8 . 0 ] , 10 mM EDTA , 1 % SDS , and protease inhibitor cocktail [ Nacalai ] ) , and sonicated using a Branson Soni ﬁ er 250 . The chromatin solution diluted 5 - fold in ChIP dilution buffer ( 0 . 01 % SDS , 1 . 1 % Triton - X - 100 , 1 . 2 mM EDTA , 16 . 7 mM Tris [ pH 8 . 0 ] , 167 mM NaCl , and protease inhibitor cocktail [ Nacalai ] ) was incubated overnight at 4 °C with speci ﬁ c antibodies . Subsequently , Dynabeads Protein G ( Invitrogen ) suspended in TE buffer containing 1 µg / μ L BSA , 0 . 2 µg / μ L sheared salmon sperm DNA ( BioDynamics Laboratory Inc . ) , and 5 % NaN 3 was added to the solution , which was incubated for another 1 h at 4 °C . The beads were then washed sequentially in wash buffer ( 0 . 1 % SDS , 1 % Triton - X - 100 , 2 mM EDTA , and 20 mM Tris pH 8 . 0 ) containing 150 mM NaCl , wash buffer containing 500 mM NaCl , and LiCl wash buffer ( 0 . 25 M LiCl , 1 % NP - 40 , 1 % deoxycholate , 1 mM EDTA , and 10 mM Tris [ pH 8 . 0 ] ) , followed by extraction twice with elution buffer ( 1 % SDS and 0 . 1 M NaHCO 3 ) . After the addition of 0 . 3 M NaCl and 10 µg of RNase A , the eluates were heated for 4 h at 65 °C to reverse the formaldehyde ﬁ xation . The DNA fragments precipitated by ethanol were resuspended and incubated in resuspension buffer ( 2 . 5 mM EDTA , 2 . 5 mM Tris [ pH 6 . 8 ] , 0 . 2 µg / μ L Proteinase K ) for 2 h at 45 °C . They were then puri ﬁ ed using FastGene Plasmid Mini Kit ( Nippon Genetics ) and used to amplify the target region by PCR with a primer set ( 5 ′ - CCTCCATGACCCTACACGTCC - 3 ′ and 5 ′ - CCAAGAAGCCAGGAATATAAA - TAAGCCC - 3 ′ ) . Statistical analysis For the bar graphs , results were expressed as the mean ± standard deviation ( SD ; n = 3 ) . Comparisons of two datasets were performed using unpaired two - tailed Student t - tests using Excel software . In the box plots , the boxes represent the median ± interquartile range , and the whiskers are con ﬁ dence intervals that denote the 10th to 90th percentiles . Statistical signi ﬁ cance was tested using the two - sided Wilcoxon matched - pairs signed - rank test . A p - value of less than 0 . 05 was considered to indicate a statistically signi ﬁ cant difference between two groups in both types of statistical analyses . RESULTSUniquefocal adhesions are formed in response to genotoxic stress As a model to analyse the responses of cell adhesions to genotoxic stress , we treated mouse embryonic ﬁ broblasts ( MEFs ) with etoposide , a DNA - damaging agent , for 24 h , at which time some populations of cells have become round or detached , whereas other cells are still ﬁ rmly attached ( Supplementary Fig . S1A ) . We therefore analysed the focal adhesions of these attached cells upon etoposide treatment . Double - immuno ﬂ uorescence analysis of focal adhesions using anti - bodies against paxillin and FAK ( epitope : amino acids 700 – 800 ) ( Fig . 1A ) , both of which are representative components of focal adhesions , demonstrated their colocalization in the focal adhesions of etoposide - treated cells as in untreated cells ( Fig . 1B ; Supplementary Fig . S1B ) . Inconsistently , however , when we used a different anti - FAK antibody ( epitope : amino acids 354 – 533 ) , FAK signals were substantially reduced in the focal adhesions of etoposide - treated cells , despite the presence of paxillin signals ( Fig . 1C ; Supplementary Fig . S1C ) . Consistently , double immunostaining using the above two anti - FAK anti - bodies recognizing the middle and C - terminal regions of FAK demonstrated that focal adhesions were only visualized with the C - terminal antibody after etoposide treatment ( Fig . 1D ; Supple - mentary Fig . S1D ) . Furthermore , double immunostaining against paxillin and the active form of FAK ( phosho - FAK at tyrosine 397 ) , which is known to localize in focal adhesions , demonstrated the presence of focal adhesions devoid of active FAK in etoposide - treated cells , but not in untreated cells ( Fig . 1E ; Supplementary Fig . S1E ) . Therefore , these results led us to infer that genotoxic stress induces the formation of unusual focal adhesions containing C - terminal regions of FAK , instead of active FAK . Immunoblot analysis provided insights into these unusual immuno ﬂ uorescence staining patterns . Whereas the expression levels of paxillin were constant during etoposide treatment , the expression levels of active and total FAK were progressively reduced ( Fig . 1F ; left panels ) . Interestingly , antibodies against the C - terminal regions of FAK ( amino acids 700 – 800 and 1019 – 1052 ) demonstrated the generation of an extra band of approximately 40 kDa ( Fig . 1F ; arrows in the right panels ) , which was not detected by the N - terminal antibody ( Fig . 1F ; lower left panel ) . Taking with the results of immuno ﬂ uorescence and immunoblot analyses together , we hypothesized that the cells formed a novel type of focal adhesion containing the C - terminal 40 - kDa region of FAK instead of active FAK . FRNK is expressed in response to genotoxic stress We next aimed to characterize the C - terminal 40 - kDa region of FAK . We initially predicted that the 40 - kDa product resulted from the degradation of FAK , and that FAK is directly cleaved by caspases , which were activated in etoposide - treated MEFs undergoing apoptosis ( Fig . 1F ; cleaved caspase 3 ) [ 9 , 28 ] . However , generation of the 40 - kDa product of FAK was not affected by QVD - OPh , a pan - caspase inhibitor , and was not affected in mutant cells simulta - neously lacking Bax and Bak genes ( Bax / Bak - DKO MEFs ) , which are unable to activate caspases ( Supplementary Fig . S2A , B ) [ 24 ] . We also found potential cleavage sites of cathepsin L and enterokinase in the C - terminal half of FAK ( Supplementary Fig . S2C ) , but all the Fak - knockout ( KO ) MEFs individually expressing FAK mutants , in which these cleavage sites were disrupted , showed the presence of the 40 - kDa product upon the treatment of etoposide ( Supplemen - tary Fig . S2D , E ) . More importantly , we detected the 40 - kDa product even in Fak - KO MEFs treated with etoposide ( Fig . 2A ; arrow ) , indicating that it was not a FAK - derived product . These results thus led us to speculate that the 40 - kDa product was from the Frnk gene , which resides within and shares its coding exons with the Fak gene , although it is an independent gene ( Fig . 2B ) . The Frnk gene promoter is embedded within intron 20 of the Fak gene , which immediately precedes the exon containing the initiation codon of the Frnk gene ( Fig . 2B ) . FRNK is translated from the 693rd methionine residue of FAK , and is identical in sequence to the C - terminal region of FAK ( Fig . 2C ) , which is approximately 40 kDa . Note that the Frnk gene is intact in the Fak - KO MEFs that were analysed , which were generated from a Fak - KO mouse lacking only exon 15 of the Fak gene ( Fig . 2C ) [ 22 ] . Consistent with our speculation , treatment with either the translation inhibitor cyclo - heximide or the transcription inhibitor actinomycin D inhibited the expression of the 40 - kDa product in etoposide - treated Bax / Bak - DKO MEFs ( Fig . 2D ) , which enabled more effective sample collection than WT MEFs owing to their higher apoptosis resistance . We subsequently analysed the expression of the Frnk gene at the transcriptional level after DNA damage in Bax / Bak - DKO MEFs , using M . Tsujioka et al . 4 Cell Death and Disease ( 2023 ) 14 : 256 RT - PCR . To this end , we used a primer set to amplify the 5 ′ - untranslated region speci ﬁ c to Frnk mRNA , originating from the unique noncoding exon of the Frnk gene ( Fig . 2E ; primer set 1 ) . Frnk mRNA was detected after etoposide treatment ( Fig . 2E , F ; primer set 1 ) , whereas the expression level of Fak mRNA remained unchanged ( Fig . 2E , F ; primer set 2 ) . When we ampli ﬁ ed a region common to Fak mRNA and Frnk mRNA , the amount of the PCR product was markedly increased by etoposide treatment ( Fig . 2E , F ; primer set 3 ) , owing to an increase in Frnk mRNA . These data con ﬁ rmed the transcriptional upregulation of the Frnk gene upon genotoxic stress . Finally , to determine whether the 40 - kDa product represented FRNK , we generated Frnk - KO mice by deletion of the 5 ’ - untranslated region of the Frnk gene , which includes the noncoding exon , using the CRISPR / Cas9 system ( Supplementary Fig . S2F , G ) . We harvested Frnk - KO MEFs from embryos and treated them with etoposide . Deletion of the Frnk gene did not affect the expression levels of total or active FAK , but the 40 - kDa band was never generated in etoposide - treated Frnk - KO MEFs ( Fig . 2G ) , leading us to conclude that FRNK was identical to the 40 - kDa product and was expressed by genotoxic stress . FRNK contains the FAT domain , which is a region crucial for the recruitment of proteins to focal adhesions ( Fig . 1A ) , and FRNK was actually recruited to focal adhesions , as shown by the colocalization of GFP - tagged FRNK with talin ( Fig . 2H ) . In addition , after etoposide treatment , expression of the 40 - kDa Fig . 1 Unusual focal adhesions are formed in cells as a result of genotoxic stress . A Schematic representation of FAK showing the positions of the FERM domain , kinase domain , and FAT domain . Regions of the epitopes used for the generation of antibodies that were used in this study are also shown . The 397th tyrosine residue , which is autophosphorylated in active FAK , and the potential cleavage sites of caspases are also indicated . B – D Confocal ﬂ uorescence images of WT MEFs double - immunostained before and after 20 µM etoposide treatment ( 24 h ) with an anti - paxillin antibody ( red ) and an anti - FAK antibody ( α 700 – 800 ) ( green ) ( B ) , an anti - paxillin antibody ( red ) and an anti - FAK antibody ( α 354 – 533 ) ( green ) ( C ) , and the two anti - FAK antibodies ( α 354 – 533 and α 700 – 800 ) recognizing its middle ( red ) and C - terminal region ( green ) , respectively ( D ) . E Conventional ﬂ uorescence images of WT MEFs double - stained with antibodies against active FAK ( red ) and paxillin ( green ) before and after 20 µM etoposide treatment ( 24 h ) . F Immunoblot analysis showing a reduction of FAK but not paxillin , and the generation of a FAK - associated 40 - kDa band ( arrows ) during etoposide treatment of WT MEFs . Active caspase 3 ( 17 kDa ) was generated after etoposide treatment . Actin was used as a loading control . Scale bars , 20 µm ( B – D ) and 10 µm ( E ) . M . Tsujioka et al . 5 Cell Death and Disease ( 2023 ) 14 : 256 product corresponding to FRNK was accompanied with a reduction in active FAK , as shown in Fig . 1F , and the antibody against both FAK and FRNK ( epitope : amino acids 700 – 800 of FAK ) still showed focal adhesion signals , whereas the antibody that detects FAK but not FRNK ( epitope : amino acids 354 – 533 of FAK ) scarcely showed focal adhesion signals ( Fig . 1D ) . These results indicated that FAK - FRNK replacement occurred in the focal adhesions in response to genotoxic stress . Note that this type of focal adhesion remodelling is very unique , because it is accomplished by the exchange of two related proteins , and not simply by assembly / disassembly of the components . FAK / FRNK replacement supports cell - matrix adhesion as a response to genotoxic stress We next analysed the role of FAK / FRNK replacement in focal adhesions upon genotoxic stress . Although Frnk - KO MEFs looked Fig . 2 FRNK is expressed in response to genotoxic stress . A Immunoblot analysis showing the generation of a FAK - associated 40 - kDa band ( arrow ) even in Fak - KO MEFs after etoposide treatment ( 20µM , 24h ) . B Schematic diagram illustrating the genomic region , including exons 20 and 21 of the Fak gene ( black ) , and the promoter region and exons 1 and 2 of the Frnk gene ( red ) . The initiation codon for the translation of Frnk resides in exon 21 , and intron 20 contains the promoter and the unique noncoding exon of the Frnk gene . Sizes of each exon are indicated in parentheses . C Schematic diagram comparing the protein structures of FAK ( black ) and FRNK ( red ) , as well as demonstrating the positions of their corresponding exons . The 693rd methionine residue of FAK is the start site of FRNK translation , and exon 15 is disrupted in Fak - KO MEFs . D Immunoblot analysis showing transcription - and translation - dependent generation of the FAK - associated 40 - kDa band in Bax / Bak - DKO MEFs ( arrows ) . For the inhibition of translation and transcription , WT MEFs were treated with 20 µM etoposide for 14 h together with cycloheximide ( 5 µg / mL ) or actinomycin D ( 0 . 2 µg / mL ) . E Schematic representation of Fak ( black ) and Frnk ( red ) cDNAs . Fak - speci ﬁ c , Frnk - speci ﬁ c , and common regions are shown in white , black , and grey , respectively . The ATG initiation codon of Fak and Frnk are indicated . Numbers in parentheses denote the nucleotide positions from the ﬁ rst nucleotide of Fak translation . Arrowheads indicate the locations of the primer sets used to amplify each region . F RT - PCR using the primer sets indicated in ( E ) , which shows the expression of FRNK mRNA but not FAK mRNA by etoposide treatment in Bax / Bak - DKO MEFs . G Immunoblot analysis showing the absence of the 40 - kDa product in Frnk - KO MEFs treated with etoposide ( 20 µM ) . H Fluorescence images showing the localization of GFP - FRNK in focal adhesions . Fak - KO MEFs transiently expressing the GFP protein were counterstained with an anti - talin antibody . Magni ﬁ ed images of the boxed regions are shown under each original image . Scale bars , 20 µm ( original image ) and 10 µm ( magni ﬁ ed image ) . For all immunoblot experiments in Fig . 2 , actin was used as a loading control . M . Tsujioka et al . 6 Cell Death and Disease ( 2023 ) 14 : 256 healthy under normal culture conditions , they became round faster than MEFs from their WT littermates upon etoposide treatment ( Fig . 3A ) . This difference was clearly demonstrated by binarising the phase - contrast images ; cells that were spread out were visualized as dark cells under the microscope ( Fig . 3A ) . Frnk - KO MEFs also tended to lack paxillin signals in focal adhesions upon etoposide treatment ( Fig . 3B , C ) , indicating the rapid loss of focal adhesions . The accelerated cell rounding of Frnk - KO MEFs was not a result of the difference in apoptosis ef ﬁ ciency ; the levels of caspase 3 activation were comparable between etoposide - treated WT and Frnk - KO MEFs ( Fig . 3D ) , and QVD - OPh treatment did not alter the phenotype of Frnk - KO MEFs ( Supplementary Fig . S3A – C ) . Therefore , our results demonstrate that FAK / FRNK replacement supports cell attachment against genotoxic stress , which occurs by a mechanism independent of apoptosis . To investigate the generality of these focal adhesion responses , we used CT26 murine colon carcinoma cells , which show an increase in FRNK levels and decrease in active FAK levels in response to genotoxic stress ( Fig . 3E , “ parent ” ) . FRNK - de ﬁ cient CT26 cells , which were generated using the CRISPR / Cas9 system ( Supplementary Fig . S3D , E ) , were less attached than their parental CT26 cells after etoposide treatment ( Fig . 3F , G ) , which was similar to our observation in MEFs . The overexpression of FRNK in the Frnk - KO strain ( FRNK OE / Frnk - KO CT26 ) ameliorated the loss of cell attachment against etoposide treatment ( Fig . 3F , G ; Supplementary Fig . S3F ) . These data con ﬁ rmed the genotoxic stress - induced expression of FRNK and Fig . 3 FAK / FRNK replacement supports cell - matrix adhesion against genotoxic stress . A – D The indicated MEFs were treated with etoposide ( 20 µM ) . A Representative images showing accelerated cell rounding of Frnk - KO MEFs upon etoposide treatment . The phase - contrast images were binarised to extract the spread - out cells , which are visualized as dark cells under the microscope , and are shown under each original image . Scale bar , 200 µm . B Confocal images of paxillin staining in WT and Frnk - KO MEFs before and after etoposide treatment . Magni ﬁ ed images of the boxed regions are shown under each original image . In etoposide - treated Frnk - KO MEFs , focal adhesion signals were faint , but instead , dense ﬂ uorescence signals were evenly distributed throughout the cytoplasm of the shrunken cells . Scale bars , 20 µm ( original image ) and 10 µm ( magni ﬁ ed image ) . C Graph showing the fractions of cells demonstrating focal adhesion signals that ful ﬁ l the criteria ( see Materials and Methods ) at 24 h after etoposide treatment . D Immunoblot analysis showing equivalent expression levels of active caspase 3 in WT and Frnk - KO MEFs after etoposide treatment . E – G The indicated CT26 derivatives were treated with etoposide ( 100 µM ) . E Immunoblot analysis showing the absence of FRNK in Frnk - KO CT26 cells . F Representative phase - contrast images showing the morphological alterations in the indicated CT26 derivatives 24 h after etoposide treatment . Scale bar , 200 µm . G Graph showing the fractions of cells remaining attached 24 h after etoposide treatment in the indicated CT26 derivatives . All data in the graphs are shown as means ± standard deviations ( SD ; n = 3 ) . The two - sided Student ’ s t test was used for statistical analysis . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 in ( C , G ) . For all immunoblot experiments in Fig . 3 , actin was used as a loading control . M . Tsujioka et al . 7 Cell Death and Disease ( 2023 ) 14 : 256 its contribution to cell attachment . Importantly , the upregulation of FRNK induced by genotoxic stress can be observed in a wide variety of cell lines , such that 11 out of the 35 cell lines analysed expressed FRNK in response to genotoxic stress ( Supplementary Table S3 ) . FRNK stabilizes focal adhesions We next sought to characterize FAK - containing and FRNK - containing focal adhesions under normal culture conditions , using Fak - KO MEFs individually expressing either FAK - GFP or GFP - FRNK , as well as their control cells expressing GFP ( Fig . 4A ) . FAK - GFP and M . Tsujioka et al . 8 Cell Death and Disease ( 2023 ) 14 : 256 GFP - FRNK but not GFP itself localized in the focal adhesions counterstained with an anti - paxillin antibody ( Fig . 4B ; Supple - mentary Fig . S4A ) . The numbers and areas of the focal adhesion signals per cell were larger in the cells expressing GFP - FRNK than in those expressing FAK - GFP , despite their comparable expression levels ( Fig . 4A , C , D ) . We also analysed focal adhesions visualized by an anti - paxillin antibody in the three cell lines . Consistent with the analysis using GFP signals , cells expressing GFP - FRNK showed larger numbers and areas of focal adhesions than cells expressing FAK - GFP and cells expressing GFP , which displayed no signi ﬁ cant difference in the number and area of focal adhesions ( Supple - mentary Fig . S4B , C ) . Even in WT and Frnk - KO MEFs , both of which constitutively express endogenous FAK , the forced expression of GFP - FRNK showed essentially the same effects on focal adhesions as in Fak - KO MEFs ( Supplementary Figs . S5A – D and S6A – D ) . We subsequently investigated the effects of the forced expres - sion of FRNK on cell adhesion . When adhesion abilities were compared among the three cell lines derived from Fak - KO MEFs by treating them with trypsin - EDTA , GFP - FRNK - expressing cells were most resistant to detachment , with no signi ﬁ cant difference between the other two cell lines ( Fig . 4E ) . Similarly , WT and Frnk - KO MEFs overexpressing GFP - FRNK were more resistant to the trypsin - EDTA treatment than their control cells expressing GFP ( Supplementary Figs . S5E and S6E ) . We next measured the adhesion strength of Fak - KO MEFs expressing FAK - GFP and those expressing GFP - FRNK more directly , using atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) . In these experiments , the AFM tip was scanned laterally to the middle of a cell to detach it ( Fig . 4F , G ) , and the lateral detachment force ( F lat ) was measured during this tip lateral scanning ( Fig . 4F – H ) . We found that F lat values were signi ﬁ cantly larger in cells expressing GFP - FRNK than in those expressing FAK - GFP ( Fig . 4I ) , demonstrating that GFP - FRNK - expressing cells adhered to the substrate more strongly . We ﬁ nally investigated the association between focal adhesions and cell attachment by analysing the cell peripheries , where focal adhesions were abundant and local detachment / attachment activities were dynamic , using time - lapse ﬂ uorescence microscopy . Fak - KO MEFs expressing FAK - GFP more frequently showed retraction of the cell edges containing the focal adhesion signals during a 30 - min observation than those expressing GFP - FRNK , whereas cells expressing GFP - FRNK tended to show persistent focal adhesions and more static peripheries than those expressing FAK - GFP ( Fig . 4J ) . We therefore conclude that FRNK plays a speci ﬁ c role in stabilizing focal adhesions , as a component of focal adhesions . This newly identi ﬁ ed function is the cause of the increase in the area and number of focal adhesions in FRNK - expressing cells , leading to their ﬁ rm attachment . Nrf2 induces the expression of FRNK upon genotoxic stress We next investigated the mechanism of the FAK / FRNK replacement , using Bax / Bak - DKO MEFs . A reduction in active FAK level upon etoposide treatment was not the consequence of FRNK expression , because it was also observed in Frnk - KO cells ( Figs . 2G , 3E ) . This reduction was found to be mediated by lysosomal degradation , because it was blocked by E64d , a lysosomal protease inhibitor ( Fig . 5A ) , and because active FAK colocalized with lysosomes upon the simultaneous treatment of etoposide and E64d ( Fig . 5B ) . Regarding the upregulation of FRNK , we searched the promoter region of the Frnk gene , and focused on the consensus binding sequence for the NF - E2 transcription factor complex ( the NF - E2 element ) ( Fig . 5C ) [ 29 ] , because NF - E2 is known to respond to genotoxic stress [ 30 – 33 ] . Expectedly , the chromatin immunoprecipitation ( ChIP ) assay demonstrated that Nrf2 , a component of NF - E2 , bound to the NF - E2 element in an etoposide - dependent manner ( Fig . 5D ) . Conversely , Nrf1 , another Nrf protein , was found to constitutively bind to the NF - E2 element , and etoposide treatment substantially reduced this binding activity ( Fig . 5D ) , which is reasonable because Nrf1 and Nrf2 are mutually exclusive . We next investigated whether Nrf2 is involved in the expression of FRNK , by perturbing Nrf2 expression and function . Treatment of Bax / Bak - DKO MEFs with parthenolide and SP600125 , which are compounds that reportedly enhance Nrf2 expression [ 33 , 34 ] , did not clearly upregulate Nrf2 , although they modestly induced the expression of FRNK ( Fig . 5E ) . However , the administration of these compounds together with etoposide somehow markedly increased the expression of Nrf2 , and concomitantly upregulated FRNK ( Fig . 5E ) . Conversely , the down - regulation of Nrf2 by gene silencing attenuated the induction of FRNK expression upon etoposide stimulation ( Fig . 5F ; left panels ) . Furthermore , when cells were simultaneously treated with etopo - side and ML385 , which blocks the nuclear translocation of Nrf2 , the induction of FRNK was even more attenuated ( Fig . 5F ; right panels ) . These ﬁ ndings demonstrated that genotoxic stress upregulates FRNK in an Nrf2 - dependent manner . FAK / FRNK replacement protects gastric tissues from genotoxic stress We next analysed the physiological role of FRNK using Frnk - KO mice . Although we did not ﬁ nd any apparent defects in Frnk - KO mice , the in vitro functions of FRNK in the genotoxic stress response prompted us to analyse the effects of exposure of the mice to X - ray irradiation . Among the multiple organs and tissues analysed for the expression of FRNK 24 h after X - ray irradiation ( Fig . 6A ) , the gastric mucosa showed substantial irradiation - dependent FRNK accumulation , as well as a reduction in active FAK level ( Fig . 6B ) , leading us to focus our analysis on gastric tissue . Stomachs from Frnk - KO mice exposed to irradiation tended to be ﬂ abby and have irregular shapes , and were red compared with those from WT mice ( Fig . 6C ) . Analysis of sliced sections of the irradiated stomachs stained with haematoxylin and eosin ( HE ) showed that the stomachs of Frnk - KO mice were highly deformed ( Fig . 6D , E ; Supplementary Fig . S7A , B ) , and demonstrated characteristics of acute gastritis , unlike their WT counterparts ( Fig . 6F – I ; Supplementary Fig . S7C – F ) . The thickness of the Fig . 4 FRNK stabilizes focal adhesions . A Immunoblot analysis showing comparable expression levels of GFP , FAK - GFP , and GFP - FRNK , which are detected by an anti - GFP antibody ( α GFP ) , in the indicated stable transformants of Fak - KO MEFs . Actin was used as a loading control . B Confocal ﬂ uorescence images of the respective transformants of Fak - KO MEFs counterstained with an anti - paxillin antibody . C , D Box plots showing the focal adhesion ( FA ) number per average one - cell area ( 2 , 750 µm 2 ) ( C ) and the percentage of focal adhesion area per cell ( D ) in the Fak - KO MEFs expressing FAK - GFP or GFP - FRNK . E Graph showing cell fractions of the Fak - KO MEF transformants remaining attached after trypsin - EDTA treatment . All data in the graph are shown as means ± SD ( n = 3 ) . The two - sided Student t - test was used for statistical analysis . * p < 0 . 05 , NS : no signi ﬁ cance . F Schematic illustration to explain the interactions between the AFM tip and a cell in the lateral detachment force ( F lat ) measurement . The angles Φ and θ were measured for the calculation of F lat ( see Materials and Methods ) . G Phase - contrast images showing the process of the lateral scanning experiment . A GFP - FRNK - expressing cell in ( i ) was subjected to the scanning , as shown in ( ii ) and ( iii ) . H F lat changes in the experiment of ( G ) . Figure 4G ( ii ) and ( iii ) were obtained at the time indicated by the dotted lines ( ii ) and ( iii ) in ( H ) , respectively . I Box plots showing F lat measured in the Fak - KO MEF transformants . J Time - lapse ﬂ uorescence imaging showing representative behaviours of focal adhesions and cell edges in each Fak - KO MEF transformant . Frequencies of retraction events accompanied with the dissolution of focal adhesion signals are shown on the right side . Scale bars , 10 µm ( B ) and 15 µm ( J ) . In all box plots , boxes represent the median ± interquartile range , and whiskers are con ﬁ dence intervals that denote 10th to 90th percentiles . Signi ﬁ cance was tested using the two - sided Wilcoxon matched - pairs signed - rank test . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . M . Tsujioka et al . 9 Cell Death and Disease ( 2023 ) 14 : 256 mucosal layer was uneven , and a partial loss of the epithelial layer was detected ( Fig . 6E ; bracket and 6G ; asterisks ) . The muscularis mucosa was intact in the epithelium - depleted region ( Fig . 6G ; white arrowheads ) , indicating that the damage was limited to the epithelium . Microscopic observation revealed a sparse appearance of the Frnk - KO epithelium ( Fig . 6I ) , which resulted partially from gaps between the aligned epithelial cells ( Fig . 6I , arrowheads ) . The results of the histological analysis suggested that the epithelial Fig . 5 Nrf2 drives the expression of FRNK upon genotoxic stress . A , B Bax / Bak - DKO MEFs were treated with etoposide ( 20 µM ) . A Immunoblot analysis demonstrating the suppression of etoposide - induced active FAK reduction by E64d ( 80 µg / mL ) , which is a broad lysosomal protease inhibitor . Band intensities of active FAK were normalized by actin used as a loading control , and the reduction rates are shown below the blots . B Immuno ﬂ uorescence images showing the colocalization of active FAK and lamp2 , a lysosome marker , by cotreatment with etoposide and E64d ( 80 µg / mL ) . Magni ﬁ ed images of the boxed regions are shown in the top and bottom panels . Arrows indicate the colocalization of the two proteins . Scale bars , 30 µm ( original image ) and 10 µm ( magni ﬁ ed images ) . C Schematic diagram illustrating the area around the promoter region of the Frnk gene . The grey and black boxes indicate the exon containing the initiation codon of Frnk and the noncoding exon , respectively . The consensus NF - E2 binding sequence ( the NF - E2 element ) , in which the ﬁ rst nucleotide is located 1636 bp upstream of the transcription start site of the Frnk gene , is also indicated . D – F Bax / Bak - DKO MEFs were treated with etoposide ( 20 µM ) . D The ChIP assay demonstrating Nrf2 binding to the NF - E2 element in place of Nrf1 in an etoposide - dependent manner . Interaction of the indicated proteins with the NF - E2 element was electrophoretically analysed . Asterisks indicate nonspeci ﬁ c bands . E Immunoblot analysis showing that the upregulation of Nrf2 by cotreatment with 5 µM parthenolide and 25 µM SP600125 coincided with the increase in the etoposide - induced expression of FRNK . The asterisk indicates nonspeci ﬁ c bands . F Immunoblot analysis showing that the etoposide - induced expression of FRNK was diminished , owing to the reduced expression of Nrf2 by gene silencing ( left panels ) and by blockade of the nuclear translocation of Nrf2 with 20 µM ML385 ( right panels ) . Actin was used as a loading control for all immunoblot experiments in this ﬁ gure . M . Tsujioka et al . 10 Cell Death and Disease ( 2023 ) 14 : 256 cells of Frnk - KO mouse stomachs were easily detached from their underlying matrix . When we collected the stomach contents from irradiated WT and Frnk - KO mice , we observed more cell masses in the contents from the stomachs of Frnk - KO mice than from those of WT mice ( Fig . 6J ) . To estimate the quantity of the dissociated cells , we extracted genomic DNA from the detached cells within the stomach contents , subjected the genomic DNA to agarose gel electrophoresis , and stained the gel with ethidium bromide ( EtBr ) . A stained band was observed only in the samples from the stomachs of Frnk - KO mice ( Fig . 6K ) , indicating the presence of a larger amount of dissociated cells in the stomachs of Frnk - KO mice than WT mice . Fig . 6 FAK / FRNK replacement protects gastric tissues from genotoxic stress . A WT mice were or were not irradiated with 5 Gy , and analysed for the expression of FAK and FRNK in each tissue after 24 h . B WT and Frnk - KO mice were irradiated with 5 Gy , and analysed for the expression of FAK and FRNK in the gastric mucosa after 24 h . Among the various tissues , the gastric mucosa was found to express FRNK and downregulate active FAK in response to irradiation ( B ) . Note that FRNK was constitutively expressed in the lungs as already reported , but the level was not affected by irradiation ( A ) . Actin was used as a loading control . C – K WT and Frnk - KO mice were irradiated with 5 Gy and their gastric mucosa were analysed after 24 h . C Macroscopic images of the stomachs of WT and Frnk - KO mice after irradiation . Scale bar , 5 mm . D – I HE staining of sliced sections of the irradiated stomachs of WT and Frnk - KO mice . F , G are magni ﬁ ed images of the boxed regions in ( D , E ) , respectively . In ( E ) , the bracket indicates the uneven thickness of the gastric mucosa of Frnk - KO mice . In ( G ) , asterisks and white arrowheads indicate partial loss of the epithelial layer and the intact muscularis mucosa , respectively , in the stomachs of Frnk - KO mice . In ( I ) , the white arrowheads indicate gaps between aligned epithelial cells in the gastric mucosa of Frnk - KO mice . Scale bars , 5 mm ( D , E ) , 0 . 5 mm ( F , G ) , and 100 µm ( H , I ) . J Phase - contrast images showing dissociated cells from the mucosal layers after irradiation and their corresponding ﬂ uorescence images showing nuclear staining with Hoechst 33342 . K Estimation of the number of dissociated cells from the mucosal layers by visualizing their extracted DNA by EtBr staining after agarose gel electrophoresis . The size of the stained band was more than 10 kbp . M . Tsujioka et al . 11 Cell Death and Disease ( 2023 ) 14 : 256 If cells are easily dissociated , increased apoptosis is expected to follow owing to the induction of anoikis , a type of apoptosis triggered by cell detachment . In fact , the Frnk - KO specimens more frequently showed apoptotic cells , de ﬁ ned by active caspase 3 immuno ﬂ uorescence and TUNEL staining , than those of WT mice ( Supplementary Fig . S7G ; arrows and bracket ) . Immunoblot analysis con ﬁ rmed the increase in active caspase 3 in the irradiated stomachs of Frnk - KO mice compared with those of WT mice ( Supplementary Fig . S7H ) . Cumulatively , these results demonstrate that FRNK is involved in genotoxic stress tolerance M . Tsujioka et al . 12 Cell Death and Disease ( 2023 ) 14 : 256 of the gastric mucosa , by reinforcing the attachment between epithelial cells and their underlying matrix . FAK / FRNK replacement supports cancer progression We next analysed the involvement of FRNK in cancer dissemina - tion , as cancer cells show an association between cell adhesion ability and their progression [ 35 – 38 ] , and are continuously exposed to moderate genotoxic stress during their progression [ 39 ] . We intraperitoneally injected CT26 derivatives into male syngeneic BALB / c mice , and analysed their disseminated tumour cell masses . Immunoblot analysis using lysates prepared from three independent cell masses of parental cells demonstrated a band of gamma - H2AX phosphorylation ( pH2AX ) , which is a marker for double - stranded breaks in DNA , and FRNK expression was also apparent ( Fig . 7A , “ parent ” ) , consistent with the genotoxic stress response under in vitro conditions . We also con ﬁ rmed the absence of and overexpression of FRNK in the disseminated cell masses of Frnk - KO and FRNK OE / Frnk - KO cells , respectively ( Fig . 7A ) . The overexpression of FRNK substantially reduced active FAK in FRNK OE / Frnk - KO cell masses , indicating that FAK / FRNK replacement occurs also in this situation . Nevertheless , substantial amounts of active FAK remained in the parental cell masses , indicating that FAK is only partially or temporarily replaced with FRNK in these tissues . Ten days after their injection , parental CT26 cells were extensively disseminated throughout the peritoneal cavity , whereas Frnk - KO cells showed substantially reduced gross - cell masses , and this phenotype was considerably reduced in Frnk - KO cells re - expressing FRNK ( Fig . 7B ) . The reduction in cancer dissemination in Frnk - KO cells was con ﬁ rmed by the weight of their mesenteries ( Fig . 7C ) . The amounts of bloody ascites clearly re ﬂ ected the different degrees of dissemina - tion among the CT26 derivatives ( Fig . 7D ; Supplementary Fig . S8A ) . We thus propose that partial and / or temporal FAK / FRNK replacement in focal adhesions facilitates the dissemination of cancer cells , probably via the reinforcement of cell adhesion under conditions of genotoxic stress . As another approach to investigate the effects of FRNK expression on cancer progression , we used a murine cancer cell line , namely , p53 - KO - T . P53 is the most frequently mutated tumour suppressor gene in humans , and p53 - KO - T was isolated and established from a spontaneous cancer in a p53 - KO mouse . We generated two clones of Frnk - de ﬁ cient p53 - KO - T by the same strategy as used to generate Frnk - KO CT26 cells ( Supplementary Fig . S3D ) . The p53 - KO - T strain , but not the two mutant clones , expressed FRNK in response to genotoxic stress in vitro ( Supple - mentary Fig . S8B ) , demonstrating that p53 is not essential for FRNK expression . The three cell lines were subcutaneously injected into female syngeneic B6 mice . Tumour formation of the parental strain was apparent in 27 of the 28 injected areas 16 days after inoculation ( Fig . 7E ; Supplementary Fig . S8C ) . However , despite an equivalent proliferation rate in vitro ( Supple - mentary Fig . S8D ) and the same number of injected cells , neither of the two FRNK - depleted strains formed tumour masses , even after 30 days ( ﬁ ve injected areas / clone ) ( Fig . 7E ) . Even when we injected a ﬁ ve times greater number of cells , tumour masses were not formed ( ﬁ ve injected areas / clone ) ( Fig . 7E ) . The expression of FRNK as well as pH2AX was detected in the parental tumours using immunoblot analysis ( Supplementary Fig . S8E , F ) , demon - strating that FRNK is essential for the tumour formation of p53 - KO - T cells . To analyse the impairment in the formation of tumour cell masses in FRNK - de ﬁ cient p53 - KO - T cells , we performed the in vitro sphere formation assay . The Frnk - KO strains formed spheres that were indistinguishable in appearance and size from those of the parental strain within seven days ( Fig . 7F , G ) . Unlike the parental strain , however , the mutant strains were not able to maintain their sphere size , which became smaller with time ( Fig . 7F , G ) . Expectedly , FRNK and pH2AX were expressed in the parental spheres ( Supplementary Fig . S8G ) . We thus suggest that the cell adhesion ability of the Frnk - KO strains is insuf ﬁ cient for the growth and maintenance of their spheres , owing to the loss of FRNK - containing focal adhesions under genotoxic stress conditions , which results in their inability to form dysplastic tumour masses in vivo . Finally , we investigated whether the FRNK gene is expressed in human cancer cells . The expression of FRNK mRNA was analysed by RT - PCR of mRNAs extracted from excised colon cancer tissues from human patients . FRNK mRNA was detectable in 16 out of the 43 samples ( 37 . 2 % ) . Notably , when restricted to metastatic colon cancer tissues , 13 out of the 23 samples ( 56 . 5 % ) were positive for FRNK mRNA signals ( Fig . 7H ; Supplementary Table S4 ) . Considering the functions of FRNK that have been clari ﬁ ed up to this point , the expression of FRNK may accelerate metastasis via the enhance - ment of cell attachment in some types of human cancer cells . DISCUSSION The present study showed for the ﬁ rst time that focal adhesions are remodelled by FAK / FRNK replacement in response to genotoxic stress , to support cell adhesion against this stress ( Supplementary Fig . S9 ) . FRNK was found to be expressed in the gastric mucosa of X - ray irradiated mice , to maintain tissue integrity . These ﬁ ndings led us to conclude that a major function of FRNK is to adapt cells and tissues to genotoxic stress conditions by reinforcing cell adhesion . Although FAK is known to be regulated in various ways , including assembly / disassembly and phosphorylation / depho - sphorylation [ 17 , 18 ] , FAK / FRNK replacement is a novel type of modi ﬁ cation of focal adhesions , which is accomplished by the exchange of the two related proteins , and not simply by the assembly or disassembly of the components . FRNK was previously considered to be an endogenous inhibitor of FAK , owing to its unique structure [ 40 ] . However , our ﬁ ndings indicate that FRNK substitutes for FAK as a focal adhesion component upon genotoxic stress , to play speci ﬁ c pathopysiological roles in cell Fig . 7 FAK / FRNK replacement accelerates cancer progression . A – D CT26 cell derivatives ( 3 × 10 5 cells ) were injected into the peritoneal cavity of male syngeneic BALB / c mice , and analysed after 10 days . A Immunoblot analysis showing the expression levels of the indicated proteins in three independent peritoneal disseminated cell masses of parental and Frnk - KO CT26 strains , as well as one cell mass of the FRNK OE / Frnk - KO strain . Cultured CT26 cells that were untreated or stimulated with 100 µM etoposide were used as negative and positive controls , respectively . Actin was used as a loading control . B Macroscopic images showing tumour mass dissemination in the mesenteries of mice injected with parental , Frnk - KO , and FRNK OE / Frnk - KO CT26 cells . C Graph indicating the dry weights of the mesenteries of mice injected with parental , Frnk - KO , and FRNK OE / Frnk - KO CT26 cells . All data in the graphs are shown as means ± SD ( n = 3 ) . The two - sided Student ’ s t test was used for statistical analysis . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , NS : no signi ﬁ cance . D Photo showing bloody ascites taken from the peritoneal cavities of mice injected with parental , Frnk - KO , and FRNK OE / Frnk - KO CT26 cells . E Plots showing the weights of tumour masses subcutaneously formed by the indicated p53 - KO - T derivatives . F , G P53 - KO - T cell derivatives ( 5 × 10 4 cells ) were 3D - cultured for the indicated days . F Phase - contrast images showing the appearance of spheres formed by p53 - KO - T cell derivatives in vitro . G Graph showing the number of cells forming spheres at 7 days and 14 days after the induction of sphere formation . H Gel electrophoresis following RT - PCR showing the expression levels of FRNK and FAK mRNA in representative primary and metastatic human cancer tissues . The asterisks indicate samples showing the expression of FRNK mRNA . Scale bars , 5 mm ( B , D ) , 100 µm ( F ) . M . Tsujioka et al . 13 Cell Death and Disease ( 2023 ) 14 : 256 adhesion , rather than inhibiting FAK . This mechanism has not been previously identi ﬁ ed in experiments using the arti ﬁ cial expression of FRNK . Interestingly , genotoxic stress concomitantly induced FAK degradation and FRNK expression . These two events are mutually independent , because FAK degradation and FRNK expression occurred in FRNK - de ﬁ cient cells and FAK - de ﬁ cient cells , respectively . Some upstream factors of the genotoxic stress responses may orchestrate this synchronous mechanism , which presently remains unclear . We suggest that FAK / FRNK replacement enhances cell adhesion by stabilizing focal adhesions , which is mainly based on the results regarding the characteristics of focal adhesions containing FAK and FRNK , and the strength of cell adhesion measured by AFM . We believe that the stabilization of focal adhesions by FRNK is reasonable , because FRNK would still be able to act as a scaffold protein within the focal adhesions , as it binds other focal adhesion components , such as paxillin and p130Cas [ 41 ] , and it lacks the kinase activity of FAK , which is required for the disassembly of focal adhesions [ 42 , 43 ] . This ﬁ rm attachment mediated by FAK / FRNK replacement is crucial , because the transient reinforcement of cell adhesions can avoid the uncontrolled loss of cell adhesions in damaged cells and resultant tissue disruption . In vivo , FRNK is predominantly expressed in smooth muscle cells ( SMCs ) composing the vascular media , with its expression barely detectable in other tissues [ 20 , 29 ] . Frnk - KO mice showed delayed differentiation from synthetic to contractile SMCs during the growth and remodelling of blood vessels , which , nevertheless , did not result in apparent defects in the developed vascular systems . As the vascular media is continuously exposed to mechanical strain caused by blood pressure , strong and stable cell - matrix adhesion mediated by FRNK may contribute to the formation and maintenance of the tissues . Similar to the X - ray irradiation of gastric tissue that was performed in the present study , experiments involving severe perturbation of the vascular system may clarify additional important functions of FRNK in the tissues . The enhanced adhesion of cells mediated by FRNK in reaction to genotoxic stress would be advantageous to cancer cells , as they are continuously exposed to moderate genotoxic stress [ 39 ] , and many reports have shown an association between cell attachment ability and tumour progression [ 35 – 38 ] . We therefore hypothe - sized that FRNK is involved in tumour progression . Cancer cells tested in the mouse model in this study demonstrated increased dissemination into the abdominal cavity ( CT26 ) , and tumorigen - esis ( p53 - KO - T ) owing to FRNK expression . Similarly , the prometa - static roles of FRNK were suggested in humans from the results of FRNK expression analysis in cancer tissues . FRNK is thought to support cell attachment in reaction to genotoxic stress under these in vivo conditions . Given the complete lack of growth of FRNK - de ﬁ cient p53 - KO - T cells in vivo , FRNK - mediated cell adhe - sion may be crucial for the dysplastic growth of cancer cells in the early phase . Consistently , spheres of FRNK - de ﬁ cient p53 - KO - T cells formed in vitro were disassembled before they grew to submillimeter diameters . As our study using human colon cancer tissues showed that FRNK was more frequently expressed in metastatic than primary tissues , FRNK expression may promote cancer metastasis through increased adhesion . When we tested an in vitro assay for cell invasive migration , that mimics a part of metastasis ( see Materials and Methods ) , using two human colon cancer cell lines ( DLD1 and HCT116 ) overexpressing FRNK , the expression of GFP - FRNK , which was con ﬁ rmed to facilitate cell adhesion in both cell lines , activated invasive migration in the DLD1 cell line ( Supplementary Fig . S10A , B ) . In contrast , however , HCT116 cells showed the decreased activity of invasive migration ( Supplementary Fig . S10B ) . Strong cell adhesion provides a large traction force for cell migration , whereas its adverse effect on cell detachment resists cell locomotion [ 44 , 45 ] . Therefore , the effects of enhanced adhesion on cell migration would be affected by some cell characteristics , which should be taken into consideration to clarify the relationship between FRNK expression and metastasis . DATA AVAILABILITY All data generated and analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request . REFERENCES 1 . Chatterjee N , Walker GC . Mechanisms of DNA damage , repair , and mutagenesis . Environ Mol Mutagen . 2017 ; 58 : 235 – 63 . 2 . Hafner A , Bulyk ML , Jambhekar A , Lahav G . The multiple mechanisms that reg - ulate p53 activity and cell fate . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2019 ; 20 : 199 – 210 . 3 . Lanz MC , Dibitetto D , Smolka MB . DNA damage kinase signaling : checkpoint and repair at 30 years . EMBO J . 2019 ; 38 : e101801 . 4 . Cordes N . Integrin - mediated cell - matrix interactions for prosurvival and anti - apoptotic signaling after genotoxic injury . Cancer Lett . 2006 ; 242 : 11 – 19 . 5 . Dickreuter E , Cordes N . Cell - ECM interactions control DDR . Oncoscience . 2015 ; 2 : 679 – 80 . 6 . Moncharmont C , Levy A , Guy JB , Falk AT , Guilbert M , Trone JC , et al . Radiation - enhanced cell migration / invasion process : a review . Crit Rev Oncol Hematol . 2014 ; 92 : 133 – 42 . 7 . Bachmann M , Kukkurainen S , Hytönen VP , Wehrle - Haller B . Cell Adhesion by Integrins . Physiol Rev . 2019 ; 99 : 1655 – 99 . 8 . Wehrle - Haller B . Structure and function of focal adhesions . Curr Opin Cell Biol . 2012 ; 24 : 116 – 24 . 9 . Gervais FG , Thornberry NA , Ruffolo SC , Nicholson DW , Roy S . Caspases cleave focal adhesion kinase during apoptosis to generate a FRNK - like polypeptide . J Biol Chem . 1998 ; 273 : 17102 – 8 . 10 . Kook S , Shim SR , Choi SJ , Ahnn J , Kim JI , Eom SH , et al . Caspase - mediated cleavage of p130cas in etoposide - induced apoptotic Rat - 1 cells . Mol Biol Cell . 2000 ; 11 : 929 – 39 . 11 . Levi L , Toyooka T , Patarroyo M , Frisan T . Bacterial genotoxins promote inside - out integrin β 1 activation , formation of focal adhesion complexes and cell spreading . PLoS ONE . 2015 ; 10 : e0124119 . 12 . Cremaschi P , Oliverio M , Leva V , Bione S , Carriero R , Mazzucco G , et al . Chronic replication problems impact cell morphology and adhesion of DNA Ligase I defective cells . PLoS ONE . 2015 ; 10 : e0130561 . 13 . Jung JW , Hwang SY , Hwang JS , Oh ES , Park S , Han IO . Ionising radiation induces changes associated with epithelial - mesenchymal transdifferentiation and increased cell motility of A549 lung epithelial cells . Eur J Cancer . 2007 ; 43 : 1214 – 24 . 14 . Nalla AK , Asuthkar S , Bhoopathi P , Gujrati M , Dinh DH , Rao JS . Suppression of uPAR retards radiation - induced invasion and migration mediated by integrin β 1 / FAK signaling in medulloblastoma . PLoS ONE . 2010 ; 5 : e13006 . 15 . Tsutsumi K , Tsuda M , Yazawa N , Nakamura H , Ishihara S , Haga H , et al . Increased motility and invasiveness in tumor cells that survive 10 Gy irradiation . Cell Struct Funct . 2009 ; 34 : 89 – 96 . 16 . Wild - Bode C , Weller M , Rimner A , Dichgans J , Wick W . Sublethal irradiation promotes migration and invasiveness of glioma cells : implications for radio - therapy of human glioblastoma . Cancer Res . 2001 ; 61 : 2744 – 50 . 17 . Mitra SK , Hanson DA , Schlaepfer DD . Focal adhesion kinase : in command and control of cell motility . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2005 ; 6 : 56 – 68 . 18 . Tapial Martínez P , López Navajas P , Lietha D . FAK structure and regulation by membrane interactions and force in focal adhesions . Biomolecules . 2020 ; 10 : 179 . 19 . Hayasaka H , Martin KH , Hershey ED , Parsons JT . Disruption of FRNK expression by gene targeting of the intronic promoter within the focal adhesion kinase gene . J Cell Biochem . 2007 ; 102 : 947 – 54 . 20 . Sayers RL , Sundberg - Smith LJ , Rojas M , Hayasaka H , Parsons JT , Mack CP , et al . FRNK expression promotes smooth muscle cell maturation during vascular development and after vascular injury . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol . 2008 ; 28 : 2115 – 22 . 21 . Mashiko D , Fujihara Y , Satouh Y , Miyata H , Isotani A , Ikawa M . Generation of mutant mice by pronuclear injection of circular plasmid expressing Cas9 and single guided RNA . Sci Rep . 2013 ; 3 : 3355 . 22 . Ili ć D , Furuta Y , Kanazawa S , Takeda N , Sobue K , Nakatsuji N , et al . Reduced cell motility and enhanced focal adhesion contact formation in cells from FAK - de ﬁ cient mice . Nature . 1995 ; 377 : 539 – 44 . 23 . Castle JC , Loewer M , Boegel S , de Graaf J , Bender C , Tadmor AD , et al . Immu - nomic , genomic and transcriptomic characterization of CT26 colorectal carci - noma . BMC Genomics . 2014 ; 15 : 190 . M . Tsujioka et al . 14 Cell Death and Disease ( 2023 ) 14 : 256 24 . Shimizu S , Kanaseki T , Mizushima N , Mizuta T , Arakawa - Kobayashi S , Thompson CB , et al . Role of Bcl - 2 family proteins in a non - apoptotic programmed cell death dependent on autophagy genes . Nat Cell Biol . 2004 ; 6 : 1221 – 8 . 25 . Deupree SM , Schoen ﬁ sch MH . Quantitative method for determining the lateral strength of bacterial adhesion and application for characterizing adhesion kinetics . Langmuir . 2008 ; 24 : 4700 – 7 . 26 . Nguyen TD , Gu Y . Investigation of cell - substrate adhesion properties of living chondrocyte by measuring adhesive shear force and detachment using AFM and inverse FEA . Sci Rep . 2016 ; 6 : 38059 . 27 . Zhang T , Chao Y , Shih K , Li XY , Fang HH . Quanti ﬁ cation of the lateral detachment force for bacterial cells using atomic force microscope and centrifugation . Ultramicroscopy . 2011 ; 111 : 131 – 9 . 28 . Harrington EO , Smeglin A , Newton J , Ballard G , Rounds S . Protein tyrosine phosphatase - dependent proteolysis of focal adhesion complexes in endothelial cell apoptosis . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol . 2001 ; 280 : L342 – 353 . 29 . Hayasaka H , Simon K , Hershey ED , Masumoto KH , Parsons JT . FRNK , the auton - omously expressed C - terminal region of focal adhesion kinase , is uniquely regulated in vascular smooth muscle : analysis of expression in transgenic mice . J Cell Biochem . 2005 ; 95 : 1248 – 63 . 30 . Fu X , Wan S , Lyu YL , Liu LF , Qi H . Etoposide induces ATM - dependent mito - chondrial biogenesis through AMPK activation . PLoS ONE . 2008 ; 3 : e2009 . 31 . Ji C , Huang JW , Xu QY , Zhang J , Lin MT , Tu Y , et al . Gremlin inhibits UV - induced skin cell damages via activating VEGFR2 - Nrf2 signaling . Oncotarget . 2016 ; 7 : 84748 – 57 . 32 . Li H , Gao A , Jiang N , Liu Q , Liang B , Li R , et al . Protective Effect of Curcumin Against Acute Ultraviolet B Irradiation - induced Photo - damage . Photochem Photobiol . 2016 ; 92 : 808 – 15 . 33 . Zhang H , Liu X , Zhou S , Jia Y , Li Y , Song Y , et al . SP600125 suppresses . J Mol Endocrinol . 2018 ; 60 : 145 – 57 . 34 . Kim CY , Kang B , Suh HJ , Choi HS . Parthenolide , a feverfew - derived phytochemical , ameliorates obesity and obesity - induced in ﬂ ammatory responses via the Nrf2 / Keap1 pathway . Pharm Res . 2019 ; 145 : 104259 . 35 . Ferragut F , Cagnoni AJ , Colombo LL , Sánchez Terrero C , Wolfenstein - Todel C , Tron - coso MF , et al . Dual knockdown of Galectin - 8 and its glycosylated ligand , the acti - vated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule ( ALCAM / CD166 ) , synergistically delays in vivo breast cancer growth . Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Res . 2019 ; 1866 : 1338 – 52 . 36 . Mino K , Ozaki M , Nakanishi K , Haga S , Sato M , Kina M , et al . Inhibition of nuclear factor - kappaB suppresses peritoneal dissemination of gastric cancer by blocking cancer cell adhesion . Cancer Sci . 2011 ; 102 : 1052 – 8 . 37 . Nekulova M , Holcakova J , Gu X , Hrabal V , Galtsidis S , Orzol P , et al . Δ Np63 α expression induces loss of cell adhesion in triple - negative breast cancer cells . BMC Cancer . 2016 ; 16 : 782 . 38 . Sluiter N , de Cuba E , Kwakman R , Kazemier G , Meijer G , Te Velde EA . Adhesion molecules in peritoneal dissemination : function , prognostic relevance and ther - apeutic options . Clin Exp Metastasis . 2016 ; 33 : 401 – 16 . 39 . Bartkova J , Horejsí Z , Koed K , Krämer A , Tort F , Zieger K , et al . DNA damage response as a candidate anti - cancer barrier in early human tumorigenesis . Nat - ure . 2005 ; 434 : 864 – 70 . 40 . Koshman YE , Kim T , Chu M , Engman SJ , Iyengar R , Robia SL , et al . FRNK inhibition of focal adhesion kinase - dependent signaling and migration in vascular smooth muscle cells . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol . 2010 ; 30 : 2226 – 33 . 41 . Koshman YE , Chu M , Engman SJ , Kim T , Iyengar R , Robia SL , et al . Focal adhesion kinase - related nonkinase inhibits vascular smooth muscle cell invasion by focal adhesion targeting , tyrosine 168 phosphorylation , and competition for p130 ( Cas ) binding . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol . 2011 ; 31 : 2432 – 40 . 42 . Hamadi A , Bouali M , Dontenwill M , Stoeckel H , Takeda K , Rondé P . Regulation of focal adhesion dynamics and disassembly by phosphorylation of FAK at tyrosine 397 . J Cell Sci . 2005 ; 118 : 4415 – 25 . 43 . Webb DJ , Donais K , Whitmore LA , Thomas SM , Turner CE , Parsons JT , et al . FAK - Src signalling through paxillin , ERK and MLCK regulates adhesion disassembly . Nat Cell Biol . 2004 ; 6 : 154 – 61 . 44 . DiMilla PA , Stone JA , Quinn JA , Albelda SM , Lauffenburger DA . Maximal migration of human smooth muscle cells on ﬁ bronectin and type IV collagen occurs at an intermediate attachment strength . J Cell Biol . 1993 ; 122 : 729 – 37 . 45 . Zhu J , Mogilner A . Comparison of cell migration mechanical strategies in three - dimensional matrices : a computational study . Interface Focus . 2016 ; 6 : 20160040 . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This study was in part based on the analysis of information from and the use of clinical materials from the BioBank at the Bioresource Research Center , Tokyo Medical and Dental University . The Fak mutant mice were kindly provided by RIKEN CDB ( Acc . no . : CDB0006K ) ( http : / / www . cdb . riken . jp / arg / mutant % 20mice % 20list . html ) . The CRISPR / Cas9 plasmid and Plat - E cells were kindly provided by Professors M . Ikawa ( University of Osaka ) and T . Kitamura ( University of Tokyo ) , respectively . This study was supported in part by a Grant - in - Aid for Scienti ﬁ c Research ( A ) ( 20H00467 ) , Grant - in - Aid for Scienti ﬁ c Research ( C ) ( 20K07564 ) , Grant - in - Aid for Scienti ﬁ c Research on Innovative Areas ( 17H05691 , 17H06413 , 17H06414 , and 22H04639 ) from the MEXT of Japan , by the Project for Cancer Research and Therapeutic Evolution ( P - CREATE ) ( JP18cm0106109 ) , by the Project for Psychiatric and Neurological Disorders ( JP18dm0107136 , JP21wm0525028 ) , by the Practical Research Project for Rare / Intractable Diseases ( JP19ek0109407 ) , by the Translational Research Program ; Strategic Promotion for Practical Application of Innovative Medical Technology , TR - SPRINT , and by the AMED - CREST ( JP19gm1210002 , JP22gm1410012 ) from the Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development . This study was also supported by the Joint Usage / Research Program of Medical Research Institute , Tokyo Medical and Dental University , and by the World Premier International Research Center Initiative ( WPI ) , MEXT , Japan . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS MT designed the research , performed the biological analyses , and wrote the manuscript ; KM , TS and TF performed the AFM analysis ; MO generated the Frnk - KO mice ; YN performed the gastric mucosa analysis ; TM collected and analysed the human samples ; HH provided advice regarding data interpretation ; SS supervised the study and wrote the manuscript . All authors edited the manuscript . COMPETING INTERESTS The authors declare no competing interests . ADDITIONAL INFORMATION Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41419 - 023 - 05774 - 4 . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Masatsune Tsujioka or Shigeomi Shimizu . Reprints and permission information is available at http : / / www . nature . com / reprints Publisher ’ s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional af ﬁ liations . Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International License , which permits use , sharing , adaptation , distributionandreproductioninanymediumorformat , aslongasyougive appropriatecredittotheoriginalauthor ( s ) andthesource , providealinktotheCreative Commons license , and indicate if changes were made . The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article ’ s Creative Commons license , unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material . If material is not included in the article ’ sCreativeCommonslicenseandyourintendeduseisnotpermittedbystatutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use , you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder . To view a copy of this license , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . © The Author ( s ) 2023 M . Tsujioka et al . 15 Cell Death and Disease ( 2023 ) 14 : 256