Delft University of Technology Inspiration choices that matter The selection of external stimuli during ideation Guerreiro Goncalves , Milene ; Coimbra Cardoso , Carlos ; Badke - Schaub , Petra DOI 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Publication date 2016 Document Version Publisher ' s PDF , also known as Version of record Published in Design Science : An international journal Citation ( APA ) Guerreiro Goncalves , M . , Coimbra Cardoso , C . , & Badke - Schaub , P . ( 2016 ) . Inspiration choices that matter : The selection of external stimuli during ideation . Design Science : An international journal , 2 ( e10 ) , 1 - 31 . DOI : 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Important note To cite this publication , please use the final published version ( if applicable ) . Please check the document version above . Copyright Other than for strictly personal use , it is not permitted to download , forward or distribute the text or part of it , without the consent of the author ( s ) and / or copyright holder ( s ) , unless the work is under an open content license such as Creative Commons . Takedown policy Please contact us and provide details if you believe this document breaches copyrights . We will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim . This work is downloaded from Delft University of Technology . For technical reasons the number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to a maximum of 10 . Received 17 September 2015 Revised 14 June 2016 Accepted 20 June 2016 Corresponding author M . Gonçalves m . guerreirogoncalves @ tudelft . nl Published by Cambridge University Press c (cid:13) The Author ( s ) 2016 Distributed as Open Access under a CC - BY 4 . 0 license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) Des . Sci . , vol . 2 , e10 journals . cambridge . org / dsj DOI : 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Inspiration choices that matter : the selection of external stimuli during ideation Milene Gonçalves 1 , Carlos Cardoso 1 and Petra Badke - Schaub 1 1 Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering , Department of Product Innovation Management , Delft University of Technology , Landbergstraat 15 , 2628 CE Delft , The Netherlands Abstract Inspiration is a widely recognized phenomenon in everyday life . However , researchers still know very little about what the process of inspiration entails . This paper investigates designers’ approaches when selecting inspirational stimuli during the initial phases of a design process . We conducted a think - aloud protocol study and interviews with 31 design Masters students while generating ideas for a design problem . The results indicate that searching for and selecting stimuli require diﬀerent levels of cognitive eﬀort , depending on whether there is unlimited or limited access to stimuli . Furthermore , three important stages of the inspiration process were identified : keyword definition , stimuli search and stimuli selection . For each of these stages , we elaborate on how designers define keywords , which search approaches they use and what drives their selection of stimuli . This paper contributes to an understanding of how designers can be supported in their inspiration process in a more detailed manner . Key words : inspiration sources , selection drivers , external stimuli , designers 1 . Introduction From the very beginning of the design process , designers usually have to choose which directions to follow from a multitude of possible options . This is a particularly challenging phase , also known as the fuzzy front end ( Buijs 2012 ) , as it is when the level of uncertainty about how to proceed is higher ( Khurana & Rosenthal 1997 ) . During this phase , it is often diﬃcult to identify and formulate the problems at hand and , in turn , to specify which directions to follow , because of the ill - defined nature of design problems ( Simon 1973 ) . Uncertainty is challenging for designers , especially novices , who are considered to be less structured in focusing their attention and might struggle while trying to choose which direction to follow ( Kavakli & Gero 2002 ) . In this early context of the design process , designers commonly seek external stimuli with the aim of framing and solving the problems they are engaged with ( Goldschmidt 1997 ; Dorst & Cross 2001 ; Gonçalves , Cardoso & Badke - Schaub 2013 ) . A number of research studies have investigated the impact of external stimuli on the generation of ideas ( e . g . , Yang , Wood & Cutkosky 2005 ; Christensen & Schunn 2007 ; Mougenot , Bouchard & Aoussat 2008 ; Goldschmidt & Sever 2010 ; Howard , Culley & Dekoninck 2010 ; Fu et al . 2013 ) . However , far too little attention has been paid to how designers actually select external stimuli for inspiration during the early stages of the design 1 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at process . This is a particularly important issue , as designers face the problem of having to decide which potential inspiration sources to search for , when there is a virtually unlimited number of available stimuli around them ( Atman et al . 1999 ; Wulﬀ , Rasmussen & Westgaard 2000 ; Prabha et al . 2007 ) . With such information overload , designers are forced to prioritize information , and by selecting certain stimuli , they might be neglecting other relevant ones . This can lead less experienced designers to struggle to find the most relevant stimuli to satisfy their needs ( Atman et al . 1999 ) . Therefore , the aim of this study is to understand designers’ approaches to the selection of external stimuli for inspirational purposes . The main research question is the following one . How do designers select external stimuli for inspirational purposes during the ideation phase ? To complement the main research question , a number of sub - questions are formulated . ( i ) How does the selection of stimuli change when their access is limited , compared with unlimited access ? ( ii ) What are the drivers for the selection of external stimuli ? We define selection of external stimuli as the decision process of defining keywords , searching and selecting stimuli to help to frame a given problem and generate ideas during ideation . In the context of this study , ideation entails both diverging and converging phases . The diverging phase follows from a task clarification phase , where problems are interpreted , and it mainly consists of the exploration of the solution space . In the converging phase , ideas are elaborated , which eventually results in a final concept . Therefore , in our study , ideation is distinguished from idea generation , which usually only addresses the creation of a large pool of ideas , without necessarily interpreting the problem or synthesizing ideas later ( Jonson 2005 ) . Studying how designers select external stimuli can help us to gain a better understanding about the inspiration process in design and , ultimately , support design creativity , in both education and practice . Design creativity refers to the development of novel and useful solutions for open , complex and ill - defined problems ( e . g . , Stein 1953 ; Sternberg 1988 ; Boden 1994 ; Lubart 1994 ; Sarkar & Chakrabarti 2007 ; Hennessey & Amabile 2010 ; Runco & Jaeger 2012 ) . By reflecting on the inspiration process , designers can potentially engage in a deliberate process of finding , selecting and using the most advantageous inspiration sources , instead of blindly chancing upon an unlimited number of stimuli . The remainder of the paper is structured in the following manner . Section 2 comprises the literature review , where we consider relevant research on design inspiration sources . Section 3 elaborates on the methodology applied in this study , and in Section 4 we describe the results of the think - aloud protocol study and interviews . Sections 5 and 6 present the discussion and conclusions of this study and implications for design practice and education . 2 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at 2 . Theoretical review 2 . 1 . Designers’ inspiration process According to Court , Culley & Mcmahon ( 1993 ) , managing information is a major task in the design process , usually taking up to 18 % of the designers’ time . Information is defined by Hicks et al . ( 2002 ) and Howard ( 2008 ) as data with context , which refers to facts that carry meaning . Subsequently , stimuli can be considered as information encountered , perceived and understood by a receiver ( e . g . , designer ) , which prompts a reaction , which can later be revealed as positive , negative or neutral . External stimuli ( not to be confused with internal stimuli , i . e . , one’s internal representations ) can vary across diﬀerent types and forms . In terms of representation modalities , stimuli can be pictorial , verbal / textual or three - dimensional , among others ( Eastman 2001 ) . Moreover , stimuli are context - dependent . Closely related stimuli refer to entities found within a domain , for instance , when looking at existing exemplar solutions for the same problem ( e . g . , Pasman 2003 ) . Conversely , distantly related stimuli are sources found in - between domains , or outside the scope of the problem ( e . g . , Ansburg & Hill 2003 ) . External stimuli can also vary in terms of the medium in which they are conveyed and accessed ( with the Internet being the most used medium by designers , according to Mougenot et al . ( 2008 ) and Gonçalves , Cardoso & Badke - Schaub ( 2014 ) ) or in the type of content they entail ( which kind of information is communicated ) . Certain information can become inspirational , but not all information is inspiring . Information only may become inspirational after it is perceived , understood by a receiver and included in the designer’s interpretation of problem and solution space , usually with a positive influence . In this way , inspiration is clearly distinguished from information . Inspiration sources can be defined as any stimulus retrieved from one’s memory or from the outside world , during ( or beyond ) a design process , that directly or indirectly influences the thinking process leading up to the framing of the problem or generation of a solution . This definition of inspiration can contain tangible entities but also digital artefacts ( e . g . , web pages ) or even intangible entities ( e . g . , talk with a friend ) . According to Ware ( 2008 ) , our search mechanisms are systematic , but the goal of the search is not always clearly defined . Thus , inspiration can entail several types of search procedures . Active search with purpose refers to deliberately searching for particular stimuli with a specific goal in mind . Examples of these practices are searching on the Internet or in books for specific stimuli , but can also include an intentional walk in a museum to observe an art piece ( Eckert & Stacey 2003 ) . Active search without purpose ( or ongoing search ) refers to active search but without a specific intention to solve a problem at hand . The goal of this type of search is to update or expand one’s knowledge on a topic ( Wilson 1997 ) . Active search without purpose refers to designers’ widespread routine of keeping informed about pertinent topics in their domain ( Eckert & Stacey 2003 ) . Passive search refers to random encounters with relevant stimuli , which are consciously integrated into the design process , also known as serendipity ( e . g . , Keller , Pasman & Stappers 2006 ) . Although there is a conscious goal to solve a problem in this type of situation , the search process is not deliberate and occurs unintentionally . Even when the search query ( or keyword ) is not fully defined , our 3 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at mind is open to recognize stimuli , which could be somehow related to the current problem , and might fit a set of vague criteria ( Wilson 1997 ; Ware 2008 ) . Passive attention refers to the moments when stimuli are encountered but not consciously integrated in the context of an existing problem . This can occur while watching TV or talking with someone , for instance . In this situation , there is no urgent intention to solve a problem nor a conscious perception of the possible influence of a stimulus ( Wilson 1997 ) . Our constant state is one of passive attention , which can quickly change into a more alert or deliberate type of search for stimuli . Therefore , all of these types of search can develop into another , depending on the situation . The value of inspiration sources and their ubiquitous presence in design is often acknowledged by designers and in research ( e . g . , Eckert & Stacey 2003 , Yang et al . 2005 ) . Thus far , the inspiration process in design has been researched by only a small number of researchers ( Eckert & Stacey 2003 ; Mougenot et al . 2008 ; Gonçalves et al . 2013 ) . According to these authors , the type of stimulus designers search for is dependent on the context of the problem at hand . The nature of the problem tends to change their preferences for representation modalities , semantic distance or even quantity of stimuli needed . Moreover , search mechanisms also diﬀer depending on whether designers are browsing the Internet or skimming through a magazine . Based on the work of Eckert & Stacey ( 2003 ) and Mougenot et al . ( 2008 ) , Gonçalves et al . ( 2013 ) developed a flowchart of inspiration , which represents it as a cyclic and iterative process , occurring multiple times within any design process ( Figure 1 ) . The inspiration process is initiated by an intention ( a keyword or search input ) , which guides the following steps of the flowchart . When confronted with a design problem , designers use stimuli as starting points , which need to be searched , selected , analysed and , depending on their suitability , discarded or adapted into the design process . Diﬀerent goals motivate a new cycle of the inspiration process , which either results in reframing of the problem ( or parts of it ) , exploration of the solution space or refinement of sub - solutions . The process is repeated until the problem is reframed or solved . Although this flowchart describes the main steps involved in the use of inspiration sources in design , it does not shed light on how designers arrive at search inputs ( keywords ) to initiate a search nor on what drives their selection of stimuli . In fact , in analogical reasoning studies , the phase of stimuli selection has been characterized as the ‘least understood’ moment of analogical problem solving ( Holyoak & Koh 1987 ) . This paper argues that a comprehensive understanding of these parts of the inspiration process could be used to better support designers in their inspiration use . 2 . 2 . Visual versus textual stimuli From the myriad of stimuli available to designers , there is a striking preference for visual representations ( e . g . , Muller 1989 ; Henderson 1999 ; Gonçalves et al . 2014 ) . This comes as no surprise , as designers are considered to be visualizers ( Mednick 1962 ) , and they are considered to be skillful in making and using visual representations . This is especially the case with visual examples that highlight form and function ( Herring et al . 2009 ) . One of the reasons for the eﬃciency of images is that less cognitive eﬀort is required when accessing , storing and communicating pictorial information compared with written information , especially when it refers to spatial relationships 4 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at Figure 1 . Designers’ inspiration process flowchart ( Gonçalves et al . 2013 ) . ( Sarkar & Chakrabarti 2008 ; Ware 2008 ) . The eﬃciency of images is also achieved due to the close relationship between what is represented in the image and our perception of what is represented ( Ware 2008 ) . Conversely , written language enables the communication of abstract relationships , at the expense of loss of immediate understanding ( Ware 2008 ) . Thus , some information can only be processed in words , while other information is better communicated via images , or even within a combination of both ( Ware 2008 ) . Nevertheless , research has shown that the potential usefulness of textual stimuli as an inspiration source should not be overlooked by designers . Chiu & Shu ( 2007 , 2012 ) have demonstrated that ( written ) language enables the exploration of the solution space during design idea generation . The ambiguity of interpretation that textual stimuli oﬀer has the potential to stimulate creative results . Similarly , in an idea generation study conducted by Goldschmidt & Sever ( 2010 ) , they found 5 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at that textual stimuli led to more original results when compared with a no - stimulus condition . In our study , we have used both visual and textual stimuli to investigate designers’ approaches to selection of inspiration sources . There has been little discussion about the usefulness of employing textual stimuli as potential inspiration sources , especially when compared with visual stimuli . Nonetheless , much of the information designers find when searching for inspiration entails elements of both typologies , as well as three - dimensional , auditory and other representation modes . Visual chunks of information are sometimes grouped with verbal chunks , temporarily combining visual and verbal working memory . Frequently , visual thinking and language - based thinking overlap and interconnect ( Ware 2008 ) . However , for the purpose of clarity , we have researched the roles of visual and textual stimuli provided separately . 2 . 3 . Closely related versus distantly related stimuli In addition to the diﬀerent representation modalities that stimuli can embody , it is also possible to characterize them in terms of distance — i . e . , how close or distant the stimulus is from the context of the problem at hand . Research on analogical reasoning defines this as analogical distance : the distance between the source of the stimulus and the target , which can range from near / within - domain to far / between - domain ( e . g . , Gick & Holyoak 1980 ; Gentner 1983 ; Christensen & Schunn 2007 ; Fu et al . 2013 ) . Analogy is defined as a ‘similarity between relationships’ ( Goldschmidt 2001 , p . 201 ) . However , since it is possible to extract meaning from a stimulus without establishing a relationship between two domains , inspiration can be triggered by cognitive mechanisms other than just analogical reasoning ( such as categorization , visualization or associations ( Sawyer 2006 ; Kerne et al . 2008 a ; Smith & Ward 2012 ) ) . Considering that this study is not solely interested in one single cognitive mechanism , and that not all inspiration sources are analogies , the term analogical distance is not used . Instead , we refer to semantic distance in terms of the meanings entailed by the stimulus and problem context , as the degree of relatedness between the two ( Gick & Holyoak 1980 ) . Designers commonly use existing and similar solutions as stimuli when tackling a problem , as they enable them to frame its context and suggest a reference point ( Pasman 2003 ) . These design precedents are considered to be closely related stimuli , as they are found within the domain of the problem context , thus , sharing mainly superficial similarities . Ozkan & Dogan ( 2013 ) investigated the selection of sources of analogical reasoning , and they found that the selection of stimuli depends on the goals and expertize of the individual . While expert architects selected closely related sources more often ( for eﬃciency purposes ) , novices preferred distant sources ( to strive for originality ) . There is a common agreement that , although closely related stimuli are easier to use than distantly related stimuli ( Ozkan & Dogan 2013 ) , the former can hinder the creative generation of ideas . Research has extensively shown that providing designers with examples of similar solutions can cause designers to become fixated ( e . g . , Jansson & Smith 1991 ; Purcell & Gero 1992 ; Cardoso & Badke - Schaub 2011 ; Cheng , Mugge & Schoormans 2014 ) . Design fixation is defined as an unconscious tendency to reuse parts and principles of examples , where their appropriateness is not considered ( Jansson & Smith 1991 ; Purcell & Gero 1992 ) . Conversely , distantly related stimuli are considered to be more advantageous for creativity 6 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at ( Gentner & Markman 1997 ; Bonnardel & Marmèche 2005 ; Christensen & Schunn 2007 ) . However , recent findings by Chan , Dow & Schunn ( 2014 ) challenge the perspective of distantly related stimuli as more beneficial to creativity than closely related stimuli . Their findings indicate that more concepts were considered to be creative when using near / closely related stimuli than when using far / distantly related stimuli . In any case , as distantly related stimuli do not share surface similarity with the problem context ( but functional or structural similarities instead ) , the potential analogical link between stimulus and problem context is not usually obvious . Thus , it can result in being more diﬃcult to implement distantly related stimuli as inspiration in design . This paper reveals that there are conflicting perspectives regarding the usefulness of closely and distantly related stimuli in design . The role of semantic distance remains unclear , and there is still insuﬃcient information on how designers select stimuli during an ideation phase . In order to investigate how designers search , select and retrieve a varied sample of stimuli , this study includes both closely related and distantly related stimuli , textual and visual . 3 . Research method 3 . 1 . Study design In order to investigate designers’ selection approaches to potential inspirational stimuli during the development of a design problem , the study was composed of an ideation session and a follow - up interview . We chose protocol analysis as the method to analyse the design process of the students . Thus , participants were requested to think aloud during the ideation session , while they were videotaped . Verbal protocols have been considered to be a valuable method , as they enable the analysis of aspects of the designers’ thought processes with minimal disruption ( Ericsson & Simon 1993 ; Atman et al . 2005 ) . However , this approach has also been criticized as it may aﬀect participants’ performance due to an increase in cognitive load ( Chiu & Shu 2010 ) . To improve the validity of verbal protocol analysis , Lloyd , Lawson & Scott ( 1995 ) advocated that other methods should be added to the analysis , to obtain a richer perspective of the process and performance of the designer . Therefore , other types of enquiry were added to this study , namely their pen - and - paper outcome and interviews . After the ideation session , the designers were interviewed , where they were asked to elaborate on the ideas generated in a retrospective manner , and to discuss their usual inspirational approaches . In this way , the interviews with each participant enabled a comparison between their usual stimuli selection strategy and their performance during the ideation session . The 31 semi - structured interviews varied between 20 and 50 min . The participants’ sketches were used as visual elicitation material to retrieve information on certain topics of the interview ( Crilly , Blackwell & Clarkson 2006 ) . In order to capture their inspiration process , we created a ‘search tool’ with a view to exploring how the participants would search for stimuli . This search tool can be compared with a simple downsized version of an online search engine . It included a visual and textual stimuli database to provide a range of possible sources for the designers to choose from . 7 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at The outcome of the ideation session resulted in a set of ideas and final concepts by each participant . Considering the total number of participants , ideas and final concepts were only evaluated to complement the analysis of the design activity and interviews . Statistical results were not included in this study , as they were considered to be insuﬃcient to carry a meaningful quantitative analysis . Thus , this paper presents findings solely focused on the impact of designers’ inspiration approaches on the design process . 3 . 2 . Participants and conditions The participants of this study comprised 31 Masters design students from an Industrial Design Engineering faculty . Of the 31 participants , 17 were female and 14 were male , with an average age of 24 years . The participants reported having an average of five years studying design , and only four indicated previous professional experience . The participants were divided in the following groups . ( i ) ‘Control’ condition ( N = 10 ) . The participants did not have access to the search tool or any other information , other than the design brief . They were also not aware of the existence of the search tool . ( ii ) ‘Unlimited’ condition ( N = 10 ) . The participants received unlimited access to the search tool , at any point during ideation . Participants could search for as many keywords and choose to see as many stimuli as they wished . There were no time constraints in how the participants used the search tool , as they could organize the ideation time as desired . No extra time was given to stimuli search . ( iii ) ‘Limited’ condition ( N = 11 ) . The participants received limited access to the search tool . They could only search for one keyword and choose only one stimulus from the options available , during ideation ( both diverging and converging phases ) . There were no time constraints in how the participants used the search tool , as they could organize the ideation time as wished . No extra time was given to stimuli search . The reason for dividing the participants into these three conditions was to enable comparison between diﬀerent levels of access to stimuli . On one hand , the ‘unlimited’ condition aims to replicate the ‘real - world’ situation , where there is a considerable overload of information ( Atman et al . 1999 ; Wulﬀ et al . 2000 ; Prabha et al . 2007 ) . With more and more information available at a distance of one click , designers tend to spend extensive time managing it ( Court et al . 1993 ) , and they may have diﬃculties in selecting the most relevant stimuli . Nevertheless , a prioritization needs to occur , as it is unreasonable to extend the stimuli search period endlessly . The ‘limited’ condition aims to simulate this prioritization , by compelling them to select only one keyword to initiate the search , and , from the options available , only one stimulus . Finally , the ‘control’ condition enables us to have a baseline comparison of the ideation process without influence of external stimuli . 3 . 3 . Procedure The ideation session , which took on average one hour , was divided into three phases ( see Figure 2 ) after the introduction . In the first phase – diverging – 8 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at Figure 2 . Sequence of activities in the ideation session , which took on average one hour . Figure 3 . The four channels : channels 1 – 3 focus on the participant’s work ; channel 4 records the search tool . participants were asked to generate as many diﬀerent ideas as possible for 30 min . In the second phase – converging – the goal was to elaborate on a final concept during 10 min . Participants from the ‘limited’ and ‘unlimited’ conditions could search for stimuli at any point during the diverging and converging phases . Finally , in the third phase – interviewing – the participants were asked a number of questions related to their own inspiration approaches , in a semi - structured interview . All sessions took place in the same room , prepared for experimental purposes ( plain white walls stripped of any information ) . Three cameras videotaped the participants , two focusing on the sketches generated and another capturing their general behaviour ( Figure 3 , channels 1 – 3 ) . We used the Quick Time Player software to digitally record the laptop screen and capture the participants’ interaction with the search tool ( Figure 3 , channel 4 ) . Participants had to create as many diﬀerent ideas as possible for the following design brief . 9 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at ‘Learning to sleep alone at night is a challenge for children at young age . Normally , until the age of two , parents keep their children close and have them sleep in a crib in the parents’ room or even in their own bed . However , it is recommended that children make the transition to their own room and bed . Having the kids wake up during the night and come into the parents’ bed is quite common and it is a big problem for parents . No one sleeps and rests conveniently , the child doesn’t conquer his / her fears and parents don’t have their privacy . Your task is to design a product to help children of young age ( 3 – 5 years old ) sleep alone through the night , in their own bed . ’ Additionally , the participants were asked to take into account the following requirements : safe for the child and comfortable . A pre - test established that the brief was accessible and enabled the exploration of many diﬀerent ideas , without requiring detailed technical knowledge . 3 . 4 . Search tool and stimuli In both the ‘unlimited’ and ‘limited’ conditions , participants were informed that they would have access to the laptop in front of them , to use a closed - circuit database specifically prepared for their design problem ( not connected to the Internet ) . Additionally , they were informed that the search tool contained both pictures and pieces of text with closely or distantly related information . We informed the participants that the use of the search tool was not mandatory . Unlike other studies that have investigated design information retrieval , where the goal was to create or test a computational tool ( Yang et al . 2005 ; Mougenot et al . 2008 ; Setchi & Bouchard 2010 ) , our stimuli database and search tool were meant as a platform for studying the selection process of designers when searching for potential inspiration sources . Thus , several requirements needed to be fulfilled . The search tool should enable the following : ( i ) a more controlled environment to run the experiment , compared with existing search engines ( but similar enough to maintain a high ecological validity ) ; ( ii ) the creation of meta - data ( not visible to the participants ) , embedded in the stimuli ; ( iii ) the search for keywords , by using meta - data ; ( iv ) to randomly display stimuli retrieved by the participants ; ( v ) to display multiple stimuli that shared the same meta - data at the same time ; ( vi ) the modification of the size of the stimuli displayed ; ( vii ) to partially display stimuli , so that participants can have only an impression of the stimulus . For this purpose , we used the existing platform www . blogger . com to build the closed - circuit database of the search tool . The process of assembling such a large quantity of stimuli required five phases of preparation , which are succinctly presented in Figure 4 . During phase 1 , 50 Master students developed ideas for the design brief , resulting in 385 ideas . Phase 1 also enabled us to pre - test the design brief to evaluate whether it was suﬃciently accessible and open for exploration . In phase 2 , two design experts , who were unaware of the solutions created in phase 1 , devised entities ( situations , products or actions ) associated with the resolution of the brief , aiming to assemble possible associations or directions that one could use 10 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at Figure 4 . Overview of the creation process of the stimuli for the search tool used in this study . as inspiration source . The experts of phase 2 were a professional product designer with five years of experience and a fellow design researcher , who were unaware of the goals of this study . In phase 3 , the first author clustered the entities resulting from phases 1 and 2 , in order to create 50 main categories ( e . g . , ‘communication’ ) . For each category , four stimuli were created or found : two pictures and two texts with two levels of semantic distance to the topic of ‘children sleeping alone at night’ , closely related and distantly related . This process resulted in a total of 200 stimuli . The remaining phases were reserved to evaluate the stimuli . In phase 4 , 15 designers rated the semantic distance of the stimuli , regarding the topic of helping children to sleep alone at night , in three levels : closely related , distantly related or unrelated . The goal was to validate whether the 200 stimuli adequately conveyed the intended level of semantic distance . When the professional designers could not reach perfect agreement , alternative stimuli were found . During phase 5 , the initial two experts from phase 2 were asked to evaluate the semantic distance level of alternative stimuli , and verbal validation was reached . Finally , there were a total of 200 stimuli ( 100 images and 100 short texts ) that were either distantly or closely related to the design brief . The 200 stimuli were clustered into 50 categories ( e . g . , ‘light’ or ‘touch’ ) . Each category contained two images and two short texts , each one being either closely or distantly related , as illustrated in Figure 5 . In this example , four stimuli from the category ‘glow in the dark’’ are represented . The image and text on the left are closely related stimuli , as they present products that glow in the dark , and could be a possible solution for the design brief ‘sleeping alone at night’ . The image and text on the right are considered to be distantly related to the problem , as they refer to glowing animals in nature . We manually generated tags ( or meta - data ) , using a thesaurus . This process , although not mechanized , was considered to be comprehensive and enabled us to identify an average of 62 keywords per pair of stimuli ( M = 62 . 5 ; SD = 17 . 7 ) . The same tags were attributed to both image and text from the same semantic level , to ensure that when the participants made a certain search query , both visual and textual counterparts would be shown . When a participant typed a keyword , all stimuli that shared the same meta - data would be retrieved , and thumbnails ( images and texts ) were displayed in a random order . In order to clearly see the stimulus , the participant needed to select the thumbnail ( i . e . , click ) . For instance , when a participant typed the keyword ‘light’ , the four stimuli of Figure 5 and other stimuli sharing the same tag would appear in the search tool . The participant could then decide to choose images or texts by clicking on the thumbnails . 11 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at Figure 5 . From left to right : closely related image , closely related text , distantly related image and distantly related text . Note : this is a visualisation of how the stimuli were created and clustered , and not a representation of how the stimuli were presented to the participants . 3 . 5 . Design protocols and interview analysis The design protocols were analysed using a software tool ( INTERACT Mangold International ) , by coding segments of the participants’ speech . Using the four channels of Figure 3 , which captured the overall experiment , together with the synchronized recording of the search tool and the ideas generated , it was possible to analyse the design protocols in a comprehensive and holistic manner . This reduced misinterpretations while coding . The coding scheme used to analyse the participants’ design process can be found in Appendix A . The main themes arose from the general phases the participants implicitly took while solving the design problem , such as analysis , idea generation or stimuli selection . Taking that theme as an example – stimuli selection – it was possible to discern two categories of action : deliberate ( where the participants vocalized their deliberate reasons to choose a stimulus during the session ) or unconscious / latent ( where the participants did not deliberately reflect on the selection ) . The interviews provided then the opportunity to ask the participants to reflect on their latent stimuli selections retrospectively . Furthermore , by analysing the recording of the search tool , it was possible to clearly discern single codes , such as when participants selected closely related images or selected a keyword ( see Appendix A ) . Although a segment of the participants’ session could include several codes simultaneously ( from diﬀerent themes and categories ) , the codes were mutually exclusive . Each interview was videotaped , transcribed and coded according to emergent categories ( using the software Atlas . ti ) . Evidently , another coding scheme was used to analyse the interviews , as they aimed to cover common inspiration strategies and to support retrospective reflection on the ideation session . The first author coded all interviews , while the second author analysed a subset of the data using the same coding scheme . The two coders reached an agreement of 74 , 1 % . While some of the codes naturally arose from the interview guide used in this set - up , other codes emerged from the participants’ behaviour observed during the ideation session . For instance , the theme use and selection of stimuli in the search tool included the category reasons for selection of stimuli ( among others ) . Within it , several codes emerged from the participants’ reflections on latent selections during the ideation session but also from reflections on their usual inspiration strategies . To avoid overlaps , several coding iterations were conducted , which finally resulted in 57 codes , grouped into 14 categories and five main themes ( Appendix A ) . 12 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at Table 1 . Use of the search tool across treatment conditions ( diverging and converging phases ) Condition Use of search tool Refusal to use Divergent phase Convergent phase search tool Unlimited ( n = 10 ) 6 participants 2 participants 4 participants Limited ( n = 11 ) 11 participants 1 participants 0 participants Only two main themes are going to be fully discussed in the following sections : use and selection of stimuli in the search tool and reflection on inspiration sources , as they were considered to be the most relevant to the topic being tackled in this paper . 4 . Results on the design process and interviews The following sections present the results of two data sources : the protocol analysis of the design process ( complemented by the participants’ ideas , videos and recordings of the search tool ) and interviews . From these analyses , a number of topics emerged , which are explained by including direct quotes from the participants . 4 . 1 . Use of ( and refusal to use ) the search tool Here , we present general observations on the ‘unlimited’ and ‘limited’ participants’ behaviour , particularly on the use of ( or refusal to use ) the search tool . The two treatment groups used the search tool mainly when they seemed to have run out of ideas during the diverging phase ( first 30 min ) . Only three participants preferred to use the search tool during the converging phase ( last 10 min ) ( See Table 1 ) . Four out of 10 participants from the ‘unlimited’ condition opted to not use the search tool . These participants , who could be considered to be ‘inspiration avoiders’ , refused to use the tool even when they were unable to generate ideas , indicating the following . ( i ) They were aware of the possible negative influence of stimuli and did not want to be steered to think in specific ways . This could be related to a conscious decision to avoid becoming fixated by precedents ( e . g . , Jansson & Smith 1991 ; Purcell & Gero 1992 ; Cardoso & Badke - Schaub 2011 ) . ( ii ) They preferred to rely on their own experience and internal stimuli . ( iii ) They considered the time of the session to be suﬃcient to continue generating ideas without assistance . ( iv ) They did not know the search tool beforehand and assumed that it would be similar to existing search engines . ( v ) They were unsure what to search for . Although they avoided searching for stimuli in the session , these participants reported later that inspiration search is part of their usual design process . Thus , they do not necessarily avoid all inspiration : they prefer to refrain from searching for additional external stimuli and rely on their internal stimuli . Conversely , all 11 participants from the ‘limited’ condition decided to use the search tool . Two types of search behaviour could be observed : while the 13 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at four ‘unlimited’ participants who refused to search for inspiration could be considered to be ‘inspiration avoiders’ in the context of this experiment , the remaining participants from the ‘unlimited’ and ‘limited’ conditions could be defined as ‘inspiration seekers’ . Contrary to ‘inspiration avoiders’ , ‘inspiration seekers’ preferred to surround themselves with as much information as they could find . With only one selection , it was sometimes necessary for the ‘limited’ participants to make the most of a stimulus and ‘force fit’ it into the context of the problem . Participant L4 ( ‘limited’ condition ) reported the following . ‘I would have wasted many things [ stimuli ] that I used , actually . ( . . . ) Actually I would have not used these kind of inputs , if I had the chance to change them over and over , I would have wasted them . ’ Additionally , even though the imposed limitation required a higher eﬀort in selecting one search input and one stimulus , all 11 participants from the ‘limited’ condition were positive about its usefulness . In fact , using the search tool in a limited way was appraised as a way to save time in stimuli searching . 4 . 2 . Formulating keywords in the search tool During the interviews , we also investigated how designers initiated a stimulus search . Using as a starting point previous research on designers’ inspiration processes ( Gonçalves et al . 2013 ) , we focused on the initial phases of the search process , especially on three moments : definition of search input , search of stimuli and selection of stimuli ( Figure 1 ) . At the beginning of every design process , designers implicitly and / or explicitly define directions that guide their search , which are operationalized by using ‘keywords’ . All participants considered that some keywords became prevalent throughout the session , opening possible directions to solve the problem . However , there were diﬀerences across conditions regarding how explicitly participants defined keywords . Participants in the ‘limited’ condition were more cautious and took longer in the selection of keywords and made more explicit decisions than those in the ‘unlimited’ condition . Ultimately , these participants regarded the option of using the search tool as a ‘trump card’ to be used as a last resort , especially when they ran out of ideas . Conversely , participants in the ‘unlimited’ condition quickly decided on keywords , not explicitly relating them to a search goal . The ‘limited’ condition participants typed , in total , 16 keywords , from which 10 were successful ( i . e . , the search tool produced results ) . On the six occasions when participants typed keywords that were not included in the search tool they were allowed to change them . There were 29 search inputs in the ‘unlimited’ condition , from which 20 were successfully associated with the data in the search tool . Figure 6 shows the keywords ( in bold ) most frequently selected by each treatment condition . When both treatment conditions ( ‘limited’ and ‘unlimited’ ) are added together , ‘fear’ was the most chosen search input ( 22 . 75 % , selected by five participants ) . When clustering synonyms of the most common words , ‘children’ was equally highly chosen ( 22 . 75 % , selected by five participants , taking into account the terms ‘kid’ and ‘toddler’ ) , but also ‘sleep’ ( 13 . 64 % , selected by three participants , considering the term ‘kids sleeping’ ) and finally ‘stuﬀed toy’ ( 13 . 64 % , 14 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at Figure 6 . Search inputs chosen by the ‘limited’ ( left ) and ‘unlimited’ ( right ) conditions . chosen by three participants , including the term ‘teddy’ ) . In the ‘unlimited’ condition , closely related keywords were chosen most frequently and earlier in the participants’ search for stimuli . Other keywords , which could be considered to be distantly related to the design brief , were chosen later . In the ‘limited’ condition , similar numbers of closely and distantly related keywords were selected . 4 . 3 . Forcing a strike of inspiration A number of participants across treatment conditions reported that they wanted to be struck by inspiration , in a random way , especially because finding useful distantly related stimuli was diﬃcult for them . Especially in the case of two participants ( from the ‘unlimited’ and ‘limited’ conditions ) , using ‘random’ as a keyword in Internet search engines was an acknowledged strategy , in order to increase the chances of coming across inspiration . In this manner , they are able to find unrelated stimuli that they subsequently try to force fit into their project . Participant U11 ( ‘unlimited’ ) explains as follows . ‘If I was really stuck and couldn’t generate ideas anymore , I think I would search for just a random image and then try to use that in any way to solve my problem . So it’s basically a random stimulus as an image . ( . . . ) I just type in ‘random image’ on Google . It works because you get images you don’t know . ’ This behaviour was also visible during the experiment , as one participant from the ‘limited’ condition chose to search for the word ‘random’ in the search tool . This did not produce any results and the participant was authorized to choose another search input . Although most Internet search engines require a keyword to initiate a query , searching for stimuli in the Internet was considered by eight participants ( one from ‘control’ , three from ‘unlimited’ and four from ‘limited’ ) as passive search , due to the unlimited amount of information it contains . This is also a possible explanation for the refusal to use the search tool ( Section 4 . 1 ) , as participant U4 , from the ‘unlimited’ condition , who intentionally did not use it , revealed the following . ‘ Yeah , I don’t know , what do I type ? And see images for what , as inspiration ? ( . . . ) Then I would look into the Internet , but not for my final product . I prefer books and yeah . It’s not the format , but I don’t know exactly what to search there . ’ This suggests that U4’s hesitation about using the search tool might have to do with not knowing what to search for . 15 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at Figure 7 . Numerical proportion of the ‘unlimited’ ( left ) and ‘limited’ ( right ) conditions’ selection of stimuli . 4 . 4 . Most selected stimuli from the search tool In alignment with previous findings ( e . g . , Muller 1989 ; Henderson 1999 ; Gonçalves et al . 2014 ) , the participants expressed a preference for using visual stimuli for inspirational purposes , despite textual stimuli also being used during the experiment . These novice designers seemed to be aware of how potentially useful distantly related stimuli might be for ideation , as shown also by Ozkan and Dogan’s findings ( 2013 ) . However , they appeared to struggle to formulate keywords that could allow them to reach for more distant ( stimuli ) domains . There were striking diﬀerences between the treatment conditions regarding the selection of stimuli , which are visualized in Figure 7 . Participants in the ‘unlimited’ condition selected a variety of images and texts ( in total , 48 images and 27 texts ) . On the other hand , the majority of those in the ‘limited’ condition selected textual stimulus in their only opportunity to use the search tool ( eight out of 11 participants ) . The six participants from the ‘unlimited’ condition who used the search tool selected ( clicked on ) a total of 75 stimuli entities . From this selection of stimuli entities , 34 ( i . e . , 45 . 3 % ) were closely related images , 20 ( 26 . 7 % ) were closely related texts , 14 ( 18 . 7 % ) were distantly related images and only seven ( 9 . 3 % ) were distantly related texts . Besides designers’ preference for visual stimuli , the ‘unlimited’ condition’s substantial use of images is also due to expectations of their inspirational value . This is illustrated by participant U8 ( ‘unlimited’ ) as follows . ‘I don’t expect to get inspiration from it [ text ] . I expect to get more inspiration from images . ’ In the ‘limited’ condition , there were 10 selected ( clicked ) stimuli . From these , six ( 60 % ) were closely related text , two ( 20 % ) were distantly related text , one ( 10 % ) was a closely related image and one ( 10 % ) was a distantly related image . As a result of the restricted tool use of the participants in the ‘limited’ condition , they adopted a diﬀerent search strategy when compared with those in the ‘unlimited’ condition . Participants in the ‘limited’ condition reported that their goal was to select a stimulus that could provide them with the highest exploitation value , to create as many ideas as possible with the one option they had . In an attempt to increase the chances of success in their restricted search , participants in the ‘limited’ condition went against their general preferences for visual stimuli and opted to use textual stimuli instead , because they believed that they could provide additional information . 16 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at Figure 8 . Example of participant U1’s idea , which was directly influenced by a closely related image . Figure 9 . Example of participant L3’s idea , which was indirectly influenced by a closely related text . 4 . 5 . Most used stimuli for ideas generated In this section , we compare how far the stimuli selected for idea generation correspond to the stimuli used by the participants . We considered that ideas were ‘directly’ influenced by a stimulus when the form , function and physical principle were transferred without transformation of the idea ( Figure 8 ) . Conversely , ideas were considered to be ‘indirectly’ influenced by a stimulus when form and function were transferred , but transformed , or when only the principle was transferred ( Figure 9 ) . For this analysis , we included not only the selected stimuli but also stimuli that happened to influence the participants even without selection , when the thumbnail was already suﬃcient to develop an idea . In the ‘unlimited’ condition , ideas were influenced by 27 stimulus entities ( 36 % of the 75 stimulus selection ) . From the 27 stimuli used by the ‘unlimited’ group , 12 were direct influences , while the remaining 15 stimuli were indirect influences . The ‘limited’ condition ideas were influenced by 20 stimuli , which means that 10 other stimuli inadvertently influenced participants’ ideas without selection . 17 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at Table 2 . Number of participants per treatment condition and their use of selection drivers . Drivers for Unlimited Limited stimuli selection ( N = 10 ) ( N = 10 ) Relevance 6 2 Recognition 4 5 Verification 5 0 Reliability 1 1 Curiosity 3 7 From these 20 stimuli , 17 were indirect influences , and only three were considered to be direct influences by the participants . 4 . 6 . Reasons for stimuli selection By asking participants about their reasons for choosing certain stimuli , it was possible to identify a number of drivers that motivated the selection of stimuli . Designers first need to decide on the keywords to find appropriate stimuli , and only then they decide on whether they want to use a particular stimulus for designing . Table 2 indicates the number of participants , per treatment condition , who based their stimuli selection on each driver . Selection based on relevance – With this driver , stimuli were selected ( or dismissed ) depending on how appropriate they were perceived to be in relation to the problem at hand ( Hicks et al . 2002 ; Kwasitsu 2003 ) . This driver brought into focus familiar stimuli , and it was dependent on the design problem being solved . Participant U1 ( ‘unlimited’ ) reported on how easy it was to choose a relevant stimulus , as there was a clear connection with the design brief . ‘I immediately thought of the connection , it just rang with me , it was a very natural thing . ( . . . ) That’s why there was an inspiration . ’ When focusing on relevance , there was a tendency to overlook distantly related stimuli , as the links between stimuli and target were not obvious or immediately available ( in both the ‘limited’ and ‘unlimited’ conditions ) . Selection based on recognition – These selections were based on whether the participants recognized or were already aware of the content of a stimulus . However , selections based on recognition did not usually result in generation of ideas . This , to some extent , explains the considerable number of selections of the ‘unlimited’ condition , reported in Section 4 . 5 . Selections based on recognition occurred also in the ‘limited’ condition , as reported by participant L2 . ‘Here there was ‘children afraid clowns’ [ closely related textual stimulus ] and I was afraid of clowns as well . I have always wondered why and now I know why . ’ In general , recognition was an important motivator to select stimuli ( or to overlook them ) , and it could be compared with experience with source ( one possible determinant for information selection , identified by Kwasitsu ( 2003 ) ) . Selection based on recognition , though , is diﬀerent from selection based on relevance . A stimulus could be considered to be relevant because it was recognized to be appropriate to the problem . However , recognition is 18 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at independent of the context of the problem and can occur even when a stimulus is considered to be irrelevant . Selections based on recognition also led to misinterpretations , with participants hoping to obtain a certain stimulus and receiving unexpected information . This resulted either in fortuitous encounters , with the stimulus being considered useful , or , especially in the ‘limited’ condition , these misunderstandings led to frustration and disappointment with the search tool . Selections caused by misinterpretations could be related to what Shah et al . ( 2001 ) refer to as creative misinterpretations , caused by provocative stimuli . According to these authors , provocative stimuli could be ‘any external stimuli to the designers that provide for a change of reference’ ( p . 173 ) . Although some selections based on recognition ( or , in fact , misinterpretation ) did result in creative ideas , many others were met with disappointment , when the stimulus did not fulfil the expectations of the participants . Thus , although being provocative , unexpected stimuli do not seem to always lead to creative input . Selection based on verification – Another reason for selection is based on the need to verify ideas generated or decisions made . Verification became important at later stages of their process ( mainly in the ‘unlimited’ condition ) , when they had already generated some ideas and needed to validate them . In general , it can be assumed that verification as a driver occurs mainly in the converging phases of the design process . As an example of this , participant U7 ( ‘unlimited’ ) indicated the following . ‘And you should do more research to know which kind of stimulus works for children now , because I don’t have experience with children . And it takes a lot more research . ’ Selection based on reliability – With this driver , selection was based on how reliable a stimulus appeared to be . Choosing a stimulus was dependent on the appearance of formality or how grounded on factual information it appeared to be , as explained by participant L5 ( ‘limited’ ) . ‘The term ‘‘co - sleeping’’ was quite new for me , I thought I just had found something scientific , something that is used by authorities . ’ Reliability can be compared with authenticity or credibility as factors that influence the selection of information ( respectively , Wilson 1997 ; Hicks et al . 2002 ) . Selection based on curiosity – Contrary to selections based on relevance , verification and recognition , some participants selected stimuli specifically because they were unfamiliar to them , eye - catching or unexpected . Participant L11 ( ‘limited’ ) reported the following . ‘This one was the only thing I didn’t expect that should be there . ’ Selections driven by curiosity in the ‘unlimited’ condition were very brief , with just enough time to click and open the image / text . In the ‘limited’ condition , these selections were more strategic , chosen to provide new and unexpected information . In general , unexpected stimuli selected by curiosity were also distantly related to the brief , thus entailing a higher eﬀort in adapting the information into a solution . 5 . Discussion As previously mentioned , this study was guided by the research question how do designers select external stimuli for inspirational purposes during the ideation phase ? 19 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at The following four sub - sections tackle diﬀerent parts of the main research question and address the two sub - questions presented in Section 1 . The process of searching is elaborated in Sections 5 . 1 and 5 . 2 , where diﬀerent aspects of the first sub - question ( How does the selection of stimuli change when their access is limited , compared with unlimited access ? ) are discussed . Section 5 . 3 addresses the second sub - question ( What are the drivers for the selection of external stimuli ? ) , which focuses on the reasons for selection . Finally , in Section 5 . 4 , we present an overall discussion of the inspiration process , based on our results . 5 . 1 . Inspiration avoiders and inspiration seekers In this study , we encountered two distinct inspiration behaviours : there were participants who were inspiration seekers and those who were inspiration avoiders . The reactance theory ( Brehm 1966 ) oﬀers a possible explanation for the diﬀerence between ‘inspiration - avoider’ and ‘inspiration - seeker’ behaviour . Reactance can occur when a person’s perceived freedom is limited , such as when ‘limited’ participants’ search processes were restricted to only one search input and only one selection . When a behavioural freedom is externally restricted or eliminated , people tend to desire their lost freedom even more and try to reinstate it . According to Brehm ( 1966 ) , there are two possible manifestations of the occurrence of reactance behaviour : ( 1 ) to try to restore the lost / endangered freedom and ( 2 ) to perceive it to be more attractive than before . When questioned about whether they would have used the search tool had there been no limitations , on either the number of search inputs or stimuli chosen , all participants from the ‘limited’ condition expressed the importance of the inclusion of inspiration search in the creation of ideas . Thus , the participants in the ‘limited’ condition considered the search tool as more appealing than those in the ‘unlimited’ condition , who had no restrictions . Furthermore , the ‘limited’ participants also tried to restore that option by taking advantage of the stimulus they selected . On the other hand , it is possible that the participants’ awareness of being in an experimental setting may have biased their behaviour . Nevertheless , our results do not support that being inspiration seeker or avoider is any better than the other . 5 . 2 . Random active search of stimuli The majority of designers in all conditions seemed to recognize the positive influence that distantly related stimuli can have as potential inspiration sources . However , one of the challenges of using distantly related stimuli is the diﬃculties in recognizing what could be inspiring . When there are no strict time constraints in a project , activities such as a walk in the park or ‘people watching’ can lead to these random passive encounters with inspiration sources . When time is limited , though , as it frequently is in design studios , designers can adopt alternative methods to support fruitful encounters with diﬀerent types of stimuli . In this study , we observed a possible alternative , which was the use of search engines as a medium to provoke opportunistic encounters with stimuli and to take advantage of any relevant information in this way ( Seifert et al . 1995 ) . These results coincide with findings by Mougenot et al . ( 2008 ) and Herring et al . ( 2009 ) , who indicated that the Internet can be used as a brainstorming tool , to come up with keywords designers initially did not think of . Similarly , participants in this study interpreted the search tool as passive search , which enabled them to stumble upon potentially 20 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at Table 3 . Five types of search for information , for inspiration purposes . inspiring stimuli . This behaviour might be caused by the uncertainty of not knowing what to search for . Without having a specific direction , designers might be dependent on randomly finding relevant stimuli in an opportunistic manner , which shows that even the process of defining a search input can be uncertain . Furthermore , our results show that there is another type of search designers engage in , in addition to the ones presented in section 2 . 1 : random active search . This type of search is characterized by being active and intentional but without a specific goal . Table 3 summarizes the five types of search approaches designers might follow to find stimuli , organized into three criteria : whether there is a problem at hand to solve ( and the search is motivated by the problem ) , whether the search for stimuli is intentional , and whether designers know what they want to find . Our results indicate that the issue of not being able to reach more distantly related stimuli is a knowledge problem , not a motivational one . These novice designers did want to incorporate distantly related stimuli , under the assumption that they can lead to more creative ideas . Although they were motivated , they could not simply reach disparate domains because they did not know what to search for . For this purpose , they devised a strategy that enabled them to actively force passive encounters with stimuli . 5 . 3 . Drivers for inspiration search Five drivers for inspiration search were revealed in the analysis of the designers’ processes . Again , diﬀerences were found between ‘unlimited’ and ‘limited’ conditions . ‘Unlimited’ participants selected stimuli by their relevance , because they were recognizable and enabled verification of their ideas . This explains , to some extent , why these participants might have made less eﬃcient use of the search tool ( see Section 4 . 5 ) : selections based on recognition and verification usually did not lead to idea generation . Many ‘unlimited’ participants were constantly browsing for additional stimuli without incorporating them into ideas . Furthermore , these drivers , especially relevance , oﬀer an explanation as to why there were so many ideas directly influenced by stimuli in the ‘unlimited’ condition . By being relevant to the problem at hand , the chosen stimuli were often also closely related . Thus , there were more superficial similarities between ideas and stimuli , which were considered to be less rare than the ones created by the ‘control’ condition . The ‘limited’ condition selections were mostly driven by curiosity and recognition . While recognition as a driver enabled participants to be more 21 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at Figure 10 . Focus on three phases of the inspiration process : definition of keywords , search and selection of stimuli . confident in their stimuli selection ( as they were already experienced with the source ) , selections driven by curiosity aimed to access unknown information and exploit the potential value of the stimulus . This reveals that the ‘limited’ condition had to select stimuli more strategically than the ‘unlimited’ one , hoping to find stimuli that could help them to generate as many ideas as possible . However , selections driven by curiosity usually led to unexpected or provocative stimuli ( Shah et al . 2001 ) , normally distantly related to the brief , which are considered to be more diﬃcult to implement than closely related ones ( e . g . , Christensen & Schunn 2007 ; Ozkan & Dogan 2013 ) . Therefore , the higher cognitive eﬀort of perceiving , transferring and transforming distantly related stimuli into the context of the brief might have led the participants in the ‘limited’ condition to develop less unique ideas . 5 . 4 . Revision of designers’ inspiration process Building on the previously mentioned framework of the designers’ inspiration process , adapted from Gonçalves et al . ( 2013 ) and based on Eckert & Stacey ( 2003 ) , we are able to elaborate on the initial three phases of the inspiration process , which are the most relevant for this study ( Figure 10 ) . Regarding the ‘definition of keywords’ , we have observed that this is an essential step , which normally happens implicitly . It is through these keywords that pattern - finding mechanisms in the brain are adjusted to focus on the most relevant 22 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at stimuli for the problem at hand . When these triggers are recognized , associations between information already stored in the brain and external stimuli can lead to the creation of new meanings ( Mednick 1962 ) . Initially , most search keywords aim to collect contextual information on the problem , which tends to be closely related , and only later can remote associations be established . The keyword definition influences the remaining steps of the inspiration process , as it directs which kind of stimuli can be found . Concerning the ‘search of stimuli’ , we have identified one more type of search – random active – besides the four aforementioned types ( Section 2 . 1 ) . Figure 10 emphasizes active , passive and random active search typologies , as they refer to searches motivated by existing problems ( passive attention and ongoing search might occur independently of a problem ) . While active search is intentional and occurs mainly to obtain specific information ( to frame the problem ) , passive and random active search tend to result in unexpected encounters with stimuli . These types of search coincide in the lack of a specific keyword to guide the search and diﬀer in intentionality . With passive search , designers either miss or stumble upon inspiration , without much control of the result , while random active search refers to intentional active search but without a specific keyword / direction . This influences the selection of stimuli , which can be unconsciously motivated by five drivers . Depending on the designers’ goals and on the phase of the design process , certain drivers can become prominent . These drivers also influence the type of stimuli found . 6 . Conclusions In this paper , the inspiration process of design students has been described and analysed by identifying how they search , select and retrieve external stimuli for inspirational purposes . Designing requires , among other factors , a continuous switch between information stored in the memory and external stimuli ( Norman 1993 ; Ware 2008 ) . Internal and external stimuli enable us to describe , analyse and understand the world , which makes them powerful reasoning aids ( Ware 2008 ) . By understanding how designers choose external stimuli , we are in a better position to support design creativity and , in tandem , to adapt innovation eﬀorts to the real need for information and avoidance of unstructured Internet search . We have unveiled a number of findings . Our results highlighted the importance of carefully considering the stage at which keywords are defined , when designers are trying to come up with appropriate terms to initiate their search process . This is the initial step of the inspiration process , which has not been thoroughly considered by previous research . Furthermore , the study revealed the search typologies that novice designers go through intuitively without reflection , to be able to search for stimuli from further domains . Finally , we have identified some of the possible drivers that motivate designers in their selection of stimuli . These are relevant findings because we can now tackle each step of the inspiration process individually , to better support it in general . By reflecting on the use of external stimuli , designers can potentially make more eﬃcient choices instead of blindly chancing upon an unlimited diversity of available sources . In this way , the key to a more eﬀective search for inspiration lies in designers’ awareness of their own inspiration process . Thus , they can redirect their attention focus , to be able to recognize the potential value of keywords ( formulated to initiate a search ) and drivers ( to select stimuli ) , which could 23 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at otherwise be dependent on pure chance . However , designers are prone to engaging in the process of causing random encounters with potential inspiration sources ( Shah et al . 2001 ) . At present , Internet search engines ( the most common medium to obtain stimuli ) require keywords to initiate a search , but they are still used as a brainstorming tool to be able to access further directions ( Mougenot et al . 2008 ; Herring et al . 2009 ) . This process can continue for a considerable time as it is based either on chance or on trial and error . In fact , search engines , such as Google , are more eﬀective when the keyword is well defined , compared with when keywords are ambiguous ( Kules 2005 ; Karlsen , Maiden & Kerne 2009 ) . To increase the eﬃciency of finding relevant distantly related stimuli , computational tools could be developed to support a less time - consuming search for stimuli with diﬀerent levels of sematic distance to the problem domain , to fit diﬀerent phases of the design process . However , previous research on computational tools and their usefulness for retrieval of analogue or bio - inspired stimuli assumes that designers know what to search for and , thus , how to actually initiate their search ( Vattam et al . 2010 ; Linsey , Markman & Wood 2012 ) . In such studies , retrieval of stimuli was considered to be the most diﬃcult stage in order to successfully use analogies or bio - inspired stimuli . However , the challenges associated with the formulation of keywords when initiating a search process would precede the retrieval of external stimuli . Although existing computational tools support the retrieval of stimuli , they do not aid in the process of framing the problem , defining directions and formulating appropriate keywords . By clarifying which steps designers go through in the inspiration process , we were able to recognize that an important stage – defining keywords – was excluded from current computational tools , and should thus be considered in future developments . This requirement was , to some extent , recognized by recent studies on existing software tools supporting analogical and biomimetic design ( e . g . , Kerne et al . 2008 b ; Vattam & Goel 2011 ; Tö & Crilly 2015 ) . In particular , these studies recommend that the development of software tools should enable several modes of accessibility , such as browsing , but also other forms of data categorization . These alternative modes of accessibility could support designers even when they do not clearly know what they are looking for . Our findings are relevant for design education and practice , as they provide insights into how designers come across stimuli , how they select them and how these might influence design creativity . Finally , a number of limitations need to be considered . Although our number of participants is considered to be adequate for a qualitative analysis , it is limited for a statistical analysis , which prevented any evaluation on the influence of the participants’ selections of stimuli on their ideation outcome . Nevertheless , this study enabled an in - depth analysis of designers’ inspiration process . On the other hand , further avenues for future research emerge from this study . It would be interesting to investigate the influence of added cognitive eﬀorts of formulating keywords and selecting external stimuli in a larger sample of participants . This would provide insights into the diﬀerence between ‘given’ and ‘intentionally retrieved’ stimuli and their influence on the creative outcome . Moreover , it would be relevant to investigate the usefulness of certain selection drivers in relation to the creative design outcome . This would enable the development of computational tools that could support designers’ search , selection and retrieval of stimuli , even when the goal is uncertain or unknown . 24 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at Acknowledgments This research was co - funded by the ESF ( the European Social Fund ) , FCT ( Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia ) and POPH ( Programa Operacional Potencial Humano ) . Appendix A . Coding scheme used to analyse designers’ process 25 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at Appendix B . Coding scheme for analysis of interviews 26 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at References Ansburg , P . I . & Hill , K . 2003 Creative and analytic thinkers diﬀer in their use of attentional resources . Personality and Individual Diﬀerences 34 , 1141 – 1152 . Atman , C . , Cardella , M . , Turns , J . & Adams , R . 2005 Comparing freshman and senior engineering design processes : an in - depth follow - up study . Design Studies 26 ( 4 ) , 325 – 357 . Atman , C . , Chimka , J . , Bursic , K . & Nachtmann , H . 1999 A comparison of freshman and senior engineering design processes . Design Studies 20 ( 2 ) , 131 – 152 . Boden , M . ( Ed . ) 1994 Dimensions of creativity . MIT Press . Bonnardel , N . & Marmèche , E . 2005 Towards supporting evocation processes in creative design : a cognitive approach . International Journal of Human – Computer Studies 63 ( 4 – 5 ) , 422 – 435 . Brehm , J . 1966 A Theory of Psychology Reactance . Academic . 27 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at Buijs , J . A . 2012 The Delft Innovation Method : A Design Thinker’s Guide to Innovation . Eleven International Publishing . Cardoso , C . & Badke - Schaub , P . 2011 The influence of diﬀerent pictorial representations during idea generation . The Journal of Creative Behaviour 45 ( 2 ) , 130 – 146 . Chan , J . , Dow , S . P . & Schunn , C . D . 2014 Do the best design ideas ( really ) come from conceptually distant sources of inspiration ? . Design Studies 36 , 31 – 58 . Cheng , P . , Mugge , R . & Schoormans , J . 2014 A new strategy to reduce design fixation : presenting partial photographs to designers . Design Studies 35 ( 4 ) , 374 – 391 . Chiu , I . & Shu , L . 2010 Potential limitations of verbal protocols in design experiments . In ASME 2010 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences & Computers and Information in Engineering Conference IDETC / CIE 2010 , pp . 1 – 10 . Chiu , I . & Shu , L . H . 2007 Using language as related stimuli for concept generation . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design Analysis and Manufacturing 21 ( 2 ) , 103 – 121 . Chiu , I . & Shu , L . H . 2012 Investigating eﬀects of oppositely related semantic stimuli on design concept creativity . J . Engineering Design 23 ( 4 ) , 271 – 296 . Christensen , B . T . & Schunn , C . D . 2007 The relationship of analogical distance to analogical function and preinventive structure : the case of engineering design . Memory & Cognition 35 ( 1 ) , 29 – 38 . Court , A . , Culley , S . & Mcmahon , C . 1993 The information requirements of engineering designers . In Proceedings of the International Conference of Engineering Design 1993 . Crilly , N . , Blackwell , A . & Clarkson , P . J . 2006 Graphic elicitation : using research diagrams as interview stimuli . Qualitative research 6 ( 3 ) , 341 – 366 . Dorst , K . & Cross , N . 2001 Creativity in the design process : co - evolution of design problem - solution . Design Studies 22 , 425 – 437 . Eastman , C . 2001 New Directions in Design Cognition : Studies of Representation and Recall ( ed . C . Eastman ) , Knowing and Learning to Design : Cognition in Design Education , pp . 1 – 46 . Elsevier . Eckert , C . & Stacey , M . 2003 Sources of inspiration in industrial practice : the case of knitwear design . Journal of Design Research 3 , doi : 10 . 1504 / JDR . 2003 . 009826 . Ericsson , K . & Simon , H . 1993 Protocol Analysis : Verbal Reports as Data . MIT Press . Fu , K . , Chan , J . , Cagan , J . , Kotovsky , K . , Schunn , C . & Wood , K . 2013 The meaning of ‘near’ and ‘far’ : the impact of structuring design databases and the eﬀect of distance of analogy on design output . Journal of Mechanical Design 135 ( 2 ) , 021007 . Gentner , D . 1983 Structure - mapping : a theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science 7 ( 2 ) , 155 – 170 . Gentner , D . & Markman , A . B . 1997 Structure mapping in analogy and similarity . American Psychologist 52 ( 1 ) , 45 – 56 . Gick , M . L . & Holyoak , K . J . 1980 Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology 12 , 306 – 355 . Goldschmidt , G . 1997 Capturing indeterminism : representation in the design problem space . Design Studies 18 , 441 – 455 . Goldschmidt , G . 2001 Visual analogy – a strategy for design reasoning and learning . In Design Knowing and Learning – Cognition in Design Education ( ed . C . Eastman , W . Newsletter & W . McCracken ) , pp . 199 – 219 . Elsevier . Goldschmidt , G . & Sever , A . L . 2010 Inspiring design ideas with texts . Design Studies 32 ( 2 ) , 139 – 155 . 28 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at Gonçalves , M . , Cardoso , C . & Badke - Schaub , P . 2013 Through the looking glass of inspiration : case studies on inspirational search processes of novice designers . In Proceedings of the International Association of Societies of Design Research , IASDR 2013 , Tokyo , Japan . Gonçalves , M . , Cardoso , C . & Badke - Schaub , P . 2014 What inspires designers ? Preferences on inspirational approaches during idea generation . Design Studies 35 ( 1 ) , 29 – 53 . Henderson , K . 1999 On Line and on Paper : Visual Representations , Visual Culture , and Computer Graphics in Design Engineering . pp . 1 – 14 . Cambridge MIT Press . Hennessey , B . & Amabile , T . 2010 Creativity . Annual Review of Psychology 61 , 569 – 598 . Herring , S . R . , Chang , C . - C . , Krantzler , J . & Bailey , B . P . 2009 Getting Inspired ! Understanding how and why examples are used in creative design practice . In Proceedings of CHI 2009 – Design Methods , pp . 87 – 96 . Hicks , B . J . , Culley , S . J . , Allen , R . D . & Mullineux , G . 2002 A framework for the requirements of capturing , storing and reusing information and knowledge in engineering design . International Journal of Information Management 22 , 263 – 280 . Holyoak , K . J . & Koh , K . 1987 Surface and structural similarity in analogical transfer . Memory & Cognition 15 ( 4 ) , 332 – 340 . Howard , T . J . 2008 Information management for creative stimuli in engineering design . Ph . D . Thesis , Bath , University of Bath . Howard , T . J . , Culley , S . J . & Dekoninck , E . A . 2010 The use of creative stimuli at early stages of industrial product innovation . Research in Engineering Design 21 ( 4 ) , 263 – 274 . Jansson , D . & Smith , S . 1991 Design fixation . Design Studies 12 ( 1 ) , 3 – 11 . Jonson , B . 2005 Design ideation : the conceptual sketch in the digital age . Design Studies 26 , 613 – 624 . Karlsen , K . , Maiden , N . & Kerne , A 2009 Inventing requirements with creativity support tools . In Proceedings 15th International Working Conference , REFSQ’2009 , Lecture Notes on Computer Science LNCS 5512 , pp . 162 – 174 . Kavakli , M . & Gero , J . S . 2002 The structure of concurrent cognitive actions : a case study on novice and expert designers . Design Studies 23 ( 2002 ) , 25 – 40 . Keller , A . I . , Pasman , G . J . & Stappers , P . J . 2006 Collections designers keep : collecting visual material for inspiration and reference . CoDesign 2 ( 1 ) , 17 – 33 . Kerne , A . , Smith , S . , Koh , E . , Choi , H . & Graeber , R . 2008 a An experimental method for measuring the emergence of new ideas in information discovery . International Journal of Human – Computer Interaction 24 ( 5 ) , 460 – 477 . Kerne , A . , Koh , E . , Smith , S . M . , Webb , A . & Dworaczyk , B . 2008 b combinFormation : mixed - initiative composition of image and text surrogates promotes information discovery . ACM Transactions on Information Systems 27 ( 1 ) , 1 – 45 . Khurana , A . & Rosenthal , S . 1997 Integrating the fuzzy front end of new product development . Sloan Management Review 38 ( 2 ) , 103 – 120 . Kules , B . 2005 National Science Foundation Workshop Report Creativity Support Tools , Washington , DC , June 13 – 14 ( 2005 ) http : / / www . cs . umd . edu / hcil / CST / report . html ( retrieved , 10 / 04 / 2016 ) . Kwasitsu , L . 2003 Information - seeking behaviour of design , process and manufacturing engineers . Library & Information Science Research 25 , 459 – 476 . Linsey , J . S . , Markman , A . B . & Wood , K . L . 2012 Design by analogy : a study of the WordTree method for problem re - representation . Journal of Mechanical Design 134 ( 4 ) , 041009 . 29 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at Lloyd , P . , Lawson , B . & Scott , P . 1995 Can concurrent verbalization reveal design cognition ? Design Studies 16 ( 2 ) , 237 – 259 . Lubart , T . 1994 Creativity . In The Handbook of Perception and Cognition : Vol . 12 . Thinking and Problem Solving ( ed . E . C . Carterette , M . P . Friedman & R . J . Sternberg ) , vol . Ed . Academic Press . Mednick , S . A . 1962 The associative basis of the creative process . Psychological Review 69 ( 3 ) , 220 – 232 . Mougenot , C . , Bouchard , C . & Aoussat , A . 2008 Inspiration , images and design : an investigation of designers’ information gathering strategies . Journal of Design Research 7 ( 4 ) , 331 – 351 . Muller , W . 1989 Design discipline and the significance of visuo - spatial thinking . Design Studies 10 ( 1 ) , 12 – 23 . Norman , D . 1993 Things That Make us Smart : Defending Human Attributes in the Age of the Machine . Addison - Wesley Longman Publishing Co . Ozkan , O . & Dogan , F . 2013 Cognitive strategies of analogical reasoning in design : diﬀerences between expert and novice designers . Design Studies 34 ( 2 ) , 161 – 192 . Pasman , G . 2003 Designing with precedents . Ph . D . Thesis , TU Delft , The Netherlands . Prabha , C . , Silipigni Connaway , L . , Olszewski , L . & Jenkins , L . R . 2007 What is enough ? Satisfying information needs . Journal of Documentation 63 ( 1 ) , 74 – 89 . Purcell , T . & Gero , J . 1992 Eﬀects of examples on the results of a design activity . Knowledge - Based Systems 5 ( 1 ) , 82 – 91 . Runco , M . & Jaeger , G . 2012 The standard definition of creativity . Creativity Research Journal 24 ( 1 ) , 92 – 96 . Sarkar , P . & Chakrabarti , A . 2007 Development of a method for assessing design creativity . In International Conference on Engineering Design , ICED’07 , vol . 390 , pp . 1 – 12 . Sarkar , P . & Chakrabarti , A . 2008 The eﬀect of representation of triggers on design outcomes . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 22 , 101 – 116 . Sawyer , R . 2006 Explaining creativity : the science of human innovation . Creativity 27 , 368 . Seifert , C . M . , Meyer , D . , Davidson , N . , Patalano , A . & Yaniv , I . 1995 Demystification of cognitive insight ? Opportunistic assimilation and the prepared - mind hypothesis . In The Nature of Insight , pp . 71 – 124 . Setchi , R . & Bouchard , C . 2010 In search of design inspiration : a semantic - based approach . Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering 10 ( 3 ) . Shah , J . , Vargas Hernandez , N . , Summers , J . & Kulkarni , S . 2001 Collaborative Sketching ( C - Sketch ) – an idea generation technique for engineering design . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 35 ( 3 ) 168 – 198 . Simon , H . 1973 The structure of ill structured problems . Artificial Intelligence 4 ( 3 – 4 ) , 181 – 201 . Smith , S . M . & Ward , T . B . 2012 Cognition and the creation of ideas . In The Oxford Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning ( ed . K . J . Holyoak & R . G . Morrison ) , pp . 456 – 474 . Stein , M . 1953 Creativity and culture . Journal of Psychology 36 , 31 – 322 . Sternberg , R . ( Ed . ) 1988 The Nature of Creativity : Contemporary Psychological Perspectives . Cambridge University Press . 30 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at Töre Yargin , G . & Crilly , N . 2015 Information and interaction requirements for software tools supporting analogical design . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 29 ( 02 ) , 203 – 214 . Vattam , S . , Wiltgen , B . , Helms , M . , Goel , A . K . & Yen , J . 2010 DANE : fostering creativity in and through biologically inspired design . In Design Creativity 2010 ( ed . T . Taura & Y . Nagai ) , pp . 115 – 122 . Springer . Vattam , S . S . & Goel , A . K . 2011 Foraging for inspiration : understanding and supporting the online information seeking practices of biologically inspired designers . In Proceedings of the ASME 2011 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences & Computers and Information in Engineering Conference IDETC / CIE 2011 , pp . 177 – 186 . Ware , C . 2008 Visual Thinking : For Design . Elsevier ( Morgan Kaufmann ) . Wilson , T . D . 1997 Information behaviour : an interdisciplinary perspective . Information Processing & Management 33 ( 4 ) , 551 – 572 . Wulﬀ , I . , Rasmussen , B . & Westgaard , R . 2000 Documentation in large - scale engineering design : information processing and defensive mechanisms to generate information overload . International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics 25 ( 3 ) , 295 – 310 . Yang , M . C . , Wood , W . H . & Cutkosky , M . R . 2005 Design information retrieval : a thesauri - based approach for reuse of informal design information . Engineering with Computers 21 ( 2 ) , 177 – 192 . 31 / 31 http : / www . cambridge . org / core / terms . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2016 . 10 Downloaded from http : / www . cambridge . org / core . Technische Universiteit Delft , on 05 Dec 2016 at 11 : 16 : 45 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use , available at