Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) 1 3 Electronic Markets ( 2023 ) 33 : 62 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12525 - 023 - 00682 - z RESEARCH PAPER Creating value beyond commercial outcomes : The ESG practices of online marketplaces for sustainable development Liang Li 1 · Mingxu Wang 2 · Xiaohao Zhou 3 Received : 14 April 2023 / Accepted : 14 November 2023 © The Author ( s ) , under exclusive licence to Institute of Applied Informatics at University of Leipzig 2023 Abstract The popularity of online marketplaces continues to grow worldwide , and with it comes increased attention to the non - economic value they provide . This study aims to analyze the environmental , social , and governance ( ESG ) reports and news of 13 online marketplace operators and examine their engagement in ESG practices , considering their characteristics and the social environment . By comparing their practices with the generic ESG framework , the study identifies unique factors and approaches specific to ESG practices in online marketplaces , such as constructing industry ecology , contributing to national current affairs and policies , protecting intellectual property , and focusing on information and network security . The study also finds that market transactions , digital innovation , and participant ecology are three key mechanisms that explain the specificity of ESG practices in online marketplaces . The findings of this study offer an ESG framework that can be applied to online marketplaces . It highlights the importance of considering online marketplaces’ social environment and individual characteristics in developing ESG practices . This study provides insights for online marketplace operators to improve their ESG practices and contributes to a growing body of literature on non - economic value creation in online marketplaces . Keywords Online marketplaces · ESG · Non - economic value · Factor framework JEL classification M150 “We will share our progress through two reports : our Annual Report on the health of our business and the ESG report on our progress in sustainability and the associated value we create . ” – Yong Zhang , Chairman of the Board , Alibaba Introduction With the rapid development of digital technology and mobile Internet , online marketplaces have become a vital part of the digital economy by serving as intermediaries that connect the supply and demand sides of goods and ser - vices ( Sun , 2010 ) . From a global perspective , most digital giants are engaged in the operation of online marketplaces ( Rowe & Markus , 2022 ) , which results in fierce competition encompassing multiple aspects such as goods categories , supply chains , user bases , and marketing strategies . Such competition , however , drives online marketplace operators to overemphasize economic performance . As a result , the public and investors recently raise great concerns about the sustainability and social value of online marketplaces , which are crucial to the industry’s ecology , users’ interests , and society’s healthy development ( Meira et al . , 2023 ; Zhou et al . , 2022 ) . Environmental , social , and governance ( ESG ) measures the sustainability and social impact of corporate invest - ments , emphasizing social goals beyond traditional finan - cial metrics ( Drempetic et al . , 2020 ) . In response to lessons Responsible Editor : Sunghan Ryu * Xiaohao Zhou zhouxh36 @ mail . sysu . edu . cn Liang Li liliang2013 @ uibe . edu . cn Mingxu Wang 1310319203 @ qq . com 1 School of Information Technology & Management , University of International Business and Economics , No . 10 Huixin Dongjie , Chaoyang District , Beijing 100029 , China 2 Business School , Renmin University of China , Zhongguancun St . , Beijing 100872 , China 3 School of Business , Sun Yat - Sen University , Xingangxi Road , Guangzhou 510275 , China Electronic Markets ( 2023 ) 33 : 62 1 3 62 Page 2 of 19 from the 2008 global financial crisis , where sustainability proved vital , ESG has become a critical criterion in evalu - ating companies in capital markets ( Berry & Junkus , 2013 ; Meira et al . , 2023 ) . Online marketplaces , as a form of digi - tal platform for business transactions , exhibit ESG perfor - mances that are subject to the same attention and regulation , but distinct from traditional businesses . For example , online marketplaces are usually leading innovators in using digital technologies like social media , short videos , live stream - ing , and big data to provide innovative solutions for envi - ronmental protections and grand societal challenges such as poverty alleviation and women empowerment ( Li et al . , 2019 ; Nguyen & Do , 2022 ) . However , as more and more online marketplaces begin to focus on ESG and sustainability issues , the existing ESG framework is not well suited to effectively assess ESG behaviors and initiatives . Although there have been plenty of studies on online marketplaces , most of them focus on their economic value or profitability ( Constantinides et al . , 2018 ) , and only a small number of studies investigate how e - commerce online marketplaces play important roles in ESG - related issues such as environment protection ( Frenken , 2017 ; Schaltegger et al . , 2016 ) , poverty alleviation ( Li et al . , 2019 ) , and platform governance ( Ondrus et al . , 2015 ) . These studies , however , are fragmented , and most of them are scat - tered in independent studies on a single dimension of ESG , lacking an integrated perspective for comprehensive analy - sis . As a result , there is still a lack of understanding of the unique characteristics of ESG for online marketplaces and the mechanisms that give rise to these characteristics . Hence , we ask two research questions : “What are the unique char - acteristics of ESG in online marketplaces ? And what are the mechanisms that give rise to these unique characteristics ? ” . To address these questions , we conduct a qualitative research based on the ESG reports and news of 13 Chinese leading online marketplaces . In recent years , we have wit - nessed successive waves of online marketplace develop - ments emerging in China , from omnichannel marketing to online - to - offline retail , from social commerce to WeChat businesses , and from short videos to live streaming . While early generations of online marketplace companies in China were often modeled after their global counterparts , newer Chinese entrants are increasingly based on original ideas or bearing characteristics unique to themselves and becom - ing trendsetters ( Li et al . , 2022 ) . For instance , in 2020 , Tmall’s gross merchandise volume ( GMV ) reached $ 709 billion , JD’s reached $ 375 billion , and Pinduoduo’s reached $ 181 billion . Meanwhile , Chinese online marketplaces are leading the way in ESG practices , setting examples for the entire industry . By prioritizing environmental efficiency , social responsibility , and strong governance , Chinese online marketplaces are not only making positive impacts on soci - ety and environment but also reinforcing their position as leaders in the digital economy . Therefore , online market - place companies in China offer revelatory exemplars for us to study the ESG practices of online marketplaces and address our research questions . This study makes two - folded theoretical contributions to the sustainable growth and development of online market - places by highlighting their unique ESG practices and their potential impacts on society and the environment . First , it provides a reference for subsequent scholars to study ESG in online marketplaces and proposes the impact mechanisms of ESG in online marketplaces to promote the sustainable development of enterprises . Second , this study contributes to the literature on the non - economic value dimension of platform companies and advances academic understanding of the sustainability impact aspects of non - economic value , emphasizing the non - economic value beyond the economic value of online marketplaces . Literature review Online marketplaces Online marketplaces are communities where buyers and sellers use internet technologies to exchange product infor - mation , negotiate , and transact . These can be divided into two categories : business - to - business ( B2B ) marketplaces facilitating exchange relationships between organizations and consumer - to - business ( C2B ) or consumer - to - consumer ( C2C ) marketplaces facilitating consumer transactions ( Pav - lou & Gefen , 2004 ) . Online marketplaces include three key components and their interactions : the intermediary ( plat - form ) , the seller ( service provider ) , and the buyer ( Sun , 2010 ) . Due to the unique intermediary properties of online marketplaces , they have been widely used in different fields . Online marketplaces have been utilized in commerce ( Peng et al . , 2023 ) , services ( Garcia , 2017 ; Lin et al . , 2002 ; Ludwig et al . , 2022 ) , travel ( Dolnicar & Zare , 2020 ) , and entertainment ( Smith & Telang , 2018 ) , among others . For example , when companies use online marketplaces for e - commerce , they can promote the efficiency of resource integration through full user participation ( Peng et al . , 2023 ) . Big data analytics and digital platform capabilities can help companies improve knowledge absorption ( Khan & Tao , 2022 ) and further improve innovation ( Jiang et al . , 2023 ) , thus improving business performance . In existing research on online marketplaces , the value platforms created for busi - nesses and organizations is primarily in economic value or profitability ( Constantinides et al . , 2018 ) . These economic values may be more obvious to consumers , such as the abil - ity to obtain better goods and services by screening trust - worthy sellers through publicly available review information on online marketplaces ( Pavlou & Dimoka , 2006 ) and the Electronic Markets ( 2023 ) 33 : 62 1 3 Page 3 of 19 62 ability to enjoy lower price as barriers between marketplaces break down ( Parker & Van Alstyne , 2005 ) . However , the economic value of online marketplaces may not always be visible to their users . For example , online marketplaces can use the large amount of user data they accumulate to launch new businesses that create economic value ( Lupton , 2014 , 2016 ) . Compared to conventional businesses , online market - places have three distinct characteristics . First , online mar - ketplaces are characterized as transactional intermediaries . Online marketplaces have revolutionized the way market transactions occur by providing a digital platform that con - nects buyers and sellers , making it convenient and efficient for both parties . These platforms offer accessibility to a wide range of products , cost - effectiveness , transparency , and con - venience , benefiting users on both ends of the transaction ( Du et al . , 2018 ; Meira et al . , 2023 ; Strader & Shaw , 1997 ) . Furthermore , online marketplaces continuously innovate through digital technologies , such as personalization , mobile commerce , artificial intelligence ( AI ) , augmented reality ( AR ) , virtual reality ( VR ) , blockchain , and cryptocurren - cies , to enhance user experiences and streamline operations . These digital innovations are pivotal in the success of online marketplaces and drive their continued growth ( Du et al . , 2018 ; Nambisan et al . , 2019 ) . Finally , online marketplaces thrive through the active participation of various stakehold - ers , including merchants , buyers , third - party developers , logistics and payment providers , customer support , trust and safety teams , and regulatory authorities ( Chen & Horton , 2016 ; Hong & Pavlou , 2014 ; Jaiswal et al . , 2018 ) . The col - laboration of these stakeholders creates a vibrant ecosystem that sustains the marketplace’s growth and ensures smooth transactions for all participants ( Barrett et al . , 2016 ; Hein et al . , 2020 ) . Second , online marketplaces are usually pioneers of digi - tal innovation , engaging in a perpetual process of adapta - tion to evolving consumer proclivities and technological advancements . The role of personalization emerges as piv - otal , with sophisticated algorithms scrutinizing user data to proffer tailored product recommendations and shopping encounters , ultimately engendering elevated levels of cus - tomer satisfaction and engagement ( Chau & Xu , 2012 ; Kim et al . , 2012 ) . Illustratively , the ascent of mobile commerce stands yet another epochal innovation , affording users the ability to engage in transactions on - the - go , while affording vendors the prospect of harnessing location - based market - ing modalities to target latent clienteles ( Eggert , 2006 ; Luo & Zhang , 2013 ) . Moreover , certain online marketplaces have embraced the transformative potential of blockchain technology and cryptocurrencies , endowing transactions with heightened security , expediting cross - border financial operations , and mitigating the encumbrance of payment pro - cessing fees ( Du et al . , 2018 ) . Third , within online marketplaces , there exists a multifac - eted ecosystem sustained through the concerted engagement of diverse stakeholders ( Adner & Kapoor , 2010 ; Boley & Chang , 2007 ; Constantinides et al . , 2018 ) . Foremost among these are merchants or vendors , who function as the primary purveyors of goods and services . These stakeholders derive pronounced advantages , characterized by unfettered access to an extensive customer base and an entrenched infrastruc - ture conducive to commercial activities ( Constantinides et al . , 2018 ; Kanat et al . , 2018 ; Lusch & Nambisan , 2015 ) . Besides , regulatory entities , in consonance with online mar - ketplaces , collaborate to navigate the labyrinthine landscape of diverse regulations pertaining to consumer protection , data privacy , taxation , and sundry other aspects , thus ensur - ing sustainable expansion and adherence to prevailing legal frameworks ( Cicchiello et al . , 2023 ; Han et al . , 2022 ) . Generic ESG framework and relevant theories ESG is an acronym that was first introduced in a 2004 report prepared by 20 financial institutions in response to a call by United Nations Secretary - General Kofi Anon ( Gillan et al . , 2021 ) . The concept was further developed in a report by the United Nations Principles for Responsible Investment ( UN PRI ) , which defined responsible investment as integrating environmental , social , and corporate governance factors into investment decisions . This approach is also known as sus - tainable investment , ethical investment , and impact invest - ment . It bridges the gap between the traditional financial assessment framework and the “investor - business - sustain - ability” market mechanism and has played an increasingly important role in global sustainable development . On the other hand , Corporate Social Responsibility ( CSR ) tradi - tionally refers to corporate activities in social responsibility . One difference between the two terms is that ESG explicitly includes governance , while CSR indirectly includes govern - ance issues related to environmental and social considera - tions . Therefore , ESG is often considered a broader term than CSR ( Gillan et al . , 2021 ) . While CSR influences the internal processes and corporate culture for achieving sus - tainability , ESG provides a measurable set of benchmarks for external partners and investors to evaluate a company’s sustainability performance ( Cheng et al . , 2023 ) . By synthesizing the previous ESG literature , it can be found that the underlying theories supporting ESG are sus - tainability theory , economic externality theory , stakeholder theory , resource - based view , signaling theory , legitimacy theory , and institutional theory . Based on the above theories , the main views that can support the ESG framework and the references are shown in Table 1 . Electronic Markets ( 2023 ) 33 : 62 1 3 62 Page 4 of 19 ESG standard setting has progressed at the European Union ( EU ) level , but the current policy framework lacks a common definition of ESG factors , resulting in variations in market practices across institutions . While some institutions use various international frameworks and standards to define ESG factors , others use their definitions . Agencies currently make use of the following existing frameworks : 1 . The United Nations Sustainable Development Goals ( SDGs ) consist of 17 interrelated global goals that aim to create a blueprint for a better , more sustainable future for all and are planned to be achieved by 2030 . 2 . The Principles for Responsible Investment ( PRI ) aim to support signatories , including asset owners / institutional investors , investment managers , and service providers Table 1 The theoretical foundations of the ESG framework Theory foundation The main perspective of the theory Important references Sustainability theory Sustainability theory suggests that under the influence of market mechanisms and regulatory measures , environmental protection and economic growth can coexist and be compatible Ge et al . ( 2022 ) ; Zhou et al . ( 2022 ) Economic externality theory The economic externality theory usually applies to the E ( environmental ) aspect of ESG . In ESG disclosure , it is important to focus not only on the negative exter - nalities generated by the production and operation of enterprises but also on their positive externalities to pursue optimal resource allocation Xia ( 2022 ) Stakeholder theory Whether ethically and morally or regarding sustainabil - ity , a company’s management should be accountable to other stakeholders and shareholders . ESG activities should be a source of opportunity , competitive advan - tage , and corporate innovation rather than a cost , an act of charity , or even a constraint Azmi et al . ( 2021 ) ; Bhandari et al . ( 2022 ) ; Nirino et al . ( 2021 ) Resource - based view The relationship between a firm’s resources and sustained competitive advantage is possible if the resources are valuable , rare , inimitable , non - substitut - able , and organized ( VRIN - O ) . The current VRIN - O attributes of the firm’s strategic resources are neces - sary but insufficient for achieving the firm’s much - needed new goals . In addition to profits , companies need to respect social development , ecological justice , and governance compliance . Environmental and social activities can lead to the development of competitive advantages by creating unique skills and competencies within the company Battisti et al . ( 2022 ) ; Bhandari et al . ( 2022 ) Signaling theory When companies disclose ESG - related information , they convey more information about their business operations and sustainability to the outside world Chen et al . ( 2023 ) ; Zhong et al . ( 2022 ) Legitimacy theory Legitimacy theory posits that an organization must con - sider the rights and expectations of the broader public beyond solely those of investors . Non - compliance with societal expectations may lead to various sanc - tions , such as restrictions on a company’s operations , resources , and product demand . When managers perceive a legitimacy gap , they develop strategies to correct their behavior and align with societal aspira - tions . As such , legitimacy theory is useful for under - standing voluntary corporate social and environmental reporting Alda ( 2021 ) ; Lokuwaduge and Heenetigala ( 2017 ) Institutional theory Institutional theory , which emphasizes external influ - ences on organizations , posits that rules , laws , regula - tions , norms , or culture impact corporate behavior more than competitive factors . The advantages of reg - ulation and government influence on ESG reporting and performance suggest that organizations respond to institutional pressures for social responsibility Avetisyan and Hockerts ( 2017 ) ; Weber ( 2014 ) Electronic Markets ( 2023 ) 33 : 62 1 3 Page 5 of 19 62 ( including advice , information , and data ) , to integrate environmental , social , and governance considerations into their investment and ownership decisions . 3 . The Global Reporting Initiative ( GRI ) of the Global Sus - tainability Standards Board is designed to help organiza - tions better understand , manage , and communicate their impact on sustainability - related issues . 4 . The ESG International Factors Framework of the Euro - pean Banking Authority ( EBA ) synthesizes several com - monly used ESG frameworks and standards internation - ally and proposes a generic ESG factor framework of general generality . Although the above frameworks have been widely used in global ESG practice , the business model of online mar - ketplaces has great specificity compared with traditional enterprises . Online marketplaces are typically digital plat - forms that connect two or more participants and form a large business ecosystem . Therefore , ESG practices in online mar - ketplaces involve more participants , apply more advanced digital technologies , and address major social challenges more effectively in a market mechanism - based manner . The unique elements of ESG practices in online marketplaces compared to the prevailing international standards are not yet well understood and are worth exploring in depth . ESG in the online marketplace context As the technology of online marketplaces has evolved over time and different players participate in online marketplaces in different ways , other dimensions of impact beyond eco - nomic value have received increasing attention from the business and academic communities . In recent years , the topic of sustainability has gained prominence , with scholars and practitioners recognizing the critical role of online plat - forms in driving sustainable development ( Kolk & Ciulli , 2020 ; Schaltegger et al . , 2016 ) . Embracing sustainability goes beyond mere profit - seeking and entails considering three essential pillars : social sustainability , environmental sustainability , and technological sustainability ( Alt , 2020 ) . By addressing these dimensions , online marketplaces can become transformative forces in promoting a more equitable , greener , and forward - looking global economy . Social sustainability , as an integral aspect of ESG , emphasizes the positive impact of online platforms on soci - ety . Such platforms can empower rural e - commerce devel - opment , opening up new economic opportunities for com - munities previously isolated from mainstream markets ( Li et al . , 2019 ) . By leveraging digital technologies , these plat - forms can bridge the urban – rural divide , facilitating female urban – rural migration and enhancing access to education , healthcare , and financial services for previously underserved populations ( Nguyen & Do , 2022 ) . Additionally , online platforms have demonstrated the potential to co - create public values with residents , fostering collective decision - making processes and empowering citizens to participate actively in public affairs ( Katsamakas et al . , 2022 ; Meijer & Boon , 2021 ) . As such , these digital marketplaces contribute to a more inclusive society by enabling stakeholders from all walks of life to participate and benefit from the growing digital economy . Turning to environmental sustainability , the impact of online marketplaces on the natural environment cannot be overlooked . While e - commerce has the potential to reduce the carbon footprint associated with traditional retail by eliminating the need for physical storefronts and reducing transportation needs , it also poses new challenges related to packaging waste and increased demand for energy - hungry data centers ( Henderikx & Stoffers , 2022 ; Pansera & Sarkar , 2016 ) . Recognizing the urgency of mitigating environmental impacts , forward - thinking online platforms have embraced innovative business models aimed at reducing negative effects on the planet ( Schaltegger et al . , 2016 ) . One such model gaining traction is that of sharing platforms , where consumers can engage in collaborative consumption , reduc - ing material demand and energy use ( Frenken , 2017 ) . By encouraging sustainable consumption practices , these plat - forms not only benefit the environment but also resonate with the increasing number of eco - conscious consumers seeking more responsible ways to shop . Despite the growing interest in sustainability within the literature , the number of comprehensive studies examining the sustainability aspects of online marketplaces remains relatively limited . While individual studies have touched upon various sustainability dimensions , these efforts are often fragmented and lack an integrated perspective for a comprehensive analysis ( Liu et al . , 2022 ; Saura et al . , 2021 ) . Addressing this research gap , our paper aims to provide an in - depth and cohesive discussion of the value of online plat - forms in advancing sustainability by adopting the lens of ESG . The concept of ESG offers a holistic approach that con - siders not only financial performance but also a company’s impact on society and the environment ( Avramov et al . , 2022 ; Zhou et al . , 2022 ) . By applying the principles of ESG to online marketplaces , we can gain deeper insights into their sustainability efforts and identify areas where further improvements are needed ( Meira et al . , 2023 ) . Addition - ally , this research will shed light on the challenges faced by online platforms in integrating sustainable practices into their core strategies , providing valuable guidance for poli - cymakers , businesses , and consumers striving for a more sustainable digital future . In the subsequent sections of this paper , we will delve into the specific components of ESG , exploring the significance of each criterion within the context of online marketplaces . Electronic Markets ( 2023 ) 33 : 62 1 3 62 Page 6 of 19 Furthermore , we will review relevant research and case stud - ies that have investigated the application of ESG principles in the digital marketplace landscape . By synthesizing exist - ing knowledge and offering fresh perspectives , this study aims to contribute to the growing body of literature on sus - tainable online marketplaces and inspire future research in this vital domain . With an ever - increasing reliance on digital technologies and their impact on global socioeconomic and environmental challenges , understanding the role of online platforms in sustainability becomes an imperative task for shaping a more resilient and responsible digital era . Research methods In order to answer our research questions , this study con - ducts a content analysis of ESG reports issued by Chinese online marketplace companies based on the generic ESG framework , which is referred to in the ESG risk management and supervision report published by the EBA . This generic framework ( Li et al . , 2021 ) and the use of ESG reports as a research sample have been widely adopted in previous stud - ies ( Arvidsson & Dumay , 2022 ; Lee et al . , 2022 ; Lokuwa - duge & Heenetigala , 2017 ) . Data collection Since China is a global leader in developing online mar - ketplaces ( Li et al . , 2022 ) , we selected Chinese online marketplaces as the research target . To identify and collect data , we first used the “Top 100 Chinese Internet Enter - prises with Comprehensive Strength in 2022” as the initial research object , which selected 11 core indicators represent - ing six dimensions , including enterprise size , profitability , innovation capability , growth , risk prevention and control capability , and social responsibility , to evaluate Chinese Internet enterprises’ comprehensive strength index . Next , we screened the top 100 Internet companies to identify those that meet the definition of online marketplaces ( operators ) . Subsequently , we identified the detailed characteristics of each online marketplace , including its main transaction units , sector , and user types . We then conducted an exten - sive search on the official websites of the sample companies and the statutory information disclosure platform of the Shenzhen Stock Exchange to determine whether they pub - lish ESG reports / sustainability reports ( after this , referred to as “reports” ) . Most of the reports are independent disclo - sures , with the remaining portion coming from the compa - nies’ annual reports . The reports are generally from January 1 , 2021 , to December 31 , 2022 . Thirteen companies were ultimately chosen as the subjects of analysis . Finally , we conducted searches on the official websites of the subjects of analysis , as well as news platforms , to compile post - 2021 ESG - related news for these enterprises . Therefore , this study analyzed the latest ESG reports / sustainability reports and associated news over the past 2 years in the Chinese online marketplaces . A total of 25 ESG reports and over 310 , 000 words of news articles were collected from 13 companies . Notably , JD Logistics and JD Health ( both subsidiaries of JD . com ) released separate ESG reports . The remaining com - panies either do not meet the definition of online market - places or do not disclose independent ESG reports or com - prehensive ESG reports ( from annual reports ) . The detailed information of our data is shown in Table 2 . Data analysis Our data analysis was largely based on thematic analy - sis ( Braun & Clarke , 2006 , 2012 ) . This method allowed researchers to inductively analyze the qualitative data and iterate between data and theories . Four data analysis steps were undertaken . Step 1 : Familiarizing ourselves with the data All the authors reviewed each ESG report and related ESG news several times to grasp its meaning . One member of the research team marked off all 25 ESG reports based on the three dimensions ( i . e . , environment , social , and governance dimensions ) of ESG framework , which helped us divide the data into mean - ingful chunks for analysis . Step 2 : Identifying the ESG indicators of online marketplaces by generating initial codes This analysis is similar to Strauss and Corbin’s ( 1998 ) notion of open coding and Gioia et al . ’s ( 2013 ) notion of first - order analysis . During this process , one member of the research team coded the ESG reports and news sentence by sentence and compiled the initial coding table . The coding was cross - checked by other members of the research teams . All disagreements were resolved through discussions until consensus was reached . We thus derived a set of initial codes that represented the ESG indicators of online marketplaces ( see Table 4 in the Appendix ) . Step 3 : Identifying the ESG factors of online marketplaces by clustering the initial codes into potential themes In this step , we firstly attempted to use the generic ESG framework to organize the initial codes . We compared the initial codes against the generic ESG framework and matched them with ESG factors that are included in the generic framework . For example , when we coded the ESG reports in Step 2 , we derived initial codes such as organizing charity aid for poverty alleviation , empowering women and disadvantaged , and encouraging participation in market transactions . These codes were clustered into the theme of poverty and famine , which has been included in the generic ESG framework as an important factor ( see Table 4 in the Appendix ) . Electronic Markets ( 2023 ) 33 : 62 1 3 Page 7 of 19 62 We also revealed themes that are not included in the generic ESG framework but specific to online marketplaces . For exam - ple , when we coded the ESG reports in Step 2 , we derived initial codes such as providing technical solutions for information and network security , establishing management systems for infor - mation and network security , and contributing to the industry development of information and network security . These codes were clustered into the theme of information and network secu - rity , which is not a factor in the generic ESG framework but is particularly important in online marketplaces compared to other industries . By iterating between literature review and data analysis , we confirmed that information and network security is a new factor that the generic ESG framework has not covered ( see Table 4 in the Appendix ) . Step 4 : Identifying the mechanisms that explain the speci - ficity of ESG practices in online marketplaces In this step , we attempted to explain the specificity of ESG practices in online marketplaces based on three mechanisms we identi - fied from the literature , i . e . , market transaction mechanism , digital innovation mechanism , and ecosystem participa - tion mechanism . We theoretically connected each specific ESG indicator of online marketplaces with one or more mechanisms ( see Table 4 in the Appendix ) . By integrating these connections , we proposed three propositions to theo - retically explain the specificity of ESG practices in online marketplaces . Findings The comparison of online marketplaces’ ESG factors with the generic framework Based on an inductive analysis of ESG reports from com - panies in the online marketplace industry in China , we Table 2 Overview of research samples and data collection Number Online market - places Main transaction units Sector Users’ type The year of ESG reports Number of pages of ESG reports Number of words in ESG news 1 Alibaba ( Taobao and Tmall ) E - commerce Commerce Seller , customer 2022 , 2023 352 15 , 777 2 Meituan Food , transporta - tion , travel , shopping , and entertainment Service , entertain - ment Seller , customer 2021 , 2022 94 60 , 010 3 JD . com E - commerce , finance , logistics Commerce Seller , customer 2021 , 2022 246 19 , 626 4 Kuaishou Short video , live streaming , social media , e - com - merce Commerce Advertiser , seller , content creator 2021 , 2022 206 30 , 708 5 Ctrip Hotel reservations , transportation , travel Tourism Hotels , airlines , railroad compa - nies , consumers 2021 41 27 , 212 6 Beike , Home Link House renting , buy - ing , and selling Service House owner , tenant 2021 , 2022 136 33 , 464 7 Netease Games , translation , education Service , entertain - ment Game developers , users , freelancers 2021 , 2022 163 19 , 041 8 Mango TV Video entertainment Copyright owner , user 2021 , 2022 106 7107 9 Tongcheng Travel Hotel reservations , transportation , travel Tourism Hotels , airlines , railroad compa - nies , consumers 2021 , 2022 149 17 , 916 10 Liepin Human resource information Service Recruiters , job seekers 2021 , 2022 85 18 , 629 11 Pinduoduo Commercial retail Commerce Seller , customer 2020 54 29 , 772 12 VIP . com Brand discount goods Commerce Seller , customer 2021 94 28 , 205 13 BOSS Zhipin Human resource information Service Recruiters , job seekers 2021 , 2022 160 36 , 487 Total 1886 318 , 574 Electronic Markets ( 2023 ) 33 : 62 1 3 62 Page 8 of 19 identified several ESG factors specific to this context . We compared them to the generic ESG factor framework . Our comparative study revealed that the ESG factors of online marketplaces share some similarities with the generic framework but exhibit distinct features . Table 3 compares the ESG factors of online marketplaces to the generic ESG factor framework , including 16 common fac - tors and four unique factors . The environmental dimension comprises six common factors and no unique factors , the social dimension has five common factors and two unique factors , and the governance dimension has five common and two unique factors . Unique practices of online mar - ketplaces are underlined , while factors not applicable to online marketplaces in the generic framework are marked in italics . As shown in Table 3 , the ESG framework of online marketplaces excludes air pollutants and sharehold - ers’ rights from the generic ESG framework while includ - ing some unique factors such as constructing industry ecology , contribution to national current affairs and poli - cies , intellectual property ( IP ) protection , and information and network security . This table highlights the role of each ESG factor in the unique context of online marketplaces in China and emphasizes the distinctiveness of online mar - ketplaces’ ESG factors . Environment dimension In the environmental dimension , both the ESG factor framework for online marketplaces and the generic ESG factor framework focus on factors such as GHG emissions , energy consumption and efficiency , water use and recy - cling , waste production and management , biodiversity , and ecosystem health , as well as innovation for environment - friendly products and services . For internal purposes , both frameworks reflect that companies can reduce their carbon footprint and GHG emissions by building a green office environment and achieving green operations . For instance , online marketplaces have adopted paperless offices , used renewable energy , reduced energy consumption intensity , and improved energy utilization , paying particular atten - tion to water use and recycling to reduce water consump - tion intensity . Online marketplace companies also pay attention to the generation and treatment of water pollut - ants , inorganic pollutants , and hazardous waste . For haz - ardous and recyclable waste generated during operations , they follow local waste and garbage management regu - lations and have established management procedures for proper treatment and disposal . Regarding external aspects , biodiversity and ecosystem health are also environmen - tal issues that require attention , and companies have a responsibility to protect biodiversity and promote healthy ecosystems . Environment - friendly product and service innovation is a strong development driver for companies to protect the environment and is a prominent tool in the online marketplace , facilitating technological and efficient environmental protection from both internal and external sources . In the environmental dimension , compared to the generic ESG factor framework , online marketplaces and their oper - ators have many special practices that reflect the industry characteristics of online marketplaces and the characteristics of Chinese management practices . Online marketplaces are actively pursuing carbon neutrality milestones through many environmental initiatives described above , such as Netease’s 2021 report that states “ In 2021 , we made our Smart Car - bon Management System an open - source platform acces - sible by everyone and built the NetEase TianGong Carbon Neutrality Open Source Community . We hope these tools can empower small and medium - sized enterprises with their hardware ecosystems so more enterprises can achieve car - bon neutrality . Through these steps , we are contributing to global efforts to achieve carbon neutrality through energy conservation and decarbonization applications . ” Addition - ally , online marketplaces promote carbon neutrality in digital intelligence by creating low - carbon , green , and energy - effi - cient data centers through technological innovation . Through innovative technology and public welfare forms , they also attract the public to participate in green and low - carbon life and strive to make carbon neutrality accessible to everyone and shared by society , such as “ helping build national and regional networks to educate Chinese citizens about biodi - versity conservation and low - carbon living ” ( Alibaba , 2022 report ) ; “ calling on Netease game players to join in the phil - anthropic environmental protection projects ” ( Netease , 2021 report ) ; “ improving environmental protection awareness for Kuaishou users ” ( Kuaishou , 2021 report ) ; and encourage green goods and packaging to advocate and change consum - ers’ perceptions and behaviors . Notably , “achieving carbon neutrality milestones” does not appear in the generic factor framework . As China is the world’s largest carbon emitter in total emissions , the Party Central Committee has proposed to reach the goal of carbon peaking by 2030 and carbon neutrality by 2060 , which is a scenario - based practice with Chinese characteristics . In the factor of “biodiversity and health of ecosystems , ” online marketplaces are fully aware of the responsibility of platform operators to intervene in market mechanisms to protect biodiversity by “strictly monitoring and act - ing to prevent the illegal wildlife trade” ( Alibaba , 2022 report ) and “prohibit ( ing ) the sale of animal killing tools , equipment , and accessories that seriously endanger ani - mal safety , including electric fish traps , bird nets , hunting clips , stumble covers , etc . ” ( JD . com , 2021 report ) . The online marketplace is also promoting the healthy devel - opment of a multi - dimensional ecosystem . For example , Electronic Markets ( 2023 ) 33 : 62 1 3 Page 9 of 19 62 Table 3 A comparison of online marketplaces with generic ESG factor framework Dimension ESG factors in the generic framework ESG factors in the online marketplaces Environment Greenhouse gas ( GHG ) emissions Carbon footprint Broken down by scopes 1 , 2 , and 3 1 GHG emissions Reducing carbon footprint and building green offices Achieving carbon neutrality goal Air pollutants Emissions of air pollutants Energy consumption and efficiency Fossil fuel sectors Energy consumption intensity Use of renewable sources of energy Energy consumption and efficiency Use of renewable energy source Reduction of resources and energy consumption Water usage and recycling Water consumption intensity Water usage and recycling Deepening water conservation practices and improving water utilization Waste production and management Production of water waste Production of solid waste Production of hazardous waste Waste production and management Comply with local waste disposal standards Proper disposal and recycling of waste Biodiversity and ecosystems health Presence / operations in geographic areas impacted by soil degradation Presence / operations in geographic areas and industries that are particu - larly dependent on biodiversity and ecosystem services Presence / operations in protected areas or areas of high biodiversity value outside protected areas Operations affecting IUCN Red List species or national conservation list species Biodiversity and ecosystems health Biodiversity conservation in online marketplace transactions Ecosystem health development Innovation in environment - friendly products and services Research and development of low - carbon and other environmental tech - nologies Innovation in environment - friendly products and services Building a green digital infrastructure Carrying out green public welfare Encouraging green goods and packaging Social Employee relationships / labor standards Freedom of association and right to organize Forced and compulsory labor Child labor Equal remuneration Training and development opportunities Discrimination and equal opportunity Workplace health and safety Employee relationships / labor standards Adherence to equal and compliant employment and protecting employees’ rights Competitive compensation and benefits system Systematic training system and talent development path Non - discriminatory workplace and equal opportunity Healthy , safe , warm , diverse , and dynamic culture and work environment Supply chain management Supply chain management Supply chain regulation Supply chain collaboration Supply chain sustainability Customer relationships Customer protection and product responsibility Personal data security and privacy Rights of customers to obtain information about ESG factors Quality and innovation in customer relations Customer relationships Adherence to a customer - oriented strategy Customer privacy protection and information security Innovative digital solutions to meet customer needs Emphasis on customer service Poverty and famine Engagement in poverty reduction / aid programs Employment opportunities for economically less advantaged groups Poverty and famine Organizing charity aid for poverty alleviation Empowering women and disadvantaged Encouraging participation in market transaction Community impacts Relations with local communities ( networks ) Social impact of products and services Community impacts Conducting public welfare volunteer activities Technology empowered education Provision of products and services suitable for juvenile Helping elders cross the “digital divide” Constructing industry ecology Empowering SME development Leadership in the industry Contribution to national strategies and affairs Support for the Olympic Winter Games Beijing 2022 Dedication to nation’s rural revitalization strategy Engagement in the fight against public emergencies Electronic Markets ( 2023 ) 33 : 62 1 3 62 Page 10 of 19 they are “ helping many creators create high - quality and original content continuously and improve environmen - tal protection awareness for Kuaishou users ” ( Kuaishou , 2021 report ) , working to “ help people have a better chance of living together in a healthy environment with blue skies and thriving ecosystems ” ( Alibaba , 2022 report ) , and building an environmentally sustainable tourism ecosys - tem ( Ctrip , 2021 report ) . Synthesizing the above research findings , we propose the following proposition : Proposition 1 : Compared to general enterprises , when online marketplace enterprises pursue the environmental dimension of sustainability goals , they have unique advan - tages in utilizing … 1a . the market transaction mechanism , i . e . , advocating the transaction of environmentally friendly products and services and prohibiting environmentally hazard - ous ones . 1b . the digital innovation mechanism , i . e . , building green digital infrastructures and providing technology - enabled green solutions for sustainable operations and environ - mental protections . 1c . the ecosystem participation mechanism , i . e . , engaging ecosystem participants ( suppliers , consumers , manufac - turers , distributors , etc . ) and other stakeholders in col - laborative environmental protection activities . Social dimension Moving on to the social dimension , both the ESG factor framework for online marketplaces and the generic ESG fac - tor framework focus on factors that extend from the com - pany itself to society . At the company level , both frame - works prioritize the company’s relationship with its people , as reflected in employee relationships and labor standards , as well as the company’s impact on its upstream and down - stream through supply chain management . At the external user level , the frameworks focus on the company’s rela - tionship with its customers , particularly how it helps the Table 3 ( continued ) Dimension ESG factors in the generic framework ESG factors in the online marketplaces Governance Ethical considerations Codes of ethics and business principles Bribery and corruption Accountability / the rule of law Ethical considerations Strict compliance with business ethics Anti - corruption Fair competition Abide by the relevant laws Strategy and risk management Strategy implementation , operational execution , and monitoring Internal controls and risk management policies and procedures Strategy and risk management Constructing an effective corporate governance system Sound risk management structure Transparency and disclosure Observance of disclosures of information rules and practices Transparency and disclosure Transparency and timely disclosure of relevant management practices Board diversity and structure Discrimination Board diversity and structure Diversity of board composition Establishment of the commission on sustainable development Stakeholder engagement Stakeholder engagement Stakeholder communication and materiality assessment Shareholder rights Creating profits for shareholders Protecting the interests of minority shareholders IP protection Protection of own IP rights Protection of ecosystem participants ' IP rights Raising awareness of IP rights Information and network security Providing technical solutions for information and network security Establishing a management system for information and network security Contributing to the industry development of information and network security 1 “Scopes 1 , 2 , and 3 GHG emissions” means the greenhouse gas emissions referred to in point ( 1 ) ( e ) ( i - iii ) of Annex III of Regulation ( EU ) 2016 / 1011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2016 on indices used as benchmarks in financial instruments and financial contracts or to measure the performance of investment funds , and amending Directives 2008 / 48 / EC and 2014 / 17 / EU and Regulation ( EU ) No 596 / 2014 Note : The unique factors and practices of online marketplaces are underlined , factors not available in online marketplaces in the generic frame - work are set in italics , and those not specially marked are common factors to both Electronic Markets ( 2023 ) 33 : 62 1 3 Page 11 of 19 62 underprivileged , reflecting a broader community impact . The online marketplace also focuses on the impact of the broader social network through constructing industry ecol - ogy and supporting national current affairs and policies . The two factors are included in social impact , but we categorize them as special since they have unique attributes to online marketplaces with many practices’ characteristic of these platforms . Regarding employee relationships and labor standards , both frameworks prioritize employee rights and welfare . When providing systematic training for employees , the company focuses not only on professional skills but also on training in business ethics , information , and network secu - rity awareness . They attach importance to talent cultivation , offering each employee the opportunity to receive training and development . For example , “ Beike has established a career development system for employees , consisting of a ‘professional development channel’ and ‘management devel - opment channel , ’ along with a Promotion Management Pol - icy to regulate its grade management system ” ( Beike , 2021 report ) . Discrimination and equal opportunities are also the main points of concern for this factor . Furthermore , in addi - tion to ensuring a healthy and safe workplace , online market - places also focus on creating a warm , diverse , and dynamic culture and work environment . For example , Alibaba cares deeply about the health , well - being , comfort , and safety of its employees and their families and works on many fronts to safeguard those . This aspect is not mentioned in the generic framework . Regarding supply chain management , there are no spe - cific indicators for this factor in the generic framework . For online marketplaces , supply chain management is divided into three aspects . The first aspect is supply chain regula - tions . Online marketplace operators have developed a stand - ardized bidding process , carried out supplier classification access and management according to the characteristics of each product and service , and assessed the environmental performance of suppliers to implement business integrity , information disclosure , and risk management to achieve compliance management . The second is supply chain col - laboration . Online marketplaces actively and positively communicate with suppliers to obtain their support and also share the experience and tools accumulated by the company in sustainable operations to help partners develop . Lastly , regarding supply chain sustainability , enterprises set green procurement standards and green qualification requirements for suppliers while creating green storage , packaging , and logistics systems to promote supply chain emission reduc - tion . The above three aspects provide specific explanations for the indicators of the factor of “supply chain manage - ment” in the generic framework , which , in turn , comple - ments the generic framework . Regarding customer relationships , both frameworks men - tion personal data security and privacy , and online market - places focus on providing technical solutions to protect cus - tomers’ privacy and data security . For example , “ We strive to build trust in digital commerce by leveraging its industry - leading technology and capabilities , including secure user privacy protection and data security , to gain the long - term trust of consumers , customers , and other stakeholders ” ( Ali - baba , 2021 report ) . Regarding product responsibility , online marketplaces are constantly innovating and updating their products and services , striving to explore and meet users’ needs in all aspects . For example , “ NetEase Yaotai is an immersive metaverse service platform . In contrast to tra - ditional video conferencing , it creates a vivid environment for participants . Users can change the look of their avatars during the conference and make avatars mirror their facial expressions ” ( Netease , 2021 report ) . “ By providing digital solutions for the entire chain of renovation , the Smart Con - struction Site project helps service providers improve inspec - tion efficiency and better serve customers ” ( Beike , 2021 report ) . To maintain customer relationships , online market - places are even more focused on user experience , tracking user feedback , and actively responding to complaints and questions for help . In addition , the generic framework also mentions that customers have the right to receive information about ESG factors , which is not mentioned in online mar - ketplaces’ customer relations . However , online marketplaces often mention that they are customer - oriented and focus on improving user experience . For example , “ JD . com always adheres to the original intention of ‘customer first’ to provide consumers with considerate and privileged services ” ( JD . com , 2021 report ) . The generic framework does not mention this “customer first” operational philosophy . In the realm of poverty and famine , both frameworks focus on aid efforts aimed at reducing poverty . These include organizing poverty - relief charitable assistance and empowering marginalized groups such as women and disabled individuals by providing them with employment opportunities . Moreover , online marketplaces also encourage impoverished regions to engage in market mechanisms , fully leveraging their local strengths . This is achieved through the sale of distinctive agricultural products , promoting the revival and preservation of intangible cultural heritage and establishing unique cultural tourism zones . These strategies collectively tackle poverty at its roots . For example , “ Since the end of 2021 , Meituan have launched the ‘Agricultural Produce Direct Sourcing’ programme , cooperating with large - scale agricultural enterprises and agricultural bases to increase the direct sourcing of high - quality agricultural products from the source area to help high - quality agricul - tural products reach the community directly and increase farmers’ income at the same time ” ( Meituan , 2021 report ) . Electronic Markets ( 2023 ) 33 : 62 1 3 62 Page 12 of 19 “ In response to the national campaign to alleviate pov - erty , Vipshop created its V - Love Workshop initiative : an e - commerce , charitable platform focusing on the rejuvena - tion and preservation of intangible cultural heritage ” ( VIP . com , 2021 report ) . “ At the same time , by making full use of local cultural brands and actively developing rural tour - ism , Tongcheng Travel implemented the rural revitalisation strategy to achieve the goal of cultural and tourism industry recovery under the ‘Specialities + Tourism + Poverty Allevia - tion’ model ” ( Tongcheng Travel , 2021 report ) . In terms of community impact , Online marketplaces have introduced the concept of “philanthropy for every - one , ” encouraging other eco - participants besides corporate employees to participate in public welfare volunteer activi - ties . For example , “ We are honored to leverage the great influence of the online game industry and call on our game players to join in our philanthropic environmental protec - tion projects ” ( NetEase , 2021 report ) . Meituan continues to promote the “Public Welfare Merchant Programme , ” which integrates public welfare into the daily business behavior of merchants . The online marketplace also utilizes technology to empower education . “ NetEase has built a comprehensive public welfare education system to help the poor ” ( Netease , 2021 report ) , and “ we have initiated a series of projects including our ‘Rural Education Plan’ and ‘Vocational Train - ing Plan , ’ which have given 610 , 000 rural teachers and stu - dents additional training ” ( Alibaba , 2022 report ) . The online marketplace has its own unique approach to caring for the elderly and minors . As a platform for a huge amount of con - tent , the online marketplace pays particular attention to the physical and mental health of minors and provides products and services suitable for minors . For example , “ A ‘minors’ mode has been launched in the product design of ‘Mango TV’ APP . In this mode , users can select video content suit - able for minors to watch and read , and there will be no user portrait and advertising for minors ” ( Mango TV , 2021 report ) . The online marketplace is also committed to car - ing for people with depression and supporting children with autism so that technology has a temperature . Moreover , the online marketplace is particularly focused on helping elders cross the “digital divide” and experience the convenience of life brought by technological innovation . It is building a barrier - free network . For example , “ a ‘senior mode’ on sev - eral of our apps incorporates an enlarged display font and a special interface for senior users , greatly improving the ease of use ” ( Alibaba , 2022 report ) . “ We utilize the platform and technical capabilities to create products and services suitable for people with special needs and meet the travel needs of special groups such as the elderly and the disabled ” ( Tongcheng Travel , 2021 report ) . Regarding constructing industry ecology , it is more able to reflect the role that online marketplaces assume as lead - ing technology - based companies and the social value they create . Therefore , we consider this factor to be special . In this factor , companies belonging to online marketplaces help more SMEs complement and strengthen their chains , enhance their innovation capabilities , and strengthen their development momentum through a series of services and specific initiatives . With the power of the platform , SMEs can meet consumers’ personalized needs by developing and producing high - quality , distinctive , and sophisticated goods . Finally , by sharing superior technologies and key resources , online marketplaces can enhance the overall development of the industry , establish industry standards , promote industry progress , and drive the future sustainable development of the industry . For example , “ We are strongly committed to sharing our resources and expertise with the industries we are engaging in so we can grow together . In 2021 , NetEase carried out broad cooperation programs and schemes to promote common development ” ( NetEase , 2021 report ) . Regarding supporting national current affairs and poli - cies , the online marketplace supports the Olympic Win - ter Games Beijing 2022 through public welfare , technol - ogy , and supply chain . In terms of public welfare impact , “ Kuaishou coordinated the Green Winter Olympics Youth Charity Action , Charming Winter Olympics Knowledge Dis - semination Docent Campaign , and Youth Healthy Growth Volunteer Project . These activities enabled volunteers to promote the Winter Olympics and Olympics knowledge while promoting basketball and sports knowledge ” ( Kuaishou , 2021 report ) . In terms of technical support , Alibaba Cloud helped the Beijing Winter Olympics to be fully on the cloud and supported the security of digital facilities for the Win - ter Olympics to complete the security emergency response promptly . In terms of supply chain support , JD . com built a green , intelligent , efficient , and safe integrated supply chain to ensure the success of the ice and snow event . Online mar - ketplaces also actively respond to “digital business to pro - mote agriculture” and develop the rural digital economy to help rural revitalization . For example , “ We have deployed its platform resources to provide digitally powered and inte - grated management of rural value chains and is trying to find areas where it can support local businesses in opera - tions or market access . This includes support in sourcing , production , logistics , sales , and other links along the value chain ” ( Alibaba , 2022 report ) . Online marketplaces also use digital technology to engage in the fight against public emer - gencies , which can support the normal functioning of the business ecosystem in times of crisis and better respond to social needs . Since the epidemic , online marketplaces have given full play to their digital power in business , finance , and logistics and have fully invested in material procure - ment , livelihood protection , and technology to help fight the epidemic . “ It also shared technologies to improve disaster forecasts , coordination , and recovery , seeking to promote broader societal resilience ” ( Alibaba , 2022 report ) . Electronic Markets ( 2023 ) 33 : 62 1 3 Page 13 of 19 62 Synthesizing the above research findings , we propose the following proposition : Proposition 2 Compared to general enterprises , when online marketplace enterprises pursue the social dimen - sion of sustainability goals , they have unique advantages in utilizing … 2a . the market transaction mechanism , i . e . , providing market - based solutions to address grand societal chal - lenges such as poverty alleviation , women empowerment , and disability assistance . 2b . the digital innovation mechanism , i . e . , providing innovative digital solutions for customers and important social issues such as eliminating the digital divide , help - ing COVID - 19 prevention and control , and providing technical support for the 2022 Beijing Winter Olympics . 2c . the ecosystem participation mechanism , i . e . , empow - ering small and medium participants within the ecosys - tem to build businesses , improve capabilities , and create value . Governance dimension In the governance dimension , both the ESG factor frame - work for online marketplaces and the generic ESG factor framework focus on business ethics , strategy and risk man - agement , transparency and disclosure , board structure and diversity , and stakeholder engagement . Companies should have their own codes of conduct and business principles in the internal governance process and adhere to compliance , anti - monopoly , anti - money laundering , anti - fraud , and anti - unfair competition . Also , companies should comply with the rules and practices of information disclosure . In terms of risk management , online marketplaces con - duct risk control through a clear risk management structure , comprehensive audit coverage , and a tight risk management system , thus achieving stable business operations . Regarding external participants , online marketplaces emphasize that the skills , industry experience , background , and gender of board members are fully considered to ensure optimal and diverse board composition . The board members have exper - tise in multiple fields , including communications technol - ogy , investment , finance , business administration , law , and social sciences , and all have extensive industry experience and are committed to improving corporate decision - making with a more comprehensive and integrated perspective and outlook . Moreover , it is crucial to communicate with stakehold - ers , understand their demands through various channels , and take measures to respond reasonably . Through exten - sive communication with stakeholders , priority substantive issues to be addressed can be identified , and key strategic objectives for sustainable development can be formed . Compared to the generic ESG framework , there are sev - eral unique practices that characterize the ESG governance of online marketplaces and their companies . For instance , in terms of governance structure , online marketplaces continu - ously optimize their governance structure by establishing a sustainable development commission to better practice ESG concepts and strategies and improve the company’s competitiveness for sustainable development . Additionally , the governance of online marketplaces also focuses on gov - ernance related to data and information security , which are not mentioned in the generic framework , such as informa - tion and network security , and IP protection . We believe these factors have the characteristics of online marketplaces and cannot be ignored in their governance , so we categorize them as special factors . In terms of information and network security , this fac - tor is particularly prominent in online marketplaces com - pared to other industries . Online marketplaces have a very high user traffic base , and once an event affects information and network security , it can cause serious consequences . For example , “ We have built a full range of data security capabilities from physical computer rooms to IaaS ( Infra - structure as a Service ) , where we control the security risks through securing the storage , network , and computing , and then our PaaS ( Platform as a Service ) and SaaS ( Software as a Service ) layers to create a trustworthy and secure envi - ronment ” ( Alibaba , 2022 report ) . Online marketplaces also have a well - established security infrastructure and a com - prehensive security management structure and system to support efficient and orderly network security management . Online marketplaces also strive to raise public awareness of information and network security , participate in and pro - mote the development of industry standards , and help build a security ecology for the industry . For example , “ Alibaba Cloud launched China’s first Data Protection Initiative with six security capabilities recognized by global authorities ” ( Alibaba , 2022 report ) . “ JD . com works closely with eco - logical partners for a trustworthy security infrastructure to continuously tackle information security problems ” ( JD . com , 2021 report ) . Regarding IP protection , the Second Plenary Session of the 20th Party Congress mentioned the need to strengthen the optimization and adjustment of institutional responsi - bilities in IP and improve the IP management system . This factor is also a key concern for online marketplaces . Through the analysis of the report , it is found that online market - places not only focus on protecting their own intellectual property , continuously improving their IP management sys - tem , setting up a professional IP team , respecting research and development achievements , and encouraging continuous innovation but also respect other parties’ IP . They protect Electronic Markets ( 2023 ) 33 : 62 1 3 62 Page 14 of 19 the legal rights of IP rights holders through measures such as user agreements and platform IP protection mechanisms . Online marketplaces also strive to raise awareness of IP rights among employees , consumers , and merchants . Synthesizing the above research findings , we propose the following proposition : Proposition 3 Compared to general enterprises , when online marketplace enterprises pursue the governance dimension of sustainability goals , they have unique advantages in utilizing … 3a . the market transaction mechanism , i . e . , strictly com - plying with business ethics during the transaction and preventing unethical behaviors , such as monopoly and unfair competition . 3b . the digital innovation mechanism , i . e . , providing innovative technical solutions for information and net - work security and establishing related managerial sys - tems . 3c . the ecosystem participation mechanism , i . e . , protect - ing the intellectual properties of their own and other eco - system participants . In addition , it is worth noting that we found no mention of two important factors , “air pollutants” and “shareholders’ rights , ” in the ESG reports of online marketplaces . Only very few ESG reports have briefly mentioned shareholder - related issues , so we excluded the factor of “shareholder rights” from our previous analysis as it is not generally accepted by internet companies in China . We believe this may be due to the imperfection of the Chinese market system . China’s market economy reform has only lasted for 40 years . During the transition from a planned economy to a market economy , Chinese companies faced problems such as poorly defined property rights , weak awareness of shareholders’ interests , and a lack of systems to protect their legal rights and inter - ests . These issues may explain why the “shareholder rights” factor is not widely accepted in the Chinese context ( Xu & Yang , 2010 ) . The absence of “air pollutants” may be due to the industry attributes of online marketplaces , which do not belong to polluting industries and therefore do not involve air pollutant emissions . Discussion and conclusion Unique characteristics of the online marketplace and mechanisms for sustainability In this study , we explored the implementation of ESG strat - egies in the online marketplaces in China in 2022 and the factors that characterize ESG practices in the online mar - ketplaces compared to the generally prevailing ESG frame - work by conducting a content analysis of ESG reports in the online marketplaces and integrating these factors into a descriptive framework . There are many ESG - related disclosure standards issued by international authorities , three of which are more com - monly used . Firstly , the concept of ESG originates from responsible investment , and the environmental aspects that investors consider when following the PRI include climate change , circular economy , biodiversity , forests , and defor - estation . Social aspects include human rights , decent work , diversity , equity , and inclusion , while governance aspects include board structure , executive compensation , tax equity , and responsible political participation . Therefore , disclosing the above ESG issues and reporting on corporate sustainabil - ity have become necessary ways for companies to respond to external investors’ concerns ( Eccles et al . , 2014 ; Khan et al . , 2016 ) . Secondly , the GRI of the Global Sustainability Standards Board is the most widely used sustainability reporting stand - ard in the world ( Darnall et al . , 2022 ) , covering topics ranging from biodiversity to taxation , waste to emissions , diversity , and equity to health and safety . There are already several aca - demic studies related to the GRI criteria ( Darnall et al . , 2022 ; Lokuwaduge & Heenetigala , 2017 ; Luo & Tang , 2022 ) . Finally , in addition to the two criteria mentioned above , the 17 Sustainable Development Goals proposed by the UN member states in 2015 are also a key element of corporate ESG disclosure that can affect corporate ESG performance ( Khaled et al . , 2021 ) . The goals address global challenges , including poverty , inequality , climate change , environmental degradation , and peace and justice . To facilitate comparison with existing ESG factor frame - works , this paper uses the ESG factor framework mentioned in the EBA report , which synthesizes several internation - ally commonly used ESG frameworks and standards and can be used as a generic international ESG factor frame - work for comparative analysis . After content analysis of the ESG reports of online marketplaces , we found that there are common factors as well as unique features between the ESG factor framework of online marketplaces and the generic ESG factor framework . The online marketplace fully reflects its industry characteristics as well as the manage - ment characteristics of Chinese companies in the process of ESG practice . First , online marketplace activities transform many non - market - based transactions into market - based transactions ( Standing et al . , 2010 ) , and more suppliers enter the mar - ketplace , reducing transaction costs while increasing market efficiency ( Malone et al . , 1987 ) . ESG practices in online marketplaces , on the other hand , reflect more non - economic Electronic Markets ( 2023 ) 33 : 62 1 3 Page 15 of 19 62 values under the market mechanism . On the environmen - tal side , online marketplaces encourage the supply of green goods , hoping to change consumers’ perceptions and behav - iors through the platform and influence them to consume responsibly . On the social side , poor people participate in the e - commerce ecosystem and are able to benefit from the online marketplace , an IT - supported , market - based approach to poverty alleviation that is effective and self - sustainable ( Li et al . , 2019 ) . Second , information systems and technology have been the subject of close attention in online market research ( Albrecht et al . , 2005 ; Standing et al . , 2010 ) , and the inte - gration of powerful information networks into the business environment has had a profound impact on the nature of management between buyers and sellers in the market - place ( Grover & Ramanlal , 1999 ) . ESG practices in online marketplaces are also characterized as technology - driven , with both innovative digital technologies and rich industry insights . On the environmental front , online marketplaces are actively innovating environment - friendly products and services and are market leaders in all metrics . On the social side , online marketplaces adopt digital technology to support rural revitalization , help social disasters , and use technologi - cal innovation to bring a more convenient and better way of life to the whole society . In terms of governance , online marketplaces pay particular attention to the “side effects” of technology , such as information leakage , cyber risks , and improper protection of IP rights . The large user base is an important reason why online marketplaces pay particular attention to data and information security ( Zha et al . , 2022 ) . Third , online marketplaces are characterized as platform enterprises with multiple stakeholders participating in their business and life , and ecosystems are different forms of organizing economic activities linked by specific types of complementarities ( Jacobides et al . , 2018 ) , and online mar - ketplaces engage in ESG practices by promoting participant ecologies . Although online marketplaces act as intermedi - aries connecting both buyers and sellers , their ESG prac - tices involve multiple parties and radiate more widely . By engaging stakeholders from different social backgrounds , ESG practices reflect different values ( Barrett et al . , 2016 ) . On the environmental side , online marketplaces spread the concept of low carbon and environmental protection through the form of public welfare and attract more people to partici - pate in low - carbon living , including new users in addition to active users of online marketplaces . In the social aspect , the online marketplace focuses not only on the company’s own level , such as employees and suppliers , but also on the external user level , such as customers , and the wider industry ecology and social network . The scope of radiation includes marginalized groups such as women and children , the elderly , and disadvantaged groups , but also includes remote areas , small - and medium - sized enterprises , the entire industry , and other large ecologies , enabling the online marketplace to take a larger range of social responsibility . Finally , the effective operation of ESG is related to the level of national development , the state of society , and cultural habits , in addition to the company’s own factors . Now that China has become a global innovation leader in developing and testing various new digital services ( Li et al . , 2022 ) , the ESG practices of Chinese online market - places are of great research significance . In the past few years , China has released a series of top - level designs on carbon peaking , carbon neutrality , common prosperity , and rural revitalization , which have become guidelines for companies to create value beyond business . Several topics in the ESG field are highly com - patible and resonate with them . In terms of the environ - ment , online marketplaces use technology to help with the green transformation of economic and social devel - opment , comprehensively improving resource utilization efficiency and deeply integrating digital technology with all aspects of carbon emissions to help enterprises achieve their carbon neutrality goals . In the social aspect , rural revitalization and stable employment are both national pri - orities . Online marketplaces improve the urban – rural gap by expanding the e - commerce market , helping to revital - ize the rural value chain , revitalizing talents , and revital - izing medical care . Online marketplaces also expand their services to remote areas , allowing disadvantaged groups and relatively less developed areas to share technological dividends and promote employment . At the governance level , online marketplaces do not focus on the rights of shareholders but instead put customers first in their busi - ness philosophy ( Xu & Yang , 2010 ) . Based on the above characteristics and the three sets of propositions given in the research findings section , this paper finally comes up with a mechanical model for online marketplaces to achieve sustainability through ESG , as shown in Fig . 1 . Theoretical contributions and practical implications The theoretical contributions of this study are two - fold . Firstly , in ESG research , this paper presents a comprehen - sive overview of the unique factors and practices in online marketplaces . By doing so , it complements and expands the existing generic ESG framework , enabling research - ers to better understand and contextualize ESG practices in the context of the online marketplace . This approach is particularly important given the distinct characteristics and challenges that online marketplaces face in terms of sustainability . Secondly , this paper contributes to the study of online marketplaces by elucidating the mechanisms through which they achieve sustainable development by fulfilling Electronic Markets ( 2023 ) 33 : 62 1 3 62 Page 16 of 19 ESG goals . It emphasizes the non - economic values that online marketplaces generate and their critical role in enhancing competitiveness and achieving sustainable development . Specifically , this paper highlights the impor - tance of social and environmental sustainability for online marketplaces and demonstrates how online marketplaces can contribute to the common prosperity and rural revitali - zation goals of the Chinese government . Furthermore , it provides evidence that online marketplaces can contribute to reducing carbon emissions and promoting green devel - opment with digital technology . Overall , the theoretical contributions of this paper are significant because it provides a deeper and more contex - tualized understanding of ESG practices and their impact on sustainable development in the online marketplace context . By highlighting the unique practices of online marketplaces , this paper provides a roadmap for future research to build upon and further develop our understand - ing of ESG practices and their implications for sustainable development . In terms of practical implications , this paper offers sev - eral contributions . Firstly , it extends the ESG framework for online marketplaces by analyzing the content of exist - ing ESG reports from leading companies . This framework can provide effective references for the ESG development and evaluation of latecomers , enabling them to achieve their sustainable development goals more precisely . Sec - ondly , partners in the online marketplace ecosystems can also use this framework to evaluate their own ESG development direction and achieve a mutual benefit and win – win situation . Finally , the research results of this paper provide a practical framework and theoretical refer - ence for all stakeholders to evaluate the ESG development of enterprises . These insights can be used to guide the development of future ESG strategies and help companies and stakeholders to prioritize and manage ESG risks and opportunities . Limitations and future research While this study is based on ESG reports from Chinese com - panies , it is important to note that the authors did not provide an in - depth discussion within the Chinese context . A signifi - cant amount of cross - country evidence suggests that corpo - rate ESG performance and perceptions are influenced by cultural and social contexts , leading to potential variations in ESG practices across different social and cultural contexts . Given the distinct cultural contexts and institutional arrange - ments between China and other countries , there are likely to be differences in the conceptual understanding and factor delineation of ESG among individuals and organizations . Therefore , it is crucial to conduct localized research based on China’s unique context , explore and identify ESG factors specific to China , and construct an ESG research framework that is suitable for the social context of China to promote ESG research in China . Future research should focus on identifying the unique ESG factors in the Chinese context and developing an ESG framework that accurately reflects the Chinese context . This will allow for a more precise eval - uation of ESG development and performance in Chinese companies and enhance our understanding of how cultural and institutional factors influence ESG practices . Supplementary Information The online version contains supplemen - tary material available at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12525 - 023 - 00682 - z . Unique characteristics of online marketplaces Market transaction mechanism Digital innovation mechanism Ecosystem participation mechanism Environment Social Governance Sustainable development of online marketplaces ESG goals Mechanisms Fig . 1 The mechanisms for online marketplaces to achieve sustainability Electronic Markets ( 2023 ) 33 : 62 1 3 Page 17 of 19 62 Funding This work was supported by the National Natural Sci - ence Foundation of China ( grant number 72172036 , 72032009 and 72072181 ) , China Postdoctoral Science Foundation ( grant number 2022M723579 ) , and Beijing Social Science Fund ( grant number 16YJC058 ) . Data Availability The data that support the findings of this study are available from the authors upon reasonable request . Declarations Conflict of interest The authors declare no competing interests . References Adner , R . , & Kapoor , R . ( 2010 ) . Value creation in innovation ecosys - tems : How the structure of technological interdependence affects firm performance in new technology generations . Strategic Man - agement Journal , 31 ( 3 ) , 306 – 333 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smj . 821 Albrecht , C . C . , Dean , D . L . , & Hansen , J . V . ( 2005 ) . Marketplace and technology standards for B2B e - commerce : Progress , chal - lenges , and the state of the art . Information & Management , 42 ( 6 ) , 865 – 875 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . im . 2004 . 09 . 003 Alda , M . ( 2021 ) . The environmental , social , and governance ( ESG ) dimension of firms in which social responsible investment ( SRI ) and conventional pension funds invest : The mainstream SRI and the ESG inclusion . Journal of Cleaner Production , 298 , 126812 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jclep ro . 2021 . 126812 Alt , R . ( 2020 ) . Electronic Markets on sustainability . Electronic Mar - kets , 30 ( 4 ) , 667 – 674 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12525 - 020 - 00451 - 2 Arvidsson , S . , & Dumay , J . ( 2022 ) . Corporate ESG reporting quantity , quality and performance : Where to now for environmental policy and practice ? Business Strategy and the Environment , 31 ( 3 ) , 1091 – 1110 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / bse . 2937 Avetisyan , E . , & Hockerts , K . ( 2017 ) . The consolidation of the ESG rating industry as an enactment of institutional retrogression : Con - solidation of the ESG rating industry . Business Strategy and the Environment , 26 ( 3 ) , 316 – 330 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / bse . 1919 Avramov , D . , Cheng , S . , Lioui , A . , & Tarelli , A . ( 2022 ) . Sustainable investing with ESG rating uncertainty . Journal of Financial Eco - nomics , 145 ( 2 ) , 642 – 664 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jfine co . 2021 . 09 . 009 Azmi , W . , Hassan , M . K . , Houston , R . , & Karim , M . S . ( 2021 ) . ESG activities and banking performance : International evidence from emerging economies . Journal of International Financial Markets , Institutions and Money , 70 , 101277 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . intfin . 2020 . 101277 Barrett , M . , Oborn , E . , & Orlikowski , W . ( 2016 ) . Creating value in online communities : The sociomaterial configuring of strategy , platform , and stakeholder engagement . Information Systems Research , 27 ( 4 ) , 704 – 723 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / isre . 2016 . 0648 Battisti , E . , Nirino , N . , Leonidou , E . , & Thrassou , A . ( 2022 ) . Corpo - rate venture capital and CSR performance : An extended resource based view’s perspective . Journal of Business Research , 139 , 1058 – 1066 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusr es . 2021 . 10 . 054 Berry , T . C . , & Junkus , J . C . ( 2013 ) . Socially responsible investing : An investor perspective . Journal of Business Ethics , 112 ( 4 ) , 707 – 720 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10551 - 012 - 1567 - 0 Bhandari , K . R . , Ranta , M . , & Salo , J . ( 2022 ) . The resource - based view , stakeholder capitalism , ESG , and sustainable competitive advantage : The firm’s embeddedness into ecology , society , and governance . Business Strategy and the Environment , 31 ( 4 ) , 1525 – 1537 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / bse . 2967 Boley , H . , & Chang , E . ( 2007 ) . Digital ecosystems : Principles and semantics . 2007 Inaugural IEEE - IES Digital EcoSystems and Technologies Conference , 398 – 403 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / DEST . 2007 . 372005 Braun , V . , & Clarke , V . ( 2006 ) . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative Research in Psychology , 3 ( 2 ) , 77 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1191 / 14780 88706 qp063 oa Braun , V . , & Clarke , V . ( 2012 ) . Thematic analysis . American Psycho - logical Association . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 13620 - 004 Chau , M . , & Xu , J . ( 2012 ) . Business intelligence in blogs : Under - standing consumer interactions and communities . MIS Quarterly , 36 ( 4 ) , 1189 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 41703 504 Chen , D . L . , & Horton , J . J . ( 2016 ) . Research note—Are online labor markets spot markets for tasks ? A field experiment on the behav - ioral response to wage cuts . Information Systems Research , 27 ( 2 ) , 403 – 423 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / isre . 2016 . 0633 Chen , M . T . , Yang , D . P . , Zhang , W . Q . , & Wang , Q . J . ( 2023 ) . How does ESG disclosure improve stock liquidity for enterprises— Empirical evidence from China . Environmental Impact Assess - ment Review , 98 , 106926 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . eiar . 2022 . 106926 Cheng , L . T . W . , Sharma , P . , & Broadstock , D . C . ( 2023 ) . Interac - tive effects of brand reputation and ESG on green bond issues : A sustainable development perspective . Business Strategy and the Environment , 32 ( 1 ) , 570 – 586 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / bse . 3161 Cicchiello , A . F . , Marrazza , F . , & Perdichizzi , S . ( 2023 ) . Non - financial disclosure regulation and environmental , social , and governance ( ESG ) performance : The case of EU and US firms . Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management , 30 ( 3 ) , 1121 – 1128 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / csr . 2408 Constantinides , P . , Henfridsson , O . , & Parker , G . G . ( 2018 ) . Introduc - tion—Platforms and Infrastructures in the Digital Age . Informa - tion Systems Research , 29 ( 2 ) , 381 – 400 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / isre . 2018 . 0794 Darnall , N . , Ji , H . , Iwata , K . , & Arimura , T . H . ( 2022 ) . Do ESG report - ing guidelines and verifications enhance firms’ information dis - closure ? Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management , 29 ( 5 ) , 1214 – 1230 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / csr . 2265 Dolnicar , S . , & Zare , S . ( 2020 ) . COVID19 and Airbnb – Disrupting the disruptor . Annals of Tourism Research , 83 , 102961 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . annals . 2020 . 102961 Drempetic , S . , Klein , C . , & Zwergel , B . ( 2020 ) . The influence of firm size on the ESG score : Corporate sustainability ratings under review . Journal of Business Ethics , 167 , 333 – 360 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10551 - 019 - 04164 - 1 Du , W . , Pan , S . , Zhou , N . , & Ouyang , T . ( 2018 ) . From a marketplace of electronics to a digital entrepreneurial ecosystem ( DEE ) : The emergence of a meta - organization in Zhongguancun , China . Infor - mation Systems Journal , 28 , 1158 – 1175 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / isj . 12176 Eccles , R . G . , Ioannou , I . , & Serafeim , G . ( 2014 ) . The impact of corpo - rate sustainability on organizational processes and performance . Management Science , 60 ( 11 ) , 2835 – 2857 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 2014 . 1984 Eggert , A . ( 2006 ) . Intangibility and perceived risk in online environ - ments . Journal of Marketing Management , 22 ( 5 – 6 ) , 553 – 572 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1362 / 02672 57067 77978 668 Frenken , K . ( 2017 ) . Sustainability perspectives on the sharing econ - omy . Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions , 23 , 1 – 2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . eist . 2017 . 04 . 004 Garcia , I . ( 2017 ) . Translating in the cloud age : Online marketplaces . Hermes , 59 – 70 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7146 / hjlcb . v0i56 . 97202 Ge , G . , Xiao , X . , Li , Z . , & Dai , Q . ( 2022 ) . Does ESG performance promote high - quality development of enterprises in China ? The mediating role of innovation input . Sustainability , 14 ( 7 ) , 3843 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / su140 73843 Electronic Markets ( 2023 ) 33 : 62 1 3 62 Page 18 of 19 Gillan , S . L . , Koch , A . , & Starks , L . T . ( 2021 ) . Firms and social respon - sibility : A review of ESG and CSR research in corporate finance . Journal of Corporate Finance , 66 , 101889 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jcorp fin . 2021 . 101889 Gioia , D . A . , Corley , K . G . , & Hamilton , A . L . ( 2013 ) . Seeking qualita - tive rigor in inductive research notes on the Gioia methodology . Organizational Research Methods , 16 ( 1 ) , 15 – 31 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 10944 28112 452151 Grover , V . , & Ramanlal , P . ( 1999 ) . Six myths of information and mar - kets : Information technology networks , electronic commerce , and the battle for consumer surplus . MIS Quarterly , 23 ( 4 ) , 465 – 495 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 249486 Han , W . , Wang , X . , Ahsen , M . E . , & Wattal , S . ( 2022 ) . The soci - etal impact of sharing economy platform self - regulations—An empirical investigation . Information Systems Research , 33 ( 4 ) , 1303 – 1323 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / isre . 2021 . 1044 Hein , A . , Schreieck , M . , Riasanow , T . , Setzke , D . S . , Wiesche , M . , Böhm , M . , & Krcmar , H . ( 2020 ) . Digital Platform Ecosystems . Electronic Markets , 30 ( 1 ) , 87 – 98 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12525 - 019 - 00377 - 4 Henderikx , M . , & Stoffers , J . ( 2022 ) . An exploratory literature study into digital transformation and leadership : Toward future - proof middle managers . Sustainability , 14 ( 2 ) , 687 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / su140 20687 Hong , Y . , & Pavlou , P . A . ( 2014 ) . Product fit uncertainty in online markets : Nature , effects , and antecedents . Information Systems Research , 25 ( 2 ) , 328 – 344 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / isre . 2014 . 0520 Jacobides , M . G . , Cennamo , C . , & Gawer , A . ( 2018 ) . Towards a theory of ecosystems . Strategic Management Journal , 39 ( 8 ) , 2255 – 2276 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smj . 2904 Jaiswal , A . K . , Niraj , R . , Park , C . H . , & Agarwal , M . K . ( 2018 ) . The effect of relationship and transactional characteristics on cus - tomer retention in emerging online markets . Journal of Business Research , 92 , 25 – 35 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusr es . 2018 . 07 . 007 Jiang , H . , Yang , J . , & Gai , J . ( 2023 ) . How digital platform capabil - ity affects the innovation performance of SMEs—Evidence from China . Technology in Society , 72 , 102187 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . techs oc . 2022 . 102187 Kanat , I . , Hong , Y . , & Raghu , T . S . ( 2018 ) . Surviving in global online labor markets for IT services : A geo - economic analysis . Infor - mation Systems Research . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / isre . 2017 . 0751 Katsamakas , E . , Miliaresis , K . , & Pavlov , O . V . ( 2022 ) . Digital plat - forms for the common good : Social innovation for active citizen - ship and ESG . Sustainability , 14 ( 2 ) , 639 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / su140 20639 Khaled , R . , Ali , H . , & Mohamed , E . K . A . ( 2021 ) . The Sustainable Development Goals and corporate sustainability performance : Mapping , extent and determinants . Journal of Cleaner Produc - tion , 311 , 127599 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jclep ro . 2021 . 127599 Khan , A . , & Tao , M . ( 2022 ) . Knowledge absorption capacity’s efficacy to enhance innovation performance through big data analytics and digital platform capability . Journal of Innovation & Knowledge , 7 ( 3 ) , 100201 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jik . 2022 . 100201 Khan , M . , Serafeim , G . , & Yoon , A . ( 2016 ) . Corporate sustainabil - ity : First evidence on materiality . The Accounting Review , 91 ( 6 ) , 1697 – 1724 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2308 / accr - 51383 Kim , H . W . , Chan , H . C . , & Kankanhalli , A . ( 2012 ) . What motivates people to purchase digital items on virtual community websites ? The desire for online self - presentation . Information Systems Research , 23 ( 4 ) , 1232 – 1245 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / isre . 1110 . 0411 Kolk , A . , & Ciulli , F . ( 2020 ) . The potential of sustainability - oriented digital platform multinationals : A comment on the transitions research agenda . Environmental Innovation and Societal Tran - sitions , 34 , 355 – 358 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . eist . 2019 . 12 . 008 Lee , M . T . , Raschke , R . L . , & Krishen , A . S . ( 2022 ) . Signaling green ! Firm ESG signals in an interconnected environment that promote brand valuation . Journal of Business Research , 138 , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusr es . 2021 . 08 . 061 Li , L . , Du , K . , Zhang , W . , & Mao , J . Y . ( 2019 ) . Poverty alleviation through government - led e - commerce development in rural China : An activity theory perspective . Information Systems Journal , 29 ( 4 ) , 914 – 952 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / isj . 12199 Li , L . , Hsu , C . , Mao , J . Y . , & Zhang , W . ( 2022 ) . Contextualising digital innovation in today’s China : Local practices and global contribu - tions . Information Systems Journal , 32 ( 3 ) , 623 – 629 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / isj . 12379 Li , T . T . , Wang , K . , Sueyoshi , T . , & Wang , D . D . ( 2021 ) . ESG : Research progress and future prospects . Sustainability , 13 ( 21 ) , Article 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / su132 111663 Lin , I . I . , Mahmassani , H . S . , Jaillet , P . , & Michael Walton , C . ( 2002 ) . Electronic marketplaces for transportation services : Shipper considerations . Transportation Research Record , 1790 ( 1 ) , 1 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3141 / 1790 - 01 Liu , B . , Pavlou , P . A . , & Cheng , X . ( 2022 ) . Achieving a balance between privacy protection and data collection : A field experi - mental examination of a theory - driven information technology solution . Information Systems Research , 33 ( 1 ) , 203 – 223 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / isre . 2021 . 1045 Lokuwaduge , C . S . D . S . , & Heenetigala , K . ( 2017 ) . Integrating envi - ronmental , social and governance ( ESG ) disclosure for a sustain - able development : An Australian study . Business Strategy and the Environment , 26 ( 4 ) , 438 – 450 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / bse . 1927 Ludwig , S . , Herhausen , D . , Grewal , D . , Bove , L . , Benoit , S . , de Ruyter , K . , & Urwin , P . ( 2022 ) . Communication in the gig economy : Buying and selling in online freelance marketplaces . Journal of Marketing , 86 ( 4 ) , 141 – 161 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 00222 42921 10308 41 Luo , L . , & Tang , Q . ( 2022 ) . The real effects of ESG reporting and GRI standards on carbon mitigation : International evidence . Business Strategy and the Environment . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / bse . 3281 Luo , X . , & Zhang , J . ( 2013 ) . How do consumer buzz and traffic in social media marketing predict the value of the firm ? Journal of Management Information Systems , 30 ( 2 ) , 213 – 238 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2753 / MIS07 42 - 12223 00208 Lupton , D . ( 2014 ) . The commodification of patient opinion : The digital patient experience economy in the age of big data . Sociology of Health & Illness , 36 ( 6 ) , 856 – 869 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 9566 . 12109 Lupton , D . ( 2016 ) . The diverse domains of quantified selves : Self - tracking modes and dataveillance . Economy and Society , 45 ( 1 ) , 101 – 122 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 03085 147 . 2016 . 11437 26 Lusch , R . F . , & Nambisan , S . ( 2015 ) . Service innovation : A service - dominant logic perspective . MIS Quarterly , 39 ( 1 ) , 155 – 175 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 25300 / MISQ / 2015 / 39 . 1 . 07 Malone , T . W . , Yates , J . , & Benjamin , R . I . ( 1987 ) . Electronic markets and electronic hierarchies . Communications of the ACM , 30 ( 6 ) , 484 – 497 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 214762 . 214766 Meijer , A . , & Boon , W . ( 2021 ) . Digital platforms for the co - creation of public value . Policy & Politics , 49 ( 2 ) , 231 – 248 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1332 / 03055 7321X 16115 95103 2181 Meira , E . , Cunha , F . A . F . d . S . , Orsato , R . J . , Miralles - Quirós , M . M . , & Miralles - Quirós , J . L . ( 2023 ) . The added value and differentia - tion among ESG investment strategies in stock markets . Business Strategy and the Environment , 32 ( 4 ) , 1816 – 1834 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / bse . 3221 Nambisan , S . , Wright , M . , & Feldman , M . ( 2019 ) . The digital transfor - mation of innovation and entrepreneurship : Progress , challenges and key themes . Research Policy , 48 ( 8 ) , 103773 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2019 . 03 . 018 Electronic Markets ( 2023 ) 33 : 62 1 3 Page 19 of 19 62 Nguyen , T . T . , & Do , M . H . ( 2022 ) . Female rural – urban migrants and online marketplaces in emerging economies : Evidence from Thailand and Vietnam . Asia & the Pacific Policy Studies , 9 ( 3 ) , 317 – 342 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / app5 . 359 Nirino , N . , Santoro , G . , Miglietta , N . , & Quaglia , R . ( 2021 ) . Corporate controversies and company’s financial performance : Exploring the moderating role of ESG practices . Technological Forecasting and Social Change , 162 , 120341 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . techf ore . 2020 . 120341 Ondrus , J . , Gannamaneni , A . , & Lyytinen , K . ( 2015 ) . The impact of openness on the market potential of multi - sided platforms : A case study of mobile payment platforms . Journal of Information Tech - nology , 30 , 260 – 275 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / jit . 2015 . 7 Pansera , M . , & Sarkar , S . ( 2016 ) . Crafting sustainable development solutions : Frugal innovations of grassroots entrepreneurs . Sustain - ability , 8 ( 1 ) , 51 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / su801 0051 Parker , G . G . , & Van Alstyne , M . W . ( 2005 ) . Two - sided network effects : A theory of information product design . Management Sci - ence , 51 ( 10 ) , 1494 – 1504 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 1050 . 0400 Pavlou , P . A . , & Dimoka , A . ( 2006 ) . The nature and role of feedback text comments in online marketplaces : Implications for trust building , price premiums , and seller differentiation . Information Systems Research , 17 ( 4 ) , 392 – 414 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / isre . 1060 . 0106 Pavlou , P . A . , & Gefen , D . ( 2004 ) . Building effective online market - places with institution - based trust . Information Systems Research , 15 ( 1 ) , 37 – 59 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / isre . 1040 . 0015 Peng , H . , Lu , Y . , & Gupta , S . ( 2023 ) . Promoting value emergence through digital platform ecosystems : Perspectives on resource inte - gration in China . Technological Forecasting and Social Change , 189 , 122338 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . techf ore . 2023 . 122338 Rowe , F . , & Markus , M . L . ( 2022 ) . Taking the measure of digital giants : Amazon and the Social Welfare Computing research agenda . Electronic Markets , 32 ( 2 ) , 437 – 446 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12525 - 022 - 00544 - 0 Saura , J . R . , Ribeiro - Soriano , D . , & Palacios - Marqués , D . ( 2021 ) . From user - generated data to data - driven innovation : A research agenda to understand user privacy in digital markets . International Jour - nal of Information Management , 60 , 102331 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinf omgt . 2021 . 102331 Schaltegger , S . , Hansen , E . G . , & Lüdeke - Freund , F . ( 2016 ) . Business models for sustainability : Origins , present research , and future avenues . Organization & Environment , 29 ( 1 ) , 3 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 10860 26615 599806 Smith , M . D . , & Telang , R . ( 2018 ) . Data can enhance creative pro - jects—Just look at Netflix . Harvard Business Review , 23 . https : / / hbr . org / 2018 / 01 / data - can - enhan ce - creat ive - proje cts - just - look - at - netfl ix Standing , S . , Standing , C . , & Love , P . E . D . ( 2010 ) . A review of research on e - marketplaces 1997 – 2008 . Decision Support Sys - tems , 49 ( 1 ) , 41 – 51 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . dss . 2009 . 12 . 008 Strader , T . J . , & Shaw , M . J . ( 1997 ) . Characteristics of electronic mar - kets . Decision Support Systems , 21 ( 3 ) , 185 – 198 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0167 - 9236 ( 97 ) 00028 - 6 Strauss , A . , & Corbin , J . ( 1998 ) . Basics of qualitative research : Tech - niques and procedures for developing grounded theory . Sage Pub - lications , Inc . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4135 / 97814 52230 153 Sun , H . ( 2010 ) . Sellers’ trust and continued use of online marketplaces . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 11 ( 4 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17705 / 1jais . 00226 Weber , O . ( 2014 ) . Environmental , social and governance reporting in China . Business Strategy and the Environment , 23 ( 5 ) , 303 – 317 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / bse . 1785 Xia , J . ( 2022 ) . A systematic review : How does organisational learning enable ESG performance ( from 2001 to 2021 ) ? Sustainability , 14 ( 24 ) , Article 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / su142 416962 Xu , S . , & Yang , R . ( 2010 ) . Indigenous characteristics of Chinese corporate social responsibility conceptual paradigm . Journal of Business Ethics , 93 ( 2 ) , 321 – 333 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10551 - 009 - 0224 - 8 Zha , Y . , Li , Q . , Huang , T . , & Yu , Y . ( 2022 ) . Strategic information shar - ing of online platforms as resellers or marketplaces . Marketing Science . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / mksc . 2022 . 1397 Zhong , X . , Chen , W . , & Ren , G . ( 2022 ) . The impact of corporate social irresponsibility on emerging - economy firms’ long - term perfor - mance : An explanation based on signal theory . Journal of Busi - ness Research , 144 , 345 – 357 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusr es . 2022 . 02 . 005 Zhou , G . , Liu , L . , & Luo , S . ( 2022 ) . Sustainable development , ESG performance and company market value : Mediating effect of financial performance . Business Strategy and the Environment , 31 ( 7 ) , 3371 – 3387 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / bse . 3089 Publisher ' s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . Springer Nature or its licensor ( e . g . a society or other partner ) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author ( s ) or other rightsholder ( s ) ; author self - archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law .