PHAGOCYTES WASp deﬁciency in mice results in failure to form osteoclast sealing zones and defects in bone resorption Yolanda Calle , Gareth E . Jones , Chris Jagger , Karen Fuller , Mike P . Blundell , Jade Chow , Tim Chambers , and Adrian J . Thrasher No defects related to deﬁciency of the Wiskott - AldrichSyndromeprotein ( WASp ) have been described in osteoclasts . Here we show that there are signiﬁcant mor - phologic and functional abnormalities . WASp - nullcellsspreadoveramuchlarger surface area and are highly polykaryotic . In their migratory phase , normal cells assemble clusters of podosomes behind their leading edges , whereas during the bone resorptive phase multiple podo - somes are densely aggregated in well - deﬁned actin rings forming the sealing zone . In comparison , WASp - null osteo - clastsineitherphasearemarkedlydepleted of podosomes . On bone surfaces , this re - sults in a failure to form actin rings at sealing zones . Complementation of WASp - null osteoclasts with an enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein ( eGFP ) – WASp fusion protein restores normal cytoarchitecture . These structural disturbances translate into abnormal patterns of bone resorption both in vitro on bone slices and in vivo . Although physiologic steady - state levels of bone re - sorption are maintained , a major impair - ment is observed when WASp - null animals are exposed to a resorptive challenge . Our results provide clear evidence that WASp is a critical component of podosomes in oste - oclastsandindicateanonredundantrolefor WASp in the dynamic organization of these actin structures during bone resorption . ( Blood . 2004 ; 103 : 3552 - 3561 ) © 2004 by TheAmerican Society of Hematology Introduction The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ) is an intracellular protein speciﬁcally expressed in hematopoietic cells and belongs to a larger family of more widely expressed proteins that mediate de novo actin polymerization . 1 , 2 At present , the members of the WASp family include WASp , N - WASP ( neural WASP ) , Scar / WAVE ( suppressor of G protein – coupled cyclic cAMP receptor cAR / WASp family verprolin - homologous protein ) proteins , and Las17p / Bee1p . WASp and WASp - related proteins consist of several functional domains that interact with signaling molecules , actin , and the actin - polymerizing factor , Arp2 / 3 complex . 3 Mutations in the gene coding for WASp leads to the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome ( WAS ) , a hematologic disorder characterized by eczema , micro - thrombocytopenia , and immunodeﬁciency . WASp - null leukocytes exhibit defects in the organization and regulation of the actin cytoskeleton , 4 , 5 contributing to the observed defects in cell migra - tion and chemotaxis . 6 , 7 Osteoclasts are highly motile cells derived from the monocytic lineage and are specialized in bone resorption and remodeling , and therefore cycle between migratory and resorptive phases . These processes are regulated by the dynamic organization of the actin cytoskeleton . Osteoclasts assemble actin - based adhesion structures named podosomes , which turn over spatially and temporally with a short half - life of between 2 and 12 minutes . 8 Podosomes are present in cells of the monocytic lineage as well as some Src - transformed ﬁbroblasts . 9 They consist of an F - actin core surrounded by vinculin , talin , (cid:1) - actinin , ﬁmbrin , gelsolin , vimen - tin 9 , 10 adaptor molecules such as Crkl , 11 and other molecules participating in cytoskeletal signaling pathways such as pp60c - Src , PI3 - K , 12 RhoA , 13 and PYK - 2 . 14 Uniquely , in nonmigratory or resorptive osteoclasts , clustering and fusion of podosomes in an organized ring around the osteoclast periphery deﬁnes a resorbing compartment where protons are released for dissolution of bone mineral . 8 , 15 , 16 The signaling mechanisms that determine the organi - zation and remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton during the migra - tory and resorptive phases of osteoclasts are , however , relatively undeﬁned . 17 , 18 It is known that ligation of (cid:1) v (cid:2) 3 integrins to bone extracellular matrix proteins such as osteopontin 19 induces cSrc - dependent tyrosine phosphorylation , PYK2 activation , and translo - cation to podosomes , followed by cell polarization and osteoclast migration . Many of these cytoskeletal changes are in part mediated through activation of the Rho - GTPases . 13 , 20 Although WASp plays a prominent role in the formation of many cytoskeletal structures in hematopoietic cells , including podosomes in macrophages and dendritic cells ( DCs ) , no evidence has yet been provided showing thatitisnecessaryformigrationorsealingzoneformationinosteoclasts . Furthermore , there has been no consistent indication of abnormal bone structure or development in humans or mice deﬁcient in WASp . In the present study we have investigated the participation of WASp in the regulation of the osteoclast cytoskeleton and the consequences of deﬁciency on resorptive osteoclast function . Our results provide good evidence for an absolute requirement for WASp during the formation of both individual podosomes and the From The Randall Centre for Molecular Mechanisms of Cell Function , New Hunt’s House , King’s College London , Guy’s Campus , London , United Kingdom ; the Department of Cellular Pathology , St George’s Hospital Medical School , London , UnitedKingdom ; andtheMolecularImmunologyUnit , Institute of Child Health , University College London , United Kingdom . SubmittedApril 25 , 2003 ; accepted December 1 , 2003 . Prepublished online as Blood First Edition Paper , January 15 , 2004 ; DOI 10 . 1182 / blood - 2003 - 04 - 1259 . Supported by grants from the Wellcome Trust ( G . E . J . , A . T . ) and the Arthritis Research Campaign ( G . E . J . , A . T . , Y . C . ) . The online version of the article contains a data supplement . Reprints : Yolanda Calle , Randall Centre , New Hunt’s House , Guy’s Campus , King’s College London , London SE1 1UL , United Kingdom ; e - mail : yolanda . calle @ kcl . ac . uk ; or Adrian Thrasher , Molecular Immunology Unit , InstituteofChildHealth , 30GuildfordSt , London , WC1N1EH , UnitedKingdom ; e - mail : a . thrasher @ ich . ucl . ac . uk . The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge payment . Therefore , and solely to indicate this fact , this article is hereby marked ‘‘advertisement’’in accordance with 18 U . S . C . section 1734 . © 2004 by TheAmerican Society of Hematology 3552 BLOOD , 1 MAY 2004 (cid:1) VOLUME 103 , NUMBER 9 For personal use only . on October 20 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From normal osteoclast sealing zone , and , consequently , for the physi - ologic regulation of bone resorption and remodeling . Materials and Methods Media and reagents Bone marrow – derived osteoclasts were cultured in modiﬁed Eagle mini - mum essential medium ( MEM ) with Earle’s salts plus 10 % heat inactivated fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , 2 mM glutamine , 100 IU / mL penicillin , and 100 (cid:3) g / mLstreptomycin ( Gibco BRL , Grand Island , NY ) . Recombinant human macrophage colony - stimulating factor ( M - CSF ) and transforming growth factor beta 1 ( TGF - (cid:2) 1 ) were purchased from R & D Systems ( Abington , Oxon , United Kingdom ) ; soluble human recombinant receptor activator of nuclear factor – kappa B ( NF - kappaB ) ligand ( RANKL ) was obtained from Insight Biotechnology ( Wembley , United Kingdom ) . Phoenix cells were cultured in Dulbecco modiﬁed Eagle medium ( DMEM ; Gibco BRL ) and supplemented with 15 % heat inactivated FBS . Antivinculin antibody was purchased from Sigma ( Gillingham , Dorset , United Kingdom ) . Alexa 488 – conjugated anti – mouse IgG antibody andAlexa 568 orAlexa 488 phalloidin were obtained from Molecular Probes ( Eugene , OR ) . Anti - WASp antibody was purchased from Upstate Biotechnology ( Milton Keynes , United Kingdom ) . Anti – green ﬂuores - cent protein ( GFP ) antibody was produced in - house and was a gift from Dr Ng ( Randall Centre , KCL , London , United Kingdom ) . Horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) – labeled antimouse and antirabbit antibodies were purchased from Dako ( Glostrup , Denmark ) . Animals Pathogen - free SV129 mice purchased from Harlan ( Bicester , Oxon , United Kingdom ) and WASp - null mice on a SV129 background 21 originally obtained from Dr FredAlt ( Howard Hughes Medical Institute ) were bred in our own colony in pathogen - free conditions . Isolation and culture of osteoclast precursors from bone marrow Preparations of osteoclast precursors from 6 - to 8 - week - old SV129 or WASp - null mice bone marrow were obtained as previously described . 22 Mice were culled by cervical dislocation . Femora and tibiae were asepti - cally removed and dissected free of adherent soft tissue . The bone ends were cut and the marrow cavity was ﬂushed out into a Petri dish by slowly injecting phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) without Ca 2 (cid:4) and Mg 2 (cid:4) at one end of the bone using a sterile 21 - gauge needle . The bone marrow cells were carefully agitated with a plastic Pasteur pipette to obtain a single cell suspension . Cells were washed twice in PBS by centrifugation ( 900 g ; 5 minutes ) , resuspended in MEM supplemented with 10 % FBS , and incubated for 24hoursinM - CSF ( 5ng / mL ) atadensityof3 (cid:5) 10 5 cells / mLin75 - cm 2 ﬂasksat 37°Cina5 % CO 2 atmosphere . After24hoursnonadherentcellswereharvested , washed , and seeded in 96 - well plates ( 10 5 cells / well ) containing coverslips or bone slices using as culture medium MEM supplemented with 10 % FBS , M - CSF ( 60 ng / mL ) , RANKL ( 30 ng / mL ) , and TGF (cid:2) 1 ( 0 . 1 ng / mL ) . Cells were incubated for 7 or 10 days and fed every 3 days . Formation of osteoclasts after incubation was evaluated by quantiﬁcation of tartrate - resistant acid phosphatase ( TRAP ) – positive cells . At days 7 and 10 , more than 80 % of the cells were TRAP - positive multinucleated and mononuclear cells . Immunocytochemistry Bone marrow osteoclast precursors were seeded on coverslips or bone slices as described above . At day 7 , cells were ﬁxed for 20 minutes in 4 % wt / vol paraformaldehyde / 3 % wt / vol sucrose in PBS warmed to 37°C . Cells were washed 3 times with PBS , permeabilized with 0 . 5 % vol / vol Triton X - 100 in PBS for 10 minutes , and blocked with 5 % wt / vol bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) in PBS for 45 minutes at room temperature . Actin ﬁlaments were detected by incubation with a solution of 0 . 1 (cid:3) g / mL Alexa 568 – conjugated phalloidin in PBS for 1 hour at 37°C . For localization of vinculin , cells were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature with a 1 / 500 dilution of antivinculin antibody in PBS containing 2 % wt / vol BSA . Coverslips were washed 3 times with PBS and incubated for 1 hour with a PBS solution of 1 / 100 anti - MoFc receptor ( Research Diagnostics , Flanders , NJ ) followed by an incubation with a PBS solution of 1 / 200 diluted Alexa 488 – conjugated anti – mouse IgG . For the simultaneous detection of nuclei and F - actin , cells were incubated with Alexa 488 - nm phalloidin as described at the beginning of this section , followed by an incubation with a PBS solution of 5 (cid:3) g / mL propidium iodide at room temperature for 30 minutes . Coverslips were mounted onto slides using 10 % wt / vol Mowiol ( Kuraray Specialties Europe , Frankfurt , Germany ) in PBS containing 0 . 1 % wt / vol P - phenylenediamine and visualizedusingaLeicaTCSNTconfocallaserscanningheadattachedtoaLeicaDMRXAopticalmicroscope ( Leica , St Gallen , Switzerland ) . Leica TCS scanning software was used to transpose 4 sequential images from 4 separate optical sections taken at equal distances . The same software was used to obtain mergedconfocalimages . Quantiﬁcation of arrangements of actin ﬁlaments in osteoclasts The presence of actin ﬁlaments and vinculin was detected by immunoﬂuo - rescence in osteoclasts plated on glass coverslips , as described in “Immuno - cytochemistry . ”Thisstainingallowedustodetectthepresenceofpodosomesby a characteristic core of actin ﬁlaments surrounded by a rim of vinculin . We identiﬁed the following possible actin ﬁlaments / vinculin arrangements on glass coverslips : ( 1 ) actin ring with peripheral single podosomes ( dense actin rings with abundant and regularly inserted podosomes surrounded by more dispersed podosomes ) ; ( 2 ) actin ring without single podosomes ( actin rings depleted of actin and vinculin with few discrete dots of actin ﬁlaments within the ring and devoid of surrounding dispersed podosomes ) ; ( 3 ) podosomes in noncircularclusters ( amorphousaggregationsofpodosomes ) ; and ( 4 ) podosomes absent ( absence actin ﬁlaments arranged as podosomes ) . Plating osteoclasts on bone induced the formation of the following arrangements of actin ﬁlaments : ( 1 ) podosomes in complete rings ( dense actin rings colocalizing with vinculin and with inserted podosomes ) ; ( 2 ) podosomes in noncircular clusters ( organization also identiﬁed on glass , see description at the beginning of this section ) ; ( 3 ) actin plaques ( actin - rich plaques colocalizing with vinculin ) ; ( 4 ) podosomes absent ( lack of actin ﬁlaments arranged into podosomes ) . We computed 100 cells per experimental condition , and quantiﬁcation was blinded to the genotypes . Western blot Osteoclasts in culture at day 7 were lysed in radioimmunoprecipitation assay ( RIPA ) lysis buffer containing 1 % Triton - X 100 , 0 . 1 % sodium dodecyl sulfate ( SDS ) , 150 mM NaCl , 50 mM Tris ( trishydroxymethylami - nomethane ) – HCl , 1 mM EDTA ( ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid ) , 1 mM EGTA ( ethyleneglycoltetraacetic acid ) , 5 mM sodium molybdate , and 20 mM phenylphosphate with protease and phosphatase inhibitors ( 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride [ PMSF ] , 10 (cid:3) g / mL aprotinin , 20 (cid:3) g / mL leupeptin , 20 (cid:3) g / mL pepstatin A , 50 mM NaF , and 1 mM sodium orthovanadate ) . Twenty micrograms of total cell lysate protein was loaded per lane in a 10 % sodium dodecyl sulfate – polyacrylamide ( SDS - PAGE ) gel and subjected to electrophoresis . Proteins were blotted onto polyvinylidene - ﬂuoride ( PVDF ) membranes using a Bio - Rad Mini protein II transfer apparatus ( Bio - Rad Laboratories , Hertfordshire , United Kingdom ) . Blots were blocked with 5 % dried milk solution diluted in TBS - T ( 10 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , 100 mM NaCl , 0 . 1 % Tween20 ) , incubated with indicated antibody , and signal detected with horseradish peroxidase – conjugated secondary antibodies and enhanced chemiluminescence ( ECL ) detection system . Blots were stripped for half an hour with 2 % SDS and 0 . 7 % (cid:2) - mercaptoethanol for 1 hour at 50°C and reprobedfor (cid:2) - actintocheckthetotalamountofproteinloadedperlane . Assessment of bone resorption in vitro Bone resorption was assessed at day 10 after plating osteoclast precursors on bone slices , as previously described . 23 Bone slices were removed from wells , immersed in 10 % NaOCl ( BDH , Poole , United Kingdom ) for 10 minutes to remove cells , washed in distilled water , dried , and sputter - coated with gold . The extent of bone resorption was quantiﬁed by counting , using reﬂected light microscopy , the number of grid intersections in an eyepiece graticule that overlayanareaofboneresorption . Inaddition , thesurfaceofeachboneslicewas examined in a confocal microscope ( Lasertec , London , United Kingdom ) to measurethedepthandvolumeoftheexcavatedregions . WASp REGULATES OSTEOCLAST CYTOSKELETON 3553 BLOOD , 1 MAY 2004 (cid:1) VOLUME 103 , NUMBER 9 For personal use only . on October 20 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From Ovariectomy Ovariectomy ( ovx ) or sham ovariectomy ( sham - ovx ) of 22 - week - old weight - matched WASp - null and SV129 wild - type mice was performed under general anesthesia ( 2 % halothane [ Concord Pharmaceuticals , Essex , United Kingdom ] , 2l / min O 2 , 2l / minN 2 O ) , using a dorsal approach . During the experiment , animals were housed in solid - bottomed cages , in groups of no more than 6 . Food and water were given ad libitum to all animals . Animals were culled 15 days after ovariectomy , and ovariectomy was conﬁrmed by measuring uterine weight . Femurs were removed and freed of soft tissue , ﬁxed in 10 % formalin in PBS for 48 hours , demineralized in 10 % EDTA in PBS for 7 to 10 days , dehydrated through graded alcohols , and embedded in parafﬁn wax . Parafﬁn sections were prepared and mounted onto glass slides . These were then dewaxed , rehydrated through graded alcohols , and stained with toluidine blue or TRAP , using a Leucognost kit ( Merck , Darmstadt , Germany ) . The volume of cancellous bone was measured in a standard zone , situated at least 0 . 5 mm from the growth plate , excluding the primary spongiosa and trabeculae connected to the cortical bone . All other histomorphometric measurements were carried out in the same zone as that used for assessing bone volume , at an objective magniﬁcation of 20 (cid:5) . Measurements were made using a digitizer pad , through a camera lucida . The digitizer pad was linked to a computer with dedicated bone software ( Osteomeasure , Osteometrics , Atlanta , GA ) . Osteoclast surface and osteoclast number were measured on the TRAP - stained parafﬁn sections , in the same way as mentioned for histomorphomet - ric measurement . Retroviral infection of bone marrow – derived osteoclasts The retroviral vector backbone used in this study has been described before 24 and encodes in our study for enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein ( eGFP ) or eGFP - WASp fusion proteins under the transcriptional control of a cytomegalovirus promoter . We have previously shown restoration of podosomes in WASp - null dendritic cells using this fusion protein . 5 A transient ecotropic packaging cell line ( 293 HEK , Phoenix ) was transfected by standard methods . Cell culture supernatants containing viral particles were collected 48 hours after transfection and ﬁltered through a 0 . 45 - (cid:3) m ﬁlter . Osteoclast precursors were grown on glass coverslips or bone slices for 48 hours after isolation from bone marrow . Transduction was performed by culturing the cells with viral supernatants for 6 hours over 3 cycles , resulting in the expression of eGFP or eGFP - WASp proteins by 70 % - 80 % of osteoclasts at day 7 on glass or day 10 on bone as determined by quantiﬁcation of the percentage of GFP - positive cells per coverslip or bone slice . Osteoclast cultures were ﬁxed in 4 % wt / vol paraformaldehyde / 3 % wt / vol sucrose in PBS at day 7 and day 10 after isolation on glass and on bone , respectively , and actin organization and cell morphology were examined following the methods given under “Immunocytochemistry . ” Results Abnormal morphology and actin organization in WASp - null osteoclasts The number and morphology of podosomes and podosome - like structures were ﬁrst quantiﬁed in osteoclast cultures obtained from Figure 1 . Organization of actin cytoskeleton in normal and WASp (cid:1) / (cid:1) osteoclasts . Bone marrow osteoclasts were derived on glass coverslips ( A ) or bone slices ( B ) , ﬁxed with 3 % paraformaldehyde , and permeabilized with 0 . 05 % Triton X - 100 , andthepresenceofactinﬁlamentsandvinculinwasdetectedbyimmunoﬂuo - rescence . We quantiﬁed the percentage of cells displaying each of the identiﬁed arrangements of actin ﬁlaments in 100 cells per experiment . The graphs illustrate the mean percentage of cells (cid:6) SD from 3 experiments . Figure 2 . Cytoskeletal organization of normal and WASp (cid:1) / (cid:1) osteoclasts on glasscoverslips . Bonemarrowosteoclastswerederivedonglasscoverslips . Atday 7afterplating , cellcultureswereﬁxedwith3 % paraformaldehyde , permeabilizedwith 0 . 05 % Triton X - 100 , and stained with a mouse anti – human antibody against vinculin ( A , D , G , J ) and Alexa 568 – conjugated phalloidin , followed by an incubation with an Alexa 488 goat anti – mouse antibody ( B , E , H , K ) . Merged images are shown in panels C , F , I , and L . Normal osteoclasts assemble podosomes in clusters behind leading edges ( A - C ) or inserted in actin rings ( D - F ) with the characteristic organiza - tion of these adhesion structures : core of actin ﬁlaments surrounded by a rim of vinculin ( inserts in C , F ) . WASp - null osteoclasts were defective in the formation of podosomes ( G - I ) , instead assembling actin plaques colocalizing with vinculin ( insert in I ) or actin rings with few podosome - like structures inserted ( J - L ) , which were depleted of vinculin ( insert in L ) . The micrographs are representative of the cytoskeletal organization of osteoclasts detected in 3 independent experiments . Bar , 20 (cid:3) m . 3554 CALLE et al BLOOD , 1 MAY 2004 (cid:1) VOLUME 103 , NUMBER 9 For personal use only . on October 20 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From bone marrow of normal and WASp - null mice and cultured on glass coverslips . The presence of podosomes in osteoclasts was deter - mined by characteristic immunostaining . As shown in Figure 1A , most normal osteoclasts displayed podosomes with an actin core mean size of 1 - (cid:3) m diameter and a well - deﬁned surrounding rim of vinculin . In 64 . 5 % of normal osteoclasts , podosomes were ar - ranged in clusters , very similar to those seen behind the lead - ing edge of migrating macrophages and dendritic cells ( Figure 2A - C ) . In 11 . 4 % of osteoclasts , podosomes were concentrated in dense actin rings ( the sealing zone ) , often surrounded by more dispersed podosome clusters ( Figure 2D - F ) . In cultures derived from WASp - null mice , 67 . 9 % of osteoclasts were completely devoid of podosomes ( Figure 2G - I ) . In contrast , actin and vinculin often colocalized in scattered patches , which were absent in normal cells . Of WASp - null osteoclasts , 30 . 3 % also assembled morphologi - cally abnormal actin rings ( Figure 2J - L ) . These were depleted of actin and vinculin and contained few discrete podosome - like structures within the ring . To determine cytoskeletal organization under more physiologic conditions , cells also were cultured on bone slices . Under these conditions , 24 . 2 % of normal osteoclasts assembled clusters of podosomes , while 54 . 8 % displayed well - organized actin rings , often with several rings per cell ( Figure 1B , Figure 3A - F ) . In summary , a greater percentage of cells formed typical osteoclastic sealing zones on bone slices when compared with cells plated onto glass surfaces , indicating that formation and maturation of actin rings is favored by a physiologic bone substratum . In contrast to normal cells , 52 . 7 % of WASp - null osteoclasts were completely devoid of podosomes ( Figure 1B , Figure 3G - I ) , and 45 . 8 % displayed only dysmorphic actin - rich plaques ( Figure 1B , Figure 3J - L ) . These actin plaques never were observed in normal osteoclasts . Interestingly , differences in the size of WASp - null osteoclasts cultured in vitro also were noted ( Figure 4 ) . When compared to normal cells , the area of spreading of WASp - null osteoclasts on glass and bone was 7 . 9 - fold and 1 . 8 - fold greater , respectively ( Figure 4A - B ) . This increase in the area of spread was associated with a 5 . 7 - fold and a 1 . 7 - fold increase in the number of nuclei per cell on glass and bone , respectively ( Figure 4C - D ) . Therefore , both the size of WASp - null osteoclasts and their individual nuclear number were signiﬁcantly increased . In addition , in normal cells the area of spread and the number of nuclei within osteoclasts increased by 2 . 7 - fold and 1 . 6 - fold , respectively , when plated on bone compared to glass . This response to the substratum was not observed in WASp - null osteoclasts . Thus , WASp - null osteoclasts Figure 3 . Cytoskeletal organization of normal and WASp (cid:1) / (cid:1) osteoclasts on bone slices . Bone marrow osteoclasts were derived on bone slices . At day 10 after plating , cell cultures were ﬁxed with 3 % paraformalde - hyde and permeabilized with 0 . 05 % Triton X - 100 and vinculin ( A , D , G , J ) , and actin ﬁlaments ( B , E , H , K ) were detectedbyimmunoﬂuorescenceasdescribedin“Materi - alsandmethods . ”MergedimagesareshowninpanelsC , F , I , and L . In normal cells , podosomes were assembled eitherinnoncircularclustersacrossthecellbody ( A - C ) or , more commonly , in actin rings , where they were more diffuse than on glass coverslips ( D - F ) . Vinculin colocal - ized with podosomes ( A - C ) and actin rings ( D - F ) . WASp - null cells were devoid of podosomes ( G - I ) or assembled large plaques of actin ( J - L ) . Vinculin staining was poor in WASp (cid:7) / (cid:7) osteoclasts , where actin ﬁlaments were al - most undetectable ( G - I ) and distributed throughout the cytoplasm of cells containing actin plaques ( J - L ) . The images are representative of the cytoskeletal organiza - tion of osteoclasts detected in 3 independent experi - ments . Bar , 20 (cid:3) m . WASp REGULATES OSTEOCLAST CYTOSKELETON 3555 BLOOD , 1 MAY 2004 (cid:1) VOLUME 103 , NUMBER 9 For personal use only . on October 20 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From were larger than normal and did not undergo any further increase in size when plated on bone . Using interference reﬂection videomicroscopy ( IRM ) , we ob - served that the formation and disassembly of the adhesion sites in normal and WASp - null osteoclasts were different . Adhesion points in normal osteoclasts were mediated by podosomes in noncircular clusters ( Figure 5A - C ) or inserted in actin rings ( Figure 5D - F ) . In WASp - null osteoclasts , attachment of cells to the substratum was mediated by actin patches ( Figure 5G - I ) or dysmorphic actin rings ( Figure 5J - L ) . As observed by IRM video microscopy of living cells , normal osteoclasts formed highly dynamic well - organized actin rings that assemble and disassembled continuously ( to watch Supplemental Video 1 , available on the Blood website , see the Supplemental Videos link at the top of the online article ) . In contrast , WASp - null osteoclasts assembled more static poorly organized actin rings ( Supplemental Video 2 ) . At the periphery of these rings very dynamic adhesion points underwent rapid cycles of assembly and disassembly , but they consistently failed to generate a normal podosome morphology . Figure 4 . Increased cell size and number of nuclei per cell in WASp (cid:1) / (cid:1) osteoclasts . The area of spreading ( A , B ) and the number of nuclei per cell ( C , D ) was quantiﬁed on normal ( f ) and WASp - null ( u ) osteoclasts derived on glass coverslips ( A , C ) or bone slices ( B , D ) . Cells were ﬁxed and stained with Alexa 468 – conjugated phalloidin and propidium iodide . Graphs express the mean (cid:6) SEM values from 3 experiments . * P (cid:8) . 05 ( Student t test ) . Figure 5 . Organization of actin ﬁlaments in normal and WASp (cid:1) / (cid:1) osteoclasts at adhesion points on the substratum . Confocal ﬂuorescent and IRM images were taken to detect vinculin ( A , D , G , J ) and F - actin distribu - tion ( B , E , H , K ) , showing that the adhesion points of the cells with the substratum detected by IRM ( C , F , I , L ) corresponded to the actin structures we detected by immunoﬂuorescence . Adhesion points in normal oste - oclasts were mediated by podosomes in noncircular clusters ( A - C ) or inserted in actin rings ( D - F ) . In WASp - null osteoclasts , attachment of cells to the substratum was mediated by actin patches ( G - I ) or dysmorphic actin rings ( J - L ) . Bar , 20 (cid:3) m . 3556 CALLE et al BLOOD , 1 MAY 2004 (cid:1) VOLUME 103 , NUMBER 9 For personal use only . on October 20 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From Reconstitution of podosomes in WASp - null osteoclasts by complementation with eGFP - WASp Transduction of WASp - null osteoclasts with an eGFP - WASp fusion retroviral vector induced the expression of WASp to levels similar to control cells ( Figure 6A - B ) . Expression of eGFP - WASp resulted in the reconstitution of morphologically normal podo - somes . WASp - null osteoclasts transduced with eGFP alone dis - played an actin cytoskeletal arrangement similar to nontransduced mutant cells . As expected , eGFP was diffusely distributed in the cytoplasm and did not colocalize speciﬁcally with any cellular structures . When plated on glass , 74 . 8 % of eGFP - transduced cells ( Figure 6C ) were completely devoid of podosomes ( Figure 7A - C ) . In 39 . 7 % of cells , actin rings of poor quality were formed , with few discrete podosomes inserted in the ring ( Figure 7D - F ) . In contrast , 45 % of eGFP - WASp – transduced mutant osteoclasts ( Figure 6C ) assembled clusters of normal podosomes ( Figure 7G - I ) . In addi - tion , 8 . 8 % of the cells displayed actin rings rich in podosomes with some discrete peripheral podosome structures ( Figure 7J - L ) . eGFP - WASp clearly colocalized with the podosome actin core . Similarly , transduction of WASp - null osteoclasts plated on bone slices also resulted in the reconstitution of actin structures , similar to those of wild - type cultures ( Figure 6D ) . Most cells transduced with eGFP alone were devoid of podosomes , and 37 . 7 % assembled abnormal actin plaques ( Figure 8A - F ) . In comparison , 50 % of eGFP - WASp – transduced cells assembled morphologically normal actin rings characteristic of the resorptive phase ( Figure 8G - I ) , or in 14 . 4 % of cells , podosome clusters characteristic of the migratory phase ( Figure 8J - L ) . eGFP - WASp again colocalized with the actin rings and the core of individual podosomes . Formation of actin plaques was abrogated in eGFP - WASp – transduced cells . Successful func - tional reconstitution of WASp - null cells also resulted in a decrease in cell size and nuclear number toward the normal phenotype ( Figure 9 ) . The area of spread and the number of nuclei per cell in WASp - null cells transduced with eGFP alone were similar to nontransduced WASp - null cells . However , expression of eGFP WASp in WASp - null osteoclasts induced a 4 . 5 - fold and 1 . 7 - fold decrease in the area of spreading in cells plated on glass and bone , respectively ( Figure 9A - B ) . The number of nuclei in eGFP WASp – expressing osteoclasts also decreased by 4 . 9 - fold and 1 . 5 - fold when cells were plated on glass and bone , respectively ( Figure 9C - D ) . WASp - null osteoclasts are defective in bone resorption To determine whether these cytoskeletal disturbances produced abnormalities of cellular function , differences in bone resorption between normal and WASp - null mice were measured , ﬁrstly in vitro . Although the number of cells in WASp - null cultures was lower , both normal and WASp - null osteoclasts differentiated on bone routinely covered the same percentage of the total surface ( data not shown ) . This was due to the signiﬁcantly larger size of WASp - null cells ( Figure 4B - D ) . However , the area of bone surface resorbed by normal osteoclasts was 1 . 8 - fold higher ( P (cid:8) . 05 ) compared to WASp - null cells ( Figure 10A ) . The quality and morphology of pits formed by WASp - null cells also were clearly different ( Figure 10B - C ) . Although both types of osteoclasts were able to form complex pits consisting of multiple individual excavations , the number of individual components per complex pit was higher in WASp - null cultures . However , the total volumes and the maximal depth of the complex pits formed by normal and WASp - null osteoclasts were not notably altered ( Figure 10D - E ) . Expression of eGFP - WASp ( but not eGFP alone ) induced a 1 . 4 - fold increase in the area of bone surface resorbed by WASp - null cells , reaching values similar to control cells ( Figure 10A ) . As expected , the mean values of the total volume and the maximal depth of the complex pits in WASp - null cells was not altered by infections with either eGFP alone or eGFP - WASp ( Figure 10D - E ) . However , the morphology of the pits excavated by osteoclasts expressing eGFP - WASp ( but not eGFP alone ) was similar to that of the normal cells ( Figure 10F - G ) . Since the abnormalities of bone resorption in vitro were modest , the capacity for bone resorption in vivo was tested following ovariectomy of female mice . This procedure induces a rapid and extensive bone loss of approximately half of the metaphyseal bone within 2 weeks that challenges the capacity of osteoclasts to dissolve the bone matrix . Bone resorption capacity was measured by determining the changes of trabecular bone volume in the metaphyses . Under normal conditions , bone volume did not differ signiﬁcantly between WASp - null ( 10 . 6 (cid:6) 7 mm 3 ) and wild - type mice ( 9 . 8 (cid:6) 1 . 4 mm 3 ) ( Figure 115A ) . However , following ovariec - tomy , there were signiﬁcant differences ( Figure 11A ) . As expected , Figure 6 . Expression of eGFP WASp in WASp - null cells results in the reconsti - tution of the normal organization of the actin cytoskeleton . Bone marrow – derived osteoclasts from normal ( SV129 ) , WASp - null ( WASp (cid:7) / (cid:7) ) , or WASp - null transduced with eGFP ( WASp (cid:7) / (cid:7) eGFP ) or eGFP - WASp ( WASp (cid:7) / (cid:7) eGFP - WASp ) werelysedinRIPAbufferatday7afterplatingandsubjectedtoa10 % SDS - PAGEgel electrophoresis , probed with anti - WASp ( A ) or anti - eGFP antibodies ( B ) . Signal was detected with horseradish peroxidase – conjugated secondary antibodies and en - hanced chemiluminescence ( ECL ) detection system . Visualization of eGFP required a 10 - second ﬁlm exposure , whereas visualization of eGFP - WASp required 90 secondsofexposure . Blotswerestrippedwith2 % SDSand0 . 7 % (cid:2) - mercaptoethanol for1hourat50°Candreprobedfor (cid:2) - actintocheckthetotalamountofproteinloaded perlane . WASp - nullbonemarrowosteoclastsderivedonglasscoverslips ( C ) orbone slices ( D ) and transduced with eGFP ( u ) or eGFP WASp ( f ) were ﬁxed with 3 % paraformaldehyde , permeabilizedwith0 . 05 % TritonX - 100 , andthepresenceofactin ﬁlaments and vinculin was detected by immunoﬂuorescence . We quantiﬁed the percentage of cells displaying each of the identiﬁed arrangements of actin ﬁlaments in 100 cells per experiment . The graphs illustrate the mean percentage of cells (cid:6) SD from 3 experiments . WASp REGULATES OSTEOCLAST CYTOSKELETON 3557 BLOOD , 1 MAY 2004 (cid:1) VOLUME 103 , NUMBER 9 For personal use only . on October 20 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From this procedure induced an extensive bone loss of 38 . 6 % in wild - type control animals compared to a nonsigniﬁcant 16 . 4 % of bone loss in ovariectomized mutant mice . Therefore , although WASp - null osteoclasts were capable of physiologic levels of resorption , there was a signiﬁcant impairment in the function of WASp - null osteoclasts when subjected to a resorptive challenge . We also noted differences in the quality of bone resorption between the 2 cell types . Despite the low levels of bone volume loss in ovariectomized WASp - null mice , we unexpectedly ob - served a signiﬁcant 2 . 75 - fold increase in the total eroded surface , similar to that observed in wild - type animals ( Figure 11B ) . Screening TRAP - stained sections to measure osteoclast parameters also revealed that both the percentage of bone surface covered by osteoclasts , and the total number of osteoclasts , were raised by 1 . 5 - fold and 1 . 7 - fold , respectively , as a result of ovariectomy in WASp - null mice . The same indices were not raised in wild - type mice ( Figure 11C - D ) , suggesting that bone loss had been largely completed at the time of analysis . These ﬁndings are consistent with the recorded indices of osteoblast activity , which remained high in WASp - null mice , associated with the active remodeling that accompanies bone resorption after ovariectomy ( data not shown ) . Therefore , despite an increase in osteoclast numbers and an increase in eroded surface , bone resorption by WASp - null cells was highly inefﬁcient . Discussion WASp is a key regulator of the actin cytoskeleton in hematopoietic cells . In WAS patients , leukocytes display cytoskeletal abnormali - ties that probably contributes signiﬁcantly to their abnormal migratory properties . , 6 , 25 , 26 Although in osteoclasts the reorganiza - tion of the actin cytoskeleton is essential for migration and bone remodeling , 8 , 10 no consistent or obvious bone abnormalities have been reported in WAS patients or in WASp - null mice . Three WAS patients have been reported with radiological and clinical features of infantile cortical hyperostosis ( Caffey disease ) . 27 This rare and usually self - limited disease is characterized by increased width of bone cortex , resulting in bone expansion and bowing deformities . The frequency with which it appears in WAS is much higher than would be expected , but the etiological link has not been identiﬁed . While normal osteoclasts displayed many podosomes , 16 WASp - null osteoclasts cultured on glass failed to assemble podosomes behind their leading edges . As expected , in the presence of bone Figure 7 . Reconstitution of podosomes in WASp - null osteoclastsplatedonglasscoverslipsbyexpression of eGFP WASp . WASp - null cells were transduced with eGFP ( A - F ) oreGFP - WASp ( G - L ) . DistributionofeGFPis showninpanelsAandD , anddistributionofeGFP - WASp in panels G and J . Actin organization was detected by immunostainingwithAlexa568 – conjugatedphalloidin ( B , E , H , K ) . Merged images are shown in panels C , F , I , and L . Cells transduced with eGFP were devoid of podo - somes ( A - C ) or assembled abnormal actin rings with few podosome - like structures inserted ( D - F ) . eGFP did not colocalize speciﬁcally with any cytoskeletal structure ( C , F ) . TransductionofeGFPWASpresultedinreconstitution of podosomes and formation of clusters similar to normal cells in both migrating cells ( G - I ) and cells with actin rings ( J - L ) . eGFP WASp colocalized speciﬁcally with the actin core of podosomes ( insert in I , L ) . The micrographs are representative of the cytoskeletal organization of osteoclasts detected in 3 independent experiments . Bar , 20 (cid:3) m . 3558 CALLE et al BLOOD , 1 MAY 2004 (cid:1) VOLUME 103 , NUMBER 9 For personal use only . on October 20 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From extracellular matrix , cultures of normal osteoclasts shifted from a predominant migratory phenotype ( podosomes in noncircular clus - ters ) on glass to a resorptive phenotype ( formation of highly condensed actin rings ) . In cultures of WASp - null osteoclasts , the formation of actin rings was markedly impaired , and they were replaced by large actin - rich plaques not observed in normal cells . Therefore , in the absence of WASp , osteoclasts retain the capacity to polymerize monomeric actin but fail to arrange these ﬁlaments in normal adhesion / resorption complexes . The dynamics of the forma - tion and dissolution of adhesion structures also were disturbed as observed using IRM imaging ( see the Supplemental Videos ) . Although WASp - null osteoclasts were able to rapidly assemble and disassemble adhesion points with the substratum indicating rapid polymerization and depolymerization of actin , these adhesion contacts were not organized in highly dynamic actin rings as in normal cells . All WASp - family proteins work similarly to promote activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex . 3 The major differences between the members of the WASp - family of proteins are in their binding regions for other interacting adaptor and regulator molecules . 3 It is therefore likely that in WASp - null cells , other proteins from the same family such as N - WASp , which is expressed in osteoclasts Figure 8 . Reconstitution of podosomes in WASp (cid:1) / (cid:1) osteoclasts plated on bone slices by expression of eGFP WASp . WASp - null cells were transduced with eGFP ( A - F ) oreGFP - WASp ( G - L ) . Actinorganizationwas detected by immunostaining with Alexa 568 – conjugated phalloidin ( B , E , H , K ) . Similarly to nontransduced WASp - null cells , cells transduced with eGFP were devoid of podosomes ( A - C ) or assembled actin - rich plaques ( D - F ) . eGFP did not colocalize speciﬁcally with any cytoskeletal structure ( C , F ) . Expression of eGFP WASp resulted in the formation of actin - based structures similar to wild - type normal cells with podosomes in migratory cells ( G - I ) and actin rings ( J - L ) . eGFP - WASp colocalized with podo - somes ( G - I ) and actin rings ( J - L ) . The micrographs are representative of the cytoskeletal organization of osteo - clastsdetectedin3independentexperiments . Bar , 20 (cid:3) m . Figure 9 . Reconstitution of normal cell size and number of nuclei of WASp (cid:1) / (cid:1) transduced with eGFP - WASp . The area of spreading ( A , B ) and the number of nuclei per cell ( C , D ) were quantiﬁed in WASp - null osteoclasts expressing eGFP ( WASp (cid:7) / (cid:7) eGFP , u ) or eGFP - WASp ( WASp (cid:7) / (cid:7) eGFP - WASp , f ) derived on glass coverslips ( A , C ) or bone slices ( B , D ) . Cells were ﬁxed and stained with Alexa 468 – conjugated phalloidin and propidium iodide . Graphs express the mean (cid:6) SEM values from 3 experiments . * P (cid:8) . 05 ( Student t test ) . WASp REGULATES OSTEOCLAST CYTOSKELETON 3559 BLOOD , 1 MAY 2004 (cid:1) VOLUME 103 , NUMBER 9 For personal use only . on October 20 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From ( data not shown ) , may partially compensate and enable at least some dysregulated polymerization of actin ﬁlaments , as it is known that the WASp - family proteins are unable to compensate for each other completely . 28 The restricted occurrence of podosomes in normal hematopoietic cells clearly indicates that WASp itself or speciﬁc WASp - interacting factors are absolutely necessary for the successful formation of these structures . 6 In terms of bone resorption , the failure to form a normal cytoarchitecture may be compensated under steady - state condi - tions by the formation of alternative actin - based resorptive struc - tures . Under normal conditions , individual osteoclasts undergo sequential phases of migration and bone matrix resorption . 16 Defective adhesion and / or migration of WASp - null osteoclasts may in part be overcome by the very signiﬁcant increase in the size of the osteoclasts compared to normal cells , thereby allowing a much larger surface area of bone to be covered and potentially exposed to resorptive enzymes . The reasons for the increase in cell size are not clear but may reﬂect alterations in the normal cell differentiation mechanism of osteoclasts , which may themselves be inﬂuenced by signaling through WASp - dependent pathways . For example , forma - tion of osteoclasts results from the fusion of mononuclear hemato - poietic precursors in a process mediated by E - cadherin . 29 Accord - ing to recent studies , E - cadherin and the Rho GTPase Cdc42 ( of which WASp is a major deﬁned effector ) regulate each other’s activity , resulting in promotion of cell migration or stability of cell - cell interaction . 30 Perturbation of cadherin function in cell - cell junctions induces increased activity of Cdc42 and promotes migration in ﬁbroblasts . 31 Activation of Cdc42 also is required for the stabilization of cadherin - based cell contacts in EL cells . 32 Therefore , contextual regulation of Cdc42 and activity of effectors such as WASp may determine either cell - cell contact for fusion or formation of adhesion structures for migration . In the absence of WASp , a balance between migration and fusion may be lost and fusion favored , leading to the formation of abnormally large cells . Interestingly , integrin subunit (cid:2) 3 – deﬁcient osteoclasts also form highly spread poorly resorbing polykaryotic cells when exposed to high - dose M - CSF . 33 Podosome assembly and condensation into typical actin rings is required to tightly seal the compartment between the cell mem - brane and the bone surface and localize acidic enzymes within the area of resorption . 16 WASp - null cells may compensate for their Figure 10 . Bone resorption in vitro of normal , WASp - null osteoclasts , and WASp - null osteoclasts transduced with eGFP or eGFP - WASp . Bone resorption of normal ( SV129 ) , WASp - null ( WASp (cid:7) / (cid:7) ) cells , WASp - null cells expressing eGFP ( WASp (cid:7) / (cid:7) eGFP ) , or WASp - null cells expressing eGFP - WASp ( WASp (cid:7) / (cid:7) eGFP WASp ) was assessedatday10afterplatingosteoclastprecursorsonboneslices . Bonesliceswereremovedfromwells , immersedin10 % NaOClfor10minutestoremovecells , washedin distilled water , dried , and sputter - coated with gold . The extent of bone resorption was quantiﬁed according to the following parameters : percent of bone surface resorbed ( A ) and depth and volume of the excavated regions ( D and E , respectively ) . Both normal ( C ) and WASp - null osteoclasts ( B ) formed complex pits consisting of multiple component excavations , however , the number of individual components in complex pits was greater in WASp - null cultures . Expression of eGFP - WASp in WASp (cid:7) / (cid:7) cells ( G ) but not expression of eGFP alone ( F ) reconstituted the normal morphology of the pits . The graphs illustrate the mean percentage of osteoclasts (cid:6) SD from 3 experiments . * P (cid:8) . 05 ( Student t test ) . Bar , 50 (cid:3) m . Figure 11 . WASp - null osteoclasts are defective in bone resorption in vivo . Weight - matched 22 - week - old WASp - null and SV129 wild - type mice were ovariecto - mized ( ovx ) or sham ovariectomized ( sham ) . Animals were culled 15 days after ovariectomy , then femurs were removed from each animal , freed of soft tissue , and ﬁxed in 10 % formalin in PBS and embedded in parafﬁn wax . Sections were stained with either toluidine blue for assessment of bone volume ( A ) , eroded surface ( B ) , or TRAPtoquantifythepercentageofboneareaoccupiedbyosteoclastsurface ( C ) and osteoclastnumberpermillimeter ( D ) . Thegraphsrepresentthemean (cid:6) SEMvalues . * P (cid:8) . 05 ( Student t test ) compared to sham - ox . 3560 CALLE et al BLOOD , 1 MAY 2004 (cid:1) VOLUME 103 , NUMBER 9 For personal use only . on October 20 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From inability to assemble properly sealed rings by forming or maximiz - ing alternative adhesive structures to seal a large portion of the membrane onto the bone surface . It was noticeable that WASp - null cells on bone slices formed large actin plaques , and vinculin distribution was not restricted to these plaques but was diffused across the cell body . Vinculin is normally restricted to the actin rings of the sealing zone and often associated with integrin - linked adhesion structures such as focal complexes , focal adhesions , and podosomes themselves . 16 , 34 The diffuse vinculin staining observed in WASp - null cells may therefore reﬂect the formation of compen - satory adhesive structures , likely associated with the vitronectin receptor , which normally colocalizes with vinculin around the core of osteoclast podosomes 19 and interactions with which are required for bone resorption . 35 Compensation in bone resorption under steady - state conditions has been observed in mice deﬁcient in the expression of structural components of osteoclasts podosomes such as gelsolin . 36 However , we have clearly shown that compensatory mechanisms in WASp - null mice are not sufﬁcient to mediate successful bone matrix degradation in response to the induction of a rapid and extensive bone resorption such as that following ovariectomy . Although ovariectomized WASp - null mice exhibited a highly signiﬁcant increase in eroded bone surface , they lacked a signiﬁcant loss of volume . These observations suggest a relatively shallow and inefﬁcient resorption process and are consistent with the tendency of WASp - null osteoclasts to form smaller excavations in vitro than normal cells . In summary , we have shown that WASp plays a key and nonredundant role in the formation and function of podosomes in osteoclasts . Absence of WASp results in a decrease in the efﬁciency of bone resorption and is clearly associated with changes in the dynamics of formation / differentiation and func - tion of osteoclasts in vivo . The formation of a spatially and dynamically regulated sealing zone and of optimal bone resorp - tive capacity is ultimately dependent on the organization of speciﬁc actin structures by WASp . References 1 . Machesky LM , Insall RH . Signaling to actin dy - namics . J Cell Biol . 1999 ; 146 : 267 - 272 . 2 . ThrasherAJ . WASp in immune - system organiza - tion and function . Nat Rev Immunol . 2002 ; 2 : 635 - 646 . 3 . Higgs HN , Pollard TD . Regulation of actin ﬁla - ment network formation throughArp2 / 3 complex : activation by a diverse array of proteins . Annu Rev Biochem . 2001 ; 70 : 649 - 676 . 4 . Linder S , Nelson D , Weiss M , Aepfelbacher M . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein regulates podo - somes in primary human macrophages . Proc Natl Acad Sci U SA . 1999 ; 96 : 9648 - 9653 . 5 . Burns S , ThrasherAJ , Blundell MP , Machesky L , Jones GE . Conﬁguration of human dendritic cell cytoskeleton by Rho GTPases , the WAS protein , and differentiation . Blood . 2001 ; 98 : 1142 - 1149 . 6 . ThrasherAJ , Burns S , Lorenzi R , Jones GE . The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome : disordered actin dy - namics in haematopoietic cells . Immunol Rev . 2000 ; 178 : 118 - 128 . 7 . Jones GE , Zicha D , Dunn GA , Blundell M , ThrasherA . Restoration of podosomes and che - motaxis in Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome macro - phages following induced expression of WASp . Int J Biochem Cell Biol . 2002 ; 34 : 806 - 815 . 8 . Kanehisa J , Yamanaka T , Doi S , et al . Aband of F - actin containing podosomes is involved in bone resorption by osteoclasts . Bone . 1990 ; 11 : 287 - 293 . 9 . Marchisio PC , Cirillo D , TetiA , Zambonin - Zallone A , Tarone G . Rous sarcoma virus – transformed ﬁbroblasts and cells of monocytic origin display a peculiar dot - like organization of cytoskeletal pro - teins involved in microﬁlament - membrane inter - actions . Exp Cell Res . 1987 ; 169 : 202 - 214 . 10 . Marchisio PC , Cirillo D , Naldini L , Primavera MV , TetiA , Zambonin - ZalloneA . Cell - substratum in - teraction of cultured avian osteoclasts is medi - ated by speciﬁc adhesion structures . J Cell Biol . 1984 ; 99 : 1696 - 1705 . 11 . OdaA , Ochs HD , Lasky LA , et al . CrkLis an adapter for Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein and Syk . Blood . 2001 ; 97 : 2633 - 2639 . 12 . Chellaiah MA , Biswas RS , Yuen D , Alvarez UM , Hruska KA . Phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphos - phate directs association of Src homology 2 - con - taining signaling proteins with gelsolin . J Biol Chem . 2001 ; 276 : 47434 - 47444 . 13 . Chellaiah MA , Soga N , Swanson S , et al . Rho - A is critical for osteoclast podosome organization , motility , and bone resorption . J Biol Chem . 2000 ; 275 : 11993 - 12002 . 14 . Lakkakorpi PT , BettAJ , Lipfert L , Rodan GA , Duong LT . PYK2 autophosphorylation , but not kinase activity , is necessary for adhesion - induced association with c - Src , osteoclast spreading and bone resorption . J Biol Chem . 2003 ; 276 : 7484 - 7492 . 15 . Lakkakorpi PT , Vaananen HK . Cytoskeletal changes in osteoclasts during the resorption cycle . Microsc Res Tech . 1996 ; 33 : 171 - 181 . 16 . Lakkakorpi PT , Vaananen HK . Kinetics of the os - teoclast cytoskeleton during the resorption cycle in vitro . J Bone Miner Res . 1991 ; 6 : 817 - 826 . 17 . Pfaff M , Jurdic P . Podosomes in osteoclast - like cells : structural analysis and cooperative roles of paxillin , proline - rich tyrosine kinase 2 ( Pyk2 ) and integrin alphaVbeta3 . J Cell Sci . 2001 ; 114 : 2775 - 2786 . 18 . Faccio R , Grano M , Colucci S , et al . Localization and possible role of two different alpha v beta 3 integrin conformations in resting and resorbing osteoclasts . J Cell Sci . 2002 ; 115 : 2919 - 2929 . 19 . TetiA , Grano M , CaranoA , Colucci S , Zambonin ZA . Immunolocalization of beta 3 subunit of inte - grins in osteoclast membrane . Boll Soc Ital Biol Sper . 1989 ; 65 : 1031 - 1037 . 20 . Ory S , Munari - Silem Y , Fort P , Jurdic P . Rho and Rac exert antagonistic functions on spreading of macrophage - derived multinucleated cells and are not required for actin ﬁber formation . J Cell Sci . 2000 ; 113 : 1177 - 1188 . 21 . Snapper SB , Rosen FS , Mizoguchi E , et al . Wis - kottAldrich syndrome protein - deﬁcient mice re - veal a role for WASP in T but not in B cell activa - tion . Immunity . 1998 ; 9 : 81 - 91 . 22 . Fox SW , Fuller K , Bayley KE , Lean JM , Cham - bers TJ . TGF - beta 1 and IFN - gamma direct mac - rophage activation by TNF - alpha to osteoclastic or cytocidal phenotype . J Immunol . 2000 ; 165 : 4957 - 4963 . 23 . Fuller K , Owens JM , Jagger CJ , WilsonA , Moss R , Chambers TJ . Macrophage colony - stimulating factor stimulates survival and chemotactic behav - ior in isolated osteoclasts . J Exp Med . 1993 ; 178 : 1733 - 1744 . 24 . Grignani F , Kinsella T , MencarelliA , et al . High - efﬁciency gene transfer and selection of human hematopoietic progenitor cells with a hybrid EBV / retroviral vector expressing the green ﬂuores - cence protein . Cancer Res . 1998 ; 58 : 14 - 19 . 25 . Zicha D , Allen WE , Brickell PM , et al . Chemotaxis of macrophages is abolished in the Wiskott - Al - drich syndrome . Br J Haematol . 1998 ; 101 : 659 - 665 . 26 . Binks M , Jones GE , Brickell PM , Kinnon C , Katz DR , ThrasherAJ . Intrinsic dendritic cell abnor - malities in Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . Eur J Im - munol . 1998 ; 28 : 3259 - 3267 . 27 . Abinun M , Mikuska M , Filipovic B . Infantile corti - cal hyperostosis associated with the Wiskott - Al - drich syndrome . Eur J Pediatr . 1988 ; 147 : 518 - 519 . 28 . Snapper SB , Takeshima F , Anton I , et al . N - WASP deﬁciency reveals distinct pathways for cell surface projections and microbial actin - based motility . Nat Cell Biol . 2001 ; 3 : 897 - 904 . 29 . Mbalaviele G , Chen H , Boyce BF , Mundy GR , Yoneda T . The role of cadherin in the generation of multinucleated osteoclasts from mononuclear precursors in murine marrow . J Clin Invest . 1995 ; 95 : 2757 - 2765 . 30 . Kim SH , Li Z , Sacks DB . E - cadherin - mediated cell - cell attachment activates Cdc42 . J Biol Chem . 2000 ; 275 : 36999 - 37005 . 31 . Noren NK , Liu BP , Burridge K , Kreft B . p120 cate - nin regulates the actin cytoskeleton via Rho fam - ily GTPases . J Cell Biol . 2000 ; 150 : 567 - 580 . 32 . Fukata M , Kuroda S , Nakagawa M , et al . Cdc42 and Rac1 regulate the interaction of IQGAP1 with beta - catenin . J Biol Chem . 1999 ; 274 : 26044 - 26050 . 33 . Faccio R , Takeshita S , ZalloneA , Ross FP , Teitel - baum SL . c - Fms and the alpha ( v ) beta ( 3 ) integrin collaborate during osteoclast differentiation . J Clin Invest . 2003 ; 111 : 749 - 758 . 34 . Critchley DR . Focal adhesions—the cytoskeletal connection . Curr Opin Cell Biol . 2000 ; 12 : 133 - 139 . 35 . Chambers TJ , Fuller K , Darby JA , Pringle JA , Horton MA . Monoclonal antibodies against os - teoclasts inhibit bone resorption in vitro . Bone Miner . 1986 ; 1 : 127 - 135 . 36 . Chellaiah M , Kizer N , Silva M , Alvarez U , Kwiat - kowski D , Hruska KA . Gelsolin deﬁciency blocks podosome assembly and produces increased bone mass and strength . J Cell Biol . 2000 ; 148 : 665 - 678 . WASp REGULATES OSTEOCLAST CYTOSKELETON 3561 BLOOD , 1 MAY 2004 (cid:1) VOLUME 103 , NUMBER 9 For personal use only . on October 20 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From January 15 , 2004 originally published online doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2003 - 04 - 1259 2004 103 : 3552 - 3561 Chambers and Adrian J . Thrasher Yolanda Calle , Gareth E . Jones , Chris Jagger , Karen Fuller , Mike P . Blundell , Jade Chow , Tim zones and defects in bone resorption WASp deficiency in mice results in failure to form osteoclast sealing http : / / www . bloodjournal . org / content / 103 / 9 / 3552 . full . html Updated information and services can be found at : ( 1930 articles ) Signal Transduction ( 969 articles ) Phagocytes ( 5517 articles ) Immunobiology and Immunotherapy ( 143 articles ) Cytoskeleton ( 790 articles ) Cell Adhesion and Motility Articles on similar topics can be found in the following Blood collections http : / / www . bloodjournal . org / site / misc / rights . xhtml # repub _ requests Information about reproducing this article in parts or in its entirety may be found online at : http : / / www . bloodjournal . org / site / misc / rights . xhtml # reprints Information about ordering reprints may be found online at : http : / / www . bloodjournal . org / site / subscriptions / index . xhtml Information about subscriptions and ASH membership may be found online at : Copyright 2011 by The American Society of Hematology ; all rights reserved . of Hematology , 2021 L St , NW , Suite 900 , Washington DC 20036 . Blood ( print ISSN 0006 - 4971 , online ISSN 1528 - 0020 ) , is published weekly by the American Society For personal use only . on October 20 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From