Detection of an Intermediate Compartment Involved in Transport of a - Factor from the Plasma Membrane to the Vacuole in Yeast Birgit Singer and Howard Riezman Biocenter , University of Basel , CH - 4056 Basel , Switzerland Abstract . a - Factor , one of the mating pheromones of Saccharomyces cerevisiae , binds specifically to a receptor on the plasma membrane of a cells , is inter - nalized and delivered to the vacuole , where it is degraded . At 15°C the rate of pheromone uptake is only slightly affected while delivery to the vacuole is markedly slowed down . A transport intermediate car - rying a - factor to the vacuole can be reversibly trapped by treatment with the metabolic inhibitors , NaN3 and NaE This intermediate ( s ) is distinct from the vacuole and the plasma membrane as judged by differential and density gradient centrifugation analysis . We pres - ent evidence that the a - factor is protected from pro - tease digestion by a detergent - sensitive structure , sug - gesting that the pheromone resides within a vesicular compartment . We propose that this intermediate ( s ) represents an endocytic or prevacuolar compartment ( s ) involved in vesicular traffic from the plasma mem - brane to the vacuole . T HE budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a uni - cellular organism that requires the action of peptide pheromones for the conjugation of haploid a and a cells ( Hartwell , 1973 ; Sprague et al . , 1983 ; Kurjan , 1985 ) . a cells respond to a - factor pheromone that is secreted by a ceils ; a cells respond to a - factor pheromone secreted by a cells . The reciprocal action of these two diffusable peptide hormones mediates a series of events that culminate in the production offa / a diploid cells : transcription of several genes is induced ( Hagen and Sprague , 1984 ; Stetler and Thorner , 1984 ) and mating - specific cell surface agglutinins are produced ( Fehrenbacher et al . , 1978 ) . Cell growth is ar - rested in the Gt phase of the cell cycle ( Hartwell , 1973 ) , and cell and nuclear fusion are coordinated ( Trueheart et al . , 1987 ; McCaffrey et al . , 1987 ; Rose et ai . , 1986 ) . An addi - tional response to the mating factors includes the induction of a morphological change , called the " shmoo " It is charac - terized by a local elongation of the yeast cell , providing the fusion site during zygote formation ( reviewed by Thorner , 1981 ; and Sprague et al . , 1983 ) , Signals to initiate the mating program in yeast are trans - duced through distinct cell surface receptors , specific for each mating factor . The a - factor receptor , encoded by the STE2 gene ( Jenness et al . , 1983 , 1986 ; Blumer et al . , 1988 ) , is a 431 residue polypeptide that contains seven putative membrane - spanning domains ( Burkholder and Hartwell , 1985 ; Nakayama et al . , 1985 ) . This topological motif is shared by the a - factor receptor ( encoded by the STE3 gene ) , although there is no apparent sequence homology between the two proteins ( Nakayama et al . , 1985 ) . Jenness and Spatrick ( 1986 ) provided evidence that the a - factor receptor is subject to downregulation . This event is accompanied by internalization of a - factor . Independently , Chvatchko et al . ( 1986 ) demonstrated that the pheromone is internalized by a cells in a time - , temperature - , and energy - dependent fash - ion and furthermore that it is degraded , most likely in the vacuole ( Chvatchko , 1987 ; Dulid , 1989 ) . These findings led to the hypothesis that a - factor is internalized by receptor - mediated endocytosis . In mammalian cells several polypep - tide hormones like insulin and epidermal growth factor are taken up by receptor - mediated endocytosis via clathrin coated pits ( Carpenter and Cohen , 1976 ; Gavin et al . , 1974 ) . The / ~ - adrenergic receptor , which has a striking structural similarity to the a - factor receptor , has also been demon - strated to be sequestered , although the pathway of this inter - nalization is less understood ( Sibley and Lefkowitz , 1985 ) . In this study we have followed the uptake and degradation of 35S - a - factor to investigate the endocytic pathway in yeast . This system has the advantage of being physiologically relevant in contrast to systems using nonphysiological mark - ers ( Riezman , 1985 ; Makarow , 1985a b ; Makarow and Nevalaineh , 1987 ) . Although downregulation of receptor sites and transport of the pheromone presumably to the vacu - ole are consistent with the hypothesis of receptor - mediated endocytosis , a direct demonstration of a vesicular uptake mechanism is clearly desirable . To facilitate the demonstra - tion and isolation of a potential vesicular intermediate in - volved in a - factor uptake and transport , we have made use of a low temperature incubation and metabolic inhibitors . These manipulations have been used successfully in mam - malian c ' ells to block transport from endosomes to lyso - somes ( Dunn et al . , 1980 ; Marsh et al . , 1983 ; Griffiths et © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 90 / 06 / 1911 / 12 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 110 , June 1990 1911 - 1922 1911 al . , 1988 ; Davey et al . , 1985 ; Gruenberg and Howell , 1986 ) . We show that transport of o ~ - factor to the vacuole , where degradation most likely takes place , is significantly slowed down at a low temperature and can be further blocked in the presence of metabolic inhibitors . Applying these conditions , we can trap t ~ - factor within a membrane - sealed compart - ment ( s ) that is distinct from the vacuole and the plasma membrane . Therefore , we provide the first evidence for a membranous intermediate compartment ( s ) containing t ~ - fac - tor , a hallmark of endocytosis . Materials and Methods Strains , Media , and Reagents The strains of S . cerevisiae used in these experiments were RH144 - 3D ( Mata , his4 , leu2 , ura3 , barl - l ) and RH732 ( Mata , his4 , leu2 , ura3 , lys2 , bad - I , pep4 : : URA3 ) . This strain was derived from RH448 ( Mata , his4 , leu2 , ura3 , lys2 , barl - l ) by a one - step gene disruption using the plasmid pTS15 ( kindly provided by T . Stevens , University of Oregon , Eugene , OR ) . RH449 ( Mata , his4 , leu2 , ura3 , lys2 , barl - 1 ) was used for a - factor produc - tion . All yeast strains were grown in complete medium ( 2 % yeast extract , 2 % peptone both Gibco Ltd . , Paisley , Great Britain , 40 / zg / ml each ade - nine Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , MO and uracil E . Merck , Darm - stadt , Federal Republic of Germanyl , and 2 % glucose ) to exponential phase ( 2 x l07 cells / ml ) at 30°C on a rotary shaker . Lyticase was prepared as described by Scott and Schekman ( 1980 ) . 35S - sulfate ( 43 Ci / mg ) was ob - tained from Du Pont de Nemours International S . A . ( Regensdorf , Switzer - land ) . Proteinase K was from Merck and BSA was from Sigma Chemical Co . Silica gel 60 plates ( analytical and preparative ) were purchased from Merck , and solvents were either from Fluka AG ( Buchs , Switzerland ) or Merck . Nycodenz was obtained from Nyegaard Co . ( Oslo , Norway ) and BCA protein assay reagent from Pierce Chemical Co . ( Rockford , IL ) . Chemicals for SDS - PAGE were purchased from Bio - Rad ( Richmond , CA ) , nitrocellulose filters were from Millipore Continental Water Systems ( Bed - ford , MA ) , and Ponceau S was obtained from Serva ( Heidelberg , FRG ) . ENTENSIFY and EN3HANCE spray were from Du Pont de Nemours In - ternational S . A . NaN3 was purchased from Merck and NaF was from Sigma Chemical Co . Buffers , Triton X - 100 , and quinacrine were from Sigma Chemical Co . DEAE - dextran was obtained from Pharmacia ( Upp - sala , Sweden ) and Amberlite ion exchange resin , type CG - 50 ( mesh size 100 - 200 ) was from Serva . Production of ~ S - t ~ - Factor ~ S - labeled u - factor was synthesized and isolated as previously described by Duli ~ and Riezman ( 1989 ) . In brief , RH449 cells were transformed with the plasmid pDA6300 ( kindly provided by J . Thorner , University of Califor - nia , Berkeley , CA ) , a 2 - # based plasmid containing tbe MFcd , STEI3 , and LEU2 genes . Transformants , showing at least 10 - fold overproduction of a - factor ( monitored by halo assay ) were used for biosynthetic labeling and a - factor was prepared from the culture supernatant by chromatography on CG - 50 ( Jenness et al . , 1983 ) . Fractions containing biologically active a - factor , as determined by either halo assay or shmoo assay , were pooled , dried , and further purified using HPLC ( p . BONDAPAK TM C18 column , 300 × 3 . 9 mm ID , 10 - # m particle size ; Millipore ) . a - Factor was eluted under isocratic conditions with 29 . 6 % acetonitrile , 0 . 025 % trifluoroacetic acid . Fractions were analyzed by TLC using the solvent system butanol / propionic acid / water ( 100 : 50 : 70 , vol / vol / vol ) with chemically synthesized a - factor as a standard on silica gel 60 plates . Purified 35S - ct - factor was dried and resuspended in 0 . 01 N HCI , 1 mM DTT , 0 . 2 mM EDTA and stored in small aliquots in liquid nitrogen . The specific radioactivity of 35S - a - factor ranged from 5 to 10 Ci / mmol of active pheromone . s - Factor Uptake and Degradation Assays Pheromone internalization and degradation assays were carried out as de - scribed by Duli6 and Riezman ( 1989 ) . Uptake assays were performed at 5 , 10 , 15 , 19 , or 30°C , using the strains RH144 - 3D and RH732 . When a - factor degradation was analyzed in the presence of metabolic poisons , NaN3 and NaF were added to 20 mM each ( final concentration ) after allowing uptake for various times at 15°C as indicated in the figures . At the same time the cells were transferred to a 30°C waterbath . The radioactivity was extracted from cells and resolved by TLC after different times of internalization as indicated in the figures . To analyze the reversibility of the NaN3 and NaF treatment , cells were incubated for 15 min at 15°C , NaN3 and NaF were added , and the cells were shifted to 30°C . After 15 min the cells were har - vested and resuspended in inhibitor - free medium , and uptake was continued at 300C . When bafilomycin A ~ ( kind gift of K . Altendorf , University of Osnabrfick , Osnabriick , Germany ) was used , a 6 . 6 mM stock was prepared in DMSO , and the drug ( or DMSO alone ) was added to 10 # M final concen - tration after allowing uptake to occur for 15 min at 15°C . Lower concentra - tions of bafilomycin Ai were not effective in elevating vacuolar pH , as de - termined by quinacrine staining ( see below ) . Upon addition of the drug the temperature was raised to 30 " C . 10 , 45 , and 105 min after the addition of bafilomycin Ai cells were stained with quinacrine as described by Banta et al . ( 1988 ) and immediately viewed by epifluorescence using a Zeiss Ax - iophot microscope . Intact and degraded a - factor were resolved by TLC ( using preparative 2 . 2 mm silica - gel 60 plates ) as described above , and fluorographs on preflashed films ( Kodak XAR - 5 ) were quantified by den - sitometric scanning on a computing densitometer ( Molecular Dynamics , Sunnyvale , CA ) . Cell Fractionation For each fractionation experiment using differential centrifugation analysis , °5 × 109 RH732 cells were harvested from an exponentially growing cul - ture , resuspended in complete medium to 1 x 109 cells / ml , and chilled on ice . 35S - a - factor ( 6 x 105 cpm ) was added and allowed to bind for i h on ice . The cells were resuspended in the same volume of ice - cold , 15 or 30°C complete medium and were further incubated for 30 , 20 , or 30 min , respec - tively . After this incubation the cells were diluted , 010 - fold with ice - cold sorbitol medium ( 0 . 6 M sorbitol , 5 mM 2 - amino - 2methyl - l , 3 - propanediole - Pipes , pH 6 . 8 ) and harvested . The cells were washed with ice - cold sorbitol medium , resuspended in 20 ml of 0 . 14 M cysteamine - HCI , 0 . 6 M sorbitol , 25 mM 2 - amino - 2methyl - l , 3 - propanediole - Pipes , pH 6 . 8 , 5 mM EDTA , 5 mM NAN3 , and 5 mM NaF and were incubated at 30°C for 20 min . Af - ter this pretreatment , the cells were diluted with ice - cold sorbitol medium , pelleted , and resuspended in 1 ml sorbitol medium , containing 5 mM NaN3 and 5 mM NaF and " 01 × 104 U lyticase . The cells were converted into spheroplasts at 30°C for 1 h and centrifuged at 1 , 500 g at 4°C through a 0 . 6 M sucrose cushion , containing 5 mM 2 - amino - 2 - methyl - l , 3 - pmpanediole - Pipes , pH 6 . 8 . The pellet was resuspended with 4 . 5 ml ice - cold sorbitol medium and the spheroplasts were lysed by adding 90 - 135 # 1 of 10 mg / ml DEAE - dextran ( in sorbitol medium ) at 0°C and then warming up to 30°C for 5 - 7 min . The lysate was subjected to three successive centrifugation steps at 4 " C . First , it was centrifuged at 3 , 500 g for 5 min , resulting in PI and SI . The supernatant SI was centrifuged at 10 , 000 g for 10 min ( giving rise to P2 and $ 2 ) . Finally the supernatant $ 2 was subjected to centrifuga - tion at 100 , 000 g resulting in P3 and $ 3 . The three pellets ( P1 , P2 , and P3 ) were resuspended in ice - cold sorbitol medium and aliquots of each of the six fractions were counted for 35S - a - factor or were TCA precipitated and resuspended in SDS gel sample buffer ( 50 mM Tris , pH 6 . 8 , 2 . 5 mM EDTA , 2 % wt / vol SDS , 5 % wt / vol glycerol , 0 . 01 % wt / vol bromphenol blue , and 2 . 5 % lvol / vol 2 - mercaptoethanol ) . Two samples from each fraction ( ' 020 and 40 # g protein ) were resolved on 7 . 5 % polyacrylamide gels con - taining 8 M urea using the buffer system of Laemmli ( 1970 ) . After elec - trophoresis , proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose , as described by Towbin et al . ( 1979 ) . After transfer , the nitrocellulose filter was stained with Ponceau S and incubated for 1 h with blocking buffer ( 2 . 5 % wt / vol dry fat milk , 0 . 2 % wt / voll Triton X - 100 in PBS ) . The filters were either treated with antiserum against the plasma membrane H + - ATPase ( kindly provided by N . Nelson , Roche Institute of Molecular Biology , Nutley , NJ , diluted 1 : 2 , 000 ) , against carboxypeptidase Y ( CPY ) I ( diluted 1 : 500 ) or against hexokinase ( kindly provided by G . Schatz , Biocenter , Basel , Switzerland ; diluted 1 : i , 000 ) . Incubation with the antiserum was carried out for 1 h with shaking at room temperature . The filters were washed four times with blocking buffer . After washing , the filters were incubated with 1 - 2 # Ci of ~ 2Sl - protein A in blocking buffer for 1 h as described before . After air dry - ing , the filters were subjected to fluorography at - 70°C using intensifying screens . Fluorographs on preflashed films ( Kodak XAR - 5 ) were quantified by densitometric scanning on a TLC scanner ( type II ; Camag , Muttenz , Switzerland ) . Since the extent of cell lysis varied between individual experi - ments , it was necessary to correct the individual values for cell lysis in order to be able to compare the various conditions and different experiments . The 1 . Abbreviation used in this paper : CPY , carboxypeptidase Y . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 110 , 1990 1912 determination of the extent of cell lysis was based on the distribution of cyto - plasmic hexokinase after centrifugation at 3 , 500 g . From localization stud - ies of hexokinase by immunocytochemistry ( van Tuinen and Riezman , 1987 ) , we calculated that " °95 % of the total cellular hexokinase is in the cytoplasm and 5 % is in nuclei . Although these 5 % should pellet at 3 , 500 g when 100 % of the cells are lysed , we neglected this small fraction in our calculations and considered the amount of hexokinase found in PI to origi - nate from unlysed cells . The fraction of unlysed cells was calculated as fol - lows : fraction of unlysed cells = Plhexokinase / ( Plhexokina ~ e + Slhexokinase ) . The average lysis in 18 experiments was 63 + 2 ! % . The amount of the other markers found in PI was corrected for cell lysis by the following formula : PI = Plunc , , rrccted - ( fraction of unlysed cells ) × ( Pluncorrected 4 - Sl ) . The total was obtained by addition of PI and SI . For subfractionation on density gradients (cid:127)5 × 10 t° cells and 1 . 5 - 2 . 5 × 106 cpm 35S - ~ t - factor were used as the starting material . Uptake of 35S - ct - factor was carried out for 20 min at 15 °C and the P3 fraction was obtained as described before except that the second differential centrifugation step was carried out at 7 , 500 g for 5 rain in order to optimize the recovery of a - factor in the P3 pellet . This fraction was resuspended in 1 . 1 ml of 35 % ( wt / vol ) Nycodenz ( Nycodenz stock solution ) and homogenized five times using a I - ml tissue grinder ( Wheaton Industries , Millville , NJ ) . The ho - mogenate was transferred to a 13 . 2 - ml centrifuge tube ( Ultra - Clear ; Beck - man Instruments Inc . , Palo Alto , CA ) and a discontinuous gradient was pre - pared by overlaying 1 ml of homogenate with 2 . 5 ml each of 31 , 27 , 20 , and 13 % Nycodenz solution . These solutions were dilutions of the Nycodenz stock solution with sorbitol medium ( so that the decreasing Nycodenz con - centrations were accompanied by an increase in sorbitol and buffer concen - tration ) . The gradient was subjected to centrifugation at 4°C for 14 - 16 h at 100 , 000 g in a TST41 . 14 swinging bucket rotor ( Kontron Instruments , Ziirich , Switzerland ) . A total of 17 fractions ( each " - , 650 ~ 1 ) were collected from the top of the gradient by pumping 60 % ( wt / vol ) sucrose into the bot - tom of the tube . A major part of the pellet formed during centrifugation was not collected . This probably explains why only 40 % of the protein loaded onto the gradient was recovered . However , > 95 % of 35S - a - factor was re - covered . Aliquots from each fraction were analyzed for 35S - a - factor and H + - ATPase as described before . Protein concentration was assayed by the BCA procedure described in a company brochure by the manufacturer ( Pierce Chemical Co . ) . The density of the fractions was determined by measuring the refractive index and reading the corresponding density from a standard curve . The standard curve was obtained from a mock gradient by determining the refractive index and the density of each fraction . Table L tl / 2 for a - Factor Uptake and a - Factor Degradation as a Function of Temperature Temperature t : _ uptake t : . degradation °C mm min 30 3 . 75 10 19 6 . 75 23 15 7 . 5 53 10 23 > 120 35S - a - factor uptake and degradation experiments were performed as described in the legends to Fig . 1 and Fig . 3 . The t , 2 for pheromone uptake was calcu - lated from the initial rate of uptake for the curves shown in Fig . 1 . The t : . for a - factor degradation ( disappearance of intact , internalized or - factor ) was calculated in the following way . The amount of internalized , intact a - factor ( pH 1 . 2 samples ) was determined by densitometric scanning of fluorographs as shown in Fig . 3 . After an initial increase in intact , internalizaed a - factor the data gave a linear decay curve on a logarithmic scale . The t : _ is the time necessary to degrade 50 % of the remaining intact u - factor . The values given for 30 and 15°C are the means of three experiments , the tt ~ 2 for degradation at 19°C was calculated from two experiments , and at 10°C from one experi - ment . The radioactivity from the internalized , intact c ~ - factor is generally re - covered in the degradation products . 1 . 0 - ~ o . 0 . 8 " 06 " ¢ , d 0 , 4 " o 0 . 2 " 0 . 0 0 10 20 3 ' 0 40 5 ' 0 60 time ( min ) Figure 1 . Effect of temperature on a - factor uptake , a cells ( RH144 - 3D ) were incubated with 35S - a - factor ( 1 x 105 cpm / 109 cells ) for 1 h at 0°C as described in Materials and Methods . The cells were harvested and resuspended in prewarmed , glucose - containing , potassium phosphate buffer . Uptake was done at 5 ( ~ ) , 10 ( o ) , 15 ( a ) , 19 ( A ) , and 30°C ( D ) . At the indicated times duplicates of 10 s cells were washed with pH 1 . 2 buffer to determine internalized a - factor and with pH 6 buffer to determine cell - associated a - factor . After filtering the cells , the associated radioactivity was determined by liquid scintillation counting . Uptake is expressed as the ratio be - tween internalized and total cell - bound radioactivity ( total cell - bound radioactivity ranged from 5 , 500 to 8 , 500 cpm ) . The values obtained at 30 , 19 , 15 , and 10°C are an average of at least three ex - perimetits . Uptake at 5°C was done once . Figure 2 . a - Factor degradation is PEP4 dependent . Wild - type ( wt ) cells ( RH144 - 3D ) and isogenic pep4 cells ( RH732 ) were incubated with asS - a - factor ( 2 x 105 cpm / 109 cells ) for 1 h at 0°C . After removal of unbound pheromone the cells were resuspended in 30°C prewarmed , glucose - containing , potassium phosphate buffer and incubated at 30°C . At the indicated times aliquots were treated at pH 1 . 2 or 6 and the radioactivity was extracted from the cells as described in Materials and Methods . The extract was loaded on sil - ica plates and resolved by TLC . The radioactivity originating from pH 1 . 2 - or 6 - treated cells is indicated by labeling the lanes I and 6 , respectively . The positions of the intact ( i ) and degraded ( d ) a - factor are indicated . The intact a - factor consists of the authentic pheromone ( Rr = 0 . 27 ) and most likely the methionine sulfoxide form of the native pheromone ( Rf = 0 . 21 ) ( Raths , S . , Biocenter , Basel , personal communication ) . The fluorograms were exposed for 7 d at - 70°C . Singer and Riezman Intermediate in ct - Factor Traffic to Vacuole 1913 Figure 3 . Effect of temperature on a - factor degradation . 35S - a - factor was incubated with RH144 - 3D cells for 1 h on ice . The cells were harvested , resuspended in 10 , 15 , 19 , or 30°C prewarmed , glucose - containing , potassium phosphate buffer and incubated for up to 2 h at the indicated temperature . Samples were treated at pH 1 . 2 ( 1 ) and pH 6 ( 6 ) at the indicated times and extracts were resolved by TLC as described in Materials and Methods . The positions of the intact ( i ) and the degraded ( d ) a - factor are shown . The fluorograms were exposed between 6 and 8 d at - 70°C . Protease Protection The 100 , 000 g pellet ( P3 ) , that was obtained as described before with the second differential centrifugation at 10 , 000 g for 10 min , was resuspended in 90 # 1 0 . 6 M sorbitol , 50 mM Tris , pH 8 , 1 mM CaClz ( sorbitol buffer ) , and divided into three aliquots . Two aliquots were incubated with 0 . 5 mg / ml proteinase K either in the presence or in the absence of 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 for 15 min at 30°C . A control aliquot was incubated without any additions . After cooling on ice , PMSF was added to 1 mM final concentration , and the samples were denatured by adding 40 # 1 of 3 x SDS gel sample buffer and heating for 5 min at 95°C . The samples were resolved by SDS - PAGE on 17 . 5 % polyacrylamide gels . The gels were fixed , treated with ENTEN - S | FY , dried , and subjected to fluorography at - 70°C . Fluorographs were scanned as described above , Time courses of protease protection using 0 . 2 and 0 . 5 mg / ml proteinase K were also performed as described above taking samples after 15 - and 30 - rain digestion at 30°C . Results Effect of Temperature on a - Factor Uptake In mammalian cells low temperature incubations have been successfully applied to arrest delivery of endocytosed mole - cules to lysosomes . We therefore explored the effect of low temperature on a - factor uptake and degradation with the hope of finding conditions that would trap a - factor on its way to the vacuole . For these studies 35S - a - factor was bound to a cells at 0°C for 1 h , unbound a - factor was washed away , and the cells were resuspended in prewarrned , glucose - containing , potassium - phosphate buffer at 5 , 10 , 15 , 19 , or 30°C . At various times aliquots were removed and treated at pH 6 or 1 . 2 . The pH 6 treatment gives a measure of the total cell - associated radioactivity , whereas at pH 1 . 2 the surface bound radioactivity is removed and the internalized a - factor can be measured . In Fig . 1 the fraction of bound c ~ - factor that is internalized is expressed as a function of time at the indi - cated temperatures . At 30°C pheromone uptake is the most rapid and complete by 30 min ( Fig . 1 ) ; the time required to internalize 50 % of the bound a - factor is 4 min ( Table I ) . At 15 and 19°C the initial rate of uptake is reduced by factors of 1 . 8 and 2 , respectively ( Table I ) . This is only weakly im - paired compared with 10°C , where pheromone uptake is re - duced by a factor of 6 . Only at 5°C , however , is a - factor in - ternalization nearly blocked . During the first 5 min of the incubation at 15 , 19 , and 30°C , , ' 020 % of the surface - bound a - factor dissociates from the cells . This , however , does not affect the internalization rates calculated , because these cal - culations take into account both the internalized and total a - factor at every time point . a - Factor Degradation in pep4 and Wild - type Cells as a Function of Temperature Degradation of pheromone has been shown to be dependent on the PEP4 gene product , proteinase A ( Chvatchko , 1987 ; Duli6 , 1989 ) , that is responsible for activating many soluble vacuolar hydrolases ( Ammerer et al . , 1986 ; Woolford et al . , 1986 ) . Here we examine the kinetics of a - factor degradation in wild - type and pep4 cells . In wild - type cells the intact pheromone that is internalized by the cells is completely degraded by 30 min ( Fig . 2 ) . Different degradation products appear successively between 15 and 45 min . Although pep4 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 110 , 1990 1914 Figure ' 4 . Metabolic inhibitors block degradation of internalized a - fact6r at 30°C . RHI44 - 3D cells were incubated with 3 ~ S - ~ - factor on ice for 1 h . After pheromone binding , cells were harvested and resuspended in 15°C prewarmed , glucose - containing , potassium phosphate buffer . After allowing uptake for 15 min at 15°C , NaN3 and NaF were added ( each 20 mM final concentration ) and the ceils were transferred to a 30°C waterbath . At the indicated times sam - ples were analyzed by extracting the radioactivity from the cells and resolving the products by TLC . The position of intact ( i ) and degraded ( d ) pheromone originating from pH 1 . 2 - ( 1 ) and pH 6 - ( 6 ) treated cells is indicated . The fluorograms were exposed for 7 d at - 70°C . The quantitation of this experiment is presented in Fig . 5 B . cells internalize a - factor as efficiently as wild - type cells ( data not shown ) , the majority of the pheromone remains in - tact for at least 120 min ( Fig . 2 , bottom ) . This suggests that the vacuole is the site of a - factor degradation . Upon ex - tended incubation ( 90 min and more ) a new species migrat - ing just below the intact a - factor appears and a minor amount of degradation products can be seen . The accumula - tion of the first mentioned species , that cannot be observed in wild - type cells , might be due to an extremely low level of vacuolar hydrolase activity . Alternatively , the lack of en - zymes that are responsible for rapid degradation under nor - mal conditions could allow another nonphysiological modifi - cation to occur . Assuming that the vacuole is the site of degradation , we used or - factor degradation as a marker for delivery of the pheromone to the vacuole . Since a - factor uptake is only moderately reduced at 19 and 15°C , it was of interest to see what effect these temperatures have on degradation . The results are presented in Fig . 3 . Lowering the temperature reduces the rate of a - factor degradation . The time necessary to degrade 50 % of the internalized , intact a - factor is shown in Table I . At 19°C the degradation and uptake rates are re - duced to a similar extent . However , at 15 and 10°C degrada - tion is more severely affected than uptake . In both cases the effect of temperature on degradation is two fold greater than on uptake ( Table I ) . This finding can be explained in two ways . First , a step in the a - factor degradation pathway subse - quent to uptake may be more temperature sensitive than up - take . This step could be a vesicular transport step from a prevacuolar compartment to the vacuole . Alternatively , one could argue that the primary reason for the delay in a - factor degradation is not a transport problem , but simply due to re - duced vacuolar hydrolase activity at low temperature . Degradation of a - Factor Can Be Blocked by Metabolic lnhibitors To demonstrate that the reduced rate of a - factor degradation at 15°C is not solely due to reduced vacuolar hydrolase activ - ity at this low temperature , we tested whether a - factor that has been internalized at 15°C can be degraded in the pres - ence of metabolic inhibitors at 30°C . If the pheromone is al - ready transported to the vacuole at 15°C , it should be degraded at 30°C , even in the presence of NaN3 and NaE since ATP is not required for the enzymatic activity of vacuo - lar hydrolases . After allowing uptake for 15 rain at 15°C , the metabolic poisons were each added to a final concentration of 20 mM and the cells were transferred to a 30°C waterbath . Upon shift to 30°C , in the absence of NaN3 and NaE a - fac - tor is degraded , demonstrating that the effect of temperature is reversible ( Fig . 4 ) . However , in the presence of metabolic inhibitors degradation is completely inhibited ( Fig . 4 ) . The same degree of inhibition can be achieved using 5 mM each NaN3 and NaF ( data not shown ) . The argument could be made that a raised vacuolar pH , due to the presence of the metabolic inhibitors , might be the primary reason for the block in a - factor degradation seen in the NAN3 - and NaF - treated cells . To exclude this possibility we investigated a - fac - tor degradation in cells that had been treated with the specific and potent inhibitor of the vacuolar H÷ - ATPase , bafilomy - cin A , ( Bowman et al . , 1988 ) . To confirm that the drug ac - tually raises the vacuolar pH under the applied conditions , cells were stained with quinacrine , a fluorescent dye that ac - cumulates in acidified organelles ( Weisman et al . , 1987 ) . 10 , 45 , and 105 min after the addition of bafilomycin A ~ the cells did not show any staining with quinacrine while control cells did ( data not shown ) , demonstrating that the vacuolar pH was raised by the drug . This is in agreement with the results described by Banta et al . ( 1988 ) , and also confirms that the inhibitor is active over the whole time course of the experi - ment . Addition of DMSO alone has almost no inhibitory effect on a - factor degradation , and treatment with bafiiomycin A ~ delays but does not block degradation ( Fig . 5 A ) . Quantita - tion of the internalized , intact a - factor ( Fig . 5 B , open and solid circles ) reveals that bafilomycin A : treated cells ex - hibit an immediate delay in degradation upon addition of the Singer and Riezman Intermediate in c ~ - Factor Traffic to Vacuole 1915 Figure 5 . Bafilomycin A ~ does not block oe - factor degradation . ( A ) The experiment was done as described in Fig . 4 . Instead of NaN ~ and NaF , bafilomycin AI was added to 10 - # M final concentration where indicated . Control cells ( top ) were treated with DMSO alone . ( B ) The amount of intact a - factor ( i ) that is extracted from the pH 1 . 2 treated cell samples was quantified by densitometric scanning of the fluorographs shown in A and Fig . 4 ( see Materials and Methods ) and is expressed as a function of time . The values obtained from the experiment described in A are symbolized by the open and solid circles . The values obtained from the experiment described in Fig . 4 are symbolized by the open and solid squares . ( < 2 ) + bafilomycin ; ( o ) - bafiiomycin ; ( l ) + NAN , , + NaF ; ( t2 ) - NAN , , - NaE drug . This is noticed from the superaccumulation of inter - nalized , intact a - factor . After ~ 30 min the intact a - factor starts to disappear with perhaps slightly reduced kinetics in comparison to control cells . Fig . 5 B also presents the quan - titation of intact a - factor in the NAN3 - and NaF - treated and untreated cells , shown in Fig . 4 . The respective values are symbolized by the open and solid squares ( Fig . 5 B ) , and clearly demonstrate that the metabolic inhibitors exert a quali - tatively and quantitatively different effect on a - factor degra - dation than bafilomycin A ~ . These results support the idea that the lack of pheromone degradation , observed in the pres - ence of metabolic poisons , is not solely due to vacuolar pH but is more likely due to a block in transport from an endo - cytic , prevacuolar compartment to the vacuole . To determine the kinetics of delivery of a - factor to the vacuole at 15°C , cells were incubated with prebound a - factor for various periods at 15°C before they were shifted to 30°C for an additional incubation in the presence of metabolic in - hibitors . Extracts of cells were analyzed after a total incuba - tion time of 120 min . This experiment shows that the cells can be left for at least 30 min at 15°C without detecting any a - factor degradation ( Fig . 6 ) . Only at or after 45 min at 15°C can one detect the appearance of degradation products . After any time period at 15°C the additional incubation at 30°C in the presence of NaN ~ and NaF results in very little fur - ther degradation of a - factor ( compare with Fig . 3 ) . This sug - gests that a - factor degradation is not limiting at 15°C in the absence of metabolic inhibitors . The a - factor must be very rapidly degraded upon delivery to the vacuole . Moreover , these experiments suggest that from 15 to 30 min at 15°C , when most of the a - factor is internalized , there is no delivery of pheromone to the vacuole . Inhibition of a - Factor Degradation in NAN3 - and NaF - treated Cells Is Reversible Since the preceding results imply that a combination of low temperature and NaN3 and NaF treatment can result in a block in transport of a - factor to the vacuole , we asked whether this block is reversible , a - Factor was internalized at 15°C for 15 min and the cells were transferred to 30°C in the presence of NaN3 and NaE After a 15 - min incubation to impose the block , the cells were harvested , resuspended The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 110 , 1990 1916 Figure 6 . Addition of metabolic inhibitors after various times of a - factor internalization . RHI44 - 3D cells were incubated with 35S - a - factor for 1 h on ice . After pheromone binding the cells were har - vested and resuspended in 15°C prewarmed , glucose - containing , potassium phosphate buffer at time zero . At the indicated times ali - quots of cells were shifted to 30°C and NaN3 and NaF were added ( a control sample was incubated in the absence of metabolic poi - sons IP ] ) . After a total incubation time of 120 min ( including up - take at 15°C and further incubation at 30°C ) the state of the a - fac - tor was analyzed by extracting the radioactivity and resolving the products by TLC . The fluorograms were exposed for 7 d at - 70°C . The position of intact ( i ) and degraded ( d ) a - factor originating from pH 1 . 2 - ( 1 ) and pH 6 - ( 6 ) treated cells is indicated . in inhibitor - free medium , and further incubated at 30°C . As shown in Fig . 7 , 30 min after removal of NaN3 and NaF the a - factor is almost completely degraded . Only a minor frac - tion of the intact species is not degraded . This finding sug - gests that the majority of the undegraded a - factor , ac - cumulating in the NaNr and NaF - treated cells , is trapped on the transport pathway to the vacuole ( see below ) and can be subsequently chased through it upon removal of the meta - bolic inhibitors . Sedimentation Behavior of a - Factor After Uptake at Different Temperatures To confirm the idea that pheromone transport from the plasma membrane to the vacuole passes through a prevacuo - lar compartment , we analyzed the sedimentation behavior of a - factor after different uptake regimes and compared it with a vacuolar , a plasma membrane , and a cytosolic protein marker . The pheromone was either bound to the plasma membrane at 0°C or was allowed to be internalized at 30°C for 30 rain or at 15°C for 20 min . We hypothesized that a - fac - tor internalized at 30°C for 30 min would cofractionate with a vacuolar marker , as under these conditions it is completely degraded , whereas when uptake is performed at 15°C it would not fractionate with the vacuole . For these experiments pep4 cells were used to avoid nonspecific protein and a - fac - tor degradation during the fractionation . After pheromone uptake , the cells were converted into spheroplasts at 30°C in the presence of 5 mM of both NaN3 and NaF , to inhibit further pheromone transport . Cells were broken using poly - base - induced lysis with DEAE - dextran as described by Dtirr et al . 0975 ) . This gentle lysis procedure is especially advan - tageous to analyze fragile organelles . The lysate was sub - jected to three successive centrifugation steps . First , it was centrifuged at 3 , 500 g for 5 min , giving a low speed pellet PI and a low speed supernatant S1 . This supernatant was cen - trifuged at 10 , 000 g for 10 min , resulting in P2 and $ 2 . The $ 2 was finally subjected to 100 , 000 g for 1 h , giving rise to P3 and $ 3 . The distribution of a - factor and three protein markers in the six fractions was quantified by counting the radioactivity of 35S - a - factor and by Western blotting , re - spectively . Plasma membrane was detected using an antise - rum against the plasma membrane H÷ - ATPase , and the dis - tribution of the vacuole was followed by an antiserum against CPY . To correct for the varying extent of cell lysis we addi - tionally quantified the distribution of the cytoplasmic marker hexokinase ( as described in Materials and Methods ) . The distribution of the described markers in the six fractions is presented in Fig . 8 . The plasma membrane H÷ - ATPase is found most prevalently , and under all conditions ( 0 , 15 , and 30°C ) , in P1 ( 50 - 60 % ) . The remaining amount is found in approximately equal quantities in P2 and P3 . The soluble vacuolar marker , CPY , sediments under all conditions pre - dominately at 3 , 500 g . This demonstrates that most of the vacuoles remain intact under the described lysis conditions . Most of the remaining CPY ( " ~ 15 % ) is found in the high speed supernatant $ 3 , whereas in P2 and P3 only very little can be detected . To rule out that the incubation of cells in the presence of metabolic poisons might influence or change the distribution of these two markers , spheroplasts were pre - pared in the absence of NaN3 and NaF , lysed , and fraction - ated as described before . As expected , we obtained results similar to those described above ( data not shown ) , implying that treatment with NaN3 and NaF does not alter the sedi - mentation behavior of CPY and the plasma membrane H ÷ - ATPase . Whereas the distribution of the vacuolar and plasma membrane markers do not change with the various condi - tions , the distribution of 3sS - a - factor does . After incubation at 0°C the radioactivity cofractionates with the plasma mem - brane H÷ - ATPase . When the pheromone is internalized at 30°C , its sedimentation behavior is similar to that of CPY , providing further evidence that a - factor is transported to the vacuole , where degradation takes place . Interestingly , when a - factor uptake is done at 15°C , the pheromone does not Figure 7 . The block in u - factor degradation due to NaN3 and NaF is reversible . Binding and uptake of 35S - a - factor in RH144 - 3D cells was done as described in the legend to Fig . 4 . 15 min after the addition of 20 mM of both NaN3 and NaF and the shift to 30°C , the ceils were harvested and resuspended in the same volume of inhibitor - free medium and further incubated at 30°C . The radio - activity was extracted at the indicated time points . The position of intact ( i ) and degraded ( d ) pheromone is marked . The fluorogram was exposed for 8 d at - 70°C . Singer and Riezman Intermediate in ct - Factor Traffic to Vacuole 1917 1 : i¢ . . ATPue , 0oC 100 t H . . ATPase , 30Oc 10o H + ' ATPaIe ' 15°C I : ll , I 4O 40 , o . o . , o i i . . o " ' * ' i 1oo , . o . 11° i , . o . o c . , , 0 O ' P1 $ 1 P2 $ 2 P3 $ 3 P1 $ 1 P2 $ 2 P3 $ 3 Pl $ 1 P2 $ 2 P3 $ 3 0 0 P1 $ 1 P2 $ 2 P3 $ 3 P1 $ 1 P2 $ 2 P3 $ 3 i L P1 $ 1 P2 $ 2 P3 $ 3 Figure 8 . Sedimentation be - havior of CPY , the plasma membrane H÷ - ATPase , and u - factor after pheromone bind - ing at 0°C and uptake at 15 and 30°C . RH732 cells were incubated with 35S - ( x - factor for 1 h at 0°C in complete medium . The cells were either left at 0°C for 30 min , or were warmed up to 15°C for 20 min , or to 30°C for 30 min . The cells were converted into spheroplasts in the presence of 5 mM each NaN3 and NaF as described in Materials and Methods . The spheroplasts were centrifuged through a 0 . 6 - M sucrose cushion , resus - pended in sorbitol medium , and lysed as described in Ma - terials and Methods . The lysate was centrifuged at 3 , 500 g for 5 min , resulting in PI and Si . SI was centrifuged at 10 , 000 g for 10 min , giving rise to P2 and $ 2 ; $ 2 was finally subject - ed to 100 , 000 g for 60 min , resulting in P3 and $ 3 . Aliquots from each of the six fractions were counted for 35S - tx - factor and proteins were resolved by SDS - PAGE . Vacuolar CPY , the plasma membrane H÷ - ATPase , and cytoplas - mic hexokinase were detected by Western blot analysis and quantified by densitometric scanning ( see Materials and Methods ) . The in - dividual values for each marker were corrected for cell lysis as described in Materials and Methods . The error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean of at least five experiments at every condition , n . d . , not detectable . fractionate like CPY nor like the plasma membrane H ÷ - ATPase . The largest fraction sediments at 100 , 000 g ( 35 % in P3 ) and the remaining amount is found almost equally in P1 , P2 , and $ 3 . This result clearly demonstrates that the a - factor taken up at 15°C is not associated with the vacuole nor with the plasma membrane , but may be trapped within an intermediate compartment ( s ) ( see below ) . The fact that this compartment sediments at 100 , 000 g is consistent with it being a small organelle . a - Factor That Is Sedimentable at lO0 , O00 g Is Membrane Enclosed To determine whether the pheromone found in the 100 , 000 g pellet ( P3 ) resides within a membrane - sealed compartment , we investigated its sensitivity to protease digestion . Aliquots from the P3 fraction were either left untreated or incubated with proteinase K in the presence or absence of Triton X - 100 . The reaction products were separated on 17 . 5 % SDS - poly - acrylamide gels that were analyzed by fluorography and den - sitometry . By using 0 . 5 mg / ml proteinase K in the presence of Triton X - 100 ( Fig . 9 , lane 2 ) , all of the a - factor is degraded after a 15 - min incubation , while 66 % of the pheromone is protected from protease digestion in the absence of detergent ( lane 3 ) . This provides evidence that a - factor is localized within a membrane - sealed vesicle with the orientation ex - pected for a transport vesicle . The fact that only 66 % of the a - factor is protected in comparison to the protease untreated sample ( Fig . 9 , lane 1 ) may be explained by some damage of vesicles caused by resuspension of the P3 . With a smaller amount of proteinase K ( 0 . 2 mg / ml ) in the presence of Triton X - 100 , 70 % of the a - factor is degraded after 15 min and al - most all is degraded after 30 - min incubation at 30°C ( data not shown ) . This shows that proteolysis is limited by the amount of proteinase K and not due to unspecific protease activity that could be released by Triton X - 100 . Another line of evidence confirming the idea that a - factor is contained within a vesicular compartment is supplied by floatation analysis of the P3 fraction on a Nycodenz gradient . In this experiment the $ 2 fraction was obtained after cen - trifugation of the lysate at 3 , 500 and 7 , 500 g , each for 5 mijn , in order to optimize the recovery of a - factor in the high speed pellet ( P3 ) . The density gradient was subjected to cen - trifugation at 100 , 000 g for 14 - 16 h to allow the vesicles to reach their equilibrium density , then was fractionated , and the amount of 35S - a - factor , H + - ATPase , and protein in each fraction quantified . The results of one typical experiment are presented in Fig . 10 . The a - factor is present in two peaks at densities of " ~ 1 . 12 and 1 . 14 g / ml , respectively , both of which are clearly resolved from the bulk protein . Moreover , the distribution of a - factor and the plasma membrane H ÷ - ATPase , peaking predominately at a density of 1 . 16 g / ml , are clearly distinct , supporting again the idea that the cx - factor is not associated with the plasma membrane . Discussion Reduction of temperature and metabolic inhibitors have been used extensively to arrest membrane transport at defined The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 110 , 1990 1918 Figure 9 . 35S - a - factor that is as - sociated with P3 after uptake at 15°C is protease protected . 35S - a - factor uptake at 15°C and prep - aration of subcellular fractions were carried out as described in the legend to Fig . 8 . The high - speed pellet ( P3 ) was resuspended in 0 . 6 M sorbitol buffer and in - cubated with or without 0 . 5 mg / ml proteinase K in the presence or absence of 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 , as indicated , at 30°C for 15 min . The reaction was stopped by chil - ling the samples on ice and addition of 1 mM PMSE The samples were resolved by SDS - PAGE on a 17 . 5 % gel . The amount of35S - a - factor in each lane was quantified by densitometric scanning of the fluorogram . The fluorogram was exposed for 2 d at - 70°C . stages in the endocytic and exocytic pathways in mammalian cells ( reviewed by Mellman et al . , 1986 ; Griffiths and Si - mons , 1986 ; Pfeffer and Rothman , 1987 ) . In this study we have examined the effect of low temperature and metabolic poisons on transport of the yeast pheromone c ~ - factor to the vacuole . There are several lines of evidence that are consis - tent with the notion that a - factor degradation takes place in the vacuole . First , degradation is dependent on the PEP4 gene product , proteinase A . This protease is essential for vacuolar zymogen activation , so that cells carrying muta - tions in the PEP4 gene have a major defect in vacuolar hydro - lytic activity ( Ammerer et al . , 1986 ; Wollford et al . , 1986 ) . Although pep4 cells internalize a - factor as efficiently as wild - type cells , the majority of the pheromone remains intact . In agreement with this , a mutant that lacks a functional vacuole ( endl ) also does not degrade or - factor , although the phero - mone is internalized normally ( Duli6 and Riezman , 1989 ) . Second , analysis of the sedimentation behavior of c ~ - factor from lysates of cells that have internalized the pheromone for 30 min at 30°C show a nearly perfect codistribution of oe - fac - tor and the vacuolar marker CPY . Even though the P1 frac - tion , where the majority of the a - factor and CPY are found , is not a pure fraction , we show here that at least plasma membrane fractionates differently . Another organelle that should be found predominately in this fraction is the nucleus . However , we think it is very unlikely that the pheromone is associated with the nucleus , as the enzymes that are activated by the PEP4 gene product are not found there ( Wiemken et al . , 1979 ; van Tuinen and Riezman , 1987 ) . Third , an ele - vated pH of the vacuolar system apparently slows down phero - mone degradation . This is similar to what has been observed in mammalian cells , using lysosomotropic agents and car - boxylic ionophores ( reviewed by Mellman et al . , 1986 ) . Using c ~ - factor degradation as a marker for transport to the vacuole , we have established conditions that allow u - factor uptake , but result in a significantly reduced rate of delivery to the vacuole . At 19°C the rates of uptake and degradation are similarly reduced in comparison to 30°C . However , at 15 and 10°C degradation is proportionally more delayed than uptake ( Table I ) . Our data favor the hypothesis that this delay in degradation is due to a kinetic block of transport to the vacuole , rather than to an inhibition of vacuolar hydrolytic activity . First , a - factor that is taken up at 15°C for 20 min does not cofractionate with the vacuolar marker CPY , whereas after internalization at 30°C for 30 min it does . Sec - ond , when cells that have internalized c ~ - factor for 15 min at 15°C are shifted to 30°C , the time required for degrada - tion products to appear is similar to when the uptake is car - ried out exclusively at 30°C . If e - factor already resided in the vacuole after uptake at 15°C , one would not expect to find a 15 - rain lag in degradation . As or - factor degradation seems not to be limiting in our assay , these data suggest that the rate limiting step in the appearance of degradation prod - ucts , even at 30°C , is the transport of or - factor to the vacuole . This is consistent with results obtained with mammalian cells , which show that fusion between endocytic vesicles and lysosomes in the perfused rat liver is the slowest step that oc - curs during the catabolism of asialoglycoprotein . This step is blocked at temperatures below 20°C ( Dunn et al . , 1980 ) . A similar result was obtained by Marsh et al . ( 1983 ) , who characterized the entry pathway of Semliki Forest virus in 10 1 = o 8 6 - x o o - 2 = - 2 O . " 1 - I " J - i = i 1 . 20 1 . 15 1 . 10 1 . 05 " o 60 " 1 . 5 . o 40 . 1 . 0 ~ - . ~ _ 20 ' 0 . 5 o 0 , • , • , - , 0 . 0 4 8 12 16 fractions Figure 10 . Floatation analysis of P3 on a density gradient . The P3 fraction containing the 35S - tx - factor after uptake at 15°C was used for the floatation analysis and was prepared in the same way as de - scribed in Fig . 8 with the exception that the second differential cen - trifugation step was at 7 , 500 g for 5 min . The P3 fraction was resuspended in 35 % Nycodenz , 1 ml was placed into a centrifuga - tion tube and overlaid with each 2 . 5 ml of four different Nycodenz dilutions in sorbitol medium as described in Materials and Methods . The gradient was centrifuged at 100 , 000 g for 14 - 16 h at 4°C and was collected from the top . Aliquots from each of the 17 fractions were analyzed for 35S - a - factor ( m ) , H + - ATPase ( o ) , protein concentration ( A ) , and density ( < > ) as described in Materials and Methods . Only 40 % of protein applied to the gra - dient was recovered , most likely due to the fact that a major part of the pellet formed during centrifugation was not collected . How - ever , > 95 % of the radioactivity was recovered . Singer and Riezman Intermediate in a - Factor Tra ~ c to Vacuole 1919 baby hamster kidney cells . In their system , transport of viral proteins from endosomes to lysosomes is also blocked at 200C . The finding that endocytic traffic in yeast seems to be efficiently slowed down only at 15°C , whereas in mammalian cells it is reduced at 20°C , is not surprising , because yeast cells normally grow at lower temperatures than mammalian cells . In conjunction with low temperature incubations , we made use of the metabolic inhibitors NaN3 and NaF to block transport from a prevacuolar compartment ( s ) to the vacuole . Both treatments are necessary to completely block the trans - port from this compartment , since low temperature installs only a kinetic block . The effect of the metabolic inhibitors on a - factor transport is consistent with in vitro experiments that reconstitute parts of mammalian endocytic ( Davey et al . , 1985 ; Gruenberg and Howell , 1986 ; Smythe et al . , 1989 ) and exocytic transport ( Balch et al . , 1984 ) . These studies showed that budding and fusion of vesicles are dependent on ATP . In our experiments we found that 5 mM NaN3 and NaF were sufficient to block degradation in vivo and trans - port of a - factor to the vacuole , even at 30°C . It is unlikely that the metabolic poisons inhibit degradation by increasing the vacuolar pH and thereby inhibiting the vacuolar hydro - lytic enzyme activity . Brief treatment of cells with bafilomy - cin A ~ results in an increase of vacuolar pH , which can be monitored by the lack of vacuolar labeling with quinacrine . However , bafilomycin A ~ does not block a - factor degrada - tion in contrast to treatment with NaN3 and NaE This per - mits us to conclude that the lack of a - factor degradation , seen in the presence of metabolic inhibitors , is not solely due to an elevated vacuolar pH , but to a block in delivery to the vacuole . The finding that bafilomycin At changed the ki - netics of c ~ - factor degradation in comparison to control cells cannot be explained at the moment , but is currently being in - vestigated in more detail . Direct evidence that a - factor transport from the plasma membrane to the vacuole involves at least one intermediate compartment comes from analysis of the sedimentation be - havior of the pheromone internalized under various condi - tions . Pheromone that was incubated with cells under condi - tions where we predicted an association with either plasma membrane or vacuole does in fact cofractionate with the plasma membrane H÷ - ATPase and CPY , respectively , a - Fac - tor that is internalized at 15°C under conditions where no degradation products can be detected , has a sedimentation behavior that is strikingly different from that of the vacuole or plasma membrane markers . The largest proportion of the a - factor is found in the 100 , 000 - g pellet , but some of it is also associated with the 3 , 500 - g pellet , the 10 , 000 - g pellet , and the 100 , 000 - g supernatant . At the moment we can only speculate about the origin of the pheromone found in these fractions , a - Factor that is pelletable at 3 , 500 g could be as - sociated with the plasma membrane . After a 20 - min incuba - tion at 15°C , x , 20 % of pheromone is still 3ensitive to a pH 1 . 2 wash ( Fig . 1 ) and ' ~ 50 - 60 % of the plz , sma membrane pellets at 3 , 500 g . By using the same type of calculation only a minor amount of pheromone found in the 10 , 000 - and 100 , 000 - g pellets could be derived from the plasma mem - brane . In addition , only very small quantities of pheromone present in these fractions could originate from the vacuole . Therefore , we conclude that most of the radioactivity sedi - menting into P2 and P3 originates from a - factor residing within the intermediate compartment ( s ) . Floatation analysis of the 100 , 000 - g fraction , obtained af - ter a - factor uptake at 15°C , reveals that the pheromone is present in two peaks . This demonstrates conclusively that the pheromone is associated with at least one membranous compartment that is distinct from the plasma membrane . The two a - factor - containing peaks could represent two different compartments involved in transport to the vacuole . However , the possibility that they represent the same com - partment in an intact and damaged form cannot be excluded at this point . The existence of an intermediate , endocytic compartment in S . cerevisiae has previously been claimed by Makarow and Nevalainen ( 1987 ) using commercially available FITC - dextran . Subsequently , Preston et al . ( 1987 ) demonstrated that intracellular labeling under these conditions is due to low molecular weight impurities in the commercially avail - able FITC - dextran . Therefore , the labeling seen by Makarow and Nevalainen cannot be considered to be endocytic in ori - gin . Makarow ( 1985a ) has also proposed that Semliki Forest virus and vesicular stomatitis virus , well - established endo - cytic markers in mammalian cells ( Helenius et al . , 1980 ) , are taken up by endocytosis into yeast spheroplasts . After in - ternalization and cell lysis three density gradient fractions were claimed to contain the viral proteins , one of which coincided with vacuolar markers , one with plasma mem - brane markers , and one banded between the vacuolar and the plasma membrane markers . Makarow considered either or both of the latter fractions to represent intermediary com - partments operating in transport to the vacuole . However , the evidence that virus is delivered to the vacuole is not con - vincing . Approximately the same proportion of viral radio - activity and plasma membrane marker cofractionate with the vacuolar marker . This calls into question this interpretation and perhaps the use of these viruses as endocytic markers in yeast . If the intermediate compartment ( s ) that we propose is en - docytic in origin then one would expect the a - factor to re - side within this organelle ( s ) . Evidence in support of this is provided by the finding that the pheromone present in P3 af - ter uptake at 15°C is protease protected . High concentra - tions of protease and incubation at 30°C for 15 min are necessary to degrade all the a - factor in the presence of Tri - ton X - 100 whereas in vitro the pure pheromone is more sen - sitive to protease ( Singer , B . , unpublished observation ) . We speculate that this might reflect a tight association of a - factor with some other protein ( s ) . If the pheromone would be freely diffusable within the vesicle , such high concentrations and temperatures would presumably not be necessary for degradation . Since a - factor is most likely taken up by recep - tor - mediated endocytosis , the a - factor receptor is certainly a good candidate for a protein to which the pheromone might be bound , a - Factor , because it is rather small , could be bur - ied by parts of the receptor , so that only after protease diges - tion of the receptor would a - factor become accessible to the protease . It still remains to be demonstrated that the a - factor recep - tor is internalized . The first hint , that the receptor is taken up by iigand - induced endocytosis , comes from studies by Jenness and Spatrick ( 1986 ) demonstrating that a - factor binding activity disappears from the surface concomitant with pheromone uptake . Analysis of receptor truncation mu - tants has revealed that COOH - terminal sequences of the The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 110 , 1990 1920 receptor are not necessary for pheromone binding , yet func - tion to regulate receptor internalization and adaptation to pheromone by phosphorylation ( Konopka et al . , 1988 ; Reneke et al . , 1988 ) . Recently , Dietzel and Kurjan ( 1987 ) and Miyajima et al . ( 1987 ) provided the first evidence for a receptor - coupled G - protein in yeast , that is involved in mat - ing . The G - protein subunits show sequence homology to mammalian receptor - coupled G - proteins . In addition to this similarity , the u - factor receptor and some G - protein - coupled receptors like rhodopsin and the / 3 - adrenergic receptor share striking structural homology , in that they all contain seven transmembrane domains , and NH2 - terminal exoplasmic , and a COOH - terminal cytoplasmic domain . Evidence has accu - mulated that suggests that the / 3 - adrenergic receptor is inter - nalized ( called sequestration ) ( reviewed by Sibley et al . , 1987 ) . However , the mechanism of internalization and subsequent targeting of polytopic signal transduction receptors has not been clarified yet in any system . One clue from yeast may come from work on clathrin - deficient mutants . They are still able to carry out o ~ - factor uptake , although it is reduced by 50 - 65 % ( Payne et al . , 1988 ) . Besides the inherent difficulty to interpret this partial effect , there is no reason to believe at the present time that clathrin is strictly required for recep - tor - mediated endocytosis , nor is there convincing evidence that polytopic signal transduction receptors are internalized via clathrin - coated pits . Since we are now in a position to iso - late and characterize the intermediate compartment ( s ) that is involved in transport of o ~ - factor to the vacuole , we hope to learn more soon about the molecular requirements of the en - docytic transport pathway in yeast . We are grateful to Uschi Behrens , Fabienne Crausaz , and Bettina Zanolari for excellent technical assistance . We would like to thank Beate Westen - berg for advice on lysis of spheroptasts and Vjeko Duli6 , Mark Egerton , Susan Raths , and Martin Spiess for critical reading of the manuscript . This work was supported by a grant from the Swiss National Science Foundation and by the Kanton Basel Stadt . Received for publication I December 1989 and in revised form 15 February 1990 . References Ammerer , G . , C . P . Hunter , J . H . Rothman , G . C . Saari , L . A . Vails , and T . H . Stevens . 1986 . PEP4 gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae encodes pro - teinase A , a vacuolar enzyme required for processing of vacuolar precursors . Mol . Cell . Biol . 6 : 2490 - 2499 . Balch , W . E . , B . S . Glick , and J . E . Rothman . 1984 . Sequential intermediates in the pathway of intercompartmental transport in a cell - free system . Cell . 39 : 525 - 536 . Banta , L . M . , J . S . Robinson , D . J . Klionsky , and S . D . Emr . 1988 . Organelle assembly in yeast : characterization of yeast mutants defective in vacuolar biogenesis and protein sorting . J . Cell Biol . 107 : 1369 - 1383 . Blumer , K . J . , J . E . Reneke , and J . Thorner . 1988 . The STE2 gene product is the ligand - binding component of the u - factor receptor of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Biol . Chem . 263 : 10836 - 10842 . Bowman , E . J . , A . Siebers , and K . Altendorf . 1988 . Bafilomycins : a class of inhibitors of membrane ATPases from microorganisms , animal cells , and plant cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 85 : 7972 - 7976 . Burkholder , A . C . , and L . H . Hartwell . 1985 . The yeast u - factor receptor : structural properties deduced from the sequence of the STE2 gene . Nucleic Acids Res . 13 : 8463 - 8475 . Carpenter , G . V . , and S . Cohen . 1976 . ~ - ' SI - labeled human epidermal growth factor ( hEGF ) : binding , internalization and degradation in human fibro - blasts . J . Cell Biol . 71 : 159 - 171 . Chvatchko , Y . 1987 . Internalisation et effets de la pheromone . Le facteur - t ~ dans la levure Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Ph . D . thesis . University of Lausanne , Lausanne , Switzerland . 126 pp . Chvatchko , Y . , I . Howald , and H . Riezman . 1986 . Two yeast mutants defective in endocytosis are defective in pheromone response . Cell . 46 : 355 - 364 . Davey , J . , S . M . Hurtley , and G . Warren . 1985 . Reconstitution of an endocytic fusion event in a cell - free system . Cell . 43 : 643 - 652 . Dietzel , C . , and J . Kurjan . 1987 . The yeast SCGI gene : a G ~ - like protein im - plicated in the a - and a - factor response pathways . Cell . 50 : 1001 - 1010 . Duli ~ , V . 1989 . Characterization of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae endl mutant and the endl gene required for vacuole biogenesis and gluconeogenetic growth . Ph . D . thesis . University of Lausanne , Lausanne , Switzerland . 92 PP . Duli ~ , V . , and H . Riezman . 1989 . Characterization oftbe ENDI gene required for vacuole biogenesis and gluconeogenetic growth of budding yeast . EMBO ( Fur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 8 : 1349 - 1359 . Diirr , M . , T . Boiler , and A . Wiemken . 1975 . Polybase induced lysis of yeast spberoplasts : a new gentle method for preparation of vacuoles . Arch . Microbiol . 105 : 319 - 327 . Dunn , W . A . , A . L . Hubbard , and N . N . Aronson , Jr . 1980 . Low temperature selectively inhibits fusion between pinocytic vesicles and lysosomes during heterophagy of ~ - ' ~ l - asialofetuin by the perfused rat liver . J . Biol . Chem . 255 : 5971 - 5978 . Fehrenbacher , G . , K . Perry , and J . Thorner . 1978 . Cell - cell recognition in S . cerevisiae : regulation of mating specific adhesion . J . Bacteriol . 134 : 893 - 901 . Gavin , J . R . , J . Roth , D . M . Neville , P . DeMeyts , and D . N . Buell . 1974 . Insulin - dependent regulation of insulin receptor concentrations : a direct demonstration in cell culture . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 71 : 84 - 88 . Gritfiths , G . , and K . Simons . 1986 . The trans Golgi network : sorting at the exit site of the Golgi complex . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 234 : 438 - 443 . Griffiths , G . , B . Hoflack , K . Simons , I . Mellman , and S . Kornfeld . 1988 . The mannose 6 - phosphate receptor and the biogenesis of lysosomes . Cell . 52 : 329 - 341 . Gruenberg , J . E . , and K . E . Howell . 1986 . Reconstitution of vesicle fusions occurring in endocytosis with a cell - free system . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Or - gan . ) J . 5 : 3091 - 3101 . Hagen , D . C . , and G . F . Sprague , Jr . 1984 . Induction of the yeast u - specific STE3 gene by the peptide pheromone a - factor . J . Mol . Biol . 178 : 835 - 852 . Hartwell , L . H . 1973 . Synchronization of haploid yeast cell cycles , a prelude to conjugation . Exp . Cell Res . 76 : 11 I - 117 . Helenius , A . , J . Kartenbeck , K . Simons , and E . Fries . 1980 . On the entry of Semliki Forest virus into BHK - 21 cells . J . Cell Biol . 84 : 404 - 420 . Jenness , D . D . , and P . Spatrick . 1986 . Down regulation of the or - factor phero - mone receptor in S . cerevisiae . Cell . 46 : 345 - 353 . Jenness , D . D . , A . C . Burkholder , and L . H . Hartwell . 1983 . Binding of u - fac - tor pheromone to yeast a cells : Chemical and genetic evidence for an c ~ - factor receptor . Cell . 35 : 521 - 529 . Jenness , D . D . , A . C . Burkholder , and L . H . Hartwell . 1986 . Binding of u - fac - tor pheromone to yeast a cells : dissociation constant and number of binding sites . MoL Cell . Biol . 6 : 318 - 320 . Konopka , J . B . , D . D . Jenness , and L . H . Hartwell . 1988 . The C - terminus of the S . cerevisiae u - pheromone receptor mediates an adaptive response to pheromone . Cell . 54 : 609 - 620 . Kurjan , J . 1985 . u - Factor structural gene mutations in yeast : effect on or - factor production and mating . Mol . Cell . Biol . 5 : 787 - 796 . Laemmli , U . K . 1970 . Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4 . Nature ( Lond . ) . 227 : 680 - 685 . Makarow , M . 1985a . Endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae : internalization of enveloped viruses into spheroplasts . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 4 : 1855 - 1860 . Makarow , M . 1985b . Endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae : internalization of u - amylase and fluorescent dextran into cells . EMBO ( Eur . MoL Biol . Or - gan . ) J . 4 : 1861 - 1866 . Makarow , M . , and L . T . Nevalainen . 1987 . Transport of a fluorescent macro - molecule via endosomes to the vacuole in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 104 : 67 - 75 . Marsh , M . , E . Bolzau , and A . Helenius . 1983 . Penetration of Semliki Forest virus from acidic prelysosomal vacuoles . Cell . 32 : 931 - 940 . McCaffrey , G . , F . J . Clay , K . Kelsay , and G . F . Sprague , Jr . 1987 . Identifica - tion and regulation of a gene required for cell fusion during mating of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Cell . Biol . 7 : 2680 - 2690 . Mellman , I . , R . Fuchs , and A . Helenius . 1986 . Acidification of the endocytic and exocytic pathways . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 55 : 663 - 700 . Miyajima , 1 . , M . Nakafuka , N . Nakayama , C . Brenner , A . Miyajima , K . Kaibuchi , K . Arai , Y . Kaziro , and K . Matsumoto . 1987 . GPAI , a haploid - specific essential gene , encodes a yeast homolog of mammalian G protein which may be involved in mating factor signal transduction . Cell . 50 : 1011 - 1019 . Nakayama , N . , A . Miyajima , and K . Arai . 1985 . Nucleotide sequences of STE2 and STE3 , cell type - specific sterile genes from Saccharomyces cerevisiae . EMBO ( Fur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 4 : 2643 - 2648 . Payne , G . S . , D . Baker , E . van Tuinen , and R . Schekman . 1988 . Protein trans - port to the vacuole and receptor - mediated endocytosis by clathrin heavy chain - deficient yeast . J . Cell Biol . 106 : 1453 - 1461 . Pfeffer , S . R . , and J . E . Rothman . 1987 . Biosynthetic protein transport and sort - ing by the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 56 : 829 - 852 . Preston , R . A . , R . F . Murphy , and E . W . Jones . 1987 . Apparent endocytosis of fluorescein isothiocyanate - conjugated dextran by Saccharomyces cere - visiae reflects uptake of low molecular weight impurities , not dextran . J . Cell BioL f05 : 1981 - 1987 . Singer and Riezman Intermediate in u - Factor Traffic to Vacuole 1921 Reneke . L E . , K . 1 . Blumer , W . E . Courchesne , and J . Thorner . 1988 . The carboxy - terminal segment of the yeast ~ - factor receptor is a regulatory do - main . Cell . 55 : 221 - 234 . Riezman , H . 1985 . Endocytosis in yeast : several of the yeast secretory mutants are defective in endocytosis . Cell . 40 : 1001 - 1009 . Rose . M . , B . Price , and G . Fink . 1986 . Saccharomyces cerevisiae nuclear fu - sion requires prior activation by ~ - factor . Mol . Cell . Biol . 6 : 3490 - 3497 . Scott , J . , and R . Schekman . 1980 . Lyticase : endoglucanase and protease activi - ties that act together in yeast cell lysis . J . Bacteriol . 142 : 414 - 423 . Sibley . D . R . , and R . J . Lefkowitz . 1985 . Molecular mechanism of receptor desensitization using the ~ - adrenergic receptor - coupled adenylate cyclase system as a model . Nature ( Lond . ) . 317 : 124 - 129 . Sibley , D . , J . Benovic , M . Caron , and R . Lefkowitz . 1987 . Regulation oftraas - membrane signaling by receptor phosphorylation . Cell . 48 : 913 - 922 . Smythe , E . , M . Pypaert , J . Lucocq , and G . Warren . 1989 . Formation of coated vesicles from coated pits in broken A431 cells . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 843 - 853 . Sprague , G . F . , Jr . , L . C . Blair , and J . Thorner . 1983 . Cell interactions and regulation of cell type in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Annu . Rev . Microbiol . 37 : 623 - 660 . Stetler , G . L . , and J . Thorner . 1984 . Molecular cloning of hormone responsive genes from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 81 : 1144 - 1148 . Thorner , J . 1981 . Pheromonal regulation of development in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . In The Molecular Biology of the Yeast Saccharomyces : Life Cy - cle and Inheritance . J . Strathern , E . Jones , and J . Broach , editors . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , Cold Spring Harbor , New York . 143 - 180 . Tnwbin , H . , T . Staehelin , and J . Gordon . 1979 . Electrophoretic transfer of pro - teins from polyacrylamide gels to nitrocellulose sheets : procedure and some applications . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 76 : 4350 - 4354 . Trueheart , J . , J . D . Boeke , and G . R . Fink . 1987 . Two genes required for cell fusion during yeast conjugation : evidence for a pheromone - induced surface protein . Mol . Cell . Biol . 7 : 2316 - 2328 . van Tuinen , E . , and H . Riezman . 1987 . lmmunolocalization of glyeraldehyde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase , hexokinase , and carboxypeptidase Y in yeast cells at the ultrastructural level . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 35 : 327 - 333 . Weisman , L . S . , R . Bacallao , and W . Wickner . 1987 . Multiple methods of visualizing the yeast vacuole permit evaluation of its morphology and in - heritance during the cell cycle . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 1539 - 1547 . Wiemken , A . , M . Schellenberg , and K . Urech . 1979 . Vacuoles : the sole com - partment of digestive enzymes in yeast ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae ) ? Arch . MicrobioL 123 : 23 - 35 . Woolford , C . A . , L . B . Daniels , F . J . Park , E . W . Jones , J . N . Van Arsdell , and M . A . lnnis . 1986 . The PEP4 gene encodes an aspartyl protease impli - cated in the posttranslational regulation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae vacuo - lar hydrolases . Mol . Cell . Biol . 6 : 2500 - 2510 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 110 , 1990 1922