A Multi - perspective Analysis of Retractions in Life Sciences Bhumika Bhatt contact @ bhumikabhatt . org Abstract The aim of this study is to explore trends in retracted publications in life sciences and biomedical sciences over axes like time , countries , journals and impact factors , and topics . Nearly seven thousand publications , which comprise the entirety of retractions visible through PubMed as of August 2019 , were used . This work involved sophisticated data collection and analysis techniques to use data from PubMed , Wikipedia , and WikiData , and study it with respect to the above mentioned axes . Importantly , I employ state - of - the - art analysis and visualization techniques from natural language processing ( NLP ) to understand the topics in retracted literature . To highlight a few results , the analyses demonstrate an increasing rate of retraction over time and noticeable diﬀerences in the publication quality ( as measured by journal impact factor ) among top countries . Moreover , while molecular biology and cancer dominate retractions , we also see a number of retractions not related to biology . The methods and results of this study can be applied to continuously understand the nature and evolution of retractions in life sciences , thus contributing to the health of this research ecosystem . Keywords : Retracted Publications ; Natural Language Processing ; Latent Dirichlet Allocation ; Data Mining ; Biomed - ical Research 1 Introduction The cutthroat competition in academia , the rush to publish or just the greed of career advancement and scientiﬁc grants can lead scientists to publish ﬂawed results and conclusions . While some of these errors can be unintentional ﬂaws and honest mistakes , others are intentional scientiﬁc misconduct . According to a 2012 report , 67 . 4 % of the then retractions in biomedical research literature were due to misconduct [ 1 ] . In this , 43 . 4 % was due to fraud or suspected fraud , 14 . 3 % due to duplicate publication , 9 . 8 % due to plagiarism and rest due to unknown or other reasons . Another 2018 study found that the most common reasons for retraction in open access journals were errors , plagiarism , duplicate publication , fraud / suspected fraud and faked peer review process [ 2 ] . Flawed publications not only undermine the integrity of science but can also lead to the propagation of erroneous data to other genuine publications , and thus retraction of such work is a necessary step to preserve the integrity of the entire scientiﬁc research ecosystem . There exist a few previous publications to understand the reasons , scope , and impact of retractions in life sciences [ 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 ] . Researchers have analyzed retractions by intentions ( i . e . , mistakes , fraud , fabrication , etc . ) as well as studied trends over time , countries , journals and in relation to authors . Much of this work has been manual and cannot beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from available computational techniques . My work in this manuscript diﬀers from the previous works in both the end goals and the approach . I map the available retraction data to various dimensions such as countries , journals and impact factors , time and subject areas and discover previously unknown or unconﬁrmed trends in the data . Studying reasons behind retractions was out of scope of this work . This study has addressed several challenges , most of which stem from the unstructured nature of the data . The aﬃliations and abstracts for publications are all unstructured . There is no easy way to obtain the authors’ countries , for instance , which we need in our analysis . Consequently , I had to gather country data from other sources and join it with the PubMed data using non - trivial automatic and manual analysis . I also perform topic modeling on the abstracts to understand and characterize retracted literature by subject areas . This involved natural language processing , analyses and visualization . Finally , the entire work has involved signiﬁcant data cleaning and processing to convert the data into a form amenable for analysis and drawing conclusions . In the next few sections , I discuss the methodology along with the ﬁndings in greater detail . This work makes the following major contributions . • Large dataset . This manuscript reports on all retractions until August 2019 , as reported on PubMed . To the best of the author’s knowledge the present study has used the biggest dataset among all retraction studies so far . • Trends by time and journal impact factors . The work shows that retraction rate is increasing over time and retraction diﬀers signiﬁcantly by journals , with most retractions happening in lower impact factors . 1 • Trends by countries . I show that authors from India and China have more of their retractions in lower impact factor journals while authors from Germany , Japan , and the US have more of their retractions in higher impact factor journals when compared to India and China . • Trends by subject areas . This work implements a topic model based on statistical techniques to identify the subject areas of retracted publications . While molecular biology , containing genetics and biochemistry , and cancer dominate the topics among retracted papers , we also ﬁnd a signiﬁcant number of papers that are not related to life sciences . 2 Methods I collected the data for retracted publications from PubMed on August 26 , 2019 using the Eutilities API [ 19 ] . From this , I extracted articles’ titles , journal names , publication and retraction dates , authors’ aﬃliations , and abstracts . The extraction and processing was done in Python . The ﬁnal dataset contains 6 , 936 unique retracted articles . Another possible source for retraction data is the Retraction Watch database [ 20 ] , which is a curated dataset . Between these two sources , I used PubMed as it also contain article abstracts , which I use for this study . 2 . 1 Processing Dates The publication dates can be found most often as PubDate ( a ﬁeld in Eutilities XML ) but may also be available as MedlineDate or PubmedPubDate ﬁelds . I chose the minimum of these dates . The 832 entries with the day of month missing were assigned 15 ( mean number of days in a month ) as the day . Another 58 entries , which were missing the month , were dropped for the time - based analysis . Retraction dates are available under the CommentsCorrections ﬁeld as unstructured text , which was parsed using regular expressions . Most ( 4 , 211 ) entries were missing the day , which was again assigned with 15 . 709 entries had imprecise or missing retraction month or year and were dropped . In 23 cases the retraction date was earlier than the publication date . Further investigation revealed that the correct publication date was not available for them . All such entries were also dropped . Additionally , in seven other cases , the retraction date appeared to be before the publication date but this was simply due to artiﬁcially assigning the day to 15 . Note that entries dropped here are still used for non - time - based analysis . 2 . 2 Processing Country Names Author aﬃliations can be used to identify which countries the authors belong to . However , this poses a few challenges . • Aﬃliations are unstructured and do not follow a common format , it is inherently challenging to derive structured information such as countries from them . • A country may be known by multiple names , for example , Germany and Deutschland ; and Brazil and Brasil . These examples appear in our dataset . • A country name may not be present in an aﬃliation but instead must be inferred . For example , if an aﬃliation mentions “Stanford University” only , it must be inferred that the country is United States . I addressed the ﬁrst challenge through an algorithm that scans an aﬃliation in the reverse order . It uses heuristics to tokenize it into groups of words , which it then uses to identify or infer a country . To solve the second challenge , I obtained a list of alternative country names from Wikipedia . When looking for countries , I searched for all country names , including the alternative ones . The third challenge is more diﬃcult . It would be desirable to have a mapping of all the universities and organizations in the world to their home countries . Fortunately , an approximation of this mapping is possible through ontological databases such as WikiData , which contain crowd - sourced information relating various entities and can be queried to obtain desired mappings . Using WikiData’s SPARQL ( a query language ) interface , I obtained a list of 84 , 476 organizations including universities , research institutes , engineering colleges , university systems , international organization , hospitals , businesses , research centers , and academies of sciences and their corresponding countries . While certainly not exhaustive , it would likely cover most of the aﬃliations we are likely to see in our dataset . Moreover , while neither the list of alternative country names nor the list of organizations may be exhaustive , together they would provide better resolution of countries than those provided by one of these methods alone . After processing aﬃliations in such an automatic fashion , I manually checked them ( about 100 were updated ) . My methodology uses all countries appearing in aﬃliations , counting each country at most once for a given paper . 25 cases had no individual authors but only collective groups as authors . I manually identiﬁed the countries these groups belong to . The data also lacked aﬃliations for 439 retracted papers . 2 2 . 3 Journals The journal names from the retraction data were combined with impact factors , which were obtained from 2019 edition of Journal Citation Reports ( JCR ) [ 21 ] . Before matching the journal names to those in the impact factor list , the names were normalized by making them lowercase , removing spaces and punctuations , and so on . The matching is still not trivial : for instance , an original journal name in the PubMed data is ‘JAMA’ , which is available in the impact factor list as ‘JAMA - Journal of the American Medical Association’ . Such mismatches were identiﬁed and ﬁxed manually . Furthermore , a few journals , e . g . , Biochimica et Biophysica Acta , have several sections , each of which is separately mentioned in JCR . However , the PubMed lists the journal only without the section . In these cases , I manually resolved the sections to assign the right impact . The two manual steps allowed assigning impact factor to 153 additional articles . 2 . 4 Topic Modeling Understanding the subject areas and themes of the retracted articles is a major eﬀort in this work . An obvious approach is to use MeSH [ 22 ] identiﬁers , which denote both broad subject areas and detailed topics and are manually curated for each article . Their primary purpose is to enable eﬃcient search for articles [ 23 , 24 ] . One may suggest that we could just use the MeSH to identify the themes in articles . Unfortunately , this does not work for us for at least two reasons : ( a ) there are 1 , 713 articles ( i . e . , about a quarter of the dataset ) , which do not have any qualiﬁers assigned ; and ( b ) MeSH provides multiple qualiﬁers for a given article but does not indicate their relative importance , thus making it diﬃcult to identify a single , most - important subject area for the article . An alternative is performing topic modeling , which uses statistical techniques to discover abstract “topics” in given documents ( here , retracted literature ) . Topic models learn topics from a corpus in an unsupervised way . Latent Dirichlet Allocation ( LDA ) [ 25 ] ] is a state - of - the - art method used for topic modeling . It is a generative probabilistic topic model , based on the idea that each document is a probability distribution over topics and each topic is a distribution over words . Thus , hidden topics in documents can be found out from the collection of words that co - occur frequently . LDA has been used in a number of natural language processing and information retrieval tasks and has even been explored in life sciences literature . For instance , it was used to discover relationships among drugs , genes , proteins , and pathways in several articles [ 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 ] . This work , however , uses LDA to understand the broad topics appearing in the literature under consideration . Next , I discuss data preprocessing to obtain the “words” for the model , and building the LDA model to understand the topics . 2 . 4 . 1 Data Preprocessing This step was used to clean and augment the available data to allow building an eﬀective model . Articles that either lacked an abstract or had an abstract describing only their retraction were excluded , resulting in 6 , 417 articles . Wherever possible , abbreviations were unabbreviated . I used a simple heuristic for this – upon encountering a possible abbreviation within parentheses , its letters are matched with the ﬁrst letters of the immediately preceding words . If a match is found , this abbreviation is expanded all over the abstract . This heuristic only helps with the common case and may miss cases like ‘hookworm’ abbreviated as ‘HW’ and ‘tuberculosis’ abbreviated as TB . Tokenization and lemmatization . This step broke text into words , removed some words based on their part - of - speech usage , and then normalized . Part of speech ( PoS ) tagging is used to enable lemmatization or normalization of words . For this work , part of speech tagging was additionally used to extract only nouns , proper nouns , and adjectives ( e . g , ‘cell’ , ‘Parkinson’s disease’ , and ‘pulmonary’ ) , while ignoring other parts of speech , such as verbs ( e . g . , ‘examined’ and ‘discovered’ ) , which do not appear useful to our current task . The obtained words were then lemmatized to extract roots of the words . This normalizes the words according to their use as diﬀerent parts of speech . For instance , the plural ‘symptoms’ would be transformed to the singular ‘symptom’ . As life science literature frequently contains phrases , such as ‘cell line’ , ‘reactive oxygen species’ , which have domain - speciﬁc connotations not conveyed by the comprising words such as ‘cell’ and ‘line’ ( when considering ‘cell line’ ) , I augmented the derived terms with such phrases . To identify these phrases , I used Named Entity Recognition . The techniques discussed here were implemented through Scispacy [ 30 ] , a python library extending spaCy [ 31 ] for processing scientiﬁc and biomedical texts . Stopword elimination . Stopwords are words that do not have enough meaning to diﬀerentiate between two texts . The NLTK [ 32 ] library contains 179 stopwords . I further added more words such as ‘proof’ , ‘researcher’ , ‘record’ that have no diﬀerentiating eﬀect in life sciences literature , making the stopword list 544 words long . Moreover , I made all words in lowercase to make the subsequent steps case - insensitive and removed all words consisting of digits only or one letter only . In addition , symbols that are common in scientiﬁc literature such as = , < , > , − were removed . 3 2 . 4 . 2 Building an LDA model I now discuss the implementation of the LDA model . The ﬁrst step is to construct a vocabulary from the terms derived from data processing . Only those terms that appeared in at least twenty articles and in not more than 15 % of the abstracts were used . The rationale is that terms appearing in too few or too many documents would not convey any meaningful pattern . This vocabulary is used to construct a document - term matrix , where each row corresponds to an article abstract ( documents ) and each column corresponds to a word or term . Each cell in the matrix represents the number of occurrences of the term in the document . This is also known as a bag - of - words ( BoW ) model and is an input to the LDA algorithm . LDA provides as many topics K as deﬁned by the user . A low K can provide broad topics while a high K can give topics with words repeated in multiple topics , thus making them diﬃcult to interpret . To arrive at an appropriate K , I started with a target K = 15 and built models for values of K around it to identify the model with the most interpretable topics . I ﬁnally selected K = 16 . This implementation was done using the Gensim library [ 33 ] . The model was visualized with LDAvis [ 34 , 35 ] . 3 Results 3 . 1 Trend over time As seen from the red curve in Figure 1a , the number of retractions for the newly published papers has been increasing each year . To answer whether this rise can be attributed to the increasing rate of publications , I collected per - year publication statistics from PubMed and plot the retraction rate in Figure 1b . The retraction rate per 10 , 000 publications was 0 . 38 in 1985 ( here , a retraction is attributed to the year of publication ) and it rose to 2 . 03 in 2000 and 5 . 95 in 2014 . Next , I checked how many publications are retracted in a given year irrespective of their publication year . From the blue curve in Figure 1a , it can be conﬁrmed that starting mid to late 2000s there is a steady increase in number of retractions . Figure 1c plots the time to retraction . Maximum retractions happen within 1 year of publication and the number decreases as years pass by . It takes , on an average , 3 . 8 years for a publication to be retracted ( with standard deviation of 4 . 01 years ) and this explains why we see less number of retractions for the papers published in year 2015 onwards compared to the year 2014 ( Figure 1a ) . Additionally , the 25th percentile for years to retraction is about 1 year and the 75th percentile is 5 . 3 years . The median is 2 . 3 years . 3 . 2 Trend among countries In the available data , the authors come from 98 countries . United States , China , Japan , India , and Germany occupy the ﬁrst ﬁve ranks ( Figure 2a ) . Focusing more on these 5 countries revealed that retracted publications from China soared in mid 2010’s especially for the years 2014 - 2015 ( Figure 2b ) . This increase in retractions correlates well ( pearson correlation coeﬃcient = 0 . 9 for 2000 - 2015 ) with the increase in publications from China ( Figure 2c ) . Next , I considered countries by their retraction rate . In order to avoid getting countries that do not publish actively , I set a threshold that a country should have at least 10 , 000 publications . The countries with highest retraction rates are Iran , Tunisia , Pakistan , Bangladesh and India ( Figure 2d ) . I also compared the distribution of retracted literature over the journal impact factor ( IF ) for the top ﬁve countries . For lower IF retractions , China dominates while at higher IFs , the USA dominates ( Figure 3a ) . Figure 3b makes a deeper analysis . India’s retractions in journals with no IF are at 33 % of its overall retractions , which is highest percentage among these ﬁve countries . Similarly , the highest percentage for retractions in journals with IF 0 - 5 is for China and for journals above 5 is for the USA . Additionally , Japan and Germany also have lower percentage of their retractions in low IF journals ( no impact factor and journals with 0 – 5 impact factor ) compared to India and China . This shows a slight skew of distribution of retracted papers for these three developed countries ( USA , Japan , Germany ) showing more of their retractions in higher impact factor journals compared to the two developing countries , China and India . 3 . 3 Trend among journals The 6 , 936 papers analyzed here were published in 2 , 102 diﬀerent journals . 54 % of these journals have only one retracted paper ( Figure 4a ) . The highest retractions are from Journal of biological chemistry with 279 retractions , Plos One with 177 and Tumor Biology with 145 retractions ( Figure 4b ) . In addition , out of the top 21 journals with the highest retractions ( the 20th journal is tied with the 21st ) , Diagnostic pathology ( total 39 retractions ) followed by Tumor Biology has the highest retraction rate ( number of retractions per total number of papers published by a journal ) among these 21 journals with highest retractions ( Figure 4c ) . Next , ( Figure 4d ) analyzes retractions by journal impact factor ( IF ) , rounded to the nearest integer . With 1 , 273 retractions , journals with factor of 3 had the most retractions . 4 ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) Figure 1 : Retraction trend over time . ( a ) The number of retractions show a generally increasing trend both by the year of publication ( red curve ) and by the year of retraction ( blue curve ) . Note that the red curve falls oﬀ in recent years because there will likely be more retractions in future among publications published in recent years . The blue curve falls oﬀ in 2019 because we have only partial data for 2019 . ( b ) Similar analysis as ( a ) , except the number retractions is per 10 , 000 publications . This shows that even after accounting for the increasing number of publications , the rate of retraction is increasing . ( c ) Most retractions happen soon after publication . ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) Figure 2 : Retraction trend among countries . ( a ) Top 20 countries with highest number of retractions . ( b ) Retraction trend over time for the ﬁve countries with highest retractions . ( c ) Publication over years for China showing very high increases in recent decades . This is a factor for the high number of retractions for China in recent years . ( d ) Top 20 countries with highest retraction rate per 10 , 000 publications . 5 ( a ) ( b ) Figure 3 : Distribution of retracted publications over their journal’s impact factor for the top ﬁve countries with highest retractions . ( a ) Number of retracted publications by their corresponding journal’s impact factor . Note : NA impact factor indicates journals without impact factor . ( b ) Pie charts indicating individual country’s distribution of retracted publications according to impact factor . Impact factors have been clustered into ﬁve groups : Not available , 0 - 5 , 6 - 10 , 11 - 20 , 21 - 80 . This was followed by journals that had no impact factor , which is closely followed by papers with IF 2 and IF 4 . 55 % of the retractions are from journals with IF below 3 . 3 . 4 Topic analysis Visualization of results . Figure 5 presents a screenshot of the interactive visualization prepared with LDAvis of the LDA model with 16 topics . Topics are represented as circles . Closely related topics are spatially close and conversely , unrelated topics are distant . Additionally , bigger circles represent more prevalent topics . Topic interpretation . LDA provides topics in the form of co - occurring words . These topics need further inter - pretation . I analyzed these topics based on the words occurring within them as well as the abstracts that had high prevalence of the respective topics . Table 1 presents the topic analysis : the topic interpretation , the salient keywords representing the topic and remarks indicating how the abstracts are relevant to the interpreted topic . Analysis . Note that some topics are more closely related than others . For example topic 1 and topic 9 , which are about molecular biology and immunology respectively , show an overlap in Figure 5 . The topics have some common terms such as complex , region , peptide , interaction , and membrane . Also , molecular biology is a broad topic encom - passing biomolecules that are functional in various aspects of cell biology , including in immunology , making the overlap intuitive . Similarly , we ﬁnd topic 1 closely related to signaling pathways ( topic 3 ) and cell growth , proliferation and 6 ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) Figure 4 : Retraction trend among journals . ( a ) Number of journals against the number of papers retracted from them . ( b ) Top 21 journals with highest number of retracted publications . ( c ) Retraction rate per 10 , 000 publications for journals in ( b ) . ( d ) Number of retractions coming from journals with diﬀerent impact factors ( NA - Not available impact factor ) . death ( topic 2 ) and therefore , these topics appear close to each other in Figure 5 . For another example , topic 15 ( risk factors ) , which frequently concerns genetic epidemiology , is related to public health ( topic 5 ) , which contains epidemiology , and the two topics are not far from each other . Additionally , topic 7 ( circulatory system ) overlaps with topic 12 ( bone health ) as well as with topic 8 ( analgesics , anti - emetics , anaesthetics ) , all related to human body and health . Similarly , we observe an overlap between topic 11 ( brain and kidney ) and topic 13 ( blood ) . Recall that a single document ( abstract ) can be made up of multiple topics , but the prevalence ( represented as a probability ) of these topics in a document can vary . This leads to two ways of ranking the topics : • By number of documents where the given topic is the most prevalent ( Figure 6a ) . • By the total prevalence across all documents ( Figure 6b ) . Topic 1 ( Molecular biology ) is the top topic according to both the ranking criteria . This is intuitive because the topic is quite vast , encompassing genetics and biochemistry . Topic 4 ranks second by both rankings . Further study reveals that while this topic contains interdisciplinary articles such as on biophysics and computational biology , many of the articles are not related to biology at all . Upon checking 100 randomly selected abstracts of the 705 comprising this topic , I found 49 to be non - biology . Extrapolating this to the rest of 705 abstracts , this suggests that about 5 % ( 345 out of 6417 ) abstracts can be non - biology related . Interestingly , topic 2 ( cell growth , proliferation and death ) is 7 Figure 5 : Visualization of topics for an LDA model with 16 topics . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 6 : Ranking of topics according to ( a ) the number of documents where they have highest probability compared to the other topics ; and ( b ) relative prevalence . highly related to cancer . Among randomly selected 100 abstracts from 555 abstracts that have topic 2 as their most prevalent topic , 77 were related to cancer . If we extrapolate this percentage of abstracts related to cancer , then 427 abstracts would be cancer - centric . Adding this number to the number of abstracts from cancer ( topic 6 ) , i . e . , 474 , the total abstracts that are related to cancer would be 901 . This would make cancer the most prevalent topic in all the documents . 4 Discussion The increase in retraction rate in Figure 1b implies an increasing number of retractions even after accounting for the increase in the number of publications . Previous studies have also reported such ﬁndings [ 6 , 7 , 8 ] . Note that the present study uses the largest dataset for such analysis and still reports this ﬁnding consistent with previous studies . Although about six retractions over 10 , 000 publications ( Section 3 . 1 ) may appear small , the disruptive potential of papers , many claiming breakthroughs , including in clinical trials and medical treatments , cannot be underestimated . This trend may be due to increased fraud , mistakes , and so on but may also be due to increased vigilance . While it is important to understand retraction trend among countries based on their absolute number of retractions , with diﬀerences in their research publication productivity it becomes crucial to understand retraction rate as well . In 8 Table 1 : Topics for the constructed LDA model . Num Topic Salient keywords Remarks 1 MolecularBiology dna , sequence , strain , domain , mutant , enzyme , mutation , acid , rna , amino Majorly contains genetics , biochemistry , molecular cloning , sequencing and other techniques 2 Cell growth , proliferationanddeath growth , apoptosis , proliferation , cell line , tumor , assay , migration , cycle , cell proliferation , western Majorly focuses on mechanisms underlying cell growth , proliferation and cell death associated with diﬀerent cancer types as well as various mechanism of action of inhibitory molecules ( biological or chemical ) for cancer cell proliferation 3 Signalingpathways receptor , activation , kinase , phosphorylation , signaling , pathway , nuclear , akt , inhibitor , channel 4 Interdisciplinary temperature , nanoparticle , water , ﬁeld , system , surface , material , electron , performance , paper Many non - biology related topics such as physics and chemistry . 5 Public health health , child , care , age , quality , index , body , prevalence , score , risk Includes epidemiology and health policy and management 6 Cancer tumor , carcinoma , tissue , metastasis , survival , mirna , hcc ( hepatocellular carcinoma ) , node , nsclc ( non - small cell lung cancer ) , breast Diagnosis , prognosis , and other characterization of various cancers 7 Circulatorysystem heart , cardiac , artery , coronary , myocardial , ventricular , pulmonary , graft , transplantation , infarction Focuses on surgery and diagnosis related to circulatory system complications 8 Analgesics , antiemetics , anaesthetics pain , surgery , postoperative , placebo , granisteron , anesthesia , propofol , dose , vomiting , eﬃcacy Majorly focuses on their usage 9 Immunology immune , cytokine , inﬂammatory , macrophage , diﬀerentiation , inﬂammation , intestinal , arthritis , dc ( dendritic cell ) , t cell , cd34 10 Metabolism insulin , glucose , endothelial , oxygen , diabetic , vascular , stress , nitric , reactive oxygen specie , antioxidant Emphasizes on glucose metabolism and oxidative stress 11 Brain and Kidney brain , renal , injury , pressure , cognitive , cerebral , airway , disorder , neuron , dysfunction Disorders and complications of brain and kidney and their treatments 12 Bone health bone , fracture , hip , vitamin , lesion , density , mineral , implant , calcium 13 Blood blood , virus , serum , infection , platelet , hes ( hydroxy ethyl starch ) , plasma , syndrome , concentration , albumin Focuses on intravascular volume therapy 14 Therapeuticsanddiagnostics drug , agent , compound , resistance , therapy , extract , inhibitor , natural , delivery , derivative , combination , toxicity Discusses synthesis and characterization of drugs that include absorption / transport , pharmacological evaluation 15 Risk factors conﬁdence interval , risk , interval , polymorphism , meta analysis , association , odd ratio , genotype , population , trial , database Majorly contains meta - analysis 16 Neuro - muscularsystem stem , stimulation , nerve , muscle , spinal , cord , pdi ( transdiaphragmatic pressure ) , fatigue , stimulus , contractility 9 our analysis , Iran has the highest retraction rate . Masoomi and Amanollahi called out scientiﬁc fraud in Iran , citing scientiﬁc misconduct behind 80 % of Iran’s retractions [ 36 ] . We observed impact factor distribution diﬀerences among the countries with the highest retractions . This empir - ically corroborates Fang et al . [ 1 ] , that fraud is more prevalent in countries with long - standing research culture , e . g . , U . S . , Germany , Japan , and among high - impact journals while plagiarism and duplication is often present in countries still developing such culture and is often associated with low - impact journals . In our topic model , some topics appear very broad and some noise is creeping in the topics . Noise in LDA models is not unheard of and is especially an artifact of small data like in this study , which comprised only abstracts from only about six thousand articles . Syed and Spruit suggest that using full text ( which this study did not have access to ) instead of abstracts will largely alleviate the above - mentioned problems of noise and broad topics [ 37 ] . Notwithstanding , our model also revealed highly interpretable topics . In our topic analysis , we see non - biology articles in our dataset . This is because the journals where these articles are published are either broad scientiﬁc journals ( such as Plos One , PNAS , and Nature ) or generic chemistry or physics or computer science ( such as The Journal of Chemical Physics , Langmuir , Neural Networks ) that sometimes publish articles relevant to life sciences and biomedical sciences . In either case , PubMed indexes the entire journals irrespective of the article subject areas . Although I have studied variation of retractions with impact factor and with topics , I have not studied how retraction rate varies with these factors . Studying retraction rate would require classifying all published research ( or a proxy ) by impact factor and topics . This is a daunting task and design of such a study is left for future work . The missing data may present a threat to validity of the results . A small amount of data – 11 % for time - based analysis , 6 % for country analysis , and 7 % for topic modeling – is missing . Nonetheless , assuming that the data is missing randomly , I believe that the results are statistically valid and generalize to the real situation . Increased digitalization has obviously led to increased vigilance , e . g . , through automatic plagiarism checks and easier access and searchability to articles . Consequently , papers that would have gone without raised eye brows in the past have greater chance of being retracted today . At the same time , the “publish or perish” adage is truer now than ever before . I believe it is therefore important to continuously track and analyze retractions in this evolving landscape and apply the derived insights to improve the integrity of scientiﬁc research . Author Bio Bhumika Bhatt is an independent researcher interested in biology and data science . She holds a Ph . D . in biochemistry and molecular biology from Medical University of Vienna , Austria . Her Ph . D . work at Max F . Perutz Laboratories helped develop a new method for detecting short - lived protein - protein interactions in yeast . She was also a postdoctoral fellow at Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute in San Diego . She runs a blog about biology and data science at https : / / bhumikabhatt . org . References [ 1 ] Fang , F . C . , Steen , R . G . & Casadevall , A . Misconduct accounts for the majority of retracted scientiﬁc publications . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 , 17028 – 17033 ( 2012 ) . [ 2 ] Wang , T . , Xing , Q . - R . , Wang , H . & Chen , W . Retracted publications in the biomedical literature from open access journals . Science and engineering ethics 25 , 855 – 868 ( 2019 ) . [ 3 ] Steen , R . G . Retractions in the scientiﬁc literature : is the incidence of research fraud increasing ? Journal of medical ethics 37 , 249 – 253 ( 2011 ) . [ 4 ] Nath , S . B . , Marcus , S . C . & Druss , B . G . Retractions in the research literature : misconduct or mistakes ? Medical Journal of Australia 185 , 152 – 154 ( 2006 ) . [ 5 ] Steen , R . G . Retractions in the scientiﬁc literature : do authors deliberately commit research fraud ? Journal of medical ethics 37 , 113 – 117 ( 2011 ) . [ 6 ] Wager , E . & Williams , P . Why and how do journals retract articles ? an analysis of medline retractions 1988 – 2008 . Journal of medical ethics 37 , 567 – 570 ( 2011 ) . [ 7 ] Steen , R . G . , Casadevall , A . & Fang , F . C . Why has the number of scientiﬁc retractions increased ? PloS one 8 , e68397 ( 2013 ) . 10 [ 8 ] Cokol , M . , Ozbay , F . & Rodriguez - Esteban , R . Retraction rates are on the rise . EMBO reports 9 , 2 – 2 ( 2008 ) . [ 9 ] Moylan , E . C . & Kowalczuk , M . K . Why articles are retracted : a retrospective cross - sectional study of retraction notices at biomed central . BMJ open 6 , e012047 ( 2016 ) . [ 10 ] Bozzo , A . , Bali , K . , Evaniew , N . & Ghert , M . Retractions in cancer research : a systematic survey . Research integrity and peer review 2 , 5 ( 2017 ) . [ 11 ] King , E . G . et al . Analysis of retracted articles in the surgical literature . The American Journal of Surgery 216 , 851 – 855 ( 2018 ) . [ 12 ] Gasparyan , A . Y . , Ayvazyan , L . , Akazhanov , N . A . & Kitas , G . D . Self - correction in biomedical publications and the scientiﬁc impact . Croatian medical journal 55 , 61 ( 2014 ) . [ 13 ] Fang , F . C . & Casadevall , A . Retracted science and the retraction index ( 2011 ) . [ 14 ] Budd , J . M . , Sievert , M . & Schultz , T . R . Phenomena of retraction : reasons for retraction and citations to the publications . Jama 280 , 296 – 297 ( 1998 ) . [ 15 ] Korpela , K . M . How long does it take for the scientiﬁc literature to purge itself of fraudulent material ? : the breuning case revisited . Current medical research and opinion 26 , 843 – 847 ( 2010 ) . [ 16 ] Bar - Ilan , J . & Halevi , G . Post retraction citations in context : A case study . Scientometrics 113 , 547 – 565 ( 2017 ) . [ 17 ] Foo , J . Y . A . A retrospective analysis of the trend of retracted publications in the ﬁeld of biomedical and life sciences . Science and engineering ethics 17 , 459 – 468 ( 2011 ) . [ 18 ] Casadevall , A . , Steen , R . G . & Fang , F . C . Sources of error in the retracted scientiﬁc literature . The FASEB Journal 28 , 3847 – 3855 ( 2014 ) . [ 19 ] Kans , J . Entrez direct : E - utilities on the unix command line ( 2013 ) . URL https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / books / NBK179288 / . [ 20 ] Retraction watch . URL https : / / retractionwatch . com / . [ 21 ] Clarivate analytics , 2018 journal impact factor , journal citation reports ( 2019 ) . [ 22 ] Medical subject headings . URL https : / / www . nlm . nih . gov / mesh / meshhome . html . [ 23 ] Lowe , H . J . & Barnett , G . O . Understanding and using the medical subject headings ( mesh ) vocabulary to perform literature searches . Jama 271 , 1103 – 1108 ( 1994 ) . [ 24 ] Coletti , M . H . & Bleich , H . L . Medical subject headings used to search the biomedical literature . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 8 , 317 – 323 ( 2001 ) . [ 25 ] Blei , D . M . , Ng , A . Y . & Jordan , M . I . Latent dirichlet allocation . Journal of machine Learning research 3 , 993 – 1022 ( 2003 ) . [ 26 ] Wang , H . et al . Finding complex biological relationships in recent pubmed articles using bio - lda . PloS one 6 ( 2011 ) . [ 27 ] Wu , Y . , Liu , M . , Zheng , W . J . , Zhao , Z . & Xu , H . Ranking gene - drug relationships in biomedical literature using latent dirichlet allocation . In Biocomputing 2012 , 422 – 433 ( World Scientiﬁc , 2012 ) . [ 28 ] Zheng , B . , McLean , D . C . & Lu , X . Identifying biological concepts from a protein - related corpus with a proba - bilistic topic model . BMC bioinformatics 7 , 58 ( 2006 ) . [ 29 ] Pratanwanich , N . & Lio , P . Exploring the complexity of pathway – drug relationships using latent dirichlet alloca - tion . Computational biology and chemistry 53 , 144 – 152 ( 2014 ) . [ 30 ] Neumann , M . , King , D . , Beltagy , I . & Ammar , W . Scispacy : Fast and robust models for biomedical natural language processing ( 2019 ) . arXiv : 1902 . 07669 . [ 31 ] spacy . URL https : / / github . com / explosion / spaCy . Industrial - strength Natural Language Processing ( NLP ) with Python and Cython . 11 [ 32 ] Bird , S . , Klein , E . & Loper , E . Natural language processing with Python : analyzing text with the natural language toolkit ( " O’Reilly Media , Inc . " , 2009 ) . [ 33 ] Řehůřek , R . & Sojka , P . Software Framework for Topic Modelling with Large Corpora . In Proceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges for NLP Frameworks , 45 – 50 ( ELRA , Valletta , Malta , 2010 ) . Http : / / is . muni . cz / publication / 884893 / en . [ 34 ] Sievert , C . & Shirley , K . Ldavis : A method for visualizing and interpreting topics . In Proceedings of the workshop on interactive language learning , visualization , and interfaces , 63 – 70 ( 2014 ) . [ 35 ] Mabey , B . pyldavis . URL https : / / github . com / bmabey / pyLDAvis . Python library for interactive topic model visualization . [ 36 ] Masoomi , R . & Amanollahi , A . Why iranian biomedical articles are retracted ? The Journal of Medical Education and Development 13 , 87 – 100 ( 2018 ) . [ 37 ] Syed , S . & Spruit , M . Full - text or abstract ? examining topic coherence scores using latent dirichlet allocation . In 2017 IEEE International conference on data science and advanced analytics ( DSAA ) , 165 – 174 ( IEEE , 2017 ) . 12