ON THE ENTRY OF SEMLIKI FOREST VIRUS INTO BHK - 21 CELLS ARI HELENIUS , JÜRGEN KARTENBECK , KAI SIMONS , and ERIK FRIES From the European Molecular Biology Laboratory , and the Division of Membrane Biology and Biochemistry , Institute of Experimental Pathology , German Cancer Research Center , 6900 Heidelberg , Federal Republic of Germany . Dr . Fries ' present address is the Department of Biochemistry , Stanford University , Stanford , California 94305 . ABSTRACT The pathway by which Semliki Forest virus ( SFV ) , a membrane - containing animal virus , enters BHK - 21 cells was studied morphologically and biochemically . After attaching to the cell surface , the majority ofviruses was rapidly trapped into coated pits , internalized by endocytosis in coated vesicles , and sequestered into intracellular vacuoles and lysosomes . Direct penetration of viruses through the plasma membrane was never observed . To assess the possible involvement of lysosomes in the release of the genome into the cytoplasm , the effect of five lysosomotropic agents , known to increase the lysosomal pH , was tested . All of these agents inhibited SFV infectivity and one , chloroquine ( the agent studied in most detail ) , inhibited a very early step in the infection but had no effect on binding , endocytosis , or intracellular distribution of SFV . Thus , the inhibitory effect was concluded to be either on penetration of the nucleocapsid into the cytoplasm or on uncoating of the viral RNA . Possible mechanisms for the penetration of the genome into the cytoplasm were studied in vitro , using phospholipid - cholesterol liposomes and isolated SFV . When the pH was 6 . 0 or lower , efficient fusion of the viral membranes and the liposomal membranes occurred , resulting in the transfer of the nucleocapsid into the lipo - somes . Infection of cells could also be induced by brief low pH treatment of cells with bound SFV under conditions where the normal infection route was blocked . The results suggest that the penetration of the viral genome into the cytosol takes place intracellularly through fusion between the limiting membrane of intracellular vacuoles and the membrane of viruses contained within them . The low pH required for fusion together with the inhibitory effect of lysosomotropic agents implicate lysosomes , or other intracellular vacuoles with sufficiently low pH , as the main sites of penetration . KEY WORDS (cid:9) coated vesicles (cid:9) lysosomes (cid:9) " (cid:9) from the extracellular space to the cytosol . This endocytosis (cid:9) - (cid:9) membrane fusion (cid:9) process requires transport through one or more lysosomotropic agents (cid:9) membrane barriers . For animal viruses the mech - anisms involved are poorly understood . Data from To infect a cell , a virus must transfer its genome (cid:9) electron microscopy suggest that penetration oc - 404 (cid:9) J . CELL BIOLOGY © The Rockefeller University Press - 0021 - 9525 / 80 / 02 / 0404 / 17 $ 1 . 00 Volume 84 (cid:9) February 1980 (cid:9) 404 - 420 on J une 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published February 1 , 1980 curs either at the plasma membrane or intracellu - larly after the virus has been taken up by endo - cytosis ( for reviews see references 8 and 35 ) . Pen - etration at the cell surface has been demonstrated for paramyxoviruses ( for reviews see references 7 and 44 ) ; the membranes of these viruses fuse with the host cell plasma membrane , and the nucleo - capsid is thereby introduced into the cytoplasm . Endocytosis , " viropexis , " has been observed for most animal viruses and may play an important role in the infection by many viruses ( see reference 8 ) . How the viral genome escapes from the endo - cytotic vacuoles into the cytoplasm in not clear . In this paper we have tried to unravel the path - way of infection used by the Semliki Forest virus ( SFV ) . SFV is a simple membrane - containing an - imal virus belonging to the alphaviruses . The structural properties , the biosynthesis , and the gen - eral features of replication have been well char - acterized . The virus consists of a spherical nucleo - capsid containing a single - stranded RNA and 240 copies of a single protein ( 5 , 18 ) . The nucleocapsid is surrounded by a lipid bilayer membrane with glycoprotein spikes ( 47 ) . Each ofthese spikes con - sists ofthree glycopolypeptides , with apparent mol wt of 48 x 10 3 , 51 x 10 3 , and 10 X 10 3 , respectively ( 18 , 56 ) . The spike proteins are anchored by hy - drophobic segments in the lipid bilayer ( 51 ) . In BHK - 21 cells , the cell line used in this study , infection proceeds rapidly ( 4 , 30 ) , penetration oc - curring within the 1st h after addition of the virus . The viral RNA synthesis is detectable after 1 . 5 h , and after 2 . 5 h the first progeny viruses appear in the medium . Our results suggest the following stages in the entry ofSFV into BHK - 21 cells : ( a ) binding to the cell surface , ( b ) internalization by adsorptive en - docytosis in coated vesicles , ( c ) entry into larger intracellular vacuoles , and ( d ) fusion of the viral membrane with the vacuolar membrane , whereby the nucleocapsid enters the cytoplasmic compart - ment . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cells and Virus BHK - 21 cells were grown as monolayers in MEM Glasgow medium ( Orion Diagnostica , Finland ) supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum ( Grand Island Biological Co . , Grand Island , N . Y . ) , 2 mM glutamine , 250 IE / ml penicillin , and 0 . 1 mg / ml streptomycin sulfate . Plastic cell culture bottles ( 75 cm ' , Falcon Labware , Div . of Becton , Dickinson & Co . , Oxnard , Calif . ) , Petri dishes ( 6 x 1 . 5 cm , Falcon Labware ) , 24 - well Linbro plates ( Linbro Div . , Flow Laboratories , Hamden , Conn . ) , and glass coverslips ( diameter 1 . 1 cm ) in 3 - cm diameter petridishes ( Falcon Labware ) were used . Thecells were passaged twice aweek and used on the 3rd d after plating . A prototype strain of SFV was grown in the BHK - 21 cells and purified as described ( 28 ) . SFV was labeled either with [ " S ] methionine ( Radiochemical Centre , Amersham , England ) ( 0 . 4 mCi / ml medium ) , orwith I ' Hlisoleucine , leucine , andvaline ( 0 . 02 mCi of each per ml medium ) ( 29 ) . Viral protein was determined by the Lowry procedure with 0 . 1 % sodium dodecyl sulfate in the reaction mixture , using bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) as a standard . In the calculations , we assumed a protein content of 57 % , anda viral mol wt of 64 x 10 ' ( 34 ) . In the " P - labeled virus , - 10 % ofthe activitywasextractable by chloroform : methanol : water ( 8 : 4 : 3 vol / vol ) , indicating that - 90 % ofthe label was in the RNA . Thenonradioactive virus , the [ ' SS ] methionine - labeled virus , andthe ' H - labeled virus were stored at - 80°C in 0 . 05 M Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 , containing 0 . 1 MNaCl and42 % wt / wt sucrose . The " P - labeled virus was stored at 4°Candused within 3 d . Association of ( 35 SJMethionine - labeled SFV to Cells Confluent cells on 6 x 1 . 5 cm Falcon dishes were washed twice with R - medium ( RPMI 1640 containing 10 mM 4 - ( 2 - hydroxyethyl ) - 1 - piperazine ethane sulfonic acid ( H£P£S , Serva , Germany ) , pH 6 . 8 , and0 . 1 % BSA . The dishes were kept either in a COs incubator ( 37°C ) or on ice for 1 h , in the presence or absence of0 . 1 mM chloroquine . Themedium wasremoved , and I ml of " S - labeled SFV in R - medium ( with or without chloro - quine ) was added to each dish either at room temperature or in the cold . The cells were then incubated at 37°C or on ice for different periods oftime . Themedium wasremoved andthe cells were washed twice with 1 . 0 ml ofcold R - medium . Thecombined medium and washes were centrifuged ( 5 min , 1 , 500 rpm , 4°C ) and 1 . 2 ml of the supernate was lyophilized and solubilized in Triton X - 100 toluol scintillation fluid . The radioactivity was determined in a Mark III scintillation counter ( Searle Analytic Inc . , Des Plaines , Ill . ) . Another 1 . 2 ml wasmixed with an equal volume of 20 % TCA . After l h at 0°C , the precipitates were collected on 0 . 45 - km Millipore filters ( Millipore Corp . , Bedford , Mass . ) and the radioactivity was determined . The cells were scraped off with a rubber policeman into 1 ml of phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) containing I mM phenyhnethylsulphonyl fluoride ( PMSF ) , and I ml ofice - cold 20 % TCAwasadded . The dishes were washed twice with 1 ml of 10 % TCA . After I h on ice , the precipitates were collected andassayed for radioactivity . Aliquots of the TCA supernate were dried at 50°C , and radio - activity wasdetermined after solubilization in scintillation fluid . To synchronize the entry ofvirus into the cells , the ' S - labeled virus was allowed to bind in the cold for l h as described above . Free and loosely bound virus was removed by twowashes with 5 ml of cold R - medium . I ml ofR - medium wasadded and the dishes were placed on the water surface ofa 37°C waterbath or for incubations longer than 20 mininto a5 % COz incubator . At various times dishes were removed , cooled , and treated as de - scribed above . Proteinase K Assayfor Internalized SFV Cells treated with radioactive SFV in the cold or at 37°Cfor varying periods werecooled onice andwashed . 0 . 5 mgproteinase K ( Boehringer , Mannheim , Germany ) or 0 , 5 mg of BSAin 1 ml of PBS was added to duplicate dishes . The dishes were rocked HELENIUS ET AL . Semliki Forest Virus Entry into Cells 405 on J une 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published February 1 , 1980 slowly for 45 min at 4°C , and 1 ml of 1 mM PMSF in PBS , containing 30 mg ofBSA , was added . Thecells were scraped off , transferred into 15 - ml conical glass tubes , vortexed , and diluted to 14 ml with PBS containing 0 . 2 % BSAon ice . After centrifu - gation ( 3 min , 2 , 000 rpm , 4°C ) the supernate was discarded , and the cells were washed twice with PBS - BSA . Finally , the cells were dissolved in 10 ml ofTriton X - 100 toluol scintillation fluid andthe radioactivity was measured . SFV Fusion with Liposomes Liposomes were prepared daily by dissolving 2 . 5 lamol each ofphosphatidylethanolamine ( bovine brain type I , Sigma Chem - ical Co . , St . Louis , Mo . ) , sphingomyelin ( bovine brain , Sigma Chemical Co . ) , andlecithin ( egg yolk , type V , Sigma Chemical Co . ) , and3 . 75 lamol ofcholesterol ( Merck , Germany , four times crystallized ) in 0 . 5 ml chloroform : methanol ( 2 : 1 vol / vol ) . The mixture wasdivided in two parts anddried on the walls ofglass tubes using arotary evaporator and was then redissolved twice in diethylether . After a fewglass beadswere added ( 1 mm Diam ) , one of the dried lipid films wassuspended by vortexing into 0 . 5 ml of0 . 05 M Tris - HCI , pH 7 . 2 , containing 0 . 13 MNaCl and0 . 1 mM CaCl2 , l MM MgCl2 , and 10 mg / ml pancreatic RNase A ( bovine , type IIIA , Sigma Chemical Co . ) . The other was sus - pended into 0 . 02 M HEPES , pH 7 . 3 , containing 0 . 1 mM CaC12 , 1 mM MgC12 , and 0 . 3 % BSA . To remove untrapped enzyme the RNase - containing sample was applied to a 0 . 7 cm x 20 cm column ofSephadex G - 150 ( Pharmacia , Uppsala , Sweden ) equil - ibrated with the HEPESbuffer . Fractions ( 0 . 31 ml ) werecollected at room temperature , and the three most opalescent fractions were pooled . To 0 . 9 ml of this pool , 20111 of carrier - free 12P - SFV wasadded ( 5 to 10 x 105 cpm ) . Control solutions were prepared as follows : ( a ) 20 Al of 12P - SFV was mixed with 0 . 15 ml of the RNase - free liposomes and0 . 75 ml of the HEPESbuffer contain - ing 0 . 1 mg / ml RNase , ( b ) 20 ttl of 12P - SFV was mixed with 0 . 9 ml of HEPES buffercontaining0 . 1 mg / ml RNase . Aliquots ( 100 111 ) of each solution were placed in the tip of five collodium thimbles ( Sartorius , Göttingen , Germany ) . The collodium thim - bles weredialyzed at 37°C for 20 minagainst buffers ofdifferent pH . Thebuffers used were 0 . 02 M HEPES - HCI , pH 7 . 3 , contain - ing0 . 13 M NaCl , 0 . 02 M2 ( N - morpholino ) ethane sulphonic acid ( MES ) with 0 . 13 M NaCl , adjusted to pH 6 . 5 , 6 . 0 , and 5 . 5 , respectively , and0 . 02 M sodium acetate , pH 5 . 0 , containing0 . 13 MNaCl . As additional controls , 100 - p1 aliquots of each starting solution were made 1 % in respect to Triton X - 100 andincubated for 20 min at 37 ' C without dialysis , and , 2P - SFV ( 20 111 ) was mixed with 0 . 9 mlofHEPESbuffer andkeptat 0°C . Immediately after dialysis or incubation , the samples were transferred to 1 . 5 - ml Eppendorf tubes on ice . Aliquots ( 25 td ) were pipetted onto two 3 MM Whatman paper disks ( 2 . 3 cm ) . Oneof the disks was allowed to air dry , andthe other wasimmersed in cold 10 % TCA . After I h at 0°C , it was washed for 15 min with ethanol : diethylether ( l : 1 vol / vol ) and for 15 min in diethylether . After air drying , both paper disks were placed into scintillation vials and the radioactivity was determined using a toluene - based scintillant . The disks that had not been TCA treated gave the total radioactivity , andthe disks that hadbeen TCAtreated gave the amount of acid - precipitable radioactivity . Identical results were obtained ifTCAprecipitationwasperformed in tubes after inactivation and solubilization with 1 % sodium dodecyl sulfate at 56°C . To determine the distribution of acid - soluble nucleotides be - tween the particulate fraction and the medium , a Beckman airfuge ( Beckman Instruments , Inc . , Spinco Div . , Palo Alto , Calif . ) was used . To 25 - 111 aliquots of the dialysates , 0 . 175 ml of 406 (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 84 , 1980 0 . 02 M HEPES , pH 7 . 3 , containing 0 . 13 M NaCl and 0 . 3 % BSA was added . Two 25 - ld aliquots of these mixtures were assayed for TCA - soluble andtotal radioactivity as described above , and the rest were centrifuged for 20 minat 105 gat room temperature . From the clear supernate , two 25 - 11l aliquots were assayed for TCA - soluble andtotal radioactivity as described above . Lysosomotropic Agents Stock solutions ( 10 mM ) were prepared daily ofchloroquine - HCl ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) andtributylamine , 100 mM ofNH , Cl and methylamine ( Merck - Schuchardt , Hohenbrunn , Germany ) and 1 mM of amantadine - HCI ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) in water . When necessary , the pH was adjusted to neutrality with NaOH or HCI , and appropriate dilutions were then made into culture medium . For experiments involving plaque titrations , BHK - 2l cells were grown to confluence in Linbro plates with 2 . 0 - cm ' wells . They were washed twice with serum - free MEM Glasgow medium andsubsequentlyinfected with 0 . I ml ofSFVcontaining serum - free medium with 0 . 2 % BSAin the presence or absence of lysosomotropic agents . After 4 . 5 h at 37 ' C with or without inhibitors , thesupernate was collected and centrifuged for4min at 5 x 10 ' g ( 4°C ) to remove cell debris . An aliquot ( 0 . 1 ml ) of the supernate wasthen added to 0 . 9 ml of PBS containing 0 . 2 % BSA . Duplicate plaque titrations were performed on BHK - 21 cell monolayers as previously described ( 45 ) . For indirect im - munofluorescence microscopy , cells were grown on coverslips in the Linbro wells and infected as above . Rhodamine and Fluorescein Labeling of SFV and Immunofluorescence Microscopy SFV was labeled with tetramethyl rhodaminylisothiocyanate Isomer R ( TRITC ) ( BBL Microbiology Systems , Becton , Dick - inson & Co . , Cockeysville , Md . ) in the following way : SFV ( I mg ofprotein ) wasmixed with atrace amount of [ 35S ) methionine - labeled SFV to give aspecific radioactivity of 200 - 500 cpm / pg protein . The mixture ( 0 . 2 ml ) was placed in dialysis tubing ( Union Carbide Corp . , Crystal Products Dept . , SanDiego , Calif . ) and dialyzed for 10 h against 0 . 1 M sodium bicarbonate andfor another 10 hagainst 10 ml of0 . 1 Msodium bicarbonate contain - ing 0 . 5 mg / ml of TRITC . For fluorescein labeling , 0 . 4 mg of SFV in 0 . 2 ml of l : 1 ( vol / vol ) PBSandsaline was made basic by addition of 20 pl ofsodium bicarbonate . 2 11g ofdichlorotriazin - ylfluorescein ( DTAF , Research Organics , Ohio ) wasadded , and the sample was incubated for I h at room temperature before addition of 40111 of0 . 5 M glycine . Both the rhodamine - andthe fluorescein - labeled virus were reisolated by sedimentation veloc - ity centrifugation in asucrose gradient ( 5 - 20 % sucrose wt / wt in 0 . 05 M Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 , containing 0 . 1 MNaCI ) in the SW50 rotor ( Beckman Instruments , Inc . , Spinco Div . ) ( 4°C , 35 , 000 rpm , 30 min ) . 40 - 60 % of the radioactivity wasfoundas acolored band at the position of control unlabeled SFV , centrifuged in a parallel gradient , the rest as faster sedimenting aggregates . The virus peak was collected and dialyzed overnight at 4 ' C against R - medium . To determine whether the virus was still intact , aliquots were subjected to sedimentation velocity and isopycnic sucrose gradient centrifugation with an internal standard of added ' ' H - labeled SFV . The fluorescent virus behaved in the same way as ' H - labeled virus . The virus particles appeared normal after negative - staining electron microscopy , but plaque titration showed that the fluorescein - labeled virus had lost 50 % of its infectivity and that the rhodamine - labeled virus was no longer infective . The number of fluorescein and rhodaminyl on J une 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published February 1 , 1980 groups per virus particle were 200 and 1 , 000 , respectively , as estimated from the absorbances at 495 and 560 nm and the protein content . Both preparations showed the same fluorescence pattern when added to cells , butonly the more intensely fluores - cent rhodamine - labeled virus could be used for photographic documentation . The fluorescent virus preparations were stable for at least 3 mo at - 80°C . For fluorescence microscopy , cells grown on coverslips were washed with cold medium ( RPMI 1640 containing 10 mM MES , pH 6 . 8 and 0 . 1 % BSA ) and incubated with 20 pl of medium containing 0 . 5 Wg of rhodamine or fluorescein - SFV for 1 hon ice . After washing with cold medium , the cells were either fixed for 15 min with 3 % paraformaldehyde in PBS or incubated for l h at 37 ' C in medium before fixation . Forindirect immunofluorescence microscopy we used rabbit anti - spike protein serum ( 55 ) previously absorbed with 5 x 10 ' BHK - 21 cells / ml serum for 1 h at 37°C , and diluted 1 : 75 with PBScontaining 0 . 1 % BSA . Cells on coverslips treated or infected with virus were washed and fixed with 3 % paraformaldehyde at room temperature . After washing with PBS containing 0 . 1 M glycine and PBSalone , the cells were incubated for 30 min with 20 Al of rabbit anti - spike protein serum , washed for 30 min with PBS , and incubated for 30 min with 10 lag / ml fluorescein - con - jugated goat anti - rabbit - IgG ( Miles , Stoke Poges , England ) in PBS . After washing , thecells were mounted in 90 % glycerol and viewed in a Zeiss fluorescent microscope using epifluorescence with appropriate filters for fluorescein and rhodamine , and the Neofluotar 25 or the Planapo 63 objective . For photography , Kodak Tri - Xfilm wasused . To determine the fraction ofinfected cells , fields with - - - 500 cells were randomly photographed with both phasecontrast andepifluorescence . The infected cells were brightly fluorescent andcouldeasily be counted . Electron Microscopy Forthin - section electron microscopy , confluent cellson cover - slips were washed with the medium used for immunofluores - cence . They were then incubated for 1 h on ice with 0 . 8 lag of SFV in 10 lal of medium and washed with cold medium . The coverslips either were fixed directly with ice - cold 2 . 5 % glutaral - dehyde in 0 . 05 M sodium cacodylate , pH 7 . 2 , containing 50 mM KCland2 . 5 mM MgC12 or they were , before fixation , immersed in 37°C medium for varying times . Dehydration , embedding , sectioning , and uranyl acetate staining were performed as de - scribed ( 24 ) . A Philips 400 or a Siemens Elmiskop 101 electron microscope wasused . Negative staining with 2 % phosphotungstic acid ( pH 7 . 0 ) was performed as described ( 24 ) . Histochemical visualization of acid phosphatase was performed on frozen sec - tions according to Paavola ( 42 ) . RESULTS Morphology of SFV - binding to the Cell Surface To visualize how SFV interacts with BHK cells , we used fluorescence microscopy to obtain an overall picture and electron microscopy to observe the individual virus particles . Both techniques re - quire a high multiplicity of virus to cells . The amount of viruses used in these experiments was 0 . 5 - 1 ttg viral protein / 106 cells , which is 102 to 103 times more than normally used for infection stud - ies . To make the SFV visible in the fluorescence microscope , rhodamine or fluorescein was cova - lently coupled to it ( _ 103 and 2 x 102 groups , respectively , per virus particle ) . The fluorescein - labeled virus was not so strongly fluorescent as the rhodamine - labeled virus , but it retained halfofits original infectivity . Indirect immunofluorescence with antiserum against the spike proteins and flu - orescein - conjugated goat anti - rabbit IgG was also used . When SFV was allowed to bind to BHK - 21 cells in the cold , the patchy distribution shown in Fig . 1 a was seen . The same fluorescence pattern was obtained with rhodamine - and fluorescein - labeled SFV , and with unlabeled SFV stained by indirect immunofluorescence . When the cells coated with rhodamine - SFV in the cold were stained with indirect immunofluorescence using fluorescein - la - beled antibodies , full overlap between rhodamine and fluorescein stains was observed , indicating that all the rhodamine - SFV remained on the sur - face . Thin - section electron microscopy ( Fig . 2 ) of cells treated with virus in the cold indicated that the viruses bound preferentially to microvilli . A count made of 3 x 103 SFV particles in thin sections offour different samples showed that 70 % were associated with the microvilli . There are 2 - 4 X 103 microvilli / cell , and their surface accounts for < 40 % of the total cell surface area . In the control cells the microvilli projected out from the cell surface ; when associated with viruses , they tended to lie flat along the membrane ( Fig . 26 ) . It is likely that most of the fluorescent patches ob - served in Fig . 1 a correspond to viruses clustered around microvilli . Many of the viruses that were not associated with microvilli were located in so - called coated pits ( 5 % of all cell surface viruses ) ( Fig . 3 a - c ) , and some ( 0 . 5 % ) were associated with small , flask - shaped indentations devoid of coat ( Fig . 3 i ) . The coated pits are invaginations of the plasma mem - brane with a characteristic electron - dense bristle coat on the cytoplasmic surface . In BHK - 21 cells , the coated pits make up < 2 % of the total cell surface . Many are localized close to the base of microvilli . Several viruses could be seen in a single coated pit , and virus particles were often located at the edges of the pits . When the pits were highly indented the viruses tended to be close to the neck . Similar observations have been reported for the location of ferritin - labeled low density lipoprotein HELENIUS ET AL . Semliki Forest Virus Entry into Cells 407 on J une 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published February 1 , 1980 FIGURE l (cid:9) Fluorescent virus associated with BHK cells . ( a ) Rhodamine - labeled SFV ( 0 . 5 ! Ig / 106 cells ) was allowed to bind on ice for 1 h . ( b ) Rhodamine - labeled virus was allowed to bind on ice for 1 h , and after washing , the cells were incubated for another hour at 37°C . Thesame distribution was observed with fluorescein - labeled SFVandin the case of awith unlabeled virus after indirect immunofluorescence . Bar , 25 gm . x 1 , 250 . in coated pits of human fibroblasts ( 2 , 41 ) . The cell surface distribution of viruses bound at 37°C closely ressembled that at 4°C . We observed , however , in agreement with Anderson et al . ( 2 ) , that deeply indented coated pits like those seen in Fig . 3 c were relatively scarce at this temperature . 408 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 84 , 1980 Morphology of SFV Internalization Coverslips with 106 cells were incubated with virus in the cold for 1 h , washed , transferred to 37°C medium for varying periods of time , and then fixed . The distribution of fluorescence of on J une 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published February 1 , 1980 FIGURE 2 (cid:9) Thin - section electron microscopy of BHKcells with SFVboundat 4°C . One million cells on a coverslip were treated with 0 . 8 rsg of SFV for 1 h on ice . The majority of viruses are associated with microvilli ( a and b ) . Microvilli covered with virus were often observed to lie parallel along the membrane ( b ) . Occasionally , multiple contacts between virus spikes and cell surface could be observed ( see arrows in inset ) . Bars ( a and b ) 0 . 2 pm ; inset , 0 . 1 ttm . X 62 , 000 ; inset , X 168 , 000 . rhodamine - labeled SFV after 1 h at 37°C was that shown in Fig . 1 b . The fluorescence was concen - trated in larger patches in the perinuclear region of the cell , a distribution very similar to that of lysosomes as visualized by acridine orange staining ( 1 ltg / ml ) ( 1 ) . The viruses were intracellular as they were no longer accessible to staining by in - direct immunofluorescence without breaking the cell membranes . For thin - section electron microscopy , the virus - coated cells were only briefly warmed to 37°C to see the earliest stages ofthe internalization process . When the incubation time at 37°C was 15 - 30 s , some of the viruses had already entered the cell . They were in coated vesicles ( Fig . 3 d - h ) that were round or ovoid in shapeand had an outer diameter of 130 - 200 nm . As a rule , only one virus was present in each coated vesicle and it usually re - mained membrane bound . After 1 min or longer at 37°C , viruses could be observed accumulating in larger vacuoles which were either devoid of bristle coat or hadjust a small coated region on their surface ( Fig . 4a and b ) . Other types of vac - uoles became prominent after - 5 min of incuba - tion at 37°C ( Fig . 4cf ) . These included large vacuoles with a lysosomal appearance . In some of these vacuoles the viruses were bound to the vac - uolar membrane , to membranous intravacuolar material , or to each other . Many of the vacuoles could be stained for acid phosphatase activity by the cytochemical reaction of Gomori , confirming their lysosomal nature . The number of viruses at the plasma membrane decreased steadily as the incubation at 37°C proceeded , so that , after 1 h , HELENIUS ET AL . Semliki Forest Virus Entry into Cells 409 on J une 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published February 1 , 1980 FIGURE 3 (cid:9) Virus associated with coated pits and coated vesicles . Virus wasallowed to bind to cells in the cold . The cells were either directly fixed ( a - c ) or warmed to 37°C for 15 s ( g and h ) , 1 min ( d ) , or 5 min ( e and f ) before fixation . In i , a virus is seen associated with an uncoated membrane invagination . Although more than one virus could be seen per coated pit ( b ) , only in one case ( see arrow in d ) have we observed more than one virus in a coated vesicle . Bars , 0 . 1 pm . x 80 , 000 . only a few external virus particles could be ob - served . When experiments were performed at 37°C without prior synchronization of uptake by atemperature shift , the same morphology of virus internalization could be observed but with more 410 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 84 , 1980 overlap between the various stages . For afull morphological description ofthe proc - ess of virus uptake , a quantitative analysis is needed . However , from our qualitative study at high multiplicity we can conclude that SFV is on J une 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published February 1 , 1980 FIGURE 4 (cid:9) SFV in cytoplasmic vacuoles . Virus was allowed to bind to cells in the cold . The cells were washed and warmed at 37°C for 1 min ( a andb ) , 5 min ( c ) , or 30 min ( d f ) , respectively , before fixation . Virus - containing vacuoles with very different morphology could be seen : partially coated vacuoles with several viruses suggesting fusion of coated vesicles with uncoated vacuoles ( a and b ) ; uncoated vacuoles with viruses loosely distributed throughout the interior ( c ) ; vacuoles tightly packed with virus particles ( d ande ) ; vacuoles with the morphology of secondary lysosomes ( f ) . Panel gshows secondary lysosomes in chloroquine - treated cells containing viruses ( arrows ) . The cells in gwere incubated for 30 min at 37°C with virus as above , except that 0 . 1 mM chloroquine was present . Bars , 0 . 2 gm . ( a f ) x 80 , 000 ; ( g ) x 60 , 000 . on J une 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published February 1 , 1980 taken up by adsorptive endocytosis . The uptake occurs almost exclusively by coated vesicles which deliver the virus into intracellular vacuoles , many of which develop into secondary lysosomes . Internalization of [ 15S ] Methionine - labeled Virus at Low Multiplicity To follow the fate of the virus at low multiplicity of infection ( 0 . 5 - 1 plaque - forming unit ( PFU / cell ) , we used carrier - free [ " S ] methionine - labeled virus ( 1 , 200 PFU / cpm ) . Fig . 5a and b show the kinetics of virus association with cells at 4° and 37°C . At 4°C , the amount of acid - precipitable radioactivity associated with cells reached a con - stant level of 2 x 103 cpm ( 1 PFU per four cells ) after 1 . 5 h . Virtually no acid - soluble radioactivity was found associated with the cells or in the medium . At 37°C , the amount of virus associated with the cells reached its maximum ( 1 . 3 x 103 cpm ) after 1 h and then decreased slowly . After ~ 30 min , degraded viral protein became detecta - ble in the medium as acid - soluble radioactivity increasing with a rate of 350 cpm / h at least up to 3 h . Little acid - soluble radioactivity was found associated with the cells at any time point . FIGURE 5 Association of carrier - free 35S - SFV with BHK - 21 cells at 4° and 37°C . Cells ( 8 x 106 on 6 - cm dishes ) were incubated with 4 , 100 cpm ' ' SS - SFV ( 5 x 106 PFU ) in R - medium . The acid - soluble and acid - precipi - table radioactivities in the medium and in the cells were determined after incubation at 4° or 37°C for different periods of time . Acid - precipitable radioactivity associ - ated with cells in the absence ( " ) and in the presence ( O ) of0 . 1 mM chloroquine ; acid - precipitable radioactiv - ity in the combined medium and cell washes in the absence ( A ) and in the presence ( L ) ofchloroquine ; acid - soluble activity in the cells in the presence ( " ) and in the absence ( 0 ) of chloroquine ; acid - soluble activity in the medium in the absence ( " ) and presence ( O ) of chloroquine . 412 (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 84 , 1980 To distinguish between the viruses on the cell surface and those inside the cell , we used protein - ase K , a nonspecific protease , which has been previously applied to remove proteins external to membranes ( 55 ) . Indirect immunofluorescence microscopy showed that virtually all virus particles present on the cell surface could be removed by this enzyme without cell lysis . To determine the extent to which SFV was internalized , a double - label experiment was carried out . [ 3H ] isoleucine - , leucine - , and valine - labeled SFV ( 1 , 400 cpm / plate and 20 PFU / cell ) were allowed to associate with 8 x 106 cells in Petri dishes for 1 h at 37°C . The plates were cooled on ice and washed . [ 35S ] methi - onine - labeled virus ( 3 , 200 cpm / plate correspond - ing to - 1 PFU / cell ) was then allowed to bind for another hour in the cold . The total amount of ' H - and " S - labeled virus associated with the cells was determined from one dish . Another similarly treated dish was treated with proteinase K in the cold . The cells were washed and the remaining radioactivity was determined . Of the 35S - labeled virus , 94 - 96 % was removed by the protease K treatment ; of the 3H - labeled virus , only 20 - 25 % was digested . If 35S - SFV was present during the 37°C incubation and if ' H - SFV was added in the cold , the reverse results were obtained . These data indicated that - 80 % ofthe viruses present at 37°C were internalized during the 1 h at 37°C . As the nucleocapsids contain less than one - fifth of the total radioactivity of SFV , these values cannot be explained as being due to nucleocapsids alone entering the cell . The data also indicate that few , if any , viruses entered the cell at 4°C . Using proteinase K treatment , we could get an estimate of the rate of virus internalization . In an unsynchronized low multiplicity infection with 0 . 6 PFU added per cell , the uptake was linear with time ( Fig . 6 ) . In a synchronized infection , where the virus was allowed to bind in the cold , the rate of uptake upon warming was initially more rapid ( Fig . 7 ) and the amount of intracellular radioac - tivity leveled off after about 30 min . At this time , degradation of virus became detectable as acid - soluble radioactivity in the medium ( Fig . 7 ) . After 2 h , all the virus radioactivity originally bound to the cell was either in a proteinase - resistant form inside the cell or in acid - soluble form in the me - dium . Effect of Lysosomotropic Agents To test whether lysosomes might be involved in the infectioe pathway , we studied the effect of on J une 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published February 1 , 1980 x Ea ó t v LII Ei 2 FIGURE 6 Internalization of carrier - free [ 35S ] methio - nine SFV . The cells were treated with " S - virus in the presence or absence of 0 . 1 mM chloroquine as in Fig . 5 ( 37°C ) . After each time point ofincubation at 37°C , two dishes were cooled and one was treated with proteinase K ( see Materials and Methods ) . Total cell - associated virus in absence ( " ) and presence ( O ) of 0 . 1 mM chlo - roquine . Proteinase K resistant virus in absence ( A ) and presence ( A ) of chloroquine . . E1 E Time ( hours ) FIGURE 7 (cid:9) Internalization and degradation of [ 35S ] me - thionine SFV in asynchronized infection . Cells ( 8 x 106 ) on Petri dishes were incubated with 10 ' cpm " S - SFV corresponding to 1 . 2 x 10 ' PFUfor 1 hat 4°C . Unbound virus was washed away leaving 3 . 4 x 103 cpm bound . The cells were warmed to 37°C and after varying time points the medium was removed and the cells were cooled to 0°C . The total cell - associated radioactivity ( O ) , the proteinase Kresistant cell - associated radioactiv - ity ( " ) , and the acid - soluble ( " ) and acid - precipitable ( A ) activity in the medium were determined as described in Materials and Methods . several lysosomotropic agents on SFV infectivity , The compounds used were weak bases of varied structure which accumulate in lysosomes owing to the low lysosomal pH ( 11 ) . Their primary effect is to increase the lysosomal pH . Ohkuma and Poole have recently shown ( 40 ) that the change in pH occurs very rapidly and can be as high as 1 . 7 U . When the agents are removed from the medium , the pH rapidly returns to values close to the orig - inal . All five lysosomotropic compounds tested sig - nificantly reduced the titer of virus produced dur - ing a single cycle infection ( Table I ) . Chloroquine and NH tCl were more effective than methylamine , tributylamine , and amantadine . Not only was the production of virus inhibited but there was also a reduction in the number of cells which expressed viral antigens on their surfaces as determined by indirect immunofluorescence ( Table I ) . For further studies , we used chloroquine as it was the most effective inhibitor . Although 0 . 05 mM chloroquine was sufficient to reduce the virus yields to 2 % of control values , we used routinely a concentration of 0 . 1 mM . If chloroquine was present 30 min before virus addition but removed when the virus wasadded to the cells , no reduction in virus titers after a single cycle infection could be observed . Furthermore , only 30 % inhibition was observed if chloroquine was added 1 h after the virus . These results indicate that the chloro - quine - sensitive step occurred within the 1st h and that later processes such as viral RNA replication , protein synthesis , and morphogenesis proceeded normally in the presence of 0 . 1 mM chloroquine . When chloroquine was present during the 1 - h TABLE I Effect of Lysosomotropic Agents on SFV Infection 1 . 8 x 106 cells per Linbro well were pretreated for 0 . 5 h with 0 . 4 ml of complete medium containing the inhibitors . Virus wasadded ( 10 PFU / cell ) and allowed to absorb for 1 h . Medium was replaced with 0 . 5 ml of fresh medium with 0 . 2 % BSA but no serum . After an incubation period of4 . 5 h , the cell medium was assayed for virus by plaque titration . In a separate experiment , the fraction ofinfected cells wasdetermined by indirect immunofluorescence microscopy as described in Ma - terials and Methods . All incubations were carried out at 37°C in 5 % COz atmosphere . HELENIUS ET AL . Semliki Forest Virus Entry into Cells 413 Inhibitor Inhibitorconcn . MM PFU / ml x 10 - e Cells in - fected None - 140 64 Tributylamine l 66 31 Amantadine 0 . 5 14 19 Methylamine 10 3 . 6 10 Chloroquine 0 . 1 1 . 2 < I NH , CI 10 0 . 8 < 1 on J une 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published February 1 , 1980 period of virus absorption but absent during the rest of the incubation , intermediate titers of virus were obtained . This result suggests that although the infection can be halted by chloroquine , it can proceed with lower efficiency when the inhibitor is removed . A more exact time point for the chloroquine - sensitive step was obtained by synchronizing the infection by a temperature shift . Viruses were bound to the cell in the cold and allowed to enter by raising the temperature to 37°C . Chloroquine was then added at various times and left in the medium for the rest of the infection . The results in Fig . 8 show that when the inhibitor was added 2 . 5 min ( or earlier ) after the temperature shift , the virus yield remained at a low level . Addition at 5 min or later failed to give efficient inhibition . This indicates that in 5 min the first viruses have al - ready proceeded beyond the chloroquine - sensitive phase of the entry pathway . Chloroquine had no effect on the rate of virus binding to cells or on the rate ofendocytosis ( Figs . 5 and 6 ) . Furthermore , fluorescence microscopy with rhodamine - labeled virus and thin - section electron microscopy showed that virus was taken up normally into perinuclear vacuoles and lyso - somes ( Fig . 4g ) . This led us to conclude that chloroquine most probably inhibited the release of the viral nucleocapsid into the cytoplasm or the uncoating of the RNA from the nucleocapsid . A direct effect of chloroquine on the virus is unlikely . Treatment of SFV with 10 mM chloro - quine for 15 min at pH 6 . 7 ( 37°C ) before infecting cells had no effect on the infectivity . Two possible indirect mechanisms were considered . Chloro - quine may inhibit a lysosomal hydrolase required for penetration , or inhibition could be caused by the elevation in lysosomal pH . Perhaps , acid pH was required to induce the final penetration of SFV through the membrane of some intracellular vacuoles . Membrane Fusion To test the role of pH in virus penetration , we used aliposome system where we tried to stimulate the conditions in lysosomes . Our assay relied on the fact that the viral RNA can be digested by pancreatic RNase A only if the enzyme and the RNAare present within the same membrane com - partment . In intact SFV , the viral RNA is pro - tected by the viral membrane against RNase , but in the naked nucleocapsid the RNA is sensitive ( 29 ) . Liposomes were prepared from phosphati - 414 (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 84 , 1980 dylcholine , phosphatidylethanolamine , sphingo - myelin , and cholesterol in the presence of 10 mg RNase / ml . The external RNase was removed by gel filtration . Carrier - free 32P - RNA - labeled SFV was added to the liposomes , and the pH was adjusted by dialysis to values ranging from 4 . 5 to 7 . 3 . The amount of 32P - RNA hydrolysed by the intraliposomal RNase in each sample was then determined . Fig . 9 shows that when the pH of the FIGURE 8 (cid:9) Time dependence ofchloroquine inhibition . Cells in Linbro plates ( 1 . 8 X 10 6 / well ) were allowed to bind SFV ( 10 PFU / cell ) on ice . After washing in the cold , the cells were warmed to 37°C . Chloroquine ( final concentration 0 . 1 mM ) was added at different time points after warming , and after a 4 . 5 - h infection the virus titer in the medium was determined by plaque assay . e a az 10 a w ó a 5 L (cid:9) _ L 10 (cid:9) 20 (cid:9) 30 Time ( minutes ) _ . . . . , (cid:9) . . . . . . . . . o . . . . . . . . . a . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6TX x SFV FIGURE 9 (cid:9) RNase action on viral 32P - RNAin the pres - ence of liposomes . The amount of TCA - soluble RNA when the RNase was inside the liposomes ( O ) , when it was outside the liposomes ( " ) , and when RNase was mixed with SFV in absence of liposomes ( A ) . X is the SFV control , and TX stands for the three starting mix - tures treated with Triton X - 100 and incubated for 30 min at room temperature . For detailed procedure , see Materials andMethods . - - - - - - - 8 No chloroquine - - - - - - - - - 0 0 F - 7 ao + 0 6 on J une 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published February 1 , 1980 dialysis buffer reached values of 6 or lower , the amount of RNA hydrolysed increased from back - ground level ( 15 % ) to 75 % of total RNA . IfRNase was added to the virus in the absence ofliposomes sent in the external solution but liposomes , no increase in diges - tion occurred . To confirm that the digestion of RNA occurred inside the liposomes incubated at pH 5 . 5 , a reaction mixture was centrifuged in a Beckman airfuge . 90 % ofthe acid - soluble nucleo - tides were in the pellet . Negative - staining electron microscopy ofdialy - sates containing virus and liposomes devoid of RNase showed that the passage of viral RNA into the liposomes occurred through a process of mem - brane fusion . After dialysis against pH 5 . 5 buffer , large liposomel vesicles covered with spikes were seen ( Fig . lOa - c ) . In cases where the stain had penetrated the vesicles , nucleocapsids could be seen . Several could be present in a single vesicle ( Fig . 10a ) . If dialysis was performed at neutral pH , fusion between the viral membrane and the omes was not observed ( Fig . 10d ) . These experiments show that at low pH the viral membrane fuses with liposomes , resulting in the transfer of the viral nucleocapsid into the lipo - some . The process occurs with high efficiency and without addition of proteins or enzymes . Chloroquine A test was performed to see whether low pH uld be induced between the virus and the plasma membrane of BHK cells , and to find out whether such a reaction would lead to infect BHK cells in a Linbro plate were incubated with SFV ( 14 PFUIcell ) in the cold . Chloroquine ( 0 . 1 mM ) was present in all solutions to block the normal infection route . The cells were rapidly warmed to 37°C by addition of 2 ml of warm medium ofdifferent pH ( 7 . 3 , 6 . 5 , or 5 . 5 ) containing chloroquine into each well . After 90 s , the medium was removed and replaced with normal medium ( pH 7 . 3 ) containing chloroquine . After 4 . 5 h at 37°C , the yield ofvirus and the numberofinfected cells were determined by plaque titration and in - direct immunofluorescence microscopy . The re - sults in Table II show that only at the lowest pH was the Choroquine block on virus infection by - passed . This result suggests that when the pH is low enough , the virus can infect the cell through the plasma membrane . DISCUSSION Binding We have previously shown that BHK - 21 cells at 4°C bind about 5 x 10° SFV particles with half - saturation at 10 - ' ° - 10 - " M virus concentrations ( 17 ) . Binding of the lower affinity was also de - tected , but it is probably of little consequence during infection at low or moderate multipliciti We do not yet know the identity of the receptors on BHK cells . However , using mouse and human cells we have shown that the viral spikes have affinity for the major histocompatibility antigens ( the H2K and H2D , and the HLA - A and HLA - B antigens ) ( 25 ) . Itis likely that homologous proteins occur on BHK - 21 cells . Although SFV enters the cell by endocytosis through the coated regions of the plasma mem - brane , the microvilli appear to be the preferential binding sites on BHK cells . Only ^ - 5 % of the virus bind directly to coated pits . This contrasts th the low density lipoprotein of serum whose receptors have been shown to be concentrated in the coated pits ( 3 ) . Epidermal growth factor , which is also taken up in coated vesicles , has been re - ported by one group to bind diffusely over the cell surface ( 37 ) , and by another group to preferen - tially bind to coated pits ( 22 ) . As virtually all the viruses , including those bound to the microvilli , became internalized in coated vesicles , the viruses probably move laterally from the site of binding to sites where coated vesicles are formed . Our previous data on the binding of SFV and its isolated glycoprotein ( 17 ) suggest that the viruses may bind to multiple receptors ( see also Fig . 2 , inset ) . It is conceivable that clustering of surface receptors is sufficient to cause entrapment in coated pits . Alternatively , the associa with its receptor molecules might induce specific binding to components of the coated regions . Internalization HELENIUS ET AL . Semliki Forest Virus Entry into Celts Our morphologic high and low multiplicity indicate that , under normal conditions of infection , SFV enters into the cell by adsorptive endocytosis and not by fusion with the plasma membrane . This conclusion rted by recent studies of Fan and Sefton ( 14 ) . They showed that penetration of Sindbis virus ( which is closely related to SFV ) does not on J une 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published February 1 , 1980 416 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 84 , 1980 on J une 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published February 1 , 1980 TABLE 11 pH Dependence of SFV Infection in the Presence of Chloroquine * Virus ( 14 PFU / cell ) was allowed to bind in the cold to cells grown in Linbro plates . The cells were then warmed up by addition of 2 ml ( 37°C ) of serum - free medium containing 0 . 2 % BSA and 10 mM MES ad - justed to the indicated pH . After 90 s , the media were removed and replaced with l ml of neutral serum - free medium containing 0 . 2 % BSA . In samples 2 , 3 , and 4 , all solutions contained 0 . 1 mM chloroquine throughout the experiments . After incubation at 37°C for 4 . 5 hthe titer of virus was assayed by plaque titration and the percentage of infected cells by indirect immunolluo - rescence . introduce viral antigens into the host cell plasma membrane . ' The endocytosis of SFV is rapid and efficient . 70 - 80 % of the virus added to the medium can be taken up in 1 h . This is approximately the rate of uptake reported for asialofetuin in isolated hepa - tocytes ( 49 ) and reovirus in L cells ( 46 ) . It is much faster than the uptake of serum low density lipo - protein into fibroblasts ( 19 ) . Uptake seems to oc - cur mainly in coated vesicles , but some virus par - ticles may be taken up by other means . Adsorptive endocytosis in coated vesicles has been described as acommon mechanism for the internalization of hormones , lipoproteins , and other transport pro - teins with specific receptors on the cell surface ( for review , see references 20 and 21 ) . The virus , there - ' We have repeated the experiments of Fan and Sefton ( 14 ) using P815 mastocytoma cells and SFV . In agree - ment with their results with Sindbis virus , we could not detect fusion at the plasma membrane using complement dependent cytotoxicity . fore , utilizes a complex physiological mechanism which the cell operates for the uptake of macro - molecules . The further fate of the endocytosed virus seems very similar to that of low density lipoprotein and most other proteins taken up by this process . After a very short time in the coated vesicles ( probably < 1 min ) , the virus is delivered into intracellular vacuoles , part of which then develop into lysosomes . Part of the viral proteins are eventually degraded and released into the medium . Electron microscope studies with many other viruses have previously shown that endocytosis , " viropexis , " is a common phenomenon ( 8 ) . In some cases , coated vesicles and coated pits con - taining virus particles have been observed ( 6 , 9 , 43 , 48 ) . It has been generally accepted that part of the endocytosed virus particles can find their way into lysosomes , but this is usually considered an abberant pathway leading to the destruction ofthe virus particles ( 8 , 35 ) . An exception is reovirus , a large naked RNA virus . It is taken up into lyso - somes with a rate similar to that of SFV ( 46 ) . In the lysosomes , part of the reovirus protein coat is digested by the lysosomal hydrolases . Being dou - ble - stranded , the RNA remains intact . The time - course of endocytosis , proteolytic digestion of coat proteins , and the release of digestion products in the medium is very similar to what we observe for SFV . How the transfer of the reovirus RNA from the lysosome to the cytoplasm occurs is not known . Penetration To determine whether lysosomes might be in - volved in the SFV infection , we tested five lyso - somotropic weak bases ; they all inhibited SFV infectivity . The inhibition by chloroquine , the most efficient lysosomotropic agent tested , was shown to occur already within the first 5 min after the virus had entered the cell by endocytosis . Chloroquine had no direct effect on the virus particles nor did it inhibit binding , endocytosis , or uptake of SFV into intracellular vacuoles and lysosomes . FIGURE 10 Fusion of SFV with liposomes . ( a - c ) SFV was mixed with liposomes and the pH was changed to 5 . 5 by dialysis as in Fig . 9 . Extensive fusion between viruses and liposomes had occurred as judged by the spike protein visible on the liposomal membranes . The nucleocapsids ( see arrows in a and c ) with a diameter of 30 - 35 nm were visible in some liposomes . Virus particles in the process of fusing with liposomes are indicated by arrowheads in a . In the control ( d ) which was dialyzed against pH 7 . 3 buffer , no fusion was observed . Bars , 0 . 1 lm . ( a ) x 150 , 000 ; ( b ) x 240 , 000 ; ( c ) x 180 , 000 ; ( d ) x 88 , 000 . HELENIUS ET AL . Semliki Forest Virus Entry into Cells 417 pH Virus titer PFUIml Infected cells % 1 . No chloroquine 7 . 3 10 x 10 5 53 2 . Chloroquine , 10 - " M 7 . 3 0 . 4 x 10 5 < 3 3 . Chloroquine , 10 - ° M 6 . 5 0 . 6 x 10 ' 5 < 3 4 . Chloroquine , 10 - 4 M 5 . 5 8 . 1 x 105 63 on J une 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published February 1 , 1980 The lysosomotropic agents we tested , and others similar to them , have been previously reported to inhibit infections by several enveloped viruses in - cluding myxo , oncorna , rubella , and paramyxo viruses ( 10 , 13 , 15 , 26 , 27 , 32 , 36 , 39 , 50 , 54 ) . Where studied , the mechanism of action of these agents appears strikingly similar to that of chloroquine on SFV . They cause no direct damage on the virus particles , little or no effect on binding and , in most cases , small if any effects on internalization ( 12 , 15 , 32 , 33 , 39 , 50 ) . In the case of amantadine , most investigators seem to agree that the inhibitory effect is on the final release of the nucleocapsids into cytoplasm or on uncoating of the genome . Although very different in molecular structure , all these agents are lysosomotropic , i . e . , they ac - cumulate in the lysosomes . Moreover , they all tend to increase the intralysosomal pH ( and presumably in any organelle with low pH within the cell ) . The concentrations ofchloroquine and NH4C1 we used in these studies are known to increase the pH of lysosomes of mouse peritoneal macrophages from 4 . 5 to 6 . 2 - 6 . 4 ( 40 ) . Amantadine , tributylamine , and methylamine raise the pH somewhat less ( to about pH 5 . 5 - 6 . 0 ) . Chloroquine and NH4C1 which exert the greatest effect on intralysosomal pH were more efficient inhibitors of virus infection than amantadine , tributylamine , and methylamine . To pursue the possibility of a low pH require - ment for SFV infectivity , we developed an in vitro system to study virus penetration through mem - branes . Using liposomes and isolated viruses , we demonstrated that fusion can occur between the viral membrane and a liposomal membrane , re - sulting in efficient transfer of the viral nucleocap - sid into the liposome . The fusion reaction was strictly pH - dependent ; fusion occurred only when the pH was 6 or lower . The fusogenic activity of SFV ( and other Toga viruses ) is not limited to our artificial membrane system . Recent data on the interaction of SFV , Sindbis virus , and Rubella virus have shown that they can fuse with erythrocytes from different species . The fusion manifests itself as hemolysis ( 31 , 52 , 53 ) and formation of heterokaryon cells ( 53 ) . The pH dependence of both hemolysis and cell - cell fusion is identical with that seen in our liposome system . Moreover , Mooney et al . ( 38 ) have shown that Sindbis virus binds to liposomes with a pH dependence very similar to that which we observe for SFV fusion with liposomes . Taken together , these data show that , provided the pH is low enough , SFV and related viruses can attach 418 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 84 , 1980 and fuse with bilayer membranes of widely differ - ent origin . An indication that such fusion can cause infection of cells was obtained in an exper - iment in which BHK cells with SFV bound to them were briefly treated with low pH medium . These cells were thereby efficiently infected in spite of the presence of chloroquine at all stages to block the normal pathway of infection . At low pH , viruses localized on the cell surface probably fused with the plasma membrane and thereby infected the cells directly . Further studies are , however , needed to confirm this interpretation . Judging by the morphological and immunolog - ical data described above , and the pH dependence of fusion , it seems unlikely that fusion of SFV with the plasma membrane can occur under nor - mal conditions . In this respect , SFV differs from Sendai virus ( and other paramyxo viruses ) which can fuse with the plasma membrane of cells and with artificial lipid bilayers at neutral pH ( 23 ) . If not the plasma membrane , then what is the site where the SFV genome enters the cytoplasm ? Several observations point in the direction of ly - sosomes ( or some other intracellular vacuoles with low pH ) . These are : ( a ) the low pH requirement for fusion , ( b ) the inhibition of uncoating by agents known to accumulate in lysosomes and to increase their pH , ( c ) the morphological evidence that the endocytosed SFV particles are sequestered into lysosomes and other intracellular vacuoles , and ( d ) the fact demonstrated by Friedman and Sreevalsan ( 16 ) that very rapidly ( within 20 min ) after SFV has entered chick cells , part of the parental RNA is found in a replicative interme - diate form in the mitochondrial - lysosomal organ - elle fraction . If the lysosomes were the site of entry , why would the virus not be destroyed by the lysosomal hydrolases ? Judging by the differ - ence in the speed of infection ( Fig . 8 ) and the rate of appearance of acid - soluble degradation prod - ucts ( Figs . 5 and 7 ) , it seems quite possible that the nucleocapsids may escape into the cytoplasm before the lysosomal enzymes have time to de - grade the virus particle . The final penetration of the viral genome into the cytoplasm may , in fact , occur immediately when an endocytotic vacuole containing the virus fuses with a primary lysosome and the pH drops to 6 or below . The pathway of SFV entry into BHK - 21 cells , as suggested by our data , is schematically shown in Fig . 11 . More information is needed especially to define the mode of attachment of the virus to the cell membrane , the mechanism of entrapment on J une 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published February 1 , 1980 PRIMARY LYSOSOME COATED COATED INTERMEDIATE SECONDARY PIT VESICLE VACUOLE LYSOSOME FIGURE 11 Suggested pathway for SFV entry into BHK - 21 cells . in coated pits , the role of intermediate vacuoles and lysosomes , and the mechanism of viral mem - brane fusion . It will also be of interest to find out to what extent other viruses follow the same path - way . That similarities exist betweenSFV and other membrane viruses is clear from the available mor - phological information as well as from the sensi - tivity to lysosomotropic agents . We would like to thank EvaBolzau for technical assist - ance and electron microscopy ; Hilkka Virta forpreparing the virus and performing plaque titrations ; Mark Marsh , Judith White , and Graham Warren for critical reading of the manuscript ; Annie Biais for typing and Petra Riedinger for drawing the graphs . E . Fries received support from the E . O . Johansson Scientific Foundation , Uppsala , Sweden . Receivedforpublication 20 June 1979 , and in revisedform 4 October 1979 . REFERENCES 1 . ALLISON , A . C . , andM . R . YOUNG . 1969 . Vitalstaining andfluorescence of lysosomes . In Lysosomes in Biology and Pathology , Vol . 2 . 1 . T . Dingleand H . B . Fall , editors . North - Holland Publishing Co . , Amster - dam . 600 - 628 . 2 . ANDERSON , R . G . W . , M . S . BROWN , andJ . L . GOLDSTEIN . 1977 . Role ofthecoated endocytoticvesicle in the uptake ofreceptor bound low density lipoprotein in humanfibroblast . Cell . 10 : 351 - 364 . 3 . ANDERSON , R . G . W . , J . L . GOLDSTEIN , and M . S . BROWN . 1977 . A mutation that impairs theability oflipoprotein receptors to localize in coated pits on thecell surface of human fibroblasts . Nature ( Land . ) . 270 : 695 - 699 . 4 . BRUTON , C . J . , andS . I . T . KENNEDY . 1975 . SemlikiForest intracellular RNA : properties of the multi - stranded RNA species and kinetics of positive and negative strand synthesis . J . Gen . Virol 28 : 111 - 127 . 5 . CARTWRIGHT , K . L . , and D . G . BURKE . 1970 . Virus nucleic acids formed in chick embryo cells infected with Semliki Forest virus . J . Gen . Viral . 6 : 231 - 248 . 6 . CHASEY , D . , and D . J . ALEXANDER . 1976 . Morphogenesis of avian infectious bronchitis viruson primary chick kidney cells . Arch . Virol . 52 : 101 - 111 . 7 . CHOPPIN , P . W . , and R . W . COMPANS . 1975 . Replicationof paramyxo - viruses . ComprehensiveVirology , Vol . 4 . H . Fraenkel - Conrat and R . Rwagner , editors . Plenum Press , New York . 95 - 178 . 8 . DALES , S . 1973 . Early events in cell - animal virusinteractions . Bacterial . Rev . 37 : 103 - 135 . 9 . DALES , S . , andH . HANAFUSA . 1972 . Penetrationandintracellularrelease of thegenomes of avian RNAtumorviruses . Virology . 50 : 440 - 458 . 10 . DAVIES , W . L . , R . R . GRUNERT , R . F . HAFF , J . W . MCGAHEN . E . M . NEUMAYER , M . PAULSHOCK , J . C . WATTS , T . R . WOOD , E . C . HERMANN , and C . E . HOFFMANN . 1964 . Antiviral activity of 1 - adamantanamine ( amantadine ) . Science ( Wash . D . C ) . 144 : 862 - 863 . 11 . DE DUVE , C . , T . DE BARSY , B . POOLE , A . TROUET , P . TULKENS , and F . VAN HOOF . 1974 . Lysosomotropic agents . Biochem . Pharmacol . 23 : 2495 - 2531 . 12 . DOURMASHKIN , R . R . , andO . A . J . TYRRELL . 1974 . Electronmicroscopic observations on the entry of influenza virus into susceptible cells . J . Gen . Virol . 24 : 129 - 141 . 13 . DURAND , D . P . , S . D . CHALGREN , and V . FRANKE . 1971 . Effect of chloroquine on myxovirus replication . Antimicrob . Agents Chemother . 5 : 105 - 108 . 14 . FAN , D . P . , andB . M . SEFTON . 1978 . Theentry into host cells ofSindbis virus , Vesicular stomatitis virusandSendai virus . Cell . 15 : 985 - 992 . 15 . FLETCHER , R . D . , J . E . HIRSCHFELD , andM . FORBES . 1965 . Acommon mode of antivirial action for ammonium ions and various amines . Nature ( Zond . ) . 207 : 664 - 665 . 16 . FRIEDMAN , R . M . , and T . SREEVALSAN . 1970 . Membrane binding of input reovirus nucleic acid : effect of interferon on cycloheximide . J . Virol . 6 : 169 - 175 , 17 . FRIES , E . , andA . HELENIUS . 1979 . Bindingof Semliki Forest virusand its isolated glycoprotein tocells . Eur . J . Biochem . 97 : 213 - 220 . 18 . CARDIFF , H . , K . SIMONS , andO . RENKONEN . 1974 . Isolation andchar - acterization of the membrane polypeptides of Semliki Forest virus . Virology . 61 : 493 - 504 . 19 . GOLDSTEIN , J . L . , S . K . BASu , G . Y . BRUMSCHEDE , and M . S . BROWN . 1976 . Releaseoflow density lipoprotein from its cell surface receptor by sulphated glycosaminoglycans . Cell 7 : 85 - 95 . 20 . GOLDSTEIN , J . L . , R . G . W . ANDERSON , and M . S . BROWN . 1979 . Coatedpits , coated vesicles andreceptormediated endocytosis . Nature ( Land . ) . 7 : 679 - 685 . 21 . GOLDSTEIN , J . L . , andM . S . BROWN . 1977 . Thelow - densitylipoprotein pathway and its relation to atheroscelorsis . Anna . Rev . Biochem . 46 : 897 - 930 . 22 . GORDEN , P . , J . L . CARPENTIER , S . COHEN , andL . ORci . 1978 . Epidermal growth factor : morphological demonstration ofbinding internalization and lysosomal association in human fibroblasts . Proc . Nail . Acad Sci . U . S . A . 75 : 5025 - 5029 . 23 . HAYWOOD , A . M . 1974 . FusionofSendai viruswith modelmembranes . J . Mol . Biol . 87 : 625 - 628 . 24 . HELENIUS , A . , E . FRIES , andJ . KARTENBECK . 1977 . Reconstitution of Semliki Forest virusmembrane . J . Cell Biol . 75 : 866 - 880 . 25 . HELENIUS , A . , B . MOREIN , E . FRIES , K . SIMONS , P . ROBINSON , V . SCHIRRMACHER , C . TERHORST , and J . L . STROMINGER . 1978 . Human ( HLA - A and - B ) andmurine ( H2 - KandD ) histocompatibility antigens are cell surface receptors for Semliki Forest virus . Proc . Nail . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 75 : 3846 - 3850 . 26 . JENSEN , E . M . , and O . C . Liu . 1961 . Studies of inhibitory effect of ammonium ions inseveral virus - tissue culture systems . Proc . Soc . Exp . Biol . Med . 107 : 834 - 838 . 27 . JENSEN , E . M . , and O . C . Liu . 1963 . Inhibitoryeffectofsimple aliphatic amines on influenzavirus in tissue culture Proc . Soc . Exp . Biol . Med . 112 : 456 - 459 . 28 . KÄARIAINEN , L . , K . SIMONS , andC . H . VON BONSDORFF . 1969 . Studies of Semliki Forest virus subviral components . Ann . Med . Exp . Biol . Fenn . 47 : 235 - 248 . 29 . KAÄRIAINEN , L . , andH . SÖDERLUND . 1971 . Properties of Semliki Forest virus nucleocapsid 1 . Sensitivityto pancreatic ribonuclease . Virology . 43 : 291 - 299 . 30 . KAARIAINEN , L . , and HSÖDERLUND . 1978 . Structure andreplicationof alphaviruses . Curr . Top . Microbial lmmunol . 82 : 15 - 34 . 31 . KARABATSOS , N . 1965 . Further studies on the hemolytic properties of arboviruses . Proc . Soc . Exp . Biol . Med . 11 & 461 - 465 . 32 . KATO , N . , and H . l . EGGERS . 1969 . Inhibition of uncoating of low plaque virus by I - adamantanamine hydrochloride . Virology . 37 : 632 - 641 . 33 . KOFF , W . C . , and V . KNIGHT . 1979 . Inhibition of influenza virus uncoating by rimantadine hydrochloride . J . Virol . 31 : 261 - 263 . 34 . LAINE , R . , H . SÖDERLUND , and O . RENKONEN . 1973 . Chemical com - position of Semliki Forest virus . Intervirology . 1 : 110 - 118 . 35 . LONBERG - HOLM , K . , andL . PHILIPSON . 1974 . Early interactionbetween animal virus andcells . Monogr . Virol . 9 : 1 - 149 . 36 . MAASSAB , H . F . , and K . W . COCHRAN . 1964 . Rubella virus ; inhibition in vitroby amantadine HCI . Science ( Wash . , D . C . ) . 145 : 1443 - 1444 . 37 . MAXFIELD , F . R . , J . SCHLESSINGER , Y . SCHECHTER , 1 . PASTAN , and M . C . WILLINGHAM . 1978 . Collection of insulin , EGF andax - macroglob - ulin in the same patches on the surface of cultured fibroblasts and common internalization . Cell . 14 : 805 - 810 . 38 . MOONEY , J . J . , J . M . DALRYMPLE , C . R . ALVING , and P . K . RUSSELL . 1975 . InteractionofSindbis viruswith liposomalmodelmembranes . J . Viral . 15 : 225 - 231 . 39 . NEUMAYER , E . M . , R . F . HAFF , and C . E . HOFFMANN . 1965 . Antiviral activityofamantadine hydrochloride in tissue cultureandinova . Proc . HELENIUS ET AL . Semliki Forest Virus Entry into Cells 419 on J une 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published February 1 , 1980 Soc . Exp . Biol . Med . 119 : 393 - 396 . 40 . OHKUMA , S . , and B . POOLE . 1978 . Fluorescence probe measurement of the intralysosomal pH in living cells and the perturbation of pH by varying agents . Froc . Nall . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 75 : 3327 - 3331 . 41 . ORCI , L . , J . L . CARPENTIER , A . PERRELET , R . G . W . ANDERSON , 1 . L . GOLDSTEIN , and M . S . BROWN . 1978 . Occurence of low density lipo - protein receptors within large pits on the surface of human fibroblasts as demonstrated by freeze etching . Exp . Cell Res . 113 : 1 - 13 . 42 . PAAVOLA , L . G . 1978 . The corpus luteum of the guinea pig . III . Cytochemical studies on the Golgi complex and GERL during normal postpartum regression of luteal cells , emphasizing the origin of lyso - somes and autophagic vacuoles . J . Cell Biol . 79 - 59 - 73 . 43 , PATHAK , S . , H . E . WEBB , S . W . OATEN , and S . BATEMAN . 1976 . An electron - mictoscopicstudy ofthe development ofvirulentandavirulent strains of Semliki Forest virus in mouse brain . J . Neurol . Sci . 28 : 289 - 300 . 44 . POSTE , G . , and C . A . PASTERNAK . 1978 . Virus induced cell fusion . In Cell Surface Reviews . Vol . 5 . G . Poste and G . L . Nicholson , editors . North - Holland Publishing Co . , Amsterdam . 305 - 367 . 45 . PORTERFIELD , 1 . S . 1960 . A simple plaque inhibition test for the study ofarthropod home viruses , Bull . W H . O . 22 : 373 - 380 . 46 . SILVERSTEIN , S . C . , and S . DALES . 1968 . The penetration of reovirus RNA and initiation of its genetic function in L - strain fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 36 : 197 - 230 . 47 . SIMONS , K . , H . GAROFF , A . HELENIUs , and A . ZiEMiECKL . 1978 . In Frontiers of Physiochemical Biology . B . Pullman , editor . Academic 420 (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY - VOLUME 84 , 1980 Press , Inc . , New York . 387 - 407 . 48 . SIMPSON , R , W . , R . E . HAUSER , and S . DALES . 1969 , Viropexis of vesicular slomatitisvirions by L cells . Virology . 37 : 285 - 290 . 49 . TOLLESHAUG , H . , T . BERG , M . NILSSON , and K . R . NORUM . 1977 . Uptake and degradation of " °I - labeled asialo - fetuin by isolated rat hepatocytes , Biochim . Biophys . Acia . 499 : 73 - 84 . 50 . SKEHEL , J . J A . J . HAY , and J . A . AMSTRONG . 1977 , On the mechanism of inhibition of Influenza virus replication by amantadine hydrochlo - ride . J . Gen . Virol . 38 : 97 - 110 . 51 . UTERMANN , G . , and K . SIMONS . 1974 . Studieson the amphipalic nature of the membraneproteins in Semliki Forest virus . J . Mol . Biol . 85 : 569 - 587 . 52 . VAÄNANEN , P . , and L . KAARiAINEN . 1979 . Hemolysis by two alpha - viruses : Semliki Forest virus and Sindbis virus . J . Gen . Virol . In press . 53 . VAANANEN , P . , and L . KAARIANEN . 1980 . Fusion and hemolysis caused by three Togaviruses ; Semliki Forest virus , Sindbis and Rubella . J . Gen . Virol . In press . 54 . WALLBANK , A . M . , R . E . MATTER , and N . G . KLINIKOWSKI . 1966 . I - Adamantanamine hydrochloride : inhibition ofRous and Esh Sarcome viruses in cell culture . Science ( Wash . , D . C . ) . 152 : 1760 . 55 . WARREN , G . , andB . DOBBERSTEIN . 1978 . Protein transfer across micro - somal membranes reassembled fromseparated membrane components . Nature ( Lond . ) . 273 : 569 - 571 . 56 . ZIEMIECKL A . , and H . GAROFF . 1978 . Subunit composition of the membrane glycoprotein complex ofSemliki Forest virus . J . Mol . Biol . 122 : 259 - 269 . on J une 21 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published February 1 , 1980