Differences in the Mechanics of Information Diffusion Across Topics : Idioms , Political Hashtags , and Complex Contagion on Twitter Daniel M . Romero Cornell University Ithaca , NY dmr239 @ cornell . edu Brendan Meeder Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh , PA bmeeder @ cs . cmu . edu Jon Kleinberg Cornell University Ithaca , NY kleinber @ cs . cornell . edu ABSTRACT There is a widespread intuitive sense that different kinds of infor - mation spread differently on - line , but it has been difﬁcult to eval - uate this question quantitatively since it requires a setting where many different kinds of information spread in a shared environ - ment . Here we study this issue on Twitter , analyzing the ways in which tokens known as hashtags spread on a network deﬁned by the interactions among Twitter users . We ﬁnd signiﬁcant variation in the ways that widely - used hashtags on different topics spread . Our results show that this variation is not attributable simply to differences in “stickiness , ” the probability of adoption based on one or more exposures , but also to a quantity that could be viewed as a kind of “persistence” — the relative extent to which repeated expo - sures to a hashtag continue to have signiﬁcant marginal effects . We ﬁnd that hashtags on politically controversial topics are particularly persistent , with repeated exposures continuing to have unusually large marginal effects on adoption ; this provides , to our knowl - edge , the ﬁrst large - scale validation of the “complex contagion” principle from sociology , which posits that repeated exposures to an idea are particularly crucial when the idea is in some way con - troversial or contentious . Among other ﬁndings , we discover that hashtags representing the natural analogues of Twitter idioms and neologisms are particularly non - persistent , with the effect of mul - tiple exposures decaying rapidly relative to the ﬁrst exposure . We also study the subgraph structure of the initial adopters for different widely - adopted hashtags , again ﬁnding structural differ - ences across topics . We develop simulation - based and generative models to analyze how the adoption dynamics interact with the net - work structure of the early adopters on which a hashtag spreads . Categories and Subject Descriptors H . 4 [ Information Systems Applications ] : Miscellaneous General Terms Theory , Measurement Keywords Social media , social contagion , information diffusion 1 . INTRODUCTION A growing line of recent research has studied the spread of infor - mation on - line , investigating the tendency for people to engage in activities such as forwarding messages , linking to articles , joining Copyright is held by the International World Wide Web Conference Com - mittee ( IW3C2 ) . Distribution of these papers is limited to classroom use , and personal use by others . WWW 2011 , March 28 – April 1 , 2011 , Hyderabad , India . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0632 - 4 / 11 / 03 . groups , purchasing products , or becoming fans of pages after some number of their friends have done so [ 1 , 4 , 7 , 9 , 15 , 20 , 22 , 23 , 29 ] . The work in this area has thus far focused primarily on identify - ing properties that generalize across different domains and differ - ent types of information , leading to principles that characterize the process of on - line information diffusion and drawing connections with sociological work on the diffusion of innovations [ 27 , 28 ] . As we begin to understand what is common across different forms of on - line information diffusion , however , it becomes increasingly important to ask about the sources of variation as well . The vari - ations in how different ideas spread is a subject that has attracted the public imagination in recent years , including best - selling books seeking to elucidate the ingredients that make an idea “sticky , ” fa - cilitating its spread from one person to another [ 11 , 16 ] . But despite the fascination with these questions , we do not have a good quanti - tative picture of how this variation operates at a large scale . Here are some basic open questions concerning variation in the spread of on - line information . First , the intuitive notion of “stick - iness” can be modeled in an idealized form as a probability — the probability that a piece of information will pass from a person who knows or mentions it to another person who is exposed to it . Are simple differences in the value of this probability indeed the main source of variation in how information spreads ? Or are there more fundamental differences in the mechanics of how different pieces of information spread ? And if such variations exist at the level of the underlying mechanics , can differences in the type or topic of the information help explain them ? The present work : Variation in the spread of hashtags . In this paper we analyze sources of variation in how the most widely - used hashtags on Twitter spread within its user population . We ﬁnd that these sources of variation involve not just differences in the prob - ability with which something spreads from one person to another — the quantitative analogue of stickiness — but also differences in a quantity that can be viewed as a kind of “persistence , ” the rela - tive extent to which repeated exposures to a piece of information continue to have signiﬁcant marginal effects on its adoption . Moreover , these variations are aligned with the topic of the hash - tag . For example , we ﬁnd that hashtags on politically controversial topics are particularly persistent , with repeated exposures continu - ing to have large relative effects on adoption ; this provides , to our knowledge , the ﬁrst large - scale validation of the “complex conta - gion” principle from sociology , which posits that repeated expo - sures to an idea are particularly crucial when the idea is in some way controversial or contentious [ 5 , 6 ] . Our data is drawn from a large snapshot of Twitter containing large coverage of all tweets during a period of multiple months . From this dataset , we build a network on the users from the struc - ture of interaction via @ - messages ; for users X and Y , if X in - cludes “ @ Y ” in at least t tweets , for some threshold t , we include a directed edge from X to Y . @ - messages are used on Twitter for a combination of communication and name - invocation ( such as mentioning a celebrity via @ , even when there is no expecta - tion that they will read the message ) ; under all these modalities , they provide evidence that X is paying attention to Y , and with a strength that can be tuned via the parameter t . 1 For a given user X , we call the set of other users to whom X has an edge the neighbor set of X . As users in X ’s neighbor set each mention a given hashtag H in a tweet for the ﬁrst time , we look at the probability that X will ﬁrst mention it as well ; in effect , we are asking , “How do successive exposures to H affect the proba - bility that X will begin mentioning it ? ” Concretely , following the methodology of [ 7 ] , we look at all users X who have not yet men - tioned H , but for whom k neighbors have ; we deﬁne p ( k ) to be the fraction of such users who mention H before a ( k + 1 ) st neighbor does so . In other words , p ( k ) is the fraction of users who adopt the hashtag directly after their k th “exposure” to it , given that they hadn’t yet adopted it . As an example , Figure 1 shows a plot of p ( k ) as a function of k averaged over the 500 most - mentioned hashtags in our dataset . Note that these top hashtags are used in sufﬁcient volume that one can also construct meaningful p ( k ) curves for each of them sepa - rately , a fact that will be important for our subsequent analysis . For now , however , we can already observe two basic features of the av - erage p ( k ) curve’s shape : a ramp - up to a peak value that is reached relatively early ( at k = 2 , 3 , 4 ) , followed by a decline for larger values of k . In keeping with the informal discussion above , we de - ﬁne the stickiness of the curve to be the maximum value of p ( k ) ( since this is the maximum probability with which an exposure to H transfers to another user ) , and the persistence of the curve to be a measure of its rate of decay after the peak . 2 We will ﬁnd that , in a precise sense , these two quantities — stickiness and persistence — are sufﬁcient to approximately characterize the shapes of indiv - didual p ( k ) curves . Variation in Adoption Dynamics Across Topics . The shape of p ( k ) averaged over all hashtags is similar to analogous curves mea - sured recently in other domains [ 7 ] , and our interest here is in going beyond this aggregate shape and understanding how these curves vary across different kinds of hashtags . To do this , we ﬁrst classi - ﬁed the 500 most - mentioned hashtags according to their topic . We then average the curves p ( k ) separately within each category and compare their shapes . 3 1 One can also construct a directed network from the follower re - lationship , including an edge from X to Y if X follows Y . We focus here on @ - messages in part because of a data resolution is - sues — they can be recovered with exact time stamps from the tweets themselves — but also because of earlier research suggest - ing that users often follow other users in huge numbers and hence potentially less discriminately , whereas interaction via @ - messages indicates a kind of attention that is allocated more parsimoniously , and with a strength that can be measured by the number of repeat occurrences [ 17 ] . 2 We formally deﬁne persistence in Section 3 ; roughly , it is the ratio of the area under the curve to the area of the largest rectangle that can be circumscribed around it . 3 In Section 2 we describe the methodology used to perform this manual classiﬁcation in detail . In brief , we compared independent classiﬁcations of the hashtags obtained by disjoint means , involving annotation by the authors compared with independent annotation by a group of volunteers . Our results based on the average curves 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 0 . 002 0 . 004 0 . 006 0 . 008 0 . 01 0 . 012 0 . 014 0 . 016 0 . 018 0 . 02 0 . 022 K P Student Version of MATLAB Figure 1 : Average exposure curve for the top 500 hashtags . P ( K ) is the fraction of users who adopt the hashtag directly af - ter their k th exposure to it , given that they had not yet adopted it Many of the categories have p ( k ) curves that do not differ sig - niﬁcantly in shape from the average , but we ﬁnd unusual shapes for several important categories . First , for political hashtags , the persistence has a signiﬁcantly larger value than the average — in other words , successive exposures to a political hashtag have an un - usually large effect relative to the peak . This is striking in the way that it accords with the “complex contagion” principle discussed earlier : when a particular behavior is controversial or contentious , people may need more exposure to it from others before adopting it themselves [ 5 , 6 ] . In contrast , we ﬁnd a different form of unusual behavior from a class of hashtags that we refer to as Twitter idioms — a kind of hashtag that will be familiar to Twitter users in which com - mon English words are concatenated together to serve as a marker for a conversational theme ( e . g . # cantlivewithout , # dontyouhate , # iloveitwhen , and many others , including concatenated markers for weekly Twitter events such as # musicmonday and # followfriday . ) Here the stickiness is high , but the persistence is unusually low ; if a user doesn’t adopt an idiom after a small number of exposures , the marginal chance they do so later falls off quickly . Subgraph Structure and Tie Strength . In addition to the person - to - person mechanics of spread , it is also interesting to look at the overall structure of interconnections among the initial adopters of a hashtag . To do this , we take the ﬁrst m individuals to mention a particular hashtag H , and we study the structure of the subgraph G m induced on these ﬁrst m mentioners . In this structural con - text , we again ﬁnd that political hashtags exhibit distinctive fea - tures — in particular , the subgraphs G m for political hashtags H tend to exhibit higher internal degree , a greater density of triangles , and a large of number of nodes not in G m who have signiﬁcant arising from this classiﬁcation are robust in the following sense : despite differences in classiﬁcation of some individual hashtags by the two groups , the curves themselves exhibit essentially identical behavior when computed from either of the two classiﬁcations sep - arately , as well as from an intersection of the two classiﬁcations . numbers of neighbors in it . This is again broadly consistent with the sociological premises of complex contagion , which argues that the successful spread of controversial behaviors requires a network structure with signiﬁcant connectivity and signiﬁcant local cluster - ing . Within these subgraphs , we can consider a set of sociological principles that are related to complex contagion but distinct from it , centered on the issue of tie strength . Work of McAdam and others has argued that the sets of early adopters of controversial or risky behaviors tend to be rich in strong ties , and that strong ties are cru - cial for these activities [ 25 , 26 ] — in contrast to the ways in which learning about novel information can correspondingly beneﬁt from transmission across weaker ties [ 13 ] . When we look at tie strength in these subgraphs , we ﬁnd a some - what complex picture . Because subgraphs G m for political hash - tags have signiﬁcantly more edges , they have more ties of all strengths , including strong ties ( according to several different deﬁnitions of strength summarized in Section 4 ) . This aspect of the data aligns with the theories of McAdam and others . However , the fraction of strong ties in political subgraphs G m is actually lower than the fraction of strong ties for the full population of widely - used hash - tags , indicating the overall greater density of edges in political sub - graphs comes more dominantly from a growth in weak ties than from strong ones . The picture that emerges of early - adopter sub - graphs for political hashtags is thus a subtle one : they are structures whose communication patterns are more densely connected than the early - adopter subgraphs for other hashtags , and this connectiv - ity comes from a core of strong ties embedded in an even larger profusion of weak ties . Interpreting the Findings . When we look at politically contro - versial topics on Twitter , we therefore see both direct reﬂections and unexpected variations on the sociological theories concerning how such topics spread . This is part of a broader and important is - sue : understanding differences in the dynamics of contentious be - havior in the off - line world versus the on - line world . It goes with - out saying that the use of a hashtag on Twitter isn’t in any sense comparable , in terms of commitment or personal risk , to taking part in activism in the physical world ( a point recently stressed in a much - circulated article by Malcolm Gladwell [ 12 ] ) . But the under - lying issue persists on Twitter : political hashtags are still riskier to use than conversational idioms , albeit at these much lower stakes , since they involve publicly aligning yourself with a position that might alienate you from others in your social circle . The fact that we see fundamental aspects of the same sociological principles at work both on - line and off - line suggests a certain robustness to these principles , and the differences that we see suggest a perspective for developing deeper insights into the relationship between these be - haviors in the on - line and off - line domains . This distinction between contentious topics in the on - line and off - line worlds is one issue to keep in mind when interpreting these results . Another is the cumulative nature of the ﬁndings . As with any analysis at this scale , we are not focusing on why any one in - dividual made the decisions they did , nor is it the case that that Twitter users are even aware of all the tweets containing their ex - posures to hashtags via neighbors . Rather , the point is that we still ﬁnd a strong signal in an aggregate sense — as a whole , the pop - ulation is exhibiting differences in how it responds to hashtags of different types , and in ways that accord with theoretical work in other domains . A further point to emphasize is that our focus in this work is on the hashtags that succeeded in reaching large numbers of people . It is an interesting question to consider what distinguishes a hash - tag that spreads widely from one that fails to attract attention , but that is not the central question we consider here . Rather , what we are identifying is that among hashtags that do reach many people , there can nevertheless be quite different mechanisms of contagion at work , based on variations in stickiness and persistence , and that these variations align in interesting ways with the topic of the hash - tag itself . Simulated Spreading . Finally , an interesting issue here is the in - teraction between the p ( k ) curve and the subgraph G m for a given hashtag H — clearly the two develop in a form of co - evolution , since the addition of members via the curve p ( k ) determines how the subgraph of adopters takes shape , but the structure of this sub - graph — particularly in the connections between adopters and non - adopters — affects who is likely to use the hashtag next . To under - stand how p ( k ) and G m relate to each other , it is natural to consider questions of the following form : how would the evolution of G m have turned out differently if a different p ( k ) curve had been in effect ? Or correspondingly , how effectively would a hashtag with curve p ( k ) have spread if it had started from a different subgraph G m ? Clearly it is difﬁcult to directly perform this counterfactual experiment as stated , but we obtain insight into the structure of the question by simulating the p ( k ) curve of each top hashtag on the subgraph G m of each other top hashtag . In this way , we begin to identify some of the structural factors at work in the interplay be - tween the mechanics of person - to - person inﬂuence and the network on which it is spreading . 2 . DATASET , NETWORK DEFINITION , AND HASHTAG CLASSIFICATION Data Collection and Network Deﬁnition . From August 2009 un - til January 2010 we crawled Twitter using their publicly available API . Twitter provides access to only a limited history of tweets through the search mechanism ; however , because user identiﬁers have assigned contiguously since an early point in time , we simply crawled each user in this range . Due to limitations of the API , if a user has more than 3 , 200 tweets we can only recover the last 3 , 200 tweets ; all messages of any user with fewer than this many tweets are available . We collected over three billion messages from more than 60 million users during this crawl . As discussed in Section 1 , in addition to extracting tweets and hashtags within them , we also build a network on the users , con - necting user X to user Y if X directed at least t @ - messages to Y . In our analyses we use t = 3 , except when we are explicitly varying this parameter . The resulting network contains 8 , 509 , 140 non - isolated nodes and 50 , 814 , 366 links . As noted earlier , there are multiple ways of deﬁning a network on which hashtags can viewed as diffusing , and our deﬁnition is one way of deﬁning a proxy for the attention that users X pay to other users Y . Hashtag Selection and Classiﬁcation . To create a classiﬁcation of hashtags by category , we began with the 500 hashtags in the data that had been mentioned by the most users . From manual in - spection of this list , we identiﬁed eight broad categories of hashtags that each had at least 20 clear exemplars among these top hashtags , and in most cases signiﬁcantly more . ( Of course , many of the top 500 hashtags ﬁt into none of the categories . ) We formulated def - initions of these categories as shown in Table 1 . Then we applied multiple independent mechanisms for classifying the hashtags ac - cording to these categories . First , the authors independently anno - tated each hashtag , and then had a reconciliation phase in which Category Deﬁnition Celebrity The name of a person or group ( e . g . music group ) that is featured prominently in entertainment news . Political ﬁgures or commentators with a primarily political focus are not included . The name of the celebrity may be embedded in a longer hashtag referring to some event or fan group that involves the celebrity . Note that many music groups have unusual names ; these still count under the “celebrity” category . Games Names of computer , video , MMORPG , or twitter - based games , as well as groups devoted to such games . Idiom A tag representing a conversational theme on twitter , consisting of a concatenation of at least two common words . The concatenation can’t include names of people or places , and the full phrase can’t be a proper noun in itself ( e . g . a title of a song / movie / organization ) . Names of days are allowed in the concatenation , because of the the Twitter convention of forming hashtags involving names of days ( e . g . MusicMonday ) . Abbreviations are allowed only if the full form also appears as a top hashtag ( so this rules out hashtags including omg , wtf , lol , nsfw ) . Movies / TV Names of movies or TV shows , movie or TV studios , events involving a particular movie or TV show , or names of performers who have a movie or TV show speciﬁcally based around them . Names of people who have simply appeared on TV or in a movie do not count . Music Names of songs , albums , groups , movies or TV shows based around music , technology designed for playing music , or events involving any of these . Note that many music groups have unusual names ; these still count under the “music” category . Political A hashtag that in your opinion often refers to a politically controversial topic . This can include a political ﬁgure , a political commentator , a political party or movement , a group on twitter devoted to discussing a political cause , a location in the world that is the subject of controversial political discussion , or a topic or issue that is the subject of controversial political discussion . Note that this can include political hashtags oriented around countries other than the U . S . Sports Names of sports teams , leagues , athletes , particular sports or sporting events , fan groups devoted to sports , or references to news items speciﬁcally involving sports . Technology Names of Web sites , applications , devices , or events speciﬁcally involving any of these . Table 1 : Deﬁnitions of categories used for annotation . Category Examples Category Examples Celebrity mj , brazilwantsjb , regis , iwantpeterfacinelli Music thisiswar , mj , musicmonday , pandora Games maﬁawars , spymaster , mw2 , zyngapirates Political tcot , glennbeck , obama , hcr Idiom cantlivewithout , dontyouhate , musicmonday Sports golf , yankees , nhl , cricket Movies / TV lost , glennbeck , bones , newmoon Technology digg , iphone , jquery , photoshop Table 2 : A small set of examples of members in each category . they noted errors and arrived at a majority judgment on each an - notation . Second , the authors solicited a group of independent an - notators , and took the majority among their judgments . Annotaters were provided with the category deﬁnitions , and for each hashtag were provided with the tag’s deﬁnitions ( when present ) from the Web resources Wthashtag and Tagalus , as well as links to Google and Twitter search results on the tag . Finally , since the deﬁnition of the “idiom” category is purely syntactic , we did not use annotators for this task , but only for the other seven categories . Clearly even with this level of speciﬁcity , involving both hu - man annotation and Web - based deﬁnitional resources , there are ultimately subjective judgments involved in category assignments . However , given the goal of understanding variations in hashtag be - havior across topical categories , at some point in the process a set of judgments of this form is unavoidable . What we ﬁnd is the results are robust in the presence of these judgments : the level of agree - ment among annotators was uniformly high , and the plots presented in the subsequent sections show essentially identical behavior re - gardless of whether they are based on the authors’ annotations , the independent volunteers’ annotations , or the intersection of the two . To provide the reader with some intuition for the kinds of hash - tags that ﬁt each category , we present a handful of illustrative ex - amples in Table 2 , drawn from the much larger full membership in each category . The full category memberships can be seen at http : / / www . cam . cornell . edu / ∼ dromero / top500ht . 3 . EXPOSURE CURVES Basic deﬁnitions . In order to investigate the mechanisms by which hashtag usage spreads among Twitter users , we begin by reviewing two ways of measuring the impact that exposure to others has in an individual’s’ choice to adopt a new behavior ( in this case , using a hashtag ) [ 7 ] . We say that a user is k − exposed to hashtag h if he has not used h , but has edges to k other users who have used h in the past . Given a user u that is k − exposed to h we would like to estimate the probability that u will use h in the future . Here are two basic ways of doing this . Ordinal time estimate . Assume that user u is k − exposed to some hashtag h . We will estimate the probability that u will use h before becoming ( k + 1 ) − exposed . Let E ( k ) be the number of users who were k − exposed to h at some time , and let I ( k ) be the number of users that were k − exposed and used h before becoming ( k + 1 ) − exposed . We then conclude that the probability of using the hashtag h while being k − exposed to h is p ( k ) = I ( k ) E ( k ) . Snapshot estimate . Given a time interval T = ( t 1 , t 2 ) , assume that a user u is k − exposed to some hashtag h at time t = t 1 . We will estimate the probability that u will use h sometime during time interval T . We let E ( k ) be the number of users who were k − exposed to h at time t = t 1 , and let I ( k ) be the number of users who were k − exposed to h at time t = t 1 and used h sometime be - fore t = t 2 . We then conclude that p ( k ) = I ( k ) E ( k ) is the probability of using h before time t = t 2 , conditioned on being k − exposed to h at time t = t 1 . We will refer to p ( k ) as an exposure curve ; we will also informally refer to it as an inﬂuence curve , although it is being used only for prediction , not necessarily to infer causal inﬂuence . The ordinal time approach requires more detailed data than the snapshot method . Since our data are detailed enough that we are able to generate the ordinal time estimate , we only present the re - sults based on the ordinal time approach ; however , we have con - ﬁrmed that the conclusions hold regardless of which approached is followed . This is not surprising since it has been argued that suf - ﬁciently many snapshot estimates contain enough information to infer the the ordinal time estimate [ 7 ] . Comparison of Hashtag Categories : Persistence and Stickiness . We calculated ordinal time estimates P ( k ) for each one of the 500 hashtags we consider . For each point on each curve we calculate the 95 % Binomial proportion conﬁdence interval . We observed some qualitative differences between the curves corresponding to differ - ent hashtags . In particular , we noticed that some curves increased dramatically initially as k increased but then started to decrease relatively fast , while other curves increased at a much slower rate initially but then saturated or decreased at a much slower rate . As an example , Figure 3 shows the inﬂuence curves for the hashtags Political Idioms Music Technology Movies Sports Games Celebrity 0 . 6 0 . 62 0 . 64 0 . 66 0 . 68 0 . 7 0 . 72 0 . 74 F ( P ) Student Version of MATLAB Figure 2 : F ( P ) for the different types of hashtags . The black dots are the average F ( P ) among all hashtags , the red x is the average for the speciﬁc category , and the green dots indicate the 90 % expected interval where the average for the speciﬁc set of hashtags would be if the set was chosen at random . Each point is the average of a set of at least 10 hashtags # cantlivewithout and # hcr . We also noticed that some curves had much higher maximum values than others . 4 In this discussion , we are basing differences among hashtags on different structural properties of their inﬂuence curves . In order to make these distinctions more precise we use the following mea - sures . First , we formalize a notion of “persistence” for an inﬂuence curve , capturing how rapidly it decays . Formally , given a func - tion P : [ 0 , K ] → [ 0 , 1 ] we let R ( P ) = K max k ∈ [ 0 , K ] { P ( k ) } be the area of the rectangle with length K and height max k ∈ [ 0 , K ] { P ( k ) } . We let A ( P ) be the area under the curve P assuming the point P ( k ) is connected to the point P ( k + 1 ) by a straight line . Finally , we let F ( P ) = A ( P ) R ( P ) be the persistence parameter . When an inﬂuence curve P initially increases rapidly and then decreases , it will have a smaller value of F ( P ) than a curve (cid:101) P which increases slowly and the saturates . Similarly , an inﬂuence curve P that slowly increases monotonically will have a smaller value of F ( P ) than a curve (cid:101) P that initially increases rapidly and then saturates . Hence the measure F captures some differences in the shapes of the inﬂuence curves . In particular , applying this measure to an inﬂuence curve would tell us something about its persistence ; the higher the value of F ( P ) , the more persistent P is . Second , given an inﬂuence curve P : [ 0 , K ] → [ 0 , 1 ] we let M ( P ) = max k ∈ [ 0 , K ] { P ( k ) } be the stickiness parameter , which gives us a sense for how large the probability of usage can be for a par - ticular hashtag based on the most effective exposure . 4 As k gets larger the amount of data used to calculate P ( k ) de - creases , making the error intervals very large and the curve very noisy . In order to take this into account we only deﬁned P ( k ) when the relative error was less than some value θ . Throughout the study we checked that the results held for different values of θ . 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 0 . 005 0 . 01 0 . 015 0 . 02 0 . 025 K P Student Version of MATLAB Figure 3 : Sample exposure curves for hashtags # cantlivewith - out ( blue ) and # hcr ( red ) . We are interested in ﬁnding differences between the spreading mechanism of different topics on Twitter . We start by ﬁnding out if hashtags corresponding to different topics have inﬂuence curves with different shapes . We found signiﬁcant differences in the val - ues of F ( P ) for different topics . Figure 2 shows the average F ( P ) for the different categories , compared to a baseline in which we draw a set of categories of the same size uniformly at random from the full collection of 500 . We see that politics and sports have an average value of F ( P ) which is signiﬁcantly higher than expected by chance , while for Idioms and Music it is lower . This suggests that the mechanism that controls the spread of hashtags related to sports or politics tends to be more persistent than average ; repeated exposures to users who use these hashtags affects the probability that a person will eventually use the hashtag more positively than average . On the other hand , for Idioms and Music , the effect of re - peated exposures falls off more quickly , relative to the peak , com - pared to average . Figure 4 shows the point - wise average of the inﬂuence curves for each one of the categories . Here we can see some of the differences in persistence and stickiness the curves have . For example , the stickiness of the topics Music , Celebrity , Idioms , and politics tends to be higher that average since the average inﬂuence curve for those categories tends to be higher than the average inﬂuence curve for all hashtags , while that of Technology , Movies , and Sports tends to be lower than average . On the other hand , these plots give us more intuition on why we found that politics and Sports have a high per - sistence while for Idioms and Music it is low . In the case of Politics , we see that the red curve starts off just below the green curve ( the upper error bar ) and as k increases , the red curve increases enough to be above the green . Similarly , the red curve for Sports starts be - low the blue curve and it ends above it . In the case of Idioms , the red curve initially increases rapidly but then it it drops below the blue curve . Similarly , the red curve for Music is always very high and above all the other curves , but it drops faster than the other curves at the end . Approximating Curves via Stickiness and Persistence . When we compare curves based on their stickiness and persistence , it 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 0 . 005 0 . 01 0 . 015 0 . 02 0 . 025 0 . 03 0 . 035 K P Student Version of MATLAB ( a ) Celebrity 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 0 0 . 005 0 . 01 0 . 015 0 . 02 0 . 025 0 . 03 0 . 035 K P Student Version of MATLAB ( b ) Sports 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 0 0 . 005 0 . 01 0 . 015 0 . 02 0 . 025 0 . 03 0 . 035 K P Student Version of MATLAB ( c ) Music 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 0 0 . 005 0 . 01 0 . 015 0 . 02 0 . 025 0 . 03 0 . 035 K P Student Version of MATLAB ( d ) Technology 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 0 0 . 005 0 . 01 0 . 015 0 . 02 0 . 025 0 . 03 0 . 035 K P Student Version of MATLAB ( e ) Idioms 0 5 10 15 20 25 0 0 . 005 0 . 01 0 . 015 0 . 02 0 . 025 0 . 03 0 . 035 K P Student Version of MATLAB ( f ) Political 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 0 0 . 005 0 . 01 0 . 015 0 . 02 0 . 025 0 . 03 0 . 035 K P Student Version of MATLAB ( g ) Movies 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 0 0 . 005 0 . 01 0 . 015 0 . 02 0 . 025 0 . 03 0 . 035 K P Student Version of MATLAB ( h ) Games Figure 4 : Point - wise average inﬂuence curves . The blue line is the average of all the inﬂuence curves , the red line is the average for the set of hashtags of the particular topic , and the green lines indicate the interval where the red line is expected to be if the hashtags were chosen at random . 0 5 10 15 20 25 0 0 . 005 0 . 01 0 . 015 0 . 02 0 . 025 0 . 03 pickone k P Student Version of MATLAB Figure 5 : Example of the approximation of an inﬂuence curve . The red curve is the inﬂuence curve for the hashtag # pickone , the green curves indicate the 95 % binomial conﬁdence interval , and the blue curve is the approximation . is important to ask whether these are indeed an adequate pair of parameters for discussing the curves’ overall “shapes . ” We now es - tablish that they are , in the following sense : we show that these two parameters capture enough information about the inﬂuence curves that we can approximate the curves reasonably well given just these two parameters . Assume that for some curve P we are given F ( P ) and M ( P ) . We will also assume that we know the maximum value of k = K for which P ( k ) is deﬁned . Then we will construct an approximation curve (cid:101) P in the following way : 1 . Let (cid:101) P ( 0 ) = 0 2 . Let (cid:101) P ( 2 ) = M ( P ) 3 . Now we will let (cid:101) P ( K ) be such that F ( (cid:101) P ) = F ( P ) . This value turns out to be (cid:101) P ( K ) = M ( P ) ∗ K ∗ ( 2 ∗ F ( P ) − 1 ) K − 2 4 . Finally , we will make (cid:101) P be piecewise linear with one line connecting the points ( 0 , 0 ) and ( 2 , M ( P ) ) , and another line connecting the points ( 2 , M ( P ) ) and ( K , M ( P ) ∗ K ∗ ( 2 ∗ F ( P ) − 1 ) K − 2 ) . Figure 5 shows an example of an approximation for a particular inﬂuence curve . In order to test the quality of the approximation (cid:101) P we deﬁne the approximation error between (cid:101) P and P as the mean absolute error E ( P , (cid:101) P ) = 1 K K (cid:88) k = 0 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ( P ( k ) − (cid:101) P ( k ) ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) and compare it with the mean absolute of the error E ( P ) obtained from the 95 % conﬁdence intervals around each point P ( k ) . The av - erage approximation error among all the inﬂuence curves is 0 . 0056 and the average error of based on the conﬁdence intervals is 0 . 0050 . The approximation error is slightly smaller , which means that out approximation is , on average , within the 95 % conﬁdence interval from the actual inﬂuence curve . This suggests the information con - tained in the stickiness and persistence parameters are enough to Type Mdn . Mentions Mdn . Users Mdn . Ment . / User All HTS 93 , 056 15 , 418 6 . 59 Political 132 , 180 13 , 739 10 . 17 Sports 98 , 234 11 , 329 9 . 97 Idioms 99 , 317 26 , 319 3 . 54 Movies 90 , 425 15 , 957 6 . 57 Celebrity 87 , 653 5 , 351 17 . 68 Technology 90 , 462 24 , 648 5 . 08 Games 123 , 508 15 , 325 6 . 61 Music 87 , 985 7 , 976 10 . 39 Table 3 : Median values for number of mentions , number of users , and number of mentions per user for different types of hashtags accurately approximate the inﬂuence curves and gives more mean - ing to the approach of comparing the curves by comparing these two parameters . Frequency of Hashtag Usage . We have observed that different topics have differences in their spreading mechanisms . We also found that they differed in other ways . For example , we see some variation in the number of mentions and the number of users of each category . Table 3 shows the different median values for num - ber of mentions , number of users , and number of mentions per user for different types of hashtags . We see that while Idioms and Tech - nology hashtags are used by many users compared to others , each user only uses the hashtag a few times and hence the total number of mentions of the these categories is not much higher than oth - ers . On the other hand , only relatively few people used Political and Games hashtags , but each one of them used them many times , making them the most mentioned categories . In the case of games , a contributing factor is that some of users of game hashtags allow external websites to post on their Twitter account every time they accomplish something in the game , which tends to happen very of - ten . It is not clear that there is a correspondingly simple explanation for the large number of mentions per user for political hashtags , but one can certainly conjecture that it may reﬂect something about the intensity with which these topics are discussed by the users who engage in such discussions ; this is an interesting issue to explore further . 4 . THE STRUCTURE OF INITIAL SETS The spread of a given piece of information is affected by the dif - fusion mechanism controlled by the inﬂuence curves discussed in the previous section , but it may also be affected by the structure of the network relative to the users of the hashtag . To explore this further , we looked at the subgraph G m induced by the ﬁrst m peo - ple who used a given hashtag . We found that there are important differences in the structure of those graphs . In particular , we consider differences in the structures of the sub - graphs G m across different categories . For each graph G m , across all hashtags and a sequence of values of m , we compute several structural parameters . First , we compute the average degree of the nodes and the number of triangles in the graph . Then , we deﬁned the border of G m to be the set of all nodes not in G m who have at least one edge to a node in G m , and we deﬁne the entering degree of a node in the border to be the number of neighbors it has in G m . We consider the size of the border and the average entering degree of nodes in the border . Looking across all categories , we ﬁnd that political hashtags are Type I II III IV All HTS 1 . 41 384 1 . 24 13425 Political 2 . 55 935 1 . 41 12879 Upper Error Bar 1 . 82 653 1 . 32 15838 Lower Error Bar 1 . 00 112 1 . 16 11016 Table 4 : Comparison of graphs induced by the ﬁrst 500 early adopters of political hashtags and average hashtags . Column deﬁnitions : I . Average degree , II . Average triangle count , III . Average entering degree of the nodes in the border of the graphs , IV . Average number of nodes in the border of the graphs . The error bars indicate the 95 % conﬁdence interval of the average value of a randomly selected set of hashtags of the same size as Political . the category in which the most signiﬁcant structural differences from the average occur . Table 4 shows the averages for political hashtags compared to the average for all hashtags , using the sub - graphs G 500 on the ﬁrst 500 users . 5 In brief , the early adopters of a political hashtag message with more people , creating more tri - angles , and with a border of people who have more links on av - erage into the early adopter set . The number of triangles , in fact , is high even given the high average degree ; clearly one should ex - pect a larger number of triangles in a subgraph of larger average degree , but in fact the triangle count for political hashtags is high even when compared against a baseline consisting of non - political hashtags with comparable average degrees . These large numbers of edges and triangles are consistent with the predictions of complex contagion , which argues that such structural properties are impor - tant for the spread of controversial topics [ 6 ] . Tie Strength . There is an interesting further aspect to these struc - tural results , obtained by looking at the strength of the ties within these subgraphs . There are multiple ways of deﬁning tie strength from social media data [ 10 ] , and here we consider two distinct ap - proaches . One approach is to use the total number of @ - messages sent across the link as a numerical measure of strength . Alternately , we can declare a link to be strong if and only if it is reciprocated ( i . e . declaring ( X , Y ) to be strong if and only if ( Y , X ) is in the subgraph as well , following a standard working notion of recipro - cation as a proxy for tie strength in the sociology literature [ 14 ] ) . Under both deﬁnitions , we ﬁnd that the fraction of strong ties in subgraphs G m for political hashtags is in fact signiﬁcantly lower than the fraction of strong ties in subgraphs G m for our set of hashtags overall . However , since political subgraphs G m contain so many links relative to the typical G m , we ﬁnd that they have a larger absolute number of strong ties . As noted in the intro - duction , standard sociological theories suggest that we should see many strong ties in subgraphs G m for political topics , but the pic - ture we obtain is more subtle in that the growth in strong ties comes with an even more signiﬁcant growth in weak ties . Understanding these competing forces in the structural behavior of such subgraphs is an interesting open question . 5 . SIMULATIONS We have observed that for some hashtags , such as those relating to political subjects , users are particularly affected by multiple ex - posures before using them . We also know that the subgraphs on 5 The results are similar for G m with a range of other values of m (cid:54) = 500 . which political hashtags initially spread have high degrees and ex - tensive clustering . To what extent do these aspects intrinsically go together ? Do these types of political hashtags spread effectively because of the close - knit network of the initial users ? Are politi - cal subjects less likely to successfully spread on sparsely connected initial sets ? In this section , we try to obtain some initial insight into these questions through a simulation model — not only in the context of political hashtags but also in the context of the other categories . In particular , we develop a model that naturally complements the process used to calculate the p ( k ) functions . We perform simula - tions of this model using the measured p ( k ) functions and a varying number of the ﬁrst users who used each hashtag on the actual in - ﬂuence network . Additionally , we record the progression of the cascade and track its spread through the network . By trying the p ( k ) curve of a hashtag on the initial sets of other hashtags , and by varying the size of the initial sets , we can gain insight into the factors that lead to wide - spreading cascades . 5 . 1 The Simulated Model We wish to simulate cascades using the measured p ( k ) curves , the underlying network of users , and in particular the observed sub - graphs G m of initial adopters , In this discussion , and in motivating the model , we refer to the moment at which a node adopts a hashtag as its activation . We operationalize the model implicit in the deﬁ - nition of the function p ( k ) , leading to the following natural simu - lation process on a graph G = ( V , E ) . First , we activate all nodes in the starting set I , and mark them all as newly active . In a general iteration t ( starting with t = 0 ) , we will have a currently active set A t and a subset N t ⊆ A t of newly active nodes . ( In the opening iteration , we have A 0 = N 0 = I . ) Newly active nodes have an opportunity to activate nodes u ∈ V − A t , with the probabilities of success on u determined by the p ( k ) curve and the number of nodes in A t − N t who have already tried and failed to activate u . Thus , we consider each node u ∈ V − A t that is a neighbor of at least one node in N t , and hence will experience at least one activation attempt . Let k t ( u ) be the number of nodes in A t − N t adjacent to u ; these are the nodes that have already tried and failed to activate u . Let ∆ t ( u ) be the number of nodes in N t adjacent to u . Each of these neighbors in N t will attempt to activate u in sequence , and they will succeed with probabilities p ( k t ( u ) + 1 ) , p ( k t ( u ) + 2 ) , . . . , p ( k t ( u ) + ∆ t ( u ) ) , since these are the suc - cess probabilities given the number of nodes that have already tried and failed to activate u . At the end , we deﬁne N t + 1 to be the set of nodes u that are newly activated by the attempts in this iteration , and A t + 1 = A t ∪ N t + 1 . 5 . 2 Simulation Results We simulate how a cascade that spreads according to the p ( k ) curve for some hashtag evolves when seeded with an initially active user sets of other hashtags . In total , there are 250 , 000 ( p ( k ) , start set ) hashtag combinations we examine . We additionally vary the size of the initially active set to be 100 , 500 , or 1 , 000 users . Since we want to study how a hashtag blossoms from being used by a few starting nodes to a large number of users , we must be careful about how we select the size of our starting sets . We believe that these ini - tial set sizes capture the varying topology observed in Section 4 and are not too large as to guarantee wide - spreading cascade . For 100 and 500 starting nodes we run ﬁve simulations on each ( p ( k ) , start set ) pair , and for 1 , 000 starting nodes we run only two simulations . The simulation is instrumented at each iteration ; we record the size of the cascade , the number of nodes inﬂuenced by active users , ( a ) Celebrity vs . random p ( k ) curves , celebrity start sets ( b ) Political vs . random start sets , political p ( k ) curves . ( c ) Idiom vs . random start sets , idiom p ( k ) curves . Figure 6 : Validating Category Differences : The median cascade sizes for three different categories . In ( a ) we randomize over the p ( k ) curves and show that celebrity p ( k ) curves don’t perform as well as random p ( k ) curves on celebrity start sets . Figures ( b ) and ( c ) illustrate the strength of the starting sets for political and idiom hashtags compared to random start sets . All starting sets consist of 500 users . and the number of inactive users inﬂuenced by active users . Fur - thermore , each simulation runs for at most 25 iterations . We found that this number of iterations was large enough to observe interest - ing variation in cascade sizes yet still be efﬁciently simulated . We calculate the mean and the 5th , 10th , . . . , 95th percentiles of cascade sizes after each iteration . For each category , we measure these twenty measures based on all of the simulations where the p ( k ) hashtag and the starting set hashtag are both chosen from the category . We then compare these measurements to the results when a random set of hashtags is used to decide the p ( k ) curve , the start - ing set , or both the p ( k ) curve and the starting set . The cardinality of this random set is the same as the number of hashtags in the cat - egory . We sample these random choices 10 , 000 times to estimate the distribution of these measured features . Using these samples , we test the measurements for statistical sig - niﬁcance . In particular , we look at how the ‘category’ cascades ( those in which both hashtag choices are from the category set ) compare to cascades in which the p ( k ) curve or starting set hash - tages were chosen randomly . In all of the following ﬁgures , the red line indicates the value of the measurements over the set of simu - lations in which p ( k ) curve and the start set come from category hashtags . The blue line is the average feature measurement over the random choices , and the green lines specify two standard devi - ations from the mean value . The cascade behavior of a category is statistically signiﬁcant with respect to one of the measured features when most of the red curve lies outside of the region between the two green curves . We compare how the p ( k ) curves for a category perform on start sets from the same category and on random start sets . We addition - ally evaluate how random p ( k ) curves and category p ( k ) curves perform on category start sets . In general , categories either per - formed below or above the random sets in both of these measures . Some particular observations are • Celebrities and Games : Compared to random starting sets , we ﬁnd that start sets from these categories generate smaller cascades when the p ( k ) curves are chosen from their respec - tive categories . This difference is statistically signiﬁcant . • Political and Idioms : These categories’ p ( k ) curves and start sets perform better than a random choice . This is especially true for the smaller cascades ( 5 - 30th percentiles ) . • Music : This category is interesting because the music p ( k ) curves perform better than random p ( k ) curves on music starting sets , music p ( k ) curves perform better on random starting sets than on music starting sets , regardless of the number of initially active users . This is the only category in which the p ( k ) and start set ‘goodness’ differs . • Movies , Sports , and Technology : These categories don’t ex - hibit particularly strong over or underperformance compared a random choice of p ( k ) hashtags and starting set hashtags . 6 . CONCLUSION By studying the ways in which an individual’s use of widely - adopted Twitter hashtags depends on the usage patterns of their network neighbors , we have found that hashtags of different types and topics exhibit different mechanics of spread . These differences can be analyzed in terms of the probabilities that users adopt a hash - tag after repeated exposure to it , with variations occurring not just in the absolute magnitudes of these probabilities but also in their rate of decay . Some of the most signiﬁcant differences in hashtag adoption provide intriguing conﬁrmation of sociological theories developed in the off - line world . In particular , the adoption of polit - ically controversial hashtags is especially affected by multiple re - peated exposures , while such repeated exposures have a much less important marginal effect on the adoption of conversational idioms . This extension of information diffusion analysis , taking into ac - count sources of variation across topics , opens up a variety of fur - ther directions for investigation . First , the process of diffusion is well - known to be governed both by inﬂuence and also by ho - mophily — people who are linked tend to share attributes that pro - mote similiarities in behavior . Recent work has investigated this interplay of inﬂuence and homophily in the spreading of on - line behaviors [ 2 , 8 , 3 , 19 ] ; It would be interesting to look at how this varies across topics and categories of information as well — it is plausible , for example , that the joint mention of a political hashtag provides stronger evidence of user - to - user similarity than the anal - ogous joint mention of hashtags on other topics , or that certain con - versational idioms ( those that are indicative of shared background ) are signiﬁcantly better indicators of similarity than others . There has also been work on the temporal patterns of information diffu - sion — the rate over time at which different pieces of information are adopted [ 9 , 18 , 21 , 24 , 30 ] . In this context there have been comparisons between the temporal patterns of expected versus un - expected information [ 9 ] and between different media such as news sources and blogs [ 21 ] . Our analysis here suggests that a rich spec - trum of differences may exist across topics as well . Finally , we should emphasize one of our original points , that the phenomena we are observing are clearly taking place in aggregate : it is striking that , despite the many different styles in which people use a medium like Twitter , sociological principles such as the com - plex contagion of controversial topics can still be observed at the population level . Ultimately , it will be interesting to pursue more ﬁne - grained analyses as well , understanding how patterns of varia - tion at the level of individuals contribute to the overall effects that we observe . Acknowledgements . We thank Luis von Ahn for valuable discus - sions and advice about this research , Curt Meeder for helping with edits , and our volunteers Ariel Levavi , Yarun Luon , and Alicia Ur - dapilleta for their valuable help . This work has been supported in part by the MacArthur Foundation , a Google Research Grant , a Yahoo ! Research Alliance Grant , and NSF grants IIS - 0705774 , IIS - 0910664 , IIS - 0910453 , and CCF - 0910940 . Brendan Meeder is supported by a NSF Graduate Research Fellowship . 7 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] E . Adar , L . Zhang , L . A . Adamic , and R . M . Lukose . Implicit structure and the dynamics of blogspace . In Workshop on the Weblogging Ecosystem , 2004 . [ 2 ] A . Anagnostopoulos , R . Kumar , and M . Mahdian . Inﬂuence and correlation in social networks . In Proc . 14th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 7 – 15 , 2008 . [ 3 ] S . Aral , L . Muchnik , and A . Sundararajan . Distinguishing inﬂuence - based contagion from homophily - driven diffusion in dynamic networks . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 106 ( 51 ) : 21544 – 21549 , Dec . 2009 . [ 4 ] L . Backstrom , D . Huttenlocher , J . Kleinberg , and X . Lan . Group formation in large social networks : Membership , growth , and evolution . In Proc . 12th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , 2006 . [ 5 ] D . Centola . The spread of behavior in an online social network experiment . Science , 329 ( 5996 ) : 1194 – 1197 , 3 September 2010 . [ 6 ] D . Centola and M . Macy . Complex contagions and the weakness of long ties . American Journal of Sociology , 113 : 702 – 734 , 2007 . [ 7 ] D . Cosley , D . P . Huttenlocher , J . M . Kleinberg , X . Lan , and S . Suri . Sequential inﬂuence models in social networks . In Proc . 4th International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media , 2010 . [ 8 ] D . Crandall , D . Cosley , D . Huttenlocher , J . Kleinberg , and S . Suri . Feedback effects between similarity and social inﬂuence in online communities . In Proc . 14th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 160 – 168 , 2008 . [ 9 ] R . Crane and D . Sornette . Robust dynamic classes revealed by measuring the response function of a social system . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 105 ( 41 ) : 15649 – 15653 , 29 September 2008 . [ 10 ] E . Gilbert and K . Karahalios . Predicting tie strength with social media . In Proc . 27th ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 211 – 220 , 2009 . [ 11 ] M . Gladwell . The Tipping Point : How Little Things Can Make a Big Difference . Little , Brown , 2000 . [ 12 ] M . Gladwell . Small change : Why the revolution will not be tweeted . The New Yorker , 4 October 2010 . [ 13 ] M . Granovetter . The strength of weak ties . American Journal of Sociology , 78 : 1360 – 1380 , 1973 . [ 14 ] M . Granovetter . The strength of weak ties : A network theory revisited . Sociological Theory , 1 : 201 – 233 , 1983 . [ 15 ] D . Gruhl , D . Liben - Nowell , R . V . Guha , and A . Tomkins . Information diffusion through blogspace . In Proc . 13th International World Wide Web Conference , 2004 . [ 16 ] C . Heath and D . Heath . Made to Stick : Why Some Ideas Survive and Others Die . Random House , 2007 . [ 17 ] B . A . Huberman , D . M . Romero , and F . Wu . Social networks that matter : Twitter under the microscope . First Monday , 14 ( 1 ) , Jan . 2009 . [ 18 ] A . Johansen . Probing human response times . Physica A , 338 ( 1 – 2 ) : 286 – 291 , 2004 . [ 19 ] G . Kossinets and D . Watts . Origins of homophily in an evolving social network . American Journal of Sociology , 115 ( 2 ) : 405 – 50 , Sept . 2009 . [ 20 ] J . Leskovec , L . Adamic , and B . Huberman . The dynamics of viral marketing . ACM Transactions on the Web , 1 ( 1 ) , May 2007 . [ 21 ] J . Leskovec , L . Backstrom , and J . Kleinberg . Meme - tracking and the dynamics of the news cycle . In Proc . 15th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , 2009 . [ 22 ] J . Leskovec , M . McGlohon , C . Faloutsos , N . Glance , and M . Hurst . Cascading behavior in large blog graphs . In Proc . SIAM International Conference on Data Mining , 2007 . [ 23 ] D . Liben - Nowell and J . Kleinberg . Tracing information ﬂow on a global scale using Internet chain - letter data . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 105 ( 12 ) : 4633 – 4638 , Mar . 2008 . [ 24 ] R . D . Malmgren , D . B . Stouffer , A . E . Motter , and L . A . N . Amaral . A poissonian explanation for heavy tails in e - mail communication . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 105 ( 47 ) : 18153 – 18158 , 25 November 2008 . [ 25 ] D . McAdam . Recruitment to high - risk activism : The case of Freedom Summer . American Journal of Sociology , 92 : 64 – 90 , 1986 . [ 26 ] D . McAdam . Freedom Summer . Oxford University Press , 1988 . [ 27 ] E . Rogers . Diffusion of Innovations . Free Press , fourth edition , 1995 . [ 28 ] D . Strang and S . Soule . Diffusion in organizations and social movements : From hybrid corn to poison pills . Annual Review of Sociology , 24 : 265 – 290 , 1998 . [ 29 ] E . Sun , I . Rosenn , C . Marlow , and T . M . Lento . Gesundheit ! Modeling contagion through Facebook News Feed . In Proc . 3rd International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media , 2009 . [ 30 ] A . Vazquez , J . G . Oliveira , Z . Deszo , K . - I . Goh , I . Kondor , and A . - L . Barabasi . Modeling bursts and heavy tails in human dynamics . Physical Review E , 73 ( 036127 ) , 2006 .