Vol : . ( 1234567890 ) Journal of Community Health ( 2022 ) 47 : 504 – 509 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10900 - 022 - 01067 - 7 1 3 ORIGINAL PAPER A Successful Collaboration Between an Urban School District , a Health System , and a Public Health Department to Address COVID‑19 While Returning Children to the Classroom Katherine A . Auger 1 , 2 , 3 · Margaret Hall 4 · Susan Bunte 4 · Grant Mussman 5 · Maryse Amin 5 · Susan Sprigg 3 · Lauren Porter 3 · Rita Porter 5 · Mona Mansour 2 , 6 · Mary Carol Burkhardt 2 , 6 · Robert S . Kahn 2 , 3 , 6 Accepted : 12 January 2022 / Published online : 26 February 2022 © The Author ( s ) , under exclusive licence to Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2022 Abstract We sought to create and implement a set of COVID - 19 mitigation processes including reliable testing to minimize in - school transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 . A large urban school district ( > 33 , 000 students ) , a city health department , and a free - standing children’s hospital partnered to implement multi - layered mitigation procedures which included access to polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) testing with same day or next morning results . We tracked COVID - 19 cases as well as probable / confirmed transmissions and identified needed mitigations through frequent huddles . During the 2020 – 2021 school year , there were 13 weeks of hybrid in person learning and 9 weeks of 5 day a week learning . Of the 1936 cases documented , only 3 . 2 % resulted in subsequent school - related transmission . When children felt ill in the classroom , they were isolated within 10 min of reporting ill symptoms ( > 90 % of the time ) . PCR test results were routinely available to the school district by 6AM the following morning ( 79 – 99 % of the time , depending on the learning model ) . An adaptive , fast - learning partnership across school district , public health , and a children’s hospital minimized school - related transmission of COVID - 19 and allowed children to safely return to the classroom . Keywords COVID - 19 · School · Health systems · Public health Background COVID - 19 has been profoundly disruptive to children . Not only have more than 12 million children contracted the dis - ease [ 1 ] , children who have not contracted COVID - 19 have seen their daily lives greatly disrupted . One of the biggest sources of this disruption has been the dramatic changes to schools and school environments during the pandemic . School systems have been forced to adapt to unprecedented circumstances without evidence to guide their decisions— balancing risk from a lethal infectious disease [ 2 , 3 ] , with their mission to educate children and foster childhood social and emotional development . Dramatic shifts in teaching modes—including closures , hybrid schedules , and remote teaching—have significant implications for overall educa - tional attainment , as well as the potential to widen existing educational equity gaps [ 4 ] . Returning students to classrooms as safely as possible involves a high level of complexity and tremendous number of unknowns . While guidelines for school policies continue to emerge and evolve [ 5 , 6 ] , there is a paucity of specifics , * Katherine A . Auger katherine . auger @ cchmc . org 1 Division of Hospital Medicine , Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center , 3333 Burnet Ave , Cincinnati , OH 45229 , US 2 Department of Pediatrics , University of Cincinnati College of Medicine , 2600 Clifton Ave , Cincinnati , OH 45221 , US 3 James M . Anderson Center for Health Systems Excellence , 3333 Burnet Ave , Cincinnati , OH 45229 , US 4 Cincinnati Public School System , 2651 Burnet Ave , Cincinnati , OH 45219 , US 5 Cincinnati Health Department , 3101 Burnet Ave , Cincinnati , OH 45229 , US 6 Division of General and Community Pediatrics , 3333 Burnet Ave , Cincinnati , OH 45229 , US 505 Journal of Community Health ( 2022 ) 47 : 504 – 509 1 3 and no roadmap for processes that must bridge schools , pub - lic health , and health care . Thus , it is critical that school sys - tems adapt and partner with health and public health experts with a goal of providing safe , in - person school options . As the Cincinnati public school ( CPS ) district began con - templating strategies to optimize learning in the 2020 – 21 school year , the district capitalized on existing partner - ships with Cincinnati children’s hospital medical center ( CCHMC ) and the Cincinnati health department ( CHD ) to design , implement , and test COVID - 19 testing and mitiga - tion strategies . The goals of this partnership were to work through the complexity and uncertainty by sharing a learn - ing system approach , and to work across sectors to gain clear vision , aim , drivers , and critical process measures . CPS stu - dents returned to the classroom in October 2020 in a hybrid model , with two cohorts of children each with in - person learning occurring 2 days a week . There was a subsequent all - remote period during the winter months ( November 23 – January 31 ) followed by another hybrid in - person learn - ing period February 1 – March 19 . Full in - person instruction began after spring break on March 31 , 2021 through the end of the school year in late May . In this report , we present our experiences , challenges , learnings , and successes . Methods Setting CPS district is a large , urban district with a high percentage of economically disadvantaged families ; approximately 80 % of children in the district qualify for free or reduced - price lunch . CPS consists of 66 schools and serves 33 , 290 children living in southwest Ohio . Goal Our goal was to minimize in - school transmission . We sought to achieve this goal by developing a system to quickly iden - tify , isolate , and remove any students with COVID - 19 from the school building . This required offering reliable and easy access to COVID - 19 PCR testing in each school building for symptomatic students , with rapid isolation of the ill student , next - morning access to COVID - 19 test results , and expedi - tious identification of potential close contacts to begin quar - antine . Schools also implemented a robust bundle of in - class protective measures in addition to in - school COVID testing , including masking , and distancing . Stakeholder Team To address the challenges with school reopening during the pandemic , we assembled a multi - stakeholder team ( Online Fig . 1 ) . This team included leaders from CPS ; CHD school nurse leaders , clinicians , and epidemiolo - gists ; CCHMC quality improvement ( QI ) teams , popula - tion health leaders , and clinical laboratory leaders ; and representation from school - based health centers . CPS has longstanding partnerships with both CCHMC and CHD . CPS and CCHMC have worked together around QI initia - tives and training ; CHD provides school health services to CPS through the support of school nurses and school - based health centers . Collaborative Design and Improvement Sessions To achieve this goal , we convened a series of in - depth design sessions . The initial design meetings were in June 2020 with a wide range of stakeholders . The three partner organiza - tions CPS , CCHMC , and CHD gathered with approximately 50 community representatives , including students and par - ents . Team members gathered to discuss how to implement COVID - 19 mitigation for the upcoming school year . Topics discussed included : • Whether and how to screen for COVID - 19 symptoms among students and staff • Responses when a child screened positive • COVID - 19 testing opportunities in collaboration with CCHMC and CHD After the design sessions the team conducted regular meetings between the three institutional partners over video link . CCHMC QI specialists provided support to map in detail the critical processes from beginning to end of the testing and quarantine effort before school began ( Online Fig . 2 ) . COVID‑19 Testing Process When a student had possible COVID - 19 symptoms upon arrival to school or during the school day , the child was immediately sent to a COVID - 19 isolation room and the school nurse was notified . All CPS staff were trained in screening and identification of COVID - 19 symptoms . The CHD school nurse performed a health assessment in the isolation room . If the child’s symptoms were consistent with SARS - CoV - 2 infection , a COVID - 19 test was offered , and collected by the nurse . Parents and guardians signed standing consent forms in the case that a student became 506 Journal of Community Health ( 2022 ) 47 : 504 – 509 1 3 symptomatic during the year , these consent forms also gave permission for test results to be released to the school . If a standing consent form was not on file , the guardian was offered the option of signing the form during pickup of the ill child . Students with potential COVID - 19 symptoms who declined testing were sent home to quarantine with a letter recommending testing with locations . All testing swabs were collected by courier twice daily and taken to CCHMC for testing . All tests were polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) tests to offer the highest sensitivity and specificity . CCHMC runs PCR testing multiple times a day allowing test results to often be available the same day . Posi - tive results were communicated to CHD as the public health authority and to a CPS hotline . To ensure redundancy in this system , positive results were also sent to school nurses each morning via secured email , with a goal that the test result be known by 6AM the next day for appropriate isolation of close contacts . School nurses contacted families with the results . Upon being notified of a positive case , the CPS prin - cipal , teachers , and CHD nurse worked together to identify close contacts , who were notified and asked to quarantine . For children with medical insurance , the insurance was billed for the testing , the family was not charged for any out - of - pocket costs . For children without insurance , testing costs were covered by federal funds via the state of Ohio to CCHMC for implementation of a robust community testing infrastructure . Iteration of Procedures and Refinement of Processes Once in - person learning began , a daily huddle was con - ducted before school each morning . The huddle was an opportunity to discuss cases , escalate issues or challenges , and share learnings as testing processes evolved . This huddle included operational leaders from CPS , CHD , and CCHMC . Measures The multidisciplinary team discussed potential measures of success , including two outcome and four process measures that would be meaningful for school processes and COVID - 19 disease incidence . We focused on two outcome measures : ( 1 ) overall number of COVID - 19 cases in both students and teachers / staff and ( 2 ) number of suspected / confirmed in - school transmissions . Key process measures included : ( 1 ) time from a child feeling unwell ( as recorded by the student’s teacher or recorded at the time of the positive daily screen - ing ) to isolation in the designated isolation room at school , ( 2 ) number of students who entered the isolation room each day , ( 3 ) number of COVID - 19 tests collected daily and ( 4 ) percentage of COVID - 19 test results available before the start of the next school day . Key Protective Measures The bundle of protective measures implemented by all schools included : universal masking , distancing to at > 6 feet when space allowed ( typically 3 – 6 feet during 5 day a week school ) , cohorting same students together , frequent surface cleaning , and hand - washing . Additionally , all CPS students were screened at building entry each morning for symptoms . Each school had a dedicated isolation room to immediately isolate any person with COVID - 19 - like symptoms . Each school had an assigned a full - time CHD school nurse . All teachers and staff were required to undergo COVID - 19 test - ing twice , once before school began and once after students arrived in the classroom in the fall . The processes for teacher and staff screening testing were separate than the in - school symptomatic student testing described in this report . Documenting Potential Transmission Daily partner meetings were utilized to investigate in - school transmission in a structured way . We trained and deployed CHD nurses to assist CHD epidemiologists in the investiga - tion of close contacts and determine likelihood of suspected transmissions . A case was considered a probable / confirmed transmission if two individuals with close contact became ill ( either in the classroom or in an extracurricular activity ) . Results Cincinnati Public Schools held a total of 9 weeks of full in - person learning , and 13 hybrid in - person learning weeks ( 6 weeks in the fall and 7 weeks in the winter ) . On a typical hybrid day there were ~ 13 , 000 students in CPS buildings . On a typical full in person day there were ~ 25 , 000 students in CPS buildings , with the remainder of students opting for on - line learning . Outcomes The rate of COVID - 19 cases among in - person students , teachers , and staff are displayed in the Fig . 1 . During hybrid and in - person learning periods , there were a total of 1936 ill cases in students and teacher / staff . Case numbers during the remote learning period are not included in this report as they were believed to be underreported as reporting from fami - lies became intermittent when children were not attending in - person school . School - related transmission events were rarely documented , with 3 . 2 % of cases resulting in subse - quent probable / confirmed incidents of transmission in CPS settings ( n = 61 transmission events ) . Incidents primarily originated with positive students ( n = 53 ) and 8 incidents of transmission originating with staff . Transmission incidents 507 Journal of Community Health ( 2022 ) 47 : 504 – 509 1 3 Fig . 1 Number of cases in students and teachers per 10 , 000 learners during in - person learning . Solid blue line represents the number of cases in the schools per 10 , 000 in - person learners . The dashed blue line represents the number of cases in the county per 1 , 000 , 000 resi - dents . Of note 10 community cases per 1 , 000 , 000 equals 100 com - munity cases per 100 , 000 . Each time period ( first remote , second remote , and 5 day a week ) has a new mean and control limits set as each period represented a fundamentally different system of learning ( colour figure online ) Table 1 Performance on process measures * Goal for children in isolation room is to have them report to isolation room within 10 min of reporting feeling unwell . Goal for test results is that test result is reported to the school by 6AM the next day During Hybrid During 5 day a week school Number Number of weeks Number per week % at goal * Number Number of weeks Number per week % at goal * Number of children in isolation room per week 2069 13 159 . 2 91 3688 9 409 . 8 90 Number of Col - laborative tests performed per week 155 13 11 . 9 99 553 9 61 . 4 79 508 Journal of Community Health ( 2022 ) 47 : 504 – 509 1 3 occurred predominantly in the classroom setting ( n = 50 ) , with the remaining 11 transmission incidents occurring in CPS extracurricular settings . Process measures The median time to isolation in the designated room for children reporting symptoms was consistently brief . Most children ( > 90 % ) were isolated within 10 min of feeling unwell . ( Table 1 ) . The number of children in the isolation room each day varied between hybrid and full 5 day teaching models , with 2069 children reporting to the isolation room during the 13 hybrid weeks ( 159 . 2 children per week ) and 3688 children reporting to the isolation room during the 9 weeks of full in - person learning ( 409 . 8 children per week ) . The number of COVID - 19 tests performed by the school increased when students were in the classrooms 5 days a week compared with the hybrid period . During the hybrid period , there were 155 COVID tests performed over 13 weeks ( average of 11 . 92 COVID tests performed per week ) . This number rose to a total of 553 COVID - 19 tests performed over 9 weeks during the full 5 day a week period ( 61 . 4 tests per week ) . The percentage of test results that were reported by 6AM the next day was very high during both learning models . 99 % of all tests results were returned by 6AM during the hybrid period and 79 % returned by 6AM during the 5 days a week period . Discussion Through a highly - intentional partnership between a large public school district , a city health department , and a free - standing children’s hospital , we successfully implemented a robust set of COVID - 19 protocols which included reliable , in - school access to COVID - 19 PCR testing , next - day test result reporting and immediate quarantine of all exposed individuals . Testing in schools gave children access to a reli - able , easily available testing location . The use of QI tools including process map , and run charts allowed us to address complex processes and create consist - ent messages for teachers and staff . Reviewing the process maps with users prior to school beginning allowed them to visualize deficits . In times of uncertainty , process maps reas - sure school workers that plans do exist and encourage ques - tions prior to the unfolding of actual events . The detailed , daily huddles to review of positive cases allowed for con - sideration of modifications to protocols . For example , one potential case of staff - to - staff transmission was reviewed , and job responsibilities were reconfigured to ensure more physical distancing in the future . The huddles allowed for daily learning and rapid mitigation for processes that might have failed . For significant challenges , questions and con - cerns were quickly escalated to senior leadership for com - munication across the district . The collaborative faced several challenges in imple - menting processes . For example , we recognized the need for test result communication that was rapid and acces - sible , yet securely maintained confidentiality . Thus , we intentionally developed redundancy through both the health department and the school for positive case report - ing using secure email and faxing systems . A second chal - lenge was developing a tracking system for positive cases and close contacts that was both secure and accessible by critical team members in each organization . A cloud - based secure site was developed and modified as the team learned together . A third challenge included adequate staffing for testing and contact tracing . CPS hired enough nurses to staff a CHD nurse in every school building . Many of these nurses had previous experience as contact tracers early in the pandemic and were experienced with pandemic proto - cols . However , at times of the year the demand on all parts of the system was high . Moving forward , this learning system approach can be adapted to focus on new shared outcomes . The proac - tive testing structure with close contact tracing prevented spread beyond only a few dozen probable transmissions in a large urban school district . This approach continues into the 2021 – 2022 year , maintaining a focus on minimizing in - school transmission and improving vaccine access for children . A multilayered COVID - 19 mitigation approach with strong partnerships allows children to attend school while limiting COVID - 19 transmission events , as evi - denced by our experiences and others [ 7 ] . Conclusion A collaborative learning system built among the public school system , public health department , and a local chil - dren’s hospital , COVID - 19 to implement school processes including fast , reliable COVID - 19 testing and rapid results reporting which supported early identification and quar - antine of close contacts . This multi - sector learning health system helped ensure in - school COVID - 19 transmission was rare . Supplementary Information The online version contains supplemen - tary material available at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10900 - 022 - 01067 - 7 . Author Contributions All authors participated in the design of the col - laboration , have provided critical revisions , and have approved the final manuscript submission . KAA wrote the initial draft . 509 Journal of Community Health ( 2022 ) 47 : 504 – 509 1 3 Funding This work was conducted without funding from an external organization . Data Availability Not applicable . Code Availability Not Applicable . Declarations Conflict of interest The authors declare no competing interests . Ethics Approval Exempt . Consent to Participate Not applicable . Informed Consent Not applicable . References 1 . Children and COVID - 19 : State - level data report . Accessed February 14 , 2022 . http : / / www . aap . org / en / pages / 2019 - novel - coron avirus - covid - 19 - infec tions / child ren - and - covid - 19 - state - level - data - report / 2 . Stein - Zamir , C . , Abramson , N . , Shoob , H . , Libal , E . , Bitan , M . , Cardash , T . , Cayam , R . , & Miskin , I . ( 2020 ) . A large COVID - 19 outbreak in a high school 10 days after schools’ reopening , Israel , May 2020 . Euro Surveill , 25 ( 29 ) , 2001352 . 3 . Yung , C . F . , Kam , K . , Nadua , K . D . , et al . ( 2021 ) . Novel Corona - virus 2019 Transmission Risk in Educational Settings . Clinical Infectious Diseases , 72 ( 6 ) , 1055 – 1058 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / cid / ciaa7 94 4 . Achievement gap and coronavirus McKinsey . Accessed August 24 , 2021 . https : / / www . mckin sey . com / indus tries / public - and - social - sector / our - insig hts / covid - 19 - and - stude nt - learn ing - in - the - united - states - the - hurt - could - last - a - lifet ime 5 . COVID - 19 Guidance for Safe Schools . Accessed August 24 , 2021 . http : / / www . aap . org / en / pages / 2019 - novel - coron avirus - covid - 19 - infec tions / clini cal - guida nce / covid - 19 - plann ing - consi derat ions - return - to - in - person - educa tion - in - schoo ls / 6 . Guidance for COVID - 19 Prevention in K - 12 Schools CDC . Accessed August 24 , 2021 . https : / / www . cdc . gov / coron avirus / 2019 - ncov / commu nity / schoo ls - child care / k - 12 - guida nce . html 7 . Zimmerman , K . O . , Brookhart , M . A . , Kalu , I . C . , Boutzoukas , A . E . , McGann , K . A . , Smith , M . J . , Maradiaga Panayotti , G . M . , Armstrong , S . C . , Weber , D . J . , Moorthy , G . S . , & Benja - min , D . K . ( 2021 ) . Community SARS - CoV - 2 surge and within - school transmission . Pediatrics . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1542 / peds . 2021 - 052686 Publisher ' s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations .