INTRODUCTION Gradients of maternal factors are important for the earliest patterning events in Drosophila embryogenesis ( reviewed in St . Johnston and Nüsslein - Volhard , 1992 ) . Along the anterior posterior axis , transcription factors encoded by bicoid ( bcd ) and the maternal component of hunchback ( hb MAT ) are distributed as gradients with high levels in anterior regions ( Driever and Nüsslein - Volhard , 1988a ; Tautz , 1988 ) . These gradients initiate a hierarchy of genetic interactions that will eventually subdivide the embryo into fourteen segmental primordia by specifying positions of expression of target genes ( reviewed by Pankratz and Jäckle , 1993 ; Small , 1997 ) . For example , bcd has been shown to be a concentration - dependent activator of zygotic hb ( hb ZYG ) expression in the anterior half of the embryo ( Driever and Nüsslein - Volhard , 1989 ; Struhl et al . , 1989 , but see also Simpson - Brose et al . , 1994 ) . It has also been shown that the hb MAT gradient sets speciﬁc boundaries of target gene expression in posterior regions ( Hülskamp et al . , 1990 ; Struhl et al . , 1992 ) . In both cases , positions of gene expression boundaries are thought to be set by thresholds of protein concentration . Nuclei at speciﬁc positions within the gradients receive different concentrations of these factors , and respond by activating and repressing speciﬁc sets of genes . Among the ﬁrst targets of the maternal gradients are the gap genes , which are expressed in patterns of one or two broad bands at speciﬁc positions along the anterior posterior axis . The exact positioning of each gap gene expression domain involves initial cues from the maternal gradients as well as patterning events mediated by the gap genes themselves ( Gaul and Jäckle , 1990 ; Kraut and Levine , 1991b ) . Since the gap genes also encode transcription factors , these events include autoregulation and repressive interactions between neighboring gap expression domains that reﬁne borders of gene expression . The mature gap expression domains overlap at their edges , creating a situation where nuclei at each position along the axis contain unique concentrations and combinations of gap proteins ( Fig . 1A ) . This system of overlapping gap and maternal proteins directs the expression of the pair - rule genes , each of which is expressed in a pattern of seven evenly spaced stripes that encircle the embryo ( Hafen et al . , 1984 ; Macdonald et al . , 1986 ; Frasch et al . , 1987 ) . Despite intensive study , the exact mechanisms involved in pair - rule patterning are not well understood . One possibility is that each gap gene expression domain acts as a source for a diffusion gradient that sets the position of target gene expression borders based on protein concentration . An example is the gap gene giant ( gt ) , which is expressed in two broad domains located in anterior and posterior regions of the embryo respectively ( Mohler et al . , 1989 ; Fig . 1 ) . Previous studies suggest that gt activity is required at two levels in the segmentation hierarchy , the gap level and the pair - rule level . At the gap level , the best candidate for a target of gt repression is Krüppel ( Kr ) , which is expressed in a broad domain in the center of the embryo ( Knipple et al . , 1985 ) . Heat shock misexpression experiments indicate that gt can act as a potent repressor of Kr ( Kraut and Levine , 1991b ; Eldon and Pirrotta , 1991 ) , and several 3765 Development 125 , 3765 - 3774 ( 1998 ) Printed in Great Britain © The Company of Biologists Limited 1998 DEV5218 We have combined genetic experiments and a targeted misexpression approach to examine the role of the gap gene giant ( gt ) in patterning anterior regions of the Drosophila embryo . Our results suggest that gt functions in the repression of three target genes , the gap genes Krüppel ( Kr ) and hunchback ( hb ) , and the pair - rule gene even - skipped ( eve ) . The anterior border of Kr , which lies 4 - 5 nucleus diameters posterior to nuclei that express gt mRNA , is set by a threshold repression mechanism involving very low levels of gt protein . In contrast , gt activity is required , but not sufficient for formation of the anterior border of eve stripe 2 , which lies adjacent to nuclei that express gt mRNA . We propose that gt’s role in forming this border is to potentiate repressive interaction ( s ) mediated by other factor ( s ) that are also localized to anterior regions of the early embryo . Finally , gt is required for repression of zygotic hb expression in more anterior regions of the embryo . The differential responses of these target genes to gt repression are critical for the correct positioning and maintenance of segmentation stripes , and normal anterior development . Key words : Drosophila melanogaster , Segmentation , Patterning , Repression , giant SUMMARY Two distinct mechanisms for differential positioning of gene expression borders involving the Drosophila gap protein giant Xuelin Wu , Rajesh Vakani and Stephen Small * Department of Biology , New York University , 100 Washington Square East , New York , NY 10003 , USA * Author for correspondence ( e - mail : sjs1 @ is3 . nyu . edu ) Accepted 16 April ; published on WWW 7 September 1998 3766 high affinity gt - binding sites exist in the Kr regulatory region , suggesting that this repression may be direct ( Capovilla et al . , 1992 ) . However , it is not clear whether gt repression of Kr is important for normal development . The anterior Kr border lies 3 - 4 nucleus diameters posterior to nuclei that express gt mRNA ( Fig . 1A ) , and when Kr expression was examined in embryos lacking gt , no signiﬁcant change was detected in the position of this border ( Kraut and Levine , 1991b ; Eldon and Pirrotta , 1991 ) . At the pair - rule level , a series of genetic and cotransfection experiments suggests that gt acts as a repressor to form the anterior border of stripe # 2 of the even - skipped ( eve ) gene ( Small et al . , 1991 , 1992 ; Stanojevic et al . , 1991 ) . This border lies adjacent to nuclei that express gt mRNA , and is therefore formed in a region that contains relatively high levels of gt protein . Three low affinity gt - binding sites have been mapped to a 480 bp eve enhancer sufficient for directing reporter gene expression at the stripe 2 position , suggesting that this interaction may be direct ( Small et al . , 1991 ; Capovilla et al . , 1992 ) . However , it is not clear whether gt activity is sufficient for repression of stripe 2 activation in vivo . In this paper we use two complementary approaches to test the roles of gt in anterior patterning . The ﬁrst involves a targeted misexpression approach to change the proﬁle and shape of the gradient of gt protein emanating from the anterior domain . In the second , we reexamine gap and pair - rule expression patterns in gt mutant embryos . We ﬁnd that gt activity diffusing from the anterior domain is critical for restricting Kr expression to central regions of the embryo during normal development , and that very low gt levels are sufficient for Kr repression . In contrast , the eve stripe 2 response is much less sensitive to gt repression compared with Kr , suggesting that the formation of the anterior border of this stripe involves gt and other unidentiﬁed factor ( s ) . Thus , gt seems to be involved in two different repression mechanisms that set the anterior borders of eve stripe 2 and Kr respectively . Finally , we present evidence that gt - mediated repression is also transiently required for the normal reﬁnement of the zygotic hb expression pattern . The implications of these results are discussed in light of current models for gap gene function . MATERIALS AND METHODS Targeted mis - expression of gt at the position of evestripe 2 Previous experiments have identiﬁed a 480 bp enhancer that is sufficient for reporter gene expression at the position of eve stripe 2 ( Small et al . , 1992 ) . This enhancer is activated by bcd and hb , and the anterior and posterior borders are formed by repression involving gt and Kr respectively ( Stanojevic et al . , 1991 ; Small et al . , 1992 ) . The st2 - gt transgene used here contained a version of the 480 bp eve stripe 2 enhancer that was modiﬁed in two ways . First , since gt has been shown to be a repressor of this enhancer ( Stanojevic et al . , 1991 ; Small et al . , 1991 , 1992 ) , all gt - binding sites in this sequence were deleted to avoid feedback repression . Second , the three low affinity bcd - binding sites ( bcd - 3 , 4 , and 5 ; Small et al . , 1991 ) in the enhancer were changed to the consensus ( GGGATTAGAG / A ) derived by Driever and coworkers ( 1989 ) . Previous experiments showed that these changes increase the levels of expression driven by the enhancer ( Arnosti et al . , 1996 ) . Two copies of the modiﬁed enhancer ( separated by 22 bp of polylinker sequence ) were fused upstream of an eve fragment that contains the basal promoter and 80 bp of leader sequence to make a heterologous promoter fragment . Two versions of the gt cDNA were tested in these experiments . The wild - type version extends from an artiﬁcial Nde I site at the initiating codon ( Small et al . , 1991 ) to an Eco RI site located approx . 400 bp 3 ¢ of the termination codon . The other version is identical to wild type except for the addition of the FLU epitope ( YPYDVPDYA , Han and Manley , 1993 ) at the carboxy terminus of the coding sequence . This epitope was added by site - directed mutagenesis using the Mutagene kit ( Bio - Rad Labs , Richmond , CA ) , and enabled us to distinguish ectopic gt expression from endogenous . The constructs also contained the eve 3 ¢ UTR ( Kosman and Small , 1997 ) . To avoid problems with potential dominant embryonic lethality in making transgenic stocks , a transcriptional stop sequence ﬂanked by two recombination targets for yeast FLPase was inserted between the heterologous promoter fragment and the gt coding sequence ( Struhl et al . , 1993 ) . Thirteen independent transgenic lines carrying st2 - gt constructs ( eleven with the FLU tag , and two without ) were generated for these studies using standard microinjection techniques ( Spradling , 1986 ) . To activate misexpression , we generated males that contained both a st2 - gt and a b 2 - tubulin - FLP transgene that is active during spermatogenesis ( Struhl et al . , 1993 ) . These males were mated with w 1118 females , and embryos were collected from these crosses for analysis of expression patterns . Ectopic expression was monitored by in situ hybridization using an antisense gt probe ( Fig . 1 ) , or by immunocytochemistry ( data not shown ) using an anti - FLU antibody ( Berkeley Antibody Company , Berkeley , CA ) . Some variations in the level of ectopic gt were detected among these lines , probably due to different positions of genomic insertion . There were no qualitative differences between lines with respect to their effects on the expression proﬁles of other genes , and no discernible difference between lines carrying the FLU - tagged constructs and those with the wild - type gt sequence . Most of the data shown here was generated using a line ( st2 - gt5 ) that drives intermediate levels of misexpression when compared to other lines . Data from a second line ( st2 - gt7 ) that drives higher levels of misexpression are included in some cases . All embryos in this paper are oriented so that anterior is to the left and dorsal is on top . In situ hybridization and cuticle analysis Whole - mount in situ hybridization using anti - sense RNA probes was performed according to the method described by Kosman and Small ( 1997 ) . Larval cuticles were prepared as follows ( after Wieshaus and Nüsslein - Volhard , 1986 ) . Embryos were collected for a 2 - hour period , and aged for 20 hours before dechorionation . The vitelline membrane was removed by shaking in methanol / heptane ( 2 : 1 by volume ) . The embryos were ﬁxed in a 1 : 4 ratio ( V : V ) of glycerol : acetic acid at 65°C overnight , mounted in a 1 : 1 ratio of Hoyer’s medium : lactic acid and baked in a 65°C oven overnight . The cuticle structures were analyzed and photographed using a 20 · objective and phase constrast optics on a Zeiss Axioscope . RESULTS Extending the anterior gt domain using targeted misexpression In wild - type precellular embryos , gt mRNA is initially transcribed in a broad anterior band in response to the bcd morphogen gradient ( Mohler et al . , 1989 ; Eldon and Pirrotta , 1991 ; Kraut and Levine , 1991a ; Fig . 1B ) . This band later resolves into two stripes , and a third stripe is activated very near the anterior tip of the embryo ( Fig . 1C ) . Previous studies suggest that a gradient of gt protein diffusing posteriorly from nuclei expressing gt mRNA may be important for repressive interactions that set boundaries of expression of other segmentation genes . To change the diffusion proﬁle of this gradient , we used a transgenic approach and the yeast FLP - FRT system to misexpress gt under the control of a modiﬁed version of the 480 bp eve stripe 2 enhancer ( st2 - gt ; see Materials and Methods ) . Whole mount in situ hybridization experiments were X . Wu , R . Vakani and S . Small 3767 Repression borders involving giant performed to detect ectopic expression driven by the st2 - gt transgene . Ectopic expression appeared as a wide band which overlapped most of the endogenous anterior gt domain , and extended 4 - 5 nucleus diameters toward the posterior ( Fig . 1D , E ) . This expression persisted until the start of gastrulation . To test whether gt functions as a gradient of repressive activity in the region posterior to its normal expression domain , we analyzed the expression patterns of potential target genes in embryos containing the st2 - gt transgene , and then compared them to patterns in wild - type and gt mutant embryos . gt repression is required for restricting Kr expression to central regions of the embryo The gap gene Kr is activated in a broad central region of precellular embryos ( Knipple et al . , 1985 ) . Midway through cleavage cycle 14 , this domain extends from 41 - 59 % egg length . The initial positioning of the anterior border of this domain is thought to be controlled by repression involving a combination of hb MAT and hb ZYG ( Hülskamp et al . , 1990 ; Struhl et al . , 1992 ; Schulz and Tautz , 1994 ) . To test whether gt is also involved in setting or maintaining this border , we analyzed the Kr expression pattern in embryos containing the st2 - gt transgene . These embryos showed no changes in the initial positioning of the Kr expression domain early in cleavage cycle 14 , but slightly later there was a dramatic retraction of the anterior Kr border ( Fig . 2C , D ) . The delay in the observed repressive effect on the Kr anterior border is probably due to the fact that the Kr domain is expressed earlier than the st2 - gt transgene . Higher levels of ectopic gt resulted in a more severe retraction , suggesting that Kr transcription is very sensitive to repression by gt ( compare Fig . 2D with 2C ) . To test whether gt affects Kr expression during normal development , we examined Kr expression in embryos that carry a strong hypomorphic gt allele ( gt YA82 ) . In previous studies , no signiﬁcant changes in Kr expression were detected in gt mutants ( Kraut and Levine , 1991b ; Eldon and Pirrotta , 1991 ) . Consistent with these reports , we found that the initial Kr expression pattern was correctly established in gt YA82 embryos ( data not shown ) . However , slightly later , we did detect a signiﬁcant anterior expansion ( from 59 % to 65 % egg length ; Fig . 2B ) , suggesting that gt - mediated repression is essential for maintaining the position of the anterior border of the Kr domain . The role of gt in setting the position of evestripe 2 The anterior gt mRNA expression domain abuts the anterior border of eve stripe 2 in wild - type embryos . Several previous studies suggest that gt may act in vivo to set this border by repression . For example , there is a transient derepression in the interstripe region between eve stripes 1 and 2 in gt mutant embryos ( Frasch and Levine , 1987 ) , which suggests an anterior expansion of the stripe 2 response . Other studies suggest that gt acts as a direct repressor of stripe 2 . For example , three gt - binding sites have been identiﬁed in the stripe 2 enhancer ( Small et al . , 1991 ) , and deletions that remove these sites cause an anterior expansion of lacZ reporter gene expression ( Stanojevic et al . , 1991 ; Small et al . , 1992 ) . However , it is not clear whether gt is sufficient for repression of the in vivo eve stripe 2 response . To test this , we examined eve expression in embryos containing the st2 - gt transgene , which extends the gt domain so that it overlaps the position of eve stripe 2 . Surprisingly , the ectopic gt caused only a weak transient reduction of the stripe early in cycle 14 ( Fig . 3C ) . Later the stripe recovered to full strength , but expanded toward the posterior by about two nucleus diameters ( Fig . 3F ) . Double in situ hybridization experiments Fig . 1 . ( A ) Schematic representation of the overlapping gap gene expression patterns in blastoderm stage embryos . Note that eve stripe 2 occupies a position between the anterior gt domain and the central Kr domain . ( B - E ) gt mRNA expression patterns in wild - type embryos ( B , C ) and embryos that contain one copy of the st2 - gt5 transgene ( D , E ) . Staining patterns are shown early in cleavage cycle 14 ( B , D ) and midway through the cycle ( C , E ) . In wild - type embryos , gt is expressed in broad bands located in anterior and posterior regions ( B ) . The anterior band then resolves into two stripes , and a more anterior stripe is also activated ( C ) . The position and extent of the ectopic gt domain driven by the st . 2 - gt transgene is shown as a blue bar above D . This transgene directs a broad band of expression that overlaps the anterior gt domain at both stages , and extends four to ﬁve cells toward the posterior . Fig . 2 . The gap gene Kr is sensitive to changes in the anterior gt expression domain . ( A , B ) Kr mRNA expression is shown in wild - type ( A ) and gt YA82 ( B ) embryos midway through cleavage cycle 14 . Note that the Kr expression domain expands anteriorly in gt mutants at this time . ( C , D ) gt and Kr mRNA expression in embryos from two different lines carrying the st2 - gt transgene . This transgene extends the expression domain of gt toward the posterior , resulting in a retraction of the anterior border of Kr . Higher levels of ectopic gt cause a more severe retraction ( compare C with D ) . 3768 showed that the timing and the extent of the expansion correlated well with the retraction of the Kr domain ( Fig . 3I ) , suggesting that the expansion of eve stripe 2 is indirectly caused by relief from Kr repression . Doubling the ectopic gt expression levels still did not cause a signiﬁcantly stronger repression ( data not shown ) , suggesting that eve stripe 2 is quite insensitive to gt repression . The endogenous eve stripes are initially regulated by the gap genes , and then reﬁned by autoregulation and regulatory inputs from other pair - rule genes . Previous studies have identiﬁed independent enhancers that control the early expression of stripes 2 , 3 and 7 , as well as a late element that responds to pair - rule regulation ( Goto et al . , 1989 ; Harding et al . , 1989 ; Small et al . , 1992 ; Small et al . , 1996 ; Fujioka et al . , 1996 ) . To test whether the effects of ectopic gt on eve stripe 2 are controlled by the early or late regulatory elements , we examined the expression of lacZ reporter genes in embryos containing st2 - gt transgenes . Our ﬁrst experiments tested S1 , which contains the minimal 480 bp eve stripe 2 enhancer , and the 500 bp eve stripe 3 + 7 enhancer as a control for staining intensity ( Small et al . , 1993 ) . In early embryos carrying the S1 construct , the st2 - gt domain caused a signiﬁcant delay of lacZ expression at the position of stripe 2 ( Fig . 4B ) , but later the stripe recovered , although not to its normal level ( Fig . 4E ) . Increasing the dose of ectopic gt resulted in a more severe repression of the stripe 2 lacZ response ( Fig . 4C ) , but did not prevent its recovery ( Fig . 4F ) . The early repression of the eve stripe 2 lacZ driven by the S1 construct was more dramatic than the effect on the endogenous eve stripe ( Fig . 3C ) . This may reﬂect the fact that the stripe 2 enhancer in the S1 construct is a minimal sequence element that lacks other regulatory sequences which augment eve stripe 2 activation in the context of the intact gene . To test whether ectopic gt would have a similar effect on a more robust stripe 2 enhancer , we assayed lacZ expression driven by another transgene ( E14 ) , which contains the intact eve 5 ¢ regulatory region extending to 5 . 2 kb upstream of the transcription start site . This region includes all of the regulatory sequences for the initial expression of eve stripes 2 , 3 and 7 , but not the late autoregulatory element ( Goto et al . , 1989 ; Harding et al . , 1989 ) . No obvious repression of the stripe 2 response was detected when the E14 construct was crossed into embryos containing the st2 - gt transgene ( data not shown ) . This result is similar to the very minor effect observed on the endogenous eve stripe 2 . However , embryos containing the extended gt domain did show increased levels of staining in the interstripe region between stripes 2 and 3 for both lacZ reporter constructs ( Fig . 4E , F ; data not shown ) , suggesting a posterior expansion of the stripe 2 response . A similar expansion is seen with the endogenous eve stripe 2 ( Fig . 3F , I ) . Since neither reporter construct contains the late regulatory element , it is likely that the posterior expansion of endogenous eve stripe 2 caused by the st2 - gt transgene is mediated through the early acting enhancer . The recalcitrance of the eve stripe 2 response to ectopic gt expression led us to reexamine the eve expression pattern in gt mutant embryos . Early in cycle 14 , these mutants showed a derepression in the interstripe region between stripes 1 and 2 ( Fig . 3B ) , consistent with previous reports ( Frasch and Levine , 1987 ) . However , later in cycle 14 , gt mutants showed a dramatic reduction in stripe 2 expression levels ( Fig . 3E ) , suggesting a role for gt in maintaining the stripe . Since Kr has been previously implicated as the repressor that forms the stripe 2 posterior border , it is possible that the stripe 2 reduction in gt mutants is indirectly caused by Kr , which expands anteriorly to completely overlap the diminishing stripe ( Fig . 3I ) . To test this possibility , we generated gt mutant embryos that also contained one copy of the Kr 1 null mutation ( Preiss et al . , 1985 ) . Early in cycle 14 , gt ; Kr / + embryos showed a slight posterior shift of eve stripe 2 ( Fig . 5C ) . Both the anterior and posterior borders of this stripe appeared fuzzy at this time , suggesting that activities important for setting both borders are compromised in these embryos . Later , stripe 2 diminished somewhat in intensity ( Fig . 5D ) , but was visibly stronger than the comparable stripe in gt mutants ( Fig . 5B ) . Therefore , the repression of eve stripe 2 observed in gt mutants can be relieved by reducing Kr levels . These results suggest that a major function of the anterior gt domain is to prevent Kr from expanding anteriorly , thus permitting the expression of eve stripe 2 . Furthermore , since gt repression maintains the position of the anterior Kr border in wild - type embryos , it indirectly deﬁnes the position of the posterior border of eve stripe 2 . X . Wu , R . Vakani and S . Small Fig . 3 . gt has both repression and maintenance functions in eve stripe 2 regulation . eve ( blue and black ) and Kr ( red ) mRNA expression patterns are shown for wild - type ( A , D , G ) , gt YA82 ( B , E , H ) and st2 - gt ( C , F , I ) embryos early in cycle 14 ( A - C ) or midway through the cycle ( D - I ) . gt mutants can be unambiguously identiﬁed by the fusion of eve stripes 5 and 6 in posterior regions . In gt mutant embryos , there is a transient fusion of eve stripes 1 and 2 early in cycle 14 ( B ) , but later , stripe 2 is nearly abolished ( E ) . A double in situ hybridisation experiment shows that the expanded Kr expression domain completely overlaps the weak eve stripe 2 in these embryos ( H ) . Embryos containing the st2 - gt5 transgene show a very weak repression of eve stripe 2 early in cycle 14 ( C ) , but later the stripe recovers , expanding 1 - 2 cells toward the posterior ( F ) . A retraction of the Kr expression domain coincides with the expanding stripe 2 ( I ) . 3769 Repression borders involving giant A gt concentration gradient is not required for setting the anterior border of evestripe 2 In principle , the preceding experiments support the hypothesis that gt acts as a concentration - dependent repressor to set the anterior borders of the Kr and eve stripe 2 expression domains in different positions . Ectopic gt is an effective repressor of Kr , but has little effect on the activation of eve stripe 2 . In situ hybridization experiments indicate that endogenous gt levels are signiﬁcantly higher than the ectopic gt driven by even the strongest st2 - gt transgenic lines ( Figs 1 , 2 ; data not shown ) . Perhaps these higher endogenous levels are required for effectively setting the anterior border of eve stripe 2 . If this is the case , the early expansion of eve stripe 2 toward stripe 1 detected in gt mutants ( Fig . 6B ) should not be affected in embryos in which the endogenous gt gene is replaced by the st2 - gt misexpression domain . To test this , we examined eve expression in gt mutants that contained the st2 - gt5 transgene . Surprisingly , a sharp anterior eve stripe 2 border was formed in these embryos , with a clear interstripe between eve stripes 1 and 2 ( Fig . 6C ) . Furthermore , the st2 - gt domain rescued eve stripe 2 to full strength with a posterior expansion which is probably due to repression of the anterior Kr border . As noted above , the relatively low levels of ectopic gt driven by the st2 - gt construct overlap the endogenous gt domain and extend 4 - 5 nucleus diameters posteriorly . The fact that a sharp anterior eve stripe 2 border is formed in embryos containing only this domain argues against a simple concentration - dependent mechanism for setting this border . Rather , we propose that other factor ( s ) are involved along with gt in deﬁning the anterior border of eve stripe 2 in vivo ( see Discussion ) . evestripe 2 - gt can completely rescue the anterior cuticle defects in gtmutants Strong gt mutants die during embryogenesis and exhibit speciﬁc defects in anterior and posterior regions of the larval cuticle ( Gergen and Weishaus , 1985 ; Petschek et al . , 1987 ; Fig . 6E ) . Anteriorly , the head does not complete involution , showing a characteristic ‘buttonhead’ phenotype , and speciﬁc defects are present in the internal head skeleton . For example , the labrum , epistomal sclerite , H - piece , hypostomal sclerite and dorsal bridge are completely missing in strong gt mutants ( Mohler et al . , 1989 ) . These structures are derived primarily from the labral and the labial segments ( Jürgens et al . , 1986 ) . Some of these cuticular defects can be traced back to disruptions of particular pair - rule stripes in gt mutants earlier in development . In particular , the anterior part of the eve pattern in strong gt mutants is largely normal except for the eventual near abolition of eve stripe 2 . This stripe marks the position of parasegment 3 ( PS3 ) , which normally gives rise to the posterior compartment of the labial segment and the anterior compartment of the ﬁrst thoracic segment . As noted above , the severe reduction of eve stripe 2 in gt embryos can be rescued by the st2 - gt transgene , and the stripe shifted back to a more normal position ( Fig . 6C ) . Other pair - rule expression patterns disrupted in gt mutants can also be rescued by the st2 - gt transgene . An example is the fushi - tarazu ( ftz ) gene , which is expressed in a seven stripe pattern reciprocal to the eve pattern . Previous experiments showed that removing gt function results in an anterior shift and expansion of ftz stripe 2 into the region normally occupied by eve stripe 2 ( Frasch and Levine , 1987 ) . Replacing the anterior gt domain with st2 - gt shifts ftz stripe 2 back to a position posterior of eve stripe 2 , restoring the reciprocal pattern in this region ( data not shown ) . Since the anterior patterns of eve and ftz appeared nearly normal in embryos containing the st2 - gt domain as their sole source of anterior gt activity , we tested whether this domain could rescue the anterior cuticular defects caused by the loss of gt function . In these experiments , males carrying both the st2 - gt5 and the b 2 - tubulin - FLP transgenes were crossed with gt YA82 / FM7 females . Offspring from this cross were then Fig . 4 . Ectopic gt represses lacZ expression driven by the 480 bp minimal stripe enhancer . lacZ mRNA expression patterns driven by reporter construct S1 in otherwise wild - type embryos ( A , D ) or embryos containing the st2 - gt5 ( B , E ) or st2 - gt7 ( C , F ) transgenes , which drive intermediate and high levels of ectopic gt ( Fig . 2C , D ) . Embryos are shown early ( A - C ) and midway ( D - F ) through cycle 14 . In wild - type embryos , the S1 construct drives lacZ expression at the positions of eve stripes 2 , 3 and 7 ( A and D ) . lacZ expression at the stripe 2 position is signiﬁcantly repressed early in cycle 14 by the st2 - gt domain ( B and C , compare with A ) . However , this stripe partially recovers later , but is positioned closer to stripe 3 ( E and F , compare with D ) . Fig . 5 . The loss of eve stripe 2 in gt mutants is partially rescued by genetically reducing the activity of Kr . eve mRNA expression patterns are shown for gt YA82 mutants ( A , B ) and gt YA82 mutants that are also heterozygous for the gap gene Kr ( C , D ) . Embryos are shown early and midway through cycle 14 ; Kr heterozygotes can be unambiguously identiﬁed by the thinning of eve stripes 3 and 4 . The inter - stripe spacing between e ve stripes 1 and 2 is better resolved in gt ; Kr / + embryos ( C ) compared to gt mutants ( A ) early in cycle 14 . Stripe 2 also persists much longer in gt ; Kr / + embryos ( D ) compared to gt mutants ( B ) . 3770 analyzed for rescue of the cuticular defects . More than 70 % of the gt mutants carrying a single copy of the activated st2 - gt5 transgene showed some phenotypic rescue of the anterior cuticular defects , while posterior defects were unaffected ( Table 1 ) . Of these , more than 40 % showed a cuticular head morphology that was indistinguishable from wild - type ( Fig . 6F ) . A role for gt in regulating zygotic hbexpression Zygotic expression of the gap gene hb is initially activated by the bcd and hb MAT gradients in a broad domain that spans the anterior half of the embryo ( Driever and Nüsslein - Volhard , 1989 ; Struhl et al . , 1989 ) . This expression is then rapidly reﬁned during nuclear division cycle 14 , leaving a secondary pattern that includes a variable head domain , a stripe at the position of parasegment 4 ( PS4 ) , and a posterior stripe ( Hülskamp et al . , 1994 ; Margolis et al . , 1995 ; Fig . 7A ) . The PS4 stripe overlaps the anterior border of the Kr domain ( Fig . 7E ) . By examining hb expression in gt mutants , we detected signiﬁcant changes in this secondary pattern ( Fig . 7B ) . First , hb expression at the position of PS4 was greatly reduced , possibly because of the anterior expansion of the Kr domain in gt mutants ( Fig . 7F ) . To test this possibility , we examined hb expression in gt mutants that also contained reduced Kr activity . In both gt ; Kr / + ( Fig . 7C ) and gt ; Kr / Kr ( Fig . 7D ) embryos , there was a partial recovery of the stripe as well as a posterior shift . This is consistent with the hypothesis that Kr acts as a repressor to form the posterior border of this stripe ( Hülskamp et al . , 1994 ) . However , the expression levels of the shifted stripe were signiﬁcantly lower than the wild - type stripe . The cause of this reduction is unknown , but a similar reduction was also detected in Kr single mutants ( data not shown ) , suggesting that Kr activity is required for wild - type expression levels of the hb PS4 stripe . We also noted that high levels of hb expression persisted in more anterior regions of gt mutant embryos . The persistent hb expression domain appeared very similar in shape to the normal gt domain ( compare to Fig . 1B ) , suggesting that gt may act as a repressor to clear hb expression from this part of the embryo during wild - type development . To test whether endogenous gt levels were required for this repression , we examined hb expression in gt mutants that also contained the st2 - gt transgene . hb expression was repressed normally by a single copy of the st2 - gt5 transgene ( data not shown ) , suggesting that relatively low levels of ectopic gt can replace this function of the endogenous gene . Since gt seems to be involved in repression of hb in anterior regions , it is possible that this repression is important for setting the anterior border of the hb PS4 stripe during wild - type development . To test this , we examined hb expression in embryos containing the st2 - gt transgene ( Fig . 7G , H ) . The position of the anterior border of the hb PS4 stripe appeared unchanged in these embryos , suggesting that the levels of ectopic gt tested here are not sufficient to repress hb PS4 expression . However , a slight posterior expansion of this stripe could be detected in embryos with high levels of misexpression ( Fig . 7H ) , which is probably caused by the retraction of the Kr domain . This supports the hypothesis that Kr activity is important for setting the posterior PS4 stripe border , and X . Wu , R . Vakani and S . Small Fig . 6 . The loss of eve stripe 2 expression and the anterior cuticle defects in gt mutant embryos can be rescued by the st2 - gt transgene . eve mRNA expression patterns ( A - C ) , and corresponding larval cuticles ( D - F ) are shown for wild - type embryos ( A , D ) , gt mutants ( B , E ) , and gt mutants carrying one copy of the st2 - gt5 transgene ( C , F ) . The cuticles of gt mutants can be unambiguously identiﬁed by the loss of ventral denticle bands in abdominal segments A5 - A8 . The position of the A5 denticle band is marked with an asterisk . Ectopic expression driven by the st2 - gt transgene rescues the loss of eve stripe 2 expression detected in gt mutants and shows a posterior expansion of the stripe ( compare C with B ) . The larval cuticles of strong gt mutant embryos exhibit a typical ‘buttonhead’ phenotype and the loss of A5 - A8 dentical bands ( E ) . The st2 - gt domain can rescue the anterior defects found in gt mutants ( F ) . Some of these rescued cuticles are indistinguishable from wild type ( D ) . Table 1 . Anterior cuticle structures in gt YA82 embryos containing a single copy of the st2 - gt5 transgene Partial Full No gt rescue rescue rescue * Overall morphology 138 45 35 30 Head involution 138 22 59 29 Dorsal bridge 149 1 69 40 H - piece 165 54 56 Sclerites 150 22 47 41 In this experiment , 219 gt mutant cuticles were identiﬁed by missing denticle bands in posterior regions , and examined for rescue of defects in head structures . Based on the genetic cross used to generate these embryos ( see text ) , only half ( 110 ) should have contained the st2 - gt transgene . The number of st2 - gt embryos that showed no rescue * was estimated by subtracting the number of embryos showing partial or full rescue from 110 . This experiment was repeated twice with similar results . 3771 Repression borders involving giant further demonstrates the importance of gt - mediated restriction of Kr expression to central regions of the embryo . DISCUSSION We have used a combination of genetics and a targeted misexpression approach to examine the in vivo patterning functions of the anterior domain of the gap gene gt . The results are summarized in Fig . 8 . We ﬁnd that gt functions as a repressor of the gap genes Kr and hb , and the pair - rule gene eve . Furthermore , we show that gt is involved in distinct mechanisms that set the borders of two expression domains . These borders are the anterior border of eve stripe 2 , which lies adjacent to nuclei that produce gt mRNA , and the anterior border of Kr , which lies 4 - 5 nucleus diameters further posterior ( Fig . 8A ) . Our results suggest that the anterior Kr border is set by a threshold mechanism involving very low levels of gt protein that diffuse toward the posterior . However , higher gt levels are not sufficient for setting the anterior border of eve stripe 2 . Rather , a combination of gt activity and at least one other factor is required to set this border . gt - mediated repression of Kr Expression patterns of the gap genes are initially established by maternal morphogens , and then reﬁned by autoregulatory mechanisms and repressive interactions between neighboring domains . In the case of Kr , previous experiments suggested that the anterior border is set by a combination of maternal and zygotic hb , with a minor role for gt . Genetic removal of zygotic hb resulted in an anterior Kr expansion ( Hülskamp et al . , 1990 ; Struhl et al . , 1992 ) , but only subtle changes were detected in embryos lacking gt function . A more severe anterior Kr expansion was detected in gt ; hb double mutants ( Kraut and Levine , 1991b ) . These experiments led to the hypothesis that hb and gt repression activities are redundant , or part of a cooperative mechanism . The results reported here conﬁrm that gt is critical for maintaining the anterior Kr boundary . Contrary to previous reports , we detect a signiﬁcant anterior expansion of the Kr border in gt mutants , and a retraction in embryos that contain the expanded gt domain directed by the st2 - gt transgene . Since the highest levels of ectopic gt repress Kr to a position just beyond the posterior border of hb expression ( Fig . 7H ) , low gt levels appear to be sufficient for this repressive Fig . 7 . The gap genes gt and Kr are both involved in reﬁning the mature hb ZYG expression pattern . ( A - D ) hb mRNA expression patterns are shown for wild - type mid - cycle 14 embryos and several mutant combinations as indicated . The wild - type pattern at this stage includes a variable head domain , the PS4 stripe , and the posterior stripe ( A ) . In gt mutant embryos , hb expression persists in regions anterior to the normal position of the PS4 stripe , which is nearly abolished ( B ) . Genetically reducing Kr function results in a posterior shifting of the reduced PS4 stripe , suggesting that Kr may be important for setting the posterior border . ( E - H ) Double - stained mid - cycle embryos showing hb ( red ) and Kr ( black ) mRNA expression patterns in wild - type embryos ( E ) , gt mutants ( F ) , and embryos containing extended gt expression domains ( G , H ) . In wild - type embryos , the hb PS4 stripe partially overlaps the anterior border of the central Kr domain ( E ) . In gt mutants , the anterior expansion of the Kr domain overlaps with the derepressed hb in more anterior regions . Ectopic gt ( G , H ) causes a posterior retraction of the Kr domain , but has no effect on the anterior border of the PS4 hb stripe . However , a slight posterior expansion of the hb PS4 stripe is detected in embryos containing high levels of ectopic gt ( H ) . eve st . 2 A . wild - type early cycle 14 B . wild - type mid cycle 14 C . wild - type plus st2 - gt D . gt mutant E . gt mutant plus st2 - gt Kr gt hb hb PS4 Fig . 8 . A summary of the changes in gene expression patterns caused by manipulations of the anterior gt expression domain . Initial expression patterns of the gap genes ( A ) are reﬁned by mid cycle 14 ( B ) . Adding ectopic gt with the st2 - gt transgene ( C ) causes a strong retraction of the anterior Kr border , and a concommitant posterior expansion of the eve stripe 2 response and the hb PS4 stripe . In gt mutants ( D ) , Kr expands anteriorly , resulting in the severe reduction of both eve stripe 2 and the hb PS4 stripe . In gt mutants that contain the st2 - gt construct ( E ) , the levels and positions of the PS4 hb stripe and eve stripe 2 are rescued . 3772 activity , arguing against a cooperative mechanism involving hb . This leaves open the possibility that the repressive effects of hb and gt on Kr are redundant , but we propose that each repression activity is required for setting the border at different times in development . Our experiments suggest that the expansion in gt mutants ( Fig . 2B ) occurs later than that observed in hb mutants ( data not shown ) . Thus hb activity sets the initial border , but gt activity is required later to maintain its position . In wild - type embryos and those containing the st2 - gt transgene ( Fig . 2C , D ) , there is an apparent space ( 3 - 4 nucleus diameters ) between the posterior - most row of nuclei that express detectable levels of gt mRNA and those that express Kr . This space deﬁnes the distance that gt protein levels , sufficient for repression , can diffuse away from nuclei that produce gt mRNA . This space suggests that Kr is very sensitive to gt - mediated repression . Since gt has been shown to bind in vitro to several high - affinity sites in the Kr regulatory region ( Capovilla et al . , 1992 ) , this repression is probably direct , and the high affinity sites allow Kr to respond to very low levels of gt protein . Multiple roles for gt in the regulation of evestripe 2 Previous experiments suggest that gt acts as a repressor to form the anterior border of eve stripe 2 ( Frasch and Levine , 1987 ) . A 480 bp minimal enhancer that drives lacZ reporter expression at the position of stripe 2 contains three gt - binding sites , and deleting these sites causes an anterior expansion of the lacZ stripe ( Stanojevic et al . , 1991 ; Small et al . , 1992 ; Arnosti et al . , 1996 ) . Furthermore , cotransfecting gt into cultured Drosophila cells causes a dose - dependent repression of a CAT reporter gene containing sequences from the stripe 2 enhancer ( Small et al . , 1991 ) . Here we have shown , however , that ectopic expression driven by the st2 - gt transgene is not sufficient for effective repression of the endogenous stripe . One possible explanation is that the expression levels driven by the st2 - gt transgene are not high enough for efficient repression . Two results argue against this . First , doubling the levels of ectopic expression does not increase the repression of the in vivo stripe . Second , the anterior border of eve stripe 2 can be set by the ectopic st2 - gt expression domain in the absence of endogenous gt function . Since the ectopic domain completely overlaps the stripe from the anterior , a steep concentration gradient of gt is not required for setting the anterior border . These results indicate that other factor ( s ) are required along with gt for setting the anterior border of stripe 2 . At least one of these factor ( s ) must also be localized to anterior regions of the embryo , because the stripe 2 anterior border is correctly set in gt ; st2 - gt embryos . Thus , gt may act as a potentiator of repression mediated by these localized factors . Previous experiments support the possibility that other factors are involved in setting the anterior border of eve stripe 2 . For example , when a stripe 2 - lacZ transgene is crossed into a gt mutant , there is a moderate anterior expansion of the stripe response ( Small et al . , 1992 ) . However , deleting the gt - binding sites in the enhancer results in a more severe expansion , suggesting that these deletions also interrupt the function of another repressive activity . Since gt encodes a putative leucine zipper ( b - ZIP ) protein ( Vinson et al . , 1989 ) , one possibility is that this activity is also a b - ZIP protein that can heterodimerize with gt as part of an effective repressor complex . Repressive function in the absence of gt would be provided by a homodimer of this protein . Alternatively , since the gt site deletions tested in previous experiments removed relatively long sequences ( 14 - 43 bp ) , it is possible that these deletions may have removed or interrupted binding sites for other protein ( s ) . Genetic studies using segmental aneuploids have localized an activity that may be involved in repression of the anterior eve stripe 2 border to the left arm of the chromosome II ( Vavra and Carroll , 1989 ) . Embryos lacking this region exhibit an anterior expansion of stripe 2 similar to that detected in gt mutants . The later reduction of eve stripe 2 in gt mutants suggests a role in maintaining the stripe response . Several lines of evidence suggest that this maintenance occurs by restricting Kr to central regions of the embryo . First , Kr has been previously proposed as a repressor that forms the posterior border of stripe 2 , and binds in vitro to several sites in the stripe 2 enhancer ( Stanojevic et al . , 1989 ) . Second , the derepressed Kr domain in gt mutants overlaps virtually all of eve stripe 2 ( Fig . 3H ) , consistent with its role as a repressor . Third , the stripe 2 reduction in gt mutants can be rescued by reducing Kr activity , or by repressing the anterior border of the Kr domain using the st2 - gt transgene . Thus , gt plays several important roles in eve stripe 2 regulation . It functions in combination with other factor ( s ) to set the anterior border , and it indirectly controls maintenance of the stripe and the position of the posterior border by setting the anterior Kr border . gt represses zygotic hbin anterior regions of the embryo Zygotic hb is initially activated throughout the anterior half of the embryo , and then reﬁned to a pattern that includes a variable head stripe and the PS4 stripe ( Figure 7A ) . It has been previously shown that phosphorylation of bcd by the terminal system leads to the down - regulation of hb expression anterior to the head stripe ( Ronchi et al . , 1993 ) . Other experiments suggest that the PS4 stripe is activated via autoregulation , while its posterior border is formed by high levels of Kr ( Hülskamp et al . , 1994 ) . However , the mechanism for forming the anterior border of this stripe is not known . One possibility is that hb expression activated by bcd is repressed by other factors in this region , leaving a stripe at the most posterior part of the domain , which then initiates autoregulation . The anterior gt domain lies within this region ; removing gt function causes a transient derepression of hb ( Reinitz and Levine , 1990 ; Fig . 7B ) , suggesting that gt may be part of such a mechanism . This activity can be replaced by the st2 - gt transgene , suggesting that lower levels are sufficient for this repressive activity . However , while gt may be important for repressing hb anteriorly , it is clear that gt repression is not the primary activity that sets the anterior border of the PS4 stripe . X . Wu , R . Vakani and S . Small gt Kr eve 2 hb kni eve 3 Fig . 9 . A general model for integrating pattern between the gap and pair - rule levels of the segmentation hierarchy . Strong interactions between non - adjacent gap expression domains may create spacing between domains of repression involved in forming the stripe borders of individual eve stripes ( for details , see text ) . The data in this paper supports the model for eve stripe 2 ( left ) , and a similar model can be proposed for the regulation of eve stripe 3 ( right ) . 3773 Repression borders involving giant First , the anterior border of the PS4 stripe in Kr mutant embryos does not expand in Kr ; gt double mutants ( Fig . 7C ) . Second , extending the gt domain with the st2 - gt transgene has no effect on the position of the anterior PS4 stripe border . Thus , we suggest that the anterior border of this stripe is formed by other factors , but gt may play a role in repressing hb in more anterior regions . The biological signiﬁcance of this repression is evident if the pair - rule patterns and cuticular structures of gt ; Kr / + embryos are compared with gt mutant embryos that also contain the st2 - gt transgene ( gt ; st2 - gt ) . The pair - rule patterning defects associated with gt mutants are rescued to some degree in both genetic combinations ( Figs 5C , D , 6C ) but the larval cuticles resulting from these genotypes are distinctly different . As noted above , the st2 - gt transgene can fully or partially rescue the anterior cuticular defects in gt mutants ( Table 1 ; Fig . 6F ) . In contrast , the head cuticle defects of gt ; Kr / + larvae are identical to those observed in gt mutants ( data not shown ) . Our results suggest that a major patterning difference between these two genotypes is the derepression of hb expression in gt ; Kr / + embryos . Perhaps the persistence of hb in this region causes some of the head defects observed in gt mutants . Opposing gradients of gt and Kr and anterior body patterning Previous studies suggested a minor role for gt in maintaining the anterior border of the Kr expression domain . The results presented here suggest that this may be one of gt’s most important functions . gt mutants exhibit a signiﬁcant anterior Kr expansion that may cause the repression of the hb PS4 stripe and eve stripe 2 . These stripes are positioned in adjacent parasegments , with the hb PS4 stripe overlapping the anterior border of the Kr domain ( Fig . 8B ) . Since Kr has been implicated as a repressor of both stripes , their respective posterior borders may be set by a gradient of Kr protein where low levels are sufficient for repression of eve stripe 2 , while high levels are required to repress the PS4 stripe . Future experiments will be required to test this model . The importance of gt - mediated repression of Kr is underscored by the fact that the anterior defects of strong gt mutants can be rescued by a single copy of the st2 - gt transgene , which represses Kr and restores the expression of the hb PS4 stripe and the pair - rule stripes in this region . It is worth noting that the st2 - gt transgene drives low levels of expression in a broad domain that overlaps the region normally occupied by the endogenous gt domain ( Fig . 8E ) . In contrast to the endogenous gt domain , which reﬁnes into two stripes and persists throughout germ band elongation , the st2 - gt domain does not reﬁne signiﬁcantly , and persists only until the beginning of gastrulation . The rescue activity mediated by this transgene suggests that some ﬂexibility is permitted in gt concentration levels and in the shape of the anterior domain . One possibility is that gt ’s major roles in anterior embryonic patterning are restricted to early developmental stages before its further reﬁnement into three stripes , or that there is some redundancy in its later functions . Differential repression : a mechanism for multi - level pattern integration Repressive interactions among the gap genes are critical for establishing their precise overlapping expression patterns in the blastoderm . Kraut and Levine ( 1991b ) have previously proposed that strong interactions between non - adjacent gap genes , coupled with weak interactions between adjacent genes could generate the observed overlapping pattern . Since gt and Kr represent non - adjacent gap genes , the demonstration here that Kr is very sensitive to gt repression is consistent with this model . A consequence of this interaction is the creation of a space ( 3 - 4 nucleus diameters ) between nuclei that express gt mRNA and those that express Kr . This is precisely the space where eve stripe 2 is activated because its enhancer is much less sensitive to gt repression compared with Kr . We have shown that the correct positioning of the anterior border of eve stripe 2 requires gt and other factors ( s ) , but in principle , this border could have been formed by higher levels of gt alone . Perhaps combining the activities of more than one localized repressor is a more effective mechanism for establishing a sharp border of gene expression than a simple concentration threshold involving one protein . Mechanisms similar to the one described here for eve stripe 2 may also be involved in the positioning of other pair - rule stripes . An example is eve stripe 3 ( Fig . 9 ) . Previous experiments suggest that hb , and its non - adjacent neighbor , kni , act as repressors that form the anterior and posterior borders of this stripe ( Small et al . , 1996 ; Fig . 1A ) . However , hb is also involved in setting the anterior border of kni ( Hülskamp et al . , 1990 ; Struhl et al . , 1992 ) . Perhaps different sensitivities to hb - mediated repression are involved in setting these borders in different positions . Both the eve stripe 3 + 7 enhancer ( Small et al . , 1996 ) and the kni regulatory region ( Pankratz et al . , 1992 ) contain multiple hb - binding sites , suggesting that they could respond to different levels of hb protein . Thus differential sensitivities between gap and pair - rule targets to gradients of gap proteins may be a general mechanism involved in pair - rule patterning . A key aspect of this type of mechanism is that it integrates positional information between different levels of the segmentation hierarchy . Such multi - level integration may provide a mechanism for stabilizing relative positions of gene expression patterns . It has been previously shown that signiﬁcant ﬂexibility can be tolerated in the exact positions of segmentation patterns along the anterior posterior axis . This is most dramatically seen in embryos containing multiple copies of the maternal effect gene bcd ( Driever and Nüsslein - Volhard , 1988b ; Struhl et al . , 1989 ) . The extra copies of bcd cause the expression patterns of the segmentation genes to be compressed into posterior regions of the embryo . Nevertheless , many embryos containing up to six bcd genes hatch and appear wild - type , suggesting that the spatial order of expression patterns required for normal development is not disturbed . We propose that multi - level integration mechanisms such as the one described here are important for coordinating the positional shifts of individual genes in this extreme case , and for maintaining the spatial order of gene expression patterns during the normal segmentation process . We thank Gary Struhl for the b 2 - tubulin - FLP ﬂy stock , and Jim Jaynes , Eric Wieshaus , Tad Goto , Miki Fujioka , Dave Kosman , John Reinitz , Michael Levine , Vikram Vasisht , and other members of the Small lab for discussions and moral support . This work was funded by a research grant from the NSF ( IBN - 9513550 ) , and support from the Keck Foundation . REFERENCES Arnosti , D . , Barolo , S . , Levine , M . and Small , S . ( 1996 ) . The eve stripe 2 enhancer employs multiple modes of transcriptional synergy . Development 122 , 205 - 214 . 3774 Capovilla , M . , Eldon , E . and Pirotta , V . ( 1992 ) . The giant gene of Drosophila encodes a b - ZIP DNA - binding protein that regulates the expression of other segmentation genes . Development 114 , 99 - 112 . Driever , W . and Nüsslein - Volhard , C . ( 1988a ) . A gradient of bicoid protein in Drosophila embryos . Cell 43 , 59 - 69 . Driever , W . and Nüsslein - Volhard , C . ( 1988b ) . The bicoid protein determines position in the Drosophila embryos in a concentration - dependent manner . Cell 54 , 95 - 104 . Driever , W . and Nüsslein - Volhard , C . ( 1989 ) . The Bicoid protein is a positive regulator of hunchback transcription in the early Drosophila embryo . Nature 337 , 138 - 143 . Driever , W . , Thoma , G . and Nüsslein - Volhard , C . ( 1989 ) . Determination of spatial domains of zygotic gene expression in the Drosophila embryo by the affinity of binding sites for the bicoid morphogen . Nature 340 , 363 - 367 . Eldon , E . and Pirrotta , V . ( 1991 ) . Interactions of the Drosophila gap gene giant with maternal and zygotic patterning genes . Development 111 , 367 - 378 . Frasch , M . and Levine , M . ( 1987 ) . Complementary patterns of even - skipped and fushi tarazu expression involve their differential regulation by a common set of segmentation genes in Drosophila . Genes Dev . 1 , 981 - 995 . Frasch , M . , Hoey , T . , Rushlow , C . , Doyle , H . and Levine , M . ( 1987 ) . Characterization and localization of the even - skipped protein of Drosophila . EMBO J . 6 , 749 - 759 . Fujioka , M . , Miskiewicz , P . , Raj , L . , Gulledge , A . , Weir , M . and Goto , T . ( 1996 ) . Drosophila paired regulates even - skipped expression through a composite binding site for the paired domain and the homeodomain . Development 122 , 2697 - 2707 . Gaul , U . and Jäckle , H . ( 1990 ) . Role of gap genes in early Drosophila development . Advances in Genetics 27 , 239 - 275 . Gergen , J . P . and Wieshaus , E . ( 1985 ) . The localized requirements for a gene affecting segmentation in Drosophila : Analysis of larvae mosaic for runt . Dev . Biol . 109 , 321 - 335 . Goto , T . , MacDonald , P . and Maniatis , T . ( 1989 ) . Early and late periodic patterns of even - skipped expression are controlled by distinct regulatory elements that respond to different spatial cues . Cell 57 , 413 - 422 . Hafen , E . , Kuroiwa , A . and Gehring , W . ( 1984 ) . Spatial distribution of transcripts from the segmentation gene fushi tarazu during Drosophila embryonic development . Cell 37 , 833 - 841 . Han , K . and Manley , J . ( 1993 ) . Transcriptional repression by the Drosophila even - skipped protein : deﬁnition of a minimal repression domain . Genes Dev . 7 , 491 - 503 . Harding , K . , Hoey , T . , Warrior , R . and Levine , M . ( 1989 ) . Autoregulatory and gap response elements of the even - skipped promoter of Drosophila . EMBO J . 8 , 1205 - 1212 . Hülskamp , M . , Pfeiﬂe , C . and Tautz , D . ( 1990 ) . A morphogenetic gradient of hunchback protein organizes the expression of the gap genes Kruppel and knirps in the early Drosophila embryo . Nature 346 , 577 - 579 . Hülskamp , M . , Lukowitz , W . , Beermann , A . , Glaser , G . and Tautz , D . ( 1994 ) . Differential regulation of target genes by different alleles of the segmentation gene hunchback in Drosophila . Genetics 138 , 125 - 134 . Jürgens , G . , Lehmann , R . , Schardin , M . and Nüsslein - Volhard , C . ( 1986 ) . Segmental organisation of the head in the embryo of Drosophila melanogaster . A blastoderm fate map of the cuticle structures of the larval head . Roux’s Arch . Dev . Biol . 195 , 359 - 377 . Knipple , D . , Seifert , E . , Rosenberg , U . , Preiss , A . and Jäckle , H . ( 1985 ) . Spatial and temporal patterns of Kruppel gene expression in early Drosophila embryos . Nature 317 , 40 - 44 . Kosman , D . and Small , S . ( 1997 ) . Concentration - dependent patterning by an ectopic expression domain of the Drosophila gap gene knirps . Development 124 , 1343 - 1354 . Kraut , R . and Levine , M . ( 1991a ) . Spatial regulation of the gap gene giant during Drosophila development . Development 111 , 601 - 609 . Kraut , R . and Levine , M . ( 1991b ) . Mutually repressive interactions between the gap genes giant and Kruppel deﬁne middle body regions of the Drosophila embryo . Development 111 , 611 - 621 . Macdonald , P . , Ingham , P . and Struhl , G . ( 1986 ) . Isolation , structure , and expression of even - skipped : A second pair - rule gene of Drosophila containing a homeobox . Cell 47 , 721 - 734 . Margolis , J . , Borowsky , M . , Steingrimsson , E . , Shim , C . , Lengyel , J . and Posakony , J . ( 1995 ) . Posterior stripe expression of hunchback is driven from two promoters by a common enhancer element . Development 121 , 3067 - 3077 . Mohler , J . , Eldon , E . and Pirrotta , V . ( 1989 ) . A novel spatial transcription associated with the segmentation gene , giant , of Drosophila . EMBO J . 8 , 1539 - 1548 . Pankratz , M . , Busch , M . , Hoch , M . , Seifert , E . and Jäckle , M . ( 1992 ) . Spatial control of the gap gene knirps in the Drosophila embryo by posterior morphogen system . Science 255 , 986 - 989 . Pankratz , M . and Jäckle , H . ( 1993 ) . Blastoderm segmentation . In The development of Drosophila melanogaster ( eds . M . Bate and A . Martinez - Arias ) . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press . Petschek , J . , Perrimon , N . and Mahowald , A . ( 1987 ) . Region speciﬁc effects in l ( 1 ) giant embryos of Drosophila . Dev . Biol . 119 , 177 - 189 . Preiss , A . , Rosenberg , U . , Kienlin , A . , Seifert , E . and Jäckle , H . ( 1985 ) . Molecular genetics of Kruppel , a gene required for segmentation of the Drosophila embryo . Nature 313 , 27 - 32 . Reinitz , J . and Levine , M . ( 1990 ) . Control of the initiation of homeotic gene expression by the gap genes giant and tailless in Drosophila . Dev . Biol . 140 , 57 - 72 . Ronchi , E . , Treisman , J . , Dostatni , N . , Struhl , G . and Desplan , C . ( 1993 ) . Down - regulation of the Drosophila morphogen Bicoid by the Torso receptor - mediated signal transduction cascade . Cell 74 , 347 - 355 . Schulz , C . and Tautz , D . ( 1994 ) . Autonomous concentration - dependent activation and repression of Kruppel by hunchback in the Drosophila embryo . Development 120 , 3043 - 3049 . Simpson - Brose , M . , Treisman , J . and Desplan , C . ( 1994 ) . Synergy between the Hunchback and Bicoid morphogens is required for anterior patterning in Drosophila . Cell 78 , 855 - 865 . Small , S . , Kraut , R . , Hoey , T . , Warrior , R . and Levine , M . ( 1991 ) . Transcriptional regulation of a pair - rule stripe in Drosophila . Genes Dev . 5 , 827 - 839 . Small , S . , Blair , A . and Levine , M . ( 1992 ) . Regulation of even - skipped stripe 2 in the Drosophila embryo . EMBO J . 11 , 4047 - 4057 . Small , S . , Arnosti , D . and Levine , M . ( 1993 ) . Spacing ensures autonomous expression of different stripe enhancers in the even - skipped promoter . Development 119 , 767 - 772 . Small , S . , Blair , A . and Levine , M . ( 1996 ) . Regulation of two pair - rule stripes by a single enhancer in the Drosophila embryo . Dev . Biol . 175 , 314 - 324 . Small , S . ( 1997 ) . Mechanisms of segmental pattern formation in Drosophila melanogaster . In Reproductive Biology of Invertebrates ( eds . K . Adiyodi and R . Adiyodi ) . VII pp . 137 - 178 . Spradling , A . ( 1986 ) . P - element mediated transformation . In Drosophila : A Practical Approach ( ed . D . B . Roberts ) . Oxford : IRC Press Limited . Stanojevic , D . , Hoey , T . and Levine , M . ( 1989 ) . Sequence - speciﬁc DNA binding activities of gap proteins encoded by hunchback and Kruppel in Drosophila . Nature 341 , 331 - 335 . Stanojevic , D . , Small , S . and Levine , M . ( 1991 ) . Regulation of a segmentation stripe by overlapping activators and repressors in Drosophila . Science 246 , 1385 - 1387 . Struhl , G . , Struhl , K . and MacDonald , P . ( 1989 ) . The gradient morphogen Bicoid is a concentration - dependent transcriptional activator . Cell 57 , 1259 - 1273 . Struhl , G . , Johnston , P . and Lawrence , P . ( 1992 ) . Control of Drosophila body pattern by the hunchback morphogen gradient . Cell 69 , 237 - 248 . Struhl , G . , Fitzgerald , K . and Greenwald , I . ( 1993 ) . Intrinsic activity of the Lin - 12 and Notch intracellular domains in vivo . Cell 74 , 331 - 345 . St . Johnston , D . and Nüsslein - Volhard , C . ( 1992 ) . The origin of pattern and polarity in the Drosophila embryo . Cell 68 , 201 - 219 . Tautz , D . ( 1988 ) . Regulation of the Drosophila segmentation gene hunchback by two maternal morphogenetic centres . Nature 332 , 281 - 284 . Vavra , S . and Carroll , S . ( 1989 ) . The zygotic control of Drosophila pair - rule gene expression . I . A search for new pair - rule regulatory loci . Development 107 , 663 - 672 . Vinson , C . , Sigler , P . and Mcknight , S . ( 1989 ) . Scissors - grip model for DNA recognition by a family of leucine zipper proteins . Science 246 , 911 - 916 . Wieshaus , E . and Nüsslein - Volhard , C . ( 1986 ) . Looking at embryos . In Drosophila : A Practical Approach ( ed . D . B . Roberts ) . Oxford : IRC Press Limited . X . Wu , R . Vakani and S . Small