Abstract — We present here preliminary findings from our ongoing study of situation awareness in cybersecurity ( cyber - SA ) . Analysis of data collected from the field has produced two preliminary findings . One , cyber - SA is distributed across individuals , technological agents , and functional domains . Two , an absence of effective boundary objects inhibit cross - boundary collaboration and reduce individual cyber - SA . Index Terms — cyber situation awareness , cybersecurity , boundary objects , living lab approach I NTRODUCTION MPROVING cybersecurity and defending networked information and technological assets is an ever present priority for organizations as they struggle to meet the threats posed by organized crime , nation - state based cyber - warfare and espionage , corporate espionage , casual hackers and internal threats . Indeed , even organizations in the business of providing cybersecurity solutions such as RSA and Northrop Grumman have found themselves vulnerable to the increasingly sophisticated attack methods be deployed in cyberspace [ 1 ] . Much of the research on cybersecurity has focused on developing better automated technological tools , algorithms , and sensors [ 2 ] . More recently increased attention has been given developing methods and tools to facilitate improved cyber situation awareness in the human actor ( cyber - SA ) . This paper presents preliminary findings from our ongoing study that seeks to both better understand cyber - SA as a cognitive phenomenon and to develop data fusion and presentation tools to contribute to improved analyst cyber - SA . We present our work in three sections . We briefly summarize and discuss prior work on situation awareness in cyberspace . We then describe our research approach and data collection . Our preliminary findings are presented and the implications are discussed in the final section . P RIOR WORK ON CYBER SITUATION AWARENESS Prior research on cyber - SA has largely focused on developing new technological tools , probabilistic models , and information visualizations to enhance the SA of the human operator . Examples include examining how information visualizations can enhance cyber - SA [ 3 - 5 ] the development of frameworks Manuscript received September 1 , 2011 . for evaluating cyber - attacks [ 6 - 8 ] ; and the use of complex programs to project intrusion activity and assess the impacts of cyber - attacks [ 9 , 10 ] . This work relies heavily on Endsley’s [ 11 ] theorization of SA as being comprised of three levels – perception ( Level 1 ) , comprehension ( Level 2 ) , and projection ( Level 3 ) – in conjunction with the JDL model of data fusion . Though the cognitive work of cybersecurity is similar in many ways to other work employing or within complex systems , there are at least three features of cybersecurity that make it unique . One , the operational space is boundless with minimal geographical features . While an analyst may know the boundaries of his own internal network external cyberspace is limitless . The link between cyberspace and the geography of the physical world is tenuous . As a result , unlike operating a vehicle or flying an aircraft , the environment from which the human actor has to perceive salient cues is vastly larger and more difficult to comprehend . Comprehending even a small segment of cyberspace is an extraordinary cognitive challenge . Two , the rate at which the cyberspace changes is much faster that other environments bound by physical constraints . New vulnerabilities and corresponding exploits are continuously emerging , new offensive technologies are constantly being developed , and the physical geography is constantly changing . Further , modern exploits often are either employed through misdirection – e . g . , a distributed denial of service attack ( DDoS ) through compromised computers in a BotNET – or delivered passively via embedded malware . A combat airspace with a similar dynamic would have new aircraft with new weapons representing new unknown entities appearing instantaneously . Further , those same enemies would be capable of compromising friendly aircraft to attack the defender or by secretly deploying the weapons payload on the defender’s aircraft . The constant high rate of change in cyberspace quickly makes mental models obsolete . Three , everything the cybersecurity analyst knows about the environment is a virtual representation of the cyberspace mediated by a technological artifact . Unlike a combat pilot that can physically sense the g - force of hard turn and see the physical geography ( usually ) , the cyber - analyst only sees the information her sensors are capable of detecting in a form that can be rendered on the screen of her computer . Everything the cyber - analyst knows about the cyber - environment is in the form of digital information – be it intrusion detection alerts , firewall logs , or open - source intelligence . Because knowledge of cyberspace – and therefore perception and comprehension The Distributed Nature of Cyber Situation Awareness Michael Tyworth , Nicklaus A . Giacobe , Vincent Mancuso , Christopher Dancy I 2012 IEEE International Multi - Disciplinary Conference on Cognitive Methods in Situation Awareness and Decision Support , New Orleans , LA 978 - 1 - 4673 - 0345 - 3 / 12 / $ 31 . 00 ©2012 IEEE 174 of cyberspace – is inherently mediated by tech artifacts the human agent’s ability to develop awareness is greatly mitigated by the degree t network’s sensors are correctly configured an mission - critical data . These differences motivate our research qu SA different from SA in other environments ; To begin answering that question we started w cybersecurity professionals in order to unders cognitive work as it is actually practiced . R ESEARCH D ESIGN AND D ATA C OLL A . The Living Lab Approach We employ a living lab approach to our res Living Lab approach is an ecological approac integrates theory , practice , and context [ 12 ] . T approach is comprised of ethnographic study , elicitation using traditional cognitive engineer experimentation using scaled - world simulatio development of reconfigurable prototypes for field . Figure 1 - The Living Lab Approa The core premise of the Living Lab approa grounding of theoretical insights in the contex understanding of professional practice . Findin laboratory - based experiments are validated th application to practice via the development of interfaces . Lessons learned in the field are us refinement of existing – or the development o As a cyclical model the Living Lab approac research to begin at any point along the cycle . wanted to first understand what cyber - security actually do in practice we began with ethnogr knowledge elicitation . B . Data Collection and Analysis Our field research consisted of 23 semi - stru of cyber - security professionals and ethnograp of cadets from the United States Military Aca in the 2011 Cyber - Defense Exercise run by th Security Agency . We chose the semi - structur format because it allows for directed inquiry a exploration of data that emerges during the co interview [ 13 , 14 ] . Each semi - structured interview was approxi in duration and consisted of 20 to 25 predesig The predesigned questions were designed to e hnological situation to which the nd capturing uestion : Is cyber - and if so how ? with talking to stand their LECTION search . The ch to design that The Living Lab knowledge ring methods , ons , and the r evaluation in the ach ach is the xtual ngs derived from hrough f prototype sed to inform the of new theory . ch allows for . Because we y analysts raphic study and uctured interviews phic observation ademy competing he National red interview and deeper ourse of the imately one - hour gned questions . elicit data about four areas of inquiry : routine work a processes associated with the develo information , and information - proces analysts ; and the influence of organi policy , culture , and work environme cyber - SA . Domain Military Government Education Table 1 - Interviews Informants were triangulated acro ( military contractor , education , gove responsibility ( intrusion detection an administration , management ) to incr findings by reducing the impact of th one source of data [ 15 , 16 ] . All but were conducted by teams of two or t ensure accuracy of data collection . In addition to performing semi - str conducted ethnographic observation Military Academy participating in th Exercise . Our ethnographic observat three researchers over a period of tw team members focused their observa dynamics ( perception , comprehensio individual team members ; the inform cadets relied on the most to detect , a intrusions ; and intergroup communic detection and response . After each o team debriefed and compared notes . All interview data was transcribed observational data was then coded u research software 1 . F INDINGS Two preliminary findings have em cyber - SA distributed across individu agents in different operational doma effective boundary objects to facilita communication impedes developme SA . We qualify these findings as pr need conduct further field work and further validate them . A . Cyber - SA is distributed across teams , and functional domain In cybersecurity , the “big picture” individuals and technological agents functional domains because the pictu large no individual can comprehend sufficient detail . We identify at leas 1 See http : / / www . qsrinternational . com / produc activity ; cognitive opment of cyber - SA ; data , ssing tools used by izational variables such as ent on the development of # of Interviews 14 4 5 Quantified oss industrial sector ernment ) and across work nalyst , system rease the validity of our he subjective bias of any the four of the interviews three interviewers to ructured interviews we ns of the United States he 2011 Cyber Defense tions were conducted by wo days . The research ations on cyber - SA on , and projection ) among mation technologies the analyze , and understand cation related to intrusion observation session the d . Both the interview and using NVivo qualitative S merged from our data . One , uals and technological ains . Two , the lack of ate cross - domain nt of higher level cyber - reliminary because we experimental research to s agents , individuals , s is distributed across s operating in different ure of cyberspace is so it in its entirety in st four of these functional cts _ nvivo . aspx . 175 domains : tactical / intrusion detection , operatio administration , threat landscape analysis , and management / policy . Individuals operating in domains have incomplete domain - specific cyb understand what is happening from their persp generally have incomplete or no knowledge o of individuals operating in other functional do Figure 2 - Cybersecurity Domain For example , the intrusion detection analys consistently remarked on negative impact thei knowledge of the systems and networks they had on their ability to distinguish signal ( threa ( benevolent traffic ) . Policymakers similarly understanding of the current threat landscape network because their network defense provid to report malicious but unsuccessful activity t penetrate the network . In this sense cyber - SA exhibits a Distribute Awareness ( DSA ) dynamic in which individu own awareness which may be very different b with other agents [ 17 ] . DSA theory describe being distributed across both human and non - and only shared when there is task overlap . In precisely what we found in the field : cyber - S shared among team members when there is go Distributed Situation Awareness theory also we saw in the field in terms of SA being distri both individual human actors and technologic example , intrusion detection sensors do the m perception of malicious traffic for intrusion de These sensors , in effect cognitive artifacts pro analysts to inspect traffic and match rule - base traffic as malicious , alert the analyst and block Because the sensors are rule - based however , i detection sensors often miss emergent forms o analysts have not yet created rules for them . W happens the analysts inspect the traffic themse characteristics and make a determination on it ( malicious or benign ) . This inspection proces consultation with other analysts , researching o intelligence websites , and simply monitoring comparing it to their experienced - derived men the network they are monitoring . There are two other aspects of DSA theory we saw in the field . One , DSA theory posits t onal / system n these functional ber - SA : they pective but of the cyber - SA omains . ns sts we spoke ir lack were monitoring ats ) from noise lacked an facing their ders were failing that failed to ed Situation uals hold their but compatible es team - SA as - human agents , ndeed this is SA only becomes oal overlap . o describes what ibuted across cal actors . For majority of etection analysts . ogrammed by the ed patterns flag k the traffic . intrusion of attack as the When this elves , study its ts nature ss may include open - source the traffic and ntal models of that reflect what that situation awareness holds loosely - coupled sys another way , that a cognitive system cybersecurity system is held togethe individuals operating in different fun degree to which the cybersecurity sy threat is a function of the awareness intrusion detection analyst , the syste forensic analyst , the policymaker , an landscape analyst . Two , DSA theory the degree to w actors in the system overlaps is direc extent to which their goals overlap . saw in the field and learned in our in working in the policy and operations unaware of the nature and volume o directed towards their network becau disposed of by the network intrusion comment . This can be problematic f and in policymakers in particular , be incomplete understanding of the sev activity to which their assets are exp analogous to a battlefield commande enemy is probing his line because fo not bother reporting the squad of ene destroyed / repulsed . The reason this happens is becaus detection analysts , their sole focus is blocking malicious activity . They ar larger threat landscape , an in practic takes to do that work effectively pro able to , even if they wanted to . As o be a problem because traffic my get broader perspective . The inverse of this dynamic also o working in the operations and threat domains often do not provide missio intrusion detection analysts resulting limited understanding . For example and IDS analyst to diagnosis traffic a out upon contacting the monitored n that no , that traffic is actually approv that repeatedly came up during inter working in threat analysis domain w information on traffic from a particu particular device , without providing information as to why . As a result , t monitoring traffic without knowing worthy of special attention . B . Lack of effective boundary obj development The functional domains of cyber s both physical and virtual boundaries domains are rarely collocated in larg even work for the same organization separating the functional domains ar information is only able to only part stems together . Or , put m is held together by the er by the awareness of the nctional domains . The ystem can respond to a of individuals : the em administrator , the nd perhaps the threat which the SA of individual ctly correlated to the Again , that is what we nterviews . Individuals s domains are often f malicious activity use it is caught and n analysts without for system administrators ecause they have verity of the malicious posed . This dynamic is er not being aware that the orward operating base did emy they engaged and se for the intrusion s on identifying and re not concerned about the ce , the cognitive effort it ohibits them from being one subject noted , this can missed for lack of a occurs . Individuals t landscape analysis on - salient information to g in wasted effort and e , it is not uncommon for as suspicious only to find network administrators , ved . Similarly , a comment rviews was that operators would regularly ask for ular device , or directed at a further contextual the IDS specialists were why it was important or jects impedes Cyber - SA ecurity are separated by s . Operators in these ge enterprises , and may not ns . The boundaries re opaque ; and task - salient tially pass through the 176 boundaries . As a result , individuals’ domain - SA is degraded as a result of lacking key info knowledge from other domains . We draw on boundary objects theory to des dynamic for two reasons . One , boundary obje conceptually aligns well with distributed situa theory in that it describes distributed cognitive on partially shared understandings . Two , bou theory describes collaborative work among he communities of practice of the type we see in work . Boundary objects theory comes out of socio Originally developed to describe how differen of practice , with their own terminologies , foci understandings are able to collaborate on scie Communities of practice were are able to coll theory posits , because there are objects that sp boundaries of the community that are at once form to be commonly understood by all comm plastic enough to be uniquely understood by e Star originally proposed four archetype bound repositories ( such as libraries & database ) , for coincident boundaries ( such as maps ) , and ide objects such as models . Central to the concep object was that there was in all boundary obje of standardization that allowed the object to b understood by different communities by estab terminology . Since it was introduced , bounda has been applied to the study of computer - sup cooperative work , aircraft maintenance , produ inter - organizational information sharing [ 19 - 2 In the settings we examined , task - salient in crosses domain boundaries primarily in the fo standardized reports . The reports codified in information in a standardized form that was th unique ways by operators in the different func Intrusion detection analysts used the standard three ways . One , the report served as a way to of an incident . Two , the report was how the a communicated to their customers and their ow team information about incidents of malicious been identified . Three , in archived form , the r a knowledge repository that could be consulte researching suspicious , but previously uniden Our research suggests that cybersecurity re customizability rather than standardization ac echoing Lee’s [ 22 ] earlier argument for viewi objects as boundary - negotiating artifacts . The working in the different functional domains n information in other domains , but in a way tha customize to their own operational purposes . policymaker needs information on intrusion a much higher level than that which the intrusio analysts need . Similarly , administrators work operational domain need information about th and vulnerabilities of the type available on op intelligence websites but in actionable form ra - specific cyber - rmation or scribe this ects theory ation awareness e work that relies undary objects eterogeneous cybersecurity ology of work . nt communities i , and entific work [ 18 ] . laborate , the pan the rigid enough in munities , and each community . dary objects : rms , terrain with eal / platonic pt of a boundary ects some degree be commonly blishing common ary object theory pported uct design , and 21 ] . nformation orm of ncident hen used in ctional domains . ized reports in o track the status analysts wn management s activity that has reports served as ed by analysts ntified traffic . quires cross boundaries , ing boundary e individuals need access to at they can For example , the activity but at a on detection king in the he latest exploits pen source ather than in the signature form useful to IDS analyst Figure 3 - Visualiza Some preliminary work that we h navigable information visualizations fulfill this boundary object role and aggregate cyber - SA by improving th analysts . Drawing on work we did f Specifically we are exploring the vis from hard and soft ( e . g . , human ) sen [ 23 ] . F UTURE RESEA In our future research we seek to the findings presented here and use t visualization tool that we can then d field . Currently we are in the proces based experiments using a scaled - wo scenarios are derived in part from th collected in the field . The current ro focuses on transactive memory and t experiments will focus on measuring prototype visualization on cyber - SA We also will be returning to the fi empirical data on practicing cyberse are considering employing a modifie Analysis for Systemic Teamwork ( E framework developed by Baber and data collection [ 24 ] . Finally we will continue developm tool we developed for the VAST Ch primitive prototype , the tool shows s Indeed the tool was recognized as an by challenge organizers . As part of our focus will not only be on develo visualizations , but also the underlyin C ONCLUSIO This paper presents two prelimina ongoing research into cyber - SA . On across human and technological acto functional domains . Two , there is a boundary - objects to facilitate cross - b information and knowledge and this of cyber - SA throughout the system . ts . ation Tool ave done suggests that s may be well suited to potentially improve the he cyber - SA of individual for the IEEE VAST . sualization of data fused nsors to enhance cyber - SA ARCH further validate and extend them to further develop a deploy back out in to the ss of designing scenario - orld simulation . The he empirical data we have ound of experiments task load . Future g the impact of our A . ield to collect more ecurity professionals . We ed version of the Event EAST ) methodological Stanton in this phase of ment of the visualization hallenge . Though a significant promise . n innovative tool adaption this development process oping and improving the ng fusion algorithms . ON ary findings from our ne , cyber - SA is distributed ors operating in different lack of effective boundary sharing of inhibits the development 177 The distributed nature of cyber - SA and the lack of effective cross - boundary information sharing pose significant challenges to practitioners . As noted above , incomplete information results in incomplete understanding of the cyberspace and wasted effort . To improve cyber - SA it is critical that we develop practices and technologies that increase the flow of salient information across the boundaries of the functional domain . As we proceed with our ongoing research program we are seeking to further validate these findings and apply our insights into the development of new technological artifacts capable of facilitating cross - boundary collaboration in cybersecurity . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] F . Y . Rashid . ( 2011 , August 1 , 2011 ) . Northrop Grumman , L - 3 Communications Hacked via Cloned RSA SecurID Tokens . eWeek . com . Available : http : / / www . eweek . com / c / a / Security / Northrop - Grumman - L3 - Communications - Hacked - via - Cloned - RSA - SecurID - Tokens - 841662 / [ 2 ] E . McMillan and M . Tyworth , " An Alternative Framework for Research on Situational Awareness in Computer Network Defense , " in Situational Awareness in Computer Network Defense : Principles , Methods and Applications , C . Onwubiko and T . Owens , Eds . , ed New York : IGI Global , 2012 . [ 3 ] A . D ' Amico , K . Whitley , D . Tesone , B . O ' Brien , and E . Roth , " Achieving Cyber Defense Situational Awareness : A Cognitive Task Analysis of Information Assurance Analysts , " in Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 49th Annual Meeting , Orlando , FL , 2005 , pp . 229 - 233 . [ 4 ] A . D ' Amico and M . Kocka , " Information assurance visualizations for specific stages of situational awareness and intended uses : lessons learned , " in IEEE Workshop on Visualization for Computer Security ( VizSEC 05 ) , Minneapolis , Minnesota , 2005 , pp . 107 - 112 . [ 5 ] M . Gregoire and L . Beaudoin . ( 2005 , June , 2010 ) . Visualisation for Network Situational Awareness in Computer Network Defence . Meeting Proceedings RTO - MP - IST - 043 , 20 . 1 - 20 . 6 . Available : http : / / www . rto . nato . int / abstracts . asp [ 6 ] S . Mathew , C . Shah , and S . Upadhyaya , " An alert fusion framework for situation awareness of coordinated multistage attacks , " in Third IEEE International Workshop on Information Assurance , College Park , Maryland , 2005 , pp . 95 - 104 . [ 7 ] M . Sudit , A . Stotz , and M . Holender , " Situational awareness of a coordinated cyber attack , " in SPIE Conference on Data Mining , Intrusion Detection , Information Assurance , and Data Networks Security , Orlando , FL , USA , 2005 , pp . 114 - 129 . [ 8 ] M . Sudit , A . Stotz , M . Holender , W . Tagliaferri , and K . Canarelli , " Measuring situational awareness and resolving inherent high - level fusion obstacles , " in SPIE Conference on Multisensor , Multisource Information Fusion : Architectures , Algorithms , and Applications , Orlando , FL , 2006 , pp . 624205 - 9 . [ 9 ] D . Shen , G . Chen , L . Haynes , and E . Blasch , " Strategies Comparison for Game Theoretic Cyber Situatational Awareness , " D . o . Defense , Ed . , ed . Washington , D . C . : Defense Technical Information Center , 2007 , p . 9 . [ 10 ] S . J . Yang , S . Byers , J . Holsopple , B . Argauer , and D . Fava , " Intrusion activity projection for cyber situational awareness , " in IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics ( ISI 2008 ) . Tapei , Taiwan , 2008 , pp . 167 - 172 . [ 11 ] M . R . Endsley , " Toward a Theory of Situation Awareness in Dynamic Systems , " Human Factors : The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society , vol . 37 , pp . 32 - 64 , 1995 . [ 12 ] M . D . McNeese , " An Ecological Perspective applied to Multi - Operator Systems , " in Human Factors in Organizational Design and Management - V , O . Brown Jr . and H . W . Hendrick , Eds . , ed Amsterdam : Elsevier Science B . V . , 1996 , pp . 365 - 370 . [ 13 ] J . P . Spradley , The ethnographic interview . New York : Holt , Rinehart and Winston , 1979 . [ 14 ] W . F . Whyte , " Interviewing Strategy and Tactics , " in Learning from the Field : A Guide from Experience , W . F . Whyte and K . K . Whyte , Eds . , ed Beverly Hills : Sage Publications , 1984 , pp . 97 - 112 . [ 15 ] T . D . Jick , " Mixing Qualitative and Quantitative Methods : Triangulation in Action , " Administrative Science Quarterly , vol . 24 , p . 602 , Dec 1979 . [ 16 ] E . P . Jack and A . S . Raturi , " Lessons learned from methodological triangulation in management research , " Management Research News , vol . 29 , pp . 345 - 357 , 2006 . [ 17 ] N . A . Stanton , R . Stewart , D . Harris , R . J . Houghton , C . Baber , R . McMaster , P . Salmon , G . Hoyle , G . Walker , M . S . Young , M . Linsell , R . Dymott , and D . Green , " Distributed situation awareness in dynamic systems : theoretical development and application of an ergonomics methodology , " Ergonomics , vol . 49 , pp . 1288 - 1311 , 2006 / 10 / 10 2006 . [ 18 ] S . L . Star , " The Structure of Ill - Structured Solutions : Boundary Objects and Heterogeneous Distributed Problem Solving , " in Readings in Distributed Artificial Intelligence , M . Kuhn and L . Gasser , Eds . , ed Menlo Park , CA : Morgan Kaufman , 1989 , pp . 36 - 54 . [ 19 ] M . S . Ackerman and C . Halverson , " Organizaitonal Memory : Processes , Boundary Objects , and Trajectories , " in 32nd Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences HICSS ' 99 , Kauai , Hawaii , 1999 . [ 20 ] C . P . Lee , " Boundary Negotiating Artifacts : Unbinding the Routine of Boundary Objects and Embracing Chaos in Collaborative Work , " Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 16 , pp . 307 - 339 , 2007 . [ 21 ] W . G . Lutters and M . S . Ackerman , " Beyond Boundary Objects : Collaborative Reuse in Aircraft Technical Support , " Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 16 , pp . 341 - 372 , 2007 . [ 22 ] C . P . Lee , " Boundary Negotiating Artifacts : Unbinding the Routine of Boundary Objects and Embracing Chaos in Collaborative Work , " Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 16 , pp . 307 - 339 , 2007 . [ 23 ] N . Giacobe and S . Xu , " Geovisual Analytics for Cyber Security : Adopting GeoViz Toolkit , " presented at the IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology ( VAST ) , Providence , RI , 2011 . [ 24 ] G . H . Walker , H . Gibson , N . A . Stanton , C . Baber , P . Salmon , and D . Green , " Event analysis of systemic teamwork ( EAST ) : a novel integration of ergonomics methods to analyse C4i activity , " Ergonomics , vol . 49 , pp . 1345 - 1369 , 2006 / 10 / 10 2006 . 178