Infrastructures of the Imagination : Community Design for Speculative Urban Technologies Karl Baumann University of Southern California 3470 McClintock Ave Los Angeles , CA , USA kbaumann @ usc . edu Benjamin Stokes American University 4400 Massachuse ! s Ave NW Washington , DC , USA bstokes @ american . edu François Bar University of Southern California 3630 Wa ! Way Los Angeles , CA , USA fbar @ usc . edu Ben Caldwell Kaos Network 4343 Leimert Blvd Los Angeles , CA , USA bencaldwell ﬁ lm @ aol . com ABSTRACT Recent speculative and critical design practices may critique the dominant socio - cultural assumptions of technologies , but often lack diversity and participatory input outside the privileged realm of academic and professional designers . # is paper investigates the process and potential of designing speculative futures with local communities , in order to collectively imagine technology that serves a common good and reinforces local identity . # is study re ﬂ ects on the “Sankofa City” 1 project , a three - month community - university collaboration based in a historically black neighborhood in South Los Angeles . # e project utilized design ﬁ ction scenario videos and collages to present provocative design concepts to local stakeholder meetings and the general public . # is paper analyzes the methodology and outcomes of co - designing emerging technologies ( such as augmented reality and self - driving cars ) in order to establish “infrastructures of the imagination” for long - term strategies and alternative cultural models of innovation . CCS CONCEPTS • Participatory Design • Field Studies • Scenario - based KEYWORDS Community - based Design , Speculative Design , Infrastructuring , Design Fiction , Urban Technology , Autonomous Vehicles , AR ACM Reference format : K . Baumann , B . Stokes , F . Bar , and B . Caldwell . 2017 . In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Communities and Technologies ( C & T ' 17 ) , 4 pages . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 3083671 . 3083700 Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . C & T ' 17 , June 26 - 30 , 2017 , Troyes , France © 2017 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4854 - 6 / 17 / 06 $ 15 . 00 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3083671 . 3083700 1 INTRODUCTION The current population shift toward the urban core in US cities has created an exciting and delicate time for urban innovation and design . Attempts to bring new technology can easily aggravate disparities , undermining local culture and disproportionately benefiting newcomers . How can community - based speculative design help to retain cultural values and plan for the future , especially with technology ? Infrastructures of the imagination is a method to empower local populations to engage with emerging technologies in their own cultural terms and even to design potential implementations . By focusing on imagination , rather than strictly practical or feasible designs , we hoped to encourage non - expert participation in the design process . Rather than trying to fix contemporary problems , speculative processes use design to push the imagination toward wholly new sociotechnical systems . The project here is part of a longer - term collaboration , started in the South Los Angeles community of Leimert Park - a neighborhood famous for African - American music and culture , and where the construction of a new subway line threatens significant ethnic and population shifts [ 1 ] . Within this context , the authors started The Leimert Phone Company ( LPC ) in 2012 as a design collaborative , bringing together a university lab and a community art center . Three of the authors were initially from based at a nearby university while the other author owns and organizes a community art center . We use rapid - prototyping workshops to empower community - student groups to imagine technological interventions in the built environment [ 2 ] . While we initially repurposed familiar urban objects ( payphones , bus benches , newspapers boxes , and community gardens ) the “Sankofa City” project co - designs emerging or yet - to - exist technologies . By focusing on speculative technologies , we sought to give participants a greater sense of imaginative freedom . Our method used “what if” questions to define parameters and provoke brainstorming , but the participants determined the designs . They created a range of concepts in the form of basic prototypes , collages , and a final design fiction video . Participant groups gravitated towards certain “what if” conceptual domains over others , revealing that the methodology was useful for generating designs and also tracking what did not resonate with local participants and their desires for the future . The participant groups came up with a wide range of designs : 1 . ) self - driving public shuttles that dynamically display local history along the route , 2 . ) socially networked shoes that communicate when nearby C & T’17 , 26 - 30 June 2017 , Troyes , France K . Baumann et al . 2 friends are having a pop - up event or basketball game , 3 . ) augmented reality glasses that overlay “deep time” and ancestral history onto the present , and 4 . ) a musical park equipped with a sensor - based public garden that provides food while offering activities for unemployed youth and the homeless ( Figure 1 ) . Each concept was a synthesis of community participant and university student collaborations , designed to resonate with local issues and desires for the future . Figure 1 . Group designs : self - driving shuttles ( top left ) , networked shoes ( top right ) , interactive garden ( bottom left ) , and ancestral augmented reality ( bottom right ) . 2 DESIGNING FOR THE COMMONS Speculative and critical design [ 3 ] and design fiction [ 4 ] have emerged in recent years as experimental forms of design that represent alternative , critical , or yet - to - exist design objects and interfaces . Bordering on conceptual art and science fiction , the practices have a strong emphasis on aesthetics , storytelling , and conceptual provocation . However , speculative and critical design have been critiqued as a privileged space that is either elitist [ 5 ] or ignores issues of class , race , and gender [ 6 ] . One strategy for speculative design would be to ground the work within a community context , drawing from processes of co - design and participatory design . Participatory design ( PD ) initially emerged in Scandinavia as a method for democratizing workplaces , but has evolved to engage a wide range of groups such as elderly , immigrant , and indigenous populations [ 2 , 7 , 8 ] . By collaborating directly , designers gain a better understanding of users’ desires – and more importantly – incorporate alternative cultural practices and social beliefs into their designs . The “Sankofa City” project worked with community participants to define their preferable futures , often tied to local African - American cultural norms and social practices . Their imagined futures can present alternatives to dominant techno - cultures , associated with Silicon Valley [ 9 ] or “The California Ideology” [ 10 ] , which is characterized as socially progressive while economically neoliberal , using proprietary techno - systems to replace traditional government services or organized labor . In contrast , the Leimert Phone Company ( LPC ) is driven by an ethos of developing public technology for the “commons . ” In the Commonwealth [ 11 ] , political philosophers Hardt and Negri argue that urban centers present the most powerful potentials for establishing the “commons” through encounters across different populations , in order to combat the isolation and individualism of neoliberalist socio - economic practices . The LPC process of design is based on deliberate encounters , or contact zones [ 8 ] , particularly between outsiders and local residents . As the new subway will connect Leimert Park to the rest of the city , there will inevitably be an influx of outside populations . Rather than be defensive or self - victimizing , our projects seek to create public technologies that facilitate meaningful encounters or direct outsiders to engage with local cultural history and institutions . We have previously created a constellation [ 12 ] of designs around contact zones , while developing long - term strategies for capacity building and sustainable growth . 3 SPECULATIVE COMMUNITY PROCESS The “Sankofa City” project teamed USC students with local residents , musicians , and artists . All workshops took place at the Kaos Network art center in Leimert Park , with another workshop at the USC film school’s green screen stage to shoot a design fiction video . The workshops were run as an experimental course , facilitated by the first author , who is a USC PhD student , and the fourth author , who is owns and operates the art center . Workshops met for twelve weeks , with a final public presentation at the end . The size varied from week to week , peaking at 16 participants in the early weeks . We had 4 regular students , 2 occasional students , 2 - 9 community participants , and 2 - 4 organizers . One unexpected participant / organizer was a design graduate student , who is developing public autonomous - shuttles . A wide range of guest speakers were also invited , including urban planners , local historians , an AR designer , a critical race professor , a game designer , a media theorist , and a multimedia designer . The process included 3 phases , plus a final exhibition : 1 . ) Brainstorming – high level concepts organized around “what if” hypothetical questions and systematic imagining of the neighborhood . Groups rotated weekly . 2 . ) Prototyping – groups solidify to create personas and prototypes ( wearables and urban objects ) engaging the larger systematic concepts . 3 . ) Design Fictions – designs and personas synthesize into scenarios to create design fiction collages and a video . 4 . ) Presentation – groups present their collages and videos to a local planning committee of stakeholders . This process began with a broad set of ideas and then syphoned down to a more focused set of particular designs , personas , and scenario collages / videos . Throughout the process , we intentionally balanced futurist provocations with local history and existing urban forms , as well as systemic approaches with human - centric design perspectives . Infrastructures of the Imagination : Community Design for Speculative Urban Technologies C & T’17 , 26 - 30 June 2017 , Troyes , France 3 3 . 1 Speculative “what if” questions To envision the future , we used hypothetical “what if” questions to guide the process , acting as provocations [ 3 ] to trigger the participants’ imagination while creating an infrastructure for collaborative brainstorming . Rather than completely open - ended questions , workshops benefit from thematic constraints to focus designs and keep them from traveling into the purely fantastical . The questions ranged from socializing new technology ( like self - driving cars ) to more structural issues ( like sustainable gardening and no private property ) . Augmented reality was also offered as a personal technology relevant to all groups . Below are the provocations listed from specific to general : 1 . Autonomous Vehicles : What if self - driving shuttles replaced privately owned vehicles ? 2 . City as Instrument : What if the city could be played like a musical instrument ? 3 . Gardening Community : What if the city was built around community gardening / farming ? 4 . No Private Property : What if there was no private property and no policing ? The questions were created by the organizers , based on our community partner’s ( fourth author’s ) insights into ongoing issues within the community and Los Angeles generally ( Table 1 ) . As Dunne and Raby point out , the benefit of speculative design is to tackle wicked problems that plague society or design thinking [ 3 ] . By suspending our beliefs in contemporary solutions , we are able to collectively search for novel solutions and inventions . What if ? Issues and Concerns Autonomous Vehicles Traffic , parking , and attention City as Musical Instrument Cultural heritage and engagement Garden Community Sustainability and Healthy food options No Private Property Homelessness , affordability and policing Table 1 : “What if” prompts related to local and wicked problems . 3 . 2 Initial Outcomes and Issues As groups synthesized their designs , there was a noticeable gap in which “what if” questions stuck and which slipped away . For example , ideas generated from the No Private Property group were not present by the fourth week . This may indicate that the prompt was too open or systematically complex . While City as Musical Instrument and Garden Community were not tied to one single technology , they immediately conjured up design objects . Participants could quickly grasp urban furniture , musical instruments , and urban farming . In contrast , No Private Property appeared too abstract and required a more drastic leap away from our current property - based economic system . In trying to tackle economic issues as well as homelessness and policing , the concept proved too vast and slippery for the allotted workshop time . While No Private Property was an explicit prompt for creating the “commons , ” the other questions intuitively generated alternative forms of property . The Gardening Community group imagined collective urban farms that functioned through shared labor , training programs ( for unemployed youth or homeless ) , and non - monetary exchange . The Autonomous Vehicles group imagined self - driving shuttles as shared work spaces , and the City as Instrument group imagined interactive musical parks for public collaboration . So rather than introduce the “commons” concept from the top - down , groups organically imagined designs that modeled socio - technical systems for the common good . 3 . 3 Infrastructures of the Imagination Throughout the workshops , it was invaluable to re - present previous week’s work and develop a shared vocabulary . Even at the stage of brainstorming and paper prototyping , technology can be conceptually challenging . As new community participants rotated in , some were alienated by casual uses of design jargon or technological terms ( like “augmented reality” ) . It was a crucial lesson for infrastructuring [ 2 ] as we sought to empower participants to understand emerging speculative technologies . As Kafai et al . argue , community - based technology education programs cannot simply focus on technical literacy but must also emphasize normative dimensions of long - term cultural adoption [ 13 ] . One novel approach from an older ( and highly dedicated ) participant , was to imagine augmented reality overlays as a tool for seeing ancestral temporalities within the present world . By pairing his spiritual beliefs with the technology , he found a more meaningful cultural engagement . Beyond technical literacy , infrastructures of the imagination establish conceptual frames that merge speculative design thinking with local worldviews . 4 SCENARIOS FROM THE FUTURE After four weeks of rotating groups to cross - pollinate ideas , we finalized groups to create personas , prototypes , and scenarios . 4 . 1 Personas and Contact Zones Groups created personas to focus on individual users and ground designs in the community experience [ 4 ] . Indeed , two personas were directly inspired by the community participants , essentially writing themselves into the future . Groups also created “outsider” personas , since the neighborhood is focused on cultural preservation in the face of rapid urban development . Teams thus designed around encounters or contact zones [ 8 ] - meeting points of difference across professional , ethnic , geographic , and class identities - to tie their designs to the larger civic complexity of their neighborhood and to create urban “commons” [ 11 ] . 4 . 2 Rapid - Prototyping and Scenarios C & T’17 , 26 - 30 June 2017 , Troyes , France K . Baumann et al . 4 Workshops strategically alternated between top - down systemic perspectives and bottom - up human centric designs . One week , groups created future neighborhood models out of foam , plastic , and wood . Another week , participants prototyped augmented reality glasses and wearable tech ( Figure 2 ) . Shifting between the systemic and the human - centric fostered conversations and designs that could create an ecosystem of modular and interrelated activities . Each individual design object was not an isolated element , but were Things [ 7 ] , i . e , socio - material assemblages that generated relationships between people and places . Figure 2 . Neighborhood design ( left ) , brainstorming ( top right ) and rapid - prototyping wearables ( bottom right ) . For public presentation , groups created scenarios [ 14 ] that synthesized their personas and urban technologies . They created visual collages of a day - in - the - life in their future neighborhood , often interweaving multiple scenarios to show the modularity of their concepts . For example , the garden based design ( Figure 1 ) represented 1 . ) an interactive musical fountain to activate the local park , 2 . ) maintaining the continuing presence of drum circles , and 3 . ) a community garden that has sensors to keep track of water levels . The autonomous vehicle group showed 1 . ) vehicles could have AR history tours for visitors , 2 . ) paratransit for local families , and 3 . ) drones to trade produce across neighborhoods . 4 . 3 Design Fiction Video In each of our previous LPC community design projects , we have used “design fiction videos” [ 4 ] to utilize the power of movie making ( echoing science fiction ) to visualize our speculative designs . For this project , we went a step further to use 3D modeling and visual effects ( VFX ) to present designs that we could not build . The video represented the experience of a visitor driving through Leimert Park and becoming enraptured by the rich local musical history and architecture . 4 PUBLIC PRESENTATION Community is never singular , but is multi - dimensional , much as many PD theorists have adopted Dewey’s term publics [ 7 ] . The final outcome of our workshop series was a public presentation at a local stakeholders and planning group . Our participants presented 7 collages and their final video to provoke dialogue about long - term strategies for developing new technologies . The video was particularly effective in bringing the designs to life and incorporating local archival music footage . Community members said that they were “inspired” and asked to join future workshop series . The organizer claimed it ws “the ﬁ rst time I’ve seen [ the university ] do something signi ﬁ cant…where urban planning and community values and taste are brought together . ” His statement spoke to an appreciation of the process and not just the designs . 5 CONCLUSION By working with communities directly , speculative design can expand its methodological horizons and empower groups to imagine alternative future solutions to “wicked problems . ” Focusing on imaginative possibilities , prompted by “what if ? ” questions , frees participants to explore ideas and connections , with less deference to expert contributions . Long - term envisioning can also suggest more immediate planning strategies that support the “commons . ” But formal and conceptual unknowns can be alienating and require infrastructuring to create shared vocabularies tied to local worldviews . Video is particularly powerful for visualizing the more nebulous concepts and for additional community recruitment . While the project received positive feedback , the direct effect on local planning is yet to be seen . This project demonstrates and advances our understanding of infrastructures of the imagination that empower local communities to develop future designs , concepts , and strategies that are in line with their local culture and future trajectory . REFERENCES [ 1 ] E . A . Kaplan . 2013 . Leimert Park : Where does it go from here ? Departures . KCET . Retrieved December 3 , 2013 . [ 2 ] Karasti , H . Infrastructuring in participatory design . Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference : Research Papers - Volume 1 , ACM ( 2014 ) , 141 - 150 . [ 3 ] Dunne , A . and Raby , F . 2013 . Speculative everything : design , fiction , and social dreaming . MIT Press . [ 4 ] Mark Blythe . 2014 . Research through design fiction : narrative in real and imaginary abstracts . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 703 – 712 . [ 5 ] Simon Bowen . 2010 . Critical theory and participatory design . Proceedings of CHI , Citeseer . [ 6 ] Luiza Prado de O . Martins . 2014 . Privilege and oppression : Towards a feminist speculative design . Proceedings of DRS 2014 : Design’s big debates : 980 – 990 . [ 7 ] Björgvinsson , E . , Ehn , P . , and Hillgren , P . - A . Agonistic participatory design : working with marginalised social movements . CoDesign 8 , ( 2012 ) , 127 - 144 . [ 8 ] Sabiescu , A . G . , David , S . , van Zyl , I . , and Cantoni , L . Emerging spaces in community - based participatory design : reflections from two case studies . Proceedings of the 13 th Participatory Design Conference : Research Papers - Volume 1 , ACM ( 2014 ) , 1 – 10 . [ 9 ] Herman Gray . 2005 . Cultural moves : African Americans and the politics of representation . Univ of California Press . [ 10 ] Marc Tuters and Kazys Varnelis . 2006 . Beyond locative media : Giving shape to the internet of things . Leonardo 39 , 4 : 357 – 363 . [ 11 ] Antonio Negri and Michael Hardt . 2009 . Commonwealth . Harvard Univ Press . [ 12 ] Baumann , K . , Stokes , B . , Bar , F . , and Caldwell , B . 2016 . Designing in constellations : sustaining participatory design for neighborhoods . Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Interactive Exhibitions , Workshops - Volume 2 , ACM , 5 – 8 . [ 13 ] Kafai , Y . B . , Peppler , K . A . , and Chiu , G . M . 2007 . High tech programmers in low - income communities : Creating a computer culture in a community technology center . In Communities and Technologies 2007 . Springer , 545 – 563 . [ 14 ] Howard , S . , Carroll , J . , Murphy , J . , and Peck , J . Using ‘endowed props’ in scenario - based design . Proceedings of the second Nordic conference on Human - computer interaction , ACM ( 2002 ) , 1 – 10 .