603 YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 87 ( 2014 ) , pp . 603 - 605 . Copyright © 2014 . Human Evolutionary Genetics . 2nd Edition . By Mark Jobling , Edward Hol - lox , Matthew Hurles , Toomas Kivisild , Chris Tyler - Smith . New York : Garland Science ; 2013 . US $ 124 . 21 ( Paper - back ) . 650 p . ISBN : 978 - 0815341482 . Human Evolutionary Genetics is a highly recommended textbook that helps readers understand differences in the human genome and how evolution has af - fected development of the genome and ac - quired diversity . The book’s chapters delineate the com - plexity of these topics . The introductory chapter sets the foundation for an in - depth analysis of how the history of evolution guides the development of genomic diver - sity and variation . The chapters that follow narrate the organization of the human genome , genetic variation , and different tools to analyze genome diversity ; elucidate the basic concept of population genetics and evolution ; and focus on the origin of hu - mans and explicate the genetic basis of the differences between humans and our evolu - tionary ancestors . The last few chapters il - lustrate the human colonization of the globe , the genetic diversity that exists in dif - ferent parts of the world , and the evolution - ary approach in understanding these phenotypic variations . At the end of each chapter , the authors have provided a com - prehensive summary . Overall , the chapters render a coherent flow in understanding the concepts of genome diversity , interpretation of genetic variation , origin of the humans , the colonization of the world , and , finally , applications of the evolutionary approach to interpret genetic diseases and complexities . The distinguishing feature of this book is the inclusion of “Opinion Boxes , ” which are comments from guest authors and ex - perts in different fields of biology . This book is very well laid out for those who want to introduce themselves to the concepts of evolution and genetics and is a good read for advanced undergraduates and graduates , as well as geneticists , human biologists , anthropologists , and oth - ers . Sreeurpa Ray Department of Therapeutic Radiology Yale University The Cell : A Molecular Approach . 6th Edition . By Geoffrey M . Cooper and Robert E . Hausman . Sunderland , MA : Sinauer Associates ; 2013 . US $ 134 . 95 ( Hardcover ) . 832 p . ISBN : 978 - 0763739058 . Over several decades , knowledge about the structure and functions of the cell has progressed tremendously due to the ad - vancement in various techniques like mi - croscopy , next generation sequencing , and genome wide analysis . The Cell : A Molec - ular Approach is a helpful resource for un - derstanding the basic science of cellular and molecular biology . The book has four main parts , each of which include several chapters discussing the various aspects of cellular structure and function . Part I provides a background on the evolution and chemistry of the cell and discusses methods used for studying the cell . It also introduces the fundamentals of molecular biology . Part II illustrates the genome organization and follows the model for the central dogma of molecular biology : DNA  RNA  protein . Although concise , this part successfully provides an overview of the structure and function of DNA , RNA , and protein . Part III contains the core chapters describing the organiza - Book Reviews Book reviews 604 tion , structure , and function of the cell . It discusses information about the nucleus , cy - toplasm , and other organelles . Part IV fo - cuses on cell regulation and the cell cycle . The concluding chapters discuss cell death , cell renewal , and cancer and introduce the consequences of defects in basic cell regu - lation mechanisms . The book is concise , and the text is suc - cinct . It is accompanied by a website that pro - vides multi - media resources that enable the reader to review the material of each chapter in an interactive way . Also , the end of each chapter includes a set of questions and a sum - mary that enables the reader to think further about the science presented . A key experi - ment illustrated at the end of each chapter en - hances the reader’s appreciation of the application of science in a clinical context . This book is very successful in provid - ing a basic understanding of the structure and function of a cell . The book is a good read for students just beginning to study the complexities of biology , as well as a good review for intermediate students who al - ready have an understanding of the subject . Sreeurpa Ray Department of Therapeutic Radiology Yale University Molecular Modeling for the Design of Novel Performance Chemicals and Materials . By Beena Rai , editor . Boca Raton , FL : CRC Press , Taylor and Fran - cis Group , LLC ; 2012 . 382 p . US $ 113 . 51 ( Hardcover ) . ISBN : 978 - 1439840788 . The primary purpose of Molecular Modeling for the Design of Novel Perform - ance Chemicals and Materials is to intro - duce molecular modeling ( MM ) and provide the reader with applications of MM in chem - ical , drug , and materials design . After a few chapters that present basic MM concepts , the editor draws on the expertise of various academic researchers for current examples of MM rational design and application . The chapter progression through the text is clear and logical , though there are jumps in the subject matter , a result of having different authors for each chapter . Each individual chapter is well structured in finely delin - eated sections and subsections , conveniently annotated with a table of contents at the be - ginning of each . This feature provides facile access to specific topics and makes the book a convenient resource for MM researchers . The book contains many color figures and clearly rendered equations , though the deri - vations for equations are typically not in - cluded . The conclusions of each chapter provide extensive lists of original research articles cited , demonstrating the expertise and scholarship of the authors and provid - ing a valuable reference for readers . The primary audience for this book would likely be advanced graduate students or postdocs with some background in chem - istry , physics , and / or engineering . It could also be a useful resource for faculty with a broad range of expertise in computational modeling . In order to test or otherwise put into practice concepts presented in the text , the reader is presumed to have already de - veloped computational skills necessary to write code , scripts , or utilize tools . The cur - rent , specialized applications , together with the expected knowledge of reader , may make this text challenging to use in a traditional classroom setting . Further , the text does not contain problem sets at the end of chapters or online resources for instructors and / or stu - dents that are common in larger , more gen - eral subject undergraduate textbooks . While the text clearly conveys the advan - tages of MM approaches , there are relatively few instances where caveats or weaknesses of MM for a given application are discussed . The text could have been strengthened by including more information regarding the experimental testing and validation of the MM topics pre - sented in each chapter . Discussion of these top - ics , for example , could address assumptions intrinsic to computational design and model - ing . Further , including descriptions of ( non - computational ) experimental tests would also potentially broaden the readership . The most impressive feature of the text is that it includes current , “real world” ap - plications of MM from researchers across the globe . Overall , this textbook could serve