[ 15 : 23 10 / 12 / 2009 Bioinformatics - btp616 . tex ] Page : 139 139 – 140 BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol . 26 no . 1 2010 , pages 139 – 140 doi : 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btp616 Gene expression edgeR : a Bioconductor package for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data Mark D . Robinson 1 , 2 , ∗ , † , Davis J . McCarthy 2 , † and Gordon K . Smyth 2 1 Cancer Program , Garvan Institute of Medical Research , 384 Victoria Street , Darlinghurst , NSW 2010 and 2 Bioinformatics Division , The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research , 1G Royal Parade , Parkville , Victoria 3052 , Australia Received on March 29 , 2009 ; revised on October 19 , 2009 ; accepted on October 23 , 2009 Advance Access publication November 11 , 2009 Associate Editor : Joaquin Dopazo ABSTRACT Summary : It is expected that emerging digital gene expression ( DGE ) technologies will overtake microarray technologies in the near future for many functional genomics applications . One of the fundamental data analysis tasks , especially for gene expression studies , involves determining whether there is evidence that counts for a transcript or exon are signiﬁcantly different across experimental conditions . edgeR is a Bioconductor software package for examining differential expression of replicated count data . An overdispersed Poisson model is used to account for both biological and technical variability . Empirical Bayes methods are used to moderate the degree of overdispersion across transcripts , improving the reliability of inference . The methodology can be used even with the most minimal levels of replication , provided at least one phenotype or experimental condition is replicated . The software may have other applications beyond sequencing data , such as proteome peptide count data . Availability : The package is freely available under the LGPL licence from the Bioconductor web site ( http : / / bioconductor . org ) . Contact : mrobinson @ wehi . edu . au 1 INTRODUCTION Modern molecular biology data present major challenges for the statistical methods that are used to detect differential expression , such as the requirement of multiple testing procedures and increasingly , empirical Bayes or similar methods that share information across all observations to improve inference . For microarrays , the abundance of a particular transcript is measured as a ﬂuorescence intensity , effectively a continuous response , whereas for digital gene expression ( DGE ) data the abundance is observed as a count . Therefore , procedures that are successful for microarray data are not directly applicable to DGE data . This note describes the software package edgeR ( empirical analysis of DGE in R ) , which forms part of the Bioconductor project ( Gentleman et al . , 2004 ) . edgeR is designed for the analysis of replicated count - based expression data and is an implementation of methology developed by Robinson and Smyth ( 2007 , 2008 ) . Although initially developed for serial analysis of gene expression ∗ To whom correspondence should be addressed † The authors wish it to be known that , in their opinion , the ﬁrst two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors . ( SAGE ) , the methods and software should be equally applicable to emerging technologies such as RNA - seq ( Li et al . , 2008 ; Marioni et al . , 2008 ) giving rise to digital expression data . edgeR may also be useful in other experiments that generate counts , such as ChIP - seq , in proteomics experiments where spectral counts are used to summarize the peptide abundance ( Wong et al . , 2008 ) , or in barcoding experiments where several species are counted ( Andersson et al . , 2008 ) . The software is designed for ﬁnding changes between two or more groups when at least one of the groups has replicated measurements . 2 MODEL Bioinformatics researchers have learned many things from the analysis of microarray data . For instance , power to detect differential expression can be improved and false discoveries reduced by sharing informationacrossallprobes . Onesuchprocedureis limma ( Smyth , 2004 ) , where an empirical Bayes model is used to moderate the probe - wise variances . The moderated variances replace the probe - wise variances in the t - and F - statistic calculations . In a closely analogous but mathematically more complex procedure , edgeR models count data using an overdispersed Poisson model , and uses an empirical Bayes procedure to moderate the degree of overdispersion across genes . We assume the data can be summarized into a table of counts , with rows corresponding to genes ( or tags or exons or transcripts ) and columns to samples . For RNA - seq experiments , these may be counts at the exon , transcript or gene - level . We model the data as negative binomial ( NB ) distributed , Y gi ∼ NB ( M i p gj , φ g ) ( 1 ) for gene g and sample i . Here , M i is the library size ( total number of reads ) , φ g is the dispersion and p gj is the relative abundance of gene g in experimental group j to which sample i belongs . We use the NB parameterization where the mean is µ gi = M i p gj and variance is µ gi ( 1 + µ gi φ g ) . For differential expression analysis , the parameters of interest are p gj . The NB distribution reduces to Poisson when φ g = 0 . In some DGE applications , technical variation can be treated as Poisson . In general , φ g represents the coefﬁcient of variation of biological variation between the samples . In this way , our model is able to separate biological from technical variation . © The Author ( s ) 2009 . Published by Oxford University Press . This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non - Commercial License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc / 2 . 5 / uk / ) which permits unrestricted non - commercial use , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / b i o i n f o r m a t i cs / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 26 / 1 / 139 / 182458 b y gue s t on 20 A p r il 2019 [ 15 : 23 10 / 12 / 2009 Bioinformatics - btp616 . tex ] Page : 140 139 – 140 M . D . Robinson et al . Fig . 1 . DGE data can be visualized as ‘MA’ plots ( log ratio versus abundance ) , just as with microarray data where each dot represents a gene . This plot shows RNA - seq gene expression for DHT - stimulated versus Control LNCaP cells , as described in Li et al . ( 2008 ) . The smear of points on the left side signiﬁes that genes were observed in only one group of replicate samples and the points marked‘ × ’denote the top 500 differentially expressed genes . edgeR estimates the genewise dispersions by conditional maximum likelihood , conditioning on the total count for that gene ( Smyth and Verbyla , 1996 ) . An empirical Bayes procedure is used to shrink the dispersions towards a consensus value , effectively borrowing information between genes ( Robinson and Smyth , 2007 ) . Finally , differential expression is assessed for each gene using an exact test analogous to Fisher’s exact test , but adapted for overdispersed data ( Robinson and Smyth , 2008 ) . 3 FEATURES The required inputs for edgeR are the table of counts and two vectors annotating the samples : the vector of the library sizes ( i . e . total number of reads ) and a factor specifying the experimental group or condition for each sample . For users of limma , the edgeR package has a number of analogous functions . Once the data have been processed and the dispersion estimates are moderated , the topTags function can be used to tabulate the top differentially expressed genes ( or tags or exons , etc . ) . Also , MA ( log ratio versus abundance ) plots can be created using the plotSmear function , allowing the same visualizations for DGE data as used for microarray data analysis ( Fig . 1 ) . Anumberoffeatureshavebeenaddedtothe edgeR packagesince the initial publications . The initial methodology worked only for a two - group comparison . The extension to estimating and moderating the dispersion for multiple groups is straightforward and has been implemented recently . At present , testing for differential expression is supported only for pairwise comparisons ; the user must specify which two groups to compare . We are currently investigating tests for more general cases . Many of the early RNA - seq datasets involve sequence reads from technical replicates ( e . g . same source of RNA ) as opposed to biological replicates ( e . g . RNA from different individuals ) . Technical replicates will generally have lower variability than biological replicates and in our experience , the dispersion parameter ( and the moderation procedure in edgeR ) may not be necessary . For experiments with technical replicates , the data may be ﬁtted well by the Poisson distribution , as demonstrated in Marioni et al . ( 2008 ) . Since the Poisson distribution is a special case of the NB distribution ( φ = 0 ) , edgeR can perform a Poisson - based analysis . The pairwise exact testing procedure will still be useful for these datasets . 4 DISCUSSION We have developed a Bioconductor package edgeR that addresses one of the fundamental downstream data analysis tasks for count - based expression data : determining differential expression . The package and methods are general , and can work on other sources of count data , such as barcoding experiments and peptide counts . To the authors’ knowledge , edgeR is the only software for SAGE or DGE data at this time which can account for biological variability when there are only one or two replicate samples . Funding : National Health and Medical Research Council Program ( Grant 406657 to G . K . S . ) ; NHMRC , Independent Research Institutes Infrastructure Support Scheme ( Grant 361646 ) ; Victorian State Government OIS grant ( awarded to the WEHI ) ; a Melbourne International Research Scholarship ( to M . D . R . ) ; Belz , Harris and IBS Honours scholarships ( to D . J . M . ) . Conﬂict of Interest : none declared . REFERENCES Andersson , A . F . et al . ( 2008 ) Comparative analysis of human gut microbiota by bar - coded pyrosequencing . PLoS ONE , 3 , e2836 . Gentleman , R . C . et al . ( 2004 ) Bioconductor : open software development for com - putational biology and bioinformatics . Genome Biol . , 5 , R80 . Li , H . et al . ( 2008 ) Determination of tag density required for digital transcriptome analysis : application to an androgen - sensitive prostate cancer model . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 105 , 20179 – 20184 . Marioni , J . C . et al . ( 2008 ) RNA - seq : an assessment of technical reproducibility and comparison with gene expression arrays . Genome Res . , 18 , 1509 – 1517 . Robinson , M . D . and Smyth , G . K . ( 2007 ) Moderated statistical tests for assessing differences in tag abundance . Bioinformatics , 23 , 2881 – 2887 . Robinson , M . D . and Smyth , G . K . ( 2008 ) Small sample estimation of negative binomial dispersion , with applications to SAGE data . Biostatistics , 9 , 321 – 332 . Smyth , G . K . ( 2004 ) Linear models and empirical Bayes methods for assessing differential expression in microarray experiments . Stat . Appl . Genet . Mol . Biol . , 1 , Art 3 . Smyth , G . K . and Verbyla , A . P . ( 1996 ) . A conditional approach to residual maximum likelihood estimation in generalized linear models . J . R . Stat . Soc . B , 58 , 565 – 572 . Wong , J . W . H . et al . ( 2008 ) Computational methods for the comparative quantiﬁcation of proteins in label - free LCn - MS experiments . Brief . Bioinform . , 9 , 156 – 165 . 140 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / b i o i n f o r m a t i cs / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 26 / 1 / 139 / 182458 b y gue s t on 20 A p r il 2019