Help , I need some body The effect of embodiment on playful learning Rosemarijn Looije 1 Anna van der Zalm 2 Mark A . Neerincx 1 , 3 and Robbert - Jan Beun 2 Abstract —Children with a chronic disease like diabetes need to learn how to self manage their disease . Knowledge about their condition is indispensable to reach this goal . Within the European project ALIZ - E a robot companion is being devel - oped that should , among others attributes , have the capability to educate children . In this paper , a virtual agent on a screen is compared with a physical robot on the aspects of performance ( learning ) , attention and motivation . The experiment consisted of two sessions in which children played a quiz consisting of health related questions with both the robot and the virtual agent , there was a week between the two sessions . It was found that performance and motivation were not affected by the embodiment , but the robot did attract more attention and , when forced to choose , the children had a preference for the robot . I . INTRODUCTION As the number of people with a chronic disease grows , an important subject in their medical care is the promo - tion of self - efﬁcacy and self - management . Effective self - management allows patients to spend less time in the hospital and enables them to have a higher quality of life . To be able to manage their disease , patients need to learn about their disease and the skills required to manage it . This is true for both adults and children . Children with a chronic , lifestyle related disease can beneﬁt from extra support in their daily activities . To provide this support , the ALIZ - E project ( www . aliz - e . org ) aims to develop a social robot for these children , suitable for long - term social interaction . One of the goals of the project is to research how to use a robot to educate children on both their disease and a general healthy lifestyle , thereby increasing their self - efﬁciency . The overall scenario of the project is based on a medical setting , where children diagnosed with diabetes spend a complete week in the hospital after diagnosis , so that they can learn about managing their illness and its implications . The robot will not only function as an educator , but also as a friend and motivator . This paper describes an experiment which focuses on the role of the robot as an educative companion and compares a virtual embodied agent ( from here on : agent ) and a robot This work is ( partially ) funded by the European Union FP7 ALIZ - E project ( grant number 248116 ) 1 Rosemarijn Looije and Mark Neerincx are with TNO , P . O . Box 23 , 3769 ZG Soesterberg , The Netherlands rosemarijn . looije , mark . neerincx at tno . nl 2 Anna van der Zalm and Robbert - Jan Beun are with the department of Information and Computing Science , University Utrecht , P . O . Box 80 . 089 , 3508 TB Utrecht , The Netherlands a . vanderzalm , r . j . beun at uu . nl 3 Mark A . Neerincx is also with the department of Intelligent Systems , Technical University Delft , P . O . Box 5031 , 2600 GA Delft , The Netherlands Fig . 1 . On the left the robot and on the right the lifesize agent ( see Figure 1 ) on three aspects : Learning , and two of its contributing factors , motivation and attention . In order to make this comparison , we created a scenario in which a quiz , based on Trivial Pursuit R (cid:13) , with health related questions is played . Since we mainly want to study the effects of interaction on learning in children , we need not burden sick children , so we performed this experiment with healthy children , under the presumption that the results are generalizable to children with diabetes . II . L EARNING , ROBOTS AND AGENTS A . Learning Learning can be deﬁned as ”persisting change in perfor - mance or performance potential that results from experience and interaction with the world” [ 1 ] . To achieve change there is a need for interaction so that information can be processed and stored . This interaction can be achieved in multiple ways , for example face - to - face with a human teacher , but also via a computer interface , virtual agent or robot . When there is a need for many repetitions , this is hard to ask from a human educator , but this is not a problem for an electronic one . Another advantage of electronic educators is their capability to keep track of a user’s progress and adapting to it . Given these advantages , an electronic educator can be especially beneﬁcial in situations where it is difﬁcult for a human educator to tailor education to one individual ( in a classroom setting ) , when a human teacher simply isn’t available or has little time . To achieve the above - mentioned change in performance , several means to enhance the interaction are used . Two vital aspects in these means are motivation and attention ; both have been shown to improve the retention of educated materials [ 2 ] , [ 3 ] . To improve learning , both human and electronic educators strive to hold attention and increase motivation . Games have been shown to have an added value over standard e - learning methods , because of the fun they 2012 IEEE RO - MAN : The 21st IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication . September 9 - 13 , 2012 . Paris , France . 978 - 1 - 4673 - 4606 - 1 / 12 / $ 31 . 00 ©2012 IEEE 718 provide . Balancing fun and educational value ensures a high motivation and longer interaction ( attention ) [ 4 ] , [ 5 ] . B . Agents and robots Next to games , virtual agents are used to attract attention and to keep motivation in an e - learning environment . Studies show that the presence of an agent enhances memory per - formance [ 6 ] , self - efﬁcacy and enjoyment [ 7 ] . The available studies in which a robot has the role of an educative companion [ 8 ] , [ 9 ] show that the use of a robot in role can be effective , but that there are still many questions on how and when a robot has an added value . C . Embodiment Several studies have looked into the differences between agents and robots ( e . g . [ 10 ] , [ 11 ] , [ 12 ] , [ 13 ] , [ 14 ] ) . Embodi - ment ( here : having a body in the physical world ) is the main difference between an agent and a robot . Literature names several factors that are inﬂuenced by embodiment , either virtual or physical , that could cause an effect in learning ( e . g . attention [ 15 ] , attitude [ 16 ] , trust [ 17 ] ) . Results from studies comparing agents and robots are inconclusive . They are often performed with agents and robots having a different appearance [ 14 ] , [ 18 ] and the evaluation is usually done with adults as subjects , for one session only . We will use a robot and an agent with the same appearance and use our target group ( children ) to evaluate the embodiment effect on learning and two of its contributing factors , motivation and attention , during two sessions . Given the embodiment of the robot in the real world , we hypothesize that the robot will get more attention and motivates children more , resulting in better learning . This leads to the following individual hypotheses : 1 ) Learning : Children learn more while interacting with a robot than while interacting with a virtual agent 2 ) Attention : A robot keeps children’s attention longer / better than a virtual agent 3 ) Motivation : Children are more motivated to learn when interacting with a robot than with a virtual agent In order to test these hypotheses a ﬁeld experiment with a within - subject design of two sessions was conducted . III . I MPLEMENTATION A . Quiz scenario Literature on educating children [ 19 ] provided require - ments for the scenario for an educative companion role . The main requirements are active involvement , capability to address developmental and individual differences and for it to be entertaining for children , thereby making it intrinsically motivating . We decided to use a quiz scenario because a quiz adheres to all of these requirements and this scenario is feasible to implement . We based the quiz that is used in this study on a two player Trivial Pursuit R (cid:13) : four topics were included 1 ( ”schijf van vijf” / food pyramid ) , 2 ( energy balance ) , 3 ( eating healthy ) , 4 ( the heart ) . We used multiple choice questions with four answer options ( see Appendix for question examples ) . The Fig . 2 . Scoring robot child read the questions of cards and the agent / robot read them from ’memory’ . Questions were taken and adapted from existing material or newly created . A teacher checked all the questions to make sure they were of the right level . We also included a scoring element , for this allows children to monitor their progress , and creates an element of friendly competition between the agent / robot ( who was at the same knowledge level as the child ) and the child , both of which are known to enhance motivation . We created a visual scoreboard and made it such that , if a child answered all questions fast ( within 10 minutes ) and correct it could complete the scoreboard completely . A topic is completed when three questions are answered correct . ( Figure 2 ) . B . Game play The game - play is as follows : Child’s turn : 1 ) Robot / agent asks the child to pick a topic . 2 ) If that topic is played for the ﬁrst time , a video is shown to introduce the topic . 3 ) Robot / agent asks the a question on that topic and pro - vides the four multiple choice options . These options are also displayed on a separate screen . 4 ) Two chances are given to answer the question correct . 5 ) If the correct answer isn’t given , the robot explains the correct answer . 6 ) Scoreboard ( displayed on separate screen ) is updated . 7 ) The robot / agent makes a comment , praising the child or encouraging it to do better . Robot’s turn : 1 ) Robot / agent picks a topic . 2 ) Child reads the question and answer option from a card . 3 ) Robot / agent gets two chances to answer correctly . 4 ) If it fails , the robot / agent asks the child to explain the answer ( explanation is also given on the card ) . 5 ) Scoreboard is updated , robot / agent comments on it . C . Robot / Agent interaction implementation We developed a script containing both the dialogue op - tions and gestures . The dialogue script contains the whole interaction of playing the quiz and takes into account the most common aspects that can go wrong ( e . g . the child doesn’t understand the robot / agent or the other way around ) . Gestures are both incorporated in the dialogue script ( e . g . pointing in the right direction when in dialogue contains the phrase ”look there” ) and in idle movements . Looking at the user at the right moments was also implemented , combined 719 with the gestures this should make the whole interaction more natural . The robot we used was the NAO 1 . To ensure that the agent ( a virtual representation of the NAO ) looked as similar as possible it was displayed on a 30 - inch monitor . The speech of the robot and the agent was produced by the same text - to - speech editor . D . Wizard of Oz The whole experiment was scripted and automated , except for the speech recognition , which was not yet available . We used a Wizard of Oz setting to replace this . IV . E XPERIMENT A . Participants A ﬁfth grade of a Dutch primary school participated in the experiment . It was a class for children with a lag in , for example , the Dutch language . Therefore , the class was small ( 11 children ) . The class consisted of three girls and eight boys . One child was excluded afterwards because he changed schools during the experiment . The average age was 11 . 1 . None of the children suffered from diabetes . B . Measures Below we present the metrics used for each of the three hypotheses . 1 ) Hypothesis 1 : Performance : The answers on the quiz questions provide an indication of performance , but because the participants might receive a different number of questions or use different learning strategies , we did not use this as a measure . Instead , we created a knowledge test consisting of random questions from the quiz , two from each subject . Per subject , one question was taken from the questions asked to the child , the other was picked from the questions asked to the robot / agent . 2 ) Hypothesis 2 : Attention : To measure attention we used subjective self - reported attention ( self - reported by the child ) and objective video analysis . In the video analysis we looked at where the child looked ( robot / agent , quiz screen or elsewhere ) , how many times and how long ( in total and per gaze ) the child looked there . 3 ) Hypothesis 3 : Motivation : For measuring motivation we asked questions on sub - factors that inﬂuence motiva - tion [ 20 ] , [ 21 ] , [ 22 ] ; enjoyment , trust and preference . The questionnaires were made suitable for children , following guidelines that were derived from [ 23 ] and [ 24 ] . C . Experiment design and procedure Since the number of participants is small , we decided to do a within - subject design ; this entails that all children interacted with both the robot and the agent . We randomized the order in which they interacted with the robot or the agent in both of the session . Each session consists of two phases of 10 minutes , with a short break between them . A phase consists of one full quiz - game against either the robot or the agent ( including introduction and goodbyes ) . In the ﬁrst 1 http : / / www . aldebaran - robotics . com / Fig . 3 . Experiment design phase , the child receives and asks questions on topic 1 and 2 and in the second phase on topics 3 and 4 . This was done so that a possible primacy or recency effect would not bias the results . A schematic overview of this is provided in Figure 3 . Figure 3 also shows the experimental procedure . All children started with a knowledge test , which serves as the baseline of their knowledge on the four topics in the quiz . It was administered on the same day they were introduced to the agent and the robot . In the days after this all children interacted with the robot and agent for the ﬁrst time . They played the quiz with either the robot or the agent and then answered questions about that interaction . They proceeded with a quiz with the other opponent . After this interaction they answered questions speciﬁc for the interaction and questions comparing the robot and agent . One week later the procedure was repeated and another week later the knowledge test from the start was repeated to measure their end level ( see Appendix for the knowledge test ) . D . Setup Figure 4 provides a schematic overview of the experi - mental setup . The children were recorded with two cameras ( number 1 and 2 in Figure 4 ) , camera 1 records the face of the child , camera 2 gives an overview of child , robot / agent and quiz screen . The cameras were explained to the children as being there ”to see whether the robot makes mistakes and if so , when , so that we can ﬁx it” . The experimenter was 720 Fig . 4 . Experimental Setup located in another room , close by . To enable the experimenter to see what was going on in the other room and to act as a wizard of oz , a microphone and network camera ( number 3 ) with an overview look were placed in the same room as the child . The children were told they could call the researcher using the microphone if they were scared or when something wasn’t working . This explained the presence of the microphone and was reassuring for the children . V . R ESULTS Eleven children participated in the baseline knowledge test . One child left school , so he did not participate in the interactions or the second knowledge test , he was excluded from all analyses . One child was sick during the second knowledge test , but his interaction results are part of the analysis . A . Hypothesis 1 : Performance We excluded an outlier ( severely distracted during second test ) and a participant with missing data ( not present during the second knowledge test ) from the performance data , leaving us with an N of eight . On the ﬁrst knowledge test , the participants answered respectively 5 questions out of 8 correctly , in the second knowledge test this was 5 . 6 . TABLE I A VERAGE DURATION OF LOOK ( IN SECONDS ) On robot / agent On quiz - screen Elsewhere Agent ( S1 ) 79 , 0 328 , 0 195 , 1 Robot ( S1 ) 123 , 6 290 , 8 185 , 6 Agent ( S2 ) 65 , 3 327 , 8 209 , 4 Robot ( S2 ) 120 , 0 296 , 3 183 , 6 This difference is not signiﬁcant , p = 0 . 25 . We compared the progress on subjects that were played against the robot with the subjects that were played the agent , but no difference between the conditions was found . What could be concluded is that good performance on the quiz correlates with a good performance on the second knowledge test ( r = 0 . 855 and p < 0 . 01 ) . The two knowledge tests were not correlated ( p = 0 . 56 ) , which shows that good performance on the quiz is a better indicator of their ﬁnal score than the baseline test . Furthermore , questions that were asked during the quiz were more likely to be answered correctly in the knowledge test . In the baseline test 65 % of the questions that were not in the quiz were answered correctly and this was 67 . 5 % in the second knowledge test . The questions that were in the quiz were answered correctly in 58 % of the time before the quiz and 75 % after the quiz . B . Hypothesis 2 : Attention There were no differences in user reported attention ; most children reported they found it easy to keep their attention directed to the robot / agent . Objectively , there were differences between robot and agent . Table I provides an overview of mean number of times per 10 minutes that a child looked at one of the measuring points ( robot / agent , quiz screen , elsewhere ) and Table II shows the average duration of looking at the measuring points . A two - way repeated measures MANOVA with as independent variables session and condition was performed . The effect of condition was signiﬁcant ( p < 0 . 01 ) . Looking further into the differences between robot and agent condition it was found that the duration of looking at the opponent was signiﬁcantly higher in the robot condition ( p < . 001 ) . Furthermore , the children looked more often towards the robot , the difference with the agent condition was signiﬁcant ( p = 0 . 05 ) . Since the total time of one phase is always 10 minutes , the time children looked at either the quiz - screen or elsewhere in the agent condition must be different . The results show that they look longer at the screen . Next to this we looked at correlations between attention and performance , we did ﬁnd a negative correlation between number of times looking elsewhere and performance ( r = - 0 . 828 and p < 0 . 05 ) . C . Hypothesis 3 : Motivation No signiﬁcant differences were found in the measures we deﬁned as factors for motivation ( enjoyment , trust and preference ) . Enjoyment and trust both scored almost 3 on a 3 - point scale in both the ﬁrst and the second session and for both the robot and the agent . Only in the forced choice 721 TABLE II N UMBER OF TIMES LOOKING AT MEASURING - POINT ( DURING 10 MINUTES ) On robot / agent On quiz - screen Elsewhere Agent ( S1 ) 39 , 4 36 , 8 29 , 5 Robot ( S1 ) 45 , 9 39 , 0 29 , 3 Agent ( S2 ) 38 , 3 41 , 0 28 , 1 Robot ( S2 ) 42 , 5 33 , 8 29 , 3 preference there was a difference between robot and agent ; 8 children chose the robot and 2 the agent . VI . C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION A . Hypothesis 1 : Performance We did not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant learning effect overall , and no signiﬁcant effect in either condition separately . The hypotheses on performance can thus not be conﬁrmed for this particular scenario . B . Hypothesis 2 : Attention The children did look signiﬁcantly more often at the robot . Next to this they did look signiﬁcantly longer at the robot than at the agent . The robot was thus better in retaining attention and did not draw attention from the quiz screen . They did look a shorter amount of time at the quiz screen and at other things in the room when interacting with the robot , but because the number of switches between items was not signiﬁcantly different we conclude that the robot was not distracting . It is interesting to note that the number of times looking elsewhere is correlated to the performance , which suggests our measure is indeed effective for measuring attention . C . Hypothesis 3 : Motivation The children were highly motivated to work with both the agent and the robot . The differences between the two were not signiﬁcant . There was a small preference for the robot when they were forced make a choice between the two and this might inﬂuence the motivation in the long run . D . Observations During the experiment , the experimenters made a lot of observations that might help other researchers design their experiments or lead to new research questions . The novelty of the robot proved to be distracting , which is why we only introduced the robot after explaining the experiment . We recommend having such an introduction before an experiment , both to take away the fear and questions children might have and to reduce the possible bias of children being more interested in something just because it is a novelty to them . During the introduction of the experiment , a week before the actual start of the experiment , children came with many questions regarding the robot , i . e . : ”will the robot hit us” , ”can it dance and play football” , ”can we please touch it” . They did not ask anything about the quiz or the agent . During the experiment it was noticed that children who took charge in the game during the second session ( e . g . saying whose turn it was , choosing the topic ) , were also the children who were outgoing towards the experiment leaders , which could be interesting in relation to previous research on personality [ 25 ] . The robot / agent as peer with which the children were in competition had a positive effect for their motivation . Many children informed the experimenter about how well they did and when the robot / agent commented on the score they became extra competitive and excited when they did better than the robot / agent . Although the questionnaires showed no difference in anthropomorphisation , behavior like offering help or asking non - game related questions only occurred in sessions with the robot . By giving the robot and the agent a ( different ) name and constantly using this to refer to them , children seemed more ready to see them as different characters and assign them certain character traits . E . Discussion experiment The fact that we found signiﬁcant differences using a participant group of only 10 children is promising . The small number of participants could also be the reason that only in attention signiﬁcant results were found . Other possible reasons that we did not ﬁnd learning effects is that we had a large number of children with a language deﬁciency ; the fact that the material was on a 5th grade level , but the language proﬁciency of some of the children up to two and a half year lower , might have prevented these children from fully absorbing the material . Apart from that , the children already scored quite good on the baseline test ( thus making it harder to see a learning effect ) . Last , some errors in the used text - to - speech engine may also have contributed . Furthermore , there were some problems with the game ﬂow . The robot / agent sometimes asked a question without announcing it , this caused many children to not quite catch the question . The biggest problem however was confusion of the answer possibilities ’b’ and ’d’ . The children had a hard time distinguishing the b and d from the speech of the robot / agent and might misjudge its answer . However , worse was the fact that the Wizard also had trouble distinguishing the b and d from the children’s speech , which sometimes led to misjudging the children , which they found very frustrating . The setting of the experiment might also have provided a distraction : with a window looking out to the schoolyard and a window to the hallway , the room was not aural and visual distraction proof . Although one could argue this is a natural setting , it might obscure the results . The measurements could also be improved ; for instance , for knowledge we only looked at long - term retention using multiple choice , but short term and free recall are also interesting and could be added in a next experiment . For attention we now measured eye gaze directed to the opponent ( robot or agent ) , quiz - screen and ’somewhere else’ . Looking ’somewhere else’ included looking at the quiz cards 722 or obviously thinking about the answer , which is of course not procrastination . In the future , it would be interesting to see if we could distinguish game related eye gaze from procrastination or distraction . F . Discussion Robots are still quite expensive and should therefore only be used in settings where they have a distinct advantage . In the current experiment the robot did not take advantage of the extra attention it received , so an agent should have the preference in the current scenario . On the other hand , a learning companion should be nice to work with for a longer period of time and the forced choice and attention that were in favor of the robot point towards a possible higher motivation in the long term for an embodied companion . Two changes in the experiment could be exploited to look if a robot has beneﬁts as a learning companion over an agent in certain situations . The ﬁrst is that the experiment could take place over a longer period of time and with more than two interactions ; [ 26 ] shows that only in the third session there evolved a difference between the motivation for an adaptive or non - adaptive robot . Second , the robot could take advantage of the attention it receives to direct attention to objects in the physical world . This is in agreement with results from [ 18 ] who looked at the difference between a virtual and robot bunny that gave advice on objects in the real world versus the virtual world . G . Overall conclusion No difference between the agent and the robot was found on the knowledge tests , our measure of performance . The learning potential , of which attention and motivation are two factors , did differ between robot and agent . For moti - vation we did not ﬁnd signiﬁcant differences , but we did for attention . So one of the determinants of performance was inﬂuenced positively in this context . Overall , we can conclude that the robot has potential to be a more effective learning companion than an agent . Attention is kept longer , even in the second session ; children also prefer the robot and think it is nice , which could increase the long - term motivation . However , there is no reason to prefer the robot over the agent as an educational companion in the current setting . APPENDIX This appendix contains the selection of questions asked in the post knowledge test . It consists of two questions from each topic , one posed by the robot to the child and one posed by the child to the robot during the quiz . Within brackets and in italics there is some extra explanation for some of the questions , when direct translation was not possible 1 ) What is meant by ”energy balance” ? • That you exercise a lot and eat little • That eating and exercise are in balance • That you eat a lot and exercise little • That you eat for the same time as that you exercise 2 ) What does the F in BOFT stand for ? ( BOFT is a mnemonic for children to remember four important topics of a health lifestyle ( excercise , eat breakfast , drink water in stead of sweet drinks and not to much tv and videogames ) . • Biking ( in Dutch Fietsen ) instead of taking the car • Drinking fresh ( in Dutch Fris ) water from the tap , instead of soda • Soda ( in Dutch Frisdrank ) is tasty and healthy • Eat fruit ( in Dutch Fruit ) every day 3 ) Can you take a vitamin pill instead of eating fruit and vegetables ? • No , only adults can do that • Yes , if you take a blue one • No , a vitamin pill doesn’t contain everything you need • Yes , a vitamin pill contains everything you need 4 ) Why is it important that blood is pumped through your body ? • Otherwise you wouldn’t hear ticking in your chest • So that you can fall in love • It makes sure all substances in your body go to the right place • Otherwise your veins get a weird colour 5 ) Why do you need meat and dairy ? • It protects you against diseases • It contains a lot of vitamins • Its very good • It helps you building bones and muscles 6 ) If you prefer fruit to vegetables , is it ok to just eat fruit ? • Yes , as long as you eat a lot of fruit • No , you can’t • Yes , you can . • Yes , as long as you eat enough apple sauce 7 ) What is transferred from your bowels to you blood ? • Carbon dioxide • Vitamins • Fuel • Food 8 ) When do you eat healthy ? • When you eat varied from all parts of the ”schijf van vijf” ( Dutch equivalent of the food pyramid - ”Disc of ﬁve” ) , and not too much • When you eat everything from the schijf van vijf • When you eat something from at least three of the sections • When only eat things from the vegetable and fruit section . ACKNOWLEDGMENT We would like to thank the Egelantier school in Soest ( the Netherlands ) , especially the children and teacher from the 5th grade , for their cooperation . 723 R EFERENCES [ 1 ] M . P . Driscoll , Psychology of learning for instruction . Boston [ u . a . ] : Pearson A and B , 2005 . [ 2 ] J . Keller , “Using the arcs motivational process in computer - based instruction and distance education , ” New directions for teaching and learning , vol . 1999 , no . 78 , pp . 37 – 47 , 1999 . [ 3 ] P . Moreno - Ger , D . Burgos , I . Martnez - Ortiz , J . L . Sierra , and B . Fernndez - Manjn , “Educational game design for online education , ” Computers in Human Behavior , vol . 24 , no . 6 , pp . 2530 – 2540 , 2008 . [ 4 ] M . Prensky , “Fun , play and games : What makes games engaging , ” Digital game - based learning , pp . 1 – 31 , 2001 . [ 5 ] K . Hirsh - Pasek , R . Golinkoff , L . Berk , and D . Singer , A mandate for playful learning in preschool : Applying the scientiﬁc evidence . Oxford University Press , 2008 . [ 6 ] R . Beun , E . D . Vos , and C . Witteman , “Embodied conversational agents : effects on memory performance and anthropomorphisation , ” in Intelligent Virtual Agents . Springer , 2003 , pp . 315 – 319 . [ 7 ] S . A . Jin , “The effects of incorporating a virtual agent in a computer - aided test designed for stress management education : The mediating role of enjoyment , ” Computers in Human Behavior , vol . 26 , no . 3 , pp . 443 – 451 , May 2010 . [ 8 ] F . Tanaka and T . Kimura , “Care - receiving robot as a tool of teachers in child education , ” Interaction Studies , vol . 11 , no . 2 , pp . 263 – 268 , 2010 . [ 9 ] R . Mitnik , M . Nussbaum , and A . Soto , “An autonomous educational mobile robot mediator , ” Autonomous Robots , vol . 25 , no . 4 , pp . 367 – 382 , Aug . 2008 . [ 10 ] R . Looije , V . De Lange , and M . Neerincx , “Children’s responses and opinion on three bots that motivate , educate and play , ” Journal of Physicial Agents , vol . 2 , pp . 13 – 20 , 2008 . [ 11 ] R . Looije , M . A . Neerincx , and F . Cnossen , “Persuasive robotic assistant for health self - management of older adults : Design and evaluation of social behaviors , ” International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , vol . 68 , no . 6 , pp . 386 – 397 , 2010 . [ 12 ] C . Bartneck , J . Reichenbach , and A . V . Breemen , “In your face , robot ! the inﬂuence of a characters embodiment on how users perceive its emotional expressions , ” in Design and Emotion Conference , 2004 . [ 13 ] J . Wainer , D . Feil - Seifer , D . Shell , and M . Mataric , “The role of physical embodiment in human - robot interaction , ” in The 15th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communi - cation , 2006 . , 2006 , pp . 117 – 122 . [ 14 ] A . Powers , S . Kiesler , S . Fussell , and C . Torrey , “Comparing a com - puter agent with a humanoid robot , ” in Proceedings of the ACM / IEEE international conference on Human - robot interaction . ACM , 2007 , pp . 145 – 152 . [ 15 ] D . M . Dehn and S . v . Mulken , “The impact of animated interface agents : a review of empirical research , ” Int . J . Hum . - Comput . Stud . , vol . 52 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 22 , 2000 . [ 16 ] T . Komatsu , Y . Abe , H . Prendinger , J . Lester , and M . Ishizuka , “Comparing an On - Screen agent with a robotic agent in Non - Face - to - Face interactions , ” in Intelligent Virtual Agents , ser . Lecture Notes in Computer Science . Springer Berlin / Heidelberg , 2008 , vol . 5208 , pp . 498 – 504 . [ 17 ] H . Naito , Y . Takeuchi , J . Kim , S . S . Ge , P . Vadakkepat , N . Jesse , A . Al Manum , S . Puthusserypady K , U . Rckert , J . Sitte , U . Witkowski , R . Nakatsu , T . Braunl , J . Baltes , J . Anderson , C . Wong , I . Verner , and D . Ahlgren , “Promotion of efﬁcient cooperation by sharing environment with an agent having a body in real world , ” in Progress in Robotics , ser . Communications in Computer and Information Science . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 2009 , vol . 44 , pp . 128 – 133 . [ 18 ] K . Shinozawa , F . Naya , J . Yamato , and K . Kogure , “Differences in effect of robot and screen agent recommendations on human decision - making , ” Int . J . Hum . - Comput . Stud . , vol . 62 , no . 2 , pp . 267 – 279 , Feb . 2005 . [ 19 ] S . Vosoiadou , “How children learn ? ” International Academy of Edu - cation , Tech . Rep . Education Practices Series - 7 , 2003 . [ 20 ] S . Hidi , “An interest researcher’s perspective : The effects of extrinsic and intrinsic factors on motivation , ” in Intrinsic and Extrinsic Moti - vation . Elsevier , 2000 , pp . 309 – 339 . [ 21 ] D . M . Christophel , “The relationships among teacher immediacy be - haviors , student motivation , and learning , ” Communication Education , vol . 39 , no . 4 , pp . 323 – 340 , Oct . 1990 . [ 22 ] H . A . Davis , “Conceptualizing the role and inﬂuence of Student - Teacher relationships on children’s social and cognitive development , ” Educational Psychologist , vol . 38 , no . 4 , pp . 207 – 234 , Dec . 2003 . [ 23 ] P . Markopoulos , Evaluating children’s interactive products principles and practices for interaction designers . Amsterdam ; Boston : Morgan Kaufmann , 2008 . [ 24 ] A . Bell , “Designing and testing questionnaires for children , ” Journal of Research in Nursing , vol . 12 , no . 5 , pp . 461 – 469 , Sept . 2007 . [ 25 ] S . Robben , “Facilitate bonding between a child and a social robot : Exploring the possibility of a robot adaptive to personality . ” Master’s thesis , University of Nijmegen , 2011 . [ 26 ] J . B . Janssen , C . C . van der Wal , M . A . Neerincx , and R . Looije , “Motivating children to learn arithmetic with an adaptive robot game , ” in ICSR Conference , November 2011 2011 , pp . 153 – 162 . 724