AI in Global Health : The View from the Front Lines Azra Ismail Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta , Georgia , USA azraismail @ gatech . edu Neha Kumar Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta , Georgia , USA neha . kumar @ gatech . edu ABSTRACT There has been growing interest in the application of AI for So - cial Good , motivated by scarce and unequal resources globally . We focus on the case of AI in frontline health , a Social Good domain that is increasingly a topic of significant attention . We offer a the - matic discourse analysis of scientific and grey literature to identify prominent applications of AI in frontline health , motivations driv - ing this work , stakeholders involved , and levels of engagement with the local context . We then uncover design considerations for these systems , drawing from data from three years of ethnographic fieldwork with women frontline health workers and women from marginalized communities in Delhi ( India ) . Finally , we outline an agenda for AI systems that target Social Good , drawing from lit - erature on HCI4D , post - development critique , and transnational feminist theory . Our paper thus offers a critical and ethnographic perspective to inform the design of AI systems that target social impact . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI . KEYWORDS AI ; Social Good ; Healthcare ; India ; HCI4D ; Qualitative ACM Reference Format : Azra Ismail and Neha Kumar . 2021 . AI in Global Health : The View from the Front Lines . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’21 ) , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 21 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445130 1 INTRODUCTION Emerging research has brought to light the problematic roles that artificial intelligence ( AI ) systems play in exacerbating marginaliza - tion [ 79 , 127 , 174 ] , privacy violations [ 252 ] , and the exploitation and unemployment of workers [ 21 , 97 ] —even as they claim to improve human lives [ 222 ] . The various agendas of government and indus - try actors aspiring to leverage AI are also increasingly being subject to scrutiny [ 94 , 252 ] . Amid these concerns , a cautiously optimistic parallel discourse has also surfaced around leveraging AI to address “social good” or “global development problems” [ 114 , 160 ] , rather than advancing capitalist goals [ 252 ] . Emerging perspectives from Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspecificpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan © 2021 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 8096 - 6 / 21 / 05 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445130 the Global South seek to center the majority of the world’s popula - tion residing in contexts typically characterized as “low - resource” , “marginalized” , or “developing” [ 120 , 223 ] . A key motivation driving the social good narrative in under - served contexts is the desire to address inequities , optimize existing scarce resources , and overcome workforce shortages [ 82 ] . These re - flect the optimism that technology can help countries in the Global South leapfrog or accelerate the pace of development [ 140 ] . Along these lines , the fourth annual United Nations Global Summit on AI for Good in September 2020 invited an array of global stakeholders to present their visions on how AI might be channeled towards pos - itive societal impact [ 40 , 114 ] . There have also been more localized initiatives . For instance , several state and non - profit institutions in India have taken the lead in ideating possible AI futures for the country [ 2 , 11 , 17 ] . These efforts have also been supported by industry through research [ 86 , 196 , 197 ] and grant funding , such as the USD 25 million fund provided by Google . org in support of organizations using “the power of AI to address social and environ - mental challenges” [ 86 ] . Within academia , workshops at prominent AI research venues such as the International Conference on Ma - chine Learning ( ICML ) and the Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems ( NeurIPS ) are asking how their fields might take on development and social good challenges [ 62 , 83 , 160 , 235 ] . Global health is one among several application domains that has garnered significant interest [ 235 ] . Leading global health organizations have proposed and funded AI systems , and these efforts have been accelerated during the COVID - 19 pandemic [ 161 , 228 , 230 , 248 ] . Many of these interven - tions aim to improve existing frontline health infrastructures that deliver last mile healthcare , especially critical in countries of the Global South [ 154 , 195 ] . However , the perspectives of the frontline health workers ( FHWs ) operating these health infrastructures and the marginalized communities accessing the healthcare system find rare representation in this discourse . In particular , the voices of the women who largely make up the healthcare workforce , most in lower - tier positions , and are frequently the primary care providers in the home , are glaringly missing . In this paper , we draw attention to FHWs and their communities that are targeted by proposed AI interventions to identify more inclusive opportunities for design . We begin by presenting a the - matic discourse analysis of academic and grey literature published by governments , industry , and researchers on AI for healthcare in resource - constrained contexts . We identify prominent applica - tions of AI in frontline health , stakeholders involved , motivations driving this work , assumptions made about context , and level of engagement with local actors . We then uncover gaps in these efforts and outline opportunities for design , drawing from data collected over three years of ethnographic fieldwork with women FHWs and women from marginalized communities receiving care in Delhi , CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan Ismail and Kumar India . Our focus on this population is motivated by the scholar - ship of transnational feminist scholar , Chandra Talpade Mohanty , who posits that an “experiential and analytic anchor in the lives of marginalized communities of women provides the most inclusive paradigm for thinking about social justice” [ 165 ] . Our analysis high - lights how the “AI for Social Good” discourse reflects structures of power that disadvantage FHWs . Acknowledging our feminist stance [ 23 , 164 ] , we are troubled by these power differentials and their impact on technology design . We draw from lessons learned across Human - Computer Interaction for Development ( HCI4D ) , post - development critique , and transnational feminist theory to propose opportunities for the design of AI that targets social good outcomes , while attending to the power inequities between de - velopers and target communities . Our paper offers a critical and ethnographic perspective from the Global South to a growing body of HCI research that is engaging with the design of AI systems , particularly research that aims to support healthcare workflows in resource - constrained settings . 2 BACKGROUND : TECHNOLOGY - MEDIATED FRONTLINE HEALTH Since the early 2000s , information and communication technol - ogy ( ICT ) interventions have been designed , deployed , and studied across a range of global health domains such as maternal health [ 67 , 134 , 186 ] , sexual health [ 118 , 175 ] , and tuberculosis [ 59 ] . A sizeable portion of this work has focused on frontline health —healthcare infrastructures that aim to provide care directly where they are most needed . Early work in this field has focused on the use of low - cost mobile phones to deliver interventions [ 151 ] . Technolo - gies have been designed and developed to digitize data collection by FHWs [ 179 ] , track their workflows and provide feedback on per - formance [ 67 ] , enable peer - learning [ 246 ] , and disseminate health information [ 136 , 167 , 193 ] . ICT interventions have also been de - veloped to offer last - mile care support by FHWs such as follow - ups with patients after hospital visits [ 176 ] , and antenatal care via chat [ 186 , 187 ] . As the costs of accessing the internet have fallen dramat - ically , FHWs in many parts of the Global South have also begun to use smartphones and the internet to access digital financial services [ 124 ] , chat for work and leisure [ 113 , 125 ] , and for accessing training materials [ 244 ] . More recently , frontline health has become a target of technology efforts during the COVID - 19 pandemic [ 126 , 138 , 227 ] . Alongside these research contributions , critical perspectives have emerged to examine the extent to which such interventions , as they are most commonly designed , can impact the most marginalized groups [ 111 , 134 , 171 ] . Our paper further contributes towards an understanding of how emerging AI technologies might be designed appropriately for the FHWs and marginalized populations that they aim to serve . Prompted by the shortage of medical personnel and equipment in many countries , there has been an increasing interest in AI - based technologies for frontline health [ 236 ] . A report by key foundations in global health—the United States Agency for International Devel - opment ( USAID ) , Rockefeller Foundation , and Gates Foundation— outlines promising applications of AI , such as AI - based population health tools , virtual assistants for FHWs and patients , and various diagnostic tools [ 82 ] . AI systems have been developed to help with early detection and diagnosis [ 5 , 27 ] , drug discovery [ 47 ] , and out - come prediction and prognosis evaluation [ 107 , 226 ] . Within the Global South , AI has been used primarily to address tropical and infectious diseases , such as by using machine learning to forecast the spread of dengue [ 98 ] and ebola [ 39 ] , and in tuberculosis screen - ing [ 9 , 156 ] . AI tools are also being developed to support maternal and child health such as for early screening of low birth - weight and preterm infants [ 11 , 53 , 198 ] , and to identify mothers not engaging with a health program [ 173 ] . In India in particular , a report by NITI Aayog , the policy think tank of the government , identifies diagnos - tics , personalized treatment , and early identification of pandemics as key AI applications that can enable affordable healthcare for all [ 2 ] . Many of these efforts above rely on or target existing primary health and frontline health infrastructures . In this paper , we detail current AI efforts and identify gaps in this body of work . The growing popularity of AI has helped attract resources to frontline health , as in other domains . However , to build sustainable and impactful solutions , an HCI perspective would argue that it is critical to attend to the context in which the technology is designed and deployed . The field of HCI has begun to explore how AI systems might be better designed to consider the needs of potential users and developers . Guidelines have been proposed for the design of AI systems that collect data from , impact , or interact with humans [ 15 , 86 , 147 ] . Recent research demonstrates how ethnographic and participatory design studies could inform the design of AI systems in healthcare [ 24 , 182 , 245 ] . For example , Yadav et al . examined the potential of chatbots for breastfeeding education by conducting a Wizard - of - Oz experiment with FHWs and breastfeeding mothers [ 245 ] . Researchers have studied how AI could support the routine , “unremarkable” work of clinicians [ 247 ] , and help with collaborative decision - making among medical experts [ 41 ] . In a rare example of a study of the real - world deployment of an AI system , Beede et al . undertook an ethnographic study of a deep learning system for diabetic retinopathy in hospital settings [ 24 ] . Given limited oppor - tunities for design iterations of AI systems post development , they argue that “formative research that provides a strong understand - ing of clinical users and their context is critically important to the success of such a system” [ 24 ] . We provide this formative research in the case of frontline health workflows , and contribute a critical and ethnographic perspective from the Global South to emerging HCI literature on the design of AI systems . 3 METHODS Our research combines a thematic discourse analysis of literature on AI and global health with an ethnographic perspective based in data from fieldwork in frontline health . While the former allows us to understand what is with respect to developments around AI and global health , the latter lets us illuminate what could be . We began by constructing a corpus of scientific and grey literature to situate our analysis in the context of emergent conversations around AI and global health . We first applied thematic discourse analysis to identify common themes across AI initiatives targeting healthcare provision in resource - constrained settings [ 91 ] . We then situated our analysis in fieldwork conducted with women frontline health workers ( FHWs ) and women from underserved communities in Delhi ( India ) . We paid close attention to the articulation work AI in Global Health : The View from the Front Lines CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan involved in frontline health , or the labors associated with coordinat - ing and planning work - related activities , often invisible to others [ 221 ] . 3 . 1 Thematic Discourse Analysis We studied the discourse around AI for frontline health , as expressed in scientific and grey literature published by academic , government , and industry actors . The study of discourse has its roots in Fou - cault’s argument that discourse is how we come to shape realities , subjectivities , and power relations [ 84 ] . Discourse analysis allows us to examine how structures and processes of power and control are reproduced via discourse [ 91 ] . In this paper , we employ the - matic discourse analysis to identify common themes across articles on AI and frontline health [ 91 ] . This method has previously been used by HCI researchers to study the representation of the “human” in research on predicting mental health status [ 48 ] , intersectional identities of research participants [ 208 ] , and the agency of autistic children in technology research [ 217 ] . Before we describe our discourse analysis process , we clarify what we mean by “AI” . We define AI as digital artifacts that extend any of the capacities related to natural intelligence [ 35 ] . Intelligence requires the capacity to perceive contexts for action , the capacity to act , and the capacity to associate contexts to actions [ 35 ] . Using on this definition , we identified AI technologies being proposed and developed in global health ( see category 1 in Table 1 ) . We cast a wide net to construct our corpus . We analyzed news ar - ticles , academic publications in a range of journals and conferences , and white papers by global health organizations , consulting com - panies , policy think tanks , and government organizations . We also included short papers published in conference workshops in our search as these are relatively more accessible to researchers from the Global South . We focused on items published between January 2010 and June 2020 . We used the ACM Digital Library , Scopus , and Google Scholar for our search , using the search terms described in Table 1 . This resulted in a total of 1631 document results . We did not limit results by type of document or venue , but discarded results where we could not find the document online . We did not add papers that were literature reviews to our corpus . In the case that more than one publication reported on the same AI system , we only included the most recent one . We used Google Search to supplement our data , screening results from the first five pages for each combination of search terms in Table 1 . This helped us identify 63 more potentially relevant sources—white papers , web pages , and blog posts . We excluded mental health and pharmacology as part of the health domains that we considered . We then manually screened through the titles and abstracts of these 1694 sources using the following filtration criteria : ( 1 ) The paper or article proposes or reports on the design , de - velopment , or deployment of an AI system ( see category 1 in Table 1 ) . ( 2 ) The technology explicitly targets a resource - constrained or Global South context ( see category 2 in Table 1 ) . ( 3 ) The technology targets a challenge in the health domain , barring interventions relating to mental health or pharma - cology . Table 1 : Filtering strategy for constructing the corpus . Note that the “ + ” sign in category 2 indicates the AND operator . Category Keywords Artificial Intelligence ( 1 ) artificial intelligence , machine learning , chatbot , computer vision , neural network , deep learning , prediction , precision health , NLP Global Health ( 2 ) global health , developing countries + health , marginalized + health , low resource + health , low income + health , LMIC + health , primary health , frontline health , maternal health , newborn health Search term ( 1 ) AND ( 2 ) Table 2 : Breakdown of papers reviewed by domain . Domain Number of Papers Computer Science 100 Engineering 70 Medicine 72 Public Health or Environmental Science 49 Industry , Non - profit , or Government 25 Other 31 Table 3 : Breakdown of papers reviewed by type of publica - tion venue . Publication Venue Number of Papers Journal Articles 183 Conference Proceedings and Workshop Papers 121 Book Chapters 13 Science Articles and White Papers 7 Web pages and Blog posts 23 Total 347 We ended up with 383 articles and papers through the initial filtering process . We also used this list of papers generated to seed our search for similar applications by looking through papers that referenced these publications . This yielded a few more papers . We manually scanned the body of these articles and papers using the same list of questions to further filter results . Through this process , we arrived at a final list of 347 papers , articles , and web pages . We then conducted a thematic analysis of this data following the approach outlined by Braun and Clarke : familiarizing oneself with the data , coding , generating themes , reviewing themes , defining and naming themes , and writing up results [ 31 ] . Through the initial process of familiarizing ourselves with the data , we arrived at a set of questions that we were interested in asking of the data . We started by coding the data around the following : the AI technologies are proposed , stakeholders involved , global health challenges tar - geted , motivations for an AI solution , level of engagement with the target context , and assumptions made about the context . For exam - ple , some codes that emerged through this process were “predicting disease spread , ” “automating health workflows , ” “obtaining data from local organizations , ” and “designing for resource - constrained CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan Ismail and Kumar environments . ” We also recorded the following aspects of each pa - per : the field that it was published in , the location of the work , and venue and year of publication . Tables 2 and 3 offer a breakdown of papers in our corpus by discipline and publication venue . We then searched for and finalized a set of broad themes in the discourse such as “AI for disease surveillance and forecasting” , “unsustain - able intervention” , and “engagement with local context” . Section 4 details the themes that we generated . Section 5 offers an ethno - graphic perspective on these themes to highlight what is assumed or left unsaid in the discourse , drawing on data from fieldwork . We describe the analysis of this ethnographic data next . 3 . 2 Ethnography The second set of data that we draw on in this paper was collected as part of a long - term ethnographic engagement in a peri - urban neighborhood in Delhi from May 2016 to August 2019 . This is located in a predominantly Muslim region of South - East Delhi , with relatively poor infrastructure , and illegal settlements located beside the Yamuna river . Many residents in the area are migrants originally from the nearby states of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar . We began our ethnographic work with the study of government and private clinics accessed by slum residents in the region . Our engagement with government clinics brought us into contact with Accredited Social Health Activists or ASHAs [ 158 ] . ASHAs are FHWs employed by the state government to deliver care at the last mile . Their everyday tasks include data collection , healthcare pro - vision , and information dissemination , with special attention paid to maternal and child health . They receive monetary incentives for their work but are not salaried government employees ; their work is considered to be voluntary . Recognizing the role of ASHAs as key intermediaries between communities and the government health - care infrastructure , our goal through our extended engagement was to gain a situated understanding of their healthcare provision activ - ities . We collected data over five extended visits to Delhi between 2016 and 2019 , and through continued engagement with ASHAs between visits through phone calls , WhatsApp , and Facebook . Our research has been approved by the Institutional Review Board at the Georgia Institute of Technology , along with neces - sary permissions from local institutions where we conducted our fieldwork . As one of the options for multi - sited ethnography recom - mended by Marcus [ 152 ] , we followed and stayed with the move - ments of the ASHAs as they went about their work , immersing ourselves in their worldviews to the extent possible . Gaining privi - leged access to these worldviews and sensitive information around their lives involved building trust and nurturing relationships with these ASHAs over the years , in - person and remotely . ASHAs were compensated for their time and care when possible and appropriate as a token of gratitude , such as with chai and snacks , sweets , mobile recharge cards , and transportation costs , but their contributions to our research cannot be measured in material terms . We conducted interviews , focus groups , and in - person partic - ipant observation with a total of 21 ASHAs , all of whom report to the same Primary Health Center ( PHC ) aka the dispensary . We gained access to the ASHAs through snowball sampling [ 96 ] . We conducted multiple interviews and focus groups with most ASHAs , each session lasting between 30 minutes to 3 hours . Additionally , we Table 4 : Demographic information of ASHA participants P a r t i c i p a n t A g e R e g i o n P a r t i c i p a n t A g e R e g i o n Farida 50 - 55 Jogabai Aisha 50 - 55 Batla House Maryam 30 - 35 Jogabai Rida 35 - 40 Batla House Hiba 20 - 25 Jogabai Arti 55 - 60 Khizarabad Hafsa 45 - 50 Jogabai Karishma 25 - 30 Khizarabad Khadija 25 - 30 Jogabai Reshma 30 - 35 Khizarabad Amna 30 - 35 Batla House Susha 40 - 45 Khizarabad Tasneem 25 - 30 Batla House Rekha 25 - 30 Khizarabad Saba 20 - 25 Batla House Meena 45 - 50 Khizarabad Zainab 25 - 30 Batla House Afsana 35 - 40 Okhla Village Bushra 25 - 30 Batla House Naima 55 - 60 Okhla Village Nadia 30 - 35 Batla House Table 5 : Demographic information of interview participants from the community . Total 50 participants Education level Completed college : 4 , Completed 12th grade : 8 , Completed 10th grade : 11 , Completed 8th grade : 15 , Below 8th grade : 12 Age ( years ) 18 - 25 : 9 , 26 - 35 : 16 , 36 - 45 : 15 , 46 - 55 : 6 , 55 - 65 : 4 Annual household income Below INR 2 lakhs : 32 , INR 2 to 3 lakhs : 18 shadowed eight ASHAs during their lengthy house visits , observing their interactions with over 250 households . We also interviewed household members during 50 of these visits . The annual household incomes of the ASHAs as well as the families we interacted with fell into the low to low - middle income categories , defined as earning less than USD 5840 per year [ 131 ] . Two ASHAs we interacted with have completed 12th grade education , while the others have com - pleted 10th grade . All are married women with children , and two have grandchildren . Six of the ASHAs identify as Hindus and work in predominantly Hindu neighborhoods , while the remaining iden - tify as Muslim . Our engagement with five ( Muslim ) ASHAs who frequently work together has been particularly deep and steady for over three years , and they have offered us rich insight into how their aspirations , engagement with the healthcare infrastructure , and situations at home have evolved over time . All interactions and data collection were undertaken by the first author , Azra , and took place in Hindi or Urdu , then translated to English . Interview and observation data was collected in the form of field notes , audio recordings , and photographs . All data was recorded only after the consent of the participants , and was later anonymized . Participant names used in this paper are all pseudonyms . Tables 4 and 5 offers demographic information about our participants . The qualitative data was collectively analyzed by both authors— Azra and Neha—using the inductive process outlined by Merriam [ 157 ] . We conducted several rounds of open coding , discussing the codes after each iteration . The first round of coding closely fol - lowed the text . The next round of coding was more high - level and AI in Global Health : The View from the Front Lines CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan resulted in codes such as “managing disease outbreak , ” “coordinat - ing work with other ASHAs , ” and “providing emotional support to patients . ” Subsequent rounds of coding combined several codes to generate high - level codes such as “care - driven work , ” “lack of data transparency , ” and “power dynamics across stakeholders . ” We then analyzed these codes in relation to the themes that emerged from the thematic discourse analysis , centering the perspective of the FHWs . Our analysis highlights how the “AI for Social Good” discourse , as it operates currently , may exert power by diverting re - sources from other solutions , silencing local knowledges , extracting limited resources , and reinforcing structures of oppression . We offer design recommendations to address these challenges , and identify workflows that could be supported by AI interventions . 3 . 3 Positionality Both Azra and Neha have experience conducting fieldwork with ( predominantly ) women FHWs in rural and urban India . Azra was also involved in a newborn health project with a non - profit research institute in India focused on AI for Social Good—an experience that offered invaluable insights into conversations at this intersection . Our analysis in this paper is shaped by our postcolonial feminist leanings and a growing sensitization to the marginalizations result - ing from intersectional factors such as gender , religion , caste , and class that surfaced in our fieldwork . Despite our sincerest attempts to understand and portray the perspectives of women from the marginalized contexts where our research is located , we acknowl - edge that our lived realities are starkly different from those of our participants , and we can at best offer a partial perspective [ 99 ] . 3 . 4 Limitations A major constraint of our discourse analysis was that we did not include literature in languages other than English . We realize this means that our review likely excludes valuable perspectives and approaches that may have been published in other languages . We reviewed articles and other grey and non - academic literature to identify efforts that we would have missed otherwise , but empha - size nevertheless that this cannot be a complete account . Finally , though our analysis is situated in an underserved setting in India , we cannot claim to speak for all Indian settings , much less the rest of the Global South . We contend , however , that there are high - level commonalities across frontline health contexts in India , and take - aways that may be relevant far beyond the urban Delhi setting . Leveraging our ethnographic findings , however , we highlight the gaps that might arise in designing AI when sociocultural complexi - ties are crucial to account for , and offer takeaways that might be more broadly applicable . 4 AI IN GLOBAL HEALTH Our review of academic and grey literature on AI and global health uncovered diverse perspectives from across geographies , academic and non - academic fields , application domains , and technologies . Most applications we uncovered targeted South Asia ( 96 ) , or did not target any specific region ( 55 ) . This was followed by Latin America ( 47 ) , Africa ( 46 ) , East Asia ( 38 ) , Southeast Asia ( 24 ) , the Middle East ( 18 ) , with several targeting multiple settings ( see Table 6 for details ) . We also found five papers from North America and Table 6 : Breakdown of papers by region targeted . Region Number of Papers South Asia 96 Latin and Central America 47 Africa 46 Middle East 18 East Asia 38 Southeast Asia 24 North America 3 Europe 2 Not Specified 55 Other or multiple regions 31 Table 7 : Breakdown of papers by application area . Application Area Number of Papers Disease Surveillance and Forecasting 87 Diagnostics and Screening 161 Risk Assessment 32 Epidemiology 22 Resource Allocation 9 Behavior Prediction 4 Health Systems Measurement 3 Information Delivery 11 Data Quality Control 7 Other 11 Europe that targeted “low - resource” or “developing” settings . An application was characterized as targeting one of these regions if the work was motivated by the incidence of disease or a particular workflow in that region , the dataset used was based there , or if this was the location where the system was deployed . We now present key themes that emerged from our analysis . 4 . 1 Application Areas Of the 347 AI applications that we reviewed , we found that a sig - nificant fraction fell into two categories : diagnosis and screening ( n = 161 ) or disease surveillance and forecasting ( n = 87 ) . A complete breakdown of the kinds of AI interventions in our corpus is pre - sented in Table 7 . We note that several of them could have fallen into more than one category . For the purpose of analysis , we placed these into a single category that the authors mutually agreed was the closest fit . Below we describe the various application areas of AI that we found , the stakeholders driving them , the approaches they take , their stated motivations , and the underlying assumptions they reflect about the targeted setting . 4 . 1 . 1 Disease Surveillance and Forecasting . We found that most AI interventions in the Public Health or Environmental Science domains focused on predicting and analyzing the spread of disease over a region or population , though this was also a popular applica - tion area in Computer Science and Medicine . This involved the use CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan Ismail and Kumar of a variety of environmental , spatial , demographic and temporal data . A recent example of the use of AI for disease forecasting is during the COVID - 19 pandemic , to predict growth in positive cases and spatial spread globally [ 92 , 161 , 228 , 248 ] . We found that environmental factors in particular , such as cli - mate data ( temperature , precipitation , humidity ) , vegetation , or proximity to water bodies were frequently used in the case of vector - borne diseases such as malaria [ 192 ] , dengue fever [ 203 ] , Zika [ 12 ] , and others that were more unique to a specific region ( e . g . , scrub typhus in Nepal [ 6 ] ) . This approach was also used in the case of a variety of infectious diseases , ranging from diarrhea [ 238 ] to influenza [ 56 ] to Ebola [ 39 ] . Our analysis indicated that the use of AI in such cases was primarily aimed at enabling early warning systems for policymakers to take early action . For example , one study described the motivation of the work thus : “Since malaria is preventable and treatable , one of the solutions towards reducing the number of deaths is by implementing an effective malaria outbreak early warning system that can forecast malaria incidence long before they occur . This way , policymakers can put mitigation measures in place . ” [ 153 ] There are limitations to how far this method can impact under - lying issues . For instance , one paper conducted a spatio - temporal analysis of the spread of Chagas disease in Brazil using demographic and environmental data [ 216 ] . Though it found a relationship to “different types of deforestation identified in the municipality , as well as agglomerations of cases , ” it did not offer how they expect a pol - icymaker to act upon this finding . Neither did the authors take a political stance on the issue . We also found environmental factors employed to forecast non - communicable diseases in two cases , both studying the impact of air pollution on health [ 19 , 249 ] . In one of these , the authors themselves acknowledged the limitation of their approach : “We understand that the best action to improve air quality is reducing emissions , however it is not possi - ble in a short term . . . they could be used to estimate hospital admissions and alert government and hospi - tals for possible increases of hospitalizations due to high air pollution episodes or adverse meteorological conditions . ” [ 19 ] None of the other papers on disease forecasting were similarly open about limitations of their work . Another approach to disease surveillance that we found was through analysis of social media posts and online search queries ( n = 6 ) , correlating posts and search terms to data on disease incidence ( e . g . , [ 14 , 170 ] ) . These aim to offer real - time disease monitoring and inform health promotion - based interventions on social media , though there is little evidence of their effectiveness in practice and the extent to which they can be integrated into existing surveillance systems [ 51 , 234 ] . 4 . 1 . 2 Diagnosis and Screening . We found diagnostic tools to be the most popular applications of AI in healthcare , particularly in Computer Science and Engineering ( representing 59 . 41 % of systems from these fields , and 46 . 39 % overall ) . We encountered several terms that were used interchangeably in this area—diagnosis , screening , triage , detection , and decision support . Our analysis revealed that their usage reflected little meaningful difference with respect to system design or outcomes of the system , but were related to their intended use . Diagnosis ( n = 90 ) typically referred to systems that aimed to provide a result on whether someone does or does not have a certain medical condition . Triage , screening , or detection ( n = 51 ) were terms used to refer to systems that offer an indication of whether expert advice needs to be sought or if additional medical tests need to be conducted . Decision support ( n = 9 ) was used to de - scribe systems that provided a suggestion to a medical professional or health worker on what step to take next with a patient . We found that several AI systems were motivated by limited access to expensive equipment used in diagnosis in low - resource regions , and aimed to offer alternative methods that were low - cost and accessible ( e . g . , [ 29 , 95 ] ) . One AI application used a smartphone camera for skin disease analysis , stating that “patients in remote areas , poor and developing countries can scan , analyze and make regular skin examinations in any place” [ 29 ] . Apart from making tools themselves more accessible , AI were aimed at addressing lack of specialized medical expertise in many regions ( e . g . , [ 121 , 155 ] ) . One paper was particularly critical of the poor quality of healthcare stating that “ . . . millions of people have to put up with inaccurate medical care services due to lacking of experienced doctors , especially in the developing countries and areas” [ 74 ] . Though this may appear dismissive of healthcare professionals , it might also reflect how patients in that region view their healthcare system . The below quote is a more representative statement of motivation : “Cervical cancer is the most common cause of cancer death for women in Kenya , where there is only around one pathologist for every million people . That’s not nearly enough to analyze Pap smears , the routine screening tests that detect abnormal cells in the cervix , from all the women who should receive them regu - larly . . . aims to facilitate screening and catch abnormal cells before full - blown cancer develops . ” [ 240 ] Many such AI systems that support with diagnosis , triage , screen - ing , or detection were designed to automate workflows , such as the identification of head CT scan abnormalities [ 54 ] . Others were aimed at reducing the time taken by healthcare providers , such as through the use of convolutional neural networks to more quickly classify chest X - ray images to detect tuberculosis [ 43 , 108 , 142 ] . However , only one of these studies measured the impact on time spent by health workers [ 24 ] . It found that the AI system they de - signed for diabetic retinopathy screening occasionally introduced unnecessary delays for some patients , such as due to network issues or poor lighting conditions of images [ 24 ] . Some AI applications we reviewed aimed for their system to be used by a less skilled health worker to reduce the burden on more skilled professionals . For ex - ample , the following AI intervention that was built using data from mobile clinics : “In health consultancy with caravan health sensing , doctors’ task becomes the bottleneck of the whole process because of the cost and the huge workload , and we try to delegate some of them to health workers who are less skilled” [ 119 ] . We note that this reflects the assumption that less skilled healthcare professionals have more time available . 4 . 1 . 3 Risk Assessment and Epidemiology . We also found AI systems that aimed to stratify a population based on certain underlying AI in Global Health : The View from the Front Lines CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan “risk” factors . Though closely related to triage systems mentioned previously that also aimed to identify patients for follow - up , risk assessment ( n = 32 ) systems worked on a population level rather than an individual level . Such systems focused on predicting patients at risk of a medical condition or mortality and in need of additional care , using demographic and behavioral data . The following excerpt from a paper offers an example of such a system : “Nowadays , developing countries face serious health issues such as Sexually Transmitted Infections , un - intended pregnancies and other Reproductive Tract Infections . To tackle those health issues , customized awareness programs are necessary . To provide cus - tomized education and training to the women in de - veloping and under developed regions , it is necessary to classify the women in those regions into differ - ent health risk segments and sub groups within the segment . ” [ 16 ] A significant number of the papers that we found in this space ( n = 20 ) similarly focused on maternal , child , or sexual / reproductive health . The above paper offered an information - focused interven - tion , but several others focused on predicting the death of a pa - tient , such as newborns from sepsis or asphyxia [ 106 , 117 , 144 ] and women during their pregnancy [ 169 , 199 ] . They aimed to in - form a healthcare provider to pay additional attention to patient identified to be at risk . We caution that though such systems are well - meaning , they can be problematic . We see this in the case of Plataforma Tecnológica de Intervención Social ( Technological Platform for Social Intervention ) set up by the Ministry of Early Childhood in the Province of Salta , Argentina [ 188 ] . A machine learning system was developed by Microsoft to help public authori - ties prevent school dropouts and teenage pregnancy . The governor of Salta has claimed : “With technology , based on name , surname and address , you can predict five or six years ahead which girl , or future teenager , is 86 % predestined to have a teenage pregnancy” [ 188 ] . The reliance on demographic data in such cases means that AI could be used to police groups that are already made vulnerable , and may reflect and reinforce historical biases . AI in epidemiology ( n = 22 ) offered a counterpoint to the predic - tion approach . Epidemiology is the study of the factors ( social , demographic , environmental , and more ) that impact the presence or absence of disease in a population . It is typically studied in re - lation to a population considered to be at risk . While the above risk assessment interventions seek to “predict , ” , epidemiological applications were focused on informing policy makers and health - care authorities about appropriate actions to take . For example , the following paper was also around newborn health , but framed differently : “Recognizing the urgency in reducing stillbirths glob - ally , multi - pronged strategies should be designed to promote gender equality and strengthen the reproduc - tive and maternal health services in Africa , Eastern Mediterranean , South Eastern Asia , and other coun - tries with disproportionately high stillbirth rates . ” [ 8 ] In the above text , we see that the focus is on informing structural issues that impact reproductive and maternal health rather than offering AI as the solution . We found no applications of epidemiol - ogy in industry . However , in a similar vein , we did find applications of AI in industry for resource allocation ( n = 9 ) . These were aimed at better directing limited resources and improving work efficiency . Macro - Eyes is a for - profit organization doing such work , and is de - veloping a machine learning system that “predicts vaccine utilisation at the facility , district , and regional level . The predictive supply chain for vaccines offers 96 % reduction in vaccine misallocation” [ 146 ] . The applications of AI in epidemiology and resource allocation above also align with recent suggestions to use computing to diagnose and formalize social problems [ 3 ] , and the latter reflects the mechanism design approach [ 4 ] . 4 . 1 . 4 Other Applications . We also found implementations of AI for information delivery , behavior prediction , verbal autopsy , health system measurement , data digitization , and data quality control ( breakdown in Table 7 ) . Information delivery ( n = 11 ) , in particular , was popular in industry , typically taking the form of chatbots to provide patients and clinicians with information . Ada Health , for example , is a for - profit company that developed a multi - lingual app - based chatbot to provide information on a variety of health conditions [ 215 ] . Chatbots have also been used in counseling , such as on HIV and breastfeeding practices [ 245 ] . These aim to address “inadequate access to medical experts” [ 180 ] , providing affordable and accessible means to get care and answers to common healthcare questions . The use of AI for behavior prediction and health systems mea - surement ( n = 7 ) that we reviewed were tightly coupled with exist - ing programs run by non - profits or hospitals , and the AI solutions were frequently implemented in collaboration with academics . For instance , 99DOTS is a medication adherence tool developed by Everwell Health Solutions , a non - profit organization [ 128 ] . An AI solution was implemented using historical data on adherence from their Tuberculosis program , to identify patients likely to miss medication or for whom the treatment is less successful and need additional attention from health workers [ 128 ] . Other examples include the use of AI to identify children who are likely to default on immunization visits [ 49 ] , and to evaluate the effectiveness of an SMS - and IVR - based information delivery program , and potential spaces for improvement [ 173 ] . These , however , represented a small fraction of all AI applications that we reviewed ( 2 . 02 % ) . 4 . 2 Localization and Deployment We mentioned above that many papers in our corpus ( n = 55 ) were not motivated by or did not target a specific context . However , far from this work being driven by the Global North , as we might assume , these papers were largely led by researchers in the Global South , sometimes in collaboration with US or Europe - based institu - tions . Though these papers did not explicitly reference a specific context , the researchers’ location may have impacted their choice of topic and framing of the problem ( and the interest in global health ) . Most of these papers focused on diagnostic tools ( 70 . 9 % ) , and may have been attempting to speak to a broader audience . All other papers we reviewed focused on a specific region , ranging in scale from a country to a specific community . CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan Ismail and Kumar We found that data used to develop systems was rarely exclu - sively generated in the region targeted . Many papers were moti - vated by a challenge in a particular region , but used data generated elsewhere ( typically open - source data from the US or Europe ) , par - ticularly the case in diagnostics [ 90 , 209 ] . Others obtained data from the target context through a partner , sometimes supplement - ing with data generated elsewhere [ 25 , 210 ] . These were typically collected in hospital settings for diagnostic tools [ 9 , 232 ] , or with community organizations in risk assessment or behavior predic - tion [ 128 , 173 ] . Datasets used for disease forecasting were either generated by global health organizations such as the World Health Organization ( WHO ) and USAID [ 61 , 110 ] , or were obtained from local health units ( e . g . , Heng County’s Center for Disease Control and Prevention in China [ 239 ] ) alongside other openly available geospatial and meteorological data . In some cases , forecasting was based on collected samples [ 71 , 116 ] . In epidemiology , data was collected through household or patient surveys [ 130 ] . We note that many of the systems we reviewed mentioned data - hungry approaches like deep learning ( n = 47 ) or big data ( n = 12 ) , despite being largely motivated by resource - constrained settings . Only a few ( n = 4 ) were designed specifically for settings with data and technical infrastructure constraints ( e . g . , [ 22 , 129 ] ) . Our analysis also indicated that there has been limited engage - ment with target users and populations . Only two studies in our corpus , both in HCI , engaged substantially with users [ 24 , 245 ] . None of the papers on disease surveillance that we analyzed men - tioned whether these applications had been used , reviewed , or discussed with target stakeholders . Though many diagnostic tools were developed using data obtained from a hospital , the researchers rarely engaged more deeply with the context . One tool to detect cervical cancer was exceptional in that it described plans for follow - up sustainable implementation . It noted : “There’s an ethical problem to identifying precancerous lesions if you can’t do anything about them” and therefore focused on cervical cancer screenings where “one effective treatment for abnormal cells involves freezing them off with cryotherapy , and can be safely done at low cost by midwifes or nurses” [ 240 ] . We note that some for - profit organizations appeared to have engaged in design or market research , and may have been incentivized to engage with stakeholders to attract and retain users . For instance , an article we reviewed on Ada Health stated that they were collaborating with Muhimbili University of Health and Allied Sciences in Tanzania and Foundation Botnar to make the tool culturally and linguistically appropriate [ 7 , 215 ] . Finally , we found very few extended implementations of AI , most of which were either led by startups ( e . g . , [ 54 ] ) or large software companies ( e . g . , [ 24 , 109 , 225 ] ) . This may be due to the additional work and financial resources required to undergo regulation , ensure high accuracy , and build robust systems . For instance , in June 2020 , Qure . AI received one of the first clearances by the U . S . Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) for an AI - based diagnostic tool [ 189 ] . The startup was founded in India in 2016 . Another example is Facebook’s use of AI to match blood donors to local hospitals and blood banks , only possible because of its existing scale [ 225 ] . Tools for diagnosis and resource management , in particular , have mostly seen uptake and received funding from venture capitalists and US - based foundations like the Gates Foundation [ 146 , 189 , 220 ] . However , some small - scale and short - term deployments have been undertaken by academics , in collaboration with hospitals and non - profit organizations [ 231 ] . 5 AI IN FRONTLINE HEALTH In our discourse analysis , India emerged as a country with high research and industry activity around AI and global health ( n = 69 ) . This is partially due to the state’s push in recent years to develop a robust digital and data ecosystem [ 190 ] . We now draw from ethno - graphic data on the healthcare system in an underserved region of Delhi , centering the experiences of women seeking and providing care . We uncover the gaps between the AI systems being proposed and healthcare workflows and needs as observed . We also highlight opportunities for AI - focused efforts to support existing workflows , strengthen healthcare systems , and address resource gaps . 5 . 1 Recognizing Where the Stakes Lie Our discourse analysis revealed that AI developers were largely agnostic to local political and economic specificities , and how they influence the entry points for AI and sustained uptake . Below we lay out the healthcare ecology in our field site and implications for AI interventions , starting with the political and organizational context . The clinics and hospitals in Delhi are administered by a diverse group of institutions . At the time of writing this paper , control of government clinics was divided across two political parties—the Bharatiya Janata Party or BJP ( which also makes up the central gov - ernment and controls the Municipal Corporation of Delhi ( MCD ) ) [ 200 ] , and the Aam Aadmi Party or AAP ( which makes up the state government ) [ 237 ] . There are two kinds of government clinics : dispensaries operated by the MCD and Mohalla ( or neighborhood ) Clinics set up and operated by the state , both of which provide primary healthcare at no cost . Most government hospitals in the state are operated by the state , but some are under the control of the central government . The MCD is also responsible for sanitation services . Our literature review found a special focus on government actors in the case of disease forecasting and epidemiology , where it was assumed that relevant action would be taken by the munic - ipality or healthcare authorities . In practice , who holds power to make decisions can be complicated . For example , sanitation and dispensaries in Delhi were not managed by the state government in power [ 93 ] . There has also been significant friction between the BJP and AAP around healthcare provision [ 93 ] . The government also provides frontline healthcare in under - served areas of Delhi under the National Urban Health Mission ( NUHM ) —an extension of the older National Rural Health Mission [ 158 ] . This program is jointly funded by the center and the state and employs women frontline health workers including Accredited Social Health Activists ( ASHAs ) , Anganwadi Workers ( AWWs ) , and Auxiliary Nurses and Midwives ( ANMs ) [ 158 ] . They are re - sponsible for offering care on Reproductive - Maternal - Neonatal - Child and Adolescent Health ( RMNCH + A ) , and Communicable and Non - Communicable Diseases . ASHAs , in particular , conduct door - to - door data collection , healthcare provision , and information dissemination [ 112 , 158 ] . In rural India where healthcare may be less accessible , frontline health plays an essential role in filling gaps in coverage . Despite their key role in the healthcare system , our AI in Global Health : The View from the Front Lines CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan literature review found only 24 systems that targeted use by health workers . In addition to government services in Delhi that are free or heav - ily subsidized , there are hundreds of private clinics and hospitals that range in quality and cost of care . There are also health services of - fered by non - profit and religious groups located close to communities . Differences across how hospitals and clinics , or private and govern - ment services operate and are administered can have a significant impact on the uptake and use of an AI intervention . The papers we reviewed rarely considered the role of institutional differences . An exception was Chao et al . ’s study that took into account the size , income , doctor degrees , number of visits , and more of government hospitals in China [ 50 ] . Only one paper considered religious groups at all , while forecasting tuberculosis incidence at a religious site in Iraq [ 163 ] . Another key stakeholder in the healthcare ecology are the local pharmacies or chemist shops . This was the first stop for many of our participants who directly purchased over - the - counter medication or supplements in lieu of visiting a doctor . None of the papers or articles we reviewed focused on the role of pharmacies , despite them being significant care providers . We also point out the presence of competing health knowledges in this context [ 111 ] . Alongside allopathy , or western medicine , participants also turned to religious practices and indigenous medicine with varying results [ 63 ] . The Ministry of Health in India has a dedicated effort to support AYUSH medicine ( Ayurveda , Yoga and Naturopathy , Unani , Siddha and Homoeopathy ) —forms of complementary and alternative medicine [ 63 , 201 ] . AYUSH medicine was also available in government dispensaries and hospitals . Only two papers in our corpus relied on non - western sources of knowledge , both using traditional Chinese medicine [ 177 , 251 ] . Deploying AI systems requires cognizance of the complex ecolo - gies that involve multiple stakeholders with possibly conflicting interests . Even within a site , some stakeholders may be more open to adopting new technologies than others . For instance , the rela - tively new Mohalla Clinics were equipped with digital tablets to collect patient data and mobile - based diagnostic tools , unlike the older dispensaries [ 214 ] . Our prior research revealed that despite the techno - optimism of the government , doctors perceived the use of tablets for collecting patient data as a bureaucratic requirement that did not align with their workflows [ 111 ] . The multiple insti - tutions , knowledges , and stakeholders in the healthcare ecology provide many entry points for AI interventions , but can entail conflicting goals and priorities . 5 . 2 Patient Choice and Agency in Care - Seeking We next consider how patients navigate the complex healthcare ecology . Wefoundseveralfactorsthatinformedcare - seekingbehaviors— cost , accessibility , quality of care , and recommendations of family and community members . Our participants were primarily women and our findings therefore reflect a gendered perspective . For many residents , there were trade - offs involved between cost , accessibility , and quality of care when deciding where to seek care . Though free government clinics were available , they had long waiting times and were open only in the day during working hours . Taking time off from work was frequently not an option for our participants . To save time and money on travel , they visited small low - cost private clinics in their area that charged as little as INR 50 [ approx . 0 . 67 USD ] per visit . One participant who was a domestic worker explained her decision - making process : “I generally go to the doctor when my children fall sick . I am active all day and rarely fall sick . My kids fall sick often and if I take them to a chhota - mota ( small - time ) doctor , they charge less but the medicines are not very effective . I will end up going to the same doctor multiple times , which means more money is spent . If I go to a better doctor , like a pediatrician , then the medicines they give are very effective and I don’t need to visit the doctor again . But I will have to get a number and then wait till my name is called . . . I can’t take time off from work to take my kids to the government dispensary . ”—Naima , 26 , resident How the participant decided to seek care depended also on who she was caring for . She was more likely to seek care ( particularly higher quality care ) for her children , and appeared to be the one responsible for taking the children to a doctor . We found this trend across our participants , where women viewed themselves as the primary caregivers in the home , responsible for nutrition ( cooking ) , hygiene ( cleaning and laundry ) , and healthcare ( hospital visits ) . Our discourse analysis revealed several AI efforts to make healthcare more accessible and affordable via remote consultation ( e . g . , [ 7 , 191 , 245 ] ) . However , such programs have seen limited sustained uptake among underserved communities in the past , even when offered for free , due to lack of alignment with the local context [ 33 , 141 ] . One intervention that has had a measure of success in India is Kilkari , a free IVR service that delivers maternal and child health information [ 45 ] . The content and marketing was designed over several years , informed by an understanding of family dynamics and gender roles , as well as the particular digital , health , and language literacies of women in diverse regions of India [ 10 , 113 , 133 , 205 ] . Adoption of AI will depend on the attention paid to these aspects . A major concern that our participants cited with government ser - vices was long waiting times , with “a different line for everything— to register , see the doctor , get medicines . . . . ” AI systems have been proposed to help reduce waiting times by automating certain work - flows or supporting doctors to reduce the amount of time it takes to diagnose patients [ 44 , 142 ] . However , our interviews revealed that doctors were perceived to already be “too quick” to assess patients . One participant stated that doctors “just write ( the prescription ) , and don’t tell us how to use it . ” This failed to meet the care needs of patients who were concerned that they were not heard properly and may have been misdiagnosed . AI tools designed for diagnosis could be used as an additional check against the doctor’s recom - mendation to validate their response and allay patient fears , or flag a potential problem in the case of frequent differences with the AI’s prediction . Consultation with AI agents could also be offered as an option for less critical ailments when doctors are unavailable , supported by human personnel . Our analysis of the dispensaries and Mohalla Clinics also revealed a contradiction around waiting times . Though clinics were busy at certain times of the day , wait times could be as little as five minutes at other times . AI applications can help address the challenge of scheduling ( e . g . , [ 137 , 159 ] ) , particu - larly in larger hospitals . Risk assessment systems could prioritize CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan Ismail and Kumar patients at higher risk or who may have traveled from farther away , though this could increase wait times for others . We also found that our participants frequently relied on or were influenced by the recommendations of family and community members on where to seek care . In particular , women could face pressure to accept the preferences of their husband or in - laws . One participant shared with us : “Once , when my arm was broken , I was ready to get an X - ray . But since X - ray is expensive , everyone told me to go to a pehelwan ( local wrestler ) first , so I went . That didn’t fix it so then I went to a doctor who took an X - ray and I got a plaster . ” AI could support and complement hyperlocal healthcare infrastructures such as pharmacies , low - cost clinics , and indigenous knowledge sources that are the first resort for affordable care . Prior work has argued for privileging the knowledge of the doctor in AI systems because of their and their patients’ lack of trust [ 139 ] . However , AI could lend accuracy and credibility to stakeholders who may have limited medical expertise . This might also legitimize their role in the healthcare system and check any harmful practices , expanding the reach of quality care . Healthcare seeking was not always organic and was frequently a result of interactions initiated by FHWs , mobile clinics , or aware - ness camps . The hierarchical government healthcare system em - ployed a referral system starting with frontline health . An individ - ual was referred to the next tier when the care needed went beyond the expertise of the healthcare provider . This system resulted in high burdens at the top - most tier of large hospitals , where participants reported having to sometimes wait days to receive care . Our dis - course analysis uncovered that diagnostic and screening tools have been proposed for use in such scenarios to make tools / expertise available at lower tiers ( e . g . , [ 46 , 109 , 119 ] ) . However , the hold - up is not necessarily the time that referral or diagnosis takes . The systemic challenge is one of limited infrastructure ( hospital beds , doctors , nurses and staff ) and bureaucracy faced by lower - level staff . Without addressing these issues , a higher rate of referrals could add pressure on an already overburdened system . AI could in - stead play a role in resource allocation , taking a mechanism design approach [ 4 ] . Data on where patients are coming from , for which services , and with what medical conditions could be leveraged by AI researchers to propose more sustainable solutions . Accordingly , healthcare services could be offered by the government in specific regions to help reduce the overall burden . 5 . 3 Invisible Workflows in Frontline Health We now take a closer look at frontline health workflows . An im - portant connect to the government healthcare system for many underserved communities was the ASHA assigned to their area . The vignette below provides a window into the work of an ASHA , and is based on participant observation with ASHA Hiba during a measles outbreak . Using this vignette , we detail the workflows of ASHAs to identify considerations for the design of AI interventions . After seeing her daughter off to school and her husband to work , ASHA Hiba settled down to breastfeed her six - month - old daughter . Suddenly her phone beeped with a WhatsApp message . On the group chat with other ASHAs and ANMs affiliated with the local Primary Health Center ( PHC ) , the supervising Medical Officer had messaged : “All ASHAs , please report to dispensary for emergency meeting . ” Convincing her mother - in - law to take care of the baby , Hiba rushed to the PHC where she learned that two ASHAs in nearby areas had found cases of measles . All the ASHAs were instructed to go to each of the 400 - or - so households in their areas , find and report cases of measles , and provide treatment to stem a wider outbreak . In the following week , rain or shine , Hiba visited as many homes as she could to conduct a survey of measles symptoms . She was sometimes accompanied by another ASHA for safety and solidarity . She focused mostly on jhuggi - jhopadis ( slum dwellings ) where vaccination rates were low . These visits were on top of her routine data collection and care provision duties , but were not financially compensated . There were also several in - stances where she had to revisit households where no one was at home , either because the family was out at work or had traveled to their native village . Dur - ing house visits , Hiba advised households : “Measles is spread in this area . Get your child immunized , you can get it done at the PHC . I can show you the way if you don’t know . ” In one Bengali - speaking migrant commu - nity , Hiba struggled to communicate . She relied on the Hindi - speaking members to mediate , “What are they saying ? Tell your neighbor that measles is spreading . ” In one of her visits , Hiba found three children with the measles rash and immediately notified the PHC on a call . An ANM gave her instructions for dispensing treatment . A WHO representative also joined her dur - ing the visits to confirm that they had measles . After the visits , he asked , “Why have the children not been vac - cinated ? ” Hiba explained , “I have been trying to get slum residents to come to immunization drives . But they have many reasons , they have work and have no one to take care if the child falls sick . They also travel to their native village and bring these diseases . . . The ANM needs to come here but is unwilling . And immu - nization drives happen only once a month . ” The WHO representative sympathized and promised , “I will tell the ANM to visit . There should be two extra drives per month because of the high risk here . ” Once he left , Hiba expressed her doubts saying , “We will see if that happens . ” 5 . 3 . 1 Helping with Quick Response and Filling the Cracks . ASHAs were expected to adapt to and address local needs that were unmet by the healthcare infrastructure ( e . g . , motivating a community to install a toilet or a water filter which should have been set up by the government ) . As a nationwide network , they were also called on to help with health - related emergency response , such as in the case of the COVID - 19 pandemic [ 28 ] or measles outbreaks . Disease forecasting has been proposed for such situations by predicting outbreaks and informing preventative action by gov - ernment authorities [ 66 , 98 ] . However , we need to consider what precautionary measures are targeted by such an AI system . The appropriate recommendation in response to a predicted measles AI in Global Health : The View from the Front Lines CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan outbreak would entail vaccinating children in that region [ 89 ] . As the above example illustrates , this is already a key priority for ASHAs and PHCs . n The challenge then is not that PHCs are unable to predict measles outbreaks , but that residents are unable or un - willing to attend immunization drives . Our discourse analysis also revealed that AI developers assumed that government authorities would take action , but in practice , public workers such as ASHAs are the ones ultimately responsible for implementing interventions . Based on power dynamics we observed in our fieldwork , mundane and labor - intensive tasks were delegated to those with least insti - tutional power even when other stakeholders ( e . g . , doctors , ANMs , etc . ) are involved , which ends up being the ASHAs . AI could be used to support existing workflows at the ASHA level . For instance , AI could bring attention to places where immuniza - tion coverage is low . The companies , Macro - Eyes and Logistimo , have been using AI in supply chain management for immunization to address vaccine shortages [ 143 , 146 ] . A similar approach could be applied to workflows , to identify the places where more human resources are needed . AI could also help support ASHAs in their work of identifying children likely to default from immunization programs [ 49 ] . In the vignette , we see Hiba focusing on communi - ties that had not achieved full immunization coverage because she was aware that these were the areas at greater risk . Our interviews with her revealed that she mostly relied on her memory and oper - ated in an ad hoc manner , and this process could be supported to be more directed and less burdensome . 5 . 3 . 2 Work Planning . Our interviews and observations revealed that work planning for ASHAs was supported by the PHC only to a limited extent . ASHAs received high - level instructions from the PHC and they were supervised , as in the case of the measles outbreak . Their work was otherwise expected to be driven by the incentive - based payment structure that paid based on the com - pletion of tasks . Beyond being driven by the payment structure , ASHAs gave additional time and attention to marginalized popula - tions , even if these were smaller groups that were more challenging to work with . For instance , they spent more time in migrant com - munities , trying to communicate and build relationships despite language and sociocultural barriers . They had hour - long counsel - ing visits with women who faced physical and emotional abuse . Such labor was not recognized nor compensated . There was signifi - cant effort that went into completing a single incentivized task in high - risk populations , and some kinds of work were not paid at all . AI - based risk assessment tools have been proposed to direct healthcare providers to households “at risk” ( e . g . , [ 184 ] ) . Certainly , there were some cases where ASHAs were accused by residents of not visiting frequently , where such a system could help build accountability . Our interviews with women in one slum community revealed that they had last seen ASHAs three months back for polio drops , because the region was hard to reach . However , the underly - ing issue is of misaligned incentives . In our focus group discussions , we learned of rampant forging of data used to determine work done and salary earned by some ASHAs . This was unfair to ASHAs who made less incentives because supervision was conducted in areas where ASHAs made less money and were assumed to be doing less work . AI systems that force certain workflows could end up pushing ASHAs to find workarounds and may further impact the quality of work . One opportunity for AI is to bring attention to the misaligned incentives , by predicting the amount of time it would take for an ASHA to achieve a specific outcome in an at - risk household . Such a tool could offer more realistic work schedules , and be used to advocate for better incentives . Finally , we highlight that much of the ASHAs’ time was spent on mundane and redundant work , such as data collection . ASHAs were also the medium for reaching the beneficiaries of many government schemes , though they received nominal ( if any ) compensation for carrying them out . AI could be used to automate such tasks . One way to do this is through automated IVR calls that can be used by residents to determine which incentives they are eligible for , where the monetary compensation may serve sufficient motivation to use the system . This would leave the ASHA with more time for care - driven tasks . Another approach to take is to treat the ASHAs’ time on specific tasks as a finite resource , and take a resource allocation approach to distribute that resource where most needed . 5 . 3 . 3 Addressing Sociocultural Dimensions of Health . A critical part of an ASHA’s work was being attentive to the nuances of behav - ior and what is left unsaid , piecing together information across sources—other community and family members , other ASHAs , doc - tors , and ANMs at PHCs . This was particularly relevant in the case of taboo topics such as women’s sexual and reproductive health . Over time , they gained an understanding of health behaviors and family dynamics in different households . For instance , in the measles outbreak example , Hiba immediately identified members who spoke Hindi and recruited them to help . ASHAs also relied on their personal experiences in their work . As a breastfeeding mother who had to coordinate household responsibilities with her mother - in - law , living in a Muslim household , Hiba could relate to the experiences of the women in her area . AI systems could be developed to capture such sociocultural dimensions of care , making this data available to others in the public health system . One way to do this could be to use AI to compile community profiles from household surveys . The approach followed in epidemiology that we found in our discourse analysis , could be leveraged here to identify the underlying ( social and environmental ) issues that are impacting the health of communities . Such a system could hold healthcare authorities accountable for addressing these issues . If the profiles are verified by ASHAs , it would also legitimize their knowledge . We also found that ASHAs are frequently consulted on medical symptoms in the household . They could not prescribe formally , but had access to common over - the - counter medication from the dispensary . For cases that they are unable to diagnose or that require further tests , ASHAs refer the client to the local PHC . Diagnostic and decision support tools have been proposed for use by ASHAs to support consultation . Our literature review revealed that a majority of these tools have been developed for screening a specific medical condition . It is critical that we ask where these systems would fit into the varied workflows of ASHAs , and what existing workflow they aim to replace . ASHA Afsana pointed out : “What is the point of collecting data on the phone if the government will still ask for paper documents ? They ask for paper - based proof for everything . ” This also applies to diagnostic tools . If the tool just refers to a doctor , or if it is not approved by the government , it increases the burden on the ASHA and community members . The incentives for using the AI CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan Ismail and Kumar system would also need to be carefully defined . Though it would be unethical to demand more work for little to no pay , it would also be unethical to incentivize ASHAs for doing work that does not benefit the communities they serve . This could distort their priorities and existing workflows . 5 . 3 . 4 The Burden of Data Collection . For AI to make predictions or recommendations , large amounts of timely and structured data is needed . Frontline health workers such as ASHAs then constitute one of the few feasible existing ( human or technical ) infrastructures that is equipped to collect and send timely and detailed health , demographic , or other data . In India , ASHAs are already engaged in extensive data collection , mostly to report the coverage of health services . The amount of time spent collecting data was a significant point of tension and led ASHA Amna to say : “This is what we do , this is our work . To do fieldwork and conduct surveys . . . The other actors at the dispensary ( ANMs and data entry personnel ) just sit and make money from our hard work . ” In the vignette shared , we also see that consent did not feature in data collection or care provision which raises data privacy and ownership concerns . ASHAs collect a lot of highly sensitive data on women’s bodies and family demographics . During our field - work , we encountered several women who used contraceptives without their husband’s knowledge and their use was recorded by ASHAs . Data - driven systems may put such women at risk if pri - vacy is compromised . Data is likely to be collected on the ASHA’s phones / tablets and then likely transmitted elsewhere . During our fieldwork , we found that ASHAs retained access to data by copying it over to a personal notebook to help with future data collection , but were not expected do so by the PHC . The communities did not have ownership over the data , though in same cases they refused to give their data . Data collected was submitted to the PHC on a monthly basis and there was little transparency in data flows as reflected in the question ASHA Meena posed to us at the end of an interview , “Where does the data go ? ” 5 . 3 . 5 Supporting Each Other and Advocating for System Reform . In the absence of support from the PHC , ASHAs leaned on each other to fill gaps in their knowledge , offer emotional support , and help plan and improve workflows . These peer relationships and informational needs could be further supported . For instance , chat - bots could be used for information delivery , and such systems have been designed and developed in recent years [ 180 , 245 ] . AI could also help match ASHAs who face similar challenges in their work or serve populations with similar demographic characteristics . AI systems could also help deliver personalized health information based on the learning needs of each ASHA [ 243 ] , helping them continually update their knowledge base . Finally , we consider it our ethical responsibility to point out the ongoing exploitation of ASHAs . Beyond work , ASHAs frequently gathered in each others’ homes to socialize and discuss their wages and working conditions . There was widespread discontent among the ASHAs and a sense that they “have no value . ” Many of our par - ticipants were part of Delhi’s ASHA Worker Union , and kept track of strikes and protests by ASHAs in other parts of Delhi and other states , which motivated them to also engage in activism [ 57 , 212 ] . There was a desire to be recognized fairly for their labor . During our focus groups , several ASHAs expressed interest in tools that track their work , in order to make their labor more visible and iden - tify ASHAs entering fraudulent data . Though such tools may leave ASHAs vulnerable to surveillance , it also indicates an opportunity to generate counter - data that questions dominant narratives , as proposed by feminist data scientists [ 70 , 224 ] . 5 . 4 Data from / about the Underserved We must consider the implications of collecting data in politicized contexts . The region where we conducted fieldwork ( Jamia ) has a Muslim - majority population and most residents are migrant work - ers from neighboring states . Jamia has been the center of protests in India against the Citizenship Amendment Act ( CAA ) and the National Register of Citizens ( NRC ) in December 2019 [ 60 , 149 ] . The protests were motivated by the fear that these policies would strip many of citizenship status on the basis of religion , and dis - proportionately impact lower socioeconomic groups who may not have documents required to demonstrate citizenship [ 149 ] . As India moves towards programs such as the National Health Stack , which aims for a “nationally shared digital infrastructure usable by both Centre and State across public and private sectors” [ 1 , 148 ] , we ur - gently need to consider the risk of policing and privacy violations . During our fieldwork , we learned that ASHAs have already been re - cruited by the government to motivate residents to get an Aadhaar number ( India’s national identification system ) and provide this number to be able to receive social welfare benefits . Aadhaar is also planned to be integrated with the National Health Stack [ 1 ] . This places ASHAs in a difficult position , where their in - group status is used to obtain data wanted by the government . Aadhaar has already had several data leaks [ 172 , 242 ] , and research has uncovered the exclusions and system breakdowns that tying Aadhaar to other government welfare programs has caused [ 52 , 115 , 211 ] . Our field - work uncovered that such privacy concerns lead to ASHAs being occasionally questioned by residents who refused to provide data . As many countries move towards “digital governance , ” we need to ask which political structures the systems we develop are working for , with , or against . 6 TARGETING SOCIAL GOOD WITH AI Our analysis uncovered how current AI efforts tend to focus on iso - lated problems such as diagnosis or disease forecasting , rarely con - sidering the broader context of implementation or engaging with communities being designed for . We showed how the “AI for Social Good” discourse reveals opportunities for futures with resource - intensive AI solutions such as disease forecasting and diagnosis , even as they target resource - limited settings . At the same time , attention / resources are diverted from alternative AI and non - AI futures that might better support workers and strengthen frontline health ecosystems overall . Current discourse also reflects who has power to shape AI - driven futures , with the targeted communities having little voice . Given the growing attention to problems of social and global relevance among AI proponents , we outline steps to check and recuperate the “AI for Social Good” discourse . We lay out considerations for the design of AI systems that target social good , drawing on literature in HCI4D and ICTD , post - development discourse , and transnational feminist theory . AI in Global Health : The View from the Front Lines CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan 6 . 1 Learning from the Past Research and practice in the fields of HCI4D and ICTD have success - fully brought together a wealth of interdisciplinary perspectives to engage at length with the challenges surfaced by the integration of different computing technologies , in widely disparate contexts [ 37 , 64 , 171 , 218 ] . We contend that there are relevant lessons to be learned from prior interventions , both failures and successes , even if that technology has thus far rarely included AI . 6 . 1 . 1 Foregrounding User Agency . In the push for more data , the role of the humans and the work they do are routinely marginalized , even as they provide critical linkages to make the data / AI infrastruc - tures work . HCI and related disciplines have invested consistently in making work visible . This body of work is wide - ranging , from Such - man’s [ 221 ] and Gray and Suri’s investigation of invisible work [ 97 ] to Sambasivan and Smyth’s description of the “human infrastruc - ture of ICTD” [ 207 ] . Though not integrated into the digital economy quite yet , there are similar risks to extracting ( invisible ) labor from the FHWs who are already overburdened on account of responsibil - ities touching diverse , overlapping aspects of their lives [ 113 ] . Our analysis detailed the limited compensation they receive for their ever - growing list of responsibilities . Even as FHWs are viewed as actors and changemakers across their communities [ 42 , 112 ] , they are vulnerable to being taken advantage of for the data collection and scale that AI systems target . We recommend that AI systems be designed to foreground user agency—by not forcing workflows and allowing users the autonomy to decide whether to use the suggestions made by an AI system . Care work has also remained consistently undervalued , additionally marginalizing FHWs’ invis - ible labor [ 97 , 112 ] , even when they are frequently expected to provide the services that generally lie within the purview of trained ( and far better paid ) doctors . AI systems may reinforce gendered and racialized notions of devalued work [ 21 ] . A key reflex we must cultivate is to always ask whose social good we are attempting , and who ( not what ) we are centering . If AI systems are not designed to foreground agency , researchers and practitioners may find that targeted “users” do not use these systems at all [ 72 ] , use them in unexpected ways [ 20 , 194 ] , or work around the systems altogether [ 213 ] . Our fieldwork in Delhi clearly conveyed that FHWs were not passive actors and frequently orga - nized to advocate for improved working conditions . ICTD research has long documented interpretative flexibility in technology adop - tion [ 37 , 132 , 213 ] , giving us sufficient evidence that “use” must not be taken for granted . These are not merely “unintended conse - quences” but consequences that we must by now be in a position to anticipate [ 183 ] . 6 . 1 . 2 Questioning the Unit of Scale . A key argument that has fre - quently been made in favor of deploying ICTs is that they are relatively easy to scale . In practice , however , most technology in - terventions in the field of ICTD have struggled to achieve scale . As a participant in Dell and Kumar’s review of HCI4D scholarship noted , “The problem is that showing development outcomes in any of these spaces is extraordinarily difficult . We don’t try to show outcomes , we try to show outputs . Just demonstrate some development output , such as making a system work better . Outcomes are the holy grail of evaluations in any of these spaces . It happens once in a while . . . ” [ 64 ] . Toyama has argued that this limited demonstration of development outcomes in the field is because technology can only play the role of amplifying existing institutional forces , not substitute for missing institutional capacity or human intent [ 229 ] . Alongside this critique , a number of works have emerged on the human infrastructure sup - porting technological systems [ 75 , 76 , 185 , 207 ] . For AI systems to be successful in supporting frontline health , we must foreground its human infrastructure , and FHWs are a significant fraction of it . Currently , there is a misalignment of incentives between what the government intends to scale and what FHWs are most concerned about . While FHWs care for more dignity and recognition of their work , as well as fairer salaries and working conditions , the govern - ment is focused on improving health outcomes at minimal cost . AI could be used to scale government intent to supervise workers or enforce certain workflows , but could also target automating mun - dane workflows for FHWs and maximizing their ( fixed ) work time on care - based tasks . The notion of scale holds an additional complication in the case of AI systems . With data - hungry AI algorithms , as we found in our literature review , data collection must happen at scale to make AI work [ 123 ] . Such data to present date are scarce in the Global South [ 105 ] . In the case of interventions such as disease forecasting , the data also needs to be generated in real time . Data sharing is one way to manage data needs , but appropriate data protection policies for such efforts are still in progress . Further , AI developed using data from one demographic or location may not be straightforward to apply at another location when an intervention is scaled [ 102 , 233 ] . Finally , scholars question whether large - scale AI systems should be built at all , if the target outcome is indeed social good [ 181 ] . 6 . 2 Targeting Sustainable Good We next situate ourselves in critical understandings of development , to consider the Social Good that AI interventions are attempting to achieve . The post - development discourse has argued for an aban - donment of the Western growth - centered ideal [ 77 , 202 ] and ques - tioned impulses of wanting to “help” countries in the Global South [ 77 ] . It argues that development—a goal set by the Global North for all nations—has pushed communities to abandon historically sustainable modes of living [ 202 ] , and that we need to instead take a pluralistic worldview [ 65 , 78 ] . We discuss this discourse in relation to AI efforts for social good below . 6 . 2 . 1 Moving Towards a Pluralist Worldview . In recent years , tech - nology utopianism among those pushing for AI solutions has been severely rebuked [ 58 ] . Recent discourses have asked how AI could instead be transformative and be put to work for social justice [ 122 , 162 ] . We caution that these may reflect unwarranted optimism re - garding what is possible with AI , when even well - meaning efforts to include marginalized populations in data efforts have been used to enable violence against these very groups [ 79 , 103 ] . AI that is aimed at subverting power structures may end up directing re - sources and attention away from local efforts and more effective non - AI solutions such as policy and activism . A post - development standpoint asks how communities might be driving decisions on whether and how they might like to use AI . Assuming that researchers are deeply invested in a certain context , we favor a modest approach to aligning with this perspective—to CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan Ismail and Kumar work closely with communities over time and have an open dia - logue . Participatory Action Research ( PAR ) offers one such research approach [ 80 , 101 ] . PAR is a form of research that necessitates tak - ing action to address a problem while also generating knowledge by learning from the action [ 80 , 101 ] . It involves crafting research questions in collaboration with the community partner , implemen - tation and evaluation of an intervention , and writing up results with the partners [ 101 ] . Such an approach is reflected in many suc - cessful ICTD interventions ( e . g . , Open Data Kit [ 34 , 100 ] , Medic Mo - bile [ 241 ] , Digital Green [ 88 ] , Gram Vaani [ 166 ] , CGNet Swara [ 150 ] , 99DOTS [ 59 ] ) that have entailed years of investment of human , technical , and financial resources , relationship - building with local champions and partners , training and bi - directional knowledge - sharing , and perseverance on the part of those driving these initia - tives . Many of them go beyond open - sourcing their technologies , by sharing knowledge with local groups wishing to adapt the system for their context . Some of these organizations have also increas - ingly been using their positions of power to advocate on behalf of the populations that they are building for , such as frontline health workers [ 104 ] , farmers [ 87 ] , and rural populations [ 104 ] . A shorter - term alternative is to develop strong partnerships with community organizations and allow them an active hand in guiding design , and offer technical support beyond initial imple - mentation . The research collaboration between Google , the Indian Institute of Technology Madras ( a premier research institute in India ) and ARMMAN ( a non - profit ) , is an example of an initiative that relies on the experience , knowledge , and networks of the com - munity partner [ 173 ] . Fostering such partnerships is undoubtedly a time - consuming endeavor . We caution here that it matters who the partners are . In the case of Delhi’s healthcare infrastructure , for example , the government overlooked the knowledge and per - spectives that FHWs had to offer . AI initiatives that solely rely on the knowledge and position of the government without engaging with FHWs and communities may reinforce the existing power differential . 6 . 2 . 2 Developing Sustainable Interventions . A community - centered approach is one step towards developing sustainable interventions , there is a need to also examine sustainability from a resource per - spective . Researchers have highlighted the environmental impact of data / AI systems [ 32 , 58 , 145 ] . Our discourse analysis revealed that many AI initiatives in global health relied on large datasets or resource - intensive algorithms like deep learning , particularly in the case of disease forecasting and diagnosis . Though a few sys - tems were designed specifically for settings with data and technical infrastructure constraints ( e . g . , [ 22 , 116 , 129 ] ) , they were few and far between . We emphasize that a key step with any AI intervention should be to consider less resource - intensive alternatives , including non - technical solutions . If AI is still the approach taken , we recommend the following steps to check extraction of resources : streamline and leverage existing data flows rather than introducing new ones , build systems that require less data ( e . g . , by using transfer learning [ 68 ] ) , be directed about collecting data when required ( i . e . avoid collecting unnecessary data ) , compute less on the devices of the underserved , and build for lean computation and power consumption ( e . g . , by es - chewing deep learning [ 18 , 219 ] ) . ICTD research has recommended similar steps for practical reasons when working with sparse or poor network and computing infrastructures , but a consequence of this approach has been less use of resources overall . We advocate this as a conscious strategy to take in the Global South and North , even as infrastructures improve and technology becomes pervasive . 6 . 3 Fostering Solidarity Across Borders Given the global scope of the challenges targeted by AI for So - cial Good , we consider how one might undertake translation work across geographies , technologies , and disciplines . We offer femi - nist solidarity as a lens that could enable translation work [ 135 ] . Feminist solidarity is centered on the notion that diverse individ - uals and communities can find a base to work together based on shared struggles [ 165 ] . Even as we focus on commonalities , we pay attention to differences across contexts as feminist scholars rec - ommend [ 165 , 250 ] . We consider these differences and spaces for solidarity below . 6 . 3 . 1 Engaging with Diverse Disciplines . Engagement with inter - disciplinarity begins with developing an understanding and appre - ciation for what other fields have to offer [ 168 ] . Feminist scholars , Parvin and Pollock , illustrate the disciplinary gap eloquently when they describe the dismissal of their ethical concerns by technologist colleagues as “unintended consequences” [ 183 ] . The prevailing view in the field of AI is one of positivism—the objectivist philosophy that only knowledge gained using the scientific method through un - biased observations is accurate and true . Like the natural sciences , positivist research seeks to explain and predict . This approach is eminently appropriate for questions such as “how well can we predict the severity of diabetic retinopathy with retinal images ? ” However , it does not allow for space to engage with broader questions like “why are patients unable to access diabetic retinopathy screening in the first place ? ” The former reflects realism , an ontological position that one reality exists and can be studied and understood as the “truth . ” Questions like the latter can reveal diverse perspectives depending on whose view is elicited and what methods are employed . This can make realists deeply uncomfortable because it reflects relativism , the ontological position that reality exists in the mind and each individual creates their own version of the truth . Engaging with other disciplines involves reckoning with the source of this discom - fort , and choosing to listen and engage meaningfully and not only performatively when ontological and epistemological differences arise [ 38 , 168 ] . The positivist view pervasively impacts how we think about computing’s role in social change—as understanding and measur - ing social problems , helping define them , bringing attention to them , and clarifying the limits of an intervention [ 3 ] . We found these reflected across the AI systems we reviewed—to measure and bring attention to social dimensions of health in epidemiology , to measure and define disease spread , to define and then predict a specific medical condition in diagnostics , and identify and tar - get resource deficits . Our ethnographic analysis offered a broader perspective , and revealed where such approaches may fall short . Other disciplines can similarly inform design at various points—by augmenting our understanding of what problems to focus on and where , how to approach these problems , which actors to target and what workflows , and what Good to work towards . Finally , we AI in Global Health : The View from the Front Lines CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan emphasize that researchers from diverse backgrounds must come together to demonstrate solidarity with one another , such as in their shared interest in and commitment to a context or Social Good domain . The disciplinary differences then serve to strengthen the work and its capacity for achieving social impact . 6 . 3 . 2 Translating Across Contexts . In our analysis , we identified op - portunities for AI , situated within a specific context . As researchers develop AI systems for diverse settings , we recommend a focus on common struggles to enable translation across geographies . In healthcare , for instance , this could mean that an AI system devel - oped to address or support the struggles of frontline health workers in Delhi overburdened by mundane work , could be translated to other places where workers are facing similar challenges . Similarly , across geographies , we may find women to be overburdened by care work , and marginalized communities to find it harder to access affordable care . Such a focus can also enable bi - directional learning across the Global North and South , as exemplified in our prior work [ 135 ] . For instance , Global South researchers can learn from critical scholar - ship on AI in the Global North , a site that produces global power structures . Scholars haveuncoveredalgorithmicbiasagainst women and transgender people [ 55 , 127 ] , people of color [ 26 , 36 , 174 ] , and the poor and working class [ 79 ] . These concerns also largely ap - ply to countries in the Global South , alongside other intersections with caste / tribe , language , or religion , as well as a history of colo - niality . In healthcare for instance , we found that AI interventions mostly leverage existing datasets , which prior work has pointed out tends to be skewed towards men , higher castes and classes , domi - nant languages , and urban regions [ 13 , 123 , 206 ] . This can divert attention and resources from regions that are already disadvan - taged , further widening the gap in healthcare access . Conversely , emerging efforts in the Global North to use technology to target social justice can learn from work in the Global South [ 69 , 73 , 85 ] . The COVID - 19 pandemic has further highlighted health and other inequities that exist within the Global North [ 30 ] , and the global nature of these challenges . We outlined several spaces for such en - gagement above , such as learning from past critiques and failures of technology for development [ 178 , 202 , 204 ] as well as successful technological efforts , the history and evolution of the development discourse [ 77 , 202 ] , and a transnational feminist approach [ 81 , 165 ] . Finally , across the Global North and South , we urge AI researchers to ask themselves how they might find solidarity with the commu - nities they target—what draws them to the underserved contexts where they work and the struggles therein ? 7 CONCLUSION As our society increasingly powers towards AI - integrated futures , there is an urgent need to examine these futures more deeply . AI for Social Good initiatives promise futures where AI is put to work to achieve “social good” outcomes . The Social Good label , however , can provide cover against charges that AI systems elsewhere have faced around enabling surveillance , automation , and marginaliza - tion . We studied the unfolding focus areas of AI in frontline health , an active application area for AI enthusiasts . We weighed this analy - sis against our ethnographic research conducted in an underserved frontline health setting in India , highlighting the gaps between proposed AI systems and the lived realities of the frontline health workers and underserved communities targeted by such systems . We also identified opportunities for AI to offer value in these con - texts . Our paper thus offered a critical and ethnographic perspective to discourse on AI and Social Good , centering perspectives from the Global South to propose an agenda for the design of AI that targets social good outcomes . We contribute to a growing body of HCI research that is engaging with the design of AI systems , and particularly inform research that aims to support healthcare workflows in resource - constrained contexts . 8 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We dedicate this paper to the frontline health workers who put their lives at risk everyday to enable healthier futures for their communi - ties , and who have been on the front lines throughout the ongoing COVID - 19 pandemic . We are grateful to the ASHAs and community members who participated in this study for being generous with their time and trusting us with their stories . We thank the mem - bers of the TanDEM lab at Georgia Tech who provided unfailing support and critical feedback for the many revisions of this paper , and our anonymized reviewers for their encouragement . Finally , we are thankful for the many ( sometimes difficult ) conversations with researchers in academia and industry working on AI and / or Social Good that have shaped the thoughts and ideas presented in this paper . REFERENCES [ 1 ] NITI Aayog . 2018 . National Health Stack - Strategy and approach . https : / / niti . gov . in / writereaddata / files / document _ publication / NHS - Strategy - and - Approach - Document - for - consultation . pdf [ 2 ] NITI Aayog . 2018 . National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence . Technical Report . Aayog , NITI . [ 3 ] Rediet Abebe , Solon Barocas , Jon Kleinberg , Karen Levy , Manish Raghavan , and David G Robinson . 2020 . Roles for computing in social change . In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness , Accountability , and Transparency . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 252 – 260 . [ 4 ] Rediet Abebe and Kira Goldner . 2018 . Mechanism design for social good . AI Matters 4 , 3 ( 2018 ) , 27 – 34 . [ 5 ] Michael D Abràmoff , Philip T Lavin , Michele Birch , Nilay Shah , and James C Folk . 2018 . Pivotal trial of an autonomous AI - based diagnostic system for detection of diabetic retinopathy in primary care offices . NPJ digital medicine 1 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 1 – 8 . [ 6 ] BipinKumarAcharya , WeiChen , ZengliangRuan , GobindPrasadPant , YinYang , LalanPrasadShah , ChunxiangCao , ZhiweiXu , MeghnathDhimal , andHualiang Lin . 2019 . Mapping Environmental Suitability of Scrub Typhus in Nepal Using MaxEnt and Random Forest Models . International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 16 , 23 ( 2019 ) , 4845 . [ 7 ] Ada . 2019 . World’s first AI health guidance app in Swahili . https : / / ada . com / press / 191119 - worlds - first - ai - health - guidance - app - in - swahili / [ 8 ] Daniel Adedayo Adeyinka , Babayemi Oluwaseun Olakunde , and Nazeem Muha - jarine . 2019 . Evidence of health inequity in child survival : spatial and Bayesian network analyses of stillbirth rates in 194 countries . Scientific reports 9 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 1 – 11 . [ 9 ] FábioSAguiar , RodrigoCTorres , JoãoVFPinto , AfrânioLKritski , JoséMSeixas , and Fernanda CQ Mello . 2016 . Development of two artificial neural network models to support the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis in hospitalized patients in Rio de Janeiro , Brazil . Medical & biological engineering & computing 54 , 11 ( 2016 ) , 1751 – 1759 . [ 10 ] Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed , Nova Ahmed , Faheem Hussain , and Neha Kumar . 2016 . Computingbeyondgender - imposedlimits . In ProceedingsoftheSecondWorkshop on Computing Within Limits . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 7 . [ 11 ] Wadhwani AI . 2019 . Wadhwani AI - Maternal , Newborn , and Child Health . https : / / www . wadhwaniai . org / work / maternal - newborn - child - health / [ 12 ] MahmoodAkhtar , MoritzUGKraemer , andLaurenMGardner . 2019 . Adynamic neural network model for predicting risk of Zika in real time . BMC medicine 17 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 171 . CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan Ismail and Kumar [ 13 ] Hassane Alami , Lysanne Rivard , Pascale Lehoux , Steven J Hoffman , Stéphanie Bernadette Mafalda Cadeddu , Mathilde Savoldelli , Mamane Abdoulaye Samri , Mohamed Ali Ag Ahmed , Richard Fleet , and Jean - Paul Fortin . 2020 . Artificial intelligence in health care : laying the Foundation for Responsible , sustainable , and inclusive innovation in low - and middle - income countries . Globalization and Health 16 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 6 . [ 14 ] Shoayee Alotaibi , Rashid Mehmood , Iyad Katib , Omer Rana , and Aiiad Albeshri . 2020 . Sehaa : A big data analytics tool for healthcare symptoms and diseases detection using Twitter , Apache Spark , and Machine Learning . Applied Sciences 10 , 4 ( 2020 ) , 1398 . [ 15 ] Saleema Amershi , Dan Weld , Mihaela Vorvoreanu , Adam Fourney , Besmira Nushi , Penny Collisson , Jina Suh , Shamsi Iqbal , Paul N Bennett , Kori Inkpen , et al . 2019 . Guidelines for human - AI interaction . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3 . [ 16 ] S . AnbuandB . Sarmah . 2017 . Machinelearningapproachforpredictingwomens health risk . In 2017 4th International Conference on Advanced Computing and Communication Systems ( ICACCS ) . IEEE . [ 17 ] Urvashi Aneja , Vikrom Mathur , and Abishek Reddy . 2018 . AI for All : 10 Social Conundrums for India . https : / / tandemresearch . org / assets / AI _ Lab1 _ Final - Report _ TR _ compressed . pdf [ 18 ] Lasse F Wolff Anthony , Benjamin Kanding , and Raghavendra Selvan . 2020 . Carbontracker : Tracking and predicting the carbon footprint of training deep learning models . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2007 . 03051 ( 2020 ) . [ 19 ] LilianNAraujo , JônatasTBelotti , ThiagoAntoniniAlves , YaradeSouzaTadano , andHugoSiqueira . 2020 . EnsemblemethodbasedonArtificialNeuralNetworks to estimate air pollution health risks . Environmental Modelling & Software 123 ( 2020 ) , 104567 . [ 20 ] Payal Arora . 2019 . The next billion users : Digital life beyond the West . Harvard University Press . [ 21 ] Neda Atanasoski and Kalindi Vora . 2019 . Surrogate Humanity : Race , Robots , and the Politics of Technological Futures . Duke University Press . [ 22 ] Alejandro Baldominos , Hasan Oğul , and Ricardo Colomo - Palacios . 2019 . In - fection Diagnosis using Biomedical Signals in Small Data Scenarios . In 2019 IEEE 32nd International Symposium on Computer - Based Medical Systems ( CBMS ) . IEEE , 38 – 43 . [ 23 ] Shaowen Bardzell . 2010 . Feminist HCI : taking stock and outlining an agenda for design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 1301 – 1310 . [ 24 ] Emma Beede , Elizabeth Baylor , Fred Hersch , Anna Iurchenko , Lauren Wilcox , Paisan Ruamviboonsuk , and Laura M Vardoulakis . 2020 . A Human - Centered Evaluation of a Deep Learning System Deployed in Clinics for the Detection of Diabetic Retinopathy . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . [ 25 ] Valentina Bellemo , Zhan W Lim , Gilbert Lim , Quang D Nguyen , Yuchen Xie , Michelle YT Yip , Haslina Hamzah , Jinyi Ho , Xin Q Lee , Wynne Hsu , et al . 2019 . Artificial intelligence using deep learning to screen for referable and vision - threateningdiabeticretinopathyinAfrica : aclinicalvalidationstudy . TheLancet Digital Health 1 , 1 ( 2019 ) , e35 – e44 . [ 26 ] Ruha Benjamin . 2019 . Race after technology : Abolitionist tools for the new jim code . Social Forces ( 2019 ) . [ 27 ] Kaustav Bera , Kurt A Schalper , David L Rimm , Vamsidhar Velcheti , and Anant Madabhushi . 2019 . Artificial intelligence in digital pathology—new tools for diagnosis and precision oncology . Nature reviews Clinical oncology 16 , 11 ( 2019 ) , 703 – 715 . [ 28 ] Nilanjana Bhowmick and Saumya Khandelwal . 2020 . Millions of women volunteers form India’s frontline COVID response . https : / / www . nationalgeographic . com / history / 2020 / 06 / millions - women - volunteers - form - india - frontline - covid - 19 - response / [ 29 ] Abderrahim Bourouis , Ali Zerdazi , Mohammed Feham , and Abdelhamid Bouchachia . 2013 . M - health : skin disease analysis system using Smartphone’s camera . Procedia Computer Science 19 ( 2013 ) , 1116 – 1120 . [ 30 ] LisaBowleg . 2020 . We’renotallinthistogether : OnCOVID - 19 , intersectionality , and structural inequality . American journal of public health 110 , 7 ( 2020 ) , 917 . [ 31 ] VirginiaBraunandVictoriaClarke . 2006 . Usingthematicanalysisinpsychology . Qualitative research in psychology 3 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 77 – 101 . [ 32 ] Benedetta Brevini . 2020 . Black boxes , not green : Mythologizing artificial intelligence and omitting the environment . Big Data & Society 7 , 2 ( 2020 ) , 2053951720935141 . [ 33 ] A ‘Simply Brilliant’ Innovation . 2018 . Mobile Phones for Maternal Health in Rural Bihar . Economic & Political Weekly 53 , 11 ( 2018 ) , 51 . [ 34 ] Waylon Brunette , Samuel Sudar , Mitchell Sundt , Clarice Larson , Jeffrey Beorse , and Richard Anderson . 2017 . Open Data Kit 2 . 0 : A Services - Based Application Framework for Disconnected Data Management . In Proceedings of the 15th Annual International Conference on Mobile Systems , Applications , and Services ( MobiSys ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 440 – 452 . event - place : Niagara Falls , New York , USA . [ 35 ] Joanna J Bryson . 2019 . The past decade and future of AI’s impact on society . [ 36 ] Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru . 2018 . Gender shades : Intersectional accu - racy disparities in commercial gender classification . In Conference on fairness , accountability and transparency . 77 – 91 . [ 37 ] Jenna Burrell . 2012 . Invisible users : Youth in the Internet cafés of urban Ghana . Mit Press . [ 38 ] JennaBurrellandKentaroToyama . 2009 . WhatconstitutesgoodICTDresearch ? Information Technologies & International Development 5 , 3 ( 2009 ) , pp – 82 . [ 39 ] Massimo Buscema , Masoud Asadi - Zeydabadi , Weldon Lodwick , Alphonse Nde Nembot , Alvin Bronstein , and Francis Newman . 2020 . Analysis of the Ebola Outbreak in 2014 and 2018 in West Africa and Congo by Using Artificial Adaptive Systems . Applied Artificial Intelligence 34 , 8 ( 2020 ) , 597 – 617 . [ 40 ] Declan Butler . 2017 . AI summit aims to help world’s poorest . Nature News 546 , 7657 ( 2017 ) , 196 . [ 41 ] CarrieJCai , SamanthaWinter , DavidSteiner , LaurenWilcox , andMichaelTerry . 2019 . " Hello AI " : Uncovering the Onboarding Needs of Medical Practitioners for Human - AI Collaborative Decision - Making . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 1 – 24 . [ 42 ] Catherine Campbell and Kerry Scott . 2012 . Community health and social mobilization . The handbook of global health communication ( 2012 ) , 177 – 193 . [ 43 ] Sema Candemir , Sameer Antani , Stefan Jaeger , Renee Browning , and George R Thoma . 2015 . Lung boundary detection in pediatric chest X - rays . In Medical Imaging 2015 : PACS and Imaging Informatics : Next Generation and Innovations , Vol . 9418 . International Society for Optics and Photonics , 94180Q . [ 44 ] Yu Cao , Chang Liu , Benyuan Liu , Maria J Brunette , Ning Zhang , Tong Sun , Peifeng Zhang , Jesus Peinado , Epifanio Sanchez Garavito , Leonid Lecca Garcia , et al . 2016 . Improving tuberculosis diagnostics using deep learning and mobile health technologies among resource - poor and marginalized communities . In 2016 IEEE first international conference on connected health : applications , systems and engineering technologies ( CHASE ) . IEEE , 274 – 281 . [ 45 ] Sara Chamberlain . 2016 . An overview of Kilkari – A maternal and child health service in India . https : / / www . gsma . com / mobilefordevelopment / programme / mhealth / an - overview - of - kilkari - a - maternal - and - child - health - service - in - india / [ 46 ] Cary Champlin , David Bell , and Celina Schocken . 2017 . AI medicine comes to Africa’s rural clinics . IEEE Spectrum 54 , 5 ( 2017 ) , 42 – 48 . [ 47 ] HC Stephen Chan , Hanbin Shan , Thamani Dahoun , Horst Vogel , and Shuguang Yuan . 2019 . Advancing drug discovery via artificial intelligence . Trends in pharmacological sciences 40 , 8 ( 2019 ) , 592 – 604 . [ 48 ] Stevie Chancellor , Eric P . S . Baumer , and Munmun De Choudhury . 2019 . Who is the " Human " in Human - Centered Machine Learning : The Case of Predicting Mental Health from Social Media . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 3 , CSCW , Article 147 ( Nov . 2019 ) , 32 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359249 [ 49 ] Subhash Chandir , Danya Arif Siddiqi , Owais Ahmed Hussain , Tahira Niazi , Mubarak Taighoon Shah , Vijay Kumar Dharma , Ali Habib , and Aamir Javed Khan . 2018 . Using predictive analytics to identify children at high risk of defaulting from a routine immunization program : feasibility study . JMIR public health and surveillance 4 , 3 ( 2018 ) , e63 . [ 50 ] Jianqian Chao , Jiangyi Gu , Hua Zhang , Huanghui Chen , and Zhenchun Wu . 2018 . The Impact of the National Essential Medicines Policy on Rational Drug Use in Primary Care Institutions in Jiangsu Province of China . Iranian journal of public health 47 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 24 – 32 . [ 51 ] Lauren E Charles - Smith , Tera L Reynolds , Mark A Cameron , Mike Conway , Eric HY Lau , Jennifer M Olsen , Julie A Pavlin , Mika Shigematsu , Laura C Stre - ichert , Katie J Suda , et al . 2015 . Using social media for actionable disease surveillance and outbreak management : a systematic literature review . PloS one 10 , 10 ( 2015 ) , e0139701 . [ 52 ] Bidisha Chaudhuri . 2020 . Distant , opaque and seamful : seeing the state through the workings of Aadhaar in India . Information Technology for Development ( 2020 ) , 1 – 13 . [ 53 ] Irene Y Chen , Shalmali Joshi , and Marzyeh Ghassemi . 2020 . Treating health disparities with artificial intelligence . Nature Medicine 26 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 16 – 17 . [ 54 ] SasankChilamkurthy , RohitGhosh , SwethaTanamala , MustafaBiviji , NorbertG Campeau , Vasantha Kumar Venugopal , Vidur Mahajan , Pooja Rao , and Prashant Warier . 2018 . Deep learning algorithms for detection of critical findings in head CT scans : a retrospective study . The Lancet 392 , 10162 ( 2018 ) , 2388 – 2396 . [ 55 ] Davide Cirillo , Silvina Catuara - Solarz , Czuee Morey , Emre Guney , Laia Subirats , Simona Mellino , Annalisa Gigante , Alfonso Valencia , María José Rementeria , Antonella Santuccione Chadha , and Nikolaos Mavridis . 2020 . Sex and gender differences and biases in artificial intelligence for biomedicine and healthcare . NPJ Digital Medicine 3 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 11 . [ 56 ] Leonardo Clemente , Fred Lu , and Mauricio Santillana . 2019 . Improved real - time influenza surveillance : using internet search data in eight Latin American countries . JMIR public health and surveillance 5 , 2 ( 2019 ) , e12214 . [ 57 ] Special Correspondent . 2019 . Anganwadi , ASHA workers protest in support of demands . https : / / www . thehindu . com / news / national / karnataka / anganwadi - asha - workers - protest - in - support - of - demands / article28363975 . ece [ 58 ] Kate Crawford , Roel Dobbe , Theodora Dryer , Genevieve Fried , Ben Green , Elizabeth Kaziunas , Amba Kak , Varoon Mathur , Erin McElroy , Andrea Nill AI in Global Health : The View from the Front Lines CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan Sánchez , et al . 2019 . AI now 2019 report . New York , NY : AI Now Institute ( 2019 ) . [ 59 ] Andrew Cross , Rashmi Rodrigues , George D’Souza , and William Thies . 2014 . 99DOTS : usingmobilephonestomonitoradherencetotuberculosismedications . In Washington , Global mHealth Forum . [ 60 ] Éric Dagiral and Khetrimayum Monish Singh . 2020 . Governance and Account - able Citizenship Through Identification Infrastructures : Database Politics of Copernicus ( France ) and National Register of Citizens ( India ) . Science , Technol - ogy and Society ( 2020 ) , 0971721820912895 . [ 61 ] Ali Darwish , Yasser Rahhal , and Assef Jafar . 2020 . A comparative study on predicting influenza outbreaks using different feature spaces : application of influenza - like illness data from Early Warning Alert and Response System in Syria . BMC research notes 13 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 8 . [ 62 ] Maria De - Arteaga , Amanda Coston , and William Herlands . 2018 . Proceedings of NeurIPS 2018 Workshop on Machine Learning for the Developing World : Achieving Sustainable Impact . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1812 . 10398 ( 2018 ) . [ 63 ] Haile T Debas , Ramanan Laxminarayan , and Stephen E Straus . 2006 . Com - plementary and alternative medicine . Disease control priorities in developing countries 2 ( 2006 ) . [ 64 ] Nicola Dell and Neha Kumar . 2016 . The ins and outs of HCI for development . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2220 – 2232 . [ 65 ] Federico Demaria and Ashish Kothari . 2017 . The Post - Development Dictionary agenda : paths to the pluriverse . Third World Quarterly 38 , 12 ( 2017 ) , 2588 – 2599 . [ 66 ] Suruchi Deodhar , Jiangzhuo Chen , Mandy Wilson , Keith Bisset , Chris Barrett , and Madhav Marathe . 2015 . EpiCaster : An integrated web application for situation assessment and forecasting of global epidemics . In Proceedings of the 6th ACM Conference on Bioinformatics , Computational Biology and Health Informatics . 156 – 165 . [ 67 ] Brian DeRenzi , Nicola Dell , Jeremy Wacksman , Scott Lee , and Neal Lesh . 2017 . Supporting Community Health Workers in India through Voice - and Web - Based Feedback . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com - puting Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2770 – 2781 . [ 68 ] Thomas Desautels , Jacob Calvert , Jana Hoffman , Qingqing Mao , Melissa Jay , Grant Fletcher , Chris Barton , Uli Chettipally , Yaniv Kerem , and Ritankar Das . 2017 . Using transfer learning for improved mortality prediction in a data - scarce hospital setting . Biomedical informatics insights 9 ( 2017 ) , 1178222617712994 . [ 69 ] Michael A Devito , Ashley Marie Walker , Jeremy Birnholtz , Kathryn Ringland , Kathryn Macapagal , Ashley Kraus , Sean Munson , Calvin Liang , and Herman Saksono . 2019 . Social Technologies for Digital Wellbeing Among Marginalized Communities . In Conference Companion Publication of the 2019 on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 449 – 454 . [ 70 ] Catherine D’Ignazio and Lauren F Klein . 2020 . Data feminism . MIT Press . [ 71 ] Fangyu Ding , Jingying Fu , Dong Jiang , Mengmeng Hao , and Gang Lin . 2018 . Mapping the spatial distribution of Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus . Acta tropica 178 ( 2018 ) , 155 – 162 . [ 72 ] Leslie L Dodson , S Revi Sterling , and John K Bennett . 2012 . Considering failure : eight years of ITID research . In Proceedings of the fifth international conference on information and communication technologies and development . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 56 – 64 . [ 73 ] Lynn Dombrowski , Ellie Harmon , and Sarah Fox . 2016 . Social justice - oriented interaction design : Outlining key design strategies and commitments . In Pro - ceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 656 – 671 . [ 74 ] Yichun Duan , Guopeng Zhou , Yuanxing Zhang , Zhaoqian Lan , Chunhua Chi , and Wei Yan . 2018 . Neural Network Based Clinical Treatment Decision Support System for Co - existing Medical Conditions . In 2018 IEEE Third International Conference on Data Science in Cyberspace ( DSC ) . IEEE , 131 – 138 . [ 75 ] Michaelanne Dye , David Nemer , Neha Kumar , and Amy S Bruckman . 2019 . If it Rains , Ask Grandma to Disconnect the Nano : Maintenance & Care in Havana’s StreetNet . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 1 – 27 . [ 76 ] Michaelanne Dye , David Nemer , Josiah Mangiameli , Amy S Bruckman , and Neha Kumar . 2018 . El Paquete Semanal : The Week’s Internet in Havana . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . [ 77 ] Arturo Escobar . 2011 . Encountering development : The making and unmaking of the Third World . Vol . 1 . Princeton University Press . [ 78 ] Arturo Escobar . 2018 . Designs for the pluriverse : Radical interdependence , auton - omy , and the making of worlds . Duke University Press . [ 79 ] VirginiaEubanks . 2018 . Automatinginequality : Howhigh - techtoolsprofile , police , and punish the poor . St . Martin’s Press . [ 80 ] Orlando Fals - Borda . 1987 . The application of participatory action - research in Latin America . International sociology 2 , 4 ( 1987 ) , 329 – 347 . [ 81 ] Myra Marx Ferree and Aili Mari Tripp . 2006 . Global feminism : Transnational women’s activism , organizing , and human rights . NYU Press . [ 82 ] U . S . AgencyforInternationalDevelopment . 2019 . ArtificialIntelligenceinGlobal Health : Defining a Collective Path Forward . https : / / www . usaid . gov / cii / ai - in - global - health [ 83 ] AI for Social Good . 2019 . Joint Workshop on AI for Social Good at NeurIPS 2019 . https : / / aiforsocialgood . github . io / neurips2019 / [ 84 ] Michel Foucault . 1972 . The archaeology of knowledge ( AMS Smith , Trans . ) . New York : Pantheon ( 1972 ) . [ 85 ] Sarah Fox , Jill Dimond , Lilly Irani , Tad Hirsch , Michael Muller , and Shaowen Bardzell . 2017 . SocialJusticeandDesign : PowerandOppressioninCollaborative Systems . In Companion of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( CSCW ’17 Companion ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 117 – 122 . event - place : Portland , Oregon , USA . [ 86 ] Jacquelline Fuller . 2019 . Here are the grantees of the Google AI Impact Chal - lenge . https : / / www . blog . google / outreach - initiatives / google - org / ai - impact - challenge - grantees / [ 87 ] Rikin Gandhi , Rajesh Veeraraghavan , and Kentaro Toyama . 2016 . Digital green . Harnessing the power of collective learning : Feedback , accountability and con - stituent voice in rural development ( 2016 ) , 16 – 30 . [ 88 ] Rikin Gandhi , Rajesh Veeraraghavan , Kentaro Toyama , and Vanaja Ramprasad . 2007 . Digital green : Participatory video for agricultural extension . In 2007 International conference on information and communication technologies and development . IEEE , 1 – 10 . [ 89 ] Paul A Gastanaduy , Emily Banerjee , Chas DeBolt , Pamela Bravo - Alcántara , SamiaASamad , DesireePastor , PaulARota , ManishaPatel , NatashaSCrowcroft , and David N Durrheim . 2018 . Public health responses during measles out - breaks in elimination settings : Strategies and challenges . Human vaccines & immunotherapeutics 14 , 9 ( 2018 ) , 2222 – 2238 . [ 90 ] George Gatuha and Tao Jiang . 2016 . Android based naive Bayes probabilistic detection model for breast cancer and mobile cloud computing : design and im - plementation . In International Journal of Engineering Research in Africa , Vol . 21 . Trans Tech Publ , 197 – 208 . [ 91 ] James Paul Gee . 2014 . An introduction to discourse analysis : Theory and method . Routledge . [ 92 ] Nouby M Ghazaly , Muhammad A Abdel - Fattah , and AA Abd El - Aziz . 2020 . Novel Coronavirus Forecasting Model using Nonlinear Autoregressive Artificial Neural Network . Journal of advanced science ( 2020 ) . [ 93 ] Sayantan Ghosh . 2020 . Ahead of Delhi polls , AAP government and BJP - run MCD provide contrasting case studies in governance , Firstpost . https : / / www . firstpost . com / politics / ahead - of - delhi - polls - aap - government - and - bjp - run - mcd - provide - contrasting - case - studies - in - governance - 7907751 . html [ 94 ] Anand Giridharadas . 2018 . Winners take all : The elite charade of changing the world . Knopf . [ 95 ] Mayank Goel , Elliot Saba , Maia Stiber , Eric Whitmire , Josh Fromm , Eric C Larson , Gaetano Borriello , and Shwetak N Patel . 2016 . Spirocall : Measuring lung function over a phone call . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 5675 – 5685 . [ 96 ] Leo A Goodman . 1961 . Snowball sampling . The annals of mathematical statistics ( 1961 ) , 148 – 170 . [ 97 ] Mary L Gray and Siddharth Suri . 2019 . Ghost Work : How to Stop Silicon Valley from Building a New Global Underclass . Eamon Dolan Books . [ 98 ] Pi Guo , Tao Liu , Qin Zhang , Li Wang , Jianpeng Xiao , Qingying Zhang , Ganfeng Luo , Zhihao Li , Jianfeng He , Yonghui Zhang , and Wenjun Ma . 2017 . Developing a dengue forecast model using machine learning : A case study in China . PLoS neglected tropical diseases 11 , 10 ( 2017 ) , e0005973 . [ 99 ] Donna Haraway . 1988 . Situated knowledges : The science question in feminism and the privilege of partial perspective . Feminist studies 14 , 3 ( 1988 ) , 575 – 599 . [ 100 ] Carl Hartung , Adam Lerer , Yaw Anokwa , Clint Tseng , Waylon Brunette , and Gaetano Borriello . 2010 . Open data kit : tools to build information services for developing regions . In Proceedings of the 4th ACM / IEEE international conference on information and communication technologies and development . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . [ 101 ] Gillian R Hayes . 2011 . The relationship of action research to human - computer interaction . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 18 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 1 – 20 . [ 102 ] TheLancetPublicHealth . 2019 . Nextgenerationpublichealth : towardsprecision and fairness . The Lancet Public health 4 , 5 ( 2019 ) , e209 . [ 103 ] Anna Lauren Hoffmann and Iris Marion Young . 2020 . Terms of Inclusion : Data , Discourse , Violence . New Media & Society ( August 2020 ) . Forthcoming . [ 104 ] IsaacHolemanandDiannaKane . 2020 . Human - centereddesignforglobalhealth equity . Information Technology for Development 26 , 3 ( 2020 ) , 477 – 505 . [ 105 ] Ahmed Hosny and Hugo JWL Aerts . 2019 . Artificial intelligence for global health . Science 366 , 6468 ( 2019 ) , 955 – 956 . [ 106 ] TanjaAJHouweling , DavidvanKlaveren , SushmitaDas , KishwarAzad , Prasanta Tripathy , Dharma Manandhar , Melissa Neuman , Erik de Jonge , Jasper V Been , Ewout Steyerberg , et al . 2019 . A prediction model for neonatal mortality in low - and middle - income countries : an analysis of data from population surveillance sites in India , Nepal and Bangladesh . International journal of epidemiology 48 , 1 CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan Ismail and Kumar ( 2019 ) , 186 – 198 . [ 107 ] Shigao Huang , Jie Yang , Simon Fong , and Qi Zhao . 2020 . Artificial intelligence in cancer diagnosis and prognosis : Opportunities and challenges . Cancer Letters 471 ( 2020 ) , 61 – 71 . [ 108 ] Sangheum Hwang , Hyo - Eun Kim , Jihoon Jeong , and Hee - Jin Kim . 2016 . A novel approach for tuberculosis screening based on deep convolutional neural networks . In Medical imaging 2016 : computer - aided diagnosis , Vol . 9785 . Interna - tional Society for Optics and Photonics , 97852W . [ 109 ] IBM . 2020 . iKure + IBM , Delivering healthcare beyond boundaries . https : / / www . ibm . com / thought - leadership / in - en / smart / ikure / [ 110 ] Merajul Islam , Jahanur Rahman , Dulal Chandra Roy , et al . 2020 . Automated detectionandclassificationofdiabetesdiseasebasedonBangladeshdemographyandhealthsurveydata , 2011 using machine learning approach . Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome : Clinical Research & Reviews ( 2020 ) . [ 111 ] Azra Ismail , Naveena Karusala , and Neha Kumar . 2018 . Bridging Discon - nected Knowledges for Community Health . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 2 , CSCW ( 2018 ) , 75 . [ 112 ] Azra Ismail and Neha Kumar . 2018 . Engaging Solidarity in Data Collection Practices for Community Health . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 2 , CSCW ( 2018 ) , 76 . [ 113 ] Azra Ismail and Neha Kumar . 2019 . Empowerment on the Margins : The Online Experiences of Community Health Workers . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 99 . [ 114 ] ITU . 2020 . AI for Good Global Summit . https : / / aiforgood . itu . int / [ 115 ] Siddhartha Jain and Nimmi Rangaswamy . 2020 . Good Digital Identity : The Case of Aadhaar in India . In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGCAS Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 345 – 346 . [ 116 ] LS Jayashree , R Lakshmi Devi , Nikolaos Papandrianos , and Elpiniki I Papageor - giou . 2018 . Application of fuzzy cognitive map for geospatial dengue outbreak risk prediction of tropical regions of Southern India . Intelligent Decision Tech - nologies 12 , 2 ( 2018 ) , 231 – 250 . [ 117 ] Chunyan Ji , Xueli Xiao , Sunitha Basodi , and Yi Pan . 2019 . Deep Learning for AsphyxiatedInfantCryClassificationBasedonAcousticFeaturesandWeightedProsodicFeatures . In 2019InternationalConferenceonInternetofThings ( iThings ) and IEEE Green Computing and Communications ( GreenCom ) and IEEE Cyber , Physical and Social Computing ( CPSCom ) and IEEE Smart Data ( SmartData ) . IEEE , 1233 – 1240 . [ 118 ] Anirudha Joshi , Mandar Rane , Debjani Roy , Nagraj Emmadi , Padma Srinivasan , N . Kumarasamy , Sanjay Pujari , Davidson Solomon , Rashmi Rodrigues , D . G . Saple , Kamalika Sen , Els Veldeman , and Romain Rutten . 2014 . Supporting Treatment of People Living with HIV / AIDS in Resource Limited Settings with IVRs . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Toronto , Ontario , Canada ) ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1595 – 1604 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557236 [ 119 ] EikoKai , AshirAhmed , SozoInoue , AtsushiTaniguchi , YasunobuNohara , Naoki Nakashima , and Masaru Kitsuregawa . 2014 . Evolving health consultancy by predictive caravan health sensing in developing countries . In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing : Adjunct Publication . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1225 – 1232 . [ 120 ] AmbaKak . 2020 . " TheGlobalSouthiseverywhere , butalsoalwayssomewhere " National Policy Narratives and AI Justice . In Proceedings of the AAAI / ACM Conference on AI , Ethics , and Society . 307 – 312 . [ 121 ] Siva Teja Kakileti , Himanshu J Madhu , Geetha Manjunath , Leonard Wee , An - dre Dekker , and Sudhakar Sampangi . 2020 . Personalized Risk Prediction for BreastCancerPre - screeningusingArtificialIntelligenceandThermalRadiomics . Artificial Intelligence in Medicine ( 2020 ) , 101854 . [ 122 ] Pratyusha Kalluri . 2020 . Don’t ask if artificial intelligence is good or fair , ask how it shifts power . Nature 583 , 7815 ( 2020 ) , 169 – 169 . [ 123 ] Shivaram Kalyanakrishnan , Rahul Alex Panicker , Sarayu Natarajan , and Shreya Rao . 2018 . Opportunities and Challenges for Artificial Intelligence in India . In Proceedings of the 2018 AAAI / ACM Conference on AI , Ethics , and Society ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( AIES ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 164 – 170 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3278721 . 3278738 [ 124 ] Naveena Karusala , Isaac Holeman , and Richard Anderson . 2019 . Engaging Identity , Assets , and Constraints in Designing for Resilience . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 1 – 23 . [ 125 ] Jasmeet Kaur , Asra Sakeen Wani , and Pushpendra Singh . 2019 . Engagement of Pregnant Women and Mothers over WhatsApp : Challenges and Opportunities Involved . In ConferenceCompanionPublicationofthe2019onComputerSupported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 236 – 240 . [ 126 ] Sirina Keesara , Andrea Jonas , and Kevin Schulman . 2020 . Covid - 19 and health care’s digital revolution . New England Journal of Medicine 382 , 23 ( 2020 ) , e82 . [ 127 ] Os Keyes . 2018 . The misgendering machines : Trans / HCI implications of auto - matic gender recognition . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interac - tion 2 , CSCW ( 2018 ) , 88 . [ 128 ] JacksonAKillian , BryanWilder , AmitSharma , VinodChoudhary , BistraDilkina , and Milind Tambe . 2019 . Learning to prescribe interventions for tuberculosis patients using digital adherence data . In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2430 – 2438 . [ 129 ] Dani Kiyasseh , Girmaw Abebe Tadesse , Nhan Le Nguyen Thanh , Tan Le Van , Louise Thwaites , Tingting Zhu , and David Clifton . 2020 . PlethAugment : GAN - BasedPPGAugmentationforMedicalDiagnosisinLow - ResourceSettings . IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics ( 2020 ) . [ 130 ] Phani Krishna Kondeti , Kumar Ravi , Srinivasa Rao Mutheneni , Mad - husudhan Rao Kadiri , Sriram Kumaraswamy , Ravi Vadlamani , and Surya - naryanaMurtyUpadhyayula . 2019 . Applicationsofmachinelearningtechniques to predict filariasis using socio - economic factors . Epidemiology & Infection 147 ( 2019 ) . [ 131 ] Sandhya Krishnan and Neeraj Hatekar . 2017 . Rise of the new middle class in India and its changing structure . Economic and Political Weekly 52 , 22 ( 2017 ) , 40 – 48 . [ 132 ] Neha Kumar . 2014 . Facebook for self - empowerment ? A study of Facebook adoption in urban India . New media & society 16 , 7 ( 2014 ) , 1122 – 1137 . [ 133 ] Neha Kumar . 2015 . The gender - technology divide or perceptions of non - use ? First Monday 20 , 11 ( 2015 ) . [ 134 ] Neha Kumar and Richard J Anderson . 2015 . Mobile phones for maternal health in rural India . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 427 – 436 . [ 135 ] NehaKumar , NaveenaKarusala , AzraIsmail , MarisolWong - Villacres , andAditya Vishwanath . 2019 . Engaging Feminist Solidarity for Comparative Research , Design , and Practice . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 1 – 24 . [ 136 ] Neha Kumar , Trevor Perrier , Michelle Desmond , Kiersten Israel - Ballard , Vikrant Kumar , Sudip Mahapatra , Anil Mishra , Shreya Agarwal , Rikin Gandhi , Pallavi Lal , and Richard Anderson . 2015 . Projecting Health : Community - led Video Education for Maternal Health . In Proceedings of the Seventh International Con - ference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development ( Sin - gapore , Singapore ) ( ICTD ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 17 , 10 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2737856 . 2738023 [ 137 ] Rajesh Kumar T and Abinaya . K . 2020 . An AI Based Chat - Bot for Providing Health Services . Test Engineering and Management 83 ( 03 2020 ) , 3721 – 3726 . [ 138 ] SamuelLalmuanawma , JamalHussain , andLalrinfelaChhakchhuak . 2020 . Appli - cationsofmachinelearningandartificialintelligenceforCovid - 19 ( SARS - CoV - 2 ) pandemic : A review . Chaos , Solitons & Fractals ( 2020 ) , 110059 . [ 139 ] Emily LaRosa and David Danks . 2018 . Impacts on trust of healthcare AI . In Proceedingsofthe2018AAAI / ACMConferenceonAI , Ethics , andSociety . 210 – 215 . [ 140 ] Kai - Fu Lee . 2018 . AI superpowers : China , Silicon Valley , and the new world order . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt . [ 141 ] Siew Hwa Lee , Ulugbek B Nurmatov , Bright I Nwaru , Mome Mukherjee , Liz Grant , and Claudia Pagliari . 2016 . Effectiveness of mHealth interventions for maternal , newborn and child health in low – and middle – income countries : Systematic review and meta – analysis . Journal of global health 6 , 1 ( 2016 ) . [ 142 ] Chang Liu , Yu Cao , Marlon Alcantara , Benyuan Liu , Maria Brunette , Jesus Peinado , and Walter Curioso . 2017 . TX - CNN : Detecting tuberculosis in chest X - ray images using convolutional neural network . In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing ( ICIP ) . IEEE , 2314 – 2318 . [ 143 ] Logistimo . 2019 . Logistimo | Advanced Technologies - Artificial intelligence and optimisation algorithms powering the supply chain and logistics platform . https : / / www . logistimo . com / advanced - technologies [ 144 ] FernandoLópez - Martínez , EdwardRolandoNúñez - Valdez , JaimeLorduyGomez , and Vicente García - Díaz . 2019 . A neural network approach to predict early neonatal sepsis . Computers & Electrical Engineering 76 ( 2019 ) , 379 – 388 . [ 145 ] Federica Lucivero . 2020 . Big data , big waste ? A reflection on the environmental sustainability of big data initiatives . Science and engineering ethics 26 , 2 ( 2020 ) , 1009 – 1030 . [ 146 ] macro eyes . 2020 . CHAIN - macro - eyes Health . https : / / www . macro - eyes . com / chain [ 147 ] Michael A Madaio , Luke Stark , Jennifer Wortman Vaughan , and Hanna Wallach . 2020 . Co - Designing Checklists to Understand Organizational Challenges and Opportunities around Fairness in AI . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . [ 148 ] Charru Malhotra , Vinod Kotwal , and Aniket Basu . 2019 . Designing National Health Stack for Public Health : Role of ICT - Based Knowledge Management Sys - tem . In 2019ITUKaleidoscope : ICTforHealth : Networks , StandardsandInnovation ( ITU K ) . IEEE , 1 – 8 . [ 149 ] Sanya Mansoor and Billy Perrigo . 2019 . Inside the Anti - Citizenship Act Protests Rocking India . https : / / time . com / 5752186 / india - protests - citizenship - act / [ 150 ] Megh Marathe , Jacki O’Neill , Paromita Pain , and William Thies . 2015 . Revis - iting CGNet Swara and its impact in rural India . In Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 10 . [ 151 ] Milena Soriano Marcolino , João Antonio Queiroz Oliveira , Marcelo D’Agostino , Antonio Luiz Ribeiro , Maria Beatriz Moreira Alkmim , and David Novillo - Ortiz . 2018 . The impact of mHealth interventions : systematic review of systematic AI in Global Health : The View from the Front Lines CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan reviews . JMIR mHealth and uHealth 6 , 1 ( 2018 ) , e23 . [ 152 ] George E Marcus . 1995 . Ethnography in / of the world system : The emergence of multi - sited ethnography . Annual review of anthropology 24 , 1 ( 1995 ) , 95 – 117 . [ 153 ] Muthoni Masinde . 2020 . Africa’s Malaria Epidemic Predictor : Application of Machine Learning on Malaria Incidence and Climate Data . In Proceedings of the 2020 the 4th International Conference on Compute and Data Analysis . 29 – 37 . [ 154 ] Becky McCall . 2020 . COVID - 19 and artificial intelligence : protecting health - care workers and curbing the spread . The Lancet Digital Health 2 , 4 ( 2020 ) , e166 – e167 . [ 155 ] Jaime Melendez , Clara I Sánchez , Rick HHM Philipsen , Pragnya Maduskar , Rodney Dawson , Grant Theron , Keertan Dheda , and Bram Van Ginneken . 2016 . AnautomatedtuberculosisscreeningstrategycombiningX - ray - basedcomputer - aided detection and clinical information . Scientific reports 6 ( 2016 ) , 25265 . [ 156 ] Syeda Shaizadi Meraj , Razali Yaakob , Azreen Azman , Siti Nuralain Mohd Rum , Azree Shahrel , and Ahmad Nazri . 2019 . Artificial Intelligence in Diagnosing Tu - berculosis : A Review . Int . Journal on Advanced Sci . , Eng . and Inform . Technology 9 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 81 – 91 . [ 157 ] Sharan B Merriam . 2002 . Qualitative research in practice : Examples for discussion and analysis . Jossey - Bass Inc Pub . [ 158 ] National Rural Health Mission . 2017 . Guidelines for Community Processes . http : / / bit . ly / 2hfEGVU [ Online ; accessed 19 - September - 2017 ] . [ 159 ] Gairika Mitra . 2020 . How Is Telemedicine Acting As A Disruptor In The Health TechSpace ? https : / / www . expresscomputer . in / interviews / how - is - telemedicine - acting - as - a - disruptor - in - the - health - tech - space / 53860 / [ 160 ] ML4D . 2020 . Machine Learning for Development ( ML4D ) 2020 . https : / / sites . google . com / view / ml4d / home [ 161 ] Leila Moftakhar , SEIF Mozhgan , and Marziyeh Sadat Safe . 2020 . Exponentially Increasing Trend of Infected Patients with COVID - 19 in Iran : A Comparison of Neural Network and ARIMA Forecasting Models . Iranian Journal of Public Health 49 ( 2020 ) , 92 – 100 . [ 162 ] Shakir Mohamed , Marie - Therese Png , and William Isaac . 2020 . Decolonial AI : Decolonial Theory as Sociotechnical Foresight in Artificial Intelligence . Philosophy & Technology ( 2020 ) , 1 – 26 . [ 163 ] SuhadHadiMohammed , MohanadMohsinAhmed , AliMousaAl - Mousawi , Ade - boye Azeez , et al . 2018 . Seasonal behavior and forecasting trends of tuberculosis incidence in Holy Kerbala , Iraq . Int J Mycobacteriol 7 , 4 ( 2018 ) , 361 – 367 . [ 164 ] Chandra Talpade Mohanty . 1988 . Under Western eyes : Feminist scholarship and colonial discourses . Feminist review 30 ( 1988 ) , 61 – 88 . [ 165 ] Chandra Talpade Mohanty . 2003 . “Under Western eyes” revisited : feminist solidarity through anticapitalist struggles . Signs : Journal of Women in culture and Society 28 , 2 ( 2003 ) , 499 – 535 . [ 166 ] Aparna Moitra , Vishnupriya Das , Gram Vaani , Archna Kumar , and Aaditeshwar Seth . 2016 . Design lessons from creating a mobile - based community media platform in Rural India . In Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 11 . [ 167 ] Maletsabisa Molapo , Melissa Densmore , and Brian DeRenzi . 2017 . Video Con - sumption Patterns for First Time Smartphone Users : Community Health Work - ers in Lesotho . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 6159 – 6170 . [ 168 ] Katie Moon and Deborah Blackman . 2014 . A guide to understanding social science research for natural scientists . Conservation Biology 28 , 5 ( 2014 ) , 1167 – 1177 . [ 169 ] Mário WL Moreira , Joel JPC Rodrigues , Francisco HC Carvalho , Naveen Chil - amkurti , Jalal Al - Muhtadi , and Victor Denisov . 2019 . Biomedical data analytics in mobile - health environments for high - risk pregnancy outcome prediction . Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing 10 , 10 ( 2019 ) , 4121 – 4134 . [ 170 ] Yongqing Nan and Yanyan Gao . 2018 . A machine learning method to monitor China’s AIDS epidemics with data from Baidu trends . PloS one 13 , 7 ( 2018 ) , e0199697 . [ 171 ] MeenaNatarajanandTapanParikh . 2013 . UnderstandingBarrierstoInformation Access and Disclosure for HIV + Women . In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development : Full Papers - Volume 1 ( Cape Town , South Africa ) ( ICTD ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 143 – 152 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2516604 . 2516627 [ 172 ] BBC News . 2018 . Aadhaar : ‘Leak’ in world’s biggest database worries Indians . https : / / www . bbc . com / news / world - asia - india - 42575443 [ 173 ] Siddharth Nishtala , Harshavardhan Kamarthi , Divy Thakkar , Dhyanesh Narayanan , Anirudh Grama , Ramesh Padmanabhan , Neha Madhiwalla , Suresh Chaudhary , Balaraman Ravindra , and Milind Tambe . 2020 . Missed calls , Auto - mated Calls and Health Support : Using AI to improve maternal health outcomes by increasing program engagement . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2006 . 07590 ( 2020 ) . [ 174 ] Safiya Umoja Noble . 2018 . Algorithms of oppression : How search engines reinforce racism . nyu Press . [ 175 ] Erick Oduor , Timothy Nyota , Charles Wachira , Sam Osebe , Sekou L . Remy , and Aisha Walcott . 2018 . Medication Management Companion ( MMC ) for a Rural Kenyan Community . In Companion of the 2018 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( Jersey City , NJ , USA ) ( CSCW ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 145 – 148 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3272973 . 3274041 [ 176 ] Fabian Okeke , Lucas Nene , Anne Muthee , Stephen Odindo , Dianna Kane , Isaac Holeman , and Nicola Dell . 2019 . Opportunities and challenges in connecting care recipients to the community health feedback loop . In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development . ACM , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 13 . [ 177 ] Olugbenga Oluwagbemi and Abdulwahab Jatto . 2019 . Implementation of a TCM - based computational health informatics diagnostic tool for Sub - Saharan African students . Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 14 ( 2019 ) , 43 – 58 . [ 178 ] Joyojeet Pal . 2017 . The fallacy of good : marginalized populations as design motivation . interactions 24 , 5 ( 2017 ) , 65 – 67 . [ 179 ] Joyojeet Pal , Anjuli Dasika , Ahmad Hasan , Jackie Wolf , Nick Reid , Vaishnav Kameswaran , PurvaYardi , AllysonMackay , AbramWagner , BhramarMukherjee , et al . 2017 . Changing data practices for community health workers : Introduc - ing digital data collection in West Bengal , India . In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development . ACM , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 17 . [ 180 ] Ankur Pandey , Inshita Mutreja , Saru Brar , and Pushpendra Singh . 2020 . Ex - ploring Automated Q & A Support System for Maternal and Child Health in Rural India . In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGCAS Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 349 – 350 . [ 181 ] Tapan Parikh . 2019 . Much AI About Nothing . Medium . https : / / medium . com / @ tap2k / much - ai - about - nothing - 7939db48aecf [ 182 ] Sun Young Park , Pei - Yi Kuo , Andrea Barbarin , Elizabeth Kaziunas , Astrid Chow , Karandeep Singh , Lauren Wilcox , and Walter S Lasecki . 2019 . Identifying Challenges and Opportunities in Human - AI Collaboration in Healthcare . In ConferenceCompanionPublicationofthe2019onComputerSupportedCooperativeWorkandSocialComputing . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 506 – 510 . [ 183 ] Nassim Parvin and Anne Pollock . 2020 . Unintended by Design : On the Political Uses of “Unintended Consequences” . Engaging Science , Technology , and Society 6 ( 2020 ) , 320 – 327 . [ 184 ] Robert H Paul , Kyu S Cho , Andrew C Belden , Claude A Mellins , Kathleen M Malee , Reuben N Robbins , Lauren E Salminen , Stephen J Kerr , Badri Adhikari , Paola M Garcia - Egan , et al . 2020 . Machine - learning classification of neurocogni - tiveperformanceinchildrenwithperinatalHIVinitiatingdenovoantiretroviraltherapy . Aids 34 , 5 ( 2020 ) , 737 – 748 . [ 185 ] Sachin R Pendse , Faisal M Lalani , Munmun De Choudhury , Amit Sharma , and Neha Kumar . 2020 . " Like Shock Absorbers " : Understanding the Human Infras - tructures of Technology - Mediated Mental Health Support . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . [ 186 ] Trevor Perrier , Nicola Dell , Brian DeRenzi , Richard Anderson , John Kinuthia , Jennifer Unger , and Grace John - Stewart . 2015 . Engaging Pregnant Women in Kenya with a Hybrid Computer - Human SMS Communication System . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Seoul , Republic of Korea ) ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1429 – 1438 . [ 187 ] Trevor Perrier , Elizabeth K Harrington , Keshet Ronen , Daniel Matemo , John Kinuthia , Grace John - Stewart , Richard Anderson , and Jennifer A Unger . 2018 . Male partner engagement in family planning SMS conversations at Kenyan health clinics . In Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGCAS Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3 . [ 188 ] Paz Peña and Joana Varon . 2019 . Decolonising AI : A transfeminist approach to data and social justice . https : / / www . codingrights . org / decolonising - ai - a - transfeminist - approach - to - data - and - social - justice / [ 189 ] Qure . ai . 2020 . Qure . ai bags industry’s first 4 - in - 1 FDA clearance for medical imaging AI . https : / / qure . ai / news / 2020 / 06 / 30 / qure - dot - ai - bags - industrys - first - 4 - in - 1 - fda - clearance - for - medical - imaging - ai . html [ 190 ] Vivek Raghavan , Sanjay Jain , and Pramod Varma . 2019 . India stack—digital infrastructure as public good . Commun . ACM 62 , 11 ( 2019 ) , 76 – 81 . [ 191 ] Md Moshiur Rahman , Ruhul Amin , Md Nazmul Khan Liton , and Nahid Hossain . 2019 . Disha : An Implementation of Machine Learning Based Bangla Healthcare Chatbot . In 2019 22nd International Conference on Computer and Information Technology ( ICCIT ) . IEEE , 1 – 6 . [ 192 ] Md Z Rahman , Leonid Roytman , Abdelhamid Kadik , and Dilara A Rosy . 2014 . Environmental data analysis and remote sensing for early detection of dengue and malaria . In Sensing Technologies for Global Health , Military Medicine , and Environmental Monitoring IV , Vol . 9112 . International Society for Optics and Photonics , 91121C . [ 193 ] Divya Ramachandran , John Canny , Prabhu Dutta Das , and Edward Cutrell . 2010 . Mobile - izing health workers in rural India . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1889 – 1898 . [ 194 ] NimmiRangaswamyandMelissaDensmore . 2013 . UnderstandingJugaad : ICTD and the Tensions of Appropriation , Innovation and Utility . In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information and Communications Technologies CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan Ismail and Kumar and Development : Notes - Volume 2 ( ICTD ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 120 – 123 . event - place : Cape Town , South Africa . [ 195 ] Jawad Rasheed , Akhtar Jamil , Alaa Ali Hameed , Usman Aftab , Javaria Aftab , Syed Attique Shah , and Dirk Draheim . 2020 . A survey on artificial intelligence approaches in supporting frontline workers and decision makers for COVID - 19 pandemic . Chaos , Solitons & Fractals ( 2020 ) , 110337 . [ 196 ] IBM Research . 2018 . IBM Science for Social Good . https : / / www . research . ibm . com / science - for - social - good / [ 197 ] Microsoft Research . 2019 . MSR India Center for Societal impact through Cloud and Artificial Intelligence ( SCAI ) . https : / / www . microsoft . com / en - us / research / theme / scai / [ 198 ] Katelyn J . Rittenhouse , Bellington Vwalika , Alexander Keil , Jennifer Winston , Marie Stoner , Joan T . Price , Monica Kapasa , Mulaya Mubambe , Vanilla Banda , Whyson Muunga , and Jeffrey S . A . Stringer . 2019 . Improving preterm newborn identification in low - resource settings with machine learning . PLOS ONE 14 , 2 ( Feb . 2019 ) , e0198919 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0198919 [ 199 ] Eugenia Arrieta Rodríguez , Francisco Edna Estrada , William Caicedo Torres , and Juan Carlos Martínez Santos . 2016 . Early prediction of severe maternal morbidity using machine learning techniques . In Ibero - American Conference on Artificial Intelligence . Springer , 259 – 270 . [ 200 ] Srirupa Roy . 2014 . Being the change : The Aam Aadmi Party and the politics of the extraordinary in Indian democracy . Economic and Political Weekly ( 2014 ) , 45 – 54 . [ 201 ] ShaliniRudra , AakshiKalra , AbhishekKumar , andWilliamJoe . 2017 . Utilization of alternative systems of medicine as health care services in India : evidence on AYUSH care from NSS 2014 . PloS one 12 , 5 ( 2017 ) , e0176916 . [ 202 ] Wolfgang Sachs . 1997 . Development dictionary , The : A guide to knowledge as power . Orient Blackswan . [ 203 ] Mazrura Sahani and Zainudin Mohd Ali . 2017 . Feature selection algorithms for Malaysian dengue outbreak detection model . Sains Malaysiana 46 , 2 ( 2017 ) , 255 – 265 . [ 204 ] Nithya Sambasivan . 2019 . The Remarkable Illusions of Technology for Social Good . Interactions 26 , 3 ( April 2019 ) , 64 – 66 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3319378 [ 205 ] Nithya Sambasivan , Amna Batool , Nova Ahmed , Tara Matthews , Kurt Thomas , Laura Sanely Gaytán - Lugo , David Nemer , Elie Bursztein , Elizabeth Churchill , and Sunny Consolvo . 2019 . " They Don’t Leave Us Alone Anywhere We Go " : GenderandDigitalAbuseinSouthAsia . In Proceedingsofthe2019CHIConference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2 . [ 206 ] Nithya Sambasivan and Jess Holbrook . 2019 . Toward responsible AI for the next billion users . interactions 26 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 68 – 71 . [ 207 ] Nithya Sambasivan and Thomas Smyth . 2010 . The Human Infrastructure of ICTD . In Proceedingsofthe4thACM / IEEEInternationalConferenceonInformation and Communication Technologies and Development ( London , United Kingdom ) ( ICTD ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 40 , 9 pages . [ 208 ] Ari Schlesinger , W Keith Edwards , and Rebecca E Grinter . 2017 . Intersectional HCI : Engaging identity through gender , race , and class . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 5412 – 5427 . [ 209 ] Kaushik Kunal Singh and Sachin Saagar Singh . 2019 . An Artificial Intelligence based mobile solution for early detection of valvular heart diseases . In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Electronics , Computing and Communication Technologies ( CONECCT ) . IEEE , 1 – 5 . [ 210 ] Namrata Singh , Pradeep Singh , and Deepika Bhagat . 2019 . A rule extraction approach from support vector machines for diagnosing hypertension among diabetics . Expert Systems with Applications 130 ( 2019 ) , 188 – 205 . [ 211 ] Ranjit Singh and Steven J . Jackson . 2017 . From Margins to Seams : Imbrication , Inclusion , and Torque in the Aadhaar Identification Project . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Denver , Colorado , USA ) ( CHI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 4776 – 4824 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025910 [ 212 ] Tanupriya Singh . 2018 . India’s ASHA community health work - ers protest for wage hike and better working conditions . https : / / peoplesdispatch . org / 2018 / 12 / 17 / indias - asha - community - health - workers - protest - for - wage - hike - and - better - working - conditions / [ 213 ] Thomas N Smyth , Satish Kumar , Indrani Medhi , and Kentaro Toyama . 2010 . Where there’s a will there’s a way : mobile media sharing in urban india . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems . ACM , 753 – 762 . [ 214 ] Arjun Soin . 2020 . Blog : Delhi’s Mohalla Clinics - The Big Data Oppor - tunity . https : / / www . ndtv . com / blog / delhis - mohalla - clinics - the - big - data - opportunity - 2160026 [ 215 ] Dr . James Somauroo . 2019 . Ada Health Launches World’s First AI - Powered Health App In Swahili . https : / / www . forbes . com / sites / jamessomauroo / 2019 / 12 / 02 / ada - health - launches - worlds - first - ai - powered - health - app - in - swahili / [ 216 ] Alcinês da Silva Sousa Júnior , Vera Regina da Cunha Menezes Palácios , Claúdia do Socorro Miranda , Rodrigo Junior Farias da Costa , Clistenes Pamplona Catete , Eugenia Janis Chagasteles , Alba Lucia Ribeiro Raithy Pereira , and Nelson Veiga Gonçalves . 2017 . Space - temporal analysis of Chagas disease and its environ - mental and demographic risk factors in the municipality of Barcarena , Pará , Brazil . Revista Brasileira de Epidemiologia 20 ( 2017 ) , 742 – 755 . [ 217 ] Katta Spiel , Christopher Frauenberger , Os Keyes , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2019 . Agency of autistic children in technology research—A critical literature review . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 26 , 6 ( 2019 ) , 1 – 40 . [ 218 ] Janaki Srinivasan and Jenna Burrell . 2013 . Revisiting the Fishers of Kerala , India . In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development : Full Papers - Volume 1 ( Cape Town , South Africa ) ( ICTD ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 56 – 66 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2516604 . 2516618 [ 219 ] Emma Strubell , Ananya Ganesh , and Andrew McCallum . 2019 . Energy and policy considerations for deep learning in NLP . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1906 . 02243 ( 2019 ) . [ 220 ] BK Subramanian , S Kaulgud , V R Joshi , Girish Godbole , and Madhavi Bahulikar . 2018 . Comparativestudytodeterminethereliabilityandaccuracyofthefetallite electronic fetal monitor when compared with conventional cardiotocography . In 2018 10th International Conference on Communication Systems & Networks ( COMSNETS ) . IEEE , 671 – 676 . [ 221 ] Lucy Suchman . 1995 . Making work visible . Commun . ACM 38 , 9 ( 1995 ) , 56 – 64 . [ 222 ] Mariarosaria Taddeo and Luciano Floridi . 2018 . How AI can be a force for good . Science 361 , 6404 ( 2018 ) , 751 – 752 . [ 223 ] Alex Taylor , Daniela Rosner , and Mikael Wiberg . 2020 . AI Activism . Interactions 28 , 1 ( Dec . 2020 ) , 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3442368 [ 224 ] Linnet Taylor . 2017 . What is data justice ? The case for connecting digital rights and freedoms globally . Big Data & Society 4 , 2 ( 2017 ) , 2053951717736335 . [ 225 ] Facebook Technology . 2019 . Using AI to help increase blood donations . https : / / tech . fb . com / using - ai - to - help - increase - blood - donations / [ 226 ] Kenneth Thomsen , Lars Iversen , Therese Louise Titlestad , and Ole Winther . 2020 . Systematic review of machine learning for diagnosis and prognosis in dermatology . Journal of Dermatological Treatment 31 , 5 ( 2020 ) , 496 – 510 . [ 227 ] Daniel Shu Wei Ting , Lawrence Carin , Victor Dzau , and Tien Y Wong . 2020 . Digital technology and COVID - 19 . Nature medicine 26 , 4 ( 2020 ) , 459 – 461 . [ 228 ] Sunita Tiwari , Sushil Kumar , and Kalpna Guleria . 2020 . Outbreak Trends of Coronavirus Disease – 2019 in India : A Prediction . Disaster medicine and public health preparedness ( 2020 ) , 1 – 6 . [ 229 ] Kentaro Toyama . 2015 . Geek heresy : Rescuing social change from the cult of technology . PublicAffairs . [ 230 ] Raju Vaishya , Mohd Javaid , Ibrahim Haleem Khan , and Abid Haleem . 2020 . Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) applications for COVID - 19 pandemic . Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome : Clinical Research & Reviews ( 2020 ) . [ 231 ] Camilo E Valderrama , Faezeh Marzbanrad , Lisa Stroux , Boris Martinez , Rachel Hall - Clifford , Chengyu Liu , Nasim Katebi , Peter Rohloff , and Gari D Clifford . 2018 . Improving the quality of point of care diagnostics with real - time machine learning in low literacy LMIC settings . In Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGCAS Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies . 1 – 11 . [ 232 ] Thomas LA van den Heuvel , Hezkiel Petros , Stefano Santini , Chris L de Korte , and Bram van Ginneken . 2019 . Automated fetal head detection and circum - ference estimation from free - hand ultrasound sweeps using deep learning in resource - limited countries . Ultrasound in medicine & biology 45 , 3 ( 2019 ) , 773 – 785 . [ 233 ] Effy Vayena , Alessandro Blasimme , and I Glenn Cohen . 2018 . Machine learn - ing in medicine : Addressing ethical challenges . PLoS medicine 15 , 11 ( 2018 ) , e1002689 . [ 234 ] Edward Velasco , Tumacha Agheneza , Kerstin Denecke , Goeran Kirchner , and Tim Eckmanns . 2014 . Social media and internet - based data in global systems for public health surveillance : a systematic review . The Milbank Quarterly 92 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 7 – 33 . [ 235 ] Ricardo Vinuesa , Hossein Azizpour , Iolanda Leite , Madeline Balaam , Virginia Dignum , Sami Domisch , Anna Felländer , Simone Daniela Langhans , Max Tegmark , and Francesco Fuso Nerini . 2020 . The role of artificial intelligence in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals . Nature communications 11 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 10 . [ 236 ] Brian Wahl , Aline Cossy - Gantner , Stefan Germann , and Nina R Schwalbe . 2018 . Artificial intelligence ( AI ) and global health : how can AI contribute to health in resource - poor settings ? BMJ global health 3 , 4 ( 2018 ) , e000798 . [ 237 ] Paul Wallace . 2015 . India’s 2014 Elections : A Modi - led BJP Sweep . SAGE Publica - tions India . [ 238 ] Yongming Wang and Junzhong Gu . 2014 . Comparative study among three different artificial neural networks to infectious diarrhea forecasting . In 2014 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine ( BIBM ) . IEEE , 40 – 46 . [ 239 ] Wudi Wei , Junjun Jiang , Hao Liang , Lian Gao , Bingyu Liang , Jiegang Huang , Ning Zang , Yanyan Liao , Jun Yu , Jingzhen Lai , et al . 2016 . Application of a combined model with autoregressive integrated moving average ( ARIMA ) and generalizedregressionneuralnetwork ( GRNN ) inforecastinghepatitisincidence in Heng County , China . PloS one 11 , 6 ( 2016 ) , e0156768 . AI in Global Health : The View from the Front Lines CHI’21 , May 8 – 13 , Yokohama , Japan [ 240 ] Nicole Wetsman . 2019 . Artificial intelligence aims to improve cancer screenings in Kenya . Nature Medicine 25 , 11 ( Nov . 2019 ) , 1630 – 1631 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41591 - 019 - 0629 - 6 [ 241 ] Caroline Whidden , Kassoum Kayentao , Jenny X Liu , Scott Lee , Youssouf Keita , Djoumé Diakité , Alexander Keita , Samba Diarra , Jacqueline Edwards , Amanda Yembrick , et al . 2018 . Improving Community Health Worker performance by using a personalised feedback dashboard for supervision : a randomised controlled trial . Journal of global health 8 , 2 ( 2018 ) . [ 242 ] Zack Whittaker . 2019 . Indian state government leaks thousands of Aadhaar numbers . https : / / techcrunch . com / 2019 / 01 / 31 / aadhaar - data - leak / ? guccounter = 1 [ 243 ] Haoran Xie , Hui - Chun Chu , Gwo - Jen Hwang , and Chun - Chieh Wang . 2019 . Trends and development in technology - enhanced adaptive / personalized learn - ing : A systematic review of journal publications from 2007 to 2017 . Computers & Education 140 ( 2019 ) , 103599 . [ 244 ] DeepikaYadav , AnushkaBhandari , andPushpendraSingh . 2019 . LEAP : Scaffold - ing Collaborative Learning of Community Health Workers in India . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 1 – 27 . [ 245 ] Deepika Yadav , Prerna Malik , Kirti Dabas , and Pushpendra Singh . 2019 . Feed - pal : Understanding Opportunities for Chatbots in Breastfeeding Education of Women in India . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 170 . [ 246 ] Deepika Yadav , Pushpendra Singh , Kyle Montague , Vijay Kumar , Deepak Sood , Madeline Balaam , Drishti Sharma , Mona Duggal , Tom Bartindale , Delvin Vargh - ese , and Patrick Olivier . 2017 . Sangoshthi : Empowering Community Health WorkersThroughPeerLearninginRuralIndia . In Proceedingsofthe26thInterna - tionalConferenceonWorldWideWeb ( Perth , Australia ) ( WWW’17 ) . International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee , Republic and Canton of Geneva , Switzerland , 499 – 508 . [ 247 ] Qian Yang , Aaron Steinfeld , and John Zimmerman . 2019 . Unremarkable ai : Fitting intelligent decision support into critical , clinical decision - making pro - cesses . In Proceedingsofthe2019CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputing Systems . 1 – 11 . [ 248 ] ZifengYang , ZhiqiZeng , KeWang , Sook - SanWong , WenhuaLiang , MarkZanin , Peng Liu , Xudong Cao , Zhongqiang Gao , Zhitong Mai , et al . 2020 . Modified SEIR and AI prediction of the epidemics trend of COVID - 19 in China under public health interventions . Journal of Thoracic Disease 12 , 3 ( 2020 ) , 165 . [ 249 ] Fenghua Yu , Mitchell Thayer , Ehsan Qasemi , Kaixi Zhu , and Amir Assadi . 2017 . Deep Learning Features in Atmospheric Chemistry : Prediction of Cancer Mor - bidity Due to Air Pollution . In 2017 International Conference on Computational Science and Computational Intelligence ( CSCI ) . IEEE , 1764 – 1766 . [ 250 ] Nira Yuval - Davis . 2006 . Intersectionality and feminist politics . European journal of women’s studies 13 , 3 ( 2006 ) , 193 – 209 . [ 251 ] Yan Zhang , Jun Wu , Chen Xu , and Ming Zhou . 2019 . Intelligent Service System Design of Food Therapy Experience into Chronic Disease . In International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction . Springer , 382 – 392 . [ 252 ] Shoshana Zuboff . 2019 . The age of surveillance capitalism : The fight for a human future at the new frontier of power . Profile Books .