World Development , Vol . 24 , No . 6 , pp . 1073 - 1087 . 1996 Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd Printed in Great Britain . All rights reserved 0305 - 750x / 96 $ 15 . 00 + 0 . 00 SO305 - 750X ( 96 ) 00023 - X Crossing the Great Divide : Coproduction , Synergy , and Development ELINOR OSTROM Indiana University , Bloomington , USA . Summary - Coproduction is a process through which inputs from individuals who are not “in” the same organization are transformed into goods and services . Two cases are presented - one from Brazil and one from Nigeria - where public officials play a major role . In Brazil , public officials actively encourage a high level of citizen input to the production of urban infrastructure . In Nigeria , public officials discourage citizen contributions to primary education . The third section of the paper provides a brief overview of the theory of coproduction and its relevance for understanding the two cases . The last section addresses the implica - tions of coproduction in polycentric systems for synergy and development . Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd 1 . THE HYPOTHETICAL DIVIDE In his introductory essay for this symposium , Peter Evans identifies a strong divide between “a market - based logic of development and traditional theories of public administration” ( Evans , 1995b ) . He identifies Judith Tendler’s concept of blurred public - private boundaries and my work on coproduction as “radical” and potentially offending to “everyone’s sense of pro - priety . ” Public Administration purists see it as threatening the insulation necessary for clearheaded decisions that are in the public interest . Market advocates see it as hopelessly muddying the logic of individual incentives and rational resource allocation ( Evans , 1995b ) . Since I think the great divide between the Market and the State or between Government and Civil Soci - ety is a conceptual trap arising from overly rigid disci - plinary walls surrounding the study of human institu - tions , I am delighted to be considered a radical . If try - ing to remove artificial walls surrounding disciplines is offensive , I regret assailing individual senses of pro - priety . I proceed on the assumption that contrived walls separating analysis of potentially synergetic into separate parts miss the potential for synergy ( see V . Ostrom , 1995 ) . By developing more fully the theory of coproduction and its relevance to the study of synergy and development , I hope to change the views of social scientists toward the hypo - thetical “Great Divide . “’ My own approach to breaching the great divide uti - lizes the concept of “coproduction . ” By coproduction , I mean the process through which inputs used to pro - duce a good or service are contributed by individuals who are not “in” the same organization . The “regular” producer of education , health , or infrastructure ser - vices is most frequently a government agency . Whether the regular producer is the only producer of these goods and services depends both on the nature of the good or service itself and on the incentives that encourage the active participation of others . All public goods and services are potentially produced by the regular producer and by those who are frequently referred to as the client . The term “client” is a passive term . Clients are acted upon . Coproduction implies that citizens can play an active role in producing pub - lic goods and services of consequence to them . To provide grist for the discussion of coproduction * The author wishes to thank Robert Putnam for his energetic intellectual , and entrepreneurial leadership of the Social Cap - ital and Public Affairs Project and Peter Evans for his simi - larly skilled leadership of the Economic Development Work - ing Group and for his comments on the fast draft of this paper . The author is appreciative of the materials made avail - able by , and useful comments of , N . Vijay Jagannathan of the World Bank , about condominial systems and other water user organizations ; and of the time and generous help extended by many public officials and local villagers while the author was in Nigeria during the summer of 1991 . Mark Granovetter and Michael Lipsky provided insightful and useful comments on earlier papers . George Varughese and Patty Dale & i both greatly improved the readability of this manuscript . Financial support from the Ford Foundation ( Grant 920 - 070 1 ) is grate - fully acknowledged . 1073