Abstract – This article addresses the emerging focus on the purposeful creation of candidate technologies for disruptive innovation . Based on the exploratory case study of Sony’s creation of transistor radio , combined with the extant literature , the constructs key to the creation of technologies for disruptive innovation have been identified in 4 propositions . The case study also indicates that the R & D leading to the creation of disruptive technologies could indeed be extremely challenging and suitable as agenda for use - inspired upstream research . Keywords – Disruptive Technology , Transistor Radio I . INTRODUCTION Disruptive Innovation ( DI ) has become a popular topic of great importance for both research and practice because it has demonstrated the beauty of how seemingly inferior technologies could eventually topple a large incumbent firm . However , this “initial inferior” characteristic has also given rise to the misperception that it was not technologically challenging . Yet , little of the extant literature has discussed the purposeful creation of DI [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] . This article is devoted to understand how a disruptive innovation , the shirt - portable transistor radio , was created by Sony with great determination to overcome overwhelming technological challenges . This revelatory case is aimed to stimulate insights on how a company may create technologies for disruptive innovation by purpose rather than by chance . II . METHODOLOGY The case study method allows investigators to retain the holistic and meaningful characteristics of real - life events [ 4 ] [ 5 ] . It contributes to the understanding of causation more than correlation . Also given the lack of prior research , qualitative case study is appropriate in this nascent stage [ 6 ] . The case of Sony transistor radio is nominated because it is a suitable case to correct the misinterpretation that DI is always simple and not technologically challenging . Moreover , the rich content helped us to generate several insights on purposeful creation of DI . A substantial amount of archive was freely available in public websites as well as company publications . Well documented over 50 years , they were objective and provided the details of the story from various angles , thus forming archival data which serve as the primary data that are complemented by interviews . III . TRANSISTOR AS A DISRUPTIVE TECHNOLOGY Nowadays , for most purposes , the vacuum tube has been replaced by the much smaller , less power - hungry , and less expensive transistor in many applications . However , in what way or ways did it constitute a disruptive technology ? This section will demonstrate the disruption by the theoretical framework of Disruptive Innovation in terms of trajectory diagram , key constructs comparison and value networks . According to the dominant metrics of radio performance in the mainstream market , these early transistor radios were really bad , offering far lower fidelity and much more static than the vacuum tube - based tabletop radios that were the dominant design of the time [ 7 ] . These transistors could not handle the power required to be used in the mainstream market such as application in tabletop radios and big floor - standing televisions . But if these deficiencies could be overcome , the transistors could be the successors to vacuum tubes which had the problem of being bulky , creating lots of heat and so on . Most of the leading electronics companies such as RCA , GE , and Westinghouse regarded transistors as potentially new radical technology which would help them to sustain their main electronics business . They focused their R & D on improving the sound quality and fidelity of transistors . They invested as a group , in today’s US dollars , between 1 and 2 billion trying to make the transistor good enough to be used in mainstream market but did not achieve influential commercial success after 10 years of intensive R & D effort . SONY , being a small company then , did not have the similar resources to pursue radical technology development . But it discovered a new market composed of teenagers that valued the attributes of the pocketability of transistor radio based on much smaller transistors compared with vacuum tubes . It enabled teenagers to do something that they could not do before—listen to rock ' n ' roll out of their parents ' earshot , though the music quality could not compete with tabletop vacuum tube radios [ 8 ] [ 9 ] . Hence the inferior transistor radio that the mainstream customers disliked found customers who were non - consumers in the past . The typical trajectories pursued by both large incumbents and Sony on how to improve and apply the transistor technology are illustrated in Fig . 1 . The accumulative profit from transistor radio provided strong financial support to further improve technical performance of transistors . SONY later Creating Candidate Technologies for Disruptive Innovation : A case study approach D . Yu 1 , C . C . Hang 2 1 , 2 Division of Engineering and Technology Management , Faculty of Engineering , National University of Singapore , Singapore yudan @ nus . edu . sg 978 - 1 - 4244 - 2330 - 9 / 08 / $ 25 . 00 ©2008 IEEE 65 introduced its first portable television in 1960 thus making another successful disruption . Fig . 1 Sony pursued the new - market disruptive path 1 The success of portable radios caused no pain to the leading electronics incumbents because they did not lose their existing customer base . As can be seen from the feedback of leaders of incumbent firms , they still aimed to meliorate transistors until it could substitute vacuum tubes in established applications which they considered as creativity and innovation , and even for the transistor based radios , they despised the miniaturization of Japanese radios as fad . In the late 1950s , an optimistic Westinghouse executive , C . J . Urban put it like this : “ We can meet foreign competition with innovation and creativity . ” Benjamin Abrams , Emerson’s founder and president , was even more upbeat , predicting in mid - 1959 that “ the Japanese import will kill itself off and disappear—within the next 12 months we will see a material decline in Japanese imports . ” They ignored the potential threat from Japanese miniaturized portables and continued to improve transistor with premium sound quality targeted largely at the mainstream home applications [ 10 ] . However , in 1965 , the transistors gradually became good enough in terms of sound quality and power requirement in big machines , so within 3 years all the customers got sucked out of the vacuum tube plane into the transistor plane [ 11 ] . These large incumbents just vaporized overnight . The disruption process can be summarized in Table 1 . The value network comparison is shown in Fig . 2 . The black and grey curves represent the S - curves of vacuum tube based and transistor based radios separately . The market was experiencing a shift in value networks from sound quality and fidelity to pocketability and low price . 1 The first new market application of the transistor was in hearing aids around 1952 , which happened to value the very low power consumption and less than one - tenth the cost of the tube models of hearing aids , but the hearing aids market was NOT the target of Sony . Transistor radios emerged and progressed on uniquely defined trajectories ( the grey curve in Fig . 2b ) in the value network of price and pocketability ( Fig . 2b ) until they could satisfy the performance demanded in the value network of sound quality and fidelity ( Fig . 2a ) , although performance was still inferior than vacuum tube based radios . At this point , they would begin to penetrate the established value network ( Fig . 2a ) and displace vacuum tube based radios . TABLE I THE MAJOR ELEMENTS IN THE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION OF TRANSISTOR RADIO COMPANIES Disruptee : RCA / GE / Westinghouse Disruptor : Sony TECHNOLOGIES Existing technology : Vacuum tube based radio Emerging technology : Transistor based pocketable radio ADVANTAGES IN TECHNICAL ATTRIBUTES ( when transistor was introduced in 1950s ) Primary / key attributes that mainstream historically valued : Sound Quality ; Fidelity Secondary / new attributes that mainstream ignored : miniaturized ; low - cost ; less power hungry . MARKET Existing market : Customers of Tabletop radios , floor - standing televisions etc , adults New market : Teenagers who like to listen to rock ‘n’ roll TIME OF DISRUPTION 1965—1968 Fig . 2 Comparison of value networks IV . FINDINGS In this case study , it has been found that Sony had to overcome tremendous technical challenges to create transistor radios ahead of potential competitors . They are summarized in this section under 4 sub - headings . The key managerial characteristics underpin their ability to create disruptive innovation is also discussed . A . No transistor technology available in the US Time Portable TVs Pocket radios PPeerrffoorrmmaannccee tthhaatt mmaaiinnssttrreeaamm ccuussttoommeerrss ccaannuuttiilliizzeePath taken by Established Vacuum tube Manufacturers Sound Quality Time Time Market for vacuum tube based radios S ound Q u a lit y a nd F i d e lit y Market for transistor based pocketable radios Fig . 2a Value network of Sound quality and Fidelity Major Established Electronics Markets : Tabletop radios , floor - standing televisions , computers , telecomm . equipment , etc . RRCCAA / / GGEE / / WWeessttiinngghhoouussee ppuurrssuueedd eexxiissttiinngg ttrraajjeeccttoorryy ttoo rreeppllaaccee vvaaccuuuumm ttuubbee wwiitthh ttrraannssiissttoorr bbuutt nnoo ccoommmmeerrcciiaall ssuucccceessss P r i ce a nd po c k e t a b ilit y Fig . 2b Value network of Price and Pocketability Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE ICMIT 66 In the early 1952 , Ibuka , the founder of Sony , convinced Bell Labs to license the transistor patent to his Japanese company . While most American companies were researching the transistor for high - end military applications , Ibuka envisioned applying it to communications . When he went to the Ministry of International Trade and Industry 2 ( MITI ) of Japan to obtain a license for manufacturing the transistor , MITI gave a point - blank refusal : “ Transistor cannot be produced so easily ” and they questioned how such a small factory could produce such a complex thing as the transistor [ 8 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] . Furthermore , in the harsh economy after World War II when Japan was just beginning to accelerate its recovery from the war , foreign currency was so scarce in Japan that MITI was not eager to grant permission [ 13 ] . Ibuka was eloquent on the possible uses of this little - known device , and it took him six months to convince the bureaucrats . Finally in August 1953 , Morita , the co - founder of Sony , visited Western Electric and signed a provisional agreement contingent upon MITI’s approval . This Totsuko 3 - WE agreement did not cover technology , but only the rights to manufacture the transistor [ 12 ] . According to Morita , “ I must make it clear that the transistor … was not something that we could license and produce and use right off the shelf” , “ This solid - state device was something completely new to our experience ” , “developing the transistor for our use would be a job that would challenge the skills of all the engineers in our company ” [ 8 ] . Not only MITI , even Ibuka’s old friend questioned him : “ Even in the U . S . transistors are used only for defense purposes where money is not object . Even if you come out with a consumer product using transistors , who can afford to buy a machine with such expensive devices ? ” [ 14 ] . The transistor was not available to be applied in any market except hearing aids at that time and Sony did not have the technological know - how in transistors . Bearing the skeptical eyes of MITI and the warning from friends , Ibuka set a firm R & D goal to pursue the project of developing an affordable and pocketable transistor radio . B . Material science challenge The early transistor invented in Bell Labs used a slab of germanium , the negative part , to which indium , the positive part , was alloyed on each side . After a period of intensive analysis , the Sony team reasoned that since negative electrons moved faster than positive ones , they could get higher frequency by reversing the polarity . That meant replacing the positive - negative - positive configuration to negative - positive - negative , but they 2 In post war Japan , the real power resides in two government agencies : The Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of International Trade and Industry ( MITI ) . MITI decides which industries will be targeted for future growth , which companies will have access to foreign currency and technology , and which goods will be protected by tariffs’ and red tape from imports 3 Totsuko was the precursor of Sony before 1958 . could not find the right material . Indium had too low a melting point for their purpose , so they began experiments using gallium and antimony , but it didn’t work well either . At one point , everyone seemed stumped and they thought of using phosphorus to replace antimony . Unfortunately , they found that Bell labs had already tried this approach and failed . As Morita said , “ It was very complicated work , and our project team went through a long period of painstaking trial and error , using new , or at least different , materials to get the increased frequency we needed . ” They even had to rebuild and virtually reinvented the transistor . Nevertheless , one team kept trying what was called phosphorus doping method , using more and more phosphorus in the process and finally succeeded at the end that greatly shocked the Bell labs scientists . C . Miniaturization challenge In order to fit the transistor and other electronics components into their small radio , they needed to miniaturize almost everything such as the capacitor , the loudspeaker , the inductor , the transformer , the condensers , the micro - speakers and even the batteries . At that time , most of the components were produced by subcontractors . Sony could not purchase the components readily from the market because most Japanese manufacturers produced radio components that copied both the design and size of those made in US . Finding or designing other parts small enough to fit together was not easy at all . Ibuka went around to every individual component manufacturer and persuaded them to start to miniaturize every component from scratch and that was the major driver for a prosperous electronic industry in Japan since then . Therefore , the French daily paper , Le Figaro described Mr . Ibuka as the father of the Japanese post war industrialization . Meanwhile , they designed and made the Printed Circuit Board ( PCB ) by themselves and eventually it became SONY Chemical Engineering Company that is very profitable subsequently [ 13 ] . In pursuit of miniaturization and compactness , the world’s first real shirt - potable transistor radio was introduced by SONY in March 1957 , by the model name of TR - 63 . It was made with an all new imaginative design with many purpose - built miniature components ( e . g . its microscopic solid dielectric variable capacitor ) . D . Cost reduction challenge In the nascent stage of commercial transistors , they were very expensive , with an average price in late 1953 of around US $ 8 each , whereas an ordinary vacuum tube for radios was less than US $ 1 [ 10 ] . Hence , how to develop the mass - produced capability of transistor to make low cost but better yield production were questions very tough to address . With an attempt to meet the challenge , first of all , Sony employed cheap labor instead of high - tech manufacturing operations . Luckily , the Japanese labor costs in the late fifties were about one - seventh of those in Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE ICMIT 67 the United States . Hence , the portable transistor radios of Sony could be cheaper than their counterparts of US competitors . However , the postwar Japanese could not afford the transistor radios produced by Sony even after Sony tried its best to reduce the cost . They hence strategically set the American market as their first target , because the success in selling a high - tech consumer product to people in the world’s mightiest industrial nation would be a significant coup [ 10 ] [ 13 ] . The purchasing power and the scale of the niche market laid a solid foundation for further penetration of transistor radios . The international market perspective was a key enabling factor for Sony’s success . E . Key roles played by core team members A glance at the key members of the transistor development project could also help us to identify the key managerial characteristics underpin their ability to create disruptive innovation . ( 1 ) Dr . Leo Esaki and his colleagues discovered and described the diode tunneling effect , thus he was awarded a Nobel Prize in 1973 as we all know [ 8 ] [ 13 ] . However , few people might notice that the process using more phosphorus was sentenced to death by Bell Labs before their intensive experiments at Sony . As the head of Sony research laboratories , Makoto Kikuchi recalled in those days the level of research and engineering in the US was so high that “ the voice of Bell Labs was like the voice of God ” [ 8 ] . Esaki dared to challenge the authority and tried to think out of the box . ( 2 ) Akio Morita , with a deep technical background , could understand and support the technical R & D needed to improve the transistor . He played a critical role in financing the project . Although he agreed with Ibuka to go into this unknown field , SONY as a small company did not have sufficient credit finance [ 13 ] . He spent a very hard time selling and marketing the new product . He was the marketing champion in Sony’s serial disruptive innovations from transistor radio to Walkman . ( 3 ) Masaru Ibuka nicknamed “genius inventor” , was instrumental in securing the licensing of transistor patent to Sony from Bell labs in the 1950s , thus making Sony one of the first companies to use transistor in non - military areas . Morita told the public , “ I always trusted him ( Ibuka ) absolutely—even when there was little more than a dream to build on . He has a great genius for innovation ” [ 15 ] . Without explicit market demands , without methods of manufacturing transistor radios , without support from MITI or friends , Ibuka had the courage to set a visionary R & D goal for Sony to aim for low cost while maintaining adequate performance at the very early stage of a science / engineering breakthrough . ( 4 ) Kazuo Iwama volunteered to head the transistor team . At that time , Western Electric did not provide specifications for the manufacturing equipments . He learnt everything from the plant tours . Based on his prodigious reports and Transistor Technology , the team managed to start making transistors and just in half a year , they had begun to build a transistor radio prototype [ 12 ] . Iwama was a scientist who knew the scientific mind ; so he encouraged the research team to add more phosphorus to see further results . The phosphorus method eventually worked , expanding on which Sony developed the high - frequency device they needed . ( 5 ) Much of the credit of the TR - 55 must go to the sterling efforts of Junichi Yasuda , the electric engineer and his circuit designers . The early transistors’ yield still left much room for improvement , and their characteristics remained uneven . This was where Yasuda’s team came into play . At that time radio circuits were of the superheterodyne type . The team made as many as 12 different varieties of these local oscillator coils in an attempt to reduce the spread of characteristics . Apart from the circuits , TR - 55 was ahead of its time in that it used a Printed Circuit Board ( PCB ) . Although today we take PCB for granted , a large amount of research and improvement went into its design in those early days . Yasuda’s pioneering team had to do everything on its own . Led by these capable men , Sony did manage to bring shirt - portable radios into huge success , a record of less than 10 years after the invention of a basic device ( which was a Nobel Prize level of breakthrough ) . The contributions of the core team members are summarized in Table 2 . TABLE II CONTRIBUTIONS BY CORE TEAM MEMBERS OF TRANSISTOR PROJECT NAME POSITION CONTRIBUTION IMPLICATIONS Leo Esaki Physicist Discover and describe diode tunneling effect , Nobel Prize winner Technical talent , has the risk - taking courage to challenge authority and think out of box Akio Morita Co - Founder Finance the project , marketing champion Companies are in urgent needs of marketing champions such as Morita who has the tacit wisdom on how to create disruptive technologies in advance . Masaru Ibuka President Obtain the license , set up the mission Set counter - intuitive R & D goal to aim for low cost while maintaining adequate performance at the very early stage of a science / engineering breakthrough , and lead the team with shared vision Kazuo Iwama Project leader Responsible for R & D of this project , send prodigious reports and principles of transistor technology back to Sony Inter - disciplinary talent , experienced manager who knew the scientific mind . Junichi Yasuda Electric engineer Design twelve different varieties of local oscillator coils . Design PCB all by them . Technical talent , very creative and innovative . Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE ICMIT 68 V . DISCUSSION The revisit of the transistor radio R & D has provided some insights into how disruptive technologies were created in Sony in the past . Several important lessons could be learnt and are discussed as follows : The low cost was obviously the critical factor in Sony’s conquest of transistor based portable radios . Ibuka once said to Morita “ Let’s make transistors for a radio which anyone can afford to buy ” [ 12 ] . From the beginning , they already set the low - cost target to the needs of low - end segment of customers . The consideration of low – end segment contributed to not only Sony’s disruption against incumbents of vacuum tube based radios , but also success in the competition with US producers of transistor radios 4 . Another impressive finding is that Sony was very smart to make R & D efforts in technologies which can provide new values to compete against nonconsumption . Ibuka clearly stated the vision of the new company : “ We shall maintain our business operations small , advance technologically and grow in areas where large enterprises cannot enter due to their size ” [ 17 ] . From mainstream customers’ perspective , Consumer Reports remarked on the early transistor radios’ poor tone quality , unpleasant distortion at high volume , low power output , and excessive background noise [ 12 ] . If Sony attempted to improve their radios in these performance aspects , it would have no difference from other U . S . producers . By competing against nonconsumption , Sony set a more practical technical hurdle for itself : The product just had to be good enough in order to find delighted emerging customers who appreciate new values but with low purchasing power . It has been tested that emerging customer orientation will favor the disruptiveness of innovation [ 19 ] . The focal case has further proved the hypothesis . Further research argued that the mainstream customer orientation and the emerging customer orientation are not on opposite ends of a continuum but are independent of each other , suggesting that firms can develop both orientations simultaneously [ 20 ] [ 21 ] . In fact , Sony was engaged to satisfy their existing customers of tape recorders while targeting at emerging opportunities in teenagers’ pocket . The business of transistor radio was not growing at the expense of recorder business [ 8 ] [ 12 ] . This leads to the first proposition . Proposition 1 : Diversified customer orientation is viable and positively related to creating technologies for disruptive innovation . We have also found that a consistent and compelling vision , incessantly communicated by a company’s senior 4 The leading companies in U . S . such as Zenith mounted an aggressive all - American campaign , targeting two shirt - pocket models at teenagers in 1960s ; however , their prices were still uncompetitive and by the end of 1963 , no all - American sets survived . team , is crucial in developing disruptive innovation of this nature . In fact , on October 18 , 1954 , the Regency TR - 1 , the world’s first transistor radio was put on the market [ 12 ] . At that time , Sony was close to manufacturing its first radios when it heard that an American company had beaten them to the punch . But they kept up the hard work and eventually produced a radio they named TR - 55 . However , TR - 1 and earliest models of Sony such as TR - 55 and TR - 72 had failed to create considerable success [ 16 ] . Buried in meditation for some time , Sony decided to speed up the miniaturization process and their work finally paid off with the world’s first pocket transistor radio TR - 63 1 year later . They consistently pursued their vision and never gave up , even behind their US competitors , even failed in the commercialization of the first few products , even with doubts from MITI and Ibuka’s friend whose view was dominant in his profession , and even with many trials and errors in material challenges . Hence , we propose that Proposition 2 : A consistent and compelling vision to inspire emotional commitment provides major foundation for creating technologies for disruptive innovation . We could not overemphasize that disruptive technological innovation may require an international perspective . Sony , as a Japanese brand locating their battlefront of shirt - portable transistor radios in U . S . has its own wisdom . Even they have tried their best to minimize the cost ; the price could be very expensive in the eyes of post - war Japanese . However , compared with US equivalents , the Japanese transistor radios were very competitive in terms of price , which enabled its success in the niche market of American teenagers . One recent paper has carefully studied how the international context was actually present in the process of disruptive innovation development and indicated that both the degree and international scope matter [ 18 ] . Combined with the focal case , it leads to Proposition 3 . Proposition 3 : International market perspective at the beginning increases the likelihood of firm’s success in niche market , thus contributing to creating technologies for disruptive innovations . As can be seen in Table 2 , the leading team was composed of risk - takers with diversified capabilities in technology , management and marketing . They were creative and determined on a coherent vision . A doctoral study on I - mode disruptive innovation in NTT DoCoMo has found similar characteristics of team members in the creation of disruptive technology [ 22 ] . Proposition 4 : A development team with characteristics such as shared vision , risk - taking courage , diversified capabilities , creativity , and determination increase the likelihood of creating technologies for disruptive innovation . Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE ICMIT 69 Because of the initial inferior performance and emergence in relatively insignificant markets , technologies in disruptive innovation could be disregarded as not very challenging . However , the above case study has given strong evidence that they might not be as simple as incremental R & D as they were indeed discontinuous . Generally speaking , the R & D leading to the creation of disruptive technologies could indeed be extremely challenging and suitable as agenda for use - inspired upstream research in companies as well as universities , especially if they are based on new scientific discoveries . Companies are therefore advised to pay attention to the significant technological challenges in disruptive innovation , in addition to dimensions of business model and leadership . Starting with transistor radio , Sony has established the unique competencies in transistor - related technologies and miniaturization . In the following years , they produced a steady miniaturization of today’s typical range of consumer electronic products : transistor TV , walkman , videotape recorder , home - use video cassette recorder , 3 . 5 - inch floppy disk , CD player , 8 - mm video , Mavica , MiniDisk , digital VCR and flat - screen TV . By creating disruptive technologies ahead of competitors , the company could command a substantial lead to sustain competitive advantages . VI . CONCLUSION As a whole , the focal case study has indicated that creating candidate technology for potential disruptive innovation is a worthwhile research direction , not only to fill the gap in theory , but also to satisfy the industrial needs to create new growth and to sustain competitive advantages . Sony has unconsciously pursued the disruptive path and with appropriate creations of new technologies for disruptive innovation , Sony made a series of successful disruption and became one of the world’s largest electronics conglomerates . Four preliminary propositions on how to deliberately create technologies for disruptive innovation have been brought forward for further validation . The case discussion also shows that disruptive technologies , in some cases , could demand significant efforts and skills . Indeed , creation of disruptive technologies is suitable to be set as an agenda for upstream research in industrial labs as well as in universities . However , the single case study , though complemented by extant literature , cannot clearly detach case specific elements from general elements . Further validation of the propositions with more cases is encouraged . For example , comparative studies among multiple cases , including both success and failure , can find general and necessary elements to the creation of disruptive innovation . REFERENCES [ 1 ] D . Yu , and C . C . Hang , “A reflective review of disruptive innovation theory” , Proc . of PICMET 2008 " Technology Management for a Sustainable Economy " , Cape Town , South Africa , 2008 , in press . [ 2 ] R . N . Kostoff , R . Boylan and G . R . Simons , “Disruptive technology roadmaps” , Technological Forecasting and Social Change , vol . 71 , 2004 , pp . 141 - 159 . [ 3 ] S . T . Walsh , “Roadmapping a disruptive technology : A case study the emerging Microsystems and top - down nanosystems industry” , Technological forecasting & Social Change , vol . 71 , 2004 , pp . 161 - 185 . [ 4 ] R . K . Yin , Case study research design and methods , 3rd edition , Sage Publications , 2003 . [ 5 ] K . Eisenhardt , “Theory Building From Cases : Opportunities and Challenges” , Academy of Management Journal , vol . 50 , no . 1 , pp . 25 - 32 , 2007 . [ 6 ] A . C . Edmondson and S . E . McManus , “Methodological fit in organizational field research” , Harvard Business School , working paper , May , 2004 . [ 7 ] C . M . Christensen , Th e innovator’s dilemma , Harper Business , 1997 , pp . 201 - 202 [ 8 ] A . Morita Made in Japan , Plume Books , 1987 . [ 9 ] “Sony Corporation” , Retrieved 15 / 03 / 08 , WWW , http : / / brands - history . info / ? page _ id = 4 [ 10 ] M . B . Schiffer , The Portable Radio in American Life , Tucson : University of Arizona Press , c1991 . [ 11 ] C . M . Christensen , “Capturing the Upside” , IT conversation , Retrieved 30 / 07 / 07 , WWW , http : / / www . itconversations . com / transcripts / 135 / transcript - print135 - 1 . html [ 12 ] Genryu , Sony Challenges 1940 - 1968 , Sony Corporation , 1988 . [ 13 ] Interview with Dr Y . Kaneda , who was a former Executive Deputy President and Representative Director of Sony , 18 / 04 / 2007 . [ 14 ] “Rest Assured We Can Make it” , Sony Corporation , Retrieved 10 / 03 / 08 , WWW , http : / / www . sony . net / Fun / SH / 1 - 4 / h6 . html [ 15 ] N . Lyons , The Sony Vision , Crown Publisher , NY , 1976 . [ 16 ] N . R . Smith , Transistor Radio : 1954 - 1968 , Schiffer Publishing , 1998 . [ 17 ] Y . Hara , “Sony , electronics ordered ‘to go’” , EETIMES online , Retrieved 15 / 03 / 08 , WWW , http : / / www . eetimes . com / pecial / special _ issues / millennium / c ompanies / sony . html [ 18 ] B . Sandberg and S . Hansen , “Creating an international market for disruptive innovations” , European Journal of Innovation Management , vol . 7 , no . 1 , 2004 , pp . 23 - 32 . [ 19 ] V . Govindarajan and P . K . Kopalle , “How legacy firms can introduce radical and disruptive innovations : theoretical and empirical analyses” , Academy of Management Best conference paper , 2004 . [ 20 ] J . C . Narver , S . F . Slater and D . L . MacLachlan , “Responsive and Proactive Market Orientation and New Product Success” , Journal of Product Innovation Management , vol 21 , iss . 5 , 2004 , pp . 334 - 347 . [ 21 ] S . Slater and J . Mohr , “Successful Development and Commercialization of Technological Innovation : Insights Based on Strategy Type” , Journal of Product Innovation Management , vol . 23 , 2006 , pp . 26 - 33 [ 22 ] E . M . Murase , “Keitai Boomu : The case of NTT DOCOMO and innovation in the wireless internet in Japan” , Ph . D . dissertation , Dept . of Communication , Stanford University , U . S . 2003 . Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE ICMIT 70