Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 15 , 3433 – 3449 , July 2004 LIMK1 Regulates Golgi Dynamics , Trafﬁc of Golgi - derived Vesicles , and Process Extension in Primary Cultured Neurons □ D Silvana Rosso , * † Flavia Bollati , * † Mariano Bisbal , * Diego Peretti , * Tomoyuki Sumi , ‡ Toshikazu Nakamura , ‡ Santiago Quiroga , § Adriana Ferreira , (cid:2) and Alfredo Ca´ceres * ¶ * Instituto Investigacion Medica Mercedes y Martin Ferreya - CONICET - Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cientı´ﬁcas y Te´cnicas , 5000 Cordoba , Argentina ; ‡ Division of Biochemistry , Osaka University Medical School , Osaka 565 - 0871 , Japan ; § Centro Investigacion Quimica Biologica Cordoba - CONICET - Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cientı´ﬁcas y Te´cnicas , 5000 Cordoba , Argentina ; and (cid:3) Institute for Neuroscience and Department of Cell and Molecular Biology , Northwestern University , Chicago , Illinois 60611 Submitted May 23 , 2003 ; Revised March 30 , 2004 ; Accepted April 9 , 2004 Monitoring Editor : Anne Ridley In this study , we examined the subcellular distribution and functions of LIMK1 in developing neurons . Confocal microscopy , subcellular fractionation , and expression of several epitope - tagged LIMK1 constructs revealed that LIMK1 is enriched in the Golgi apparatus and growth cones , with the LIM domain required for Golgi localization and the PDZ domain for its presence at neuritic tips . Overexpression of wild - type LIMK1 suppresses the formation of trans - Golgi derived tubules , and prevents cytochalasin D - induced Golgi fragmentation , whereas that of a kinase - defective mutant has the opposite effect . Transfection of wild - type LIMK1 accelerates axon formation and enhances the accumulation of Par3 / Par6 , insulin - like growth factor ( IGF ) 1 receptors , and neural cell adhesion molecule ( NCAM ) at growth cones , while inhibiting the Golgi export of synaptophysin - containing vesicles . These effects were dependent on the Golgi localization of LIMK1 , paralleled by an increase in coﬁlin phosphorylation and phalloidin staining in the region of the Golgi apparatus , and prevented by coexpression of constitutive active coﬁlin . The long - term overexpression of LIMK1 produces growth cone collapse and axon retraction , an effect that is dependent on its growth cone localization . Together , our results suggest an important role for LIMK1 in axon formation that is related with its ability to regulate Golgi dynamics , membrane trafﬁc , and actin cytoskeletal organization . INTRODUCTION During recent years , a growing body of evidence has accu - mulated suggesting that the actin cytoskeleton has a crucial role in regulating axon formation ( Bradke and Dotti , 1999 ) . In particular , signaling pathways that include the small GTPases of the Rho / Rac / Cdc42 superfamily ( Bishop and Hall , 2000 ) have been shown to be important for actin reor - ganization and dynamics during neuronal polarization ( Bradke and Dotti , 1999 ; Kunda et al . , 2001 ) . Among the downstream effectors of these GTPases are proteins that directly regulate actin turnover , such as the actin - depoly - merizing factor ( ADF ) and coﬁlin ( Bamburg , 1999 ; Sarmiere and Bamburg , 2004 ) . They are abundant in neuronal growth cones ( Bamburg and Bray , 1987 ; Khun et al . , 2000 ) where the regulation of actin dynamics is essential for axon outgrowth ( Bradke and Dotti , 1999 ; Kunda et al . , 2001 ) ; not surprisingly , overexpression of ADF - coﬁlin enhances neurite outgrowth and growth cone motility in developing neurons ( Meberg et al . , 1998 ; Meberg and Bamburg , 2000 ) . Recently , in vivo and in vitro studies have demonstrated that ADF - coﬁlin is a substrate of a novel family of kinases , designated as LIMKs . Phosphorylation of ADF - coﬁlin at a single site ( ser 3 ) by LIMKs inhibits its binding to actin monomers and its actin - depolymerizing activity ( Arber et al . , 1998 ; Yang et al . , 1998 ; Sumi et al . , 1999 ) . The LIMK family of serine - threonine kinases is composed of two major mem - bers , one of which , LIMK1 is predominantly expressed in the nervous system ( Proschel et al . , 1995 ) . Because deletion of the region coding for the LIMK1 gene induces nervous system impairment , resulting in Williams syndrome ( Belluji et al . , 1999 ) , this protein may be critically involved in brain function . In favor of this , it has recently been showed that LIMK1 knockout mice exhibit a signiﬁcant reduction in the amount of phosphorylated ADF - coﬁlin in brain slices , as well as alterations in spine morphology , and in synaptic function , including enhanced long - term potentiation ( Meng et al . , 2002 ) . Unfortunately , up to present a clear picture regarding the role of LIMK1 in neuronal development has not yet emerged . For example , although the complexity of dendritic branches from cultured hippocampal pyramidal neurons obtained from LIMK1 (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice was similar to that Article published online ahead of print . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 . 1091 / mbc . E03 – 05 – 0328 . Article and publication date are available at www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E03 – 05 – 0328 . □ D Online version of this article contains supporting material . Online version is available at www . molbiolcell . org . † These authors contributed equally to this study . ¶ Corresponding author . E - mail address : acaceres @ immf . uncor . edu . © 2004 by The American Society for Cell Biology 3433 http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / content / suppl / 2004 / 04 / 16 / E03 - 05 - 0328 . DC1 . html Supplemental Material can be found at : of wild - type neurons , the LIMK1 - deﬁcient neurons display a dramatic reduction in growth cone size and signiﬁcant al - terations in actin organization . Also , although phosphoryla - tion of coﬁlin by LIMK1 is necessary for semaphorin 3A - induced growth cone collapse in dorsal root ganglion ( DRG ) cells , overexpression of constitutively active LIMK1 or dom - inant - negative LIM - kinase has been reported to have either little effect on neurite outgrowth ( Aizawa et al . , 2001 ) or to reduce growth cone size or repress growth cone motility and neurite extension ( Endo et al . , 2003 ) . Inhibition of neurite extension by overexpression of individual domains of LIMK1 also has been reported in PC12 cells ( Birkenfeld et al . , 2001 ) . Therefore , to obtain additional information about the role of LIMK1 during neuronal development , and particularly during axon formation , we have now used a series of re - combinant constructs to overexpress LIMK1 or its mutants in cultured hippocampal pyramidal neurons and analyze effects on its subcellular distribution , process formation , and cytoskeletal organization . The results obtained provide evi - dence about a novel subcellular localization of LIMK1 , namely , the Golgi apparatus . More importantly , we show that in developing neurons LIMK1 regulates Golgi dynamics and that its presence within the Golgi apparatus is impor - tant for promoting axon outgrowth and the delivery to growth cones of proteins ( e . g . , Par3 / Par6 ; Shi et al . , 2003 ) critically involved in the development of neuronal polarity . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell Culture Dissociated cultures of hippocampal pyramidal cells from embryonic rat brain tissue were prepared as described previously ( Kunda et al . , 2001 ) . All cultures were maintained in a humidiﬁed 37°C incubator with 5 % CO 2 . For some experiments , Jasplakinolide ( Jasp ; Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide and added to the cultures at concentration ranging from 5 to 50 nM . In other cases cytochalasin D was added to the cultures at a ﬁnal concentration of 1 (cid:1) M . Expression Plasmids and Transfection Expression plasmids for hemagglutinin ( HA ) - tagged LIMK1 and their mu - tants were constructed as described previously ( Sumi et al . , 1999 ) . To generate plasmids encoding (cid:2) LIM ( 147 – 547 amino acids ) and (cid:2) N ( 338 – 647 amino acids ) mutants of wild - type or kinase dead LIMK1 , cDNA fragments were ampliﬁed by polymerase chain reaction , with the following primers : (cid:2) LIM : forward , 5 (cid:3) GCAAGCTTGCCATGATCGAACAGATCCTC3 (cid:3) , and the reverse primer designated as ( J ) 5 (cid:3) GCTCTAGACTCAGCGTAATCTGGAAC3 (cid:3) ; (cid:2) N : forward , 5 (cid:3) CCATGGACCTCAT - CCATGG3 (cid:3) , and the reverse primer ( J ) . PCR products were digested with Hind III and Xba I and ligated to Hind III - and Xba I - digested pcDNA3 o pRo / RsV vector ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . To generate plasmids encoding : (cid:2) PK ( 1 – 255 amino acids ) , HA - tagged LIMK1 cDNA was digested with Hind III and Xho I , and ligated to Hind III and Xho I - digested pcDNA3 / LIMK2 - HA to replace the original Hind III - Xho I fragment of LIMK2 cDNA with LIMK1 cDNA ; or (cid:2) PDZ - LIMK1 , HA - tagged LIMK1 cDNA was digested with Xho I and Sal I and ligated to Xho I and Sal I digested pcDNA3 . These expression plasmids also were inserted into pEF - BOS vector by using an Xba I linker . We also used 1 ) a plasmid ( pEYFP - N1 ; BD Biosciences Clontech , Palo Alto , CA ) containing the cDNA coding for the N - terminal domains ( cytosolic tail , transmembrane domain , and a few amino acids of the stem region ) of galactosyl - transferaseT2 fused to the N terminus of the enhanced yellow ﬂuorescent protein ( Giraudo et al . , 2001 ) ; 2 ) a plasmid ( p38 - EGFP ) containing the cDNA coding for p38 synaptophysin fused to the N terminus of the enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein ( Kaether et al . , 2000 ) ; 3 ) a plasmid ( NCAM - GFP ) containing the cDNA coding for the chicken neuro - nal cell adhesion molecule ( NCAM - 180 ) fused to the N terminus of enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein ( Musch et al . , 2001 ) ; 4 ) a plasmid containing the cDNA for rat Par3 ( a generous gift of Dr . T . Pawson , Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute , Mt . Sinai Hospital , Toronto , ON , Canada ) ; and 5 ) a plas - mid containing a cDNA coding for constitutively active mutant coﬁlin ( S3A mutant ) inwhichSer3wassubstitutedbyAlabyusingsite - directedmutagenesis ( Sumi et al . , 1999 ) . Transient transfection of cultured neurons was performed using either the modiﬁed calcium phosphate precipitation method described by Kunda etal . , ( 2001 ) orLipofectamine2000 ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad ) . Cellswerethen analyzed at different posttransfection intervals ranging from 12 to 36 h . Primary Antibodies The following primary antibodies were used in this study : a monoclonal antibody ( mAb ) against tyrosinated (cid:2) - tubulin ( clone TUB - 1A2 , mouse IgG ; Sigma - Aldrich , Louis , MO , or clone YL1 / 2 , rat IgG , provided by Dr . Geri Kreitzer , Cornell Medical College , Ithaca , NY ) diluted 1 : 1000 ; a mAb against the class III neuron - speciﬁc (cid:3) - tubulin isotype diluted 1 : 1000 ; a mAb against tau protein ( clone Tau - 1 ; Kunda et al . , 2001 ) diluted 1 / 100 ; afﬁnity - puriﬁed rabbit polyclonal antibodies raised against peptides corresponding to amino acid sequences mapping at either the amino or carboxy termini of LIMK1 of human origin ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Santa Cruz , CA ) diluted 1 : 100 or 1 : 500 ; a rabbit polyclonal antibody against phosphorylated ( Thr 501 ) LIMK1 ( Cell Signaling Technology , Beverly , MA ) diluted 1 : 50 ; an afﬁnity - puriﬁed rabbit polyclonal antibody against phosphorylated coﬁlin ( SER - 3 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) diluted 1 : 100 ; an afﬁnity - puriﬁed rabbit polyclonal antibody against nonphosphorylated coﬁlin ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) diluted 1 : 100 ; a rabbit polyclonal antibody against phosphorylated coﬁlin ( provided by Dr . James Bamburg , Colorado State University , Fort Collins , CO ; Meng and Bamburg , 2000 ) diluted 1 : 100 or 1 : 1000 ; a rabbit polyclonal antibody against Par3 ( Cell Signaling Technology ) diluted 1 : 50 ; a goat polyclonal antibody against Par6 ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) ; a rabbit polyclonal antibody against phospho - AKT ( p - AKT ; Cell Signaling Technology ) diluted 1 : 50 ; a rabbit polyclonal antibody against a (cid:3) - subunit of the IGF1 receptor ( (cid:3) - gc , Mascotti et al . , 1997 ) ; a rabbit polyclonal antibody against TrkB ( Santa Cruz Biotech - nology ) diluted 1 : 100 ; a mAb against mannosidase II ( provided by Dr . Carlos Dotti , European Molecular Biology Laboratory , Germany ) ; a rabbit polyclonal antibody against the inﬂuenza protein hemagglutinin ( HA , Y - 11 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) diluted 1 : 1000 ; and a mAb against HA ( clone F - 7 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) diluted 1 : 1000 . Immunoﬂuorescence Cells were ﬁxed before or after detergent extraction under microtubule - stabilizing conditions and processed for immunoﬂuorescence as described previously ( Kunda et al . , 2001 ) . For some experiments , and to visualize the rhodamine - phalloidin staining of the Golgi apparatus and the perinuclear region , cells were ﬁxed according to the procedure described by Nakata and Hirokawa , ( 1987 ; also see Paglini et al . , 1998 ) . The antibody staining protocol was as described previously ( Kunda et al . , 2001 ) , except that ﬁxation and staining for Par3 / Par6 or p - AKT were performed as described by Shi et al . ( 2003 ) and that cultures stained for phosphorylated LIMK1 were ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde - 4 % sucrose in Tris - saline ( pH 7 . 2 ) . The cells were analyzed with a Zeiss or Leica confocal scanning microscope and with a Zeiss inverted microscope equipped with epiﬂuorescence and differential interfer - ence contrast optics . The relative intensities of HA - tagged LIMK1 , or its mutants , as well as of tubulin , coﬁlin , phospho - coﬁlin , Par3 , and F - actin staining , were evaluated in ﬁxed unextracted cells or in detergent - extracted cytoskeletons by using quantitative ﬂuorescence techniques ( Paglini et al . , 1998 ) . Synaptophysin - GFP , NCAM - GFP , or Par3 ﬂuorescence intensities were quantiﬁed after ﬁxation in a deﬁned area ( 20 – 30 (cid:1) m in length ) at the proximal and distal ends of individual neurites . Images were collected using a charge - coupled device camera ( Orca 1000 ; Hamamatsu , Middlesex , NJ ) and Meta - Morph software ( Universal Imaging , West Chester , PA ) . Time - Lapse Videomicroscopy For time - lapse ﬂuorescence microscopy , transfected hippocampal pyramidal cells were cultured in special Petri dishes prepared according to the proce - dures described by Paglini et al . ( 1998 ) . In all cases , cells were observed using a 63 (cid:4) immersion objective . Images were collected using the charge - couple device camera and MetaMorph software . Subcellular Fractionation Techniques Fetal rat brain ( E18 ) was fractionated according to Pfenninger et al . , ( 1983 ) ( also see Paglini et al . , 1998 ) to obtain growth cone particles ( GCPs ) and Golgi membranes were prepared as described by Paglini et al . ( 2001 ) . Brieﬂy , total embryonic ( E19 ) microsomal membranes from rat cerebral cortex were ad - justed to 1 . 24 M sucrose and loaded at the bottom of a 32 - ml discontinuous sucrose gradient and centrifuged at 82 , 000 (cid:4) g for 3 h . Bands at the interface between 0 . 25 M / 0 . 86 M and 0 . 86 M / 1 . 14 M sucrose , which are enriched in Golgi elements , were collected and designated as Golgi light ( F1 ) and Golgi heavy ( F2 ) fractions . Fraction 1 . 24 was deﬁned as the residual microsomal fraction ( F3 ) . Sucrose density gradient centrifugation of microsomal fractions and immunoisolation of vesicles was as described by Peretti et al . ( 2000 ) . Western Blot Analysis of LIMK1 Protein Expression Changes in the levels of LIMK1 during neuronal development as well as subcellular fractions were analyzed by Western blotting as described previ - ously ( Kunda et al . , 2001 ) . Brieﬂy , equal amounts of samples were separated on SDS - PAGE and transferred to polyvinylidene diﬂuoride membranes in a Tris - glycine buffer , 20 % methanol . The ﬁlters were dried , washed several times with Tris - buffered saline ) and blocked fo r 1 h in TBScontaining 5 % bovine serum albumin . The ﬁlters were incubated fo r 1 h atroom temperature with the primary antibodies in TBS containing 1 % bovine serum albumin , and S . Rosso et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3434 then washed three times in TBS containing 0 . 05 % Tween 20 . They were then incubated with a secondary horseradish peroxidase - conjugated antibody for 1 h . After ﬁve washes with TBS and 0 . 05 % Tween 20 , the blots were developed using a chemiluminescence detection kit ( Amersham Biosciences UK , Little Chalfont , Buckinghamshire , United Kingdom ) . Morphometric Analysis of Neuronal Shape Parameters Images were digitized on a video monitor using MetaMorph software . To measure neurite length or growth cone shape parameters , antibody - labeled cells were randomly selected and traced from a video screen by using the morphometric menu of the MetaMorph ( Paglini et al . , 1998 ; Kunda et al . , 2001 ) . Differences among groups were analyzed by the use of analysis of variance and Student - Newman - Keuls test . RESULTS LIMK1 Localizes to the Golgi Apparatus and Growth Cones in Developing Neurons To begin analyzing the possible involvement of LIMK1 in the regulation of neuronal morphology , we ﬁrst examined its time course of expression in the developing brain and in cultured neurons . In the cerebral cortex and hippocampus , the expression of LIMK1 begins at late embryonic days , having a peak at the end of the second postnatal week ( Figure 1A , lanes 1 – 3 ) , which is then followed by a progres - sive decline until adulthood . A similar analysis performed with cell extracts obtained from cultured neurons revealed an increase in LIMK1 protein levels 24 h after plating , just at the time in which cells are beginning to extend axons ; after that time point , LIMK1 protein levels remain unchanged until the end of the second week in vitro when an additional and signiﬁcant increase is detected ( Fig . 1 A , lanes 4 – 8 ) . Next , we examined LIMK1 subcellular distribution by confocal ﬂuorescence microscopy in cultured hippocampal pyramidal neurons . In unpolarized cells , light LIMK1 im - munoﬂuorescence was found in the cell body , while in neurite - bearing cells a strong immunoﬂuorescence signal was detected in growth cones and in a region of the cell Figure 1 . Endogenous LIMK1 localizes to the Golgi ap - paratus and growth cones . ( A ) Western blots showing the time course of expression of LIMK1 in the cerebral cortex of developing rats ( lanes 1 – 3 ) and in cultured hippocampal pyramidal neurons ( lanes 4 – 8 ) ; (cid:3) - tubulin ( (cid:3) - Tub ) protein levels also are shown in samples obtained from cultured cells . Whole tissue extracts were obtained at embryonic day 18 ( E18 , lane 1 ) , postnatal day 5 ( P5 , lane 2 ) , and postnatal day 15 ( P15 , lane 3 ) . Cells tissue extracts were obtained 4 h ( lane 4 ) , 1 d ( lane 5 ) , 7 d ( lane 6 ) , 14 d ( lane 7 ) , and 21 d ( lane 8 ) after plating . 10 (cid:1) g of protein was loaded in each lane . ( B ) Confocal image showing the distribution of LIMK1 ( green ) and tubulin ( red ) in a cultured hip - pocampal pyramidal neuron . Note the intense labeling for LIMK1 in the perinuclear region ( short arrows ) and at growth cones ( long arrows ) ; staining is also detected in the nuclear region . ( C ) A high - power view of an adjacent confocal plane from the cell body region of the neuron shown in B . For this experiment , cultures were ﬁxed 3 d after plating and stained with a rabbit polyclonal antibody against LIMK1 diluted 1 / 100 ( 1 (cid:1) g / ml ) . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m ( A ) and 5 (cid:1) m ( B ) . ( D ) Western blots showing the enrichment of LIMK1 , c - src , and (cid:3) - gc in GCPs . H , whole tissue homog - enate . Ten micrograms of protein was loaded in each lane . ( D ) Western blots showing the distribution of LIMK1 and several other proteins in the low - speed supernatant ( LS ) and Golgi fractions ( F1 – F3 ) . Note that Golgi fractions are enriched in LIMK1 , coﬁlin ( Cof ) , and phospho - coﬁlin ( p - Cof ) . Note that there are no signiﬁcant increases in the levels of LIMK1 between Golgi fractions obtained from embryonic ( E ) or postnatal ( PN ) brains . Twenty micro - grams of protein was loaded in each lane , except for the E and PN lanes that were loaded with 10 (cid:1) g . For these experiments , the LIMK1 antibody was used at a concen - tration of 0 . 5 (cid:1) g / ml . ( E and F ) . Confocal micrographs showing the distribution of p - LIMK1 ( green ) and tubulin ( blue ) in a hippocampal pyramidal neuron maintained in culture for 1 d . Note the intense staining for p - LIMK1 in the Golgi region ( short arrows ) , the cell nucleus ( arrow - heads ) , and the axonal growth cone ( long arrows ) . Punc - tate p - LIMK1 immunolabeling is also detected along neu - ritic shafts . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m . ( G – L ) Series of confocal images showing the distribution of p - LIMK1 ( green ) and tubulin ( blue ) in a large growth cone of a stage II - III cultured hippocampal pyramidal neuron . Note that p - LIMK1 im - munolabeling is highly enriched at the peripheral rim ( short arrows ) of the growth cone . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m . LIMK1 Regulates Golgi Dynamics Vol . 15 , July 2004 3435 body localized in close apposition to the cell nucleus that resembled the Golgi apparatus ( Figure 1 , B and C ) . Confocal microscopy revealed extensive colocalization of LIMK1 and mannosidase II in the region corresponding to the Golgi apparatus ( see below ) ; LIMK1 immunoﬂuorescence was also detected in the cell nucleus , and in vesicle - like struc - tures located along neurites . To conﬁrm biochemically these observations , growth cone particles ( GCPs ) and Golgi membranes were isolated from fetal brains and probed with the antibody against LIMK1 used at a concentration of 1 (cid:1) g / ml . The purity of GCPs was conﬁrmed by its enrichment in c - src and (cid:3) - gc , a novel sub - unit of the IGF1 receptor highly enriched in growth cones ( Mascotti et al . , 1997 ; Paglini et al . , 1998 ) . On the other hand , the purity of Golgi fractions was evaluated by the presence of mannosidase II , a well established Golgi marker , and rab 8 , a marker of the trans - Golgi network , as well as by the absence of rab5 , a marker of early endosomes , or LAMP1 , a marker of lysosomes ( Paglini et al . , 2001 ) . The results ob - tained ( Figure 1D ) clearly revealed that LIMK1 was not only present but also enriched in GCPs and Golgi membranes obtained from the embryonic rat cerebral cortex . Because the presence of LIMK1 in the Golgi apparatus represents a novel subcellular localization with potential great functional sig - niﬁcance , we also examined whether coﬁlin and / or phos - phorylated coﬁlin were present in this fraction . The results obtained clearly revealed the presence of coﬁlin in Golgi membranes and that all Golgi subfractions ( F1 - F3 fractions ) contain phosphorylated coﬁlin ( Figure 1D ) . Similar LIMK1 ( Figure 1D ) and p - coﬁlin ( our unpublished data ) protein levels were detected between Golgi fractions obtained from fetal and 10 - d postnatal brain . A downstream target of Rac and cdc42 is PAK1 ( Sarmiere and Bamburg , 2004 ) , which has been shown to promote neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells ( Daniels et al . , 1998 ) , and is a direct activator of LIMK1 through phosphorylation of Thr508 . Therefore , it became of interest to analyze the sub - cellular distribution of activated LIMK1 ( p - LIMK1 ) by using a rabbit polyclonal antibody against the phosphorylated Thr 508 epitope of LIMK1 . The results obtained show a strong immunoﬂuorescence signal for p - LIMK1 in the cell body of neurons bearing immature neurites ( stage II ) and also in those that have develop an axon - like neurite ( stage III ) ; the cell body staining comprised the region of the Golgi appa - ratus ( Figure 1 , E and F , arrows ) and the nucleus ( Figure 1 , E and F , arrowheads ) . In addition , punctate p - LIMK1 im - munoﬂuorescence was detected along neuritic processes ; this staining was much more intense in the axon and its growth cone than in minor processes ( Figure 1 , E and F ) . The conversion of one minor process into an axon ( stage II - III transition ) requires a transient engorgement of the growth cone and penetration of microtubules to form a central do - main ( c - domain ) in which actin ﬁlaments have been elimi - nated ( Paglini et al . , 1998 ; Kunda et al . , 2001 ) . Interestingly , prominent p - LIMK1 labeling was detected in the shaft and peripheral F - actin rich domain ( p - domain ) of the large growth cone of the prospective axon ( Figure 1 , G – L ) . Different Protein Domains Determine LIMK1 Subcellular Localization In a complementary series of experiments , we sought to determine protein domains responsible for LIMK1 subcellu - lar localization . For such a purpose 1 - to 3 - d - old hippocam - pal pyramidal cultures were transiently transfected with full - length LIMK1 ( wt - LIMK1 ) or with LIMK1 mutants car - rying deletions of 1 ) the NH 2 terminus ( (cid:2) N ) , 2 ) the LIM domain ( (cid:2) LIM ) , 3 ) the PDZ domain ( (cid:2) PDZ ) , or 4 ) the entire kinase domain ( (cid:2) PK ) ; all these constructs were tagged at the COOH terminus with HA . Cells were transfected using a modiﬁed calcium phosphate precipitation protocol ( Kunda et al . , 2001 ) and the constructs used at a concentration of 6 (cid:1) g / ml , unless otherwise stated . Several hours later , the cultures were ﬁxed and processed for immunoﬂuorescence with antibodies against HA or LIMK1 . Staining with the LIMK1 antibody used at a dilution of 1 : 1000 ( 0 . 05 (cid:1) g / ml ) allows for a rapid and reliable identiﬁcation of transfected neurons , because cells expressing normal levels of LIMK1 display very light immunoﬂuorescence , whereas in those overexpressing LIMK1 a high signal was easily detected ( Figure 2 ) ; by using this criterion , we estimated a transfec - tion efﬁciency of (cid:5) 15 – 20 % . In addition , levels of expression of HA - tagged wt - LIMK1 and its mutants were evaluated at different time points after transfection by quantitative ﬂuo - rescence . This analysis revealed a two - to threefold increase in LIMK1 ﬂuorescence intensity 12 – 15 h after transfection ; these values increase considerably ( more than fourfold ) after a 24 - h posttransfection interval . Therefore , most of our ex - periments were performed in cells that survived transfection no more than a day . As shown in Figure 2 , HA - tagged full - length LIMK1 ( wt - LIMK1 ) localized in a pattern similar to that of endogenous LIMK1 ( Figure 2 , A – F ) . Colocalization with mannosidase II ( Figure 2 , A and B ) , or (cid:3) - COP ( our unpublished data ) , and sensitivity to brefeldin A ( our unpublished data ) conﬁrmed that the structure labeled within the cell body was the Golgi apparatus . By contrast , deletion of the entire LIM domain ( (cid:2) LIM ) or of any one of the two tandemly arranged LIM domains ( either LIM1 or LIM2 ) results in the loss of Golgi localization ( Figure 2 , G and H ) and in its association with vesicle - like structures ; interestingly , HA - tagged (cid:2) LIM , (cid:2) LIM1 , or (cid:2) LIM2 localize to growth cones ( Figure 2 , G and H ) . By contrast , deletion of the PDZ domain ( (cid:2) PDZ ) pre - vents LIMK1 localization to growth cones without altering its association with the Golgi apparatus ( Figure 2 , I and J ) or vesicles . Deletion of the entire NH 2 - terminal domain also results in a striking alteration in LIMK1 subcellular distri - bution ; thus , HA - tagged (cid:2) N initially ( 12 – 18 h posttransfec - tion ) displays a diffuse cytoplasmic distribution , with no evident enrichment in the perinuclear region , the Golgi ap - paratus , or growth cones ( Figure 2 , K – M ) . However , at later posttransfection intervals ( 20 – 30 h ) , most of the labeling was found in the cell nucleus ( our unpublished data ) . Finally , deletion of the entire PK domain does not result in signiﬁ - cant alterations of HA - tagged LIMK1 subcellular distribu - tion ( our unpublished data ) , with the exception that it com - pletely abolished its nuclear localization . Together , these observations suggests that LIM domains are required for LIMK1 localization to the Golgi apparatus , whereas a region containing the PDZ domain is required for its localization at growth cones , and its exclusion from the cell nucleus . LIMK1 Regulates Golgi Morphology and Dynamics Because a growing body of evidence has recently emerged showing that small Rho - GTPases as well as some of their effector proteins associate with Golgi membranes ( Ridley , 2001 ) it became of considerable interest to analyze the mor - phology and dynamics of this organelle after expression of wt - LIMK1 or its mutants . To visualize the Golgi apparatus neurons were cotransfected with a cDNA coding for the galactosyl - transferase T2 ( Gal - T2 , a resident enzyme of the trans - Golgi network ; see Giraudo et al . , 2001 ) fused to the NH 2 - terminal domain of enhanced yellow ﬂuorescent pro - tein ( EYFP ) , and either wt - LIMK1 or full - length LIMK1 car - rying a point mutation at the C terminus that abolishes its S . Rosso et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3436 kinase activity ( LIMK1 - kd ; Sumi et al . , 1999 ) , or a mutated form of coﬁlin that renders it constitutive active ( S3A coﬁ - lin ) . Immunoﬂuorescence examination of (cid:6) 20 cultures re - vealed a high degree of cotransfection ( (cid:6) 80 % ) . This analysis showed that while the Golgi apparatus seems to be slightly smaller and more compact in neurons overexpressing wt - LIMK1 than in control ones , its overall morphology does not change considerably localizing either in the perinuclear re - gion or in the initial segment of one primary dendrite ( Fig - ure 3 , A – C ; see also Figure 1 , Supplementary Material ) . By contrast , the Golgi apparatus of neurons overexpressing LIMK1 - kd or S3A coﬁlin display a less compact appearance with long cisternae extending into dendritic processes ( Fig - ure 1 , Supplementary Material ) . Time - lapse recordings of living neurons conﬁrmed these observations and revealed additional features . Thus , hippocampal pyramidal neurons cotransfected with GalT2 - EYFP ( 2 (cid:1) g of DNA ) alone or GalT2 - EYFP ( 2 (cid:1) g of DNA ) plus (cid:2) - LIM ( 4 (cid:1) g of DNA ) revealed that the Golgi apparatus of hippocampal pyrami - dal neurons is a dynamic structure displaying several long ( 3 – 5 (cid:1) m in length ) tubulo - vesicular processes emerging from the main Golgi stacks that extend and retract over short periods of time ( Figure 3 , D – F ) . Interestingly , this dynamic behavior was dramatically reduced in neurons cotransfected with GalT2 - EYFP ( 2 (cid:1) g of DNA ) and wt - LIMK1 ( 4 (cid:1) g of DNA ) . Under this condition very few , if any , tubulo - vesic - ular processes were observed emerging from the Golgi stacks ; a small number of vesicle - like structures containing GalT2 - EYFP were detected in the vicinity of the Golgi ap - paratus ( Figure 3 , G – I ) . By contrast , overexpression of LIMK1 - kd produces a different effect . Thus , time - lapse re - cordings of neurons overexpressing GalT2 - EYFP and LIMK1 - kd revealed a dynamic Golgi apparatus displaying long tubulo - vesicular processes ( 10 – 15 (cid:1) m ) that persist for longer periods of time than the ones of control cells ( Figure 3 , J – O ) . Quantitative analysis of the number , length , and persistence of these Golgi - derived tubulo - vesicular struc - tures conﬁrmed these observations and clearly revealed that overexpression of wt - LIMK1 suppresses this dynamic be - havior , whereas that of the kinase - defective form tends to Figure 2 . Subcellular distribution of HA - tagged wt - LIMK1 and its mutants . ( A and B ) Double immunoﬂuorescence micrographs showing the distribution of HA - tagged wt - LIMK1 ( A ) and mannosidase II ( B ) in cultured hippocampal pyramidal neurons . Note that HA - tagged wt - LIMK1 localizes to the Golgi apparatus ( short arrow ) and the growth cone ( long arrow ) . ( C – F ) Series of confocal images showing another example of the distribution of HA - tagged wt - LIMK1 in the Golgi apparatus ( long arrows ) and the axonal growth cone ( short arrows ) of a cultured hippocampal pyramidal neuron . ( G and H ) Double immunoﬂuorescence micrographs showing the subcellular distribution of HA - tagged (cid:2) - LIM ( G ) and mannosidase II ( H ) 12 h after transfection . Note the absence of HA - tagged (cid:2) - LIM immunoﬂuorescence in the region of the Golgi apparatus , but its presence within growth cones ( arrows in G ) . ( I ) Immunoﬂuorescence micrograph showing the distribution of HA - tagged (cid:2) PDZ - LIMK1 in a cultured hippocampal pyramidal neuron . Note that most of the labeling is found concentrated in the region of the Golgi apparatus ( arrows ) . ( J ) Red - green overlay showing the distribution of HA - tagged (cid:2) PDZ - LIMK1 ( green ) and endogenous LIMK1 ( red ) . Note that HA - tagged (cid:2) PDZ - LIMK1 is absent from neuritic tips ( arrows ) . ( K and L ) Series of confocal images showing the distribution of HA - tagged (cid:2) - LIM . Note the diffuse distribution of the labeling . ( M ) Red - green overlay showing the distribution of HA - tagged (cid:2) - LIM ( green ) and of tyrosinated (cid:2) - tubulin ( red ) . The cell shown in C – F was stained with a rabbit polyclonal antibody against LIMK1 diluted 1 / 1000 . All other transfected cells were stained with a rabbit antibody against HA . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m . LIMK1 Regulates Golgi Dynamics Vol . 15 , July 2004 3437 enhance it ( Table 1 ) . A similar phenomenon was observed after transfection of S3A coﬁlin ; these neurons display an extended Golgi apparatus with very long tubules ( (cid:6) 30 (cid:1) m ) , some of which persist for more than a minute ( Figure 4 ) . Interestingly , this behavior was suppressed in a dose - depen - dent manner by Jasplakinolide ( Figure 5 ) , a cell - permeable macro - cyclic peptide that inhibits actin turnover ( Gallo et al . , 2002 ) . Finally , we noticed that the long - term overexpression ( (cid:6) 20 h posttransfection ) of LIMK1 - kd of S3A coﬁlin pro - duces a fragmentation of the Golgi apparatus ( Figure 2 , Supplementary Material ) , suggesting that regulation of actin turnover is also important for maintaining Golgi structure . One prediction of this observation is that overexpression of wt - LIMK1 should delay the occurrence of cytochalasin D - induced Golgi disruption , whereas that of LIMK1 - kd or S3a coﬁlin should accelerate this effect . The results obtained , which are shown in Figure 2 ( Supplementary Material ) fully support the proposed scenario . Effects of the Overexpression of LIMK1 or Its Mutants on Neuronal Morphology and Axon Formation We next examined the consequences of LIMK1 overexpres - sion on neurite extension and axon formation , being partic - ularly interested in determining whether the Golgi localiza - tion of LIMK1 was required for any neuritogenic function it may have . First , we analyzed the consequences of LIMK1 overexpression in neurons that have already developed morphological polarity . Analysis of neurons ( 2 – 3 days in vitro [ DIV ] ) overexpressing wt - LIMK1 revealed that 12 – 18 h after transfection (cid:6) 95 % of these cells exhibited a high level of morphological differentiation with neurites frequently taking complex pathways . Thus , neurons overexpressing wt - LIMK1 display several neurites of (cid:6) 75 (cid:1) m in length ; usually , one of these neurites , presumably the axon , ex - tended for (cid:6) 400 (cid:1) m , displaying multiple collateral branches ( Figure 6 , A and B ) . High - resolution ﬂuorescence micros - copy or confocal microscopy also revealed that axonal shafts display many ectopic cytoplasmic expansions with promi - nent lamellipodial veils that resemble growth cones ( “waves ; ” Ruthel and Banker , 1998 , 1999 ) and contain accu - mulations of LIMK1 and F - actin ( Figure 6 , B – D ) . An addi - tional and distinctive feature of neurons overexpressing wt - LIMK1 was an increase in F - actin and phospho - coﬁlin staining in the region of the Golgi apparatus ( Figure 6 , E – I ) , Figure 3 . LIMK1 regulation of Golgi dynamics . ( A – C ) Fluorescence micrographs showing the distribution of galactosyl - transferase T2 - EYFP fusion protein ( A ) and HA - tagged wt - LIMK1 ( B ) in a cultured hippocampal pyramidal neuron ; the image in C shows the red - green overlay of the images shown in A and B . Note the strong colocalization of both proteins at the Golgi apparatus . ( D – F ) Sequence of ﬂuorescence images showing the dynamics of the Golgi apparatus from a neuron transfected with galactosyl - transferaseT2 - EYFP ; the EYFP signal is shown in black . Note the presence of tubulo - vesicular processes emerging from the Golgi stacks . ( G – I ) A similar sequence to that described previously , but from a cell cotransfected with galactosyl - transferase T2 - EYFP and HA - tagged wt - LIMK1 . Note the absence of tubulo - vesicular processes emerging from the Golgi stacks and the presence of small vesicles within the cell cytoplasm . ( J – O ) A sequence of ﬂuorescence images showing the dynamics of the Golgi apparatus from a neuron cotransfected with galactosyl - transferase T2 - EYFP and HA - tagged LIMK1 - kd . Note the presence of several tubulo - vesicular processes ( arrows ) emerging from the Golgi stacks that persist for longer periods of time than the ones observed in cells transfected with galactosyl - transferaseT2 - EYFP alone ; parts of the labeled tubules are out of the plane of focus . For all these experiments cells were visualized 12 h after transfection and each image was taken at 30 - s intervals . Bars , 10 (cid:1) m ( A – C ) and 2 . 5 (cid:1) m ( D – O ) . Table 1 . Quantiﬁcation of Golgi - derived tubule formation in neu - rons overexpressing wt - LIMK1 , LIMK1 - kd , and (cid:2) - LIM Groups Number a Length ( (cid:1) m ) Duration ( sec ) b Control 2 . 6 (cid:7) 0 . 2 4 . 2 (cid:7) 0 . 4 18 (cid:7) 6 wt - LIMK1 0 . 02 (cid:7) 0 . 01 c — — LIMK1 - kd 2 . 2 (cid:7) 0 . 2 8 . 5 (cid:7) 0 . 6 * 45 (cid:7) 8 (cid:2) - LIM 2 . 5 (cid:7) 0 . 2 3 . 8 (cid:7) 0 . 6 21 (cid:7) 4 a Number of tubules emerging from the Golgi stacks per minute . b Duration represents the period of time elapsed between the for - mation of a new tubule and its retraction and disappearance into the main Golgi stacks . c Values signiﬁcantly different from those of control cells or cells cotransfected with Gal - T2 - EYFP ( 2 (cid:1) g DNA ) plus (cid:2) - LIM ( 4 (cid:1) g DNA ) . Each value represents the mean (cid:7) SEM . Seventy transfected cells were analyzed for each experimental condition . Each value is the mean (cid:7) S . E . M . S . Rosso et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3438 as well as the presence of large growth cones containing abundant F - actin in both its central and peripheral regions ( Figure 6 , J and K ) , and a signiﬁcant increase ( 2 - to 3 - fold ) in phospho - coﬁlin immunolabeling ( Table 2 ) . Neurons overex - pressing wt - LIMK1 also were analyzed at longer posttrans - fection intervals . Thus , 24 – 30 h after transfection , we de - tected a signiﬁcant reduction in the number of collateral branches , and a retraction of growth cones and neuritic processes ( Figure 6L ) ; this phenomenon was accompanied by a dramatic increase ( more than sixfold ) in the phospho - coﬁlin immunolabeling of neuritic tips . Similar alterations were detected after overexpression of (cid:2) - LIM , which is known for having a three - to fourfold increase in kinase activity ( Sumi et al . , 1999 ; Rosso and Caceres , unpublished observations ) ; in these neurons , we initially ( 10 – 15 h post - transfection ) detected an increase in the number of waves , and the size of growth cones , as well as in the staining for F - actin and phospho - coﬁlin , which was later ( 18 – 24 h post - transfection ; Table 2 and Figure 3 , Supplementary Material ) followed by growth cone collapse and axon retraction . A different picture was observed after transfection with LIMK1 - kd ( Figure 4 , Supplementary Material ) or S3A coﬁlin ( our unpublished data ) . Thus , at all posttransfection inter - vals ( 12 , 15 , and 24 h ) the transfected neurons display a single long axon with many collateral branches ( Figure 4 , Supplementary Material ) , and several ( 4 – 5 ) much shorter neurites ; even though axonal length seems to increase in the transfected cells , their overall morphologies were similar to those of nontransfected neurons . Neurons overexpressing LIMK1 - kd or S3A coﬁlin display small growth cones that stain faintly with rhodamine - phalloidin ( Table 2 ; Figure 4 , Supplementary Material ) or the phospho - coﬁlin antibody ( Table 2 ) . Interestingly , deletion of the LIM domain in LIMK1 - kd seems to enhance its neuritogenic effect , whereas deletion of the PDZ domain has the opposite effect ( see below ) . In addition , expression of the isolated C - terminal domain of LIMK1 , either of the wt - form or kd - mutant , had no effect on axon morphology , growth cone size , or actin cytoskeletal organization . Together , these data indicate that the kinase domain requires the N terminus to exert its spe - ciﬁc functions in vivo , which involve the targeting of LIMK1 to either the Golgi apparatus or the axonal growth cone . As a further evaluation of this idea , quantitative measure - ments were performed on several neuronal shape parame - ters . The results obtained conﬁrmed our qualitative obser - vations and clearly revealed that overexpression of wt - LIMK1 , LIMK1 - kd , or the (cid:2) - LIM and (cid:2) - PDZ mutants have signiﬁcant and speciﬁc consequences on neurite length , branching , and growth cone morphology ( Table 3 ) . We then analyzed the involvement of LIMK1 in neurite initiation and axon formation . Cells were transfected 2 h after plating and examined 12 and 18 h later . Any neurite of at least 40 – 50 (cid:1) m longer than the other minor neurites of the same cell and displaying a proximo - distal accumulation of Tau1 immunoﬂuorescence ( Shi et al . , 2002 ) was considered to be an axon ; the length and number of axons and minor processes also was quantitated . The results obtained showed that overexpression of LIMK1 accelerates the appearance of axon - like neurites ( Figure 7 , A – D ) ; thus , 12 h after transfec - tion we observed that many transfected neurons have al - ready extended a Tau1 immunoreactive neurite , whereas the remaining processes still display large lamellipodia ( Figure 7 , A and B ; Dehmelt et al . , 2003 ) ; in other cases , the Tau1 immunoreactive neurite originates from the rim of a lamel - lipodial extension ( Figure 7 , C and D ) . In any case , by 20 h postplating , a considerable percentage ( (cid:6) 50 % ) of neurons overexpressing wt - LIMK1 display an axon - like neurite of (cid:6) 70 (cid:1) m with a distal accumulation of Tau1 immunoﬂuo - rescence . Many of these axon - like neurites end in a promi - nent growth cone with a large lamellipodium . The effect of wt - LIMK1 was dependent on its targeting to the Golgi ap - paratus , because it was not observed in neurons expressing the (cid:2) - LIM mutant and to a much lesser extent on its pres - ence in growth cones ( Figure 7 , G and H ) . An increase in the percentage of neurons displaying axon - like neurite also was detected after transfection of LIMK1 - kd ; as in the case of older neurons , the stimulatory effect of LIMK1 - kd on axon formation was not observed after deletion of the PDZ do - Figure 4 . Sequence of ﬂuorescence images showing the dynamics of the Golgi appara - tus from a neuron cotransfected with galac - tosyl - transferase T2 - EYFP and FLAG - tagged S3A - coﬁlin . Note the extended morphology of the Golgi apparatus and the presence of a long tubulo - vesicular process ( arrows ) emerging from the Golgi stack that elon - gates and persists for more than a minute ; other labeled tubules are out of the plane of focus . Images were taken every 10 s . For this experiment , cells were visualized 12 h after transfection . LIMK1 Regulates Golgi Dynamics Vol . 15 , July 2004 3439 main . As a matter of fact , expression of this LIMK1 mutant inhibits axon outgrowth ; conversely , deletion of its LIM domain enhanced axon formation ( Figure 7 , G and H ) . Con - sistent with this , overexpression of the LIM domain alone also produced a similar inhibitory effect . One prediction of these observations ( Birkenfeld et al . , 2001 ) is that expression of the LIM domain might inhibit axon outgrowth by pre - venting the binding of endogenous LIMK1 to the Golgi apparatus . We test this possibility by examining the distri - bution of endogenous LIMK1 in neurons overexpressing the LIM domain . In these cells , endogenous LIMK1 and p - coﬁlin staining completely disappears from the Golgi region , but not from growth cones ( our unpublished data ) . Finally , it is worth mentioning that none of the constructs tested affect either the time course of appearance , number , or length of minor processes . LIMK1 Promotes the Growth Cone Accumulation of Par3 / Par6 , Tyrosine Kinase Receptors , and Phospho - AKT during Axon Formation It has recently been shown that as cultured hippocampal neurons change from stage II to stage III by rapidly extend - ing one of its neurites to form an axon , Par3 / Par6 proteins and activated phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase ( PI 3 - kinase ) accumulate at its tip ( Shi et al . , 2002 ) . Because LIMK1 pro - motes axon outgrowth , we sought to determine whether it might regulate Par3 / Par6 localization . As reported previ - ously by Shi et al . , ( 2002 ) , we found that in control neurons Par3 and Par 6 antibodies ( used at a dilution of 1 / 50 ) stain intensely the cell body and much faintly , but with high selectivity , the axonal growth cone of stage III hippocampal pyramidal neurons ; when used at a dilution of 1 / 200 Par3 / Par6 immunolabeling was basically found in the cell body . Neurons overexpressing wt - LIMK1 display a considerable and selective increase in Par3 / Par 6 immunolabeling ( anti - body dilution 1 / 200 ) at the axonal growth cone ( Figure 8 , A – E ) . High - power views of the transfected neurons revealed that Par3 / Par6 immunolabeling also was associated with LIMK1 in vesicle - like structures located along the main ax - onal shafts and in waves ( Figure 8 , F and G ) . Previous studies have shown that ectopic expression of Par3 leaves neurons with no axons speciﬁed ( Shi et al . , 2002 ) . However , coexpression of wt - LIMK1 and Par3 results in the extension of a single , highly branched axon that contains large accu - mulations of Par3 at growth cones and branch points ( Figure 8 , H and K ) . The effects of wt - LIMK1 were abolished by deletion of the LIM domain or by coexpression of S3A coﬁlin Figure 5 . Jasp reduces Golgi tubule formation induced by S3A - coﬁlin expression . A sequence of ﬂuorescence images showing the dynamics of the Golgi apparatus from neurons cotransfected with galactosyl - transferase T2 - EYFP plus FLAG - tagged S3A - coﬁlin and treated for 30 – 45 min before the beginning of the time - lapse recording with different doses of Jasp . Images were taken every 10 s . Note the disappearance of membrane tubules with increasing doses of Jasp . S . Rosso et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3440 ( Table 4 ) . In accordance with this , expression of LIMK1 - kd or of the LIM domain alone considerable reduced Par3 / Par6 accumulation at the axonal growth cone ( Table 4 ) . To further characterize the relationship between LIMK1 - Par3 / Par6 , microsomal fractions from 1 - d - old rat cerebral cortex were fractionated by ultracentrifugation across a con - tinuous sucrose density gradient extending from 0 . 32 to 1 . 76 M sucrose ( Peretti et al . , 2000 ) , and the distribution of LIMK1 , p - LIMK1 , coﬁlin , and p - coﬁlin , as well as of several membrane and actin - associated proteins analyzed by WB with speciﬁc antibodies . This analysis revealed that al - though LIMK1 has a widespread distribution throughout the gradient , its phosphorylated form is highly enriched in fractions extending from 1 . 12 to 1 . 52 M sucrose ; interest - ingly , p - coﬁlin , PAK1 , the actin regulatory protein cortactin , and Par3 / Par6 displayed a striking codistribution with p - LIMK1 ( Figure 9A ) . Besides , all of them codistributed with proteins directly implicated in axon extension , such as (cid:3) - gc ( Mascotti et al . , 1997 ; Pfenninger et al . , 2003 ) , TrkB ( Pfen - ninger et al . , 2003 ) , and the cell adhesion molecule L1 ( Peretti et al . , 2000 ) . By contrast , p - LIMK1 only partially colocalizes with synaptophysin ( Figure 9A ) , synapsin ( our unpublished data ) , and the actin regulatory protein Arp 2 ( Figure 9A ) . Together , these observations raise the possibility of activated LIMK1 interacting with a type of nonsynaptic vesicle con - taining Par3 / Par6 as membrane - associated proteins and growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases , such as (cid:3) - gc or TrkB , as integral membrane proteins . Therefore , to directly test this possibility , immunoisolation of organelles ( Peretti et al . , 2000 ) from the microsomal fractions was performed with the anti - Par3 antibody ; the remaining organelles were recov - ered by pelleting from the supernatant fraction . Figure 9B shows that with this method , Par3 - containing organelles were collected . More importantly , in this immunoisolated organelle fraction ( Figure 9B ) p - LIMK1 , p - coﬁlin , and (cid:3) - gc were quantitatively recovered . By contrast , synaptophysin and synapsin ( our unpublished data ) were not detectable in this fraction . They were quantitatively recovered in the re - maining organelle fraction ; very little if any p - LIMK1 stain - ing was detected in this fraction . The p38 antibody also was used to immunoisolate fractions enriched in synaptophy - sin ( 0 . 4 – 0 . 92 M sucrose ) and probed with antibodies against LIMK1 and p - LIMK1 . LIMK1 was partially recov - ered in the p38 - immunoprecipitated organelles ; however , Figure 6 . Effect of the expression of HA - tagged wt - LIMK1 on neuronal morphology . For this experiment , the cells were transfected with 6 (cid:1) g of HA - tagged wt - LIMK1 and ﬁxed 12 ( A – I ) , 20 ( J and K ) , and 24 ( L ) h later . The cells were stained with a rabbit polyclonal antibody against HA ( green ) and either tyrosinated (cid:2) - tubulin ( red in A , C , and D ) or rhodamine - phalloidin ( red in B , I and L ) , or p - coﬁlin ( F ) . ( A – D ) Image in A shows the general morphology of a neuron overexpressing wt - LIMK1 ; note the presence of growth cone - like structures along the axon ( ar - rows ) . The image in B shows accumulations of F - actin at the tip of neuritic branches of the transfected neuron . The image in C shows a high power view of a growth cone located along an axonal process ; note the accumulation of LIMK1 ( arrow ) at the periphery of the growth cone . These accumulations also are observed in growth cones located at the tip of neuritic pro - cesses ( arrow in D ) . ( E – G ) Double immunoﬂuo - rescence micrographs showing the distribution of HA - tagged wt - LIMK1 ( E ) and phospho - coﬁ - lin ( F ) in a cultured hippocampal pyramidal neuron 12 h after transfection . Note the dramatic increase in phospho - coﬁlin ﬂuorescence inten - sity in the Golgi region of the transfected cell compared with a nontransfected one ( arrow in F ) . ( G ) Red - green overlay of the images shown in E and F . ( H and I ) Confocal images showing the distribution of HA - tagged LIMK1 ( H ) and rhodamine - phalloidin ( I ) in cultured neurons ; note the intense phalloidin staining of the Golgi region ( arrow ) in the transfected neuron . ( J and K ) Confocal images showing examples of growth cones 20 h after transfection with wt - LIMK1 . These growth cones have abnormal shapes , are several times larger than the ones of nontransfected cells ( arrow in L ) and stained strongly for F - actin . ( L ) This image shows an example of a neuritic tip ( green - yellow ) of a neuron overexpressing wt - LIMK1 24 h after transfection . Note the disappearance of the growth cone and the presence of patches of F - actin along the distal end of the neuritic process . Bars , 15 (cid:1) m ( A and B ) and 10 (cid:1) m ( C – L ) . LIMK1 Regulates Golgi Dynamics Vol . 15 , July 2004 3441 this fraction only contains a small amount of activated LIMK1 ( Figure 9B ) . We next examined whether the accumulation of Par3 / Par6 observed in neurons overexpressing wt - LIMK1 was paralleled by increased activity of PI 3 - kinase . For such a purpose , we monitored the activation of endogenous Akt , a major downstream effector of PI 3 - kinase , by using an anti - body speciﬁc for activated Akt that is phosphorylated at Ser 476 ( Shi et al . , 2003 ) . A considerable increase in activated Akt was detected within axonal growth cones of neurons over - expressing wt - LIMK1 ( Figure 9C ) . Interestingly , an increase in (cid:3) - gc immunostaining also was detected within axonal tips of neurons transfected with wt - LIMK1 ( Figure 9D ) . As in the case of Par3 / Par6 , these effects were prevented by deletion of the LIM domain , or cotransfection with S3A coﬁlin ( our unpublished data ) . NCAM also colocalizes with p - LIMK1 across the micro - somal sucrose gradient . Therefore , in an additional set of experiments we evaluated the effect of LIMK1 on NCAM trafﬁcking . As reported previously ( Silverman et al . , 2001 ; Sampo et al . , 2003 ) overexpression of NCAM - GFP results in the labeling of the Golgi complex , vesicular structures lo - cated in all processes , and growth cones ( Figure 10 , A and B ) . Coexpression of wt - LIMK1 did not alter this pattern but considerable increases NCAM - GFP ﬂuorescent intensity within neurites and growth cones ( Figure 10 , C and D ) . High - resolution confocal microscopy conﬁrmed these obser - vations by revealing an increased number of NCAM - GFP – containing vesicles within neuritic processes ( Figure 10E ) , and waves ( Figure 10F ) located along axonal shafts . Numer - ous NCAM - GFP containing vesicles also were detected in the neurites of cells coexpressing the (cid:2) - PDZ mutant of LIMK1 ( Figure 10 , G and H ) . A completely different picture was detected in cells coexpressing LIMK1 - kd ( Figure 10 , I – K ) . We also observed that coexpression of S3A - coﬁlin re - duces the stimulatory effect of wt - LIMK1 on GFP - NCAM distribution ( Figure 10 , L and M ) ; in these cells most of the labeling was found accumulated within the cell body and particularly the Golgi region ( Table 5 ) . Finally , we also evaluated the effect of LIMK1 on synap - tophysin trafﬁcking . Previous studies have established that in cultured neurons synaptophysin - GFP localizes to vesicles or tubulo - vesicular structures inside neurites and that it becomes enriched at neuritic tips ( Nakata et al . , 1998 ; Kaether et al . , 2000 ) . In accordance with this , transfection of 2 – 3 DIV hippocampal pyramidal neurons with synaptophy - sin - GFP alone revealed the presence of synaptophysin - con - taining vesicles in the cell body within and around the Golgi Table 2 . Quantiﬁcation of coﬁlin , phospho - coﬁlin , and phalloidin ﬂuorescence intensity in neurons overexpressing wt - LIMK1 , LIMK1 - kd , and (cid:2) - LIM Anti - coﬁlin ( 1 (cid:1) g / ml ) Golgi region Growth cones Non transfected 1250 (cid:7) 65 1640 (cid:7) 20 wt - LIMK1 1225 (cid:7) 58 1750 (cid:7) 56 LIMK1 - kd 1356 (cid:7) 46 1630 (cid:7) 48 (cid:2) - LIM 1278 (cid:7) 84 1670 (cid:7) 38 Anti - phospho coﬁlin ( 0 . 5 (cid:1) g / ml ) Golgi region Growth cones Nontransfected 458 (cid:7) 72 680 (cid:7) 26 wt - LIMK1 1852 (cid:7) 64 a 2240 (cid:7) 44 a (cid:2) - LIM 450 (cid:7) 24 2720 (cid:7) 28 a Anti - phospho coﬁlin ( 1 (cid:1) g / ml ) Golgi region Growth cones Nontransfected 932 (cid:7) 68 1125 (cid:7) 55 LIMK1 - kd 184 (cid:7) 15 a 272 (cid:7) 14 a Rhodamine - phalloidin ( 0 . 2 (cid:1) g / ml ) Golgi region Growth cones Nontransfected 249 (cid:7) 17 660 (cid:7) 24 wt - LIMK1 1246 (cid:7) 68 a 1850 (cid:7) 48 a (cid:2) - LIM 312 (cid:7) 32 2412 (cid:7) 18 a Rhodamine - phalloidin ( 0 . 5 (cid:1) g / ml ) Golgi region Growth cones Nontransfected 383 (cid:7) 47 1256 (cid:7) 22 LIMK1 - kd 52 (cid:7) 12 a 325 (cid:7) 18 a S3A - Coﬁlin 65 (cid:7) 14 a 420 (cid:7) 36 a Values represent the average ﬂuorescent intensity expressed in pixels within a 5 - (cid:1) m area located in the central region of the Golgi apparatus or growth cones . 12 - Bit images were used for this quan - tiﬁcation . Scale , 0 ( black ) to 4095 ( white ) . Each value is the mean (cid:7) SEM . At least 50 cells were measured for each experimental condi - tion . a Values signiﬁcantly different from those of nontransfected cells . Table 3 . Quantiﬁcation of neuronal shape parameters in neurons overexpressing wt - LIMK1 and their mutants Groups No . of primary neurites / cell Total axonal length ( (cid:1) m ) No . of collateralbranches ( axon ) No . of growth cone like structures / axon Growth cone area ( (cid:1) m 2 ) Nontransfected 5 . 2 (cid:7) 0 . 4 295 (cid:7) 22 12 (cid:7) 2 1 . 2 (cid:7) 0 . 2 16 (cid:7) 4 wt - LIMK1 5 . 6 (cid:7) 0 . 2 425 (cid:7) 65 * 26 (cid:7) 4 * 5 . 4 (cid:7) 0 . 6 * 46 (cid:7) 7 * LIMK1 - kd 5 . 2 (cid:7) 0 . 4 545 (cid:7) 44 * 45 (cid:7) 8 * 1 . 2 (cid:7) 0 . 2 9 (cid:7) 2 * (cid:2) - LIM ( wt ) 5 . 8 (cid:7) 0 . 4 220 (cid:7) 16 * 18 (cid:7) 6 4 . 8 (cid:7) 0 . 4 * 68 (cid:7) 8 * (cid:2) - LIM ( kd ) 5 . 2 (cid:7) 0 . 2 636 (cid:7) 32 * 56 (cid:7) 10 * 1 . 6 (cid:7) 0 . 4 8 (cid:7) 2 * (cid:2) - PDZ ( wt ) 4 . 8 (cid:7) 0 . 4 388 (cid:7) 14 * 22 (cid:7) 6 * 2 . 5 (cid:7) 0 . 5 22 (cid:7) 8 (cid:2) - PDZ ( kd ) 5 . 1 (cid:7) 0 . 7 180 (cid:7) 26 * 8 (cid:7) 4 1 . 0 (cid:7) 0 . 3 10 (cid:7) 2 Each value represents the mean (cid:7) SEM . At least 100 cells were analyzed for each experimental condition . Two DIV hippocampal pyramidal cultures were transfected with each of the constructs , ﬁxed 18 h later , and processed for immunoﬂuorescence with a rabbit antibody against HA and a mAb against the class III (cid:3) - tubulin isotype . Control nontransfected cells had similar neuronal shape parameters to those of cells transfected with GFP alone ( 6 (cid:1) g DNA ) . * Values signiﬁcantly different from those of nontransfected neurons . S . Rosso et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3442 area , as well as throughout neurites ( our unpublished data ) . By contrast , when the neurons were additionally transfected with wt - LIMK1 , synaptophysin - GFP – containing vesicles completely disappear from the neurites after 12 – 24 h ; in these neurons , most of the synaptophysin - GFP labeling was found concentrated in the Golgi apparatus ( Figure 11 , A – C ) . On the other hand , cotransfection with LIMK1 - kd ( Figure 11 , D – G ) or S3A - coﬁlin ( Figure 11 , H – J ) results in the ap - pearance of numerous synaptophysin - GFP – containing ves - icles within the cell body and along neurites ; in most cases , these vesicles accumulate at neuritic tips . Quantiﬁcation of synaptophysin - GFP ﬂuorescence intensity conﬁrmed these observations ( Table 5 ) , strongly suggesting a connection be - tween changes in LIMK1 levels and / or activity and the Golgi - derived export of this type of synaptic membrane protein . DISCUSSION LIMK1 Functioning in the Golgi Apparatus The present results provide new evidence concerning the subcellular distribution and function of LIMK1 in develop - ing neurons . Thus , one striking ﬁnding of this study was the discovery that LIMK1 is present in the Golgi apparatus . The LIM domain of LIMK1 , recognized as a motif involved in protein – protein interactions ( Dawid et al . , 1998 ) , seems to be responsible for this localization . On the other hand , the PDZ domain , which is found in various submembranous proteins and also functions as a protein binding domain ( Ponting et al . , 1997 ) , is not required for the association of LIMK1 with the Golgi ; however , a region containing this domain is es - sentially required for its localization to growth cones ( this study ) and for nuclear exclusion ( Yang and Mizuno , 1999 ) . All these observations are fully consistent with the idea that in LIM - containing proteins each domain functions as a mod - ule mediating a speciﬁc interaction . The association of LIMK1 with Golgi membranes is in line with a series of recent experimental data showing that Rho family members are not only localized to vesicular compart - ments but also that play important roles in the trafﬁcking of endocytic and exocytic vesicles ( Ridley , 2001 ) . This include the early demonstration that Cdc42 localizes primarily to the Golgi apparatus ( Erikson et al . , 1996 ; Michaelson et al . , 2000 ) and that in epithelial cells , it is involved in the exit and sorting of proteins from the trans - Golgi network ( Kros - chewski et al . , 1999 ; Cohen et al . , 2001 ; Musch et al . , 2001 ) , as well as the more recent evidence showing that Citron - N , a Rho - binding protein , ROCK - II , and Proﬁlin IIa localize to the Golgi apparatus ( Camera et al . , 2003 ) . In addition , PAK4 , a novel effector for Cdc42 , not only localizes to the brefeldin A - sensitive compartment of the Golgi ( Abo et al . , 1998 ) but also interacts speciﬁcally with LIMK1 stimulating its ability to phosphorylate coﬁlin ( Dan et al . , 2001 ) . Thus , various elements required for activation of LIMK1 and for the cou - pling of Rho - GTPase signaling to actin cystokeletal dynam - ics are present in the neuronal Golgi apparatus , raising the possibility of LIMK1 acting as a regulator of Golgi organi - zation and / or trafﬁcking . In favor of this view , we have now presented evidence suggesting that a functional LIMK1 is present in the Golgi apparatus . Western blot analysis clearly revealed the pres - ence of coﬁlin and phosphorylated - coﬁlin in Golgi mem - branes . Consistent with this , overexpression of wt - LIMK1 signiﬁcantly increases the ﬂuorescent signals generated by the phospho - coﬁlin antibody and rhodamine - phalloidin in the Golgi region . On the other hand , overexpression of Figure 7 . LIMK1 promotes axon formation . ( A – F ) For this experiment , the cells were transfected 2 h after plat - ing with 6 (cid:1) g of HA - tagged wt - LIMK1 and ﬁxed 12 ( A – D ) , or 18 ( E – F ) h later . The cells were stained with a rabbit polyclonal antibody against HA ( A , C , and E ) and the mAb Tau1 ( B , D , and F ) . Note that 12 h after trans - fection the neurons have already extended a long neurite that stains intensely with the Tau1 mAb ; note also the large size of the axonal growth cones of the transfected neurons . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m . ( G and H ) Percentage of neurons displaying an axon - like neurite after transfection with wt - LIMK1 or its mutants . Cultures were transfected 2 h after plating and ﬁxed 12 or 18 h later . Each value repre - sents the mean (cid:7) SEM . At least 50 cells were measured for each transfection , as described in MATERIALS AND METHODS . Values signiﬁcantly different from those of control nontransfected ( NT ) neurons are indicated by asterisk ( * ) . LIMK1 Regulates Golgi Dynamics Vol . 15 , July 2004 3443 LIMK1 - kd , which is likely to act as a dominant - negative mutant for endogenous LIMK1 and LIMK2 ( Sumi et al . , 1999 ) , has the opposite effect . Changes in the levels / activity of LIMK1 or coﬁlin also were paralleled by alterations in Golgi morphology . In this regard , the long - term decrease in coﬁlin phosphorylation , elicited by expressing LIMK1 - kd or S3A coﬁlin for (cid:6) 20 h , result in Golgi fragmentation . To - gether , these observations show that regulation of actin turnover is critically involved in maintaining neuronal Golgi architecture . In agreement with this , overexpression of LIMK1 - kd or S3A coﬁlin dramatically accelerates cytochala - sin D - induced Golgi fragmentation , whereas that of wt - LIMK1 has the opposite effect . Our results also suggest a more subtle involvement of LIMK1 and actin dynamics in the regulation of Golgi mor - phology and function . Thus , overexpression of wt - LIMK1 dramatically reduces the formation of GalT2 - EYFP – contain - ing tubules that emerge from the Golgi stacks , whereas that of LIMK1 - kd or S3A - coﬁlin has a rather opposite effect . Several reasons suggest that the type of tubule that we have evaluated belongs to those emanating from the trans - Golgi network : 1 ) Gal - T2 , the protein that was fused with EYFP , is a resident enzyme of the trans - Golgi network ( Giraudo et al . , 2001 ) ; 2 ) the Gal - T2 EYFP – containing tubules seem not to connect adjacent cisternae , and / or to label structures resem - bling the endoplasmic reticulum ; and 3 ) the length , rate of elongation / retraction , and number of Gal - T2 EYFP – contain - ing tubules emanating from the Golgi were very similar to those reported for nonneuronal cells transfected with the ts045 vesicular stomatitis virus G protein fused to GFP and visualized at the permissive temperature of 32°C ( Hirsch - berg et al . , 1998 ) . Our observations showing that modiﬁca - tions of LIMK1 levels and / or activity alter trans - Golgi net - work – tubule formation are consistent with studies suggesting that actin - based cytoskeletal components could be involved in their formation . For example , Hirschberg et al . ( 1998 ) reported that Golgi - derived tubules formed in cy - tochalasin B - treated cells are signiﬁcantly longer than in untreated ones ; interestingly , expression of LIMK1 - kd , which reduces coﬁlin phosphorylation and F - actin at the Golgi region , produces a similar effect . LIMK1 and coﬁlin also regulate the trafﬁcking of Golgi - derived vesicles , a phe - nomenon that is likely to be important for explaining its participation in axon formation ( see below ) . LIMK1 Functioning during Axonal Development The present observations conﬁrm and extend previous stud - ies showing the involvement of LIMK1 in neuronal devel - opment . For example , the alterations in growth cone mor - phology , coﬁlin phosphorylation , and actin organization here reported are fully consistent with those described in Figure 8 . LIMK1 promotes the accumula - tion of Par3 / Par6 at axonal growth cones and waves . ( A and B ) Confocal micrographs showing the distribution of HA - tagged LIMK1 ( red ) and Par3 ( green ) in cultured hippocampal pyramidal neurons . Cells were transfected with wt - LIMK1 2 h after plating , ﬁxed 18 h later and stained with a mouse antibody against HA and a rabbit polyclonal antibody against Par3 ( diluted 1 / 200 ) . ( C and D ) Confocal micrographs showing the distribution of HA - tagged LIMK1 ( green ) , F - actin ( red ) , and Par6 ( blue ) in cultured hippocampal pyramidal neurons . Cells were transfected as described previously . Note that only the transfected neurons display intense Par3 / Par6 immunoﬂuorescence at the axonal growth cone ( arrows ) . ( F and G ) Confocal micrographs showing colocaliza - tion and accumulation of HA - tagged LIMK1 ( red ) and Par3 ( green ) within an axonal shaft and a wave ( arrows ) . ( H and I ) Confocal micrographs showing colocalization and ac - cumulation of HA - tagged LIMK1 and trans - fected Par3 within the terminal axonal arbor of a cultured hippocampal pyramidal neu - ron . ( J ) Red - green overlay of the images shown previously . ( K ) Confocal image showing the axonal shaft of a neuron trans - fected with Par3 alone . For these experi - ments cultures were transfected 1 d after plating and ﬁxed 18 h later ; the Par3 anti - body was used at a dilution of 1 / 500 . S . Rosso et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3444 LIMK1 KO mice ( Meng et al . , 2002 ) . Thus , the size of growth cones was greatly reduced in LIMK1 - deﬁcient neurons , as in the case of neurons expressing LIMK1 - kd . By contrast , over - expression of wt - LIMK1 or its (cid:2) - LIM mutant results in a complete different phenotype , with growth cones several times larger than control ones , and containing high levels of phosphorylated coﬁlin and F - actin . An inhibition of neurite elongation and growth cone motility has been observed in chick DRG cells overexpressing LIMK1 ( Endo et al . , 2003 ) ; in hippocampal pyramidal neurons , the long - term overexpres - sion of wt - LIMK1 or its (cid:2) - LIM mutant also results in growth cone collapse and neurite retraction ( this study ) . The high levels of expression of exogenous LIMK1 detected in hip - pocampal pyramidal neurons after a 24 h posttransfection interval or the one reported for DRG neurons ( (cid:6) 10 - fold ; Endo et al . , 2003 ) , and the dramatic increase in coﬁlin phos - phorylation precludes a simple explanation for this phenom - enon . However , one obvious possibility is that the large accumulation of F - actin present in the growth cones of trans - fected neurons affects process extension by preventing mi - crotubule advance and decreasing the membrane vesicle content of neuritic tips . Alternatively , a decrease in actin turnover may allow myosin to generate sufﬁcient contractile force to produce axon retraction ( Gallo et al . , 2002 ) . On the other hand , the axogenic effect of LIMK1 - kd , ADF - coﬁlin , or S3A - coﬁlin in cortical ( Meberg and Bamburg , 2000 ) , DRG ( Endo et al . , 2003 ) , or hippocampal pyramidal ( this study ) neurons ﬁts well with current models suggest - ing that axon extension and the differentiation of a neuritic growth cone to become the axon growth cone requires an increase in actin turnover , with coﬁlin acting as a positive regulator and LIMK1 as a negative one ( Bradke and Dotti , 1999 ; Kunda et al . , 2001 ; Endo et al . , 2003 ; Sarmiere and Bamburg , 2004 ) . However , it is likely that this view represents an oversim - pliﬁcation of LIMK1 participation in axon formation and that a full understanding of its functioning cannot rely ex - Table 4 . Quantiﬁcation of Par3 immunoﬂuorescence in neurons overexpressing LIMK1 or its mutants Groups Antibodydilution Cell body Distal axon Growth cone NT 1 / 200 1320 (cid:7) 46 125 (cid:7) 18 a 181 (cid:7) 23 NT 1 / 50 1854 (cid:7) 66 263 (cid:7) 52 560 (cid:7) 74 WT 1 / 200 1050 (cid:7) 28 340 (cid:7) 25 a 650 (cid:7) 64 a KD 1 / 200 1710 (cid:7) 92 60 (cid:7) 32 110 (cid:7) 15 a KD 1 / 50 2050 (cid:7) 124 140 (cid:7) 14 a 315 (cid:7) 17 a (cid:2) - LIM b 1 / 200 2023 (cid:7) 87 136 (cid:7) 22 176 (cid:7) 30 WT (cid:8) S3A 1 / 200 1415 (cid:7) 39 158 (cid:7) 16 a 240 (cid:7) 34 LIM c 1 / 50 1950 (cid:7) 65 134 (cid:7) 16 205 (cid:7) 15 a (cid:2) - PDZ d 1 / 200 1268 (cid:7) 18 186 (cid:7) 14 480 (cid:7) 26 a Values represent the average ﬂuorescent intensity expressed in pixels within a 5 (cid:1) m area located in the cell body , distal axonal segment , and growth cones . 12 - Bit images were used for this quan - tiﬁcation . Scale , 0 ( black ) to 4095 ( white ) . Each value is the mean (cid:7) S . E . M . Cultures were ﬁxed and processed for immunoﬂuorescence 18 h after transfection . At least 50 cells were analyzed for each experimental condition . a Values signiﬁcantly different from those of the corresponding con - trol groups . b This group corresponds to cells transfected with the (cid:2) - LIM mutant of wt - LIMK1 . c This group corresponds to cell transfected with the LIM domain alone . d This group corresponds cells transfected with the (cid:2) - PDZ mutant of wt - LIMK1 . Figure 9 . Activated LIMK1 associates with Par3 / Par6 containing vesicles . ( A ) Microsome fraction from developing rat cerebral cortex was fractionated by centrifugation across a continuous SDG and the same amount of protein ( 20 (cid:1) g ) from each fraction was applied to SDS - PAGE , stained with Coomassie Blue , or transferred to polyvinyli - dene diﬂuoride membranes and analyzed by Western blot with anti - bodies against LIMK1 , p - LIMK1 , p - coﬁlin , Par3 , TrkB , (cid:3) - gc , NCAM , cortactin , Arp2 , and synaptophysin ( p38 ) . Note the strong colocaliza - tion of p - LIMK1 , p - coﬁlin , PAK1 , Par3 , TrkB , (cid:3) - gc , and NCAM . ( B ) LIMK1 ( Par3 ) Immunoisolation of Par3 - containing organelles with an - ti - LIMK1 ( dilution 1 / 50 ) from a microsomal fraction extending from 0 . 92 to 1 . 6 M sucrose ; Par3 ( LIMK1 / p - LIMK1 / (cid:3) - gc / NCAM ) Immu - noisolation of p - LIMK1 - , (cid:3) - gc - , and NCAM - containing organelles with anti - Par3 ( dilution 1 / 50 ) . Note that all proteins are quantitatively re - covered in the immunoprecipitated organelle fraction ( IPO ) . Immu - noisolation of LIMK1 and p - LIMK1 - containing organelles with anti - p38 ( dilution 1 / 50 ) . Note that only a small amount of p - LIMK1 is associated with the immunoprecipitated organelle fraction . ( C ) Confo - cal images showing the distribution of HA - tagged wt - LIMK1 ( green ) , F - actin ( red ) , and p - Akt in a transfected hippocampal pyramidal neu - ron . Note the accumulation and intense labeling of p - Akt in the axonal growth cone ( arrows ) of the transfected neuron when compared with equivalent ones of nontransfected cells ( arrowheads ) . ( D ) Confocal images showing the distribution of HA - tagged wt - LIMK1 ( red ) and (cid:3) - gc ( green ) in a transfected hippocampal pyramidal neuron . Note the accumulation and intense labeling of (cid:3) - gc in the axonal growth cone ( arrows ) of the transfected neuron when compared with nontrans - fected cells ( arrowheads ) . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m . LIMK1 Regulates Golgi Dynamics Vol . 15 , July 2004 3445 clusively on its presumptive inactivation at the growth cone . By contrast , our results suggest that active LIMK1 is re - quired for axon formation ; several aspects support this idea . First , a high ﬂuorescent signal for activated LIMK1 was detected at the Golgi region , in axonal growth cones , and at the peripheral , actin - rich rim of the large growth cone of prospective axons . Second , an increase in the number of growth cone - like structures located along axons was ob - served in neurons overexpressing wt - LIMK1 . This is an interesting observation , because previous studies have es - tablished that similar structures , nicknamed waves , exhibit - ing high lamellipodial activity and containing a marked concentration of F - actin , GAP - 43 , and ezrin ( Ruthel and Banker , 1998 ) , are directly related with bursts of axonal growth ( Ruthel and Banker , 1999 ) . LIMK1 - induced waves also contain accumulations of molecules directly implicated in axon formation such as Par3 / Par6 and NCAM ( Lemmon et al . , 1992 ; Doherty et al . , 1995 ; Peretti et al . , 2001 ; Shi et al . , 2003 ) . Third , and perhaps most importantly , overexpression of wt - LIMK1 accelerates axonal development , a phenome - non paralleled by an enhanced accumulation of Par3 / Par6 , (cid:3) - gc , and p - Akt at the axonal growth cone . This function of LIMK1 involves coﬁlin phosphorylation because it is pre - vented by coexpression of S3A - coﬁlin and is not observed in neurons overexpressing LIMK1 - kd . In neurons , a signal transduction pathway linking growth factor tyrosine kinase receptors ( e . g . , IGF1 receptors ) , acti - vation of PI 3 - kinase , Par proteins , and atypical protein kinase C is essentially required for the establishment of neuronal polarity ( Shi et al . , 2003 ) . In nonneuronal cells , Rho - GTPases and the cytoskeleton regulate the distribution of Par proteins , and positive feedback loops linking PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 with Rho GTPases and / or polymerized actin have been shown to be important for neutrophil polarity during chemotaxis ( Wang et al . , 2002 ; Weiner et al . , 2002 ) . Thus , our results are consistent with activated LIMK1 being Figure 10 . LIMK1 regulation of the Golgi - derived export of NCAM - containing vesicles . ( A and B ) Double ﬂuorescence micrographs showing the distribution of NCAM - GFP ( A ) and endogenous LIMK1 ( B ) in a cultured hip - pocampal pyramidal neuron . For this exper - iment , the cells were ﬁxed 12 h after transfec - tion and stained with the rabbit polyclonal antibody against LIMK1 used at a dilution of 1 / 1000 . Note that the most intense NCAM - GFP labeling is found within the cell body and at neuritic tips ; light labeling is detected within minor neurites and along the axon ( arrows ) ( C ) Fluorescence micrograph show - ing the presence of NCAM - GFP along the axon and growth cones of a neuron cotrans - fected with HA - tagged wt - LIMK1 . Note the intense NCAM - GFP labeling of the axon and growth cones . ( D ) Corresponding overlay im - age showing the distribution of NCAM - GFP ( green ) and HA - tagged wt - LIMK1 ( red ) . The cells also were analyzed 12 h after transfec - tion . ( E ) High - power confocal micrograph showing the presence of numerous NCAM - GFP – containing vesicles within a neurite of a cell cotransfected with HA - tagged wt - LIMK1 . ( F ) Abundant NCAM - GFP – contain - ing vesicles ( green ) also are detected within growth cone - like structures ( waves ) located along the axonal shaft of a neuron cotrans - fected with HA - tagged wt - LIMK1 ( red ) . ( G and H ) Series of confocal images showing the presence of numerous NCAM - GFP – contain - ing vesicles in the axon of a neuron coex - pressing HA - tagged (cid:2) - PDZ LIMK1 . ( I and J ) Immunoﬂuorescence micrographs showing the distribution of NCAM - GFP in neurons cotransfected with HA - tagged LIMK1 - kd . The cell shown in I was transfected with 2 (cid:1) g / ml NCAM - GFP , whereas that shown in J with 4 (cid:1) g of NCAM - GFP . Note that in both cases most of the labeling is localized to the cell body and absent from neurites and their tips . ( K ) Fluorescence micrograph showing the corresponding labeling of HA - tagged LIMK1 - kd for the cell shown in J . Note that labeling is not only found in the cell body but also at neuritic tips . ( L and N ) Confocal im - ages showing the distribution of NCAM - GFP ( L ) in a hippocampal neuron cotransfected with FLAG - tagged S3A coﬁlin ( M ) and HA - tagged wt - LIMK1 ( N ) . Note that in this triple - transfected cell most of the NCAM - GFP labeling is found within the cell body . No labeling is detected in the middle or distal parts of neuritic processes , including growth cones . For all these experiments each LIMK1 cDNA was used at a concentration of 2 (cid:1) g / ml . Bars , 10 (cid:1) m ( A – D , L and M ) and 10 (cid:1) m ( E – K ) . S . Rosso et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3446 part of a positive feedback loop linking Rho GTPases and the regulation of actin dynamics with the asymmetric dis - tribution of Par proteins in polarizing neurons . LIMK1 - in - duced accumulation of p - Akt also may be important for regulating ADF - coﬁlin phosphocycling ( Gungabissoon and Bamburg 2003 ) ; thus , it has been proposed that down - Table 5 . Quantiﬁcation of synaptophysin - GFP and NCAM - GFP immunoﬂuorescence in neurons overexpressing wt - LIMK1 and its mutants Group Golgi region Proximal neurites Distal neurites Growth cones P38 - GFP Control 1450 (cid:7) 40 542 (cid:7) 38 640 (cid:7) 56 850 (cid:7) 65 wt - LIMK1 1750 (cid:7) 20 160 (cid:7) 22 a 156 (cid:7) 24 a 132 (cid:7) 16 a LIMK1 - kd 1500 (cid:7) 35 656 (cid:7) 34 720 (cid:7) 62 1350 (cid:7) 60 a (cid:2) - LIM 1400 (cid:7) 30 528 (cid:7) 44 615 (cid:7) 27 920 (cid:7) 25 NCAM - GFP Control 1500 (cid:7) 65 364 (cid:7) 41 488 (cid:7) 46 1250 (cid:7) 80 wt - LIMK1 1300 (cid:7) 45 725 (cid:7) 74 a 742 (cid:7) 38 a 1880 (cid:7) 56 a LIMK1 - kd 1780 (cid:7) 20 156 (cid:7) 32 a 131 (cid:7) 43 a 148 (cid:7) 28 a (cid:2) - PDZ 1430 (cid:7) 30 652 (cid:7) 64 a 728 (cid:7) 40 a 1640 (cid:7) 60 a Control cells were transfected with 2 (cid:1) g / ml of synaptophysin - GFP or NCAM - GFP cDNAs . Values represent the average ﬂuorescent intensity expressed in pixels within a 5 - (cid:1) m area located in the central region of the Golgi apparatus or growth cones . 12 - Bit images were used for this quantiﬁcation . Scale , 0 ( black ) to 4095 ( white ) . Values represent synaptophysin - GFP or NCAM - GFP ﬂuorescence intensities within a 30 (cid:1) m stretch located in the proximal or distal segments of individual neurites . Each value is the mean (cid:7) SEM . At least 50 cells were analyzed for each experimental condition . a Values signiﬁcantly different from those of the corresponding control groups . Figure 11 . LIMK1 regulation of the Golgi - derived export of synaptophysin - containing vesicles . ( A and B ) Double ﬂuores - cence micrographs showing the effect of the overexpression of wt - LIMK1 ( A ) on the distribution of synaptophysin - GFP fusion protein ( B ) . The cells were ﬁxed 12 h after transfection and stained with a rabbit polyclonal antibody against HA ( dilution 1 / 1000 ) . Note that most of the synaptophysin - GFP signal is localized to the region of the Golgi apparatus . ( C ) Red - green overlay of the images shown in A and B . ( D and E ) Double ﬂuorescence micrographs showing the effect of the overexpres - sion of HA - tagged LIMK1 - kd ( D ) on the distribution of synap - tophysin - GFP fusion protein ( E ) . Note the presence of numer - ous synaptophysin - GFP vesicle - like structures along neurites ( arrows ) . ( F ) Red - green overlay of the images shown in D and E . ( G ) A red - green overlay of another neuron cotransfected with LIMK1 - kd ( red ) and synaptophysin - GFP ( green ) . In this exam - ple , the HA - antibody was used at a dilution of 1 / 2500 . Note the presence of intense synaptophysin - GFP labeling at neuritic tips ( arrows ) . ( H and I ) Double ﬂuorescence micrographs showing the effect of the overexpression of FLAG - tagged S3A - coﬁlin ( H ) on the distribution of synaptophysin - GFP ( I ) . Note the presence of numerous synaptophysin - GFP vesicle - like structures along neurites . ( J ) Red - green overlay of the images shown in H and I . For these experiments each cDNAs was used at a concentration of 2 (cid:1) g / ml . Bar , 7 (cid:1) m . LIMK1 Regulates Golgi Dynamics Vol . 15 , July 2004 3447 stream of p - Akt is a speciﬁc phosphatase , possibly of the slingshot family , that can activate ADF - coﬁlin through dephosphorylation . Inhibition of axon formation and reduced accumulation of Par3 / Par6 at growth cones also were observed after expres - sion of the (cid:2) - LIM mutant of wt - LIMK1 or of the LIM domain alone ; interestingly , inhibition of neurite extension by over - expression of LIM domains also has been detected in NGF - treated PC12 cells ( Birkenfeld et al . , 2001 ) . Because the LIM domain is responsible for LIMK1 localization to the Golgi apparatus , these observations raise the interesting possibil - ity of LIMK1 regulating the trafﬁcking of Golgi - derived vesicles capable of interacting with Par3 - Par6 proteins . In favor of this , analysis of microsomal fractions obtained by SDG centrifugation revealed a striking colocalization of p - LIMK1 with p - coﬁlin , Pak1 , Par3 / Par6 , (cid:3) - gc , and NCAM . Immunoisolation experiments allow us to isolate Par3 - con - taining vesicles and directly demonstrate that they contain activated LIMK1 , (cid:3) - gc , NCAM , and phospho - coﬁlin . The fact that other types of vesicles , like those containing synaptophysin , have low amounts of p - LIMK1 and p - coﬁlin , suggest that activation - deactivation of LIMK1 may differen - tially regulate the export and / or trafﬁcking of Golgi - derived vesicles . In accordance with this , overexpression of LIMK1 - wt dramatically reduces synaptophysin - GFP label - ing from neuritic shafts , with most of the ﬂuorescence signal found within the Golgi region ; by contrast , it increases Par3 and GFP - NCAM labeling within neurites , growth cones , and waves . A complete different picture was observed after expression of LIMK1 - kd . All these observations are in line with recent studies suggesting distinct roles for actin in the formation of different classes of Golgi - derived vesicles ( Musch et al . , 1997 ; Heimann et al . , 1999 ; Fucini et al . , 2000 ; Rozelle et al . , 2000 ) . The recent demonstration of (cid:3) / (cid:4) - actin on vesicles budding from the Golgi by immunoelectron microscopy ( Valderrama et al . , 2000 ) and the existence of different actin - binding proteins , including multiple non - muscle myosins , on distinct populations of Golgi - derived vesicles ( Heimann et al . , 1999 ; this study ) supports this pro - posal . Other proteins , such as dynamin also might provide a dynamic component to this actin - membrane matrix , thereby aiding in vesicle scission . Interestingly , a GTPase - deﬁcient dynamin2 - GFP prevents vesiculation and induces the for - mation of long membrane tubules terminated with a prom - inent bulb ( Orth and McNiven , 2003 ) that resemble those observed after expression of LIMK1 - kd or S3A coﬁlin . It will be now important to precisely deﬁne the role of LIMK1 and coﬁlin in membrane protrusion , tubulation , and scission . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are greatly indebted to Carlos Dotti ( European Molecular Biology Labo - ratory ) , Claudio Giraudo and Hugo Maccioni ( CIQUIBIC - Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cientı´ﬁcas y Te´cnicas ) , Enrique Rodriguez - Boulan ( Cornell Medical College ) , Gery Kreitzer ( Cornell Medical College ) , and Tony Pawson ( Mt . Sinai Hospital , Toronto , ON Canada ) for providing some of the con - structs used in this study . We specially thank Dr . James Bamburg for the critical reading of the article , helpful discussions , and for providing a phos - pho - coﬁlin rabbit polyclonal antibody . This work was supported by Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cientı´ﬁcas y Te´cnicas ( PICT - PIP4906 ) , Fondo Nacional Ciencia y Tecnia ( PICT 05 - 01697 ) , Beca Ministerio Salud , and a Fogarty International Research Collaborative Award grant ( to A . F . and A . C . ) . It also was supported by a Howard Hughes Medical Institute grant to A . C . awarded under the International Research Scholars Program . REFERENCES Abo , A . , Qu , J . , Cammarano , M . , Dan , C . , Fritsch , A . , Baud , A . , Belisle , B . , and Minden , A . ( 1998 ) . PAK4 , a novel effector for Cdc42Hs , is implicated in the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton and in the formation of ﬁlopodia . EMBO J . 22 , 6527 – 6540 . Aizawa , H . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Phosphorylation of coﬁlin by LIM - kinase is necessary for semaphorin 3A - induced growth cone collapse . Nat . Neurosci . 4 , 367 – 373 . Arber , S . , Barbayannis , F . , Hanser , H . , Schneider , C . , Stanyon , C . , Bernard , O . , and Caroni , P . ( 1998 ) . Regulation of actin dynamics through phosphorylation of coﬁlin by LIM - kinase . Nature 393 , 805 – 812 . Bamburg , J . R . ( 1999 ) . Proteins of the ADF / coﬁlin family : essential regulators of actin dynamics . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 15 , 185 – 230 . Bamburg , J . R . , and Bray , D . ( 1987 ) . Distribution and cellular localization of actin - depolymerizing factor . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 2817 – 2825 . Belluji , U . , Lichtenberger , L . , Galaburda , A . , and Korenberg , J . R . ( 1999 ) . Bridg - ing cognition , the brain and molecular genetics : evidence from Williams syndrome . Trends Neurosci . 22 , 187 – 207 . Birkenfeld , J . , Betz , H . , and Roth , D . ( 2001 ) . Inhibition of neurite extension by overexpression of individual domains of LIMK1 . J . Neurochem . 78 , 924 – 927 . Bishop , A . , and Hall , A . ( 2000 ) . Rho GTPases and their effector proteins . Biochem . J . 248 , 241 – 255 . Bradke , F . , and Dotti , C . G . ( 1999 ) . The role of local actin instability in axon formation . Science 283 , 1931 – 1934 . Camera , P . , Santos Da Silva , J . , Grifﬁths , G . , Giuffrida , M . , Ferrara , L . , Schu - bert , V . , Imarisio , S . , Silengo , L . , Dotti , C . , and Di Cunto , F . ( 2003 ) . Citron - N is a neuronal Rho - associated protein involved in Golgi organization through actin cytoskeletal organization . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 1071 – 1078 . Cohen , D . , Musch , A . , and Rodriguez - Boulan , E . ( 2001 ) . Selective control of basolateral membrane protein polarity by Cdc42 . Trafﬁc 2 , 556 – 564 . Dan , C . , Kelly , A . , Bernard , O . , and Minden , A . , . ( 2001 ) . Cytoskeletal changes regulated by the PAK4 serine - threonine kinase are mediated by LIMK1 and coﬁlin . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 32115 – 32121 . Daniels , R . H . , Hall , P . , and Bokoch , G . ( 1998 ) . Membrane targeting of p21 - activated kinase 1 ( PAK1 ) induces neurite outgrowth from PC12 cells . EM - BOJ . 17 , 754 – 764 . Dawid , I . , Bren , J . , and Toyama , R . ( 1998 ) . LIM domains : multiple roles as adapters and functional modiﬁers in protein interactions . Trends Genet . 14 , 156 – 162 . Dehmelt , L . , Smart , F . , Ozer , R . , and Halpain , S . ( 2003 ) . The role of microtu - bule - associated protein 2c in the reorganization of microtubules and lamelli - podia during neurite initiation . J . Neurosci . 23 , 9479 – 9490 . Doherty , P . , Williams , E . , Walsh , F . ( 1995 ) . A soluble chimeric form of the L1 glycoprotein stimulates neurite outgrowth . Neuron . 14 , 57 – 66 . Endo , M . , Ohashi , K . , Sasaki , Y . , Goshima , Y . , Niwa , R . , Uemura , T . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2003 ) . Control of growth cone motility and morphology by LIM kinase and slingshot via phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of coﬁlin . J . Neurosci . 23 , 2527 – 2537 . Erickson , J . , Zhang , C . , Kahn , R . , Evans , T . , and Cerione , P . ( 1996 ) . Mamma - lian Cdc42 is a brefeldin A - sensitive component of the Golgi apparatus . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 26850 – 26854 . Fucini , R . , Navarrete , A . , Vadakkan , C . , Lacomis , L . , Erdjument - Bromage , H . , Tempts , P . , and M . Stamnes , M . ( 2000 ) Activated ADP - ribosylation factor assembles distinct pools of actin in Golgi membranes . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 18824 – 18829 . Gallo , G . , Yee , H . , and Letourneau , P . C . ( 2002 ) . Actin turnover is required to prevent retraction driven by endogenous actomyosin contractility . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 1219 – 1228 . Giraudo , C . , Daniotti , J . , and Maccioni , H . ( 2001 ) . Physical and functional association of glycolipid N - acetyl - galactosaminyl and galactosyl transferases in the Golgi apparatus . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 1625 – 1630 . Gungabissoon , R . , and Bamburg , J . ( 2003 ) . Regulation of growth cone actin dynamics by ADF / Coﬁlin . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 51 , 411 – 420 . Heimann , K . , Percival , J . , Weiberger , R . , Gunning , P . , and Stow . J . ( 1999 ) Speciﬁc isoforms of actin - binding protein on distinct populations of Golgi - derived vesicles . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 10743 – 10750 . Hirschberg , K . , Miller , C . , Ellenberg , J . , Presley , J . , Siggia , E . , Phair , R . , and Lippincott - Schwartz , J . ( 1998 ) . Kinetic analysis of secretory protein trafﬁc and characterization of Golgi to plasma membrane transport intermediates in living cells . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 1485 – 1503 . Kaether , C . , Skebel , P . , and Dotti , C . G . ( 2000 ) . Axonal membrane proteins are transported in distinct carriers : a two - color video microscopy study in cul - tured hippocampal neurons . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 1213 – 1224 . Khun , T . , Meberg , P . , Brown , M . , Bernstein , B . , Minamide , L . , Jensen , J . , Okada , K . , Soda , E . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2000 ) . Regulating actin dynamics in S . Rosso et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3448 neuronal growth cones by ADF / coﬁlin and Rho family GTPases . J . Neurobiol . 44 , 126 – 144 . Kroschewski , R . , Hall , A . , and Mellman , I . ( 1999 ) . Cdc42 controls secretion and endocytic transport to the basolateral plasma membrane of MDCK cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 8 – 13 . Kunda , P . , Paglini , P . , Kosik , K . , Quiroga , S . , and Ca´ceres , A . ( 2001 ) . Evidence for the involvement of Tiam1 in axon formation . J . Neurosci . 21 , 2361 – 2372 . Lemmon , V . , Burden , S . , Payne , H . , Elslie , G . , and Havin , M . ( 1992 ) . Neurite growth on different substrates : permissive versus instructive inﬂuences and the role of adhesive strength . J . Neurosci . 12 , 818 – 825 . Mascotti , F . , Ca´ceres , A . , Pfenninger , K . , and Quiroga , S . ( 1997 ) . Expression and distribution of IGF - 1 receptors containing a b - subunit variant ( b - gc ) in developing neurons . J . Neurosci . 15 , 1447 – 1459 . Meberg , P . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2000 ) . Increase in neurite outgrowth mediated by overexpression of actin depolymerizing factor . J . Neurosci . 20 , 2459 – 2469 . Meberg , P . , Ono , S . , Minamide , L . , Takahashi , M . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 1998 ) . Actin depolymerizing factor and coﬁlin phosphorylation dynamics : response to signals that regulate neurite extension . Cell . Motil . Cytoskeleton 39 , 172 – 190 . Meng , Y . , Zhang , Y . , Tregoubov , V . , Janus , C . , Cruz , L . , MacDonald , J . , Wang , J . , Falls , D . , and Jia , Z . ( 2002 ) . Abnormal spine morphology and enhanced LTP in LIMK1 knockout mice . Neuron 35 , 121 – 133 . Michaelson , D . , Silletti , J . , Murphy G . , D’Eustachio , P . , Rush , M . , and M . Phillips , M . ( 2000 ) Differential localization of Rho GTPases in live cells : regulation by hypervariable regions and RhoGDI binding . J . Cell Biol . 152 , 111 – 126 . Musch , A . , Cohen , D . , Kreitzer , G . , and Rodriguez - Boulan , E . ( 2001 ) . Cdc42 regulates the exit of apical and basolateral proteins from the trans - Golgi network . EMBO J . 20 , 2171 – 2179 . Musch , A . , Cohen , D . , and Rodriguez - Boulan , E . ( 1997 ) . Myosin II is involved in the production of constitutive transport vesicles from the trans - Golgi network . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 291 – 306 . Nakata , T . , and N . Hirokawa , N . ( 1987 ) . Cytoskeletal reorganization of human platelets after stimulation revealed by the quick - freeze deep - etch technique . J . Cell Biol . 106 , 1771 – 1780 . Nakata , T . , Terada , S . , and Hirokawa , N . ( 1998 ) . Visualization of the dynamics of synaptic vesicle and plasma membrane proteins in living axons . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 659 – 674 . Orth , J . , and McNiven , M . ( 2003 ) . Dynamin at the actin - membrane interface . Curr . Op . Cell Biol . 15 , 31 – 39 . Paglini , G . , Kunda , P . , Quiroga , S . , Kosik , K . , and Ca´ceres , A . ( 1998 ) . Sup - pression of radixin and moesin alters growth cone morphology , motility , and process formation in primary cultured neurons . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 443 – 455 . Paglini , G . , Peris , L . , Quiroga , S . , and Ca´ceres , A . ( 2001 ) . The Cdk5 / p35 kinase associates with the Golgi apparatus and regulates membrane trafﬁc . EMBO Rep . 2 , 1139 – 1144 . Peretti , D . , Peris , L . , Rosso , S . , Quiroga , S . , and Caceres , A . ( 2001 ) . Evidence for the involvement of KIF4 in the anterogrado transport of L1 - containing vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 141 – 152 . Pfenninger , K . H . , Ellis , L . , Johnson , M . , Friedman , L . , and Somlo , S . ( 1983 ) . Nerve growth cones isolated from fetal rat brain : subcellular fractionation and characterization . Cell 35 , 573 – 584 . Pfenninger , K . H . , Laurino , L . , Peretti , D . , Wang , X . , Rosso , S . , Morﬁni , G . , Caceres , A . , and Quiroga , S . ( 2003 ) . Regulation of membrane expansion at the nerve growth cone . J . Cell Sci . 16 , 1209 – 1217 . Ponting , C . , Phillips , C . , Davies , K . , and Blake , D . ( 1997 ) . PDZ domains : targeting signaling molecules to sub - membranous sites . Bioessays 19 , 469 – 479 . Proschel , C . , Blouin , M - I . Gutowski , N . , Ludwig , R . , and Noble , M . ( 1995 ) . LIMK1 is predominantly expressed in neural tissue and phosphorylates serine threonine and tyrosine residues in vitro . Oncogene 11 , 1271 – 1281 . Ridley , A . ( 2001 ) . Rho proteins : linking signaling with membrane trafﬁcking . Trafﬁc 2 , 303 – 310 . Rozelle , A . L . , Machesky , L . , Yamamoto , Y . , Driessens , M . , Insall , R . , Roth , M . , Luby - Phelps , K . , Marriot , G . , Hall , A . , and Yin , E . ( 2000 ) . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 bisphosphate induces actin - based movements of raft - enriched vesicles through WASP - Arp2 / 3 . Curr . Biol . 10 , 311 – 320 . Ruthel , G . , and Banker , G . ( 1998 ) . Actin - dependent anterograde movements of growth - cone like structures along growing hippocampal axons : a novel form of axonal transport ? Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 40 , 160 – 173 . Ruthel , G . , and Banker , G . ( 1999 ) . Role of moving growth cone - like waves structures in the outgrowth of cultured hippocampal axons and dendrites . J . Neurobiol . 39 , 97 – 106 . Sampo , B . , Kaech , S . , Kunz , S . , and Banker , G . ( 2003 ) . Two distinct mecha - nisms target membrane proteins to the axonal surface . Neuron 37 , 611 – 624 . Sarmiere , P . , and Bamburg , J . ( 2004 ) . regulation of the neuronal actin cytoskel - eton by ADF / Coﬁlin . J . Neurobiol 58 , 103 – 117 . Shi , S . H . , Jan , L . Y . , and Jan , Y . N . ( 2003 ) . Hippocampal neuronal polarity speciﬁed by spatially localized mPar3 / mPar6 and Pi3 - kinase activity . Cell 112 , 63 – 75 . Silverman , M . A . , Kaech , S . , Jareb , M . , Burack , M . , Vogt , L . , Sonderegger , P . , and Banker , G . ( 2001 ) . Sorting and directed transport of membrane proteins during development of hippocampal neurons in culture . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 98 , 7051 – 7057 . Sumi , T . , Matsumoto , K . , Takai , Y . , and Nakamura , T . ( 1999 ) . Coﬁlin phos - phorylation and actin cytoskeletal dynamics regulated by Rho - and Cdc42 - activated LIM - kinase 2 . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 1519 – 1532 . Valderrama , F . , Luna , A . , Babia , T . , Martinez - Menarquez , J . , Ballesta , J . , Barth , H . , Chaponnier , C . , Renau - Piqueras , J . , and Egea , G . ( 2000 ) . The Golgi - asso - ciated COP1 - coated buds and vesicles contain (cid:3) / (cid:4) - actin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 1560 – 1565 . Wang , F . , Herzmark , P . , Weiner , O . D . , Srinivasan , S . , Servant , G . , and Bourne , H . R . ( 2002 ) . Lipids products of PI ( 3 ) Ks maintain persistent cell polarity and directed motility in neutrophils . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 509 – 512 . Weiner , O . D . , Neilsen , P . , Prestwich , G . , Kirschner , M . , Cantley , L . , and Bourne , H . R . ( 2002 ) . A PtdInsP3 - and Rho GTPase - mediated positive feed - back loop regulates neutophil plarity . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 509 – 512 . Yang , N . , Higuchi , O . , Ohashi , K . , Nagata , K . , Wada , A . , Kangawa , K . , Nishida , E . , and Mizuno , K . ( 1998 ) . Coﬁlin phosphorylation by LIMK1 and its role in Rac - mediated actin reorganization . Nature 393 , 809 – 812 . Yang , N . , and K . Mizuno , K . ( 1999 ) . Nuclear export of LIM - kinase 1 mediated by two leucine - rich nuclear - export signals within the PDZ domain . Biochem . J . 338 , 793 – 796 . LIMK1 Regulates Golgi Dynamics Vol . 15 , July 2004 3449