Current Directions in Psychological Science21 ( 4 ) 258 – 262 © The Author ( s ) 2012 Reprints and permission : sagepub . com / journalsPermissions . nav DOI : 10 . 1177 / 0963721412447622 http : / / cdps . sagepub . com In an early attempt to understand the processes underlying mental arithmetic , Hitch ( 1978 ) used several experiments to outline the contributions of the working memory system to mathematical problem solving . Multidigit problems , such as 325 + 46 , were presented orally , and participants were asked to report their solution strategies , which involved breaking the solution process into sequential stages . Hitch’s analysis showed that mental arithmetic requires the temporary storage of initial information and partial results , the retrieval of infor - mation from long - term memory ( LTM ) , and the selection and use of strategies . The focus on these research themes has con - tinued into the present day . Although Hitch’s study did not examine individual differences in working memory capacity ( WMC ; a measure of attentional control ; Engle , 2002 ; Hasher & Zacks , 1988 ) , it provided theoretical groundwork explicat - ing the role of WMC in analytic problem solving . More recently , research has also addressed WMC’s role in creative problem solving . In this article , we will consider some poten - tial differences between these two types of problem solving ( Wiley & Jarosz , 2012 ) . Mathematical Problem Solving The most straightforward relationships between WMC and ana - lytical problem solving have been studied using mathematical problem - solving tasks . Dual - task studies have demonstrated that the disruptive effects of performing a concurrent task are particularly acute on multidigit problems that require a sequence of steps , carrying , or borrowing . Similarly , errors are particu - larly likely when problem solving involves intermediate solu - tions or nested goals . Studies using individual - differences approaches have shown that WMC predicts multidigit problem solving ( Seyler , Kirk , & Ashcraft , 2003 ) . Further , WMC demands are highest in the early stages of mathematical - skill acquisition ( Geary , Hoard , Byrd - Craven , & DeSoto , 2004 ) . However , the performance of concurrent executive tasks has also been found to disrupt the ability to solve even single - digit arithmetic problems , which suggests that WMC may relate to the ability to successfully retrieve math facts from LTM . In turn , recognizing the likelihood of successful retrieval may also affect the strategies that people choose . Low - WMC students continue to use counting strategies to compute solutions to problems even when those solutions are already present in LTM , and they may also be more susceptible to interference when retrieving number facts ( Geary et al . , 2004 ) . In a direct test of this idea , Mattarella - Micke and Beilock ( 2010 ) found that WMC helps reduce conflict from irrelevant operations ( e . g . , sums when products are required ) . An alternative explanation links differences in retrieval to differences in the quality of the encoding of math information in LTM . For answers to addition problems to be stored in LTM , both the addends and sums have to be present in WMC simultaneously . Because low - WMC children use slow count - ing procedures , they may develop weaker problem - answer associations ( Geary et al . , 2004 ) . Word - problem solving also seems to depend on WMC to help with interpreting problem statements , resisting distrac - tion from irrelevant problem information , and transforming problem representations ( Wiley & Jarosz , 2012 ) . For example , Corresponding Author : Jennifer Wiley , 1007 West Harrison St . , MC 285 , University of Illinois at Chicago , Chicago , IL 60607 E - mail : jwiley @ uic . edu Working Memory Capacity , Attentional Focus , and Problem Solving Jennifer Wiley and Andrew F . Jarosz University of Illinois at Chicago Abstract Attentional focus is important for many cognitive processes , including problem solving . In this article , we discuss working memory capacity ( WMC ) , a construct related to the ability to focus attention , and its differential effects on analytic and creative problem solving . One of the main ways in which WMC benefits analytic problem solving seems to be that it helps problem solvers to control their attention , resist distraction , and narrow their search through a problem space . Conversely , several lines of recent evidence have shown that too much focus can actually harm performance on creative problem - solving tasks . Keywords working memory capacity , problem solving , creativity Working Memory Capacity and Problem Solving 259 word problems involving comparisons of quantity are notori - ously difficult to solve , a fact attributed to wording that is inconsistent with the operations that are required for solution ( e . g . , the phrasing of the word problem “How many marbles does Jane have more than Mary ? ” implies addition , but the problem requires subtraction ) . These problems may be partic - ularly difficult for individuals with low WMC , either because of this inconsistency between wording and required operations or the lack of a verbal cue suggesting the correct operation , or because the problems require the creation of multiple simulta - neous representational expressions ( Thevenot & Oakhill , 2006 ) . Other work has suggested that WMC relates to the abil - ity to mentally transform the order of information in problem statements ( e . g . , when the to - be - solved entity comes before the equal sign ) . WMC also seems related to the accurate classification of problems—for example , recognizing when a problem requires a particular operation ( e . g . , subtraction ) or solution strategy ( e . g . , isolation ; Swanson , Cooney , & Brock , 1993 ) —and is thus necessarily related to the ability to select important infor - mation to include in a problem representation . Just as WMC may aid the retrieval or encoding of math facts in LTM , differ - ences in WMC may also relate to differences in the retrieval or encoding of problem classifications or schemas . A final , burgeoning area of research has been exploring dif - ferent types of stressors ( Ashcraft & Krause , 2007 ) . As might be expected , math anxiety relates negatively to mathematical problem solving . Although anxiety has little effect on the abil - ity to solve simple addition and multiplication problems , it has larger effects on the ability to solve more complex problems , including mixed fractions , algebraic equations , and carry operations . Anxiety effects may stem from a functional decrease in WMC due to rumination , which effectively adds an additional task to any target activity . Even a subtle stereo - type threat can significantly decrease both WMC and success in solving complex problems . Although one might suspect that individuals with lower WMC should be more vulnerable to the negative effects of anxiety or threat , it is high - WMC individu - als whose performance seems to be the most harmed by high - pressure conditions ( Beilock & Carr , 2005 ) . In summary , attentional focus , or WMC , is helpful in many ways for mathematical problem solving . For solving even sim - ple problems , WMC matters . WMC - related differences may result from differences in encoding or retrieval of math - related knowledge structures in LTM , in the ability to deal with interfer - ence from competing information , in the ability to limit distrac - tion from irrelevant problem features , and in the ability to generate or manipulate mental problem representations . Creative Problem Solving As outlined in the preceding section , several processes under - lying effective analytic problem solving are aided by WMC . One of WMC’s main benefits to problem solving seems to be that WMC helps solvers to focus their attention , resist distrac - tion , and narrow their search through a problem space . How - ever , one can imagine that these aspects of WMC might harm the ability to solve problems that require a broad search . A critical distinction between creative and analytic problem solving is that in creative problem solving , the most dominant solutions or most obvious solution paths will lead to initial failure ( i . e . , impasse ) rather than success . When a creative problem is not immediately solvable , reaching the solution seems to require either a completely original approach ( i . e . , restructuring ) or a novel combination of diverse bits of infor - mation through remote associations in memory . Several lines of evidence have now shown that too much focus can actually harm creative problem solving . Some studies have shown that WMC does not play the same role in creative problem solving as in analytic problem solving . Ash and Wiley ( 2006 ) explored the role of WMC in both the initial search phase of problem solving and the subse - quent phase of solution following impasse . To do this , they developed two versions of a set of insight problems , one with many moves available ( MMA ) before impasse and one with few moves available ( FMA ) before impasse . WMC predicted success in solving MMA , but not FMA , problems . Because FMA problems isolated the restructuring component of the problems , these results suggest that restructuring during cre - ative problem solving did not require controlled attention , whereas the search through the initial problem space in the MMA problems did . Fleck ( 2008 ) demonstrated that WMC uniquely predicted analytic problem solving over and above the effects of short - term memory ( STM ) , whereas creative problem solving was uniquely related only to STM . Similarly , Gilhooly and Fioratou ( 2009 ) found that attentional control , as measured by task - switching measures , predicted performance only on analytic problems , not insight problems . Thus , several findings have demonstrated that attentional control plays a greater role in analytic problem solving than in creative prob - lem solving . Other studies have supported a more extreme conclusion : Some of the very mechanisms that allow for successful ana - lytic problem solving might actually impair creative problem solving . This was first demonstrated not by a study on WMC , but rather by a study examining the effects of domain - specific knowledge on creative problem solving ( Wiley , 1998 ) . Exper - tise generally aids problem solving by allowing solvers to restrict their attention to promising alternatives and to search only a portion of the solution space . However , when solutions reside outside the range of typical responses , expertise can misdirect solvers , leading them to focus their search in incor - rect areas and thereby retarding or preventing solution . Indeed , solvers with domain - specific knowledge related to misleading solutions were less likely to find creative solutions to problems on the Remote Associates Test ( RAT ) , which requires solvers to generate a word that forms a common com - pound phrase with each of three presented words . On a RAT 260 Wiley , Jarosz problem in which the three words presented were “plate , ” “broken , ” and “shot , ” baseball experts were more likely to be stuck on the incorrect solution “home” and were less likely to find the correct solution , “glass . ” A follow - up investigation revealed that high - WMC participants who were fixated by their prior baseball knowledge were the least likely to overcome their mental sets and reach novel solutions ( Ricks , Turley - Ames , & Wiley , 2007 ) . In related work , Beilock and DeCaro ( 2007 ) found that high - WMC participants experi - enced greater Einstellung on the Luchins water - jugs task . These participants persisted in using a complex solution that worked on initial problems and were less likely to find a sim - pler means of solving once it was possible , whereas the low - WMC participants found it immediately . Similarly , patients with lateral prefrontal cortex lesions seem to experience less fixation from prior knowledge on matchstick arithmetic prob - lems . Normal adults experience great difficulty when trying to move just one matchstick to make III + III = III into a correct arithmetic statement , but these patients are twice as likely to find a solution ( Reverberi , Toraldo , D’Agostini , & Skrap , 2005 ) . A growing number of findings have suggested that high - WMC individuals may employ complex strategies when simpler , more elegant , or more direct approaches are available ( DeCaro & Beilock , 2010 ) . Other studies have suggested that low attentional control can also benefit creative problem solving by increasing sensi - tivity to peripheral cues . Older adults tend to exhibit low WMC and poor attentional control , but this can benefit their problem solving when “distracting” information actually pro - vides solution - related cues ( Kim , Hasher , & Zacks , 2007 ) . And performance on the RAT has been found to correlate with the ability take advantage of peripherally presented cues ( Ansburg & Hill , 2003 ) . Thus , a deficit in attentional control positively predicts performance on creative - problem - solving tasks , which suggests that “leaky” attention can sometimes be a good thing : It allows external cues to prime a range of solu - tions during the creative - problem - solving process . One recent study demonstrated a link between attentional control and creative problem solving in yet another way : through a manipulation of attentional control via alcohol intoxication ( Jarosz , Colflesh , & Wiley , 2012 ) . After their blood alcohol content level had reached . 075 , participants experienced a significant deficit in WMC but showed improve - ments in creative problem solving . Instead of narrowing the focus of attention , drinking appears to make attention more diffuse , allowing intoxicated individuals to better access remote solutions . Convergent findings have come from studies using differences in cognitive - control systems stemming from time of day , sleep , mood , and affective states ( Cai , Mednick , Harrison , Kanady , & Mednick , 2009 ; Rowe , Hirsh , & Anderson , 2007 ; Wieth & Zacks , 2011 ) . Even prompting solvers to “use their gut” during creative problem solving seems to encourage a more intuitive , less analytic , or less focused approach that improves performance ( Aiello , Jarosz , Cushen , & Wiley , 2012 ) . In summary , these findings suggest that too much focus or attentional control may limit creative problem solving—it may limit the scope of solutions that are explored and lead solvers to adopt or persist in nonoptimal strategies . A more passive approach to problem solving , or a more diffuse or leaky atten - tional state , may be better for creative problem solving . A Little of Each Our main goal in this overview has been to highlight dissocia - tions between analytic and creative problem solving in their relation to attentional focus as measured by WMC . Although a main conclusion is that creative problem solving may rely on constructs such as diffuse or broad attention to a greater extent than analytic problem solving does , in the end , it must be rec - ognized that most cases of real - world problem solving will likely require a mix of convergent and divergent processes ( Martindale , 1995 ) . Said another way , most problem solving may require a mix of non - goal - directed associative processes and more controlled , attention - demanding processes ( Small - wood & Schooler , 2006 ) . It is not the case that people with low WMC are always nec - essarily better creative problem solvers . Rather , the tendency to allocate attention in a diffuse way may be an individual difference that serves to promote creative problem solving ( Mendelsohn , 1976 ) . Alternatively , advantages in creative prob - lem solving may be related to individual differences in the abil - ity to flexibly switch between different modes or types of processing . This has long been an attractive idea , but there is not yet a definitive paradigm that allows for the measurement of individual differences along these lines . Some promising leads have demonstrated that bilinguals have an increased likelihood of solving insight versus analytic problems , whereas monolin - guals show the opposite pattern ( Cushen & Wiley , 2011 ) . Bilin - guals have also been suggested to possess superior switching abilities ( Bialystok , Craik , Green , & Gollan , 2009 ) . Other stud - ies have also found that individual differences in the rate of ambiguous figure reversal , the ability to identify hidden figures or objects , or the ability to generate novel patterns can predict creative problem solving ( Wiseman , Watt , Gilhooly , & Geor - giou , 2011 ) . A tentative explanation for these results is that a greater tendency to perform well on these tasks may actually be due to a greater ability to switch between global and local , or passive and analytic , modes of processing , and that this flexibil - ity may promote successful creative problem solving ( Small - wood & Schooler , 2006 ) . The WMC - related findings discussed above largely indi - cate that at least some processes underlying creative problem solving are distinct from those involved in analytic problem solving . As such , the results are consistent with findings from other perspectives that suggest a distinction between the two types of problems in relation to metacognitive access to solu - tion progress , initial problem representations ( Ash & Wiley , 2008 ) , and patterns of brain activation ( Kounios & Jung - Beeman , 2009 ) . The recognition that creative problem solving Working Memory Capacity and Problem Solving 261 may be harmed by attentional focus also supports the need for a dual - process model of problem solving that incorporates both analytic and nonanalytic processes . This review at the intersection of WMC and problem solving demonstrates that a second , less - goal - directed and less - controlled route is needed to explain key findings in this body of literature . Conclusions WMC influences problem solving , but not always positively , and not always negatively . This is because WMC is not just the size of one’s buffer . STM storage functions are important , and they do underlie basic processes in both analytic and creative problem solving . However , differences in WMC also reflect differences in attentional focus and control . In analytic - problem - solving contexts , such as mathematical problem solving , the greater focus and control associated with higher WMC generally support more successful problem solving . Yet some processes involved in creative problem solving do not depend on these executive functions , and their success can be harmed by too much focus . Successful problem solving depends on the needs of the situ - ation . Sometimes focus is needed , sometimes a lack of focus is needed , and sometimes a solver would do best to seek out con - texts that help promote one or the other ( e . g . , drinking , sleeping , altering his or her mood , or problem solving at different times of day ) . Revising our thinking about WMC by recognizing that attentional focus may have both positive and negative repercus - sions , as well as revising our thinking about problem solving by recognizing that it requires both analytic and nonanalytic pro - cesses , will provide a better understanding of both . Recommended Reading Ashcraft , M . H . , & Guillaume , M . M . ( 2009 ) . Mathematical cognition and the problem size effect . In B . H . Ross ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation ( Vol . 51 , pp . 121 – 154 ) . Burlington , VT : Academic Press / Elsevier . A review of mathematical problem solving , with a focus on math anxiety and WMC . Jarosz , A . F . , Colflesh , G . J . H . , & Wiley , J . ( 2012 ) . ( See References ) . A recent study examining alcohol and creative problem solving . Kounios , J . , & Jung - Beeman , M . ( 2009 ) . ( See References ) . A cogni - tive neuroscience - oriented review of creative problem solving . Wiley , J . , & Jarosz , A . F . ( 2012 ) . ( See References ) . A recent , compre - hensive review on the topic of WMC and problem solving . Acknowledgments We thank Ivan K . Ash , Patrick J . Cushen , and Thomas D . Griffin for their analytic and creative contributions to our thinking about these topics over the years . Declaration of Conflicting Interests The authors declared that they had no conflicts of interest with respect to their authorship or the publication of this article . References Aiello , D . , Jarosz , A . F . , Cushen , P . J . , & Wiley , J . ( 2012 ) . Firing the executive : When an analytic approach does and does not help problem solving . Journal of Problem Solving , 4 ( 2 ) , Article 6 . Ansburg , P . I . , & Hill , K . ( 2003 ) . Creative and analytic thinkers differ in their use of attentional resources . Personality and Individual Differences , 34 , 1141 – 1152 . Ash , I . K . , & Wiley , J . ( 2006 ) . The nature of restructuring in insight : An individual differences approach . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 13 , 66 – 73 . Ash , I . K . , & Wiley , J . ( 2008 ) . Hindsight bias in insight and math - ematical problem solving : Evidence of different retrospective reconstruction mechanisms for metacognitive vs . situational judgments . Memory & Cognition , 36 , 822 – 837 . Ashcraft , M . H . , & Krause , J . A . ( 2007 ) . Working memory , math per - formance , and math anxiety . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 14 , 243 – 248 . Beilock , S . L . , & Carr , T . H . ( 2005 ) . When high - powered people fail : Working memory and “choking under pressure” in math . Psycho - logical Science , 16 , 101 – 105 . Beilock , S . L . , & DeCaro , M . S . ( 2007 ) . From poor performance to suc - cess under stress : Working memory , strategy selection , and math - ematical problem solving under pressure . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 33 , 983 – 998 . Bialystok , E . , Craik , F . I . M . , Green , D . W . , & Gollan , T . H . ( 2009 ) . Bilingual minds . Psychological Science in the Public Interest , 10 , 89 – 129 . Cai , D . J . , Mednick , S . A . , Harrison , E . M . , Kanady , J . C . , & Med - nick , S . C . ( 2009 ) . REM , not incubation , improves creativity by priming associative networks . Proceedings of the National Acad - emy of Sciences , USA , 106 , 10130 – 10134 . Cushen , P . J . , & Wiley , J . ( 2011 ) . Aha ! Voila ! Eureka ! Bilingualism and insightful problem solving . Learning and Individual Differ - ences , 21 , 458 – 462 . DeCaro , M . S . , & Beilock , S . L . ( 2010 ) . The benefits and perils of attentional control . In M . Csikszentmihalyi & B . Bruya ( Eds . ) , Effortless attention : A new perspective in the cognitive science of attention and action ( pp . 51 – 73 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Engle , R . W . ( 2002 ) . Working memory capacity as executive atten - tion . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 11 , 19 – 23 . Fleck , J . I . ( 2008 ) . Working memory demands in insight versus ana - lytic problem solving . European Journal of Cognitive Psychol - ogy , 20 , 139 – 176 . Geary , D . C . , Hoard , M . K . , Byrd - Craven , J . , & DeSoto , M . C . ( 2004 ) . Strategy choices in simple and complex addition : Contributions of working memory and counting knowledge for children with mathematical disability . Journal of Experimental Child Psychol - ogy , 88 , 121 – 151 . Gilhooly , K . J . , & Fioratou , E . ( 2009 ) . Executive functions in insight versus non - insight problem solving : An individual differences approach . Thinking & Reasoning , 15 , 355 – 376 . 262 Wiley , Jarosz Hasher , L . , & Zacks , R . T . ( 1988 ) . Working memory , comprehension , and aging : A review and a new view . Psychology of Learning and Motivation , 22 , 193 – 225 . Hitch , G . J . ( 1978 ) . The role of short - term working memory in mental arithmetic . Cognitive Psychology , 10 , 302 – 323 . Jarosz , A . F . , Colflesh , G . J . H . , & Wiley , J . ( 2012 ) . Uncorking the muse : Alcohol intoxication facilitates creative problem solv - ing . Consciousness and Cognition , 21 , 487 – 493 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . concog . 2012 . 01 . 002 Kim , S . , Hasher , L . , & Zacks , R . T . ( 2007 ) . Aging and a benefit of distractibility . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 14 , 301 – 305 . Kounios , J . , & Jung - Beeman , M . ( 2009 ) . Aha ! The cognitive neuro - science of insight . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 18 , 210 – 216 . Martindale , C . ( 1995 ) . Creativity and connectionism . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Fink ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 249 – 268 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Mattarella - Micke , A . , & Beilock , S . L . ( 2010 ) . Situating math word problems : The story matters . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 17 , 106 – 111 . Mendelsohn , G . A . ( 1976 ) . Associative and attentional processes in creative performance . Journal of Personality , 44 , 341 – 369 . Reverberi , C . , Toraldo , A . , D’Agostini S . , & Skrap , M . ( 2005 ) . Bet - ter without ( lateral ) frontal cortex ? Insight problems solved by frontal patients . Brain , 128 , 2882 – 2890 . Ricks , T . R . , Turley - Ames , K . J . , & Wiley , J . ( 2007 ) . Effects of work - ing memory capacity on mental set due to domain knowledge . Memory & Cognition , 35 , 1456 – 1462 . Rowe , G . , Hirsh , J . B . , & Anderson , A . K . ( 2007 ) . Positive affect increases the breadth of attentional selection . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , USA , 104 , 383 – 388 . Seyler , D . J . , Kirk , E . P . , & Ashcraft , M . H . ( 2003 ) . Elementary sub - traction . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Mem - ory , and Cognition , 26 , 1339 – 1352 . Smallwood , J . , & Schooler , J . W . ( 2006 ) . The restless mind . Psycho - logical Bulletin , 132 , 946 – 958 . Swanson , H . L . , Cooney , J . B . , & Brock , S . ( 1993 ) . The influence of working memory and classification ability on children’s word problem solution . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 55 , 374 – 395 . Thevenot , C . , & Oakhill , J . ( 2006 ) . Representations and strategies for solving dynamic and static arithmetic word problems : The role of working memory capacities . Journal of Cognitive Psychology , 18 , 756 – 775 . Wieth , M . , & Zacks , R . ( 2011 ) . Time of day effects on problem solv - ing : When the non - optimal is optimal . Thinking & Reasoning , 17 , 387 – 401 . Wiley , J . ( 1998 ) . Expertise as mental set : The effects of domain knowledge in creative problem solving . Memory & Cognition , 26 , 716 – 730 . Wiley , J . , & Jarosz , A . F . ( 2012 ) . How working memory capacity affects problem solving . Psychology of Learning and Motivation , 56 , 185 – 227 . Wiseman , R . , Watt , C . , Gilhooly , K . , & Georgiou , G . ( 2011 ) . Creativ - ity and the ease of ambiguous figural reversal . British Journal of Psychology , 102 , 615 – 622 .