Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 21 , 4061 – 4067 , December 1 , 2010 MB O C TECHNICAL PERSPECTIVE A Guide to Simple and Informative Binding Assays Thomas D . Pollard Departments of Molecular Cellular and Developmental Biology , of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry and of Cell Biology , Yale University , New Haven , CT 06520 - 8103 Submitted August 9 , 2010 ; Revised August 18 , 2010 ; Accepted August 26 , 2010 Monitoring Editor : Douglas Kellogg The aim of binding assays is to measure interactions between two molecules , such as a protein binding another protein , a small molecule , or a nucleic acid . Hard work is required to prepare reagents , but ﬂaws in the design of many binding experiments limit the information obtained . In particular many experiments fail to measure the afﬁnity of the reactants for each other . This essay describes simple methods to get the most out of valuable reagents in binding experiments . INTRODUCTION One of the most common experiments in biochemistry and cellular and molecular biology is testing whether two mol - ecules interact with each other . This includes two proteins binding to each other , a small molecule binding to a protein , or a protein binding to a nucleic acid . In spite of apparent simplicity , many binding experiments reported in this and other journals are poorly designed and fall short of extract - ing all of the useful information available from the valuable reagents that were collected to do the experiment . In partic - ular many experiments fail to measure the afﬁnity of the reactants for each other . This is a loss , because binding reactions are not digital , with black / white , yes / no answers . Rather , the answer to whether two molecules interact with each other should always be quantitative , with a number that describes the afﬁnity , or if binding is weak , a limit on the possible afﬁnity . Many attempts to measure afﬁnities fail to meet one or both criteria for a successful binding experiment : the reac - tions must be at equilibrium at the time of measurement , and the concentration of one reactant must be varied . For example , after much labor an investigator prepares the re - actants and mixes them to allow binding ; so far , so good . But then the investigator makes the fatal mistake of disturbing the equilibrium by separating the reactants and products before measuring the extent of the reaction . For example , think of typical “GST pull down” or “immunoprecipitation” assays where pelleted material is washed free of the reac - tants . Even if the extent of the reaction is measured at equilibrium , many forget to vary the concentration of one of the reactants and thus miss the opportunity to measure the afﬁnity . Journals should insist ( where practical ) that all binding reactions be carried out at equilibrium and that reagents be used to measure ( where practical ) the equilibrium constant . Otherwise precious reagents and hard work go to waste . This essay explains proven experimental strategies to maximize the information obtained from reagents painstak - ingly acquired by biologists for binding studies . The tools for powerful binding assays are available in most laborato - ries . The essay also points out features of well - designed assays , which greatly simplify analysis of binding data . THE BASIC BINDING REACTION Let’s begin with a basic , reversible , bimolecular binding reac - tion : molecule A binds to molecule B forming a complex AB : A (cid:1) B % AB ( Reaction 1 ) Conceptually such reactions are straightforward . In the forward reaction ( indicated by the right facing arrow ) one molecule of A and one molecule of B collide and bind together . In this case the stoichiometry is 1 : 1 , which is true for most biological binding reactions . Where the ﬁnal prod - uct consists of more than two molecules , the process usually involves a series of reactions each with 1 : 1 stoichiometry . In the reverse reaction ( indicated by the left facing arrow ) one AB complex dissociates into A and B . The association reaction A (cid:1) B 3 AB involves two reac - tants , so it is by deﬁnition a second order reaction . The rate of such a second order reaction is Rate (cid:2) k (cid:1) ( A ) ( B ) ( Equation 1 ) The parameter k (cid:1) is a second order “association rate constant” ( lower case k ) with units of M (cid:3) 1 s (cid:3) 1 ( pronounced per molar per second ) . ( A ) and ( B ) are the free concentra - tions of the molecules available for reacting at the given moment in time . A useful rule of thumb is that association rate constants for molecules the sizes of typical proteins are often in the range of 10 6 to 10 7 M (cid:3) 1 s (cid:3) 1 . These reactions are typically limited by the rates of collisions between mole - cules , which are determined by both the rates of diffusion of the molecules and the sizes of their interaction surfaces . Small molecules diffuse faster than large molecules , but this DOI : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E10 - 08 - 0683 Address correspondence to : Thomas D . Pollard ( thomas . pollard @ yale . edu ) . © 2010 T . D . Pollard . This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author ( s ) . Two months after publication it is available to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported Creative Commons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . 4061 is offset by smaller interaction surfaces , restricting most protein association constants to this relatively small range . For more detail see Chapter 4 in Pollard and Earnshaw ( 2007 ) . When a complex of two molecules , AB , dissociates , AB 3 A (cid:1) B , AB is the only reactant , so by deﬁnition this is a ﬁrst - order reaction . The rate such a ﬁrst - order dissociation reaction is Rate (cid:2) k (cid:3) ( AB ) ( Equation 2 ) The parameter k (cid:3) is a ﬁrst - order rate constant called a “dissociation rate constant” with units of s (cid:3) 1 ( pronounced per second ) and ( AB ) is the concentration of AB . The disso - ciation rate constant is simply the probability that the com - plex will fall apart in a unit of time . EQUILIBRIUM CONSTANTS A number called the equilibrium constant characterizes the afﬁnity of molecules for each other . A few simple relation - ships deﬁne equilibrium constants and form the basis for determining their values experimentally . By deﬁnition at equilibrium the forward and reverse rates of a reaction are equal , so at equilibrium the forward and reverse rates of our binding reaction are equal : rate of binding (cid:2) k (cid:1) ( A ) ( B ) (cid:2) k (cid:3) ( AB ) (cid:2) rate of dissociation ( Equation 3 ) By deﬁnition the equilibrium constant ( capital K ) is equal to the ratio of the forward and reverse rate constants or the ratio of the concentration of products to the concentrations of free reactants at equilibrium . K eq (cid:2) k (cid:1) / k (cid:3) (cid:2) ( AB eq ) / ( A eq ) ( B eq ) ( Equation 4 ) Deﬁned in this way the equilibrium constant K eq for the binding reaction has the units of M (cid:3) 1 . This deﬁnition has the advantage that the value of K eq is proportional to the afﬁn - ity . Thus the larger the value of K eq , the stronger the reaction and the more completely the reactants A and B are con - verted into the product AB . The reciprocal of this expression for a binding reaction describes the “dissociation equilibrium constant” or K d K d (cid:2) k (cid:3) / k (cid:1) (cid:2) ( A eq ) ( B eq ) / ( AB eq ) ( Equation 5 ) This form of the equilibrium constant has the units of M , moles per liter . Biologists favor this deﬁnition owing to the familiar units . Deﬁned thus , the lower the value of K d , the stronger the reaction , and the more completely reactants A and B are converted into the product AB . Given the small range of association rate constants , the value of the dissociation rate constant often determines the afﬁnity . Low afﬁnity interactions with K d s in the micromolar range have dissociation rate constants around 1 s (cid:3) 1 . For a ﬁrst - order reaction this corresponds to a halftime for dissociation of 0 . 7 s ( t 1 / 2 (cid:2) ln 2 / k (cid:2) 0 . 693 / k ) . On the other hand , high - afﬁnity interactions with K d s in the nanomolar range have dissociation rate constants around 0 . 001 s (cid:3) 1 and half lives (cid:4) 10 min . The equilibrium constant is a thermodynamic parameter directly related to the free energy change ( (cid:5) G ) for the reac - tion under a particular set of conditions . (cid:5) G (cid:2) (cid:3) RT ln K eq ( Equation 6 ) where R is the gas constant and T is the absolute temper - ature . Favorable reactions have a large K eq and a large negative free energy change , which drives the reaction to - ward products . TWO STRATEGIES TO MEASURE EQUILIBRIUM CONSTANTS Two general options are available to measure afﬁnities . 1 ) In an equilibrium experiment , one determines the extent of the reaction as a function of the concentration of one of the reactants . Analysis of these data gives the equilibrium con - stant . 2 ) In a kinetic experiment , one determines the rates of the forward and reverse reactions as a function of the con - centration of one of the reactants . Analysis of these data gives the rate constants for the forward and reverse reac - tions . The ratio of these rate constants gives the equilibrium constant . The kinetic approach is more revealing , because it gives not only the thermodynamic parameter , the equilibrium constant , but also the rate constants , which characterize the dynamics of the system . Note that the street is one way from rate constants to equilibrium constants . Knowing only the afﬁnity from an equilibrium experiment reveals nothing about the rates of the forward or reverse reactions . Although generally stronger than equilibrium experiments , kinetic ex - periments often require more reagents and more sophisti - cated assays . EQUILIBRIUM BINDING EXPERIMENTS This section outlines the strategy to measure afﬁnity with an equilibrium binding experiment . The following sections pro - vide practical advice about each step . The reaction in question is simple reversible binding of molecules A and B : A (cid:1) B % AB , where K eq (cid:2) ( AB eq ) / ( A eq ) ( B eq ) and K d (cid:2) ( A eq ) ( B eq ) / ( AB eq ) . ( Equations 4 and 5 ) We will assume that the stoichiometry is 1 : 1 . Other more complicated outcomes are possible , but this is a reasonable starting assumption . The task is to measure the equilibrium concentrations of A , B , and AB over a range of concentrations of one of the reactants , A or B . With good design , this experiment is simple compared with the effort required to make the re - agents . With a powerful assay the whole experiment may take only a few minutes . Five steps yield the afﬁnity . Step 1 : Develop a sensitive assay to measure the concen - tration of A eq , B eq , or AB . Note that ( A eq ) and ( B eq ) are the concentrations of free A and free B . To reinforce this essen - tial point , this essay will use ( A free ) and ( B free ) . Measuring one of these concentrations usually sufﬁces for this simple type of reaction , because one generally knows the total concentrations of A and B and therefore can calculate the unknown concentrations by difference from the total con - centrations and measurements of ( A free ) , ( B free ) , or ( AB ) . Step 2 : Design an experiment with the lowest concentra - tion of A free , B free , or AB that can be measured accurately . Put some thought into which reactant to ﬁx and which to vary . Make the decision based on the abundance of the reactants available and the ease of the measurements The following examples use a low concentration of A . This key decision greatly simpliﬁes the experiment and its analysis . T . D . Pollard Molecular Biology of the Cell 4062 Step 3 : Set up a series of reactions , each with a ﬁxed , low concentration of total A and a wide range of concentrations of B . The concentrations of B free should span a range from less than the K d to high enough to convert essentially all of A into AB . Pilot experiments will reveal the appropriate concentrations . Step 4 : Let the reactions equilibrate . The time required is often much less ( seconds ) than often assumed . Then mea - sure either ( A free ) , ( B free ) , or ( AB ) without disturbing the equi - librium . Step 5 : Plot the concentration of AB versus the concentra - tion of B free and calculate the K d from the shape of the curve ( as explained below ) or from the concentration of B free re - quired for half of A total to be converted to AB . ADVICE ON ASSAYS TO MEASURE BINDING REACTIONS The assay for A free , B free , or AB should be sensitive and as simple as possible . Note again that A free and B free are the concentrations of free A and free B , not the total concentra - tions . The assay can be an optical measurement , a chemical measurement , the density of the band on a gel or an immu - noblot or anything else , but the signal must be directly proportional to the concentration . The following paragraphs explain how to use chemical and optical assays for binding reactions . Chemical Assays When properly calibrated , chemical assays including gel electrophoresis , ELISA , and immunoblots are excellent ways to measure concentrations with materials available in most labs , but these assays must be done without altering the equilibrium . Making chemical measurements at equilibrium is generally possible but rarely achieved . Faults with Nonequilibrium Chemical Assays Typical assays prepare an equilibrium mixture of reactants and products but then separate products from reactants , at which point the products start to dissociate to achieve a new equilibrium . Examples of this mistake are assays where products are pelleted , the supernatant containing the free reactants is removed , and the pellet is washed one or more times with buffer without reactants . Because the solution containing the resuspended pellet has no reactants , the for - ward reaction rate is zero and the products will dissociate . If the afﬁnity is low , the dissociation reaction is typically fast , for example (cid:4) 1 s (cid:3) 1 for a K d of 1 (cid:1) M . Therefore the products will dissociate with a half - time of (cid:6) 1 s , making it impossible to measure the equilibrium concentration of products . Equilibrium Chemical Assays One way to use a chemical assay at equilibrium is to sepa - rate products from reactants without disturbing the equilib - rium ( Figure 1 ) . If the products differ in sedimentation co - efﬁcient from one of the reactants , the products can be pelleted leaving an equilibrium mixture of reactants in the supernatant . For example , reactant B can be attached to a bead ( through a GST tag , for example ) and equilibrated with a solution of a low concentration of reactant A . Simply pelleting the beads does not change the equilibrium but separates all of the B attached to the beads along with any A bound to B from the free A in the supernatant . Rather than examining the pellet , simply measure the concentration of free A in the supernatant and calculate by difference the concentration of AB in the pellet . To measure afﬁnity carry out this assay with a low , ﬁxed concentration of A and a range of concentrations of B at - tached to beads ( by varying the concentration of beads ) . The equilibrium concentration of AB as a function of B free ( (cid:7) total B ) is the data required to calculate the afﬁnity . Figure 1 shows an example of such a quantitative pull down assay , where gel electrophoresis and Coomassie blue staining were used to measure the concentration of a puriﬁed Arp2 / 3 complex in the supernatant after equilibration with a range of concentrations of a GST - ligand bound to beads . In this case the ligand was a region from the tail of myosin - I . Note that this strategy can be applied to a crude system , if an assay such as a quantitative immunoblot or ELISA is available to measure free A . For example one can titrate a crude cellular extract , diluted to contain a low concentration of A , with a range of concentrations of B bound to beads and measure free A remaining in the supernatant . If one ﬁnds it necessary to measure the complex of AB in the pellet , this can be done with minimal washing using a cushion of glycerol or sucrose in the bottom of the tube . By keeping the washing time brief ( seconds ) the equilibrium will not drift too far . Washing through a cushion is done by 1 ) equilibrating the reaction , 2 ) pelleting the beads through a small volume of buffer with 5 – 10 % glycerol or sucrose , 3 ) removing the supernatant including most of the cushion , and 4 ) measuring bound B in the pellet . The Advantages of Optical Assays The rewards for developing an optical assay outweigh the effort , because optical measurements have the advantages of speed and simplicity . Speed allows for both equilibrium and kinetic measurements . Good optical assays measure the con - centration of one component in equilibrium with the other components of the reaction . Fluorescence Intensity The simplest optical assay is a difference in the ﬂuorescence intensity of the product compared with the reactants . In a Figure 1 . A quantitative GST pull down assay . Supernatant deple - tion assay for GST - 2 / 3 / A ( part of the tail of Acanthamoeba myo - sin - I ) binding amoeba Arp2 / 3 complex . Conditions : 0 . 3 mM amoeba Arp2 / 3 complex in 65 mM NaCl , 10 mM Tris ( pH 7 ) , 1 mM DTT was titrated with ( F ) GST - 2 / 3 / A immobilized on glutathione beads or ( E ) the same volumes of glutathione beads without GST - 2 / 3 / A . Beads were pelleted at 16 , 000 (cid:8) g , and supernatant proteins were separated by SDS - PAGE , stained with Coomassie , and scanned to measure the fraction bound . The binding isotherm gives a K d of (cid:7) 3 (cid:1) M . ( Inset ) Coomassie - stained gel of the supernatants showing Arp2 / 3 complex depletion . Numbers above each lane indicate total GST - 2 / 3 / A (cid:1) M concentration on the beads ( Lee et al . , 2000 ) . Binding Reactions Vol . 21 , December 1 , 2010 4063 few favorable cases the intrinsic tryptophan ﬂuorescence of a protein changes when a ligand binds . For example , poly - L - proline binding increases the intrinsic tryptophan ﬂuores - cence of proﬁlin ( Figure 2 ) . Unfortunately , few reactions give an intrinsic ﬂuorescence signal , but do not fail to check whether your system gives such a signal , because it will save much time and effort . A variant of this approach is a change in the ﬂuorescence intensity of a dye bound to one of the reactants when the product forms , but again such changes are not common . One example is the decrease in ﬂuores - cence of pyrene - labeled actin ﬁlaments when coﬁlin binds . This assay was used to collect the binding data for Figure 3 . Fluorescence Anisotropy A universally useful approach is to measure the ﬂuorescence anisotropy of one reactant tagged with a ﬂuorescent dye . Fluorescence anisotropy measures the rotational diffusion of a molecule , so when the reactant binds its partner , the larger product has a lower rotational diffusion coefﬁcient and a higher ﬂuorescence anisotropy . One example is the increase in ﬂuorescence anisotropy when a rhodamine - labeled frag - ment of the Wiskott Aldrich syndrome protein ( the VCA region of WASp ) binds Arp2 / 3 complex ( Figure 4 ) . One typically uses a very low concentration of the tagged mole - cule and titrates in a range of concentrations of the untagged partner molecule . This gives the afﬁnity of the tagged mol - ecule for its partner . The ﬂuorescent dye may inﬂuence the binding reaction , so an essential control with any tagged molecule is a competition experiment with the untagged molecule . Fixed concentrations of the tagged molecule and its partner are titrated with a range of concentrations of the untagged molecule to measure the afﬁnity of the untagged molecule for the partner . Other Optical Assays Fluorescence energy transfer is also useful to measure bind - ing but requires ﬂuorescent tags on both reactants , doubling the work in reagent preparation and doubling the chances of artifacts due to the labels . Some products scatter more light than the reactants , so light scattering can be used to measure these products . However , the signal is usually noisy compared with ﬂuorescence assays . Keep in mind that light scattering scales with the inverse fourth power of the wavelength , so using short wavelengths gives much higher signals . ADVICE ON EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN An ideal binding experiment has a ﬁxed total concentration of one of the two reactants , let’s choose A , that is lower than the K d . Ten - fold lower than the K d is ﬁne . Using a low concentration of total A simpliﬁes the execution of the ex - periment and interpretation of the data , because essentially all of the other reactant B is free under all conditions . The practical limitation is that the assay must be able to measure the concentration of free or bound A . Figure 2 . Equilibrium binding of poly - L - proline oligomers to pro - ﬁlin measured by the increase in intrinsic ﬂuorescence . These ex - periments tested the effects of peptide size and ionic strength on this simple bimolecular binding reaction . Conditions : 5 (cid:1) M Acan - thamoeba proﬁlin I in 10 mM Tris ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 75 mM KCl , and 3 . 1 mM NaN 3 , 22°C . Excitation 295 nm , emission intensity 318 nm . All data sets are normalized ( F / F max ) to their maximum ﬂuorescence change . Equilibrium dissociation constants ( K d ) were obtained by ﬁtting data directly using nonlinear least squares analysis . ( F ) L - proline 10 , K d (cid:2) 433 (cid:1) M proline ; ( * ) L - proline 15 , K d (cid:2) 344 (cid:1) M proline ; ( O ) L - proline 82 , K d (cid:2) 120 (cid:1) M proline ; and ( (cid:1) ) L - ( proline - proline - glycine ) 5 , K d (cid:2) 34 . 1 mM proline ; and ( (cid:1) ) L - ( proline - hy - droxyproline - glycine ) 5 ( Petrella et al . , 1996 ) . Figure 3 . Equilibrium binding of ﬁssion yeast coﬁlin to pyrene - labeled ADP - actin ﬁlaments measure by titrating 2 (cid:1) M pyrenyl actin ﬁlaments with 50 nM to 10 (cid:1) M S . pombe coﬁlin . Coﬁlin binding quenches the ﬂuorescence and was used to measure the extent of the reaction . This plot of binding density ( fraction of actin bound de - termined from the extent of quenching of ﬂuorescence ) versus free coﬁlin concentration is sigmoidal owing to positive cooperativity . The apparent K d (cid:2) 1 / w K a , where w is the cooperativity factor ( 8 . 5 in this case ) and K a (cid:2) k (cid:1) / k (cid:3) measured in kinetics experiments to be 0 . 12 (cid:1) M (cid:3) 1 , so the apparent K d is 1 . 0 (cid:1) M ( Andrianantoandro and Pollard , 2006 ) . Figure 4 . Fluorescence anisotropy assay of equilibrium binding of a rhodamine - labeled ligand to Arp2 / 3 complex . Rhodamine - WASp - VCA ( 0 . 025 (cid:1) M ) was titrated with the Arp2 / 3 complex in the presence ( F ; K d (cid:7) 0 . 05 (cid:1) M ) or absence ( (cid:1) ; K d (cid:2) 0 . 25 (cid:1) M ) of 5 (cid:1) M actin ﬁlaments ( Marchand et al . , 2001 ) . T . D . Pollard Molecular Biology of the Cell 4064 If one chooses a low concentration of total A , then the experiment is to determine the extent of the reaction over a wide range of concentrations of B . When the concentration of B is below the K d , most of B is free , because , given the low concentrations of both reactants , little binding will occur . At higher concentrations of B more AB forms , but the concen - tration of A is so low that virtually all of B is free . Because most of B is free both below and above the K d , B free (cid:7) B total one does not have to compensate for any B bound to A when analyzing the data . If the assay lacks the sensitivity to do the experiment with a concentration of A below the K d , then use the lowest practical concentration of A . Later , when analyzing the data ( see below ) , compensate for the ﬁnite amount of B bound to A at each concentration of total B in the sample . ANALYSIS OF EQUILIBRIUM BINDING DATA One plots the concentration of AB as a function of the concentration of B free . This plot will reveal the extent of the reaction . Providing that the experiment included high con - centrations of B , B will saturate A and the concentration of AB will reach a plateau . Without reaching this plateau , one does not know the amplitude of the reaction and , unfortu - nately , without the amplitude , one cannot calculate the equi - librium constant . Many binding experiments reported in reputable journals fail to saturate the reaction and reach a plateau of AB , compromising the value of the hard work . A Scatchard plot is an alternative method to plot the data as ( bound ) / ( free ) versus ( bound ) . This formulation was useful in the days before computers , because such plots of the data for a simple bimolecular reaction are linear . However , Scat - chard plots are now discouraged , because they can easily hide the fact that a binding curve did not reach a plateau . Let’s take a closer look at a binding curve such as Figure 1 . In a successful binding reaction , when B free is zero , all A is free and ( AB ) (cid:2) 0 . At the other extreme , when the con - centration of B free is high , all active A is bound to B . The binding curve can reveal whether some A is inactive , be - cause at very high concentrations of B some A is still free . It is important to document in this way the amount of inactive A , which can be ignored in the analysis . Some A may be inactive , because it is denatured , but the existence of inactive A may be interesting and important from a biological per - spective . For example , some A may be inactive because a posttranslational modiﬁcation compromises binding to B . Two methods are available to determine the equilibrium constant from the binding curve . For a simple bimolecular binding reaction a plot of the fraction of total molecule A that is bound ( the fractional saturation ) versus B free is a hyperbola : Fractional saturation of A (cid:2) ( B free ) / (cid:9) K d (cid:1) ( B free ) (cid:10) ( Equation 7 ) The shape of the hyperbola depends on the equilibrium constant . Readily available software can be used to ﬁt the equation to the data and calculate the equilibrium constant . Inspection of the equation reveals that the concentration of B free required to convert half of A to AB ( fractional satura - tion (cid:2) 0 . 5 ) is equal to the K d , which can be read directly from a binding curve ( Figure 1 ) . Practically speaking , experiments are set up with concen - trations of A total either below the K d or higher . If A total is well below the K d , essentially all B is free at every concen - tration of B used in the experiment , so B free (cid:7) B total . Under these circumstances a plot of ( AB ) versus B total is a hyper - bola with a shape dependent on the equilibrium constant and a half saturating value of B total is equal to K d . No math , software , or even much thinking is required with good experimental design . On the other hand , if the assay requires that the experi - ment be set up with a concentration of A total in the range of the K d , a considerable fraction of total B will be bound to A . Therefore an additional calculation is required to determine B free . Under these circumstances a quadratic equation can used to ﬁt the binding data and calculate the K d . (cid:9) LR (cid:10) / (cid:9) L (cid:10) (cid:2) ( ( (cid:9) R (cid:10) (cid:1) (cid:9) L (cid:10) (cid:1) K d ) (cid:3) ( ( (cid:9) R (cid:10) (cid:1) (cid:9) L (cid:10) (cid:1) K d ) ˆ 2 (cid:3) 4 * (cid:9) R (cid:10) * (cid:9) L (cid:10) ) ˆ 0 . 5 ) ) / 2 * (cid:9) L (cid:10) ( Equation 8 ) where [ LR ] is the concentration ligand bound to the recep - tor , [ R ] is the total concentration of receptor ( B total in our example , which is varied ) , [ L ] is the total concentration of ligand ( A total in our example ) , and [ LR ] / [ L ] is the fraction of ligand bound to receptor . This equation can be ﬁt to the data to obtain the K d . Using a low concentration of A total avoids having to deal with this equation . If the concentrations of both A and B are far above the K d , then essentially all of the added B will bind to A up to the point where A is saturated . Little or nothing is learned about the afﬁnity in such an experiment , except that the K d is less than the concentrations of A and B . COOPERATIVE BINDING REACTIONS Sometimes the plot of ( AB ) versus ( B free ) is not a hyperbola . This indicates something more complicated than a simple bimolecular binding reaction . For example , when the protein coﬁlin binds to actin ﬁlaments , the binding curve is sigmoi - dal , evidence for cooperativity in the reaction ( Figure 3 ) . Cooperativity means that binding of one ligand molecule to a receptor inﬂuences the afﬁnity of subsequent ligand mol - ecules to the same receptor . Binding of oxygen to the four sites on hemoglobin is the classic example ( Morgan and Chichester , 1935 ) , where each successive bound oxygen in - creases the afﬁnity for subsequent oxygens . Both of these examples exhibit positive cooperativity . Analysis of cooperativity requires models based on physical interactions , an interesting subject beyond the scope of this essay . Figuring out mechanisms in cooperative systems can be complicated . Investigators have been working on coopera - tive binding of oxygen to hemoglobin for more than 50 years and cooperative binding of coﬁlin to actin ﬁlaments for nearly two decades . For the purposes of this essay , the important point is that a binding curve from a well - designed assay will distinguish a simple bimolecular reaction from a cooperative reaction . KINETIC BINDING EXPERIMENTS As noted above kinetic experiments yield more information about binding reactions than equilibrium experiments , but kinetic experiments are much less common . One reason is that more materials , better assays , and specialized equip - ment are sometimes required . Another reason is that many investigators have no classroom or practical experience with the type of kinetic assays used to evaluate binding reactions . Most biochemistry courses cover only steady state enzyme kinetics . Although useful in some circumstances , neither the experiments nor the methods of analysis are appropriate for binding experiments . To make matters worse , most students ﬁnd analysis of steady state enzyme kinetics by Michaelis – Menton equations bafﬂing or irrelevant to their work . Binding Reactions Vol . 21 , December 1 , 2010 4065 Analysis of binding reactions requires a different type of kinetic experiments called presteady state or transient state kinetic experiments . Fortunately , the concepts behind and the execution of presteady experiments are not complicated . One simply changes conditions and observes the time course of the reequilibration of the system . For example , mixing A and B changes the conditions . Then one watches what hap - pens over time . Pretty simple . A detailed explanation of the methods used in presteady state kinetics is beyond the scope of this essay , but a few general points are useful for any biologist . Let’s consider our binding reaction from a kinetics perspective . The reaction is A (cid:1) B % AB . The goal is to measure the rate constants , k (cid:1) and k (cid:3) , for the two reactions . Some reactions can be mea - sured manually by using low concentrations of reactants to slow the reactions . For fast reactions that take place on a subsecond time scale mechanical mixing in stopped ﬂow or quenched ﬂow devices is required . Forward Binding Reaction The second order reaction is A (cid:1) B 3 AB , with rate (cid:2) k (cid:1) ( A ) ( B ) . One can measure the rate constant by observing the time course of the formation of AB after mixing A and B . To simplify the experiment one usually uses “pseudoﬁrst - order conditions” with a low concentration of one reactant , let’s say A , and a range of higher concentrations of the other reactant , let’s say B . As in the equilibrium binding experi - ments , the low concentration of A means that most of B is free and its concentration does not change as A is converted to AB . For the purpose of this argument , we will assume that binding is irreversible . With B in excess , the time course of the formation of AB ( (cid:2) the time course of the depletion of A ) is an exponential with an observed rate constant k obs (cid:2) k (cid:1) ( B ) . By varying ( B ) one can evaluate k (cid:1) . Dissociation Reaction The rate of a ﬁrst - order dissociation reaction AB 3 A (cid:1) B is equal to k (cid:3) ( AB ) . One can observe this reaction in several ways . Simplest , one can dilute an equilibrium mixture of A , B , and AB and observe the time course of the dissociation of AB to establish new equilibrium concentrations of A and B . Another strategy useful with optical assay is to compete a ﬂuorescent ligand from its receptor with a large excess of unlabeled ligand . The ﬂuorescent ligand dissociates at a rate determined by k (cid:3) and does not rebind , because the unla - beled ligand takes its place . Because many association reactions have rate constants in the range of 10 6 to 10 7 M (cid:3) 1 s (cid:3) 1 , the rate constant for dissocia - tion of the products is usually the main determinant of the afﬁnity . For example , dissociation rate constants will be on the order of 1 s (cid:3) 1 for a low afﬁnity reaction with a K d of 1 (cid:1) M and 0 . 001 s (cid:3) 1 for a high - afﬁnity reaction with a K d of 1 nM . Dealing with Reversible Reactions These examples ignore the reality that the binding reaction is reversible , which is legitimate for pseudoﬁrst - order condi - tions or the competition dissociation experiment . On the other hand , many kinetics experiments need to take both reactions into account—a more advanced topic . An impor - tant but surprising feature of a reversible binding reaction is that k obs for the formation of AB is equal to the sum of the rate constants for the two reactions , so for our reaction under pseudoﬁrst - order conditions k obs (cid:2) k (cid:1) ( B ) (cid:1) k (cid:3) . One way to reconcile this in your mind is that the time required for equilibration after mixing A and B is less , because the re - verse reaction limits the extent of the reaction . Note that if one knows K d from an equilibrium experi - ment and measures k (cid:3) or k (cid:1) , one can calculate the missing rate constant , because K d (cid:2) k (cid:3) / k (cid:1) . LINKED REACTIONS Many binding reactions actually occur in two steps : A (cid:1) B % AB % AB * ( Reaction 2 ) where the conformation of AB * differs from AB and the second reaction is a pair of reversible ﬁrst - order reactions . Often such a conformational change is favorable and will pull the overall reaction to the right . Most chemical assays will not distinguish AB and AB * , but the signals from AB and AB * differ in some optical assays , so kinetics can be used to characterize the second reaction . Everyone trying to understand molecular mechanisms , even experts on kinetics and thermodynamics , is tempted to violate fundamental principles by proposing mechanisms that sound nice but are impossible thermodynamically . One can avoid this trouble by paying attention to something called detailed bal - ance or “microreversibility , ” which outlaws perpetual motion machines . The concept of detailed balance is that the free energy change around any cycle of reactions must be zero . Thus the product of the equilibrium constants around the cycle must be one . An “energy square” with the linked binding reactions among molecules A , B , and C illustrates the concept . K 1 (cid:2) k (cid:1) 1 / k (cid:3) 1 B % AB K 4 (cid:2) k (cid:3) 4 / k (cid:1) 4 ( ( K 2 (cid:2) k (cid:1) 2 / k (cid:3) 2 BC % ABC K 3 (cid:2) k (cid:3) 3 / k (cid:1) 3 Note that direction of each reaction is deﬁned in one direction around this square , so reactions 1 and 2 are given as association reactions with K eq (cid:2) k (cid:1) / k (cid:3) while reactions 3 and 4 are given as dissociation reactions with K d (cid:2) k (cid:3) / k (cid:1) . If K 1 (cid:8) K 2 (cid:8) K 3 (cid:8) K 4 does not equal 1 , something is wrong . One can use energy squares to calculate unknown equi - librium constants . For example , if one knows that A binds to B with K eq (cid:2) 10 (cid:1) M (cid:3) 1 ( association reaction ) , B binds to C with K d (cid:2) 10 (cid:1) M ( dissociation reaction ) , and AB binds to C with K eq (cid:2) 1 (cid:1) M (cid:3) 1 ( association reaction ) , one can calculate the afﬁnity of BC for A . MAIN POINTS TO CONSIDER WHEN PLANNING A BINDING EXPERIMENT • Create a good assay to measure reactants or products . • Consider the advantages of optical assays . • Use a low concentration of one of the reactants . • Vary the concentration of the other reactant , including concentrations that saturate the ﬁrst reactant . • Do not disturb the equilibrium when measuring con - centrations of reactant or products . • Calculate the equilibrium constant from the dependence of complex formation on the concentration of the varied reactant . • Consider measuring rate constants to learn more about the reaction . • Check detailed balance to avoid pitfalls in linked reac - tions . T . D . Pollard Molecular Biology of the Cell 4066 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The author thanks his laboratory colleagues Jon Goss , Irene Reynolds Tebbs , and Shih - Chieh Ti for their suggestions on the text . This work in the author’s laboratory is supported by National Institutes of Health research grants GM - 026132 , GM - 026338 , and GM - 066311 . REFERENCES Andrianantoandro , E . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2006 ) . Mechanism of actin ﬁlament turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / coﬁlins . Mol . Cell 24 , 13 – 23 . Lee , W . - L . , Bezanilla , M . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2000 ) . Fission yeast myosin - I , Myo1p , stimulates actin assembly by Arp2 / 3 complex and shares functions with WASp . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 789 – 800 . Marchand , J . - B . , Kaiser , D . A . , Pollard , T . D . , and Higgs , H . N . ( 2001 ) . Interaction of WASp / Scar proteins with actin and vertebrate Arp2 / 3 com - plex . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 76 – 82 . Morgan , V . E . , and Chichester , D . F . ( 1935 ) . Properties of the blood of the domestic fowl . J . Biol . Chem . 110 , 285 – 298 . Petrella , E . C . , Machesky , L . M . , Kaiser , D . A . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1996 ) . Structural requirements and thermodynamics of the interaction of proline peptides with proﬁlin . Biochemistry 35 , 16535 – 16543 . Pollard , T . D . , and Earnshaw , W . C . ( 2007 ) . Cell Biology . Second Edition . W . B . Saunders , New York . pp . 902 . Binding Reactions Vol . 21 , December 1 , 2010 4067