Biophysical Journal Volume 70 March 1996 1112 - 1121 Shape Change and Physical Properties of Giant Phospholipid Vesicles Prepared in the Presence of an AC Electric Field Laurence Mathivet , Sophie Cribier , and Philippe F . Devaux Institut de Biologie Physico - Chimique , 75005 Paris , France ABSTRACT Giant unilamellar vesicles with diameters ranging from 10 to 60 , um were obtained by the swelling of phos - pholipid bilayers in water in the presence of an AC electric field . This technique leads to a homogeneous population of perfectly spherical and unilamellar vesicles , as revealed by phase - contrast optical microscopy and freeze - fracture electron microscopy . Freshly prepared vesicles had a high surface tension with no visible surface undulations . Undulations started spontaneously after several hours of incubation or were triggered by the application of a small osmotic pressure . Partially deflated giant vesicles could undergo further shape change if asymmetrical bilayers were formed by adding lyso compounds to the external leaflet or by imposing a transmembrane pH gradient that selectively accumulates on one leaflet phosphati - dylglycerol . Fluorescence photobleaching with 7 - nitrobenz - 2 - oxa - 1 , 3 - diazol - 4 - yl - labeled phospholipids or labeled dextran trapped within the vesicles enabled the measurement of the membrane continuity in the dumbbell - shaped vesicles . In all instances phospholipids diffused from one lobe to the other , but soluble dextran sometimes was unable to traverse the neck . This suggests that the diameter of the connecting neck may be variable . INTRODUCTION Liposomes are often used as models of biological cells . For that purpose , it is important to have a homogeneous population of unilamellar vesicles with a well - defined interior and a size comparable to the size of cells . Son - icated vesicles are unilamellar ; however , they have a diameter limited to about 40 nm , whereas large unilamel - lar vesicles ( LUVs ) obtained by extrusion of multilamel - lar vesicles through filters have a maximum size of about 200 nm . Other techniques such as the mere swelling of lipids in buffer allow one to obtain larger vesicles but in a nonsystematic manner and with a low yield ( Lasic , 1988 ; Winterhalter and Lasic , 1993 ) . Recently Angelova and collaborators ( Angelova and Dimitrov , 1986 ; Ange - lova et al . , 1992 ) have shown that a homogeneous pop - ulation of giant unilamellar vesicles ( GUVs ) , with diam - eters in the range 30 to 60 , um , can be obtained by swelling in the presence of an AC electric field of lipids deposited on a glass plate . The vesicles are perfectly spherical and their unilamellar nature was demonstrated by measurement of the elastic modulus via a statistical analysis of the thermal undulations ( Faucon et al . , 1989 ; Meleard et al . , 1990 ) . The advantage of the AC electric field technique is the reproducibility of the generation of giant vesicles . In addition , the vesicles can be obtained with different types of phospholipids in the presence or absence of cholesterol . On the other hand , the spherical shape constitutes a disadvantage in the investigation of Receivedfor publication 6 June 1995 and in finalform 12 December 1995 . Address reprint requests to Dr . Philipe Devaux , Institut de Biologie Physico - Chimique , Fondation Edmond de Rothschild , 13 rue Pierre et Marie Curie , F - 75005 Paris , France . Tel . : 33 - 1 - 43295721 ; Fax : 33 - 1 - 40518317 ; E - mail : devaux @ ibpc . fr . C ) 1996 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 96 / 03 / 1112 / 10 $ 2 . 00 shape changes because spheres cannot undergo shape changes at constant volume . This can be overcome by deflating the vesicles with the help of a small osmotic pressure before using them for such studies . The objective of the present article is to characterize GUVs obtained in the presence of AC electric field and to demonstrate that they can be used to investigate experimen - tally shape deformations of liposomes . MATERIALS AND METHODS Chemicals Egg phosphatidylcholine ( EPC ) was prepared according to the method of Singleton et al . ( 1965 ) . Egg phosphatidylglycerol ( EPG ) , brain phosphati - dylserine , and cholesterol were purchased from Sigma . The fluorescent phospholipids 1 - acyl - 2 - [ 12 - ( NBD - amino ) stearoyll - sn - glycerol - 3 - phospho - choline ( NBD - PC ) and the corresponding 2 - lyso derivatives NBD - LPC were synthesized in the laboratory ( Colleau et al . , 1991 ) . Rhodamine - LPE ( N - ( lissamine rhodamine B sulfonyl ) - O - ( 1 - oleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phospho ) - ethanolamine ) was obtained by hydrolysis of rhodamine PE ( Avanti Polar Lipids ) . Formation of giant vesicles The chamber for vesicle preparation consisted of a microscope slide and a cover slide , each coated with a thin transparent film of indium tin oxide ( ITO ) , which made them electrically conductive . The voltage was applied through thin wires sealed on each glass plate . Phospholipids ( 0 . 5 mg ) were first dissolved in 1 ml of chloroform - methanol ( 9 / 1 ) . The following mixtures were used : pure EPC , EPC / EPG ( 99 / 1 , mol ratios ) ; EPC / EPG ( 90 / 10 ) ; EPC / EPG / cholesterol ( 76 / 1 / 23 ) ; EPC / EPG / NBD - PC ( 94 / 1 / 5 ) ; EPC / PS ( 85 / 15 ) . For each sample 2 . 5 jig lipids in organic solvent was deposited on the microscope cover slide on the conductive face . The cover slide was then put under vacuum for 2 h to eliminate the solvent . It is noteworthy that for the success of liposome generation with an AC field , the film formed by evaporation had to be as uniform as possible . A teflon spacer of 0 . 5 mm was placed on the cover slide , and a microscope slide was put on top , with the conductive face 1112 Shape Change of Giant Lipid Vesicles oriented toward the cover slide . The system was held together with small clips and sealed with a sigillum paste . An aqueous solution was injected between the slide and cover slide with a syringe through a hole in the teflon spacer . The aqueous solution contained in general 50 mM sucrose and 0 . 02 % azide ( w / v ) . In some cases , fluorescent dextran ( 0 . 1 mM ) was included in the sucrose solution . Two types of dextran were used : fluoresceine dextran ( fluorescein isothiocyanate - dextran ( FITC - dextran ) from Sigma ) and rhodamine dextran ( rhodamine B isothiocya - nate - dextran from Sigma ) . Vesicles were also formed in a glucose solution ( 50 mM ) containing dextran ( molecular weight 73 , 000 ) at a concentration of 15 mg / ml and 0 . 02 % azide . The chamber was placed under an inverted light microscope ( Zeiss IM35 ) , which allowed the monitoring of the vesicle formation . A power supply generated a low - frequency voltage ( 10 Hz ) that was progres - sively increased from 0 to 1 . 2 V in 40 min . Giant vesicles were obtained in 3 to 5 h . The vesicles had a maximum diameter of 10 to 60 , tm . They were detached from the cover slide by raising the voltage to 1 . 4 V while simultaneously decreasing the frequency to 4 Hz . The vesicles were then recovered by suction with a syringe and transferred to a medium containing 50 mM glucose . The difference in density between the sucrose inside the vesicles and the glucose outside facilitated their sedimentation and provided a better contrast in the light microscope . Characterization of giant vesicles Light microscopy To determine the size distribution of a population of giant vesicles , several pictures of the same ensemble of sedimented liposomes were taken , fo - cusing the microscope at different different levels . For each liposome the larger diameter measured was assumed to correspond to its true diameter . The estimated error was + 2 . 5 % . Electron microscopy The most appropriate methods for studying liposomes in solution by electron microscopy are based on cryofixation followed by direct obser - vation of very thin frozen - hydrated specimens or by observation of the replicas of freeze - fracture preparations . Because of the very large dimen - sions of giant vesicles , the latter method is more appropriate , provided the sample is cryoprotected , to avoid morphological perturbations induced by the formation of ice crystals . A small droplet of solution of giant vesicles containing dextran and glycerol ( 30 % v / v ) was deposited on a thin copper holder and then rapidly quenched in liquid propane . The frozen sample was fractured at - 125°C , in a vacuum better than 10 - 6 Torr , with a liquid nitrogen - cooled knife in a Balzers 301 freeze etching unit . The replication was done using unidirectional shadowing , at an angle of 35° , with platinium carbon . The replicas were washed with organic solvents and distilled water , and were observed in a Philips 301 electron microscope . Shape changes The vesicles were visualized with the inverted Zeiss microscope , using Nomarski differential interference contrast or fluorescence detection modes ; the objective lens was 63 X or lOOX . A Leitz phase - contrast microscope ( Labovert ) was also used . Both microscopes were equipped with a video camera , which allowed the change in vesicle shape to be recorded as a function of time . The giant spherical vesicles were deflated by osmotic pressure . If the vesicles were tranferred directly with a micropipette to a medium of higher osmolarity , they usally collapsed . Therefore , a special chamber that allowed a very gradual increase of the osmotic pressure without turbulance was designed as follows . The chamber containing the vesi - cles in a medium of low osmolarity was made of a silicon frame ( internal diameter 10 mm , thickness 2 mm ) deposited on a cover slide . The top of the silicon frame was covered with a membrane filter ( Cyclopore ; Poly Labo , Strasbourg , France ) with 0 . 2 - , um holes and glued to a 4 - mm microscope glass slide . The glass slide had a hole forming a well in the center in contact with the filter , through which the medium with higher osmolarity diffused . Once vesicles were partially deflated , further shape transformation could be triggered by adding lysolipids injected through a 10 - , um - diameter micropipette near a selected vesicle or by mixing lysolipids with the vesicle suspension . Shape change of discoid vesicles contain - ing phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidyglycerol was triggered by the transmembrane reorientation of phosphatidylglycerol induced by a pH gradient as described by Hope et al . ( 1989a ) and Redelmeier et al . ( 1990 ) . This was achieved by transferring the vesicles with the help of a 30 - to 60 - pum - diameter micropipette and a micromanipulator system to a medium at pH 9 . In a few experiments , the pH of the medium was modified directly without the transfer of vesicles . Photobleaching experiments A fraction of a selected vesicle was bleached with a brief and intense illumination from an argon laser beam ( Coherent Innova 90 - 5 ) directed toward an area selected with a diaphragm . The recovery of the fluorescence was analyzed qualitatively . RESULTS Formation of giant vesicles Fig . 1 shows the progressive increase in size of phos - phatidylcholine vesicles that takes place during the ap - plication of an ac field . The small vesicles that are formed initially fuse to reach a maximum diameter of about 30 to 60 , um . If the solution is incubated for more than 5 h , the vesicles do not grow further . They may , in fact , collapse . Not all vesicles reach the maximum size . When the domain of exploration of the microscope is varied by changing the depth of field , smaller vesicles become apparent ( see Fig . 1 ) . The vesicles shown in Fig . 1 appear to be in close contact but seem independent . Yet the following exper - iment suggests that they may be connected . In some experiments a small percentage of long - chain fluorescent phospholipids , NBD - PC , were mixed with the unlabeled phospholipids , rendering the vesicles fluorescent ( Fig . 2 A ) . Bleaching a fraction of the vesicles with a laser beam extinguished a selected population of vesicles ( Fig . 2 , B and C ) . Although the long - chain phospholipids are un - able to jump from one vesicle to another through the aquous phase , the fluorescence was recovered within 2 min in all vesicles ( Fig . 2 D ) , suggesting that lipid can diffuse from vesicles to vesicles . The type of connection between the vesicles is not known . For example , they may be connected by small tethers , but the close packing does not allow the vizualization of such features . When the vesicles were sucked into a syringe and transferred to a different medium , the connections between the vesicles were probably ruptured mechanically , leaving indepen - dent vesicles . However , the stability of the optical con - trast proved that the vesicles remained sealed after trans - fer . The same photobleaching experiment was performed Mathivet et al . 1 11 3 Volume 70 March 1996 FIGURE 1 Swelling of EPC lipo - somes in 50 mM sucrose with an AC electic field . Vesicles are observed with an optical microscope in No - marski configuration . ( A ) Lipid film before application of the electric field . ( B ) 20 min after application of 10 Hz AC electric field , which was gradully increased from 0 to 0 . 5 V . ( C ) 30 min after application of the field , which has reached 0 . 9 V . ( D ) Same area as in C , but the image is focused to an upper region of the suspension . ( E ) t = 3 h , voltage , 1 . 1 V . ( F ) same area as in E but with a different focus . ( G and H ) Two dif - ferent views after 4 - h incubation ; the frequency is raised to 4 Hz and in - duces vesicle detachment from the supporting glass . The bar corre - sponds to 20 Am . on a cluster of such transferred vesicles containing long - chain fluorescent phospholipids , but no recovery of flu - orescence was observed ( not shown ) . An evaluation of the size distribution of giant vesicles was made . Fig . 3 shows a histogram obtained by analyz - ing a population of vesicles made with EPC / LPC ( 99 / 1 ) . The average size was slightly larger with pure EPC . Freeze - fracture electron microscopy was carried out on a population of vesicles containing dextran and glycerol ( 30 % ) and sedimented in glycerol ( 30 % ) . Careful obser - vation of a large number of freeze - fractured samples indicated that more than 90 % of giant vesicles were cross - fractured , allowing the visualization of their inte - rior , as illustrated in Fig . 4 . All cross - fractured giant vesicles were unilamellar . Most of them contained a few small vesicles and only very few contained one smaller giant vesicle . The same type of giant spherical vesicles were ob - tained under very similar conditions and with approxi - mately the same efficiency with mixtures of EPC and EPG , or EPC mixed with 15 % phosphatidylserine , or EPC mixed with 23 % cholesterol . Phospholipids contain - ing a 7 - nitrobenz - 2 - oxa - 1 , 3 - diazol - 4 - yl ( NBD ) group on one acyl chain or a fluorescent cholesterol analog could A B . - D C E F G H 1114 Biophysical Joumal Shape Change of Giant Lipid Vesicles FIGURE 2 EPC liposomes containing 5 % of fluorescent phospholipids ( NBD - PC ) . ( A ) End of the swelling period . ( B ) A selected area corresponding to a circular domain of 30 , um diameter is illuminated with a laser beam for 1 s . ( C ) Immediately after illumination , a bleached domain is visible . ( D ) Two minutes after the bleach , the fluorescence appears to be homogeneously distributed , indicating a diffusion of the fluorescent phospholipids from vesicles to vesicles . The bar corresponds to 30 um . be introduced without decreasing the yield . Saturated phospholipids ( dimyristoyl phosphatidylcholine , DMPC ) gave similar results . Increasing the buffer concentration decreased the effi - ciency of vesicle formation . In practice , 10 mM Bis - Tris or 2 - [ morpholino ] ethanesulfonic acid was found to be the maximum concentration of buffer tolerable . Above that concentration , very few vesicles are formed . Thermal undulations and vesicle aggregation Freshly prepared vesicles , transferred to a glucose medium , were perfectly spherical with no visible thermal undula - tions . The application of a small osmotic pressure appeared to be sufficient to trigger large - scale surface undulations . Undulations in vesicles containing 50 mM sucrose were typically triggered by an external concentration of 70 mM glucose without complete modification of the overall vesi - cle shape . The progressive evaporation of water in unsealed samples achieved a similar result . Thermal undulations be - came spontaneously visible after several hours ( 20 h ) of incubation at 40°C or several days ( 1 week ) at 4°C . It is very likely that during that period some lipid degradation took place . Long incubations were carried out with DMPC vesicles , i . e . , with saturated lipids . Undulations were pro - duced similarly , indicating that the lipid degradation was not due to oxidation of the acyl chains but more likely the formation of lyso - lipids . We have attempted to analyze by thin - layer chromatography the lipids extracted from a large population of vesicles incubated under similar conditions . Lyso compounds could barely be detected . They corre - sponded to a maximum of 1 % of the total lipids present . If after this long period of incubation , fatty acid free bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) was added to the medium containing the spherical vesicles , the giant vesicles were observed to aggregate and form domains , sometimes with a honeycomb morphology . See Fig . 5 A - D . With fresh vesi - cles , on the other hand , addition of BSA did not trigger aggregation ( not shown ) . Mathivet et al . 1115 Volume 70 March 1996 vesicles with discoid ( or obloid ) shapes and then into series of apparently connected spheres of smaller size . Note that , in some instances , what appears to be separate vesicles is , in fact , vesicles connected by a thin tether that is clearly visible when fluorescent probes are used ( Fig . 6 ) . A prerequisite for the success of these experiments is that the pressure be raised very gradually to avoid vesicle collapse . Several hours were typically necessary . P1 v III III III IIiIl II I 11 IT [ IllI II [ III 0 20 40 60 Diameter ( , um ) FIGURE 3 Size distribution of a population of giant liposomes obtained in one experiment by swelling in an AC electric field of a lipid mixture containing EPC / LPC ( 95 / 5 ) . Liposomes with a diameter below 1 Jim are not counted . Pure EPC gives a slightly larger average diameter . When giant vesicles were prepared in the presence of 1 % LPC and BSA added immediately after the formation of the vesicles , aggregation also took place , but without the hon - eycomb pattern . Shape changes induced by osmotic pressure The shape of a spherical vesicule cannot be modified with - out a change in the volume - to - area ratio . This can be achieved by imposing an osmotic pressure , which pumps out water . Spherical vesicles are transformed into flaccid FIGURE 4 Freeze fracture electron micrographs of largeA unilamellar vesicles ( LUVs ) ( A ) and of giant unilamellar vesicles ( GUVs ) ( B , C , and D ) . The curved arrows in B , C , D , and E point to vesicles of the size of LUVs , and the large arrow in C points to a GUY enclosed in a larger one . The magnification indicated in E is the same for all micrographs . Shape change induced by the formation of asymmetrical bilayers As shown in a previous publication ( Farge and Devaux , 1992 ) , the shape of a giant discoid or obloid vesicle can be modified , at a fixed temperature , by imposing an asymmetrical lipid composition . The simplest technique of generating a bilayer unbalance consists of adding lyso derivatives injected with a micropipette . The lyso deriv - atives , because of their partial water solubility , penetrate the external leaflet but are very slow to flip to the inner leaflet . A second technique takes advantage of the prop - erty of certain lipids such as free fatty acid , phosphatidic acid , or phosphatidylglycerol to be oriented by a trans - membrane pH gradient ( Hope et al . , 1989a ; Redelmeier et al . , 1990 ) . The advantage of the latter technique is that lipid asymmetry can be quantified , which is more diffi - cult to do with the former technique . Both techniques are used in the present investigation . In all instances , excess lipid on the external side was accompanied by shape deformation , as illustrated in Figs . 7 - 9 . Obloid giant vesicles are transformed into dummbell - shaped ( or 8 - shaped ) vesicles made of two closely associ - 2 5 0 0 E 0 n 0 aI . . 0 h . C 2 0 1 5 1 0 5 . 7 n . > - I I r , il il IL F F f fn . . n II i i . f1 - I rAAAAn ISIZIJ 1116 Biophysical Journal " I 7 / n ri Shape Change of Giant Lipid Vesicles B . . . i . ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ O i , X , S , x , X I W , ti . ft ' 1 , , # I I X ' . feCiLX ' L ' VE , 0 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ . . . . . C D , , ; C , C 4 < k E ' f C : . . W . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . i . D . . ! . FIGURE 5 Vesicle aggregation . ( A ) Control showing a population of EPC vesicles after swelling , transfer with a syringe , and storage ( 30 days at 4°C ) . ( B ) Stored vesicles 2 mn after adition of 1 % BSA . ( C ) Freshly prepared EPC vesicles containing initially 1 % LPC and incubated with BSA . ( D ) Another example of aggregation triggered by the addition of BSA to DMPC vesicles stored 7 days . The bar corresponds to 30 Am . ated spheres or into vesicles made of a series of spheres ( Figs . 7 and 8 ) . Fig . 9 should be considered a curiosity that is rarely found . In this particular case , the giant vesicle seemed to possess initially a very unusual topology . The transfer of 1 % EPG from the inner leaflet to the outer leaflet resulted in the shape transformation indicated in Fig . 8 . If 10 % EPG was used instead of 1 % , the shape transformation was very rapid and the intermediate shapes shown in Fig . 8 , B and C , were not visible . In most cases the final shapes were series of spheres . The use of fluorescent probes enabled us to determine whether the spheres were still connected or if fission ( i . e . , is physical separation ) had taken place . As in the case of the shape transformation triggered by an osmotic pressure , we found that vesicles that may appear as separated entities by phase contrast microscopy were in fact sometimes linked by a lipid tether whose physical structure is still unclear . The same type of shape transformation was achieved with vesicles containing EPC and cholesterol ( 23 % mol / mol ) . No significant difference in the time scale of transformation or in the propensity of the vesicles to separate was observed ( not shown ) . Shape transformation was also obtained by the addition of fluorescent lyso - phospholipids to liposomes containing unlabeled EPC . A lyso - PC with a NBD moiety on the acyl chain was first used ( NBD - LPC ) ; a second analog had a fluorescent rhodamine probe on the headgroup of lyso - PE . The objective of these experiments was to see if the cone - shaped molecules formed by the lyso - compounds had any tendency to accumulate in the regions of high curvature , namely at the interface between the two vesicles formed . However , we were not able to detect any lipid segregation with these probes . Photobleaching experiments Optical microscopy does not allow one to give detailed information on the structure of the neck between two spher - ical vesicles that are still connected . To determine whether the bilayer was continuous , we performed photobleaching experiments wherein one part of the vesicle was bleached by a short pulse from a laser beam while the rest was protected by a diaphragm . For these experiments , giant spherical vesicles containing either long - chain fluorescent phospholipids or soluble FITC - dextran ( molecular weight 73 , 000 ) were made by the AC field technique . Figure 8 - shaped vesicles ( or dumbbells ) were induced by the ad - 1117 Mathivet et al . Volume 70 March 1996 FIGURE 6 A single spherical EPC vesicle was transformed by applica - tion of an osmotic pressure into these three spheres connected by a narrow tether . The vesicle is loaded with fluorescent dextran ( 0 . 1 mM ) . The osmotic pressure is generated by a difference in glucose concentration of 100 mM between the inside and outside . The bar corresponds to 10 , pm . dition of lyso - PC or by a pH gradient as explained above . Fig . 10 shows an example of such a vesicle containing fluorescent dextran before , immediately after , and 4 min after bleaching . The fluorescence reappears in the bleached fraction , indicating that dextran can diffuse from one com - partment to the other . The results from these experiments are varied . In other cases , although the " neck " appeared the same when viewed with the optical microscope , the fluo - rescence intensity could not be recovered in the bleached fraction . A possible explanation is that the " hole " between the two spheres derived from a single giant vesicle may have a different size . In contrast , when such experiments were performed with long - chain fluorescent phospholipids , the bleached compartment always regained intensity , indi - cating free diffusion of the phospholipids between the two parts . The order of magnitude of time necessary to homogenize the probes ( 1 mn ) was consistent with what can be estimated from the lateral diffusion coefficient of phospholipids . Note that the long - chain phospholipids have no solubility in water and cannot hop from one vesicle to the other . DISCUSSION GUVs , with a diameter of 10 , um or more , have the size of biological cells and constitute useful model systems . They present the advantage of being visible with an optical mi - croscope . Their shape and shape modifications can be easily followed , in contrast to small unilamellar vesicles ( SUVs ) and LUVs , which can only be observed by electron micros - copy . GUVs can be obtained by the careful swelling of lipids in pure water in the absence of agitation . However , this technique has a low yield and gives rise to a mixture of vesicles , only a small fraction of which are unilamellar ; furthermore , the efficiency depends very much upon the lipid composition ( Farge and Devaux , 1992 ) . FIGURE 7 Shape transformation of a single giant EPC vesicle contain - ing fluorescent dextran ( 0 . 1 mM ) . ( A ) Discoid shape obtained by a small osmotic pressure applied to a spherical vesicle . ( B ) Four minutes after addition of LPC in the proximity of the vesicle . ( C ) Seven minutes after addition of LPC . The bar corresponds to 10 , um . The technique invented by Angelova and Dimitrov ( 1986 ) to form GUVs is based on the swelling of phospho - lipids in the presence of an AC electric field . It is a simple and reproducible technique that appears to be efficient for many types of different lipid mixtures , as long as the salt concentration is maintained at a low level ( < 10 mM ) . The vesicles , which are perfectly spherical , have a large internal volume and are stable for many days , which makes them attractive for biotechnical applications . The unilamellar na - ture of such vesicles was determined first by Faucon et al . ( 1989 ) by analysis of the thermal undulations and is con - 1118 Biophysical Joumal Shape Change of Giant Lipid Vesicles a b a . . . . a . . . . . , * s b - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 , sZ . Si ! $ Sv , u , t ? S . _ : : . e . ? X ' 2 C d * . iS . . . ' ' : ; " : . : : . ' . . . f ? FIGURE 8 Shape transformation of a giant vesicle containing EPC : EPG with a ratio of 99 : 1 . The shape change is triggered by raising the external pH from 6 to 9 . The time scale for the shape transformation is approxi - mately 10 s . The bar corresponds to 10 , um . finmed in the present study by freeze - fracture electron mi - croscopy . Freeze fracture can be ambiguous in the case of small vesicles or even LUVs , where this technique can only be used qualitatively to assess lamellarity ( Hope et al . , 1989b ) . However , there is a high probability of cross - fractures in giant liposomes , and thus the lamellarity can be ascertain by this method . The mechanism of formation of the vesicles is still un - clear . Angelova and collaborators have noticed that the vesicles , while they are growing , vibrate at the same fre - quency as the applied field . They suggested that one effect of the electric field would be to create a gentle mechanical agitation , which would help vesicles to form , fuse , and detach from the support . It is not certain , however , that the vesicles are detached from the support before transfer or micromanipulation . The photobleaching experiment de - scribed in Fig . 2 strongly suggests a connectivity between vesicles during the swelling period . Indeed , the spontaneous transfer of long - chain phospholipids between large - sized vesicles through the aqueous phase , or via vesicle collisions , is a very unlikely event that requires a long period of incubation , on the order of several hours ( Bayerl et al . , 1988 ; Geldwerth et al . , 1991 ) . The control experiment , which indicated that , after vesicle transfer , bleached vesi - cles do not recover any fluorescence even if the vesicles are in close contact , confirms that long - chain fluorescent lipids do not hop from one vesicle to another . The absence of visible thermal undulations suggests a surface tension that is probably responsible for the spheric - ity of the vesicles . Whereas Angelova et al . have reported that the vesicles relaxed and fluctuated after a few hours , we found that vesicles stored at low temperature , under argon , remained spherical and did not fluctuate for days and even weeks . Temperature seems to be the most important param - eter . Partial lipid degradation may take place at high tem - FIGURE 9 Shape transformation of a giant vesicle containing EPC : EPG with a molar ratio of 99 : 1 , as in Fig . 8 . This type of transformation is very rare . Same scale as in Fig . 8 . peratures and , as already noted by Faucon and collaborators ( 1989 ) , may help to relax the vesicle tension . If the vesicles are stored at high temperatures in a nonsealed environment , water evaporation is substantial . Because the external me - dium contains glucose , the osmotic pressure increases pro - gressively , and we have shown that this causes vesicle deformation and , hence , allows undulation to take place . As soon as the vesicles undulate , the addition of fatty acid - free BSA , which selectively depletes the outer mono - layers of all lyso derivatives , provokes vesicle aggregation ( see the preliminary report by Devaux et al . , 1993 ) . This phenomenon can be interpreted as being due to three con - secutive events : i ) generation of a surface tension caused by the mismatch between inner and outer monolayers ; ii ) in - hibition of the thermal undulations by surface tension ; and iii ) attraction of the vesicles by van der Waals forces . Tension - induced adhesion of vesicles has been discussed theoretically and observed experimentally by previous workers ( Servuss and Helfrich , 1989 ; Lipowsky , 1995 ; Radler et al . , 1995 ; Netz and Lipowsky , 1995 ) . In most cases , tension is caused by osmotic pressure . However , experimental and theoretical work has shown that the addi - tion of lyso compounds on one monolayer can generate surface tension ( Farge and Devaux , 1992 , 1993 ) . Here the mismatch is obtained by depleting selectively the outer monolayer . Removing lyso - phospholipids that form sponta - neously upon storage or exist initially as trace compounds is equivalent to the selective addition of the lyso - lipid to one monolayer . In both instances , an unbalance between the two monolayers is created and is the cause of surface tension . In the present article the vesicle shape was modified by change of the volume - to - surface ratio via osmotic pressure , or by modification of the transmembrane phospholipid dis - tribution . The final shapes were similar to those obtained in other laboratories by changing the temperature ( Kis and 1119 Mathivet et al . 0 , M8 Volume 70 March 1996 B FIGURE 10 Recovery of fluorescence after photobleaching . ( A ) This giant liposome ofEPC : EPG ( 99 : 1 ) , which looks like two adhering vesicles , was obtained by imposing a ApH of 3 pH units through the membrane of a single discocyte liposome . The liposome contains FITC dextran ( 0 . 1 mM ) . ( A ) Before photobleaching . ( B ) Immediately after bleaching of the smaller vesicle . ( C ) Three minutes after bleaching , the fluorescence reap - pears in the bleached region , indicating that dextran can freely diffuse between the two vesicles . Sackmann , 1991 ; Nazil et al . , 1992 ; Dobereiner et al . , 1993 ) . The most frequently observed morphology was two closely connected spheres or series of connected spheres . These shapes correspond to states of minimum elastic en - ergy predicted by theoreticians ( Deuling and Helfrich , 1976 ; Svetina and Zeks , 1989 ; Seifert et al . , 1991 ; Lip - FIGURE 11 Two models suggesting how phospholipids could be orga - nized in the narrow tube ( or tether ) connecting two vesicles . owsky , 1991 ; Gompper and Kroll , 1995 ) . When a lipid redistribution is imposed by a pH gradient to a membrane containing EPG , an upper limit to the percentage of lipid redistribution can be given by the percentage of EPG present . In agreement with a previous investigation ( Farge and Devaux , 1992 ) , we found that the redistribution of less than 1 % of the total phospholipid population was sufficient to provoke shape changes in giant vesicles . In a very recent article , Mui and collaborators showed by cryoelectron mi - croscopy that LUVs can undergo shape change when diol - eoylphosphatidylcholine is translocated from one leaflet to the other by a pH gradient ( Mui et al . , 1995 ) . In agreement with our prediction ( Farge and Devaux , 1993 ) , the shape change of LUVs required a redistribution of 10 % of the lipids , whereas with GUVs less than 1 % was sufficient . If 10 % EPG was present in GUVs and the vesicles submited to a pH gradient , the sequence of shape transformation was accelerated and sometimes caused the vesicle to collapse . The addition of cholesterol , in our experiments , did not modify significantly the results , and in particular , contrary to the results of Dobereiner et al . ( 1993 ) , we did not observe vesicle fission when cholesterol was present . Besides the budding of a small vesicle from a giant vesicle , we have also observed a rarer shape with a threefold symmetry ( see Fig . 9 C ) . The latter shape was predicted by Mui et al . ( 1995 ) and would result from a transformation of a discocyte by breaking of the rotational symmetry . One feature that becomes particularly visible when fluo - rescent lipids are used is the connection between separated vesicles by narrow lipid tubes or tethers ( Fig . 6 ) . The structure of this elongated lipid protuberance is unknown . Bar - Ziv and Moses ( 1994 ) have generated narrow tubes anchored at both ends to massive lipid globules . The tubes were shown to correspond to spheres connected - like pearls of a necklace . Here , the resolution is not sufficient to rule out such a structure . Fig . 11 proposes two models . In Fig . 11 1120 Biophysical Joumal Mathivet et al . Shape Change of Giant Lipid Vesicles 1121 A there is no aqueous volume inside the tube , whereas in Fig . 11 B water - soluble molecules can penetrate . The very fact that the tether is visible with fluorescent dextran ( Fig . 7 ) rules out model A . Such tubules are not only difficult to visualize ; they are also fragile . One might speculate that if they exist in biological systems , they could have been overlooked . It is always postulated that an intense traffic of vesicles takes place within organelles and that proteins are shuttled from organelle to organelle by random diffusion of vesicles , for example , in the Golgi system . An alternative model could involve connections between organelles by small lipid tubules or vesicles still attached by such protrusions . The authors thank Mrs . Paulette Herve and Dr . P . Fellmann for the synthesis of the fluorescent lipids , Dr . T . Gulik for performing the control of unilamellar nature of the giant liposomes by electron microscopy , and Dr . G . Cannarozzi for careful correction of the manuscript . Work supported by grants from the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique ( URA 526 ) , the Universities Paris VI and Paris VII , and the European Economic Community ( BI02 - CT9303448 ) . LM is a recipient of a fellowship from the Direction de la Recherche et de la Technologie du Ministere de la Defense . REFERENCES Angelova , M . I . , and D . S . Dimitrov . 1986 . Liposome electroformation . Faraday Discuss . Chem . Soc . 81 : 303 - 312 . Angelova , M . I . , S . Soleau , P . M6l6ard , J . - F . Faucon , and P . Bothorel . 1992 . Preparation of giant vesicles by external ac electric fields : kinetics and applications . Prog . Colloid Polym . Sci . 89 : 127 - 131 . Bar - Ziv , R . , and E . Moses . 1994 . Instability and " pearling " states produced in tubular membranes by competition of curvature and tension . Phys . Rev . Lett . 73 : 1392 - 1395 . Bayerl , T . M . , C . F . Schmidt , and E . Sackmann . 1988 . Kinetics of sym - metric and asymmetric phospholipid transfer between small sonicated vesicles studied by high - sensitivity differential scanning calorimetry , NMR , electron microscopy , and dynamic light scattering . Biochemistry . 27 : 6078 - 6085 . Colleau , M . , P . Herve , P . Fellmann , and P . F . Devaux . 1991 . Transmem - brane diffusion of fluorescent phospholipids in human erythrocytes . Chem . Phys . Lipids . 57 : 29 - 37 . Deuling , H . J . , and W . Helfrich . 1976 . The curvature elasticity of fluid membranes : a catalogue of vesicle shapes . J . Physique France . 37 : 1335 - 1345 . Devaux , P . F . , L . Mathivet , S . Cribier , and E . Farge . 1993 . How lipid asymmetry can make vesicles fusion - competent by inhibition of the thermal undulations . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 21 : 276 - 280 . Dobereiner , H . G . , J . Kas , D . Noppl , I . Sprenger , and E . Sackmann . 1993 . Budding and fission of vesicles . Biophys . J . 65 : 1396 - 1403 . Farge , E . , and P . F . Devaux . 1992 . Shape changes of giant liposomes induced by an asymmetric transmembrane distribution of phospholipids . Biophys . J . 61 : 347 - 357 . Farge , E . , and P . F . Devaux . 1993 . Size - dependant response of liposomes to phospholipid transmembrane redistribution : from shape change to induced tension . J . Phys . Chem . 97 : 2958 - 2961 . Faucon , J . F . , M . D . Mitov , P . Meleard , I . Bivas , and P . Bothorel . 1989 . Bending elasticity and thermal fluctuations of lipid membranes . Theo - retical and experimental requirements . J . Physique . 50 : 2389 - 2414 . Geldwerth , D . , A . de Kermel , A . Zachowski , F . Guerbette , J . - C . Kader , J . - P . Henry , and P . F . Devaux . 1991 . Use of spin - label and fluorescent lipids to study the activity of the phospholipid transfer protein from maize seedlings . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1082 : 255 - 264 . Gompper , G . , and D . M . Kroll . 1995 . Phase diagram and scaling behavior of fluid vesicles . Phys . Rev . E . 51 : 514 - 525 . Hope , M . J . , T . E . Redelmeier , K . F . Wong , W . Rodrigueza , and P . R . Cullis . 1989a . Phospholipid asymmetry in large unilamellar vesicles induced by transmembrane pH gradients . Biochemistry . 28 : 4181 - 4187 . Hope , M . J . , K . F . Wong , and P . R . Cullis . 1989b . Freeze fracture of lipids and model membrane systems . J . Electron Microsc . Tech . 13 : 277 - 287 . Kas , J . , and E . Sackmann . 1991 . Shape transitions and shape stability of giant phospholipid vesicles in pure water by area - to - volume changes . Biophys . J . 60 : 825 - 844 . Lasic , D . D . 1988 . The mechanism of vesicle formation . Biochem . J 256 : 1 - 11 . Lipowsky , R . 1991 . The conformation of membranes . Nature . 349 : 475 - 481 . Lipowsky , R . 1995 . The morphology of lipid membranes . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 5 : 531 - 540 . Meleard , P . , M . D . Mitov , J . - F . Faucon , and P . Bothorel . 1990 . Dynamics of fluctuating vesicles . Europhys . Lett . 11 : 355 - 360 . Mui , B . L . - S . , H . - G . Dobereiner , T . D . Madden , and P . R . Cullis . 1995 . Influence of transbilayer area asymmetry on the morphology of large unilamellar veiscles . Biophys . J . 69 : 930 - 941 . Nazil , A . N . , S . Bayerl , and M . Bloom . 1992 . Temperature - reversible eruptions of vesicles in model membranes studied by NMR . Biophys . J . 61 : 1413 - 1426 . Netz , R . R . , and R . Lipowsky . 1995 . Stacks of fluid membranes under pressure and tension . Europhys . Lett . 29 : 345 - 350 . Radler , J . O . , T . J . Feder , H . H . Strey , and E . Sackmann . 1995 . Fluctuation analysis of tension - controlled undulation forces between giant vesicles and solid substrates . Phys . Rev . E . 51 : 4526 - 4536 . Redelmeier , T . E . , M . J . Hope , and P . R . Cullis . 1990 . On the mechanism of transbilayer transport of phosphatidylglycerol in response to trans - membrane pH gradients . Biochemistry . 29 : 3046 - 3053 . Seifert , U . , K . Berndl , and R . Lipowsky . 1991 . Shape transformations of vesicles : phase diagram for spontaneous curvature and bilayer coupling model . Phys . Rev . A . 44 : 1182 - 1202 . Servuss , R . M . , and W . Helfrich . 1989 . Mutual adhesion of lecithin membranes at ultralow tensions . J . Phys . France . 50 : 809 - 827 . Singleton , W . S . , M . S . Gray , M . L . Brown , and J . L . White . 1965 . Chromatographically homogeneous lecithin from egg phospholipids . J . Am . Oil Chem . Soc . 42 : 53 - 56 . Svetina , S . , and B . Zeks . 1989 . Membrane bending energy and shape determination of phospholipid vesicles and red blood cells . Eur . Biophys . J . 17 : 101 - 111 . Winterhalter , M . , and D . D . Lasic . 1993 . Liposome stability and formation : experimental parameters and theories on the size distribution . Chein . Phys . Lipids . 64 : 35 - 43 .