Development of a Hybrid Decision Support System for Intelligence Analysis Dr Peter Eachus , University of Salford School of Health Sciences , Salford , United Kingdom p . eachus @ salford . ac . uk Dr Ben Short , University of Salford School of Health Sciences Salford , United Kingdom b . short @ salford . ac . uk Abstract — Intelligence analysis is highly complex and requires a multitude of skills and aptitudes . Because of the nature of intelligence analysis it is extremely unlikely that analysts will ever be completely replaced by computer systems . In their work analysts face a great many obstacles including deception and their own cognitive biases . The prototype system described here attempts to provide analysts with a structured , supportive and challenging environment that can be used in conjunction with proprietary and open source tools to help them deal with the complexities of the issues they face . Further , the system is designed to encourage collaborative working and transparency of process . Index Terms — Intelligent Decision Support System , intelligence analysis , collaborative working . ( key words ) I NTRODUCTION Intelligence analysis is vital for providing decision makers with accurate , timely and appropriate information . However a multitude of obstacles stand in the way of the analyst and these may vary from outright deception perpetuated by potential adversaries , organizational incompetence and even their own cognitive biases . The Hybrid Decision Support System ( HDSS ) is not meant to replace the analyst rather it aims to complement ( hence hybrid ) and support the work of skilled analysts by providing a structured environment for the analysis to take place , allied with a toolkit comprising proprietary and open source analysis technologies that can assist the intelligence analyst in their work . The HDSS also includes a wiki interface to encourage collaboration between analysts and transparency of process . Intelligence analysis has never been more important than in recent times . Reliable , valid and timely intelligence is vital if policy makers are to make the right decisions and the consequences of making errors can be severe . Analysts are faced with a number of problems peculiar to their profession . They are usually faced with questions of “what happens next” rather than what is known . They generally have to deal with limited evidence and the possibility of deliberately falsified evidence . Therefore the chances of error are higher than in normal decision making . This can contribute to ill - informed policy decisions . So it is vital that analysts have access to good tools and sound methods if they are to minimize the likelihood of providing inadequate analysis . Recent intelligence failures , and subsequent reports , have emphasized the need for better ways to organize , manage , and support intelligence analysis ( 9 / 11 Commission Report [ 1 ] ) . A common theme throughout these reports is the need for greater collaboration between the agencies and individuals involved . In the USA projects such as A Space and Intellipedia have been developed to promote and support such collaboration . However , the way in which collaborative work is organised can vary considerably and we need more research to inform decisions on the nature of complex collaborations . For example Convertino et al [ 2 ] investigated the effects of group composition in computer supported collaborative intelligence analysis and found that individuals working with like - minded individuals tended to show and retain greater bias in their analytical judgements than did individuals working in more heterogeneous groups . Neville [ 3 ] has considered the diagnostic errors that can accrue from co - operative working , in this case during a friendly fire incident in Iraq . His study illustrated how processes of cooperation can be vulnerable and ultimately fail , particularly when multiple participants are physically distributed and interaction is mediated by communication technologies . In the context of military intelligence analysis Jones et al [ 4 ] have described the use of ‘CoRAVEN’ , an intelligent collaborative multimedia system to support intelligence analysts a forerunner to the more sophisticated Wikis that are now widely available . The use of collaborative tools , e . g . Wikis has also been investigated in the context of intelligence analysis . Wheaton [ 5 ] studied this extensively both in classroom and real world environments . The findings reveal that Wikis can help to facilitate collaboration to a high degree and that the final intelligence product is often much better than that produced by traditional methods ( e . g . face to face ) . In a review of 15 wiki based projects Wheaton [ 5 ] discovered that both analysts and decision makers found the use of a wiki to be beneficial . However as he notes , a wiki is no more a tool for intelligence analysis than a word processor . So while using a wiki may provide advantages it should not significantly alter the process of analysis . That being the case it - 745 - seems that the use of a wiki allied with appropriate tools for analysis may be worth pursuing . Using the proper tools is important for any job . As Heuer [ 6 ] points out there are a number of psychological predispositions that may cause analysts to stumble . Therefore it seems appropriate to try and provide some means of avoiding the pitfalls of cognitive biases . Considering the collaborative nature of modern analysis and the potential benefits of wikis it seems that a solution based upon an understanding of psychological and psychosocial factors combined with the use of a wiki may yield dividends . D ESIGN C ONSIDERATIONS For the initial development phase of the HDSS , a systematic literature review was conducted in order to gain insight into the stated process of intelligence analysis , the tools used and the perceived problems within the intelligence community . In addition relevant psychological literature on decision making and bias was examined . Further work interviewing intelligence analysts is ongoing and will feed into the development of the system . At an early stage in the design process it was acknowledged that any intelligent decision support system , in the context of intelligence analysis , would have to be designed to complement , rather than replace the work of skilled analysts , hence hybrid . Analysts bring to the problem space a great deal of experience and knowledge that would be very difficult , if not impossible , to build into any decision support system . The HDSS is therefore designed to focus on the decision making process itself and to structure this in a way that will make difficulties with this process more visible to the analyst . The Hybrid Decision Support System described here does not aim to replace good analysis , or indeed good analysts , rather it intends to aid analysts in approaching their task through the implementation of structured analytic techniques . For each element of the analytic process questions are provided that are designed to prompt the analyst into a more reasoned approach to that element of the process . It is important to note that HDSS described here is not the final outcome of our research , rather it should be considered as the first draft of a system to provide analysts with a technological augmentation which will help them structure existing analytic techniques in a way which will minimize many of the problems that they face during the analytic process . IMPLEMENTATION A decision support system must be designed to enhance the quality of decisions made by intelligence analysts . The approach taken in the development of this HDSS is to provide a system that will aid the user in mitigating against a number of pathologies that have been identified as contributing to intelligence failure ( Eachus and Short , [ 7 ] ) . These pathologies include organisational dysfunction , pathological ways of thinking or problem solving ( psycho - pathologies ) and pathologies that derive from group processes ( socio - pathologies ) . In an attempt to manage and mitigate these pathologies the HDSS system is based on a structured approach to intelligence analysis ( Clark [ 8 ] ; Heuer and Pherson [ 9 ] ) with the aim of providing individual analysts with a tool that will enhance their objectivity , encourage clarity and transparency in their thinking , and as a consequence increase the rigour of their intelligence products . In an ideal world organisations would not be dysfunctional , socio and psycho - pathologies would be eliminated , and intelligence analysis would be “pure” and uncontaminated . Failures of intelligence would still occur but this would not be the result of these pathologies , rather it might be due to lack of information , deception , or just poor analysis . In reality of course users may not be able to do much about the organisational structure they are working within but an awareness of the way this structure might impact on the decision making of themselves and their colleagues could help them make better decisions . Similarly an awareness of socio and psycho - pathologies will help mitigate the influence these pathologies may have on the decision making process . As well as being aware of the challenges they face analysts can also be provided with tools that will help them meet these challenges . For example mindmapping software can help the analyst structure the problem in a way that will facilitate better understanding and creative problem solving . Open source software for the analysis of competing hypotheses is readily available and could also be included in the toolbox provided . Visualisation is being increasingly used for dealing with large complex datasets and similarly software for the analyis of social networks can help analysts better understand threats that eminate from groups . Although the HDSS does provide access to this type of tool it is recognised that individual analysts may have their preferred tools and provision is made for the incorporation of these into the toolbox . As has been reported extensively ( WMD Commission , [ 10 ] ; 9 / 11 Commission [ 1 ] ) that the sharing of information and collaborative working is vital for good intelligence analysis . This HDSS recognises this issue and allows users to associate with others to varying degrees . It can be used by an individual in isolation if required , but by using wiki technology problems can be worked on collaboratively with immediate colleagues or even more extensively with other organisations that may or may not be in the host country . The HDSS is implemented through a web browser an example of which can be found at www . psychint . net / dss . This web site is a prototype and as yet is not fully functional but it does provide a good overview of the proposed system . The Homepage presents the user with brief instructions on the use of the HDSS but the main content is found in a series of drop down menus that appear across the top of the screen . Towards the left of the screen the menus present the user with a series of challenges for dealing with a particular intelligence analysis problem . Each of these challenges is provided with a wiki based text box in which the user can post responses to the challenges posed . These posts can be shared or not as the individual desires . As the person responds to these challenges , either collaboratively or individually , they will become aware - 746 - of the pathologies that may impact on their decision making , and will be guided into responses that help mitigate the influence of these pathologies . This is the essence of structured intelligence analysis . The first drop down menu presents challenges associated with starting to work on a particular intelligence problem . The user is asked things like “Why is this intelligence needed ? ” , or “Why is this important ? ” , and “Has this question been answered before ? ” These and other similar questi ons are aimed at challenging the basis on which the intelligence analysis is to be carried out . Moving across the menus from left to right , the next menu the user finds is headed pathologies . The purpose of this is to explain what the different types of pathologies are and how they might impact on analysis and decision making . The next menu is a checklist of key questions the user needs to ask before continuing with the analysis itself . These include asking “Who is the intelligence product is for ? ” , “Would graphics help convey the message ? ” , “What is the key intelligence question ? ” and so on . We would expect experienced analysts to be asking these questions anyway though not perhaps in this form and it is this that makes the process more objective and transparent . Continuing across the screen the next menu deals with redefinition of the problem . The purpose of this section is to ensure that the problem that is to be worked on is actually the problem that needs to be worked on . Redefinition or reframing of the problem can be a powerful tool that can help avoid mission creep and to focus on the real problem as new hypotheses are formulated . Towards the right side of the screen the drop down menus provide access to a variety of tools for the analysis of the intelligence data . These include tools for Network Analysis , Mapping , Visualisation and Analysis of Matrices . Guidance is also provided on a number of useful analystic techniques for example red hat analysis , scenario generation and force field analysis . There is also a Workspace where colleagues can work collaboratively on a problem . The HDSS is best considered as an interactive workspace where problems and possible solutions can be explored . The HDSS will not provide answers to difficult problems , only analysts can do that , but what it can do is provide the challenges and tools that will help analysts work more effectively on these difficult problems and arrive at solutions that are objective , transparent and relevant . We believe that by designing the HDSS in this way it will be suitable for both experienced and less experienced analysts . We would recommend that intially all analysts should work through the challenges , but with increasing experience with the DSS , users will be able to identify the most relevant challenges to work through for a particular type of problem . Further work will develop case studies that analysts can work through using the HDSS . This will help analysts learn how to use the HDSS as well as providing real world examples that will enhance the ecological validity of the tool . P ROPOSED EVALUATION Evaluation of the HDSS will be initially undertaken with undergraduate and postgraduate students playing the role of intelligence analysts . The problems they will work on will be derived from two main sources , firstly the IEEE VAST dataset for 2010 [ 11 ] , which is particularly relevant because it deals with illegal arms trading and possible terrorist activity . The second source of intelligence problems will be taken from the case studies handbook by Beebe and Pherson [ 12 ] . This handbook provides detailed intelligence analysis case studies which allow users to observe structured analytic techniques in action . During the evaluation participants will be asked to work on the intelligence analysis problems that are set , sometimes alone , at other times as part of a larger group . The nature of these problems means that there is no single correct solution to the problem although some solutions are obviously better than others . At this stage the evaluation will focus on the process rather than the outcomes or solutions to the problems set . Data collected will include the wiki transcripts of the group discussions as well as key logging to observe exactly how the HDSS is being used . Based on our previous work that investigated collaborative working using wiki’ s ( Eachus et al [ 13 ] ) it is intended to use History Flow ( Viegas et al [ 14 ] ) as a means of visualizing the wiki output in order that the contributions to the analytic process can be examined . History Flow is an excellent tool for investigating the relative contributions of group members to as they work collaboratively on the defined problem . Using this software it is possible to observe how ideas develop , are refined and more importantly , how new knowledge emerges from the group discussions . As the name suggests , History Flow transforms the wiki input of individuals into a visualization showing the contributions of each individual as discussions progress . Changes in the observed flow are indicative of changes in input reflecting the emergence of new ideas and knowledge . It is an excellent tool for this purpose . Following the evaluation with the students it is intended to progress to analysts from various professions in order to improve the ecological validity of the HDSS . Although designed primarily for use by intelligence analysts , the HDSS is a tool that has as its main function the improvement of the analytic process . Analysts in a number of professions , for example business , economics and finance are required to do this and therefore this tool would also be of interest to these people . By testing the tool with a wide variety of analysts the ecological validity of the HDSS will be further extended . - 747 - R EFERENCES [ 1 ] National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States . 2004 . The 9 / 11 Commission Report : Final Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attack Upon the United States . Washington , D . C . : Government Pronting Office . [ 2 ] G . Convertino , D . Billman , P . Pirolli , J . P . Massar , J . P . and J . Shrager , The CACHE Study : Group Effects in Computer - supported Collaborative Analysis . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , 17 ( 4 ) , 353 - 393 , 2008 . [ 3 ] Neville , M . " You Are Well Clear of Friendlies " : Diagnostic Error and Cooperative Work in an Iraq War Friendly Fire Incident . Journal of Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 18 , 147 - 17 , 2009 [ 4 ] P . M . Jones , C . C . Hayes , C Wilkins , R . Bargar , J . Sniezek , P . Asaro , O . Mengshoel , D . Kessler , M . Lucenti , I . Choi , N . Tu , M . J . Schlabach , CoRAVEN : modelling and design of a multimedia intelligent infrastructure for collaborative intelligence analysis . Proceedings of the 1998 IEEE International Conference on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , San Diego , CA . [ 5 ] K . J . Wheaton , A Wiki is Like a Room : And Other Lessons Learned From 15 Wiki - based , Open Source , Intelligence Analysis Projects ( 2008 ) . Accessed from the International and Security Network , January 2011 . http : / / www . isn . ethz . ch / isn / Digital - Library / Publications / Detail / ? ots591 = cab359a3 - 9328 - 19cc - a1d2 - 8023e646b22c & lng = en & id = 50060 [ 6 ] R . J . Heuer , Jr . ” Psychology of Intelligence Analysis ” . New York , Novinka , 2006 . [ 7 ] P . Eachus and B . Short . Decision Support System for Intelligence Analysts . Paper presented at EISIC 2011 , Athens , September 12 - 14 th , 2011 . . [ 8 ] R . M . Clark . “ Intelligenced Analysis : A Target Centred Approach ” . Publisher CQ Press , 2009 . [ 9 ] R . J . Heuer . Jr . and R . H . Pherso “ Structured Analytic Techniques for Intelligence Analysis . ” Washington D . C . : CQ Press , 2009 . [ 10 ] Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction , 2005 . Report of Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction . Washington , D . C . : Government Printing Office . [ 11 ] IEEE VAST dataset 2010 . http : / / hcil . cs . und . edu / localphp / hcil / vast / index . php [ 12 ] S . M . Beebe and R . H . Pherson . Cases in Intelligence Analysis : Structured Analytic Techniques in Action . CQ Press , Jan 2012 [ 13 ] P . Eachus , A . Stedmon and M . Wilson . A Collaborative Multi - Source Intelligence Working Environment : A Systems Approach . Report produced in fulfillment of contract DSTLX1000054454 . [ 14 ] F . B . Viegas , M . Wattenberg and K . Dave . Studying Co - operation and Conflict Between Authors with history flow Visualisations . Proceedings of the ACMCHI 2004 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Vienna , Austria , pp575 - 582 . - 748 -