Cell Cycle Regulation of the Activity and Subcellular Localization of PLK1 , a Human Protein Kinase Implicated in Mitotic Spindle Function Roy M . Golsteyn , Kirsten E . Mundt , Andrew M . Fry , and Erich A . Nigg Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research ( ISREC ) , CH - 1066 Epalinges , Switzerland Abstract . Correct assembly and function of the mitotic spindle during cell division is essential for the accurate partitioning of the duplicated genome to daughter cells . Protein phosphorylation has long been implicated in controlling spindle function and chromosome segrega - tion , and genetic studies have identified several protein kinases and phosphatases that are likely to regulate these processes . In particular , mutations in the serine / threonine - specific Drosophila kinase polo , and the structurally related kinase Cdc5p of Saccharomyces cer - evisae , result in abnormal mitotic and meiotic divisions . Here , we describe a detailed analysis of the cell cycle - dependent activity and subcellular localization of Plkl , a recently identified human protein kinase with exten - sive sequence similarity to both Drosophila polo and S . cerevisiae Cdc5p . With the aid of recombinant baculo - viruses , we have established a reliable in vitro assay for Plkl kinase activity . We show that the activity of hu - man Plkl is cell cycle regulated , Plkl activity being low during interphase but high during mitosis . We further show , by immunofluorescent confocal laser scanning microscopy , that human Plkl binds to components of the mitotic spindle at all stages of mitosis , but under - goes a striking redistribution as cells progress from metaphase to anaphase . Specifically , Plkl associates with spindle poles up to metaphase , but relocalizes to the equatorial plane , where spindle microtubules over - lap ( the midzone ) , as cells go through anaphase . These results indicate that the association of Plkl with the spindle is highly dynamic and that Plkl may function at multiple stages of mitotic progression . Taken together , our data strengthen the notion that human Plkl may represent a functional homolog of polo and Cdc5p , and they suggest that this kinase plays an important role in the dynamic function of the mitotic spindle during chromosome segregation . URING mitosis , replicated chromosomes ( sister chro - matids ) segregate such that each daughter cell re - ceives one complete copy of the genome . Chromo - some segregation is a highly complex and dynamic process that relies on the assembly and function of a microtubule - based mitotic spindle apparatus ( for reviews see Mclntosh and Koonce , 1989 ; Mclntosh and Hering , 1991 ; Karsenti , 1991 ; Hyman and Mitchison , 1992 ; Gorbsky , 1993 ; Wad - sworth , 1993 ; Rieder and Salmon , 1994 ; Koshland , 1994 ) . Biochemical , immunocytochemical , and genetic studies concur to demonstrate that phosphorylation plays an im - portant role in controlling spindle assembly and function . For instance , biochemical studies have revealed that mitosis is accompanied by a substantial increase in protein phos - Please address all correspondence to E . A . Nigg , Swiss Institute for Ex - perimental Cancer Research , 155 Chemin des Boveresses , CH * 1066 Epalinges , Switzerland . Tel . : 41 21 692 5884 . Fax : 41 21 652 6933 . The current address of R . M . Golsteyn is Department of Medical Bio - chemistry , University of Calgary , 3330 Hospital Drive , NW , Calgary AB , Canada T2N 4N1 . phorylation ( Karsenti et al . , 1987 ) , and inhibitors of protein kinases block the formation of taxol - stabilized microtubule asters ( Verde et al . , 1991 ) , as well as chromosome - spindle interactions ( Nicklas et al . , 1993 ) . Furthermore , phosphory - lation was shown to control both the rate of nucleation of microtubules at the centrosome and their dynamic behavior ( Verde et al . , 1990 , 1992 ; Gotoh et al . , 1991 ; Buendia et al . , 1992 ) . Most recent studies indicate that reversible phospho - rylation may control the mitotic function of microtubule - based motor proteins ( Liao et al . , 1994 ; Blangy , A . , H . Lane , M . Kress , and E . A . Nigg , manuscript in preparation ) , and it is possible that phosphorylation of kinetochore - asso - ciated motors may determine the orientation of chromo - some movements ( Hyman and Mitchison , 1991 ) . Immuno - cytochemical data also provide support for a role of protein phosphorylation in the regulation of spindle function . In fact , antibodies directed against phosphorylated epitopes , such as MPM - 2 ( Davis et al . , 1983 ) or 3F3 / 2 ( Cyert et al . , 1988 ) , strongly stain components of the mitotic spindle ( Vandr6 et al . , 1984 ; Vandr6 and Burry , 1992 ; Gorbsky and Ricketts , 1993 ) . Finally , genetic studies performed with fungi and flies have identified multiple protein kinases © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 95 / 06 / 1617 / 12 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 129 , Number 6 , June 1995 1617 - 1628 1617 and phosphatases with a possible role in spindle function and chromosome segregation ( e . g . , Ohkura et al . , 1989 ; Doonan and Morris , 1989 ; Axton et al . , 1990 ; Llamazares et al . , 1991 ; Stone et al . , 1993 ; Mayer - Jaekel et al . , 1993 ; Toyn and Johnston , 1994 ) . One prominent protein kinase implicated in controlling spindle function is the p34CdC2 / cyclin B complex ( for review see Nurse , 1990 ; Nigg , 1993 ) . This kinase is partly localized to the mitotic spindle ( Bailly et al . , 1989 ; Pines and Hunter , 1991 ; Rattner et al . , 1992 ; Gallant and Nigg , 1992 ) , and it is able to stimulate microtubule dynamics in Xenopus cell - free extracts ( Verde et al . , 1990 , 1992 ; Buendia et al . , 1992 ) . The most direct evidence in support of a role of p34Cdc2 / cyclin B in the regulation of spindle function stems from the recent identification of spindle - associated , kine - sin - related motor proteins as likely physiological sub - strates of p34 ~ ¢2 / cyclin B ( Liao et al . , 1994 ; Blangy , A . , H . Lane , M . Kress , and E . A . Nigg , manuscript in prepara - tion ) . However , it would a priori seem very unlikely that the regulation of all mitotic transitions could be attributed uniquely to changes in the activity of the p34 ¢ ~ ¢2 kinase , and , as mentioned above , genetic analyses have identified numerous protein kinases and phosphatases that are re - quired for progression through mitosis ( for reviews see Forsburg and Nurse , 1991 ; Glover , 1991 ; Kinoshita et al . , 1991 ; Yanagida et al . , 1992 ) . Among the protein kinases implicated in controlling spindle function and chromosome segregation is polo , a serine / threonine - specific enzyme first identified in Dro - sophila ( Llamazares et al . , 1991 ) . Drosophila embryos harboring mutant polo alleles show a broad range of spin - dle abnormalities including monopolar spindles , highly branched bipolar spindles , and overcondensed chromo - somes ( Sunkel and Glover , 1988 ; Llamazares et al . , 1991 ) . The activity of wild - type polo kinase was measured during the rapid cell cycles of syncytial Drosophila embryos and reported to be maximal during late anaphase and early te - lophase ( Fenton and Glover , 1993 ) . Interestingly , recent studies have revealed that the CDC5 gene of Saccharomy - ces cerevisiae encodes a protein kinase with a high degree of sequence similarity to Drosophila polo ( Kitada et al . , 1993 ) . When yeast cells harboring a cdc5 ts mutant allele are cultured at the nonpermissive temperature , they arrest as large budded cells with partially segregated nuclei ( By - ers and Goetsch , 1974 ; Sharon and Simchem , 1990 ; Kitada et al . , 1993 ) , and spindle abnormalities have been ob - served in homozygous diploids undergoing meiosis ( Schild and Byers , 1980 ) . Although it is difficult to directly com - pare phenotypes of mutants in very different organisms , these findings raise the possibility that Drosophila polo and S . cerevisiae CDC5 may encode functional homologs . Using an approach based on the PCR ( Schultz and Nigg , 1993 ) , we have recently identified a human protein kinase that displays a substantial degree of sequence identity with Drosophila polo and budding yeast Cdc5p and hence was termed polo - like kinase 1 ( Plkl ) 1 ( Golsteyn et al . , 1994 ) . Independently , cDNAs encoding human and murine Plkl ( Clay et al . , 1993 ; Lake and Jelinek , 1993 ; Hamanaka et al . , 1994 ; Holtrich et al . , 1994 ) , as well as Plkl - related pro - 1 . Abbreviation used in this paper : Plkl , polo - like kinase 1 . tein kinases ( Simmons et al . , 1992 ; Fode et al . , 1994 ) , have been cloned in other laboratories . Northern blot analyses revealed that Plkl mRNA levels are highest in tissues with a sizeable proportion of proliferating cells , consistent with a role of Plkl in mitosis ( Clay et al . , 1993 ; Lake and Jel - inek , 1993 ; Golsteyn et al . , 1994 ) . In cultured cells , both Plkl mRNA ( Lake and Jelinek , 1993 ) and protein levels ( Golsteyn et al . , 1994 ) were low during G1 phase , but in - creased during S phase and reached maximal levels during G2 and M phases . By immunofluorescent staining with monoclonal antibodies , Plkl was found to be diffusely dis - tributed throughout interphase cells ; in dividing cells , however , a striking association with postmitotic bridges was noted , suggesting that Plkl might be discarded at the end of mitosis through shedding of the midbody into the culture medium ( Golsteyn et al . , 1994 ) . Further progress towards understanding the function of human Plkl had been hampered by a lack of biochemical information on the activity of this kinase . In this study , we have used recombinant Plkl to establish a reliable assay for measuring Plkl activity , and have then carried out a detailed study of Plkl activity during the cell cycle . The ac - tivity of Plkl isolated from synchronized HeLa cells was found to be low at all interphase stages of the cell cycle but high during mitosis . Using a novel , highly specific anti - body , we have also reexamined the subcellular distribution of human Plkl . We found that Plkl localizes to distinct el - ements of the mitotic spindle at all stages of mitosis , but undergoes a remarkable redistribution as cells progress from metaphase to anaphase . Taken together , these re - suits suggest that Plkl functions in mammalian mitotic cells to control spindle dynamics and chromosome segre - gation . Materials and Methods Cell Culture and Synchronization HeLa cells were grown in DMEM ( GIBCO BRL , Gaithersburg , MD ) supplemented with 5 % heat - inactivated FCS and penicillin - streptomycin ( 100 i . u . / ml and I00 p . g / ml , respectively ) in a 7 % CO2 atmosphere . For metabolic labeling of mitotic cells with 35Smethioninelcysteine , HeLa cells were cultured for 12 h in normal growth medium containing nocoda - zole ( 100 ng / ml ) and then washed with PBS ( 8 . 1 mM Na2HPO4 , 1 . 5 mM KH2PO4 , 137 mM NaCI , 2 . 7 mM KC1 , pH 7 . 2 ) , and incubated for 30 min in methionine - free MEM ( Gibco ) supplemented with 10 % FCS ( previously dialyzed against 100 mM NaCI ) , nocodazole ( 100 ng / ml ) , 1 % glutamine and penicillin - streptomycin . Finally , they were cultured for 4 h in the above methionine - free MEM containing 80 ixCi / ml of Trans35S - label ( ICN Biomedicals , Inc . , Costa Mesa , CA ) . Cells were synchronized at the G1 / S boundary by a double thymidine - aphidicolin block , as described by Heintz et al . ( 1983 ) . In brief , cells were plated onto multiple 10 - cm dishes and cultured in the presence of thymi - dine ( 2 mM ; Sigma Chem . Co . , St . Louis , MO ) for 14 h ; then they were washed three times with normal growth medium , incubated for an addi - tional 14 h under normal growth conditions , and finally arrested by the ad - dition of aphidicolin ( 1 ixg / ml , Sigma ) for 14 h . At time zero , cells were washed three times with normal growth medium and placed under normal growth conditions . At regular intervals , ceils were collected by trypsiniza - tion . Aliquots were subjected to flow cytometric analysis as described by Draetta and Beach ( 1988 ) , using a FACS II ( fluorescence - activated cell sorter ) instrument ( Becton - Dickinson Immunocytometry Sys . , Mountain View , CA ) . The remaining cells were used for the preparation of whole cell extracts , as described below . To arrest exponentially growing HeLa cells at prometaphase , nocoda - zole was added to final concentration of 100 ng / ml for 14 h . Mitotic cells The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 129 , 1995 1618 were collected by mechanical shake - off , rinsed twice in prewarmed growth medium , and replated into normal growth medium . Immediately before ( time zero ) or at various intervals after the removal of nocodazole , cells were collected and extracted as described below . To synchronize cells in the absence of cell cycle arresting drugs , HeLa suspension cells were size - fractionated by centrifugal elutriation as described previously ( Dra - etta and Beach , 1988 ; Golsteyn et al . , 1994 ) . All fractions were then used for flow cytometric analysis and for the preparation of whole cell extracts . Site - directed Mutagenesis and Expression of Recombinant PlkI in Insect Cells To prepare a catalytically inactive Plkl mutant , codon 82 ( AAG , coding for lysine ) was mutated to AGG ( coding for arginine ) , using reagents and instructions supplied in the Transformer Site - Directed Mutagenesis Kit ( Clontech Laboratories , Palo Alto , CA ) , and the oligonucleotides GCG - GGCAGGATTGTGCCTAAG and AATTCGAGCTCAGTACCCGG as mutagenesis and selection primers , respectively . To ensure that no ad - ditional mutations were unintentionally introduced , a 352 bp BglII frag - ment encompassing this mutation was sequenced and replaced into the original Plkl - pGEM plasmid ( Golsteyn et al . , 1994 ) , The mutated plasmid was named Plkl - K82R - pGEM . A baculovirus encoding wild - type human Plkl was constructed by sub - cloning an EcoRI fragment excised from Plkl - pGEM into the pBlueBac transfer vector ( Invitrogen , San Diego , CA ) . In the resulting construct ( Plkl - pBlueBac ) , the authentic Plkl ATG is used for initiation of transla - tion . Recombinant virus was then generated by homologous recombina - tion in vivo , following cotransfection of Sf9 insect cells with Plkl - pBlue - Bae and baculovirus DNA . The transfection supernatant was used to infect Sf9 cells for standard plaque assays , and recombinant virus was pu - rified by three rounds of plaque assays . Purity of the recombinant virus was confirmed by the absence of polyhedrin occlusion bodies . A baculovi - rus encoding the K82R mutant of Plkl was generated by subcloning Plkl - K82R into the transfer vector pVL1392 , cotransfection of this DNA ( Plkl - K82R - pVL1392 ) together with Baculogold DNA ( Pharmingen , San Diego , CA ) , and subsequent amplification of viral DNA according to the manufacturer ' s instructions ( Pharmingen ) . All procedures relating to Sf9 cell growth and baculovirus handling were performed as described in O ' Reilly et al . ( 1992 ) . Immunochemical Techniques A polyhistidine - tagged 25 - kD fusion protein ( termed C - termPlkl ) coding for the COOH terminus of Plkl ( residues 402 - 603 ) was expressed in E . coli and purified as described previously ( Golsteyn et al . , 1994 ) . Rabbits were immunized with C - termPlkl according to standard protocols ( Krek and Nigg , 1991 ) , until an adequate titer was obtained . The immune serum of rabbit 32 ( R32 ) was used for immunoprecipitation experiments , and the preimmune serum obtained from the same rabbit was used for controls . For affinity purification of anti - Plkl immunoglobulins ( AR32 ) from se - rum R32 , C - termPlkl protein was isolated from bacteria by the prepara - tion of inclusion bodies ( Harlow and Lane , 1988 ) , before nickel column chromatography ( Qiagen ) . 1 mg of purified C - termPlkl protein was then bound to CNBr - activated Sepharose 4B , as described by the manufacturer ( Pharmacia LKB Biotechnology , Piscataway , N J ) . Antibodies were puri - fied on this affinity matrix as described by Harlow and Lane ( 1988 ) , and AR32 immunoglobulins were used at 350 ng / ml for immunoblotting and at 3 . 5 ixg / ml for immunofluorescent staining . Immunoprecipitation experiments were performed by adding R32 se - rum ( at 1 : 100 ; vol / vol ) or AR32 immunoglobulins ( to a final concentration of 7 . 5 Ixg / ml ) to whole cell lysates and incubating the samples on ice for 1 h . After a 5 - min centrifugation at 10 , 000 g , supernatants were transferred to new tubes , and immune complexes were collected by incubation for 30 rain with protein A - Sepharose beads ( Pharmacia LKB Biotechnology ) . Beads were washed three times in Bead Buffer ( 50 mM Tris pH 7 . 5 , 0 . 1 % NP - 40 , 250 mM NaC1 , 5 mM NaF , 5 mM EDTA , 5 mM EGTA , 1 mM phe - nylmethylsulfonyl phosphate , 1 p . g / ml each of soybean trypsin inhibitor , leupeptin and pepstatin ) , as described by Meijer et al . ( 1989 ) . For analysis of immune complexes by SDS - PAGE , washed beads were again trans - ferred to new tubes , gel sample buffer was added , and samples were heated for 5 min to 95°C . For protein kinase assays , beads were also trans - ferred to new tubes , washed once in the appropriate kinase assay buffer ( see below ) , and stored on ice until used . Preparation of Cell Extracts and Protein Kinase Assays HeLa or Sf9 insect cells were collected and washed twice in PBS . Then , they were resuspended to a density of 5 , 000 cells / p , l and incubated for 30 min on ice , in either NP - 40 lysis buffer or historic H1 kinase buffer ( see below ) , depending on the assay to be performed : since Plkl was equally active under both lysis conditions , cells were lysed in historic HI kinase buffer when both Plkl and cyclin - dependent kinase ( CDK ) activities were to be determined . NP - 40 lysis buffer was 50 mM Hepes pH 7 . 4 , 1 % NP - 40 , 100 mM NaCI , 25 mM NaF , 25 mM sodium 13 - glycerophosphate , 1 ~ g / ml each of soybean trypsin inhibitor , leupeptin and pepstatin , and 30 ~ Lg / ml of DNase I and RNase A . Histone H1 kinase buffer was 1 % NP - 40 , 60 mM 13 - glycerophosphate , 10 mM MgCI2 , 10 mM EGTA , 1 mM ATP , 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl phosphate , 1 p , g / ml each of soybean trypsin inhibi - tor , leupeptin and pepstatin , and 30 ~ g / ml of DNase I and RNase A . Sub - sequently , samples were passed five times through a 27 - gauge needle and centrifuged for 5 min at 10 , 000 g ( 4°C ) . Supernatants were stored at - 80°C until used for kinase assays . To measure Plkl activity , Plkl immunoprecipitates were washed once in Plkl wash buffer ( 20 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM KC1 , 10 mM MC12 , 1 mM EGTA , 0 . 5 mM DTr , and 5 mM NaF ) and stored on ice . To start the reaction , 20 ~ 1 of Plkl assay buffer was added to the beads and samples were incubated for 15 rain at 30°C . Plkl assay buffer was Plkl wash buffer supplemented with 10 ~ M ATP , 4 p ~ Ci of 7 - 32pATP ( 10 mCi / ml ) , and 0 . 5 mg / ml of dephosphorylated casein ( Sigma ) . In some experiments , casein was substituted by different exogenous substrates , notably enolase , his - tone H1 , myelin basic protein , phosvitin , or MAP - 2 , each used at 0 . 5 mg / ml . Also , to determine the ability of Plkl to use GTP as a phosphate do - nor , experiments were carried out in the presence of 10 p , M GTP and 4 IxCi of ~ - 32pGTP ( 10 mCi / ml ) instead of ATP . Reactions were stopped by the addition of an equal volume of 2 . 5 x gel sample buffer . Then samples were heated for 5 min to 95°C before analysis by SDS - PAGE and autora - diography . To assay CDK - associated histone H1 kinase activity , CDK / cyclin com - plexes were collected using p9 ~ ucl beads , as described previously ( Maridor et al . , 1993 ) . They were washed once with CDK wash buffer ( 50 M 13 - glyc - erophosphate , pH 7 . 5 , 10 mM MgC12 , 10 mM NaF , and 1 mM DTr ) and stored on ice . To start the reaction , 20 i ~ 1 CDK assay buffer was added and samples were processed further as described above for Plkl assays . CDK assay buffer was CDK wash buffer supplemented with 10 ~ M ATP , 0 . 2 mCi / ml of ~ - 32pATP , and 0 . 4 mg / ml of histone H1 ( Boehringer Mann - heim Corp . , Indianapolis , IN ) . Quantitations of Plkl and CDK activities were performed using a Phosphorlmager and ImageQuant software ( Molecular Dynamics , Sunny - vale , CA ) and a CCD camera and Bio - Print software ( Vilber Lourmat , France ) . For Plkl assays , exposure times for autoradiography or phos - phorimaging were usually ~ 10 times longer than those required for opti - mal visualization of CDK assays . Miscellaneous Techniques Confocal laser scanning microscopy was performed on an MRC 600 in - strument ( BioRad Labs . , Hercules , CA ) , as described by Palladino et al . ( 1993 ) . AR32 antibody was detected with biotinylated goat anti - rabbit / streptavidin Texas red , as described by the manufacturer ( Amersham Life Sciences , UK ) . In vitro transcription - translation experiments were carried out in the presence of 35Smethionine / cysteine , using the TnT rabbit retie - ulocyte lysate system ( Promega Corp . , Madison , WI ) . Transient transfec - tions of HeLa cells with Plkl - CMV and myc - tagged Plkl - CMV ( Golsteyn et al . , 1994 ) were carried out as described by Krek and Nigg ( 1991 ) . Results Characterization of Anti - Plkl Antibody All results reported here were obtained using a novel rab - bit antibody ( R32 ) raised against the COOH - terminal 201 amino acids of human Plkl . Fig . 1 illustrates the specificity of this reagent . When used for immunoprecipitation ex - periments ( Fig . 1 A ) , the anti - Plkl antibody precipitated a major 68 - kD protein from 35S - labeled mitotic cell lysates ( lanes 2 and 3 ) . This protein comigrated exactly with the Golsteyn et al . Spindle Association and Mitotic Activation of Plkl 1619 Figure 1 . Characterization of R32 anti - Plkl antibodies . ( A ) Deter - mination of antibody specificity by immunoprecipitation . HeLa cells were cultured in the presence of nocodazole and [ 35S ] me - thionine / cysteine . A total cell lysate was then prepared and all - quots were incubated with either preimmune serum ( Pre ; lane 1 ) , anti - Plkl immune serum ( R32 , lane 2 ) or affinity - purified anti - Plkl antibodies ( AR32 , lane 3 ) . Immune complexes were collected and analyzed by SDS - PAGE and autoradiography . For comparison , 35S - labeled Plkl was also prepared by in vitro transcription / transla - tion of the PIkl - pGEM plasmid in a rabbit reticulocyte lysate and loaded onto the same gel ( IVT , lane 4 ) . The 68 - kD Plkl protein is indicated by an arrowhead , and the molecular masses markers are indicated in kD . The 40 - kD protein visible in lane 4 may arise from proteolysis or from internal initiation . ( B ) Determination of anti - body specificity by immunoblotting . Total cell lysates were pre - pared from exponentially growing HeLa cells ( Expo , lane 1 ) , and from HeLa cells transfected with cDNAs encoding either Plkl ( wt , lane 2 ) or MycPlkl ( Myc , lane 3 ) . Extracts were then analyzed by immunoblotting , using the affinity - purified anti - Plkl antibody AR32 . Note the comigration of the endogenous protein detected in lanes 1 and 3 with the overexpressed Plkl protein in lane 2 ( lower arrowhead ) . The decreased mobility of the MycPlkl protein detected in lane 3 is consistent with the presence of the 20 - amino acid myc - tag at the NH 2 terminus of Plkl . Equal amounts of total cellular protein were loaded in each lane . We note that ectopically expressed Plkl proteins were not detectable by Coomassie blue staining ( not shown ) . product obtained by in vitro translation of RNA tran - scribed from the human plkl cDNA ( lane 4 ) , and it was not recognized by the preimmune serum ( lane 1 ) . Like - wise , when used for immunoblotting on a total cell lysate prepared from exponentially growing HeLa cells ( Fig . 1 B ) , the anti - Plkl antibody reacted with a single 68 - kD pro - tein ( lane 1 ) . The identity of this protein was confirmed by transient transfection experiments : overexpression of the full - length Plkl protein resulted in a markedly increased signal intensity ( lane 2 ) , whereas expression of an myc - epitope tagged Plkl protein resulted in the expected ap - pearance of a second immunoreactive protein with a slightly increased molecular weight ( lane 3 ) . In contrast to the anti - Plkl monoclonal antibodies used previously ( Gol - steyn et al . , 1994 ) , the R32 antibodies did not cross - react with an unidentified ll0 - kD protein , and hence may be considered as monospecific for Plkl . Recombinant Human Plkl Is Active as a Casein Kinase Previously , we had been unable to detect specific protein kinase activity associated with Plkl immunoprecipitates ( Golsteyn et al . , 1994 ) . A priori these negative results might have been due to the choice of inappropriate in vitro substrates or assay conditions , an inhibitory action of the anti - Plkl antibodies , or a narrow window of activity of Plkl during the cell cycle . To overcome this difficulty and make Plkl amenable to a biochemical characterization , we constructed a recombinant baculovirus coding for wild - type Plkl . As a control , a virus coding for a catalytically in - active mutant Plkl ( K82R ) was also made . Corresponding arginine for lysine substitutions in other protein kinases have previously been shown to interfere with phosphate transfer to the substrate without drastically altering the three - dimensional structure of the kinase ( Taylor et al . , 1992 ) . Expression of human Plkl in Sf9 insect cells could readily be visualized by immunoblotting , and maximal ex - pression occurred at 30 - - 40 h postinfection ( Fig . 2 A ) . Wild - type and mutant Plkl were expressed to comparable levels ( Fig . 2 B , compare lanes 1 and 2 ) , and no signal was observed in control lysates ( Fig . 2 B , lane 3 ) . To determine whether recombinant Plkl displayed pro - tein kinase activity , immunoprecipitates were prepared from infected Sf9 insect cell lysates , washed extensively , and then incubated in vitro with [ - y - 32p ] ATP as a phos - phate donor and casein as an exogenous substrate ( Fig . 2 C ) . Casein was chosen as a substrate since both Dro - sophila polo and yeast Cdc5p have been reported to phos - phorylate casein ( Fenton and Glover , 1993 ; Kitada et al . , 1993 ) . Under the above conditions , kinase activity could readily be demonstrated for wild - type Plkl ( lane 4 ) , and phosphoamino acid analysis revealed that phosphoryla - tion occurred on both serine and threonine residues ( data not shown ) . Attesting to the specificity of the observed re - action , no casein kinase activity was seen in immunopre - cipitates of the catalytically inactive mutant ( lane 2 ) , or when immunoprecipitations were performed with the cor - responding preimmune serum ( lanes 1 and 3 ) . A phos - phorylated protein migrating at the size of Plkl was also detected , but , interestingly , this phosphoprotein was seen only in immunoprecipitates of wild - type Plkl ( lane 4 , ar - row ) , suggesting that Plkl may be able to undergo auto - phosphorylation . Using the above assay , several additional proteins were tested as potential substrates of Plkl . Where - as histone H1 , enolase , and phosvitin were not phosphory - lated to any significant extent , myelin basic protein and the microtubule - associated protein MAP - 2 could be phos - phorylated by Plkl , albeit to a much lower degree than casein ( data not shown ) . Since casein is a good in vitro substrate not only for Plkl , but also for other protein kinases , notably casein ki - nase II ( Pinna , 1990 ) and p34cdc2 / cyclin B ( Brizuela et al . , 1989 ) , we considered it important to compare the biochem - ical properties of these different casein kinases . To this end , we first tested the ability of Plkl to use GTP as a phosphate donor . As shown in Fig . 3 A , Plkl could use [ ' y - a2p ] ATP ( lane 1 ) but not [ ~ / - 32p ] GTP ( lane 3 ) , and the use of [ ~ / - 32p ] ATP was not inhibited by the presence of an excess of unla - beled GTP ( lane 2 ) . In contrast , casein kinase II was able to use [ ~ , - 32p ] GTP as efficiently as [ ~ - 32p ] ATP ( compare The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 129 , 1995 1620 Figure 2 . Production of recombinant Plkl and K82R - Plk1 in baculovirus - infected Sf9 cells , and demonstration of Plkl kinase activity . ( A ) Insect Sf9 cells were infected with recombinant baculovirus encoding Plkl . At the indicated intervals , extracts were prepared for analysis of Plkl expression by immunoblotting with AR32 antibodies . Equal amounts of protein were loaded in each lane , and the position of molecular mass markers are indi - cated in kD . ( B ) lnsect Sf9 cells were infected with either Plkl baculovirus ( wt , lane 1 ) , K82R - baculovi - rus ( K82R , lane 2 ) or a control baculovirus encoding a nonrelated protein ( Contr , lane 3 ) . At 30 h post - infection , extracts were prepared and analyzed by immunoblotting with anti - Plkl antibody AR32 . ( C ) Insect Sf9 ceils were infected with baculoviruses encoding either K82R - Plk1 ( lanes 1 and 2 ) or wild - type Plkl ( lanes 3 and 4 ) . At 30 h postinfection , extracts were prepared and incubated with either preimmune serum ( Pre , lanes 1 and 3 ) or anti - Plkl immune serum ( Imm , lanes 2 and 4 ) . The immune complexes were collected with protein A beads , washed three times with Bead buffer and once with kinase assay buffer , transferred to new tubes , and incubated in the presence of [ " / - 32p ] ATP and casein . The phosphorylated reaction products were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and autoradiography . The arrowhead marks the position of phosphorylated casein , whereas the arrow points to a phosphopro - tein comigrating with Plkl . lanes 4 and 6 ) , and excess GTP interfered with the use of [ ' y - aEp ] ATP ( lane 5 ) . Hence , on the basis of a differential use of GTP , it is possible to distinguish Plkl from casein kinase II . Also , in further experiments ( data not shown ) , we found that Plkl was unable to phosphorylate the pep - tide RRREEETEEE , a preferred substrate of casein ki - nase II ( Kuenzel et al . , 1987 ) , and that Plkl was not inhib - ited by heparin ( up to 500 ~ g / ml ) , a potent inhibitor of casein kinase II ( Pinna , 1990 ) . Fig . 3 B shows that the casein kinase activity of Plkl could also readily be distin - guished from that associated with p34 ~ ¢2 / cyclin B : whereas Plkl phosphorylated almost exclusively a - casein ( lane 2 ) p34cdcE / cyclin B acted preferentially on [ 3 - casein ( lane 1 ) . Plkl Activity Peaks during Mitosis Having optimized experimental conditions for assaying Plkl activity , we proceeded to carry out a detailed analysis of Plkl kinase activity during the cell cycle . HeLa cells were either synchronized using drug arrest - release proto - cols ( Figs . 4 and 5 ) or fractionated according to size by centrifugal elutriation ( Fig . 6 ) , and Plkl casein kinase ac - tivity was measured in immunoprecipitates . To provide a marker for the timing of mitosis , the histone H1 kinase ac - tivity of CDKs ( particularly p34 edc2 ) was also determined for each sample . In these experiments , it was convenient to use p9 sue1 beads for the isolation of p34 cdc2 ( Meijer et al . , Figure 3 . Comparison of Plkl with casein ki - nase II and p34 cdc2 . ( A ) The use of GTP pro - vides a means to distinguish Plkl activity from casein kinase II activity . Plkl was immu - noprecipitated from an extract of Plkl - bacu - lovirus - infected Sf9 cells , and immune com - plexes were used for phosphorylating casein in the presence of the phosphate donors indi - cated above each lane ( lanes 1 - 3 ) . In parallel , the ability of casein kinase II ( Promega ) to phosphorylate casein was assayed under iden - tical conditions ( lanes 4 - 6 ) . [ ~ - 32p ] ATP or [ ~ - 32P ] GTP were provided at 4 ixCi , in the presence of 10 tzM unlabeled nucleotide triphosphate , whereas excess unlabeled GTP was added at 1 raM . The reaction products were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and autora - diography . The positions of molecular mass markers are indicated in kD . ( B ) Plkl prefer - entially phosphorylates o ~ - casein , whereas p34CdC2 / cyclin B prefers [ 3 - casein . The casein kinase activities of p34CdC2 / cyclin B ( lane 1 ) and Plkl ( lane 2 ) were assayed in parallel and analyzed by SDS - PAGE and autoradiography . The positions of ~ t - and [ 3 - casein were deter - mined by Coomassie blue staining of the gel before autoradiography . The p34°d ~ 2 / cyclin B complex used in these experiments was iso - lated from mitotically arrested HeLa cells , using p9 sud beads ( Maridor et al . , 1993 ; Golsteyn et al . , 1994 ) . Golsteyn et al . Spindle Association and Mitotic Activation of Plkl 1621 C Expo 0 2 • • • • • T B 100 - 75 - % Activity 50 - 25 - 0 O CDK I I I I I I | I I I 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 Time after release ( hours ) v4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 I ' T • V • Y • T T Y T • • • • i i , I i l , l , i Figure 4 . Cell cycle - dependent activation of Plkl after release from a thymidine / aphidicolin block at G1 / S . ( A ) HeLa cells were cul - tured for 14 h in the presence of 2 mM thymidine , and then for 14 h in fresh medium without thymidine , and finally , for 14 h in the pres - ence of 1 ixg / ml of aphidicolin . At time 0 , cells were washed and replaced into fresh medium . Extracts were prepared from aphidicolin - arrested cells ( time 0 , lane 2 ) , and at 2 - h intervals after release from the aphidicolin block ( lanes 3 - 11 ) . For comparison , an extract was prepared also from exponentially growing cells ( Expo , lane 1 ) . Plkl and CDKs were isolated from all extracts by immunoprecipitation and absorption on p9 sue1 beads , respectively . Immunoprecipitated Plkl activity was assayed using casein as a substrate ( top panel ) , whereas CDK activity associated with p9 sue1 beads was determined using histone H1 as a substrate ( bottom panel ) . The reaction prod - ucts were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and autoradiography . Only the relevant portions of each autoradiogram are shown . ( B ) The amounts of [ 32p ] incorporated into casein and histone H1 , reflecting the activities of Plkl and CDKs , respectively , were quantitated by using a phosphorimager . They were plotted as a function of time after release from the aphidicolin block ; for both substrates , values were nor - malized relative to the maximal phosphorylation ( 100 % ) observed at 14 h after release . The Plkl - associated casein kinase activity is rep - resented using filled symbols , whereas the CDK - associated histone H1 kinase activity is shown using open circles . ( C ) In parallel to the preparation of extracts for obtaining the data shown in panels A and B , a fraction of each cell population was used for FACS analysis . For each sample , the positions of the G1 phase peak and the G2 / M phase peak are marked by small arrows . 1989 ; Maridor et al . , 1993 ; Golsteyn et al . , 1994 ) . These beads bind also to other members of the CDK family , but it appears safe to attribute the bulk of the measured activ - ity to p34 ~ c2 . During the cell cycle , complexes between this kinase and mitotic cyclins show at least tenfold higher histone HI kinase activity than any other CDK / cyclin complex ( Gabrielli et al . , 1992 ) . Furthermore , qualita - tively very similar results were obtained when histone H1 kinase activities were measured in p34 cdc2 immunoprecipi - tates ( data not shown ) . In a first experiment ( Fig . 4 ) , HeLa cells were synchro - nized at the G1 / S boundary , using a thymidine / aphidicolin double block procedure adapted from Heintz et al . ( 1983 ) . After release from drug arrest , ceils were collected at reg - ular intervals , and Plkl and CDK activities were mea - sured , using casein and histone H1 as substrates , respec - tively ( Fig . 4 , A and B ) . In parallel , the DNA content of each sample was analyzed by flow cytometry ( Fig . 4 C ) . This experiment allowed us to survey a period correspond - ing to nearly one complete cell cycle . It revealed that the Plkl - associated casein kinase and the CDK - associated his - tone H1 kinase displayed a very similar cell cycle depen - dency . Both activities were low in cells at early stages of the cell cycle ( 0 - 8 h after release from the G1 / S block ) , but increased drastically to reach maximal levels as cells passed through mitosis ( 12 - 16 h after release from the G1 / S block ) . By 18 h after release , when the bulk of the cell pop - ulation had completed mitosis and reentered G1 phase , both Plkl and CDK activities decreased again . To corroborate the above results , Plkl and CDK activ - ities were also measured following release of cells from a prometaphase block imposed by nocodazole ( Fig . 5 ) . Under the experimental conditions used here , cells tra - versed mitosis within ~ 2 h , and daughter cells flattened onto the substratum by ~ 3 - 4 h ( data not shown ) . As shown in Fig . 5 , both Plkl - associated casein kinase and CDK - associated histone H1 kinase activities were high in no - codazole - arrested cells ( lane 2 ) , stayed high for ~ 60 min after removal of the drug ( lanes 3 - 5 ) , and declined with similar kinetics as cells exited from mitosis ( lanes 6 - 8 ) . We note that three proteins coprecipitating with Plkl ( labeled a , b , and c ) were reproducibly phosphorylated in these as - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 129 , 1995 1622 Figure 5 . Cell cycle ~ lependent inactivation of Plkl after release from a nocodazole block at prometaphase . HeLa cells were cul - tured for 14 h in the presence of nocodazole and mitotic cells were collected by mechanical shake - off . Extracts were prepared at time 0 ( lane 2 ) , as well as at the indicated times ( in minutes ) af - ter the release from the nocodazole block ( lanes 3 - - 8 ) . For com - parison , an extract was prepared also from exponentially growing cells ( Expo , lane 1 ) . The casein kinase activity of immunoprecip - itated Plkl ( top panel ) and the histone H1 kinase activity of p9SUCl - absorbed CDKs ( bottom panel ) were then determined as described in the legend to Fig . 4 , and the reaction products were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and autoradiography . The positions of molecular mass markers are indicated in kD . Arrows a , b , and c point to potential substrates coprecipitating with Plkl . says . One of these ( protein c ) may correspond to Plkl it - self , but it will be interesting to identify the others and determine whether they are physiologically relevant sub - strates of Plkl . To exclude potential artefacts arising from the use of drugs for synchronization , HeLa cells were subjected to size fractionation by centrifugal elutriation ( Fig . 6 ) . Each sample was then used for assaying the activities of immu - noprecipitated Plkl and p9SUCl - adsorbed CDKs ( Fig . 6 A , top and middle panel , respectively ) , and analyzed for DNA content by flow cytometry ( Fig . 6 B ) . In addition , the amount of Plkl protein in each fraction was deter - mined by immunoblotting ( Fig . 6 A , bottom panel ) . Con - sistent with the data shown in Figs . 4 and 5 , we found that both Plkl and CDK activities were low in cell populations consisting predominantly of G1 and S phase cells ( Frac - tions 1 - 3 ) , but increased substantially as more and more cells progressed to the G2 and M phases of the cell cycle ( fractions 4 - 7 ) . On the basis of these results we conclude that the human protein kinase Plkl is maximally active during mitosis . We have shown previously that Plkl protein levels fluc - tuate during the cell cycle , being low during G1 , and in - creasing progressively to reach a peak during mitosis ( Gol - steyn et al . , 1994 ) . This finding is confirmed by the immunoblotting data shown in Fig . 6 A ( bottom panel ) . In - B 1 2 3 • T T T T T 4 5 6 7 T • ~ ' T I ' T T Y Figure 6 . Cell cycle - - dependent activity of Plkl in cells synchro - nized by centrifugal elutriation . ( A ) Exponentially growing HeLa ceils were synchronized by centrifugal elutriation , as described previously ( Draetta and Beach , 1988 ; Golsteyn et al . , 1994 ) . Plkl and CDKs were then isolated from each sample , as well as from exponentially growing ceils , and the activities of these kinases were assayed as described in the legend to Fig . 4 , using casein as a substrate for Plkl ( top panel ) and histone H1 as a substrate for CDKs ( middle panel ) . To determine the abundance of Plkl in each sample , each extract was also probed by immunoblotting with AR32 anti - Plkl antibodies ( bottom panel ) . Only the rele - vant parts of the autoradiograms and the immunoblot are shown . ( B ) In parallel to the preparation of extracts for obtaining the data shown in A , a fraction of each cell population was used for FACS analysis . For each sample , the positions of the G1 phase peak and the G2 / M phase peak are marked by small arrows . terestingly , however , a quantitative analysis of these data revealed that the increase in Plkl protein cannot fully ac - count for the increase in kinase activity ( data not shown ) . This suggests that posttranslational events may be re - quired for maximal activation of Plkl . Association of Plk l with the Mitotic Spindle Apparatus Previous immunolocalization studies carried out with mono - clonal antibodies against Plkl had revealed that this kinase is diffusely distributed in both cytoplasm and nucleus dur - ing interphase stages of the cell cycle , but concentrated within postmitotic bridges in dividing cells ( Golsteyn et al . , 1994 ) . Prompted by the exquisite specificity of the R32 rabbit anti - Plkl antibody described here ( see Fig . 1 ) , we reexamined the subcellular localization of Plkl using con - Golsteyn et al . Spindle Association and Mitotic Activation of PIkl 1623 Figure 7 . Subcellular localization of Plkl in mitotic HeLa cells . HeLa cells were cultured on glass coverslips . Exponentially growing cells were treated , at room temperature , for 5 min with 3 % paraformaldehyde , 2 % sucrose in PBS , and then for 5 rain in 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 in 20 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 4 , 3 mM MgCI2 , 50 mM NaCI , 300 mM sucrose , 0 . 02 % NAN3 , and finally , at - 20°C , for 5 min with metha - nol . Then , they were washed with PBS , and sequentially incubated with the rat monoclonal anti - tubulin antibody YOL1 / 34 ( Serotec , Oxford , UK ) , followed by fluorescein - conjugated goat anti - rat IgG antibody , and with AR32 anti - Plkl antibody , followed by biotiny - lated goat anti - rabbit IgG antibody and Texas red - - conjugated streptavidin . Confocal microscopy was performed with an MRC 600 in - strument ( BioRad Labs ) . In each panel , tubulin staining is shown on the left , and Plkl staining on the right . A , interphase cell with single centrosome ; B , prophase cell with duplicated centrosomes ; C , metaphase cell ; D , anaphase cell ; E , telophase cell ; F , daughter cell pair in late telophase - early G1 phase . Bar in A indicates the magnification for panels A , B , C , and D and represents 10 ~ m . Bar in F represents 5 ~ m . focal laser scanning microscopy . Exponentially growing HeLa cells were stained with affinity - purified rabbit R32 anti - Plkl antibodies ( Fig . 7 ; right hand panels ) , and , in par - allel , with the rat monoclonal anti - tubulin antibody YOL / 34 ( Fig . 7 ; left hand panels ) . These experiments confirmed that Plkl is diffusely distributed throughout interphase cells ( A ) and associated with postmitotic bridges in divid - ing cells ( F ) . More interestingly , however , they also re - vealed that Plkl undergoes a remarkable redistribution as cells progress through mitosis . In particular , we observed a prominent association of Plkl with centrosomes and spindle poles at early stages of mitosis ( A - C ) , followed by a con - centration of Plkl in the equatorial region of the spindle and in the cleavage plane at later stages of mitosis ( D - F ) . Plkl was detected at centrosomes already in interphase cells ( A ) , and it persisted at spindle poles during prophase ( B ) and metaphase ( C ) . During anaphase , however , Plkl immunoreactivity disappeared completely from the spin - dle poles ( D ) . Instead , intense staining for Plkl arose in an equatorial plane corresponding to the spindle microtubule overlap zone ( D ) . Plkl then persisted in a region corre - sponding to the cleavage plane throughout telophase ( E ) , The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 129 , 1995 1624 and concentrated close to the midbody in the postmitotic bridges connecting the dividing cells ( F ; see also Golsteyn et al . , 1994 ) . At this time , staining of Plkl in the surround - ing cytoplasm was barely detectable , suggesting that either all Plkl had accumulated close to the midbody or that cy - toplasmic Plkl had been degraded . In additional experi - ments , cells were extracted with detergent before fixation with methanol and acetone ( Nislow et al . , 1993 ) , with very similar results ( data not shown ) . Attesting to the specific - ity of the R32 anti - Plkl antibody , we also note that very similar staining patterns were observed after transfection of HeLa cells with myc - epitope tagged Plkl , and subse - quent visualization of the ectopically expressed protein with anti - myc antibodies ( data not shown ) . Discussion A Novel Protein Kinase Family Implicated in Cell Cycle Progression Human Plkl is a member of a newly emerging family of protein kinases . The founding member of this family is en - coded by polo , a Drosophila gene identified in the course of studies on mutants displaying mitotic arrest phenotypes ( Sunkel and Glover , 1988 ; Llamazares et al . , 1991 ) . More recently , the S . cerevisiae gene CDC5 was found to encode a polo - related protein kinase ( Kitada et al . , 1993 ) , and muta - tions in this gene cause yeast cells to arrest during late mi - totic division ( Byers and Goetsch , 1974 ; Schild and Byers , 1980 ; Kitada et al . , 1993 ) . Furthermore , when diploid cells homozygous for a temperature - sensitive cdc5 mutant allele were subjected to the restrictive temperature during meio - sis , they arrested at a stage following spindle pole body du - plication with an aberrant meiosis I spindle ( Schild and Byers , 1980 ) . Hence , genetic evidence suggests that polo - related kinases are required for both mitotic and meiotic divisions . Several laboratories have independently isolated cDNAs encoding a mammalian protein kinase , Plkl , that may rep - resent a functional homolog of the Drosophila polo and yeast Cdc5p ( Clay et al . , 1993 ; Lake and Jelinek , 1993 ; Golsteyn et al . , 1994 ; Hamanaka et al . , 1994 ; Holtrich et al . , 1994 ) . Over the entire protein , Plkl displays 52 % se - quence identity with Drosophila polo , and sequence con - servation is not confined to the catalytic domain ( 65 % identity ) but extends to several motifs within the noncata - lytic COOH - terminal domain . Other mammalian polo - related protein kinases displaying a lower degree of se - quence similarity have also been described , notably the murine kinases Snk ( Simmons et al . , 1992 ) and Sak - a and Sak - b ( Fode et al . , 1994 ) . Interestingly , the expression of Snk is strongly induced upon mitogenic stimulation of cells , suggesting that this kinase might play a role at early stages of the cell cycle ( Simmons et al . , 1992 ) . Hence , it is possible that different members of the polo - like kinase family may all function in relation to cell proliferation , but may carry out distinct roles during the cell cycle , some - what reminiscent of the functional specialization of cyclin - dependent protein kinases . Recombinant Plkl Is Active as a Casein Kinase No data have so far been available on the biochemical properties of any of the polo - related kinases identified in mammals . To obtain this indispensable information , we have raised a rabbit antibody ( R32 ) that is exquisitely spe - cific for Plkl , and have constructed recombinant baculovi - ruses for expressing both wild - type and catalytically inac - tive Plkl in insect cells . Using these tools , we were then able to develop an in vitro kinase assay that allows us to reliably measure Plkl activity . When several commonly used protein kinase substrates were tested for their ability to be phosphorylated by Plkl , casein was found to be a preferred substrate . This result falls in line with previous studies showing that Drosophila polo and yeast Cdc5p also phosphorylate casein preferentially over histone H1 ( Fen - ton and Glover , 1993 ; Kitada et al . , 1993 ) . More importantly , it provides the first biochemical evidence for a functional relationship between mammalian Plks and structurally re - lated kinases from lower eukaryotes . Human Plkl Is Maximally Active during Mitosis Using both drug - arrest release protocols for cell cycle syn - chronization and centrifugal elutriation for size - fraction - ation of HeLa cells , we found that Plkl activity was low during interphase , but high as cells progressed through mi - tosis . We emphasize that possible contamination of Plkl immunoprecipitates by casein kinase II or p34 cdc2 cannot be invoked to explain these results : casein kinase II activ - ity has previously been shown to be virtually constant throughout the cell cycle ( Litchfield et al . , 1992 ; Krek , W . , and E . A . Nigg , unpublished results ) and p34 cdc2 phosphor - ylates 13 - casein rather than et - casein ( see Fig . 3 B ) . Parallel measurements of Plkl and p34 cdc2 kinase activities indicate that these two kinases display a very similar pattern of cell cycle - dependent activation and inactivation , at least within the temporal resolution afforded by our cell syn - chronization protocols . Our findings raise the question of how Plkl activity is regulated . Although nuclear run - off experiments suggested that Plkl transcription rates may be fairly constant , mRNA levels were shown to fluctuate during the cell cycle , reach - ing a peak at the G2 / M transition ( Lake and Jelinek , 1993 ) . In line with these results , we have shown previously ( Golsteyn et al . , 1994 ) and confirmed here ( Fig . 6 ) , that Plkl protein levels increase as cells progress from G1 to M phase . Interestingly however , this increased expression cannot fully account for the increased activity of Plkl dur - ing mitosis . In fact , we found that Plkl isolated from mi - totically arrested cells was ~ 4 - 6 times more active than an equivalent amount of Plkl from interphase cells ( data not shown , but see Fig . 6 ) . Thus , the activity of Plkl may be regulated by posttranslational mechanisms , and prelimi - nary results indicate that Plkl is phosphorylated during mitosis ( Mundt , K . E . , R . M . Golsteyn , and E . A . Nigg , un - published results ) . In this context , it is noteworthy also that when recombinant Plkl was immunoprecipitated from insect cells , the wild - type protein was phosphorylated in vitro , whereas the catalytically inactive K82R mutant was not ( Fig . 2 C ) . Similarly , a phosphorylated protein of ~ 68 kD was observed after performing protein kinase assays with Plkl isolated from mitotic human cells ( Fig . 5 , arrow c ) . These data suggest that Plkl might undergo autophos - phorylation . Golsteyn et al . Spindle Association and Mitotic Activation of Plkl 1625 On the basis of studies performed with Drosophila early syncytia embryos , which undergo synchronous and very rapid nuclear divisions , Drosophila polo was reported to be maximally active during late anaphase and telophase ( Fenton and Glover , 1993 ) . Hence , we were surprised to find that human Plkl was activated already at the G2 / M transition ( Figs . 4 and 6 ) . In fact , the kinetics of activation of Plkl at the onset of mitosis were indistinguishable from those determined for the p34 cdc2 protein kinase . Likewise , upon release of cells from a prometaphase block Plkl and p34 cd ~ 2 displayed very similar patterns of inactivation ( Fig . 5 ) . No synchronization protocol presently available for cultured cells affords a degree of cell cycle synchrony that would match the synchrony observed in the early embryos of species such as Drosophila . Hence , we cannot exclude that a sharp spike of Plkl activity at the anaphase - telo - phase transition might have gone undetected in our studies . On the other hand considering the very similar activation patterns observed for Plkl and p34 cdc2 , it appears difficult to escape the conclusion that Plkl is active before the on - set of anaphase . At present , we cannot readily reconcile our data with those reported for Drosophila polo , and it would clearly be interesting to study Plkl activity in other organisms displaying natural cell cycle synchrony , e . g . , sea urchins ( Meijer et al . , 1989 ) . This , however , will have to await the generation of appropriate tools . Plkl Associates with Multiple Components of the Mitotic Spindle The intracellular localization of Plkl suggests that this ki - nase may control processes related to spindle organization and chromosome segregation . Using monospecific anti - Plkl antibodies for confocal laser scanning immunofluores - cence microscopy , we observed that Plkl associated with centrosomes already in interphase cells . The kinase then remained associated with duplicating centrosomes during prophase and with spindle poles during metaphase . How - ever , at anaphase all Plkl immunoreactivity disappeared from the spindle poles and instead , strong Plkl staining was observed in the equatorial region of the cell where spindle microtubules emanating from opposite poles overlap . Fi - nally , at the end of telophase intense Plkl staining was seen within postmitotic bridges , where Plkl protein became concentrated on both sides of the midbody . Thus , during the period of its maximal activity , Plkl un - dergoes multiple transient associations with different ele - ments of the mitotic spindle . With present technologies , it is not possible to assay protein kinase activities in situ , and hence we do not know at which of the various described locations Plkl is active . However , our data are consistent with the possibility that Plkl may act upon as yet unidenti - fied substrates already at the onset of mitosis , when it is associated with the centrosomes , and then later during metaphase , when it is bound to spindle poles . In this con - text , it is interesting that mutations in Drosophila polo resulted in a disruption of centrosome organization , as visualized by a loss of staining by an anti - centrosomal anti - body ( Llamazares et al . , 1991 ) . Thus , Drosophila polo may also be required not only during anaphase and telophase , when it was reported to be maximally active ( Fenton and Glover , 1993 ) , but already at earlier stages of mitosis . With the onset of anaphase , centrosome staining by anti - Plkl antibodies disappeared and was replaced by strong staining in the spindle midzone area . We cannot formally exclude that these results simply reflect a concomitant masking and unmasking of Plkl epitopes , but the most straightforward interpretation of our data is that the Plkl protein undergoes a profound redistribution at the meta - phase to anaphase transition . Other proteins that ulti - mately collect in postmitotic bridges are also recruited to the spindle midzone at the metaphase to anaphase transi - tion , but it is interesting that several of these proteins first localize to chromosome arms or kinetochores ( Rattner , 1992 ; Nislow et al . , 1992 ; Earnshaw and Pluta , 1994 ) . Ex - amples of this are provided by CENP - E ( Yen et al . , 1991 ) , CENP - F ( Rattner et al . , 1993 ) , and the inner centromere proteins ( INCEPs ; Cooke et al . , 1987 ; Earnshaw and Cooke , 1991 ) . In contrast , there is presently no evidence that Plkl would associate with chromosomes at any stage of mitosis . Hence , it will be interesting to determine with what components of the mitotic spindle Plkl associates , and what mechanisms control the observed redistribution from spindle poles to midzone . To approach this issue , we have constructed several Plkl mutants for use in both transfection experiments and yeast two - hybrid screens . Concerning the function of the redistribution of Plkl from spindle poles to spindle midzone , two alternative , but not mutually exclusive , possibilities come to mind . On the one hand , Plkl may continue to be active during anaphase and telophase , and hence may phosphorylate substrates in the vicinity of the equatorial spindle microtubules . On the other hand , it is possible also that Plkl translocates to the miotic spindle in preparation for its own destruction . We have argued previously that Plkl protein levels might be reduced at the end of cell division , simply by shedding of postmitotic bridges ( Golsteyn et al . , 1994 ) . Alternatively , or in addition , it is possible that Plkl protein may be sub - ject to degradation at the end of mitosis . Plkl levels drop later in mitosis than those of cyclins A and B ( Murray and Hunt , 1993 ) , but this does not exclude that Plkl might be degraded by a similar type of proteolytic mechanism . In support of this possibility , it has recently been proposed that the motor protein CENP - E is specifically destroyed at the end of mitosis ( Brown et al . , 1994 ) . In future studies , it will be interesting to determine how Plkl activity is regulated during the cell cycle , and to es - tablish possible links between Plkl and known regulatory elements of mitotic control , particularly the CDK / cyclin complexes . Furthermore , it will be important to identify the physiological substrates of Plkl , Drosophila polo , and yeast Cdc5p . In this regard , the information on the activity and subcellular localization of Plkl , as well as the avail - ability of active recombinant Plkl , should be very helpful . We thank G . Thomas ( FMI Basel ) for a kind gift of purified MAP - 2 pro - tein , V . Simanis for assistance with elutriation , Thiery Laroche for help with confocal microscopy , and P . Zaech and C . Knabenhans for help with FACS analysis . We also thank A . Blangy and H . Lane for critical reading of the manuscript and all members of the laboratory for valuable discus - sions . This work was supported by a grant from the Swiss National Science Foundation to E . A . Nigg ( 31 - 33615 . 92 ) . R . M . Golsteyn and A . Fry ac - knowledge support by fellowships from the Alberta Heritage Foundation for Medical Research , and The Royal Society , respectively . K . Mundt is a The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 129 , 1995 1626 recipient of a Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research predoc - toral fellowship . Received for publication 24 January 1995 and in revised form 9 March 1995 . References Axton , J . M . , V . Domhradi , P . T . W . Cohen , and D . M . Glover . 1990 . One of the protein phosphatase 1 isoenzymes in Drosophila is essential for mitosis . Cell . 63 : 33 - 46 . Bailly , E . , M . Dorre , P . Nurse , and M . Bornens . 1989 . p34cdc2 is located in both nucleus and cytoplasm ; part is centrosomally associated at G2 / M and enters vesicles at anaphase . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 8 : 3985 - 3995 . Brizuela , L . , G . Draetta , and D . Beach . 1989 . Activation of human CDC2 pro - tein as a histone H1 kinase is associated with complex formation with the p62 subunit . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 86 : 4362 - 4366 . Brown , K . D . , R . M . R . Coulson , T . J . Yen , and D . W . Cleveland . 1994 . Cyclin - like accumulation and loss of the putative kinetochore motor CENP - E re - sults from coupling continuous synthesis with specific degradation at the end of mitosis . J . Cell Biol . 125 : 1303 - 1312 . Buendia , B . , G . Draetta , and E . Karsenti . 1992 . Regulation of the microtubule nucleating activity of centrosomes in Xenopus egg extracts : role of cyclin A - associated protein kinase . J . Cell Biol . 116 : 1431 - 1442 . Byers , B . , and L . Goetsch . 1974 . Duplication of spindle plaques and integration of the yeast cell cycle . Cold Spring Harbor Symp . Quant . Biol . 3 : 123 - 131 . Clay , F . J . , S . J . McEwen , I . Bertoncello , A . F . Wilks , and A . R . Dunn . 1993 . Identification and cloning of a protein kinase - encoding mouse gene , PIk , re - lated to the polo gene of Drosophila . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 90 : 4882 - 4886 . Cooke , C . A . , M . M . Heck , and W . C . Earnshaw . 1987 . The inner centromere protein ( INCENP ) antigens : movement from inner centromere to midbody during mitosis . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 2053 - 2067 . Cyert , M . S . , T . Scherson , and M . W . Kirschner . 1988 . Monoclonal antibodies specific for thiophosphorylated proteins recognize Xenopus MPF . Dev . Biol . 129 : 209 - 216 . Davis , F . M . , T . Y . Tsao , S . K . Fowler , and P . N . Rao . 1983 . Monoclonal anti - bodies to mitotic cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 80 : 2926 - - 2930 . Doonan , J . H . , and N . R . Morris . 1989 . The bimG gene of A . nidulans , which is required for completion of anaphase , encodes a homolog of mammalian phosptmprotein phosphatase 1 . Cell . 57 : 987 - 996 . Draetta , G . , and D . Beach . 1988 . Activation of cdc2 protein kinase during mito - sis in human cells : cell cycle - dependent phosphorylation and subunit rear - rangement . Cell . 54 : 17 - 26 . Earnshaw , W . C . , and C . A . Cooke . 1991 . Analysis of the distribution of the IN - CENPs throughout mitosis reveals the existence of a pathway of structural changes in the chromosomes during metaphase and early events in cleavage furrow formation . J . Cell Sci . 98 : 443 - 461 . Earnshaw , W . C . , and A . F . Pluta . 1994 . Mitosis . Bioessays . 16 : 639 - 643 . Fenton , B . , and D . M . Glover . 1993 . A conserved mitotic kinase active at late anaphase - telophase in syncytial Drosophila embryos . Nature ( Lond . ) . 363 : 637 - 640 . Fode , C . , B . Motro , S . Yousefi , M . Heffernan , and J . W . Dennis . 1994 . Sak , a marine protein - serine / threonine kinase that is related to the Drosophila polo kinase and involved in cell proliferation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 91 : 6388 - 6392 . Forsburg , S . L . , and P . Nurse . 1991 . Cell cycle regulation in the yeasts Saccharo - myces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 7 : 227 - 256 . GabrieUi , B . G . , L . M . Roy , J . Gautier , M . Philippe , and J . L . Mailer . 1992 , A cdc2 - related kinase oscillates in the cell cycle independently of cyclins G2 / M and cdc2 . J . Biol . Chem . 267 : 1969 - 1975 . Gallant , P . , and E . A . Nigg . 1992 . Cyclin B2 undergoes cell cycle - dependent nu - clear translocation and , when expressed as a non - destructible mutant , causes mitotic arrest in HeLa cells . J . Cell Biol . 117 : 213 - 224 . Glover , D . M . 1991 . Mitosis in the Drosophila embryo - in and out of control . Trends Genet . 7 : 125 - 132 , Golsteyn , R . M . , S . J . Schultz , J . Bartek , A . Ziemiecki , T . Ried , and E . A . Nigg . 1994 . Cell cycle analysis and chromosomal localization of human Plkl , a pu - tative homologue of the mitotic kinases Drosophila polo and Saccharomyces cerevisiae Cde5 . J . Cell Sci . 107 : 1509 - 1517 . Gorbsky , G . J . 1992 . Chromosome motion in mitosis . Bioessays . 14 : 73 - 80 . Gorbsky , G . J . , and W . A . Ricketts . 1993 . Differential expression of a phospho - epitope at the kinetochores of moving chromosomes . J . Cell Biol . 122 : 1311 - 1321 . Gotoh , Y . , E . Nishida , S . Matsuda , N . Shiina , H . Kosako , K . Shiokawa , T . Ak - iyama , K . Ohta , and H . Sakai . 1991 . In vitro effects on microtubule dynamics of purified Xenopus M phase - activated MAP kinase . Nature ( Lond . ) . 349 : 251 - 254 . Hamanaka , R . , S . Maloid , M . R . Smith , C . D . O ' Connell , D . L . Longo , and D . K . Ferris . 1994 . Cloning and characterization of human and murine ho - mologues of the Drosophila polo serine - threonine kinase . Cell Growth Diff . 5 : 249 - 257 . Harlow , E . , and D . Lane . 1988 . Antibodies : a Laboratory Manual . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , Cold Spring Harbor , NY . Heintz , N . , H . L . Sive , and R . G . Roeder . 1983 . Regulation of human histone gene expression : kinetics of accumulation and changes in the rate of synthe - sis and in the half - lives of individual histone mRNAs during the HeLa cell cycle . Mol . Cell . Biol . 3 : 539 - 550 . Holtrich , U . , G . Wolf , A . Br ~ uninger , T . Karn , B . B6hme , H . Rt ~ bsamen - Waig - mann , and K . Strebhardt . 1994 . Induction and down - regulation of PLK , a human serine / threonine kinase expressed in proliferating cells and tumors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 91 : 1736 - 1740 . Hyman , A . A . , and T . J . Mitchison . 1991 . Two different microtubule - based mo - tor activities with opposite polarities in kinetochores . Nature ( Lond . ) 351 : 206 - 211 . Hyman , A . A . , and T . J . Mitchison . 1992 . Molecular basis of chromosome movement . Curr . Opin . Struet . Biol . 2 : 275 - 279 . Karsenti , E . 1991 . Mitotic spindle morphogenesis in animal ceils . Semin . Cell Biol . 2 : 251 - 260 . Karsenti , E . , R . Bravo , and M . Kirschner . 1987 . Phosphorylation changes asso - ciated with the early cell cycle in Xenopus eggs . Dev . Biol . 119 : 442 - 453 . Kinoshita , N . , H . Yamano , F . Le Bouffant - Sladeczek , H . Kurooka , H . Ohkura , E . M . Stone , M . Takeuchi , T . Toda , T . Yoshida , and M . Yanagida . 1991 . Sis - ter - chromatid separation and protein dephosphorylation in mitosis . Cold Spring Harbor Syrup . Quant . Blot , 56 : 621 - - 628 . Kitada , K . , A . L . Johnson , L . H . Johnston , and A . Sugino . 1993 . A multicopy suppressor gene of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae G1 cell cycle mutant gene DBF4 encodes a protein kinase and is identified as CDC5 . Mol . Cell . Blot , 13 : 4445 - 4457 . Koshland , D . 1994 . Mitosis : back to the basics . Cell , 77 : 951 - 954 . Krek , W . , and E . A . Nigg . 1991 . Mutations of p34cdc2 phosphorylation sites in - duce premature mitotic events in HeLa ceils : evidence for a double block to p34cdc2 kinase activation in vertebrates . EMBO ( Eur . Mot , Biol . Organ . ) J . 10 : 3331 - 3341 . Kuenzel , E . A . , J . A . Mulligan , J . Sommercorn , and E . G . Krebs . 1987 . Sub - strate specificity determinants for casein kinase II as deduced from studies with synthetic peptides . . L Biol . Chem . 262 : 9136 - 9140 . Lake , R . J . , and W . R . Jelinek . 1993 . Cell - cycle and terminal differentiation - associated regulation of the mouse mRNA encoding a conserved mitotic protein kinase . Mol . Cell . Biol . 13 : 7793 - 7801 . Liao , H . , G . Li , and T . J . Yen . 1994 . Mitotic regulation of microtubule cross - linking activity of CENP - E . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 265 : 394 - 398 . Litchfield , D . W . , B . Liischer , F . J . Lozeman , R . N . Eisenman , and E . G . Krebs . 1992 . Phosphorylation of casein kinase II by p34cdc2 in vitro and at mitosis . J . Biol . Chem . 267 : 13943 - 13951 . Llamazares , S . , A . Moreira , A . Tavares , C . Girdham , B . Spruce , C . Gonzalez , R . Karess , D . M . Glover , and C . E . Sunkel . 1991 . Polo encodes a protein ki - nase homolog required for mitosis . Genes Dev . 5 : 2153 - 2165 . Maridor , G . , P . Gallant , G . R . Golsteyn , and E . A . Nigg . 1993 . Nuclear localiza - tion of vertebrate cyclin A correlates with its ability to form complexes with cdk catalytic subunits . J . Cell Sci . 106 : 535 - 544 . Mayer - Jaekel , R . E . , H . Ohkura , R . Gomes , C . E . Sunkel , S . Baumgartner , B . A . Hemmings , and D . M . Glover . 1993 . The 55 kD regulatory subunit of Drosophila protein phosphatase 2A is required for anaphase . Cell . 72 : 621 - 633 . Mcfntosh , J . R . , and M . P . Koonce . 1989 . Mitosis . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 246 : 622 - 628 . Mclntosh , J . R . , and G . E . Hering . 1991 . Spindle fiber action and chromosome movement . Annu . Rev . Cell Blot , 7 : 403 - 426 . Meijer , L . , D . Arion , R . Golsteyn , J . Pines , L . Bfizuela , T . Hunt , and D . Beach . 1989 . Cyclin is a component of the sea urchin egg M - phase specific histone H1 kinase . EMBO ( Eur . Mot , BioL Organ . ) J . 8 : 2275 - 2282 . Murray , A . , and T . Hunt . 1993 . The Cell Cycle : an Introduction . Oxford Uni - versity Press , Oxford . Nicklas , R . B . , L . E . Krawitz , and S . C . Ward . 1993 . Od chromosome movement and inaccurate chromosome distribution in mitosis and meiosis after treat - ment with protein kinase inhibitors . Z Cell Sci . 104 : 961 - 973 . Nigg , E . A . 1993 . Targets of cyclin - dependent protein kinases . Curr . Opin . Cell Blot , 5 : 187 - 193 . Nislow , C . , V . A . Lombillo , R . Kuriyama , and J . R . Mclntosh . 1992 . A plus - end - directed motor enzyme that moves antiparallel microtubules in vitro local - izes to the interzone of mitotic spindles . Nature ( Lond . ) . 359 : 543 - 547 . Nurse , P . 1990 . Universal control mechanism regulating onset of M - phase . Na - ture ( Lond . ) . 344 : 503 - 508 . O ' Reilly , D . R . , L . K . Miller , and V . A . Lucknow . 1992 . Baculovirus Expression Vectors : A Laboratory Manual . Freeman Press , New York . Ohkura , H . , N . Kinoshita , S . Miyatani , T . Toda , and M . Yanagida . 1989 . The fis - sion yeast dis2 + gene required for chromosome disjoining encodes one of two putative type 1 protein phosphatases . Cell . 57 : 997 - 1007 . Palladino , F . , T . Laroche , E . Gilson , A . Axelrod , L . Pillus , and S . M . Gasser . 1993 . SIR3 and SIR4 proteins are required for the positioning and integrity of yeast telomeres . Cell , 75 : 543 - 555 . Pines , J . , and T . Hunter . 1991 . Human cyclins A and B1 are differentially lo - cated in the cell and undergo cell cycle dependent nuclear transport . J . Cell Biol . 115 : 1 - 17 . Pinna , L . A . 1990 . Casein kinase 2 : an ' eminence grise ' in cellular regulation . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1054 : 267 - 284 . Rattner , J . B . 1992 . Mapping the mammalian intercellular bridge . Cell Motil . Golsteyn et al . Spindle Association and Mitotic Activation of Plkl 1627 Cytoskeleton . 23 : 231 - 235 . Rattner , J . B . , A . Rao , M . J . Fritzler , D . W . Valencia , and T . J . Yen . 1993 . CENP - F is a . ca 400 kDa kinetochore protein that exhibits a cell - cycle de - pendent localization . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 26 : 214 - - 226 . Rieder , C . L . , and E . D . Salmon . 1994 . Motile kinetochores and polar ejection forces dictate chromosome position on the vertebrate mitotic spindle . J . Cell Biol . 124 : 223 - 233 . Schild , D . , and B . Byers . 1980 . Diploid spore formation and other meiotic ef - fects of two cell - division - cycle mutations of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Ge - netics . 96 : 859 - 876 . Schultz , S . J . , and E . A . Nigg . 1993 . Identification of 21 novel human protein ki - nases , including 3 members of a family related to the cell cycle regulator nimA of Aspergillus nidulansl . Cell Growth Diff . 4 : 821 - 830 . Sharon , G . , and G . Simchem . 1990 . Mixed segregation of chromosomes during single - division meiosis of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Genetics . 125 : 475 - - 485 . Simmons , D . L . , B . G . Neel , R . Stevens , G . Evett , and R . L . Erikson . 1992 . Identification of an early - growth - response gene encoding a novel putative protein kinase . Mol . Cell . Biol . 12 : 4164 - - 4169 . Stone , E . M . , H . Yamano , N . Kinoshita , and M . Yanagida . 1993 . Mitotic regula - tion of protein phosphatases by the fission yeast sds22 protein . Curr . Biol . 3 : 13 - 26 . Sunkel , C . E . , and D . M . Glover . 1988 . Polo , a mitotic mutant of Drosophila dis - playing abnormal spindle poles . J . Cell Sci . 89 : 25 - 38 . Taylor , S . S . , D . R . Knighton , J . Zheng , L . F . Ten Eyck , and J . M . Sowadski . 1992 . Structural framework for the protein kinase family . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 8 : 429 - 462 . Toyn , J . H . , and L . H . Johnston . 1994 . The Dbf2 and Dbf20 protein kinases of budding yeast are activated after the metaphase to anaphase cell cycle tran - sition . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) Z 13 : 1103 - 1113 . Vandr6 , D . D . , and R . W . Burry . 1992 . Immunoelectron microscopic localiza - tion of phosphoproteins associated with the mitotic spindle . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 40 : 1837 - 184 % Vandr6 , D . D . , F . M . Davis , P . N . Rao , and G . G . Borisy . 1984 . Phosphoproteins are components of mitotic microtubule organizing centers . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 81 : 4439 - 4443 . Verde , F . , J . - M . Berrez , C . Antony , and E . Karsenti . 1991 . Taxol - induced mi - crotubule asters in mitotic extracts of Xenopus eggs : requirement for phos - phorylated factors and cytoplasmic dynein . Z Cell Biol . 112 : 1177 - 1187 . Verde , F . , M . Dogterom , E . Stelzer . E . Karsenti , and S . Leibler , 1992 . Control of microtubule dynamics and length by cyclin A - and cyclin B - dependent ki - nases in Xenopus egg extracts . J . Cell Biol . 118 : 1097 - 1108 . Verde , F . , J . - C . Labb6 , M . Dor6c , and E . Karsenti . 1990 . Regulation of microtu - bule dynamics by cdc2 protein kinase in cell - free extracts of Xenopus eggs . Nature ( Lond . ) . 343 : 233 - 238 . Wadsworth , P . 1993 . Mitosis : spindle assembly and chromosome motion . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 5 : 123 - 128 . Yanagida , M . , N . Kinoshita , E . M . Stone , and H . Yamano . 1992 . Protein phos - phatases and cell division cycle control . In Regulation of the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle . John Wiley & Sons , Chichester . 130 - - 146 . Yen , T . J . , D . A . Compton , D . Wise , R . P . Zinkowski , B . R . Brinkley , W . C . Earnshaw , and D . W . Cleveland . 1991 . CENP - E , a novel human centromere - associated protein required for progression from metaphase to anaphase . EMBO ( Eur Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 10 : 1245 - 1254 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 129 , 1995 1628