Searching for Analogical Ideas with Crowds Lixiu Yu , Aniket Kittur , Robert E . Kraut Carnegie Mellon University 5000 Forbes Avenue , Pittsburgh , PA 15213 { lixiuyu , nkittur , robert . kraut } @ cs . cmu . edu ABSTRACT Seeking solutions from one domain to solve problems in another is an effective process of innovation . This process of analogy searching is difficult for both humans and ma - chines . In this paper , we present a novel approach for re - presenting a problem in terms of its abstract structure , and then allowing people to use this structural representation to find analogies . We propose a crowdsourcing process that helps people navigate a large dataset to find analogies . Through two experiments , we show the benefits of using abstract structural representations to search for ideas that are analogous to a source problem , and that these analogies result in better solutions than alternative approaches . This work provides a useful method for finding analogies , and can streamline innovation for both novices and professional designers . Author Keywords Analogy searching ; schema ; crowdsourcing ; creativity ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 3 . Group and Organization Interfaces INTRODUCTION The emergence of large online idea repositories has the potential to radically improve design practice by increasing designers’ access to ideas relevant to the problems they are trying to solve . There now exist an enormous selection of ideas that embody design patterns that could spark creative ideas . For example , InnoCentive ( innocentive . com ) con - tains more than 40 , 000 business , social , policy , scientific , and technical problems and solutions in various domains , hundreds of new product ideas are submitted to Quirky ( quirky . com ) every day by a pool of nearly 500 , 000 inven - tors , and OpenIDEO has collected hundreds of solutions for a variety of social problems since 2010 ( openideo . com ) . Online idea repositories could provide a treasure trove of useful solutions to problems that are analogous to the orig - inal idea but in different domains . For example , a method for extracting a lost cork from a wine bottle might be adapted to save a baby stuck in the birth canal [ 33 ] . Analo - gy can be a highly effective tool for increasing innovation in domains ranging from scientific discovery to creative problem - solving to product development . Scientific and technological breakthroughs are often the result of taking a solution from a source domain and transferring it to a target domain [ 14 ] . Numerous psychological studies have shown that analogy transfer improves creative problem - solving [ 17 , 18 ] . Similarly , both empirical observation and experi - mental studies in product development find a positive rela - tionship between the extent of analogical transfer and the originality of the product concept [ 8 ] . However , being able to harness the power of these idea repositories depends on designers’ ability to find , recognize , and use analogies . Searching for analogous ideas across domains is challeng - ing for a number of reasons . Ideas that are analogous may share the same deep relational structure but be very differ - ent in terms of surface attributes [ 16 ] . For example , Chry - sippus in the second century B . C . made an important anal - ogy that sound waves behaved like water waves , despite the many different surface features between the two [ 22 ] . Some far analogies may eschew physical similarities alto - gether , such as Luria’s analogy between bacterial mutation and a slot machine [ 22 ] . Thus a key challenge in finding analogous ideas is the need to look for sets of structural relations between objects , rather than attributes of those objects [ 13 ] . For example , a love triangle is defined by the set of relations between three people rather than the charac - teristics of the individuals composing it [ 22 ] . Unfortunate - ly , online idea databases are typically represented by object attributes ( such as domain , material , manufacturing meth - od , etc . ) , which may not be useful for and indeed might actually impede search based on relational structure . Recognizing the similarity in relational structures between two entities remains a challenging computational problem . In order to find analogies in text computer scientists have developed a variety of natural language techniques includ - ing using words , parts of speech or other language - feature - based vector representations of objects in order to calculate similarity measures or associations between object pairs [ see 30 ] . Such approaches are challenged when there is little textual similarity between analogs , as when the source Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permit - ted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CHI 2014 , April 26 - May 01 2014 , Toronto , ON , Canada Copyright 2014 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2473 - 1 / 14 / 04… $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557378 Session : Crowds and Creativity CHI 2014 , One of a CHInd , Toronto , ON , Canada 1225 2 and target domains are very different , and when those ana - logs are more complex than linguistic metaphors , involving multiple - relation mappings between two problems . Another approach to finding analogies has been to use the structural similarity of sentences or texts , such as using coupled clus - tering for detecting structural correspondence of text [ 3 , 34 ] . However , these approaches typically require rich data sets with clear substructures , whereas most description of problems or ideas in existing online databases are short , sparse , and lack consistent structure . In addition , these ap - proaches all rely upon on textual descriptions and fail when ideas are described in other modalities ( for example , imag - es or videos ) . Finding analogies can be challenging for people as well . Memory retrieval is highly sensitive to surface similarity , favoring near , within - domain analogs that share object at - tributes over far , structurally similar analogs that share ob - ject relations [ 15 , 16 , 17 , 24 ] . Analogical processing also incurs a heavy cognitive load , taxing working memory when even a few relations are required to be processed at once [ 19 ] . Thus searching through datasets with hundreds or thousands of ideas for structurally similar ones may be a daunting prospect . In summary , the need to search for underlying structure rather than object attributes creates a major challenge for analogical search . Such relations are difficult for machines to find and recognize , and can even be challenging for peo - ple to retrieve unaided . In this paper , we propose and eval - uate an approach for using crowds to find analogies by searching for a structural representation of a problem ( i . e . , a schema ) . We demonstrate that this procedure leads to people finding more deep structural analogies than having them search with other instructions , and that the ideas they find are more useful for solving the original problem and other related problems . Finally we discuss the implications of these results for systems aiming to increase innovation . EXPERIMENTS Analogy - based search requires going beyond surface fea - tures to search for common underlying structure between problems . One approach that has been shown to promote the recognition of analogies is to induce schemas and use them as the basis for retrieval [ 6 , 7 , 13 , 17 , 21 , 22 , 28 ] . A schema refers to a structured mental representation consist - ing of entities and the relations between them . For example , a schema for a love triangle involves three entities each of whom loves and is loved by different entities . However , inducing schemas and recognizing when they are applica - ble is difficult even in carefully controlled laboratory con - ditions with small numbers of potential analogs to choose from [ 13 , 18 ] . Unlike cognitive science experiments where participants are given both a problem and a solution that are perfect matches to a target problem [ 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 29 ] , we are interested in open - ended real world problems where participants must search for examples themselves , and where most matches are messy and incomplete . To address this problem we propose taking advantage of recent developments in crowdsourcing . Web technologies now enable us to assemble hundreds of thousands of people across the globe to process large amounts of data [ 1 , 5 ] . Provided with the right structure , many individuals could search simultaneously , allowing the crowd to navigate large datasets . However , realizing this possibility will re - quire the development of processes and structures enabling novice crowd workers to search for ideas based on analogi - cal structure rather than surface features , and to do so in large , uncontrolled idea repositories where descriptions are sparse and inconsistent . In the experiments below , we test the viability of using a crowd to search in a large , real - world dataset for ideas that are analogically similar to a given source problem . Specifi - cally , we ask participants to find ideas that may be relevant to a source problem in the online idea repository of Quirky . com , which has thousands of community - submitted ideas . We examine whether giving people schemas ( Exper - iment 1 ) increases their ability to find ideas analogous to the source problems , and whether the analogical ideas they find result in better solutions to the source problem and related problems than alternative methods ( Experiment 2 ) . EXPERIMENT 1 : SEARCHING FOR ANALOGIES Experiment 1 aimed to test whether providing the schema for a source problem increases the likelihood of finding analogically similar ideas in an idea repository , and wheth - er using these ideas improves solution quality . By analogi - cally similar , we mean ideas that share the same underlying abstract structure as the source problem but may have dif - ferent surface features . For example , the top left row of Table 6 shows an idea ( Ventu ) that shares a similar under - lying structure to the top right row ( Jar problem ) : both aim to solve the problem of reaching hard - to - access parts of an object by making part of the object removable . We conducted the experiment in the context of product innovation , specifically using an online idea repository from Quirky , a crowdsourced product development website in which people submit and vet product ideas , with Quirky manufacturing and selling the top ideas . Quirky’s idea re - pository contains thousands of products and is publicly accessible . Product ideas are described with names , text , images and sometimes videos . These characteristics make the website particularly suitable as real - world dataset for people to look for analogs to solve given problems . Session : Crowds and Creativity CHI 2014 , One of a CHInd , Toronto , ON , Canada 1226 We created two sets of source problems ( the five problems shown in Table 1 ) which we believed would have analo - gous ideas in Quirky’s product repository . For example , one problem consisted of removing dough from someone’s hands after kneading . Another instantiation of the same fundamental problem was removing debris from a cat’s fur . Both these problems share the abstract problem schema of “detaching one object from another” . We created three more problems that shared the problem schema of “keeping an unstable object in place” ( see the Bathroom , Strap , and Cup problems in Table 1 ) . The experiment consisted of two phases : first , finding po - tential ideas in Quirky that might be useful for solving the source problem , and second , generating a solution to the source problem . Our experimental manipulation centered on the way in which people searched for ideas in Quirky : specifically , whether they used an abstract schema in their search process , or one of two other control conditions de - scribed in detail below . Participants In all experiments , subjects were recruited by posting tasks to Amazon Mechanical Turk [ 25 ] , a crowdsourcing mar - ketplace . In total 183 workers participated in the experi - ment . Fifty - seven percent were women , and 96 % were na - tive English speakers . Their average age was 31 , and the ages ranged from 18 to 70 . Design and Procedure After accepting the task , participants were randomly as - signed to one of four conditions : 1 . Use Schemas . Participants were given a source problem and a schema ( referred to as a pattern for participants to avoid introducing unfamiliar terminology ) for that prob - lem . We operationalize a specific type of schema in this context of this paper as an idea schema , consisting of a problem an idea aims to solve ( e . g . , preventing something fragile from breaking ) and a mechanism for doing so ( e . g . , using a flexible cord to secure it to a stable object ) . Im - portantly , the description of a problem and the mechanism of its solutions abstracts away surface details to focus on the underlying structure . For example , some participants saw the Cup problem in Table 1 and its schema “keeping an unstable object in place” . Schemas were selected from a sample generated by participants in a previous study [ 35 ] that were rated highly by multiple judges . Prior to this step , participants engaged in a short training phase in which they generated a schema for a sample problem and received feedback on what a good schema looked like . We then asked participants to find a product idea from Quirky that would be useful for solving the problem and also fit the schema they were given . Specifically they were told : “To solve the above problem , you can use the pattern to find similar problems which are already solved . For example , in what other situations do people need to hold an unstable object in place ? Now please use this pattern to search problems which also share this pattern in the web - site shown below . ” After they found an analogous idea , they were asked to generate a solution for the problem . In this and all other conditions , participants were told that their solutions would be evaluated in terms of their practicality ( the idea can be designed and produced easily ) , usefulness ( the solution solves the problem effectively ) and novelty ( the idea hasn’t been thought of by others ) . 2 . Use Features . As discussed previously , retrieval of anal - ogies is highly biased by surface features [ 16 ] . Further - more , many ideas are represented in online idea reposito - ries in terms of an object’s features . We designed this con - trol condition to test whether providing features as an in - termediate representation would help participants to search for useful and relevant ideas . This also serves to control for the amount of information provided to participants in com - parison to the Use Schemas condition . Participants were given a source problem and a list of fea - tures relevant to the problem . These features were generat - ed by a separate group of twenty participants who were asked to list features of the source problem . Features men - tioned by more than half of the twenty participants were included in the list . For example , the common features for the Dough problem were “dough” , “fingers” , “sticky” , and “difficult to clean” . We then asked participants to look for useful ideas using some of the features . Specifically they were told : “To solve the above problem , you can use these features to find simi - lar problems which are already solved . For example , what Problem description Dough problem : When you knead dough , the dough gets stuck in between your fingers . This makes it difficult to clean your hands , and you also lose a lot of the dough in the process . The problem is to get dough off your hands easily . Cat problem : Cats often come in the house bringing in lots of junk like leaves , burr , even lint on their fur - - and it gets all over the house . People often have to use a cat brush to get this debris off the cat . This is unpleasant and time - consuming . The problem is how to get debris off cats easily . Bathroom problem : Many people like to read in their bath - room . But when they sit down , stand up , or move , books or Kindles get dropped often . They either get dirty or damaged . Strap problem : Purse straps or backpack straps keep slipping off your shoulder , especially when you walk or run . It is very annoying that you have to constantly push the straps on your shoulder or hold them with your hands . The problem is how to keep the straps on your shoulder . Cup problem : Cups or glasses can easily fall and coffee , juice , wine , or water spills . This happens often on dinner tables , nightstands , and office desks . When the liquid spills , it can ruin important files , phones , and even laptops . The problem is to prevent cups or glasses falling and spilling . Table 1 . Experiment 1 : the problems used in the experiment Session : Crowds and Creativity CHI 2014 , One of a CHInd , Toronto , ON , Canada 1227 4 features are critical to solving this problem and might be shared by other problems ? Now please use these features to search for problems which also share some of these fea - tures in the website shown below . ” After they found an idea , they were told to generate a solution for the problem using the same procedure as in the Use Schemas condition . 3 . Find Inspiration . While the Use Features condition at - tempted to control for the amount of information and pro - cessing participants would engage in during the search pro - cess , in real life people do not have a structured process for searching for examples . In this condition participants were simply asked to find an idea for inspiration but given no further constraints . Specifically they were told : “ To solve the above problem , you might be able to get inspiration from other ideas on the following website . ” After they found an idea , they were asked to generate a solution for the problem using the same procedure as the Use Schemas condition . 4 . Solve Problems . We also created a baseline condition in which people were asked to solve the problems without any intermediate steps or pointer to the Quirky repository . Rating analogical similarity and solution quality We were interested in evaluating two outcome variables : the analogical similarity of the ideas people found in Quirky , and the quality of their solutions to the source problems . To evaluate the ideas people found , two judges blind to the condition rated each product idea independent - ly as to whether it was a valid analog to the source prob - lem . One judge was the first author of this paper and the second judge was an undergraduate student . After the first round , the judges achieved inter - rater reliabilities of . 75 as calculated by the Intraclass Correlation Coefficient ( ICC ) [ 10 ] . The judges then resolved any discrepancies by discus - sion . We also examined the similarity of the analogies to the given problem , in order to judge whether an analog was a far or near analogy [ 11 ] . If an analogy shared surface simi - larities with the description of the problem , it was classified as a near analog . Otherwise , it was coded as a far analog . For example , for the Cup problem , if an analog had fea - tures such as “desk , ” “cup , ” or “glass , ” it was coded as a near analog . Two raters judged all the analogs independent - ly . After the first round , the inter - rater reliability was . 92 as measured by the ICC . Remaining discrepancies were re - solved by discussion . Table 2 shows three examples of ideas found for the Cup problem . We next rated the quality of the solutions , using criteria from prior research that argues that good creative ideas need to be both novel and practical [ 9 ] . We considered a product novel if it was not obvious and was different from existing products on the market 1 . We operationalized prac - ticality in terms of usefulness to the user of the product and the practicality of manufacturing it today . For example , a teleportation device might be both novel and useful , but is infeasible to manufacture . Two judges , who were blind to the experimental condition , rated each product idea on three 7 - point Likert scales of novelty , usefulness , and practicality . One judge was the first author , and the second judge was an undergraduate student . For training , the judges independently rated a sub - set of 20 solutions and discussed these ratings to reach agreement on the dimensions . They then independently rated the full set of ideas . The judges achieved high inter - rater reliabilities of . 86 , . 77 and . 84 for usefulness , novelty , and practicality , as calculated by the ICC . They then dis - cussed ratings with discrepancies of more than two points . The final quality of the ideas was computed as the geomet - ric mean of the three dimensions in order to weight against ideas that were low on any given dimension [ 12 ] . Results and Analysis Sixteen participants whose answers failed to provide a so - lution to the problem were excluded from the analysis ( 7 from the Find Inspiration condition , 6 from Use Features , and 3 from Use Schemas ) . Table 3 shows percentages of examples participants found that were analogs to the prob - lem , the percentage that were far analogs , and the means and standard deviations of the solutions’ ratings they gen - erated . We first looked at the number of analogs found by experi - mental condition . We used logistic regression analysis to 1 Raters judged novelty based on their experience rather than a market survey or patent because we wanted to assess an idea’s relative novelty compared to products that most people would know about , rather than using the patent office’s standard that the idea was unique in historical time [ 31 , p . 169 ] . A far analogy A near analogy A non - analogy Wing span : It is a bike rack that is capable of holding more cargo without the risk of having them topple over . It is very similar to how a scissor op - erates . These bars can be positioned in any orientation and locked in place to accommodate a wide variety of gear , large or small . Tether : Washing your wine glasses can be risky busi - ness , especially when you are using your dish - washer . Save your stemware with Tether , a flexible plastic rod that stabilizes your stemware as it goes through the cycle . Totem is a stacka - ble cup for use in your bathroom or kitchen . Each cup has three bumps around the top circumference to keep them slightly separated when stacked so air can flow around the entire surface and dry them faster than normal stacked cups . Table 2 . Experiment 1 : Ideas found for the Cup problem . Session : Crowds and Creativity CHI 2014 , One of a CHInd , Toronto , ON , Canada 1228 compare the Use Schemas , Use Features and Find Inspira - tion conditions to predict whether or not participants found an analog for the problem . We controlled for participants’ education level and time spent on the task . In addition , we also included the problem used in the experiment as a ran - dom variable . We found that the number of valid analogs found in the Use Schemas condition was significantly higher than in the Use Features condition ( b = 1 . 22 , z = 2 . 65 , p < . 01 ) and the Find Inspiration condition ( b = 1 . 78 , z = 3 . 17 , p < . 01 ) . The difference between the Use Features and Find Inspiration conditions was not significant ( b = . 49 , z = . 95 , p = . 34 ) . These results indicate that people are more likely to return product ideas analogous to a problem they were trying to solve when given the problem schema than when given features describing the problem or simply looking for in - spiring examples . We next looked at whether using sche - mas led people to find more ideas that were far analogs ( i . e . , in other domains and not sharing surface features with the source problem ) . Participants found more far analogs as a percentage of all analogs in the Use Schemas condition compared to the Use Features condition ( b = 3 . 53 , z = 3 . 73 , p < . 001 ) and the Find Inspiration condition ( b = 4 . 20 , z = 3 . 45 , p < . 001 ) . Again , no significant difference was found between the Use Features and Find Inspiration conditions ( b = 1 . 16 , z = 1 . 00 , p = . 32 ) . Together these results provide evidence that people are more likely to find valid analogi - cal matches using schemas , and furthermore are more like - ly to find far analogies in different domains that do not share surface features with the problem . We next examined the quality of the solutions to find out whether people generated better solutions after finding product ideas using schemas . We first compared all the conditions to the baseline Solve Problems condition , in which participants were asked to solve the problem but given no further instructions . The results showed that the solutions generated in the Find Inspiration , Use Features , and Use Schemas conditions were all of higher quality than ones from the Solve Problems condition ( b Use Schemas = 1 . 23 , t ( 80 ) = 3 . 46 , p < . 001 ; b Use Features = 1 . 03 , t ( 85 ) = 2 . 93 , p < . 01 ; b Find Inspiration = . 79 , t ( 67 ) = 2 . 21 , p < . 05 ; all tests cor - rected for multiple comparisons ) . This confirms previous research showing that finding useful ideas can help people solve problems better than trying to solve them alone . However , contrary to our initial hypothesis , the Find Inspi - ration , Use Features , and Use Schemas conditions did not differ from each other . Understanding the Searching Process In order to understand the process by which schema - based analogy searching was more effective than feature - or in - spiration - based searching , we invited seven participants across conditions ( two for feature - based searching , two for inspiration - based searching , and three for schema - based searching ) into a laboratory study , asking them to think aloud during their search process . We found that people used similar search processes in both the Find Inspiration and Use Features conditions . They often used the search bar of the website to look for terms related to the specific objects of the problems . For exam - ple , for the Dough problem , they searched for “dough” , “fingers” , etc . When they were not using the search bar , they went to the relevant product category , such as “kitch - en , ” to look for useful ideas . For example , one participant clicked the kitchen category and said , “ I am looking for products related to dough or flour or finger cleaning , and they should be in this category . ” These observations are consistent with the theories in prior literature . The literature indicates that retrieval of analogs by people is extremely sensitive to the degree of semantic overlap between the source analog that provides retrieval cues and the target analog to be found in memory [ 32 ] . This leads to a higher chance that people will find non - analogs or analogs that share surface similarity . By contrast , when people were looking for useful ideas using schemas , they seldom used the search bar of the web - site . They browsed product ideas by quickly examining their images and names , and tried to find the ones fitting the schema for the given problem . For example , one partic - ipant was instructed to solve the Cup problem , and he looked through many products and then said “ that is not about stabilization…I guess I need to think deeper about each of these ideas to see if there is actually any related . ” As he continued to browse product ideas , he said , “ I am looking for products holding something in place . Yeah , this seems like… it is trying to hold things together , stabilize it…so I am not sure it will work with the cup but it does hold it in place which fits the pattern in general . ” These observations provide some process level suggestions about how using schemas led people to pay less attention to the domains and surface features . Instead , they focused on the structural aspects of the given problem , leading them to find more far analogs . Condition Percentage with analogs SD Percentage with far analogs SD Mean Quality SD Freq . 1 . Use schemas . 74 . 44 . 86 . 35 4 . 00 1 . 72 47 2 . Use features . 48 . 50 . 30 . 46 3 . 78 1 . 56 52 3 . Find inspiration . 44 . 50 . 29 . 47 3 . 69 1 . 50 34 4 . Solve problems NA NA NA NA 2 . 96 1 . 63 34 Total . 56 . 49 . 48 . 43 3 . 66 1 . 63 167 Table 3 . Experiment 1 : the percentage of analogies , the percentage of far analogies among the analogies , and the quality of the solutions in all conditions Session : Crowds and Creativity CHI 2014 , One of a CHInd , Toronto , ON , Canada 1229 6 EXPERIMENT 2 : SOLVE PROBLEMS WITH ANALOGS The results from Experiment 1 suggested that people are more likely to find analogs and especially far analogs for source problems with the help of problems’ schemas . However , the analogs did not seem helpful in solving the problems better than ideas found using features or for in - spiration . In further investigation we identified several po - tential reasons for this . First , in Experiment 1 participants only searched for a sin - gle product idea . However , previous research has shown that having multiple examples is highly beneficial to sche - ma induction and creative problem solving [ 18 ] . Further - more , because we were providing participants with only a problem schema , the search space was relatively uncon - strained . That is , there can be many potential ideas with an analogous problem to the source problem in the Quirky dataset that do not provide a good solution to the source problem . For example , an idea for scraping ice off a car windshield presents an analogous problem to the Dough problem : they both aim to detach one object from another object . However , the Dough problem has different con - straints : hands are more delicate than windshields , and might not be well served by using the blades involved in scraping ice . Presenting multiple ideas to a participant may increase the chance of finding one or more useful solutions for the source problem . Second , we noticed in Experiment 1 that there were often no clear connections between the ideas people found in Quirky and the solutions they proposed . One explanation for this , as identified in prior literature , is that spontaneous - ly noticing and transferring analogies is difficult [ 17 ] . We thus reminded participants to utilize the given product ideas in Experiment 2 , and encouraged them to do so by having them explicitly cite any ideas they used in their solution . Third , even though we asked participants to generate their own solutions , they may have copied existing products they had used or seen . This may also account for the disconnect between the ideas participants found and their proposed solutions . To address this we asked people to generate mul - tiple solutions for a given problem , under the assumption that even if they had seen one instance of an existing matching product they would still have to generate more . This also enables us to test whether people could generate more good solutions using product ideas found with sche - mas , providing a more sensitive measure than a single bina - ry outcome . We focused on the Dough and Cup problems , and selected three samples of the product ideas found by the participants from different conditions in Experiment 1 ( samples of six product ideas for the Dough problem and samples of five product ideas for the Cup problem ) . These samples had different characteristics . The samples of schema - based ide - as ended up with having 85 % analogs . By contrast , 85 % of the sampled ideas found with features or inspiration were not analogs and shared surface features with the source problems . In addition to testing the usefulness of the ideas in solving the source problems , we were also interested in their use - fulness in solving new analogical problems to the source problems . The schema - based ideas might have higher transferability because most of them were analogies and didn’t share surface features with the Dough and Cup prob - lems . Consequently they might be equally helpful in solv - ing new problems analogous to the Dough and Cup prob - lems . In contrast , the usefulness of the product ideas found with features or through inspiration might be more limited . These ideas might be more useful for the Dough and Cup domains than for new domains with similar problems . To test this we created an analogous problem for each of the Dough and Cup problems : the Jar and the Airplane prob - lem , which we called far - transfer problems , shown in Table 4 . Experiment 2 was also designed with another purpose . One of our goals is to build a crowd analogy searching process : when people have problems , being able to assemble a crowd to search for analogs for these problems and in turn use these analogs to solve their problems . Thus we wanted to test whether one set of people could find analogs , and another set use those analogs to solve problems . Participants In total 228 workers participated in the experiment . Fifty - one percent of participants were women , and 95 % were native English speakers . Their average age was 31 , and the ages ranged from 19 to 59 . Design and procedure After accepting the task participants were randomly as - signed to one of three conditions . In all conditions partici - pants were given a sample of ideas ( six ideas for the Dough and Jar problems , and five ideas for the Cup and Airplane problems ) collected from Experiment 1 and asked to gener - ate multiple solutions to a source problem as well as an Problems description ( far - transfer problems ) Airplane problem : Baggage placed in the overhead storage of airplanes or other traveling vehicles is sometimes shuffled during the traveling . It is very dangerous if they suddenly fall out of storage when people open the door of the overhead storage . The problem is to prevent baggage falling and hurting people . Jar problem : It bothers people when they try to scrape the last bits of peanut butter , honey , jam , etc . from a jar . These leftovers hide in various hard - to - reach corners . People often lose their patience and a lot of peanut butter , honey or jam is wasted . The problem is to extract jarred food product easily even if there is relatively little left . Table 4 . Experiment 2 : The far - transfer problems used in the experiment : the Airplane problem was analogous to the Cup problem , and the Jar problem was analogous to the Dough problem . Session : Crowds and Creativity CHI 2014 , One of a CHInd , Toronto , ON , Canada 1230 analogous far - transfer problem . The only difference be - tween conditions was the source of the set of ideas provid - ed : whether they were collected using schemas , features , or for inspiration ( resulting in Schema - based ideas , Feature - based ideas , and Inspiration - based ideas conditions , re - spectively ) . Checkboxes for each idea were provided to encourage participants to use and attribute the given ideas in their solutions . Specific instructions for each problem read : “ Below are some selected product ideas that may help you come up with solutions . ” After reading the ideas , they were told : “Please generate three different solutions for solving the problem . For each solution , please check any ideas that influenced or inspired it from the examples given above . ” Rating Solutions scores were calculated the same way as in Exper - iment 1 , using two judges blind to the condition . After the first round , the judges achieved inter - rater reliabilities , . 76 , . 74 , and . 57 for usefulness , novelty and practicality respec - tively , calculated as the ICC . They then discussed any rat - ings with discrepancies of more than two points . Their av - eraged resulting ratings were used for the analysis . Results and analysis Thirty - seven participants’ answers were excluded from the analysis ( 12 from Schema - based ideas condition , 17 from Feature - based ideas condition and 8 from Inspiration - based ideas condition ) because no solutions to the given problems were provided . The means and standard devia - tions of the remaining ideas are shown in Table 5 . We first examined whether ideas found based on schemas inspired better solutions to the source problem than ideas found in the other conditions . We conducted a regression analysis predicting solution quality based on conditions , with education and time spent on task as control variables , and source problem as a random variable . Results indicated that the Schema - based ideas condition resulted in signifi - cantly higher - rated solutions than both the Feature - based ideas condition ( b = . 80 , t ( 198 ) = 6 . 23 , p < . 001 ) and Inspi - ration - based ideas condition ( b = . 91 , t ( 200 ) = 6 . 72 , p < . 001 ) and no significant difference was found between the Feature - based ideas and Inspiration - based ideas condi - tions ( b = . 06 , t ( 183 ) = . 40 , p = . 69 ) . We next examined the usefulness of the found ideas in solving the analogous far - transfer problems , which shared similar structure to the source problems but were in differ - ent domains ( e . g . , bags falling in an airplane vs . cups fall - ing off a table ) . Here we found the same basic pattern as for the source problems : the Schema - based ideas condition generated significantly better solutions than the Feature - based ideas condition ( b = . 63 , t ( 181 ) = 2 . 93 , p < . 01 ) and the Inspiration - based ideas condition ( b = . 65 , t ( 185 ) = 3 . 06 , p < . 01 ) . Again , there was no significant difference between the Feature - based ideas and Inspiration - based ideas conditions ( b = . 02 , t ( 169 ) = . 09 , p = . 92 ) . These main effects for far - transfer problems mirror those for the source problems . However , there was a significant interaction between condition and problem type ( source problem vs . far - transfer problem ) . As shown in Figure 1 , while the Schema - based ideas condition did equally well on source and far - transfer problems , the two control condi - tions ( Feature - and Inspiration - based ideas ) actually did better on the far - transfer problems than the source problem ( b Feature - based ideas = . 44 , t ( 173 ) = 2 . 12 , p < . 05 ; b Inspiration - based ideas = . 49 , t ( 179 ) = 2 . 42 , p < . 05 ) . On the surface , this is a particularly counterintuitive find - ing . Why would the Feature - and Inspiration - based condi - tions do worse solving the problem for which the ideas were specifically targeted than a structurally similar prob - lem in a different domain ? One possible explanation is that the match in surface similarity between the found ideas and source problem might overly fixate participants on those ideas that are in the same domain but do not have useful structural similarities . Switching to a different domain would release participants from the fixation and enable them to make better use of the structurally similar analogs in the found ideas . This explanation suggests that a critical factor in solution success is whether the idea that influences a solution is one that shares surface similarity or structural similarity to the Condition Mean SD Freq . 1 . Use schema - based ideas 3 . 1 Source problems 3 . 2 Far - transfer problems 3 . 40 3 . 40 3 . 41 1 . 48 1 . 46 1 . 51 207 108 99 2 . Use feature - based ideas 2 . 1 Source problems 2 . 2 Far - transfer problems 2 . 54 2 . 31 2 . 78 1 . 28 1 . 16 1 . 38 174 91 83 3 . Use inspiration - based ideas 3 . 1 Source problems 3 . 2 Far - transfer problems 2 . 51 2 . 28 2 . 76 1 . 25 1 . 04 1 . 40 180 93 87 Total 2 . 85 1 . 41 561 Freq . is the number of ideas . Table 5 . Experiment 2 : effects of base - ideas on the quality of solutions Figure 1 . Predictive margins of the interaction between the type of problems and the base - ideas with 95 % CIs . Session : Crowds and Creativity CHI 2014 , One of a CHInd , Toronto , ON , Canada 1231 8 problem being solved . For example , Table 6 shows two ideas that were marked as influencing solutions and their respective solutions . In this case the analogical idea – which shared structural similarity to the Jar problem – re - sulted in a highly rated solution , while the non - analogy – which shared surface similarity to the Cup problem – re - sulted in a poorly rated solution . To test this hypothesis explicitly we ran a mediation analysis examining whether the type of idea participants marked as influencing their solution ( i . e . , analog vs . non - analog , where non - analogs typically shared surface similarity with the problem but not structural similarity ) accounted for the quality of the solu - tion . Specifically , utilizing the method of Baron and Kenny [ 2 ] , the mediator function was examined with regression equa - tions . The quality ( the outcome variable ) was regressed on the type of problems ( the predictor variable ) , and was found to be significant ( b = . 48 , p < . 01 ) . The relationship between the type of problems ( the predictor ) and the types of inspiring ideas ( the mediator variable ) was also signi ﬁ cant ( b = 1 . 24 , p < . 001 ) ; as was between the type of problems and the quality , ( b = . 37 , p < . 01 ) . Multiple re - gression of quality ( the outcome variable ) on both the types of the inspiring ideas ( the predictor ) and the type of prob - lems ( the mediator ) resulted in the effect from the type of problems ( the predictor variable ) becoming non - signi ﬁ cant ( b = . 28 , p = . 18 ) . We found the same results for the Fea - ture - based ideas condition . The quality was regressed on the types of problems , and was found to be significant ( b = . 47 , p < . 01 ) . The relationship between the type of prob - lems and the types of inspiring ideas was also signi ﬁ cant ( b = 1 . 71 , p < . 001 ) ; as was between the type of problems and the quality ( b = . 98 , p < . 001 ) . Multiple regression of the quality on both the predictor and the mediator resulted in the effect from the types of the type of problems becoming non - signi ﬁ cant ( b = . 33 , p = . 09 ) . These results suggest that the type of idea that influenced a participants’ solution completely mediated the causal relationship between the type of problem ( source vs . far - transfer ) and solution quali - ty . In other words , solution quality was higher when an idea was influenced by an analog that shared structural but not surface similarity . For far - transfer problems in which there was little or no surface similarity with the found ideas , par - ticipants could focus on structurally similar analogs . When ideas with high surface similarity to the source problem existed , these ideas may have prevented people from notic - ing and using analogies . For example , a product idea about designing a rolling pin containing flour was found by peo - ple in both Feature - and Inspiration - based ideas condi - tions . Many people in Experiment 2 generated solutions based on this product idea , and these solutions were differ - ent variations of the rolling pin idea . None of these ideas solved the Dough problem . However , even though far - transfer problems in the Fea - ture - and Inspiration - based ideas conditions benefited more from the analogical ideas , their solutions were still not as good as the ones inspired by schema - based ideas . This suggests that providing additional structurally similar analogs ( as was the case in the Schema - based ideas condi - tion ) is particularly advantageous , perhaps providing peo - ple with additional useful potential solutions for transfer . Another important implication of Experiment 2 is that the analogs found in Experiment 1 were found helpful , even though Experiment 2 involved a different set of partici - pants . This suggests that the process of searching for anal - ogies can be effectively decomposed and distributed to crowds . CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION In this paper we investigated the feasibility of searching for analogical ideas with the crowd in a live dataset of thou - sands of ideas at Quirky . com . We proposed a novel ap - proach for improving analogical search by using the ab - stract schema of the source problem , and demonstrated the effectiveness of our approach through two experiments . Experiment 1 showed that using schemas could assist in finding more analogies , and , in particular , finding more far analogies that did not share surface features with the source problem . Experiment 2 showed that analogical ideas found by previous participants could be used by participants to generate better solutions for the source problems , and were also useful for solving structurally similar problems in oth - Inspiring ideas Solutions Analogy Ventu : Prep , strain , serve , and store , all in one ele - gant solution . That ' s Ventu , a serving bowl that also allows you to strain excess moisture from fruit , sal - ads , pasta , and more . Just remove the base to easily switch between straining and serving functions , and save yourself from washing more dirty dishes The Jar problem : The Ventu inspired this idea by having the twist - off bottom to serve different purposes . It is hard to reach the bottom of a container with a spoon , knife , or other utensil . However , if the bottom would come off , it would make the hard to reach parts more easily accessible . Non - analogy Totem is a stackable cup for use in your bathroom or kitchen . Each cup has three bumps around the top circumference to keep them slightly separated when stacked so air can flow around the entire surface and dry them faster than normal stacked cups . The Cup problem : Pour a little bit of liquid in each of the totem glasses and stack them on top of each other . Due to the heaviness of the totem glass , the glasses will not fall and water / juice might not spill Table 6 . Experiment 2 : two inspiring ideas and the inspired solutions . The first solution was scored 6 . 50 , and the second solu - tion was scored 1 . 27 . Session : Crowds and Creativity CHI 2014 , One of a CHInd , Toronto , ON , Canada 1232 er domains . These findings extend previous literature in analogical rea - soning by scaling from small - scale laboratory studies using contrived analogical problems to explore how analogies might be identified from large , real - world datasets and used to solve problems [ 17 , 18 ] . They also have important prac - tical implications for search . While semantic web and other technologies ( e . g . , faceted search ) aim to improve search by generating higher - level classes , developing a process for generating abstractions that accurately captures the essen - tial structure of a product idea has been a significant chal - lenge . While there have been some approaches to doing so ( e . g . , patent search tools ) such tools have still had trouble identifying generalizable patterns and schemas , instead focusing on either inferences over surface features or a limited mechanism vocabulary that can be difficult to apply to a wide arrange of products [ 20 , 26 ] . In this paper , we demonstrate a promising approach showing that even nov - ice crowd workers can find deep analogies given an appro - priate process . Limitations and Future Work One limitation of the present study is that in all experi - ments , we showed people good schemas , which described the relational structures appropriately . This raises the ques - tion : how can we enable crowds to come up with good schemas by themselves ? A schema should abstract away surface details to focus on the underlying structure . The particular process by which humans do so remains an open research question [ 13 , 23 ] . Thus while defining the right level of schema is indeed challenging and surface features in some contexts can be structural features in others [ 5 ] , our key finding is that participants were able to generate what they considered more abstract , structural features and those features resulted in better solutions than the originat - ing representation . Formalizing the abstraction process is a profitable area for follow - up work . In the experiments , participants were asked to search anal - ogies in a website containing thousands of product ideas . However , in scaling up to repositories with millions of products ( e . g . , patents ) or sparser analogs , browsing may not be sufficient . Instead , some kind of search component may be needed . In a follow up during the laboratory exper - iment , we asked people in the schema condition to explicit - ly use the search bar to see how compatible the schema - based approach would be with search . We found that par - ticipants searched for the complete schema or the keywords of the schema and their synonyms . Because most product ideas are not described in terms of their relational struc - tures on the website we provided , they could not easily find the ideas they wanted by searching for such terms . Thus augmenting products or search processes with relational structures may be a profitable avenue for further research . What domains benefit from this approach ? Currently , we tested this approach in the field of consumer product de - sign . Ideas were shown in images and simple descriptions . It is an open question whether the crowd can also generate and apply schemas in other domains involving more com - plex problems . Towards a Future of Crowd - powered Analogy Searching Our research provides a first step towards a future of crowd searching of analogies that is more efficient and effective than existing approaches . Today , most crowd inventors have little knowledge of , and few strategies for , seeking existing solutions to help with their own problems . With the growing number of publicly available idea repositories , it will be increasingly important and valuable to make con - nections between ideas and problems . Rather than relying on intuitions or surface features to find useful and relevant ideas , we suggest that problem schemas could be the future glue that ties multiple problems or multiple idea reposito - ries together and makes them useful to each other . Such schema - based searching could help connect people who have specific problems with those who may have relevant solutions in other domains . Although much more research is needed on how to distribute the searching to the crowd and how to structure them in search within or across idea repositories to make such a future possible , the present research provides one step towards harnessing the crowd to find analogies . We envision a future crowd - powered analo - gy searching system to aid problem - solving which can ben - efit both novices and professional designers . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by NSF grants IIS - 1149797 , IIS - 1217559 , OCI - 0943148 , IIS - 0968484 , IIS - 1111124 , Bosch , Google , and Microsoft , and Carnegie Mellon’s Center for the Future of Work . REFERENCES 1 . Von Ahn , L . and Dabbish , L . Labeling images with a computer game . In Proc . CHI2004 , 319 – 326 . 2 . Baron , R . M . and Kenny , D . A . The moderator – mediator variable distinction in social psychological research : Conceptual , strategic , and statistical consid - erations . Journal of personality and social psychology 51 , 6 ( 1986 ) , 1173 . 3 . Bollegala , D . T . , Matsuo , Y . , and Ishizuka , M . Measur - ing the similarity between implicit semantic relations from the web . In Procs of the 18th international con - ference on World wide web , ( 2009 ) , 651 – 660 . 4 . Chi , M . T . , Feltovich , P . J . , and Glaser , R . Categoriza - tion and representation of physics problems by experts and novices . Cognitive science 5 , 2 ( 1981 ) , 121 – 152 . 5 . Chilton , L . , Little , G . , Edge , D . , Weld , D . S . , and Landay , J . A . Cascade : Crowdsourcing Taxonomy Cre - ation . In Proc . CHI 2013 . 6 . Clement , C . A . Effect of structural embedding on ana - logical transfer : Manifest versus latent analogs . The American journal of psychology , ( 1994 ) , 1 – 38 . 7 . Clement , C . A . , Mawby , R . , and Giles , D . E . The effects of manifest relational similarity on analog retrieval . Session : Crowds and Creativity CHI 2014 , One of a CHInd , Toronto , ON , Canada 1233 10 Journal of Memory and Language 33 , 3 ( 1994 ) , 396 – 420 . 8 . Dahl , D . W . and Moreau , P . The influence and value of analogical thinking during new product ideation . Jour - nal of Marketing Research , ( 2002 ) , 47 – 60 . 9 . Finke , R . A . , Ward , T . B . , and Smith , S . M . Creative cognition : Theory , research , and applications . MIT press Cambridge , MA , 1992 . 10 . Fisher , R . , Statistical methods for research workers . Oliver and Boyd , 1954 . 11 . Fu , K . , Chan , J . , Cagan , J . , Kotovsky , K . , Schunn , C . , and Wood , K . The Meaning of “Near” and “Far” : The Impact of Structuring Design Databases and the Effect of Distance of Analogy on Design Output . Journal of Mechanical Design 135 , ( 2013 ) , 021007 . 12 . Galton , F . The geometric mean , in vital and social sta - tistics . In Proc RSL 29 , ( 1879 ) , 365 – 367 . 13 . Gentner , D . Structure - mapping : A theoretical frame - work for analogy . Cognitive Science 7 , ( 1983 ) , 155 – 170 . 14 . Gentner , D . , S . Brem , R . Ferguson , P . Wolff , A . B . Markaman , K . and Forbus . Analogy and creativity in the works of Johannes Kepler . T . N . Ward , S . M . Smith , J . Vaid , eds . Creative Thought . Amer . Psych . Association , Washington , DC , ( 1997 ) . 403 – 460 . 15 . Gentner , D . and Landers , R . Analogical reminding : A good match is hard to find . Proceedings of the interna - tional conference on systems , man and cybernetics , ( 1985 ) , 607 – 613 . 16 . Gentner , D . , Rattermann , M . J . , and Forbus , K . D . The roles of similarity in transfer : Separating retrievability from inferential soundness . Cognitive psychology 25 , 4 ( 1993 ) , 524 – 575 . 17 . Gick , M . L . and Holyoak , K . J . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive psychology 12 , 3 ( 1980 ) , 306 – 355 . 18 . Gick , M . L . and Holyoak , K . J . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive psychology 15 , ( 1983 ) , 1 – 38 . 19 . Halford , G . S . , Baker , R . , McCredden , J . E and Bain , J . D . How many variables can humans process ? Psycho - logical Science 16 ( 1 ) , 2005 , 70 - 76 . 20 . Hirtz , J . , Stone , R . B . , McAdams , D . A . , Szykman , S . , and Wood , K . L . A functional basis for engineering de - sign : reconciling and evolving previous efforts . Re - search in engineering Design 13 , 2 ( 2002 ) , 65 – 82 . 21 . Holyoak , K . J . and Koh , K . Surface and structural simi - larity in analogical transfer . Memory & Cognition 15 , 4 ( 1987 ) , 332 – 340 . 22 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . Mental leaps : Analogy in creative thought . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 1995 . 23 . Hummel , J . E . and Holyoak , K . J . Distributed represen - tations of structure : A theory of analogical access and mapping . Psychological Review 104 , 3 ( 1997 ) , 427 . 24 . Keane , M . On retrieving analogues when solving prob - lems . The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychol - ogy 39 ( 1 ) , 1987 , 29 - 41 . 25 . Kittur , A . , Chi , E . H . , and Suh , B . Crowdsourcing user studies with Mechanical Turk . Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems , ( 2008 ) , 453 – 456 . 26 . Kumar , R . , Satyanarayan , A . , Torres , C . , Lim , M . , Ahmad , Klemmer , S . R . , and Talton , J . O . , Webzeit - geist : Design mining the web . CHI’13 . 27 . Lakhani , K . R . and Panetta , J . A . The principles of dis - tributed innovation . Innovations 2 , 3 ( 2007 ) , 97 – 112 . 28 . Linsey , J . , Laux , J . , Clauss , E . , Wood , K . L . , and Markman , A . Increasing innovation : A trilogy of ex - periments towards a design - by - analogy method . Pro - ceedings of the ASME 2007 International Design En - gineering Technical Conferences & Computers and In - formation in Engineering Conference , ( 2007 ) . 29 . Linsey , J . , Wood , K . L . , and Markman , A . B . Increasing innovation : presentation and evaluation of the word - tree design - by - analogy method . Proceedings of the ASME IDETC Design Theory and Methodology Con - ference , ( 2008 ) . 30 . Shutova , E . Models of metaphor in NLP . Proceedings of the 48th annual meeting of the association for com - putational linguistics , ( 2010 ) , 688 – 697 . 31 . Sternberg , R . J . Handbook of creativity . Cambridge University Press , 1998 . 32 . Thagard , P . , Holyoak , K . J . , Nelson , G . , and Gochfeld , D . Analog retrieval by constraint satisfaction . Artificial Intelligence 46 , 3 ( 1990 ) , 259 – 310 . 33 . The New York Times , http : / / www . nytimes . com / 2013 / 11 / 14 / health / new - tool - to - ease - difficult - births - a - plastic bag . html 34 . Turney , P . D . Similarity of semantic relations . Compu - tational Linguistics 32 , 3 ( 2006 ) , 379 – 416 . 35 . Yu , L . , Kittur , A . , and Kraut , R . Distributed analogical idea generation : inventing with crowds . In Proc . CHI 2014 . 36 . Yu , L . and Nickerson , J . V . Cooks or cobblers ? Crowd creativity through combination . In Proc . CHI 2011 , 1393 – 1402 . Session : Crowds and Creativity CHI 2014 , One of a CHInd , Toronto , ON , Canada 1234