ORIGINAL EMPIRICAL RESEARCH Marketing control rights and their distribution within technology licensing agreements : a real options perspective D . Eric Boyd & Brian P . Brown Received : 19 November 2010 / Accepted : 24 May 2011 / Published online : 11 June 2011 # Academy of Marketing Science 2011 Abstract Technology licensing continues to gain popularity as firms seek new sources of revenue from their product development activities . A key decision for the licensor involves whether to distribute marketing control rights associated with licensed technology on a more or less restrictive basis . Drawing on the real options literature , this paper argues that factors related to the top management mindset of the licensor and the marketing capabilities of the licensee impact the licensor ’ s distri - bution decision . A logit analysis of 129 technology licensing agreements within the pharmaceutical industry provides strong support for the hypothesized variables and broadens researchers ’ understanding of an important marketing decision related to innovation management and the design of inter - firm relationships . Keywords Marketing control rights . Technology licensing . Management mindset . Marketing capabilities . Real options theory Introduction A technology license represents an inter - firm agreement whereby one firm ( hereafter referred to as the licensor ) grants another firm ( hereafter referred to as the licensee ) the rights to commercialize the licensor ’ s product technology in exchange for royalty fees based on sales of products embodying the technology . The marketing dimensions of technology licensing are many according to a recent discussion by Hauser et al . ( 2006 ) which highlights a wide variety of marketing - related innovation research areas . First , technology licenses represent a prevalent form of strategic market entry , one based on leveraging inter - firm marketing partnerships when entering markets with new product technology ( Jiang et al . 2009 ; Kotabe et al . 1996 ) . Second , they represent an important means by which firms organize to conduct product development activities . Within the automotive industry , for example , Mazda Motor Corporation , Ford Motor Corporation and Nissan Motors recently formed technology licensing agreements with Toyota Motor Corporation in order to gain access to its hybrid technology ( Takahashi 2010 ) . Third , technology licensing agreements are an important means by which firms seek rewards from their product development efforts . IBM earns over $ 1 billion annually from its intellectual property portfolio , including patent and technology royalties , and Hewlett - Packard has quadrupled its earnings in this area to over $ 200 million in just a few years , for example ( The Economist 2005 ) . Prior research has explored important topics related to technology licensing including the motivations behind it as a market entry strategy ( Arora and Ceccagnoli 2006 ; Sine et al . 2003 ) , the rewards associated with it ( e . g . , Boyd and Spekman 2010 ) and the design decisions involved in organizing technology licensing agreements ( e . g . , Aulakh et al . 2010 ; Jiang et al . 2009 ) . Although each topic covered in the technology licensing literature is noteworthy , this paper focuses on the design of technology licensing agreements based on recent research suggesting its impor - tance to advancing marketers ’ understanding of innovation D . E . Boyd ( * ) College of Business , James Madison University , Harrisonburg , VA 22807 , USA e - mail : boydde @ jmu . edu B . P . Brown College of Business , Virginia Commonwealth University , Richmond , VA 23284 , USA e - mail : bpbrown @ vcu . edu J . of the Acad . Mark . Sci . ( 2012 ) 40 : 659 – 672 DOI 10 . 1007 / s11747 - 011 - 0262 - 5 management ( John et al . 1999 ) and research recognizing the design of inter - firm agreements as a firm capability that can lead to the creation of long - term competitive advantages ( Argyres and Mayer 2007 ) . As such , it is not surprising to find that several aspects associated with the design of technology licensing agreements , such as license duration ( Jiang et al . 2009 ) , license exclusivity ( Aulakh et al . 2010 ) , and royalty rates ( Crama et al . 2008 ) , have received attention from researchers . An important but unexplored marketing topic related to the design of technology licensing agreements is the distribution decision delimiting the licensee ’ s marketing control rights in commercializing licensed product technology . In this context , control rights distribution refers to a licensor ’ s allocation of control over marketing issues associated with new product development activities to a licensee , including which products to create with the licensed technology , which markets to target , when to launch new products based on licensed technology , and how to launch the new products . Given the broad base of marketing activities falling under the umbrella of marketing control rights , it is easy to understand why their distribution represents one of the most important issues associated with the design of technology licensing agreements according to managers involved in crafting these agreements ( Lerner and Merges 1998 ) . Unlike traditional distribution decisions associated with marketing channels , the distribution decision involved in technology licensing requires managing the flow and use of technological know - how or knowledge ( Capon and Glazer 1987 ) . On one end of the spectrum , the distribution of marketing control rights may not place any restrictions on the licensee in regard to product type and / or geographic markets that may be explored with licensed technology . On the other end , the distribution may be quite restrictive and licensors may place limits on the commercial activity of the licensee . The choice of distribution strategy is not a trivial decision for the licensor as it can have significant consequences concerning the value it creates from an individual technology licensing agreement ( Boyd and Spekman 2010 ) . However , at this point , we know very little about what determines when licensors follow a more or less restrictive strategy in distributing marketing control rights to licensees . This paper addresses the lack of research on marketing control rights by drawing on the real options literature ( e . g . , Kogut 1991 ; McGrath 1997 ) to identify key factors expected to influence whether a licensor follows a more or less restrictive distribution strategy when licensing its product technology . A real option represents an investment opportunity that a firm has a right but not an obligation to pursue ( McGrath 1997 ) . We posit that a licensor ’ s product technology provides the firm with a market entry real option and that the choice to follow a more or less restrictive distribution strategy will be determined by the upside value and downside risk the licensor assigns to that real option . In its focus , the paper makes several important contribu - tions . For one , it expands the substantive topics considered in research examining technology licensing agreement design to include the licensor ’ s distribution of marketing control rights . Specifically focusing on control rights related to marketing allows us to introduce several hitherto unexplored marketing factors as potentially impacting the design of technology licensing agreements . The new factors introduced include the top management mindset of the licensor and the marketing capabilities of the licensee . Second , the paper broadens the use of the real options literature within marketing . As such , the paper responds to growing calls for research bridging the divide between the marketing and finance functions in order to better connect marketing resources directly to financial outcomes ( Kumar and Shah 2009 ; Lehmann 2004 ) . The real options literature focuses on the advantage of flexibility and the consideration of upside value and downside risk in driving strategy . Efforts to address the marketing - finance area have been well documented but remain somewhat limited ( see Hyman and Mathur 2005 and Srinivasan and Hanssens 2009 for more detailed overviews ) . Much of this research has focused on cu stomer equity , firm valuation , or the link between marketing expenditures and financial outcomes ( e . g . , Lehmann 2004 ; Kumar and Shah 2009 ; Rust et al . 2004 ) . While marketing ’ s increased financial accountability will help it regain some influence at the executive level , we contend that marketers would benefit from an increased understanding and appropriate use of financial frameworks in the strategy development process . A more financial perspective might enhance marketers ’ stature amongst peers , lead to improved strategic thinking , and result in the acquisition of additional resources . This research also offers important managerial guid - ance to both potential licensors and licensees . Licensors can combine the findings from this paper with recent research indicating when a real options approach to technology licensing maximizes value creation ( e . g . , Boyd and Spekman 2010 ) to identify possible misalign - ment between the process underlying the distribution decision and maximization of the value created from technology licensing . From a licensee perspective , our findings will aid in the partner selection process by enabling them to select technology licensing partners that are most likely to grant their preferred level of marketing control rights . Additionally , knowing whether the licensor is likely to follow a more or less restrictive distribution strategy will help marketers within licensee firms better anticipate the demands a given technology licensing agreement will place on the marketing function . 660 J . of the Acad . Mark . Sci . ( 2012 ) 40 : 659 – 672 The remainder of the paper begins with a conceptual discussion of the real options literature and its implications for distribution decisions in technology licensing agree - ments . Next , the discussion applies the real options framework to develop hypotheses about the relationship between factors associated with ( 1 ) the top management mindset of the licensor and ( 2 ) the marketing capabilities of the licensee regarding the licensor ’ s distribution of its marketing control rights to the licensee . The methodology used in testing the hypotheses and the analytical results from testing the model are then reviewed . A discussion of the managerial and theoretical implications of the research findings follows before the paper concludes with a review of research limitations and directions for future research . Marketing control as a real option A firm ’ s technology represents the “ information needed to produce and / or sell a product or service ” ( Capon and Glazer 1987 , p . 2 ) . It provides an opportunity but not a requirement for the firm to develop and take to market products embodying the technology . One literature that appropriately captures the nature of technology manage - ment is the real options literature . A real option is the investment in resources that provides an opportunity to respond to future contingent events ( Kogut and Kulatilaka 2001 ) . For example , investments in research and develop - ment and technology alliances both provide firms with options to develop new products that can be taken to market ( Day and Schoemaker 2000 ) . Real options theory emphasizes the value to a firm of possessing those investments that allow it to manage risk proactively by exploiting uncertainty over time in a flexible fashion ( Li et al . 2010 ) . The opportunity to invest is of strategic importance as it may well be worth even more than a particular project ’ s net present value ( NPV ) in the long term , depending on such factors as the length of time the project can be deferred , the project ’ s risk , the level of interest rates , and how exclusive the licensor ’ s right is to exercise the option ( Kester 1984 ) . Real options theory originated in the finance discipline as a means of recognizing that there is value in holding the rights to undertake a given investment activity without having the obligation to do so . Yet it can also apply to marketing contexts where strategic decisions are assumed to involve a significant degree of uncertainty , irreversibility , and future managerial discretion regarding whether to exercise , defer , or abandon an opportunity ( Kogut and Kulatilaka 2001 ) , such as those involving the management of inter - firm technology agreements ( Vassolo et al . 2004 ) . Managerially , Schoder ( 2007 ) notes that many finance managers use real options theory to optimize their invest - ment portfolios . The adoption of a real options approach to decision making also occurs within managerial practice . For instance , firms such as Merck within the pharmaceu - tical industry use real options to evaluate inter - firm relationship opportunities ( Bowman and Moskowitz 2001 ) . Similarly , Pettit ( 1999 ) describes the efforts of automotive industry firms to use real options to evaluate technology investments related to product development . Real options theory has been relatively underutilized in the marketing literature , but there has been momentum behind applying it in various marketing contexts ( e . g . , Haenlein et al . 2006 ; Hult et al . 2010 ; Li et al . 2010 ) . Table 1 provides a brief overview of some marketing studies that have drawn on real options theory . From these we observe that , while real options theory can be applied in a variety of contexts , it has generally been limited to more financially - oriented ones ( e . g . , customer lifetime valua - tions , NPV calculations , pricing ) . Additionally , of the articles we uncovered , only Li et al . ’ s ( 2010 ) research concerning non - equity - based alliances and joint ventures relates in any way to our focus on inter - firm relationships . Rese and Roemer ( 2004 ) use game theory to demonstrate how real options analysis can be an effective tool to determine the choice of contractual arrangements , but their study differs in that it is based on hypothetical scenarios and does not address the specifics of technology licensing agreements . Day and Schoemaker ( 2000 ) argue that invest - ments in emerging technologies should be viewed as real options decisions , but no article specifically addresses the design of technology licensing agreements . 1 Real options theory has been used in the past to study the design of technology licensing agreements ( e . g . , Jiang et al . 2009 ; Ziedonis 2007 ) . These studies view the real option of a licensing agreement from a market entry perspective . Discussions focus on the licensor ’ s option of whether to invest in market entry itself or to allow the licensee to undertake market entry investments . This view is particularly applicable to the distribution decision involved in designing a technology licensing agreement . In choosing a less restrictive distribution strategy , the licensor is essentially ceding market entry rights to the licensee . Alternatively , a more restrictive distribution strategy preserves the licensor ’ s option to enter markets itself with the technology at some later point in time . 1 While technology licensing agreement literature is rooted in transaction cost economics ( TCE ) ( Williamson 1991 ) and is thus reminiscent of classic make - or - buy decisions , this type of framing would be inappropriate due to the distinctions between types of inter - firm relationships , specifically technology licensing agreements and how these agreements are valued . Recently , scholars have taken to categorizing decisions about transferring the production of knowledge and innovation as make - or - ally , which is consistent with our focus on technology licensing agreements between firms , rather than make - or - buy situations ( Mudambi and Tallman 2010 ) . J . of the Acad . Mark . Sci . ( 2012 ) 40 : 659 – 672 661 The literature argues that the decision to hold a real option is a function of the net value associated with the option . This net value is determined by the expected upside value and downside risk associated with managing the opportunity represented by the real option . The upside value depends upon the importance of maintaining flexibility with a particular investment opportunity . As the need for flexibility increases so too does the upside value associated with a real option . Various exogenous and endogenous factors may influence the need for flexibility . For instance , environmental uncertainty can motivate firms to place a high value on maintaining flexibility in the governance of their inter - firm agree - ments ( Li et al . 2010 ) . Alternatively , firms may value flexibility less because of strategic restraints due to the desire to leverage core competencies ( e . g . , Leonard - Barton 1992 ) dictated by top managers ( e . g . , Cho and Hambrick 2006 ; Ettlie and Subramaniam 2004 ) . Thus , the value placed on flexibility can be internally driven by a firm ’ s strategic orientation which , in turn , often reflects the orientation of top managers within the firm ( Hambrick and Mason 1984 ) . The value of a real option is also influenced by perceptions of downside risk associated with the option . Downside risk reflects the likely failure of a firm to meet performance objectives when managing a real option ( Miller and Reuer 1996 ) . Several factors can influence managers ’ perceptions of downside risk . For instance , environmental turbulence can cause managers to experience uncertainty regarding a firm ’ s future , and this can result in higher expectations of under - performance ( Miller and Leiblein 1996 ) . Downside risk is also a function of firm capabilities . For instance , firms form alliances with the intention of accessing the capabilities of their partners when managers perceive that their own capabilities may not suit a given situation ( Reuer and Leiblein 2000 ) . Hence , a licensor ’ s perception of downside risk is likely to have an external focus because a firm ’ s capabilities only have competitive value to the extent that other firms in the market have capabilities which fall below those of the firm . Thus , unlike the value placed on flexibility , Table 1 Overview of Real Options Theory ( ROT ) applied in marketing contexts Authors Study focus Key insights Li et al . ( 2010 ) Addresses issues of marketing alliance governance choice ( i . e . , non - equity alliances and joint ventures ) (cid:129) Alliance experience moderates firms ’ marketing alliance governance mode choices (cid:129) ROT emphasizes value of investments that allow firms to manage risk by exploiting uncertainty in a flexible fashion (cid:129) ROT explains tradeoff between efficiency of alternative alliance modes and the value of operating flexibly in an uncertain future Hult et al . ( 2010 ) Supply chain investment decisions when facing high levels of risk uncertainty (cid:129) Examines how different types of options are approached relative to supply chain project investments (cid:129) ROT asserts that decisions center on creating and then exercising or not exercising certain opportunities Haenlein et al . ( 2006a , b ) Suggests ROT to determine when to abandon unprofitable customers (cid:129) Propose combining ROT and customer lifetime value approaches to value seller flexibility to drop unprofitable customers (cid:129) Uses combination of examples , empirical analysis and Monte Carlo simulations Rese and Roemer ( 2004 ) Demonstrates how implications can be derived from ROT to govern tradeoff between contractual commitments and flexibility (cid:129) The value of a firm ’ s ability to switch partners is a real switching option (cid:129) ROT approach can complement traditional TCE view in the choice of contractual agreements (cid:129) ROT analysis can be used as a tool to test the efficiency of contract designs in relationships Hibbard et al . ( 2003 ) Utilizes ROT to measure the value of a business relationship (cid:129) May be multiple types of real options embedded in a business relationship Day and Schoemaker ( 2000 ) Investments in emerging technologies are akin to creating a portfolio of options (cid:129) Investments should be treated as real options to position companies to make informed , future decisions 662 J . of the Acad . Mark . Sci . ( 2012 ) 40 : 659 – 672 which is more internally driven by strategic decisions made by top management as described earlier , views of downside risk have more of an external focus in regard to how a firm ’ s capabilities compare to other firms . In a technology licensing context , this comparison should involve an assessment of a licensee ’ s capabilities relative to those of a licensor . The previous discussion portrays the distribution deci - sion involved in technology licensing as the licensor ’ s decision of whether to retain or cede the option to undertake market entry with its technology . It also high - lights the role of expectations regarding upside value and downside risk as determining the value of a real option and whether or not a firm chooses to retain a real option that it possesses . The next section draws on this discussion in developing hypotheses describing how licensors ’ top management mindset and licensees ’ marketing capability factors are expected to impact when a licensor will follow a more or less restrictive distribution of its marketing control rights in a technology licensing agreement ( see Fig . 1 ) . Hypotheses Top management is responsible for choosing and implementing strategies for a firm . The strategies chosen reflect the mindset of top management in regard to what they give attention to and consider as important in deciding on a firm ’ s strategic activity ( Hambrick and Mason 1984 ) . As such , the mindset of top management can influence the value a firm places on flexibility and the upside value the firm perceives in retaining a real option . The marketing and management literature suggest a variety of factors that are likely to influence the mindset of top management in ways that can influence the upside value associated with a real option . Three such factors that we expect will influence the mindset of top management in such a way include CEO tenure , the presence of a Chief Marketing Officer ( CMO ) on the top management team , and the executive demands of top management . We now turn to developing hypotheses for each of these variables . Licensor top management mindset CEO tenure CEOs ’ orientation toward change and the need for flexibility varies over the course of their time at the helm of a firm ( Hambrick and Fukutomi 1991 ; Henderson et al . 2006 ; Miller 1991 ) . They tend to become adverse to change later in their tenure due to various factors including strategic momentum , greater autonomy , and past successes . As the key decision maker within the firm , their preference for change can alter perceptions throughout top manage - ment regarding the need for flexibility such that top management will value flexibility more when led by less tenured CEOs and value flexibility less when led by more tenured CEOs . The effect CEOs have on the value associated with flexibility by top management should cause licensors with longer tenured CEOs to place less value on the option to retain a portion of the marketing control rights involved with licensed technology . H1 : The likelihood a licensor will distribute its marketing control rights on a less restrictive basis increases as the tenure of the CEO for the licensor increases . CMO presence Firms that have a CMO as a member of the top management team are unique from their counterparts that do not . Those with a CMO tend to be more exploratory and focused on being innovative in their strategic activity ( Nath and Mahajan 2008 ) . The ability to be flexible is important to exploratory strategies because of the uncer - tainty regarding outcomes and best practices that character - izes innovative activity . As such , we expect that firms with a CMO on the top management team will value flexibility more than their counterparts without a CMO and that this difference will lead the former to see greater upside value MARKETING CONTROL RIGHTS DISTRIBUTION TOP MANAGEMENT MINDSET (cid:129) Licensor CEO Tenure (cid:129) Licensor CMO Presence (cid:129) Licensor Executive Demands LICENSEE MARKETING CAPABILITIES (cid:129) Licensee Relational Capability (cid:129) Licensee Branding Capability (cid:129) Licensee Sales Capability Fig . 1 A model of marketing control right distribution decisions J . of the Acad . Mark . Sci . ( 2012 ) 40 : 659 – 672 663 associated with licensed technology . In turn , this difference should motivate firms with a CMO to pursue a more restrictive distribution strategy in order to retain the right to commercialize the licensed technology themselves . H2 : The likelihood a licensor will distribute its marketing control rights on a less restrictive basis decreases if a CMO is present on the licensor ’ s top management team . Top management executive demands Although the strate - gies implemented by executives provide the means by which they affect firm performance , each initiative contributes to making the job of an executive consider - ably demanding . When combined , they can make an executive ’ s job seem overly demanding and create stress ( Ganster 2005 ) . During particularly demanding times , top managers become overwhelmed or “ stressed out ” such that their actions become more imitative and less innovative as they increasingly limit the information they draw upon for task performance to their own experience and / or rely on heuristics such as the actions of others ( Hambrick et al . 2005a , b ) . As such , we expect top management will value the flexibility offered by a real option less as the demands they face increase . This should motivate top managers facing high demands to follow a less restrictive distribution strategy . H3 : The likelihood a licensor will distribute its marketing control rights on a less restrictive basis increases as the demands on executives in top management increase . The previous discussion focused on how the licensor ’ s top management mindset can influence the value placed on flexibility and can impact the distribution decision in a technology licensing agreement . Whether to retain or cede a real option like marketing control rights should also be influenced by top management ’ s perceptions of downside risk , capturing the possibility a real option will underper - form due to mismanagement . We expect that licensees ’ marketing capabilities related to managing inter - firm relationships , branding , and sales will influence licensors ’ perceptions of downside risk and , subsequently , their decision to follow a more or less restrictive distribution strategy . Licensee marketing capabilities The downside risk for the licensor is that returns from retaining the real option by following a more restrictive distribution strategy will fall below the returns from ceding the real option to the licensee through a less restrictive distribution strategy . A licensor ’ s downside risk is likely to be increased if its licensee partner has exceptional marketing capabilities because as the licensee ’ s marketing capabilities increase so too does its ability to effectively manage the market entry of licensed technology ( Dutta et al . 1999 ) . Three types of licensee marketing capabilities are expected to be of special importance in this regard : relational , branding , and sales . Relational capability A technology licensing agreement involves more than a simple hand - off between the licensor and licensee . Typically , there is collaboration and coordi - nation between the two firms in order to ensure that the knowledge associated with the licensed technology is successfully transferred between them ( Anand and Khanna 2000 ) . Thus , one factor that is likely to determine the success of a technology licensing agreement is the management of the collaboration . The extent to which a firm can manage inter - firm collaboration reflects its relational capability ( Johnson et al . 2004 ) . Firms are not equally endowed with relational capability . Rather , they develop relational capability over time as they gain experience in inter - firm relationships ( Lambe et al . 2002 ) . As such , we expect licensors will compare their relational capabilities with those of their licensee partners in order to assess which is best at managing the technology licensing agreement . If the licensee ’ s relational capability is low , then it is likely that the licensor will create more value commercializing licensed technology itself versus if the licensee manages the process . The opposite is true , however , if the relational capability of the licensee is high . In such cases , it is likely that the licensor ’ s management of the collaborative effort will lead to underperformance relative to the licensee ’ s management of the process between the firms . As a result , licensors ’ perceptions of downside risk should increase as the relational capability of the licensee increases , and this is expected to influence the licensor ’ s distribution strategy . H4 : The likelihood a licensor will distribute its marketing control rights on a less restrictive basis increases as the relational capability of the licensee increases . Branding capability Creating value through branding activities is key to commercializing a technology . Thus , building strong brands represents a second type of marketing capability and one which is critical in determining a firm ’ s ability to connect with its customers ( Anand and Delios 2002 ; Day 1994 ) . Brand building generally requires a substantial and consistent investment over time in forming and nurturing relationships between a firm ’ s products and its customers ( Luo and Donthu 2006 ) . An important consequence of this is that firms with 664 J . of the Acad . Mark . Sci . ( 2012 ) 40 : 659 – 672 exceptional branding capabilities are better able to build equity or value for their brands relative to competitors . This not only allows these firms to maintain strong relationships with existing customers but also develop relationships with new customers in new product catego - ries and markets ( Capron and Hulland 1999 ) . We expect that licensors will perceive higher downside risk when the licensee has stronger branding capabilities and this should promote a less restrictive distribution strategy . H5 : The likelihood a licensor will distribute its marketing control rights on a less restrictive basis increases as the branding capability of the licensee increases . Sales capability Sales capability refers to a firm ’ s expertise in developing and implementing personal selling strategies . A firm ’ s sales capability is critically important to success - fully commercializing technology because it allows the firm to link with customers at an individual level and effectively promote its products to those customers . Thus , sales capability is a key contributor to a firm ’ s ability to appropriate value from technology ( Bayus et al . 2003 ; Dutta et al . 1999 ) , especially new product technology in downstream markets ( Levin et al . 1987 ) . The effect of a licensee ’ s sales capability on a licensor ’ s perceptions of downside risk should parallel that discussed earlier in regard to the licensee ’ s relational and branding capabilities . A licensee ’ s strong sales capability suggests that it would likely outperform its licensor partner ’ s commercialization efforts . This realization is likely to increase the downside risk perceived by the licensor and , consequently , lower the licensor ’ s desire to retain an option to commercialize the licensed technology , resulting in a less restrictive distribu - tion strategy . H6 : The likelihood a licensor will distribute its marketing control rights on a less restrictive basis increases as the sales capability of the licensee increases . Methodology Sample We constructed our sample frame by examining announce - ments of the formation of technology licensing agreements by pharmaceutical firms . We focused solely on the pharmaceutical industry in order to eliminate the potential influence of the environment , which has been studied in past research ( i . e . , Li et al . 2010 ) , and to isolate the effect associated with our hypothesized variables . It also allowed us to remove industry - specific effects . To identify appro - priate technology licensing agreements , we used the Factiva database during the timeframe covering 1996 – 2005 . To remain consistent with our technology focus , we included only those announcements that feature inter - firm relation - ships between two firms for which the stated intent is the licensing of new technology between the firms . We also limited the sample to publicly - traded firms because of our focus on top management as an important factor influenc - ing distribution decisions . Information on top management is available in filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) for public firms ; private firms do not have the same reporting requirements as publicly - traded firms , and this makes it difficult to get top management information for these firms . We identified 129 technology licensing agreements for analysis purposes . The time period covered and sample size approximate those in past research examining technology licensing ( e . g . , Aulakh et al . 2010 ; Somaya et al . 2011 ) Dependent variable Capon and Glazer ( 1987 ) define distribution in the context of technology licensing as the specifications for how a firm may or may not use licensed technology or expertise . They identify markets and products as two key areas in which a licensor may set distribution limits with respect to the exercise of licensed market development rights by a licensee . We measure distribution restrictiveness on the basis of whether a licensor distributes its marketing control rights to a licensee on a worldwide ( less restrictive ) or a regional ( more restrictive ) basis . We study market - related distribution because the licensee ’ s use of licensed technology generally is too uncertain to establish product - related distribution limitations . Licensing agreements in which the licensor follows a more restrictive distribution strategy ( i . e . , restricted geographical markets in which the licensee may develop and market products that embody the licensed product technology ) constitute 56 % of the sample ; we assigned them a “ 0 ” code to reflect the lesser degree of marketing control rights that the licensor distributes . A less restrictive distribution strategy appears in 44 % of the sample and takes the value of “ 1 ” to indicate the greater degree of marketing control rights distributed to the licensee . Independent variables The analysis uses secondary proxies in measuring the variables included in the model . Table 2 describes the different measures and sources for each independent variable . We now discuss each measure in more detail . CEO tenure We measured CEO tenure based on an individual ’ s time in the CEO position . After identifying the individuals serving as CEO for each licensor during the J . of the Acad . Mark . Sci . ( 2012 ) 40 : 659 – 672 665 year in which the technology licensing agreements in the sample were formed , we then identified the year in which each individual became CEO . The difference between the two years represents CEO tenure . CMO presence We measured a CMO ’ s presence on the top management team of the licensor by examining the top management team members for each licensor during the year in which the technology licensing agreements in the sample were formed . Annual reports , along with 10 - K ’ s and DEF - 14 filings made to the Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) , were reviewed in order to identify the functional areas represented on each top management team . A value of “ 1 ” was assigned to each licensor if a top manager representing the marketing function was on the licensor ’ s top management team while a “ 0 ” was assigned to licensors with no such individual on the top management team . Top management executive demands Executive demands on top management capture the stress under which top management must make strategic decisions ( Hambrick et al . 2005a , b ) . Past research suggests a key source of stress for top management that is related to technology manage - ment is the number of inter - firm agreements simultaneously managed by top management within a firm ( Boyd and Spekman 2008 ) . As the number of technology agreements within a firm ’ s portfolio increases , the number of relation - ships that must be managed also increases and can create stress for top managers . We measured the size of the technology portfolio managed by the licensor based upon a count of the number of inter - firm agreements managed by each licensor at the time in which the focal technology license agreement was formed . We scaled this count by the number of individuals within the top management team for each licensor . Licensee relational capability Prior research suggests that capabilities develop primarily through the investment of time and effort ( Day 1994 ; Dyer and Singh 1998 ) and that specific capabilities result from accumulated investments in a particular area . This is true with regard to a firm ’ s relational capability ( Johnson et al . 2004 ) . As such , we measured relational capability as a historical count of the number of inter - firm agreements formed by each licensee prior to the technology licensing agreements in the sample . This measure of relational capability is consistent with conceptual discussions of relational capability ( Lambe et al . 2002 ) and prior empirical research ( e . g . , Anand and Khanna 2000 ) . Branding capability In the context of branding capability , an important area of activity involves creating and protecting trademarks ( Alcock et al . 2003 ; Krasnikov et al . 2009 ) . A trademark represents “ any sign which is capable of being represented graphically and which is Table 2 Summary of measures and data sources Conceptual variables Measure Data source Licensor Size Total revenue of licensor COMPUSTAT , 10 - Ks Licensee Size Total revenue of licensee COMPUSTAT , 10 - Ks Repeated Tie Prior alliance between licensor and licensee 10 - Ks , Annual Reports , Factiva Estimated License Value Stated estimated value of license agreement for licensor Factiva Technological Uncertainty Technology of licensed technology : therapeutic , diagnostic , chemical 10 - Ks , Annual Reports , Factiva Licensor Relational Capability Historical number of prior technology alliances formed by licensor 10 - Ks , Annual Reports , Factiva Licensor Branding Capability Historical number oftrademarks filed by licensor 10 - Ks , Annual Reports , Factiva Licensor Sales Force Capability Dollar investment in sales , general & administrative by licensor COMPUSTAT , 10 - Ks Licensor CEO Tenure Years of appointment to CEO title within licensor DEF - 14s , 10 - Ks , Annual Reports Licensor Chief Marketing Officer Presence of manager representing the marketing function on top management team of licensor DEF - 14s , 10 - Ks , Annual Reports Licensor Executive Demands of Marketing Number of active inter - firm agreements managed by licensor 10 - Ks , Annual Reports , Factiva Licensor Relational Capability Historical number of prior technology alliances formed by licensee 10 - Ks , Annual Reports , Factiva Licensor Branding Capability Historical number of trademarks filed by licensee 10 - Ks , Annual Reports , Factiva Licensor Sales Force Capability Dollar investment in sales , general & administrative by licensee COMPUSTAT , 10 - Ks 666 J . of the Acad . Mark . Sci . ( 2012 ) 40 : 659 – 672 capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one undertaking from those of another ” ( Section 1 ( 1 ) Trade Marks Act 1994 ) . Firms use trademarks to prevent competitors from using their brand names ( Petty 2008 ) because the dilution of trademarks ( Morrin and Jacoby 2000 ) or trademark usage that induces brand confusion ( Howard et al . 2000 ) can harm brands . Consistent with prior research ( Pashigian and Bowen 1994 ) , we therefore use trademarks as a proxy for branding experience . Specifically , we assessed branding capability as a historical count of the number of trademarks actually filed and used in the marketplace by each licensee up to the year of the formation of the sampled technology licensing agreements . By using the number of trademarks actually applied in the market , rather than the absolute number of trademarks filed by a firm , we acknowledge that developing branding capability ( i . e . , customer - linking ability ) requires actual experience in the marketplace . Sales capability We measured licensees ’ sales capability using each licensee ’ s sales , general , and administrative ( SG & A ) expenditures . The use of SG & A expenditures to measure a firm ’ s sales capability is consistent with previous research examining value appropriation and new products . For example , Bayus et al . ( 2003 ) use SG & A in measuring investments made toward appropriating value from new product development while Dutta et al . ( 1999 ) use SG & A spending to measure value appropriation capability in high - technology markets like those characterizing the sample analyzed in this paper . Additionally , prior empirical re - search identifies sales force expenditures as one of the most effective means by which a firm can appropriate value from new product technology in downstream markets ( Levin et al . 1987 ) . Control variables We include several variables in the model to recognize variables identified as important in past research related to the design of technology licensing agreements . Prior research suggests firms may take a bargaining power approach to licensing that focuses on simply maximizing the number of control rights gained in an agreement ( Elfenbein and Lerner 2003 ; Lerner and Merges 1998 ) . Following prior research , we measured each partner ’ s bargaining power as the natural logarithm of the licensor ’ s and the licensee ’ s total sales for the year immediately preceding the formation year for each technology licensing agreement . As discussed earlier in our review of real option theory , environmental uncertainty can influence the value placed on flexibility and , hence , perceptions of upside value . Our focus on firms within the pharmaceutical industry in constructing our sample provides one means of controlling for environmental uncertainty related to the market . We also controlled for technological uncertainty by following past research ( Santoro and McGill 2005 ) exam - ining pharmaceutical firms that focuses on whether the licensed technology is a basis for therapeutic applications ( high uncertainty ) , diagnostic applications ( medium uncer - tainty ) , or chemical applications ( low uncertainty ) . A control variable accounting for the estimated value of the licensing agreement to the licensor was also included in order to control for the actual financial value associated with each licensing agreement . Inter - firm decisions can also be influenced by the level of trust between firms ( Sivadas and Dwyer 2000 ) . Work by Gulati ( 1995 ) suggests that repeated ties provide the opportunity for interaction between firms that is critical for the development of trust between the firms . Trust was thus controlled for with a dichotomous variable indicating whether the alliance identified in the sample did ( value = “ 0 ” ) or did not ( value = “ 1 ” ) represent the first technology alliance between the licensor and its alliance partner . Lastly , we need to account for licensors ’ own marketing capabilities as we do not expect that licensors ignore their own capabilities when considering the marketing capabilities of licensees . We therefore included control variables measuring the relational , branding , and sales capabilities of each licensor using the procedure described earlier when discussing licensees ’ marketing capabilities . Analysis We used a logit model to test the hypotheses given the dichotomous nature of the dependent variable . The corre - lations and descriptive statistics for each measure included in the model are provided in Table 3 . There is no evidence of extremely high correlations between the variables which suggests multicollinearity is not biasing the results . Fur - thermore , the separate secondary sources we used to collect the data for each measure help ensure that the measures do not suffer from common method bias . The model is significant ( chi - squared ( d . f . = 15 ) = 45 . 34 , p < . 001 ) and correctly classifies the less restrictive market - ing control right distribution decisions ( coded as a “ 1 ” ) in 70 % of the cases . The model also correctly classifies situations in which marketing control rights are distributed on a more restrictive basis ( coded as a “ 0 ” ) 80 % of the time . The overall percentage of correctly classified cases equals 76 % , which is greater than chance ( 50 % ) and much better than the actual distribution of the data ( i . e . , 56 % more restricted , 44 % less restricted ) . We present the results from the logit analysis in Table 4 . The bargaining power control measure for licensees is significant and in line with prior research ( e . g . , Lerner and Merges 1998 ) . Licensees with greater bargaining power J . of the Acad . Mark . Sci . ( 2012 ) 40 : 659 – 672 667 tend to receive less restrictive marketing control rights . The control variable for licensor sales capability is also significant and negative , which suggests licensors follow a more restrictive distribution when they have higher sales capability . No other control variables are significant . The first three hypotheses cover the expected impact of licensor top management mindset on licensors ’ distribution decisions . Hypothesis 1 suggests greater licensor CEO tenure increases the likelihood that the licensor will distribute its marketing control rights on a less restrictive basis . The sign for licensor CEO tenure is positive and significant and supports H1 . Hypothesis 2 discusses the expected impact of a CMO ’ s presence on the licensor ’ s top management team . The negative and significant sign for the CMO variable shown in Table 4 provides support for H2 . Licensors with a CMO appear to value the real option associated with licensed technology greater than their counterparts with no CMO and this difference decreases the likelihood that licensors with a CMO will follow a less restrictive distribution strategy . Hypothesis 3 argues for a positive relationship between the demands faced by top management within the licensor and the likelihood the licensor will follow a less restrictive licensing strategy . The coefficient for this variable is not significant and does not provide support for the hypothe - sized effect of top management executive demands . The discussion also hypothesizes the effect licensees ’ marketing capabilities have on whether licensors follow a more or less restrictive distribution strategy . Hypothesis 4 examines the effect of a licensee ’ s marketing capabilities related to inter - firm relationship management . The analysis reveals a positive and significant effect of relational capability . This finding supports H4 and suggests that firms see relational capability as having an important impact on real option management . Hypothesis 5 examines the effect of a licensee ’ s marketing capability related to branding . The expectation is that the licensor will be more likely to distribute its marketing control rights to a licensee on a less restrictive basis when that partner has greater branding capability . The link between licensee branding capability and likelihood of marketing control rights allocation is significant as shown in Table 3 , but the sign is negative , which is opposite the hypothesized effect . We return to this finding in our general discussion . Hypothesis 6 also examines the impact of a licensee ’ s marketing capabilities but from a sales perspective . The expectation described in developing the hypothesis focuses on how a high sales capability by the licensee increases the downside risk for a licensor and promotes a less restrictive distribution strategy by the licensor . The sign for the sales capability variable is positive and significant , and this supports H6 . T a b l e 3 C o rr e l a ti on s M ea n ( F r e qu e n c y % ) S t . D e v . 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 . L i ce n s o r S i z e 2 . 96 2 . 63 1 2 . L i ce n s ee S i z e 7 . 41 2 . 84 − 0 . 11 1 3 . R e p ea t e d T i e 0 = 86 % 1 = 14 % N / A − 0 . 08 0 . 13 1 4 . E s ti m a t e d L i c e n s e V a l u e 34 . 92 99 . 02 − 0 . 04 0 . 16 − 0 . 07 1 5 . T ec hno l og i ca l U n ce r t a i n t y - M e d i u m 0 = 90 % 1 = 10 % N / A − 0 . 03 0 . 06 − 0 . 13 − 0 . 05 1 6 . T ec hno l og i ca l U n ce r t a i n t y - H i gh 0 = 31 % 1 = 69 % N / A − - 0 . 05 0 . 02 − 0 . 02 0 . 12 − 0 . 50 a 1 7 . L i ce n s o r R e l a ti on a l C a p a b ilit y 53 . 76 194 . 41 0 . 28 a − 0 . 01 − 0 . 10 0 . 12 0 . 32 a − 0 . 19 a 1 8 . L i ce n s o r B r a nd i ng C a p a b ilit y 46 . 91 164 . 21 0 . 59 a − 0 . 21 a − 0 . 01 − 0 . 07 − 0 . 00 0 0 . 33 a 1 9 . L i ce n s o r S a l e s C a p a b ilit y 11 . 81 98 . 79 − 0 . 14 − 0 . 06 0 . 09 0 . 15 − 0 . 04 0 . 08 − 0 . 03 − 0 . 05 1 10 . L i ce n s o r C E O T e nu r e 6 . 37 4 . 55 − 0 . 12 − 0 . 09 0 . 02 − 0 . 13 0 . 14 − 0 . 11 − 0 . 12 − 0 . 11 0 . 14 1 11 . L i e n s o r C h i e f M a r k e ti ng O ff i ce r 0 = 77 % ; 1 = 23 % N / A 0 . 14 − 0 . 23 a − 0 . 06 − 0 . 02 0 . 12 − 0 . 08 0 . 24 a 0 . 13 0 . 22 a 0 . 11 1 12 . L i ce n s o r E x ec u ti v e D e m a nd s o f M a r k e ti ng 21 . 85 7 . 63 0 . 30 a − 0 . 09 − 0 . 11 0 . 24 a 0 . 34 a − 0 . 25 a 0 . 32 a 0 . 22 a 0 . 01 0 . 06 0 . 09 1 13 . L i ce n s ee R e l a ti on a l C a p a b ilit y 98 . 22 232 . 54 − 0 . 08 0 . 34 a 0 . 02 0 . 52 a 0 . 29 a − 0 . 16 0 . 26 a − 0 . 11 0 . 06 − 0 . 01 − 0 . 07 0 . 38 a 1 14 . L i ce n s ee B r a nd i ng C a p a b ilit y 347 . 4 4 494 . 01 − 0 . 09 0 . 57 a 0 . 10 0 . 18 a − 0 . 09 − 0 . 12 − 0 . 09 − 0 . 18 a − 0 . 09 0 . 08 − 0 . 16 − 0 . 13 0 . 33 a 1 15 . L i ce n s ee S a l e s C a p a b ilit y 3 . 54 32 . 58 − 0 . 01 − 0 . 46 a − 0 . 04 − 0 . 05 − 0 . 04 0 . 03 − 0 . 05 0 . 02 − 0 . 01 − 0 . 05 − 0 . 03 − 0 . 05 − 0 . 11 − 0 . 13 1 a S t a ti s ti ca ll y s i gn i f i ca n t a t t h e 0 . 05 l e v e l 668 J . of the Acad . Mark . Sci . ( 2012 ) 40 : 659 – 672 Discussion The paper began by recognizing the contribution research examining technology licensing agreements can make to our understanding of important marketing areas related to innovation management such as strategic market entry , organizing inter - firm partnerships , and capturing rewards from innovation . The paper focused on the distribution decision associated with designing a technology licensing agreement from a real option perspective whereby the decision to follow a more or less restrictive distribution strategy depends upon the upside value and the downside risk a licensor associates with licensing . Upside value was argued to depend upon a firm ’ s strategic orientation as reflected by the mindset of top management within licensor firms , while downside risk was positioned as being driven by competitive considerations and argued to depend upon the marketing capabilities of licensee firms . Analysis of technology licensing agreements within the pharmaceutical industry confirmed all of the hypothesized top management variables with the exception of executive demands and all of the marketing capabilities variables with the exception of licensees ’ branding capability . We now turn to discussing the theoretical and managerial implications of these findings . Theoretical implications One theoretical contribution of the paper is its use of real options theory to expand the variables considered in the technology licensing agreements literature to include several of importance to marketing researchers and managers . A key finding in the paper is the important role played by marketing . Factors including CMO presence within top management and marketing capabilities that are relational , branding , and sales in nature appear to influence the design of technology licensing agreements . However , a review of recent research on the topic ( e . g . , Aulakh et al . 2010 ; Jiang et al . 2009 ) reveals little consideration given to marketing - related factors . Thus , this paper provides early evidence highlighting the contribution marketing makes toward the design of this important inter - firm approach to market entry . Furthermore , the findings also reveal the opportunity real options theory provides for advancing our understanding of marketing ’ s B ( Std . Error ) t - value Control variables Licensor Size − 0 . 08 ( 0 . 11 ) 0 . 46 Licensee Size 0 . 52 ( 0 . 15 ) 11 . 79 a Repeated Tie − 0 . 14 ( 0 . 64 ) 0 . 05 Estimated License Value − 0 . 01 ( 0 . 00 ) 2 . 51 Technological Uncertainty - Medium − 1 . 50 ( 0 . 99 ) 2 . 67 Technological Uncertainty - High 0 . 88 ( 0 . 59 ) 2 . 22 Licensor Relational Capability − 0 . 17 ( 0 . 08 ) 0 . 04 Licensor Branding Capability 0 . 00 ( 0 . 05 ) 0 . 00 Licensor Sales Capability − 0 . 18 ( 0 . 09 ) 3 . 98 a Hypothesized variables Licensor CEO Tenure 0 . 16 ( 0 . 05 ) 7 . 83 a Chief Marketing Officer − 1 . 31 ( 0 . 64 ) 4 . 12 a Executive Demands − 0 . 19 ( 0 . 46 ) 0 . 16 Licensee Relational Capability 0 . 14 ( 0 . 05 ) 6 . 85 a Branding Capability − 0 . 05 ( 0 . 02 ) 3 . 63 a Sales Capability 0 . 90 ( 0 . 46 ) 3 . 73 a Model statistics Chi - Square 45 . 34 Degrees of freedom 15 Significance 0 . 001 Classification accuracy Actual distribution More restrictive distribution 80 % 56 % Less restrictive distribution 70 % 44 % Overall accuracy 76 % Table 4 The distribution of market control rights within technology licensing agreements a Statistically significant at the 0 . 05 level Dependent variable : 0 = more restrictive distribution ; 1 = less restrictive distribution J . of the Acad . Mark . Sci . ( 2012 ) 40 : 659 – 672 669 contribution to innovation management , and we urge future marketing researchers to draw on real options theory in their research . A second contribution the paper makes is it expands our understanding of the unique nature of technology licensing design decisions . For example , Jiang et al . ( 2009 ) find that technology uncertainty plays a key role in determining technology license duration . The same cannot be said for distribution decisions as the technology uncertainty measures included in the model did not reach significance . Rather , the distribution decision appears to be driven by top management and marketing capability factors rather than technological uncertainty . Thus , the paper illustrates that the factors influencing the design of a technology licensing agreement can vary across design decisions , and this finding emphasizes the complex nature of the managerial decisions underlying this important approach to innovation management . A third contribution of the paper concerns the impact CMOs make toward the design of technology licensing agreements . To date , research examining marketing from a top management perspective has focused on understanding the contribution of CMOs to firm performance ( e . g . , Boyd et al . 2010 ) and the sources underlying CMO power ( Nath and Mahajan 2011 ) . This paper complements this research in two ways . First , it complements research on CMO power by providing early evidence illustrating one means by which CMOs ’ influence manifests with respect to strategic decision - making . Second , it complements research on CMOs ’ contribution to firm performance by revealing the role CMOs play in determining how a firm manages its options related to appropriating value from product technology . Together , these insights broaden our understanding of CMOs from both a power and performance perspective . Managerial implications The results of this research offer managers important implications for practice . First , while our results verify the prominence of real options theory in the licensing distribution decision , the results also serve as a caution to firms when it comes to using technology licensing agreements as a means of capturing rewards from innovation . Recent research by Boyd and Spekman ( 2010 ) suggests a real options approach to distributing technology may not always maximize value appropriation . Ideally , we would have liked to link the distribution decisions in our sample with performance , but we found very little discussion of performance associated with the sampled licensing agreements in various searches of public information released by either the licensors or licensee . However , we can combine the findings of Boyd and Spekman with our findings to recommend caution to licensors when making distribution decisions : though a real options approach like that found in our analysis may be appealing , it may not always maximize value creation . The findings also offer specific guidance for licensees regarding selecting partners , an important issue associated with organizing inter - firm relationships in support of innovation activities . A stated goal of licensees is to maximize the number of control rights they acquire in a technology licensing agreement ( Lerner and Merges 1998 ) . Our results imply that marketers in licensee firms can acquire greater marketing control by partnering with licensors that have more seasoned CEOs and no marketing top manager . Furthermore , they suggest that licensee marketers can help themselves achieve this goal by developing their own marketing capabilities , especially from a relational and sales perspective . Limitations and directions for future research There are limitations to this research that should be kept in mind when considering the results in the paper . First , the secondary proxies we use may not have measured our constructs of interest completely . This is especially true with respect to our measurement of top management mindset . However , there is a long tradition of using secondary proxies to capture managerial mindsets , and we followed this literature as closely as possible when choosing our measures ( e . g . , Carpenter and Fredrickson 2001 ; Hambrick and Mason 1984 ; Schoenecker et al . 1995 ) . We did not find support for the hypothesized effect of licensee branding capability using the real options litera - ture . One possible explanation is that there may be boundary conditions associated with the impact of branding capability as well as with the impact of the other marketing capabilities studied in the paper . We tested for possible interaction effects between the different licensor and licensee marketing capabilities but found no evidence suggesting the existence of boundary conditions . Another possible explanation for the branding capabilities finding can be found in the literature related to the pursuit of public benefits ( benefits that accrue to both partners ) versus private benefits ( benefits that accrue to only one partner ) in inter - firm agreements . A licensee ’ s branding capability could be viewed by licensors as a “ transferability factor ” that enables the licensee to take what it learns or acquires from a given technology licensing agreement and utilize it outside of the agreement ( Khanna et al . 1998 , p . 196 ) . If so , this may explain why a licensor would reluctantly give up marketing control rights to a partner that possesses a high branding capability . Only future empirical research will more definitively explain our finding relative to a licensee ’ s branding capability and uncover possible boundary conditions and alternative explanations . 670 J . of the Acad . Mark . Sci . ( 2012 ) 40 : 659 – 672 Another potential limitation is our sample ’ s focus on publicly - traded firms within the pharmaceutical industry . We focused on these firms and this industry for several reasons . Our interest in top management ’ s mindset meant that we needed data on top management . Generally , there is a greater ability to get top management related information from publicly - traded versus privately - held firms . Our focus on the pharmaceutical industry was also driven by our theoretical interest . Specifically , we hoped to move beyond prior research that has focused on how the external environment influences real option decisions and focus , instead , on internal factors as drivers of real option decisions . One drawback to our sampling decision is that we cannot claim with certainty that our results extend to privately - held firms and across industries . While recognizing these as potential limitations , they can also be viewed as opportunities for future researchers to test the robustness of our findings and extend our findings . Acknowledgement The authors are grateful for the helpful feedback received from three anonymous reviewers and the Editor . The first author acknowledges the research grant support provided by the James Madison University College of Business . References Alcock , L . , Chen , P . , Ch ’ ng , M . H . , & Hodson , S . ( 2003 ) . Building strong brands . Journal of Brand Management , 11 ( 2 ) , 115 – 118 . Anand , J . , & Delios , A . ( 2002 ) . Absolute and resources as determinants of international acquisitions . Strategic Management Journal , 23 ( 2 ) , 119 – 134 . Anand , B . N . , & Khanna , T . ( 2000 ) . Do firms learn to create value ? The case of alliances . Strategic Management Journal , 21 ( 3 ) , 295 – 315 . Argyres , N . , & Mayer , K . ( 2007 ) . Contract design as a firm capability : An integration of learning and transaction cost perspectives . Academy of Management Review , 32 ( 4 ) , 1060 – 1077 . Arora , A . , & Ceccagnoli , M . ( 2006 ) . Patent protection , complemen - tary assets , and firms ’ incentives for technology licensing . Management Science , 52 ( 2 ) , 293 – 308 . Aulakh , P . , Jiang , M . , & Yigang , P . ( 2010 ) . International technology licensing : monopoly rents , transaction costs and exclusive rights . Journal of International Business Studies , 41 ( 4 ) , 587 – 605 . Bayus , L . B . , Erickson , G . , & Jacobson , R . ( 2003 ) . The financial rewards of new product introductions in the personal computer industry . Management Science , 49 ( 2 ) , 197 – 210 . Bowman , E . H . , & Moscowitz , G . T . ( 2001 ) . Real options analysis and strategic decision making . Organizational Science , 12 ( 6 ) , 772 – 777 . Boyd , D . E . , & Spekman , R . E . ( 2008 ) . The market value of indirect ties within technology alliances . Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 36 ( 4 ) , 488 – 500 . Boyd , D . E . , & Spekman , R . E . ( 2010 ) . The licensing of market development rights within technology alliances : a shareholder value perspective . Journal of Product Innovation Management , 27 ( 4 ) , 593 – 605 . Boyd , D . E . , Chandy , R . , & Cunha , M . ( 2010 ) . When do CMOs create value ? A customer power explanation . Journal of Marketing Research , 47 ( 4 ) , 1162 – 1176 . Capon , N . , & Glazer , R . ( 1987 ) . Marketing and technology : a strategic coalignment . The Journal of Marketing , 51 ( 3 ) , 1 – 14 . Capron , L . , & Hulland , J . ( 1999 ) . Redeployment of brands , sales forces , and general marketing management expertise following horizontal acquisitions : a resource - based view . The Journal of Marketing , 63 ( 2 ) , 41 – 54 . Carpenter , M . A . , & Fredrickson , J . W . ( 2001 ) . Top management teams , global strategic posture , and the moderating role of uncertainty . Academy of Management Journal , 44 ( 3 ) , 533 – 545 . Cho , T . S . , & Hambrick , D . C . ( 2006 ) . Attention as the mediator between top management team characteristics and strategic change : the case of airline deregulation . Organization Science , 17 ( 4 ) , 453 – 470 . Crama , P . , Reyck , B . D . , & Degraeve , Z . ( 2008 ) . Milestone payments or royalties ? Contract design for R & D licensing . Operations Research , 56 ( 6 ) , 1539 – 1552 . Day , G . S . ( 1994 ) . The capabilities of market - driven organizations . The Journal of Marketing , 58 ( 4 ) , 37 – 52 . Day , G . S . , & Schoemaker , J . H . P . ( 2000 ) . Avoiding the pitfalls of emerging technologies . California Management Review , 42 ( 2 ) , 8 – 33 . Dutta , S . , Narasimhan , O . , & Surendra , R . ( 1999 ) . Success in high - technology markets : is marketing capability critical ? Marketing Science , 18 ( 4 ) , 547 – 568 . Dyer , J . H . , & Singh , H . ( 1998 ) . The relational view : cooperative strategy and sources of interorganizational competitive advan - tage . Academy of Management Review , 23 ( 4 ) , 660 – 679 . Elfenbein , D . , & Lerner , J . ( 2003 ) . Ownership and control rights in Internet portal alliances , 1995 – 1999 . The RAND Journal of Economics , 34 ( 3 ) , 356 – 369 . Ettlie , J . , & Subramaniam , M . ( 2004 ) . Changing strategies and tactics for new product development . Journal of Product Innovation Management , 21 ( 2 ) , 95 – 109 . Ganster , D . C . ( 2005 ) . Executive job demands : suggestions from a stress and decision - making perspective . Academy of Management Review , 30 ( 3 ) , 492 – 502 . Gulati , R . ( 1995 ) . Does familiarity breed trust ? The implications of repeated ties for contractual choice in alliances . Academy of Management Journal , 38 ( 1 ) , 85 – 112 . Haenlein , M . , Kaplan , A . , & Schoder , D . ( 2006 ) . Valuing the real option of abandoning unprofitable customers when calculating customer lifetime value . The Journal of Marketing , 70 ( 3 ) , 5 – 20 . Hambrick , D . , & Fukutomi , G . D . ( 1991 ) . The seasons of CEO ’ s tenure . Academy of Management Review , 16 ( 4 ) , 719 – 742 . Hambrick , D . , & Mason , A . P . ( 1984 ) . Upper echelons : the organization as a reflection of its top managers . Academy of Management Review , 9 ( 2 ) , 193 – 206 . Hambrick , D . , Finkelstein , S . , & Mooney , A . ( 2005a ) . Executive job demands : new insights for explaining strategic decisions and leader behaviors . Academy of Management Review , 30 ( 3 ) , 472 – 491 . Hambrick , D . , Finkelstein , S . , & Mooney , A . ( 2005b ) . Executives sometimes lose it , just like the rest of us . Academy of Management Review , 30 ( 3 ) , 503 – 508 . Hauser , J . , Tellis , G . J . , & Griffin , A . ( 2006 ) . Research on innovation : a review and agenda for marketing science . Marketing Science , 25 , 707 – 717 . Henderson , A . D . , Miller , D . , & Hambrick , D . C . ( 2006 ) . How quickly do CEOs become obsolete ? Industry dynamism , CEO tenure , and company performance . Strategic Management Journal , 27 ( 5 ) , 447 – 460 . Hibbard , J . , Hogan , J . , & Smith , G . ( 2003 ) . Assessing the strategic value of business relationships : the role of uncertainty and flexibility . The Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing , 18 ( 4 / 5 ) , 376 – 387 . Howard , D . , Kerin , R . , & Gengler , C . ( 2000 ) . The effects of brand name similarity on brand source confusion : implications for trademarks infringement . Journal of Public Policy & Marketing , 19 ( 2 ) , 250 – 264 . J . of the Acad . Mark . Sci . ( 2012 ) 40 : 659 – 672 671 Hult , G . , Craighead , C . , & Ketchen , D . , Jr . ( 2010 ) . Risk uncertainty and supply chain decisions : a real options perspective . Decision Sciences , 41 ( 3 ) , 435 – 458 . Hyman , M . R . , & Mathur , I . ( 2005 ) . Retrospective and prospective views on marketing / finance interface . Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 33 ( 4 ) , 390 – 400 . Jiang , M . S . , Aulakh , P . S . , & Pan , Y . ( 2009 ) . Licensing duration in foreign markets : a real options perspective . Journal of Interna - tional Business Studies , 40 ( 4 ) , 559 – 577 . John , G . , Weiss , A . M . , & Dutta , S . ( 1999 ) . Marketing in technology - intensive markets : toward a conceptual framework . The Journal of Marketing , 63 ( 4 ) , 78 – 91 . Johnson , J . , Sohi , R . , & Grewal , R . ( 2004 ) . The role of relational knowledge stores in interfirm partnering . The Journal of Marketing , 68 ( 3 ) , 21 – 36 . Kester , C . W . ( 1984 ) . Today ’ s options for tomorrow ’ s growth . Harvard Business Review , March - April , 153 – 160 . Khanna , T . , Gulati , R . , & Nohria , N . ( 1998 ) . The dynamics of learning alliances : competition , cooperation , and relative scope . Strategic Management Journal , 19 ( 3 ) , 193 – 210 . Kogut , B . ( 1991 ) . Joint ventures and the option to expand and acquire . Management Science , 37 ( 4 ) , 19 – 33 . Kogut , B . , & Kulatilaka , N . ( 2001 ) . Capabilities as real options . Organization Science , 12 ( 6 ) , 744 – 758 . Kotabe , M . , Sahay , A . , & Aulakh , P . ( 1996 ) . Emerging role of technology licensing in the development of global product strategy : conceptual framework and research propositions . The Journal of Marketing , 60 ( 1 ) , 73 – 88 . Krasnikov , A . , Mishra , S . , & Orozco , D . ( 2009 ) . Evaluating the financial impact of branding using trademarks : a framework and empirical evidence . The Journal of Marketing , 73 ( 6 ) , 154 – 166 . Kumar , V . , & Shah , D . ( 2009 ) . Expanding the role of marketing : from customer equity to market capitalization . The Journal of Marketing , 73 , 119 – 136 . Lambe , C . J . , Spekman , R . E . , & Hunt , S . D . ( 2002 ) . Alliance competence , resources , and alliance success : conceptualization , measurement , and initial test . Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 30 ( 2 ) , 141 – 158 . Lehmann , D . R . ( 2004 ) . Making marketing matter . The Journal of Marketing , 68 , 73 – 75 . Leonard - Barton , D . ( 1992 ) . Core capabilities and core rigidities : a paradox in managing new product development . Strategic Management Journal , 13 , 111 – 125 . Lerner , J . , & Merges , R . ( 1998 ) . The control of technology alliances : an empirical analysis of the biotechnical industry . The Journal of Industrial Economics , 46 ( 2 ) , 125 – 156 . Levin , R . C . , Klevorick , A . K . , Nelson , R . R . , & Winter , S . G . ( 1987 ) . Appropriating the returns from industrial research and develop - ment . Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , 3 ( Special Issue ) , 783 – 831 . Li , N . , Boulding , W . , & Staelin , R . ( 2010 ) . General alliance experience , uncertainty , and marketing alliance governance mode choice . Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 38 , 141 – 158 . Luo , X . , & Donthu , N . ( 2006 ) . Marketing ’ s credibility : a longitudinal investigation of marketing communication productivity and shareholder value . The Journal of Marketing , 70 ( 4 ) , 70 – 91 . McGrath , R . ( 1997 ) . A real options logic for initiating technology positioning investments . Academy of Management Review , 22 ( 4 ) , 974 – 996 . Miller , D . ( 1991 ) . Stale in the saddle : CEO tenure and the match between organization and environment . Management Science , 37 ( 1 ) , 34 – 52 . Miller , K . , & Leiblein , M . ( 1996 ) . Corporate risk - return relations : returns variability versus downside risk . Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 39 ( 1 ) , 91 – 122 . Miller , K . D . , & Reuer , J . J . ( 1996 ) . Measuring organizational downside risk . Strategic Management Journal , 17 , 671 – 691 . Morrin , M . , & Jacoby , J . ( 2000 ) . Trademark dilution : empirical measures for an elusive concept . Journal of Public Policy & Marketing , 19 ( 2 ) , 265 – 276 . Mudambi , S . M . , & Tallman , S . ( 2010 ) . Make , buy or ally ? Theoretical perspectives on knowledge process outsourcing through alliances . Journal of Management Studies , 47 ( 8 ) , 1434 – 1456 . Nath , P . , & Mahajan , V . ( 2008 ) . Chief marketing officers : a study of their presence in firms ’ top management teams . The Journal of Marketing , 72 , 65 – 81 . Nath , P . , & Mahajan , V . ( 2011 ) . Marketing in the C - Suite : a study of chief marketing officer power in firms ’ top management teams . The Journal of Marketing , 75 ( 1 ) , 60 – 77 . Pashigian , P . , & Bowen , B . ( 1994 ) . The rising cost of time of females , the growth of national brands and the supply of retail services . Economic Inquiry , 32 ( 1 ) , 33 – 35 . Pettit , J . ( 1999 ) . Applications in Real Options and Value based Strategy . In Lenos Trigeorgis ( Ed . ) , Real Options and Business Strategy : Applications to Decision Making , , ( pp . 59 – 84 ) . London , Risk Books . Petty , R . ( 2008 ) . Naming names : trademark strategy and beyond : Part one — Selecting a brand name . Journal of Brand Management , 15 ( 3 ) , 190 – 197 . Rese , M . , & Roemer , E . ( 2004 ) . Managing commitments and flexibility by real options . Industrial Marketing Management , 33 , 501 – 512 . Reuer , J . J . , & Leiblein , M . J . ( 2000 ) . Downside risk implications of international investments in subsidiary networks and joint ventures . Academy of Management Journal , 43 ( 2 ) , 203 – 214 . Rust , R . T . , Lemon , K . N . , & Zeithaml , V . A . ( 2004 ) . Return on marketing : using customer equity to focus marketing strategy . The Journal of Marketing , 68 , 109 – 127 . Santoro , M . D . , & McGill , J . P . ( 2005 ) . The effect of uncertainty and asset co - specialization on governance in biotechnology alliances . Strategic Management Journal , 26 ( 13 ) , 1261 – 1269 . Schoder , D . ( 2007 ) . The flaw in customer life value . Harvard Business Review , 27 . Schoenecker , T . , Daellenbach , U . , & McCarthy , A . ( 1995 ) . Factors affecting an organization ’ s commitment to innovation . Proceedings of the 1995 Annual Meeting of the Academy of Management , 52 – 56 . Sine , W . , Shane , S . , & Di Gregorio , D . ( 2003 ) . The halo effect and technology licensing : the influence of institutional prestige on the licensing of university inventions . Management Science , 49 ( 4 ) , 478 – 496 . Sivadas , E . , & Dwyer , R . F . ( 2000 ) . An examination of organizational factors influencing new product success in internal and alliance - based processes . The Journal of Marketing , 64 ( 1 ) , 31 – 49 . Somaya , D . , Kim , Y . , & Vonortas , N . S . ( 2011 ) . Exclusivity in licensing alliances : using hostages to support technology com - mercialization . Strategic Management Journal , 32 ( 2 ) , 159 – 186 . Srinivasan , S . , & Hanssens , D . M . ( 2009 ) . Marketing and firm value : metrics , methods , findings , and future directions . Journal of Marketing Research , 46 , 293 – 312 . Takahashi , Y . ( Mar 30 , 2010 ) . Corporate news : Toyota , Mazda reach hybrid - license deal . Wall Street Journal , B . 3 . The Economist ( US ) , A market for ideas . Oct 22 , 2005 , v . 377 pp . 4 – 10 . U . S . Patent and Trademark Office . ( 1994 ) . Section 1 ( 1 ) Trade Marks Act 1994 . Washington : U . S . Patent and Trademark Office . Vassolo , R . , Anand , J . , & Folta , T . ( 2004 ) . Portfolio effect in real options : the case of equity alliances in biotechnology . Strategic Management Journal , 25 , 1045 – 1061 . Williamson , O . E . ( 1991 ) . Comparative economic organization : the analysis of discrete structural alternatives . Administrative Science Quarterly , 36 , 269 – 296 . Ziedonis , A . A . ( 2007 ) . Real options in technology licensing . Management Science , 53 ( 10 ) , 1618 – 1633 . 672 J . of the Acad . Mark . Sci . ( 2012 ) 40 : 659 – 672