Spontaneous polarization and cell guidance on asymmetric nanotopography Corey Herr a , Benjamin Winkler b , Falko Ziebert c , Igor S . Aranson d , John T . Fourkas e , f , and Wolfgang Losert a , f a Department of Physics , University of Maryland ; b Physikalisch - Technische Bundesanstalt , Berlin , Germany ; c Institute for Theoretical Physics , Heidelberg University , Germany ; d Department of Biomedical Engineering , Pennsylvania State University ; e Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry , University of Maryland ; f Institute for Physical Science and Technology , University of Maryland Asymmetric nanotopography with sub - cellular dimensions has re - cently been demonstrated to be able to provide a unidirectional bias in the migration of cells . The details of this guidance depend both on the type of cell studied and the design of the nanotopography . This behavior is not yet well understood , so there is a pressing need for a predictive description of cell migration on such nanotopography that captures both the initiation of migration and the manner in which cell migration evolves . Here , we employ a three - dimensional , physics - based model to study cell guidance on asymmetric nanosawteeth . In agreement with experimental data , our model predicts that asym - metric sawteeth lead both to spontaneous motion and changes in motion phenotypes . Our model demonstrates that asymmetric nano - sawteeth induce a unidirectional bias in guidance direction that is de - pendent upon the actin polymerization rate and the sawtooth dimen - sions . Motivated by this model , an analysis of previously reported experimental data indicates that the degree of guidance by asymmet - ric nanosawteeth increases with the cell velocity . M ost cells produce motion through the coupling of the actin cytoskeleton and the cell membrane to the sur - rounding substrate . In vivo , cell guidance is aﬀected by a variety of external and internal stimuli , including the extracel - lular matrix ( ECM ) ( 1 ) , surface rigidity ( 2 ) , chemical gradients ( 3 ) , and nanotopography . Local nanotopography has a substan - tial eﬀect on cell behavior . For instance , it has been reported that nanotopographic substrates can lead to cell guidance and can inﬂuence cell morphology ( 4 – 7 ) . Nanoridges can lead to the bidirectional contact guidance of cells , causing cells to speed up and elongate parallel to ridges ( 8 ) . In vivo environ - ments are often asymmetric ( 9 , 10 ) , in the form of the porous ECM . Such asymmetries are not often considered in modeling cell migration . Asymmetric nanotopographic substrates have recently been shown to lead to a unidirectional bias in cell migration , with a preferred guidance direction that depends on both the details of the nanotopgraphy ( 11 ) and cell line ( 12 ) . Physical modelling has been highly successful in describing cell migration , allowing for the creation of conceptually sim - ple , whole - cell models with wide - reaching implications ( 13 – 20 ) . Much of the previous modelling of cell migration has focused on cells on ﬂat surfaces . However , the contact - guidance ex - periments discussed above suggest that the topography en - countered in 3D , in vivo environments can have a profound eﬀect on cell migration . We have previously developed a model that successfully captures some aspects of migration on nan - otopographic substrates ( 21 ) . Here we extend this model to rows of asymmetric nanosawteeth . The cell is modeled as a deformable boundary in which actin polymerizes at the front , forming lamellipodia and pushing the cell boundary outward . This extended model reproduces the key qualitative aspects of cell motility on asymmetric nanotopography . Our work reveals that on asymmetric , nanoscale sawteeth , cells exhibit spontaneous onset of motion and directed guid - ance . For a cell in a deterministic model to move on a ﬂat substrate , the cell must initially be polarized ( 13 , 16 , 19 , 21 ) . However , when the same cell model is implemented on asym - metric nanotopography , spontaneous cell polarization is readily observed . In agreement with previous experimental results ( 11 , 12 ) , our model exhibits biased unidirectional motion on asymmetric nanosawteeth , and exhibits a guidance direction that is dependent upon both the details of the nanotopography and actomyosin dynamics . Our model also reproduces qualita - tive cell - shape phenotypes observed experimentally , including cell elongation parallel and perpendicular to the guidance direction , depending upon the parameters of the nanotopog - raphy and the cells . The model also predicts that the degree of guidance by asymmetric sawteeth depends on cell velocity . This prediction is supported by a new analysis of previous experimental data . Results Phase - ﬁeld Model . To explore cell migration on nanotopogra - phy , we extended a 3D phase - ﬁeld model that was originally developed to model cells in conﬁned environments ( 21 ) . This model uses two dynamical variables to describe the state of the cell . The ﬁrst , ρ ( r , t ) , is a scalar phase - ﬁeld that describes the cell boundary and assumes values between 0 and 1 . The cell boundary lies at ρ = 1 / 2 , with ρ > 1 / 2 inside the cell and ρ < 1 / 2 outside of the cell . The second is a 3D vector ﬁeld p ( r , t ) . The direction of p gives the orientation of the actin ﬁlaments and the magnitude of p gives the ordering of the ﬁlaments . As in the previous 3D phase - ﬁeld model ( 21 ) , we describe the substrate using two auxiliary ﬁelds : Φ ( r ) is a steric ﬁeld that models the volume exclusion of the cell and the substrate and Ψ ( r ) restricts actin generation to occur close to the surface . The modeling framework is described by two coupled equations for ρ and p , as detailed in the Methods section . In the equations the unit of length is 1 µ m and the unit of time is 10 s . Here we study the eﬀect of three model parameters on guided cell migration and cell shape . The ﬁrst , β , is the actin polymerization rate , which determines how fast actin poly - merizes at the surface of the cell . The second , θ , determines the preferred angle of actin polymerization with respect to the local substrate geometry . When far away from the sub - strate , actin polymerizes normal to and away from the local 1 D o w n S a w t e e t h D o w n S a w t ee t h Time A B E C F D Fig . 1 . Asymmetric sawteeth and dominant phenotypes . ( A ) Zoomed - in schematic of the array of asymmetric sawteeth used in the phase - ﬁeld model . Multiple cell - shape phenotypes are observed , including ( B ) crescents and ( C ) wedges . ( D ) Polarization vector ﬁeld of a cell moving down the sawteeth . The polarization vector ﬁeld indicates the directions of the actin polymerization and the membrane pushing force . The color denotes the strength of the polarization p , with blue being the weakest and red being the strongest . All polarization vectors point out of the cell . The asymmetric sawtooth nanotopography can cause the cell to polarize spontaneously ( E ) either down the sawteeth or ( F ) perpendicular to the sawteeth . cell membrane . Near the substrate , θ determines the com - ponent of actin polymerization normal to the substrate . For θ = 0 , actin polymerizes tangentially to the local substrate , whereas for θ = 1 the normal and tangential polymerization rates are equal . The third parameter , σ , determines the rate of acto - myosin contraction . A larger value of σ represents more acto - myosin contraction in the cell . Collectively , these parameters can describe a wide variety of cell migration and shape phenotypes ( 21 ) . Asymmetric nanotopography causes spontaneous polariza - tion . We studied cell dynamics on an array of in - registry rows of asymmetric sawteeth , in which both the sawteeth and the spacings between rows were of subcellular dimensions ( Fig . 1A ) . Such sawteeth have been shown experimentally to be able to bias cell guidance unidirectionally . Sun et al . ( 11 ) reported that diﬀerent nanosawtooth heights lead to opposite guidance directions of Dictyostelium discoideum . Furthermore , Chen et al . ( 12 ) reported that the diﬀerent cell lines were guided in opposite directions on nanosawteeth with the same height . For this study , the sawtooth height was varied between 0 . 75 µ m and 2 µ m and the sawtooth length was varied between 2 . 5 µ m and 6 µ m . We investigated how this nanotopography aﬀects the onset of cell migration and the corresponding migration and shape phenotype evolution by placing a single cell on the substrate without initial polarization and observing the sub - sequent dynamics . The model produces two major cell - shape phenotypes , both of which are persistent . The crescent pheno - type ( Fig . 1B ) is representative of more contractile cells , such as the M4 cell line that has been studied on asymmetric saw - teeth ( 12 ) . The wedge phenotype ( Fig . 1C ) is representative of cells on the lower end of the contractility spectrum , such as D . discoideum , which has also been studied on asymmetric sawteeth ( 11 ) . Spontaneous polarization is not observed in phase - ﬁeld models of cells on ﬂat substrates because the resting state is stable . Thus , the cells in this situation cannot migrate without inducing polarization externally ( 22 ) or via initial conditions ( 13 , 23 ) . However , the asymmetry of the substrates studied here allows cells to generate propulsion even in the absence of an initial polarization . Figure 1D shows the polarization vector ﬁeld for a cell that is polarized spontaneously by sawteeth . There are points of strong polarization underneath the cell that have a tangential component up the sawteeth ( against the net direction of cell motion ) . However , there is strong enough polarization at the leading edge of the cell to propel the cell forward . This cell moves spontaneously with θ = 0 . Therefore , the impetus for spontaneous motion on sawteeth is actin polymerization tangential to the substrate . In this model , a cell can only move spontaneously down the sawteeth ( Fig . 1E ) or at an angle to the sawteeth ( Fig . 1F ) . The direction of cell guidance is inﬂuenced by actin polymer - ization . In experiments with cells on asymmetric nanosawteeth , the guidance direction has been observed to depend on the sawtooth height and length ( 11 ) , as well as on the cell type ( 12 ) . We next explore why diﬀerent types of cells can be guided in diﬀerent directions on the same sawtooth pattern . When inducing an initial polarization up the sawteeth , we observed three possible outcomes in our model : the cell moves up the sawteeth persistently ( Fig . 2A ) , the cell initially moves up the sawteeth and then turns around to move down the sawteeth ( Fig . 2B ) , or the cell stops . We induce the polarization up the sawteeth to counter the preferred spontaneous polarization down the sawteeth . Trajectories for these three representative behaviors are shown in Fig . 2C . To probe the selective guidance direction systematically , we created a phase diagram ( Fig . 2D ) in which we varied β and θ while keeping the sawtooth parameters the same . In all cases the cell had an initial upward bias . After 250 seconds , we measured the center - of - mass velocity . This velocity was used to determine the guidance direction shown in Fig . 2D . The data in this ﬁgure indicate that as the actin - polymerization rate increases , the guidance direction changes from down the sawteeth to up the sawteeth . We studied the transition in guidance direction by changing β at a ﬁxed θ of 0 . 1 . Figure 2E shows that for a cell with an initial polarization , there is a sharp transition of guidance direction at β = 6 . 5 . Similar transitions occur at other val - ues of θ . Below β = 6 . 5 , the cell always has the same ﬁnal ( asymptotic ) velocity . This guidance velocity is determined by the sawtooth properties , rather than by the model parameters . Additionally , we observe hysteresis in the guidance direction . If the cell is not polarized initially , the cell can only be guided down the sawteeth . This observation indicates that the pre - ferred guidance direction is down the sawteeth . Finally , a cell that reverses direction does not move solely parallel to the sawteeth . We ﬁnd instead that a cell can turn to move at an oblique angle to the sawtooth orientation . 2 Herr et al . A B = 0 . 0 = 0 . 1 = 0 . 2 C 100 80 0 20 40 60 - 20 250 200 150 100 50 Time P o s i t i on Moves Down Sawteeth Moves Up Sawteeth D 0 0 . 05 0 . 1 0 . 15 0 . 2 0 5 . 5 6 6 . 5 7 7 . 5 F i na l V e l o c i t y Initial Upward Polarization E 6 6 . 2 6 . 4 6 . 6 6 . 8 7 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 No Initial Polarization Fig . 2 . Reversal of direction and evolution of shape phenotype . ( A ) A cell guided unidirectionally up the sawteeth following initial polarization up the sawteeth . ( B ) Decreasing the actin polymerization rate leads to a trajectory in which the cell initially moves up the sawteeth but then turns around . ( C ) Trajectories representing the three most common outcomes when a cell on the sawteeth is polarized up the sawteeth . ( D ) A phase diagram showing how the guidance direction depends on the actin polymerization rate β and the angle θ of actin polymerization relative to the substrate . The cell moves up the sawteeth when both β and θ are in the larger range of the values examined here . ( E ) The asymptotic guidance velocity exhibits hysteresis for θ = 0 . 1 . For cells with an initial polarization , the transition from moving up the sawteeth to moving down the sawteeth is sudden . For unpolarized cells , guidance is only observed down the sawteeth . The substrate parameters can be used to control the cell shape and the guidance direction independently . Our model exhibits a range of stable shape phenotypes that were studied in relation to the guidance direction . To control shape , we modiﬁed the contractility of the cell , σ . Contractile forces control the shape of the cell ( 24 ) , and are linked closely to cell motility ( 25 ) . Here , we investigate the eﬀect that contrac - tility has on the direction of guidance . Figure 3A depicts a phase diagram of guidance direction as a function of σ and β ( θ = 0 . 1 ) . Cells with higher contractility σ and higher actin polymerization rate β move up the sawteeth , counter to the preferred direction of spontaneous motion . By examining the dynamics at individual points in the phase diagram ( Fig . 3B ) , we can separate the velocity trajectories into two distinct regions : the ﬁrst peak and dip in velocity due to the initial polarization of the cell , and the ensuing long - term behavior . The initial peak and dip occur for all values of σ , followed by a positive rebound in velocity that occurs Time - 0 . 2 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 v y A B C D E 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 5 5 . 2 5 . 4 5 . 6 5 . 8 6 250 200 150 100 50 0 = 0 . 1 Moves Down Sawteeth Moves Up Sawteeth = 0 . 5 = 1 . 0 = 1 . 0 = 0 . 5 = 0 . 1 Fig . 3 . The mode parameters can be used to control shape and guidance inde - pendently . A ) A phase diagram showing the guidance direction as a function of the contractility σ and the actin polymerization rate β ( θ = 0 . 1 ) . Increasing the contractility leads to a reversal in the guidance direction . ( B ) Cell migration behavior for different values of β and σ . For σ = 1 , the cell’s initial velocity decays rapidly to a more stable ﬁnal velocity . For σ = 0 . 5 , the cell’s initial velocity decay mirrors that for σ = 1 , before decaying further at longer times . For σ = 0 . 1 , the cell reverses direction at t ≈ 100 to move down the sawteeth . 3D visualizations of the stable cell - shape phenotype for ( C ) σ = 1 , ( D ) σ = 0 . 5 , and ( E ) σ = 0 . 1 . As the contractility σ decreases , the cell becomes more oval shaped . at t ≈ 150 . The major diﬀerences among the trajectories are in the long - time behavior . For σ = 1 there is a small negative acceleration , but the velocity up the sawteeth is persistent . The velocity is oscillatory because the cell slows down as it crawls up the sawteeth at its leading edge . The persistent velocity and the strong contractility of the cell results in elongation perpendicular to the direction of motion and leads to a persistent crescent shape ( Fig . 3C ) . For σ = 0 . 5 , the long - time positive velocity is not persistent . During the period of the simulation the cell moves up the sawteeth , but with a steadily decreasing velocity at long times . The contractility is high , so the cell is again elongated perpendicular to the direction of motion ( Fig . 3D ) . Finally , for σ = 0 . 1 , the long - time velocity is negative . A short period of positive acceleration at t ≈ 175 is observed but does not lead to a second change of direction . The cell in this case has an oval shape that is elongated parallel to the direction of motion ( Fig . 3E ) . Comparison to experimental cell shapes and motion . Next we reanalyze previous experimental data on D . discoideum migra - tion on asymmetric sawteeth to capture additional details of cell motion . We ﬁnd that the deterministic phase - ﬁeld model can reproduce both the observed cell shapes and the preferred guidance direction . Figures 4A - B show that D . discoideum can be elongated both parallel and perpendicular to the sawteeth , in analogy to the shape phenotypes seen in the model . D . discoideum cells moving along sawteeth tend to elongate in the Herr et al . 3 0 o 30 o 60 o 90 o Cell Elongation Angle 0 2000 4000 6000 C oun t s Time A B C D E F Fig . 4 . Experimental data support the predictions of the model . D . discoideum cells on asymmetric sawteeth are observed to elongate both ( A ) parallel and ( B ) perpendicular to the sawtooth direction during cell migration . Motion of D . discoideum ( C ) down and ( D ) up the sawteeth . ( E ) The full distribution of elongation angles of D . discoideum on asymmetric sawteeth . The distribution is peaked around the parallel and perpendicular directions , as seen in the model . However , cells can exhibit other orientations as well . ( F ) The full distribution of directions of motion of D . discoideum on asymmetric sawteeth of heights 1 µ m to 2 . 4 µ m . The model can also produce the full range of directions of motion . direction of motion , in accordance with the less contractile cells shown in Fig . 3 . Additionally , in a study of diﬀerent cell lines migrating on sawteeth by Chen et al . ( 12 ) , it was observed that M4 cells , a cancerous mutant of MCF10A epithelial cells , exhibit elongation perpendicular to the direction of motion . This behavior agrees with the observation that cancerous cells are generally more contractile than their progenitor cells ( 25 ) . Although asymmetric sawteeth create a unidirectional bias of motion , D . discoideum is capable of moving down the sawteeth ( Fig . 4C ) , up the sawteeth ( Fig . 4D ) , as well as at arbitrary angles relative to the sawteeth . A variety of cell elongation angles with respect to the sawtooth orientation are observed experimentally , as seen in Figure 4E . The distribution of elongation angles has two local maxima at 0 ◦ ( parallel to sawteeth ) and 90 ◦ ( perpendicular to sawteeth ) . Fig . 4F shows a combined spider plot of cell trajectories on sawteeth of height 1 µ m to 2 . 4 µ m . By changing the direction of initial cell polarization , a model trajectory can be produced that travels in any direction , and therefore the model can reproduce the arbitrary elongation angles that are present experimentally . The simulated cell trajectories in the continuum model are deterministic , and so cannot reproduce the stochasticity of experimental trajectories . Nevertheless , we observe that the direction of stable simulation trajectories corresponds to the preferential guidance direction of cells on asymmetric saw - teeth . To determine the eﬀect of sawtooth dimensions on cell guidance direction we compared the model to experiments of 6 7 8 9 10 5 . 5 6 6 . 5 7 Moves Down Sawteeth Moves Up Sawteeth A 8 6 4 2 0 v [ m / m i n ] 0 o 90 o 180 o 270 o B C D 8 6 4 2 0 v [ m / m i n ] 0 o 90 o 180 o 270 o 8 6 4 2 0 v [ m / m i n ] 0 o 90 o 180 o 270 o Sawtooth Height Fig . 5 . Asymmetric sawteeth preferentially guide cells with high velocities . ( A ) A phase diagram demonstrating dependence of guidance direction on β and sawtooth height in the phase - ﬁeld simulations . The average velocity distributions derived from experimental data for D . discoideum on asymmetric sawteeth of three different heights : ( B ) 1 µ m , ( C ) 1 . 8 µ m , and ( D ) 2 . 4 µ m . For the 1 µ m sawteeth , the distribution is peaked at 0 ◦ , indicating that the faster cells are guided preferentially up the sawteeth . This observation is consistent with the phase diagram in ( A ) , in which cells with higher actin polymerization rates are guided up the sawteeth . For sawtooth heights of 1 . 8 µ m and 2 . 4 µ m , the velocity distribution is peaked at 180 ◦ , indicating that the faster cells move preferentially down the sawteeth . cells on sawteeth of three diﬀerent heights : 1 µ m , 1 . 8 µ m , and 2 . 4 µ m . The model predicts that only cells with high actin polymerization rates will move up the higher sawteeth ( Fig . 5A ) . To determine the guidance direction of cells in experi - ments , we measured the average velocity of the D . discoideum cells as a function of direction relative to the sawteeth , with the angle 0 ◦ deﬁned as moving up the sawteeth ( Fig . 5B - D ) . For the 1 µ m - high sawteeth , the average velocity peaks at 0 ◦ ( Fig . 5B ) . This observation is consistent with the phase diagram ( Fig . 5A ) , in which cells with a higher actin polymer - ization rate move up the sawteeth . For the 1 . 8 µ m - high and 2 . 4 µ m - high sawteeth the average velocity is peaked at 180 ◦ . This result indicates that the D . discoideum cells do not reach the threshold velocity necessary to move up these sawteeth . Our observations suggest that asymmetric sawteeth can be used to guide cells with high velocities selectively , and that the velocity cutoﬀ can be modiﬁed by changing the sawtooth height . Discussion A toy model for cell migration on nanotopography . Important insights into cell migration can be obtained from a simple model describing a cell as a material point with a velocity threshold for the onset of motion . If there is no topography on the substrate , the equations of motion can be cast in the dimensionless form : (cid:15)∂ t v = v ( − 1 + β | v | 2 − | v | 4 ) [ 1 ] 4 Herr et al . Here (cid:15) (cid:28) 1 is the relaxation parameter and β is the driving parameter related to actin polymerization . For β > 2 , equation ( 1 ) possesses 3 stable ﬁxed points : V 0 = 0 , and V 2 s = β / 2 + p β 2 / 4 − 1 . Correspondingly , there are two unstable ﬁxed points V 2 u = β / 2 − p β 2 / 4 − 1 . In the presence of asymmetric nanotopography , the equa - tion of motion assumes the form (cid:15)∂ t v = v ( − 1 + β | v | 2 − | v | 4 ) + f ( x ) x 0 [ 2 ] Here x 0 is the unit vector in x - direction . In the case of asymmetric sawteeth , f ( x ) can be written in the form f ( x ) = c ( ax − ﬂoor ( ax ) ) [ 3 ] Here a is the spatial frequency ( spatial period L = 1 / a ) and c is the magnitude of the sawtooth modulation . Note that the sawteeth provide a positive bias , because h f ( x ) i > 0 . Despite their simplicity , Eqs . ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) capture many salient features exhibited by the fully 3D , continuum phase - ﬁeld model as a function of the driving parameter β ( Fig . 6 ) . In particular , for pure one - dimensional motion ( i . e . , in the x - direction ) , for a large enough value of β the model exhibits two stable solutions , with motion up or down the sawteeth ( Fig . 6A ) . For smaller values of β , the model only shows spontaneous motion down the sawteeth . For even smaller values of β , no motion is possible , all in agreement with the phase - ﬁeld model . The two - dimensional version of Eqs . ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) yields an intriguing prediction that motion up sawteeth is always unstable ( Fig . 6B ) . A cell that is initially polarized in the direction up the sawteeth will , after some time , make a U - turn and begin to move down the sawteeth . However , as β increases the reversal time diverges ( Fig . 6C ) . Thus , the model indicates that the complex migration behavior observed both in the phase - ﬁeld simulations and in the experiments is a synergistic eﬀect of the sawtooth substrate and the cell’s intrinsic threshold for motion . Conclusions and outlook . We have demonstrated that a 3D phase - ﬁeld model enables a rigorous investigation of cell motil - ity on asymmetric nanotopography . The phase - ﬁeld model captures the spontaneous onset of motion and the experimen - tally observed range of shapes and motions of cells that sense asymmetric guidance cues that are an order of magnitude smaller than the scale of the cell . Cell - migration experiments on asymmetric sawteeth have demonstrated that the guidance direction is aﬀected by the sawtooth dimensions ( 11 ) and the speciﬁc cell line used ( 12 ) . The phase - ﬁeld model reproduces the key phenomena observed in these experiments , including spontaneous polarization , uni - directional guidance , and elongation phenotypes . By tuning model parameters , we can change the guidance direction and cell shape in accordance with the behavior observed for dif - ferent cell lines . The correspondence between the model and experiments yields insights into the relative importance of actin polymerization , contractility , or other cell properties in promoting cell - type - dependent guidance behavior . On ﬂat surfaces , the phase - ﬁeld models require an initial polarization ( 13 , 21 ) or a strongly randomized internal actin density ( 26 ) to observe directed cell motion . In contrast , asymmetric sawteeth provide guidance cues that cause the cell to move spontaneously . Consequently , surface asymmetries 0 5 10 15 20 25 t - 2 - 1 0 1 2 v x v x ( 0 ) = - 1 v x ( 0 ) = 1 0 5 10 15 20 25 t - 2 - 1 0 1 2 v A B C 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 3 . 5 4 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 0 D i r e c t i on C hange T i m e Sawtooth Height v x v y Fig . 6 . Toy model capturing important features of full 3D phase - ﬁeld model . ( A ) Trajectories up and down the sawteeth in the simpliﬁed model , Eq . ( 2 ) , in 1D case . ( B ) A cell that initially moves up sawteeth in the 2D model , Eq . ( 2 ) performs a U - turn at t ≈ 10 . The initial trajectory is unstable . ( C ) Heat map of the time for cells with initial negative velocity to change direction in the 2D model . For higher values of β in this model , the velocity up the sawteeth persists for a longer time . For higher values of c ( height of sawtooth pattern ) in this model , the velocity up the sawteeth persists for a shorter time may be one factor that initiates directional migration in vivo and in natural environments . Our model shows that the actin polymerization rate is a primary driver of the cell guidance direction on asymmetric sawteeth . There is a transition in guidance direction from down the sawteeth to up the sawteeth at a critical value of the actin polymerization rate . This critical value is dependent on other model parameters as well , such as the sawtooth height . The actin polymerization rate is directly related to the cell velocity , so faster cells should tend to move up the sawteeth . In agreement with the predictions of our model , experimental data for cell guidance on asymmetric sawteeth show velocity - dependent selective guidance . Additionally , the model predicts that increasing the sawtooth height should increase the velocity threshold for cells to move up the sawteeth . We veriﬁed this prediction by showing that faster D . discoideum cells are preferentially guided up asymmetric sawteeth that are 1 µ m high . However , on asymmetric sawteeth with heights of 1 . 8 µ m and 2 . 4 µ m , faster cells are still guided down the sawteeth . In our model , contractility aﬀects both the shape and the guidance direction of a cell . Larger values of contractility are associated with the cell moving up the sawteeth . Thus , more contractile cells are not guided in the more typical direction on asymmetric sawteeth . Studies have linked higher contractility to invasiveness in cancer cells ( 25 ) , and this connection may be related to the change in guidance direction that we . The simple physical model presented here can explain many features of cell motility on asymmetric nanotopography . Be - cause the phase - ﬁeld model is highly modular , it can be ex - tended further to obtain a fuller picture of cellular dynamics on asymmetric nanotopography . An even more realistic model could include the modulation of speciﬁc or non - speciﬁc ad - hesive eﬀects ( e . g . , focal adhesions ) . Additionally , the actin Herr et al . 5 dynamics can be modiﬁed to include the eﬀect of regulatory proteins via an excitable network model such as local excita - tion global inhibition biased excitable network ( 27 ) or linked excitable networks ( 28 ) . Although our approach captures many important aspects of subcellular environmental asymmetries on cell migration , in vivo the dynamics can be aﬀected by many other factors . It is known that the cells can remodel , and even degrade , the local topography , especially in the context of some invasive cancers ( 29 , 30 ) . Many cancer cells form invadopodia , i . e . , actin - rich protrusions of the plasma membrane that are associated with degradation of the extracellular matrix . Incorporation of such phenomena into a phase - ﬁeld model can shed light on cancer invasiveness and metastasis and is highly desirable . However , a 3D phase - ﬁeld model on deformable and degradable substrates is a formidable computational task that we leave to future study . Materials and Methods Phase - ﬁeld equations . The following model was used to describe the cell migration in 3D : ∂ t ρ = D ρ ∆ ρ − ρ ( 1 − ρ ) ( δ [ ρ ] − σ | p | 2 − ρ ) − α p · ∇ ρ − κ ∇ Φ · ∇ ρ − λρ Φ 2 , [ 4 ] ∂ t p = D p ∆ p − βe Tc ∆ S Ψ [ ( 1 − θ ) ˆ P ( ∇ ρ ) + θ ∇ ρ ] − τ − 1 p − γ ( ∇ ρ · p ) p − Φ 2 p . [ 5 ] Here , the phase - ﬁeld ρ describes the cell shape , p characterizes the actin orientation , Φ ( r ) models a steric ﬁeld moderating the cell’s interaction with the surface , and Ψ ( r ) restricts actin generation close to the surface . The entire motility mechanism is captured by Eqs . ( 4 ) , ( 5 ) . Actin polymerizes near the cell boundary and produces a protrusion force via the polymerization ratchet mechanism ( 31 ) . As the cell moves forward , the actin polarization at the back of the cell degrades based on a model of acto - myosin contraction ( 13 ) . The cell volume is conserved as a ﬁxed point through the term δ [ ρ ] . This model of cell motility has been shown to reproduce the lamellipodium - based motion of keratocytes on ﬂat surfaces ( 13 ) . We use a modiﬁed version of the model that accounts for cell surface tension ( 32 ) . Surface tension is introduced using the exponential term e − Tc ∆ S , where T is the surface tension strength , c is the curvature , and ∆ S is the diﬀerence between surface area at a given time step and a reference surface area . This term makes the actin polymerization rate lower at points of high curvature , thereby preventing the cell from tearing apart . We introduced this term by necessity based on the high curvature of the nanotopography studied here . Numerical Method . The model used here is an extension of a previ - ously published method ( 21 ) . Equations ( 4 ) and ( 5 ) were solved on a 100 µ m × 100 µ m × 25 µ m rectangular grid ( corresponding to 576 × 576 × 128 mesh points ) in the domain using a split operator method on a periodic domain . The algorithm was implemented on graphical processing units ( GPUs ) using the NVIDIA CUDA programming language . The diﬀusion terms were calculated in Fourier space , and other operators were calculated using ﬁnite - diﬀerence methods . The curvature c in Eq . ( 4 ) was calculated using c = ∇ · ∇ ρ | ∇ ρ | . Unless otherwise mentioned , the model parameters used were those given in Table 1 . The substrate with asymmetric sawteeth was implemented via prescribing the static ﬁelds Φ and Ψ . The substrate studied for this paper was a sawtooth of length 4 . 2 µ m and a default height 1 . 4 µ m ; other heights were used as discussed above . Cell Tracking . Cell tracking was performed on bright - ﬁeld movies of D . discoideum moving on asymmetric sawteeth reported in a previous paper ( 11 ) . First , the threshold of the fast Fourier trans - form ( FFT ) of the images was used to remove the bright spikes Parameter Value Description D ρ 1 Diffusion constant for ρ D p 0 . 2 Diffusion constant for p α 1 . 5 Actin pushing strength T 25 Surface tension strength γ 1 Front - back asymmetry τ − 1 . 1 Actin degradation rate κ 2 Surface adhesion strength θ 0 . 1 Actin polymerization angle Table 1 . Model Parameters associated with the periodic sawteeth . A low - pass Hamming ﬁlter was applied to the FFT . An inverse FFT was then applied to re - cover an image with sawteeth removed . Next , the image contrast was changed so that 1 % of the brightest and darkest parts of the image were saturated . A morphological top - hat ﬁlter was applied to remove high frequency noise . Finally , the image was binarized using the Otsu thresholding method ( 33 ) . The cells were tracked using the MATLAB regionprops function to ﬁnd elongation and centroid location . The cell trajectories were found using a particle tracking algorithm fed the centroids of the cell locations . 1 . Sahai E ( 2007 ) Illuminating the metastatic process . Nature Reviews Cancer 7 ( 10 ) : 737 – 749 . 2 . Lo CM , Wang HB , Dembo M , Wang Yl ( 2000 ) Cell Movement Is Guided by the Rigidity of the Substrate . Biophysical Journal 79 ( 1 ) : 144 – 152 . 3 . Parent CA , Devreotes PN ( 1999 ) A Cell’s Sense of Direction . Science 284 ( 5415 ) : 765 – 770 . 4 . BadeND , XuT , KamienRD , AssoianRK , StebeKJ ( 2018 ) GaussianCurvatureDirectsStress Fiber Orientation and Cell Migration . Biophysical Journal 114 ( 6 ) : 1467 – 1476 . 5 . Clark P , Connolly P , Curtis AS , Dow JA , Wilkinson CD ( 1990 ) Topographical control of cell behaviour : II . Multiple grooved substrata . Development ( Cambridge , England ) 108 ( 4 ) : 635 – 644 . 6 . Dalby MJ , Riehle MO , Sutherland DS , Agheli H , Curtis ASG ( 2004 ) Changes in ﬁbroblast morphology in response to nano - columns produced by colloidal lithography . Biomaterials 25 ( 23 ) : 5415 – 5422 . 7 . Bettinger CJ , Langer R , Borenstein JT ( 2009 ) “Engineering Substrate Micro - and Nanoto - pography to Control Cell Function” . Angewandte Chemie ( International ed . in English ) 48 ( 30 ) : 5406 – 5415 . 8 . DriscollMK , SunX , GuvenC , FourkasJT , LosertW ( 2014 ) CellularContactGuidancethrough Dynamic Sensing of Nanotopography . ACS Nano 8 ( 4 ) : 3546 – 3555 . 9 . Schindler M , et al . ( 2006 ) Living in three dimensions . Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics 45 ( 2 ) : 215 – 227 . 10 . Abbott A ( 2003 ) Biology’s new dimension . Nature 424 ( 6951 ) : 870 – 872 . 11 . Sun X , et al . ( 2015 ) Asymmetric nanotopography biases cytoskeletal dynamics and pro - motes unidirectional cell guidance . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112 ( 41 ) : 12557 – 12562 . 12 . ChenS , etal . ( 2019 ) ActinCytoskeletonandFocalAdhesionsRegulatetheBiasedMigration of Breast Cancer Cells on Nanoscale Asymmetric Sawteeth . ACS nano 13 ( 2 ) : 1454 – 1468 . 13 . Ziebert F , Swaminathan S , Aranson IS ( 2012 ) Model for self - polarization and motility of kera - tocyte fragments . Journal of The Royal Society Interface 9 ( 70 ) : 1084 – 1092 . 14 . Shao D , Levine H , Rappel WJ ( 2012 ) Coupling actin ﬂow , adhesion , and morphology in a computational cell motility model . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 ( 18 ) : 6851 – 6856 . 15 . Tjhung E , Tiribocchi A , Marenduzzo D , Cates ME ( 2015 ) A minimal physical model captures the shapes of crawling cells . Nature Communications 6 ( 1 ) : 5420 . 16 . Löber J , Ziebert F , Aranson IS ( 2014 ) Modeling crawling cell movement on soft engineered substrates . Soft matter 10 ( 9 ) : 1365 – 1373 . 17 . Camley BA , et al . ( 2014 ) Polarity mechanisms such as contact inhibition of locomotion reg - ulate persistent rotational motion of mammalian cells on micropatterns . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 ( 41 ) : 14770 – 14775 . 18 . PalmieriB , BreslerY , WirtzD , GrantM ( 2015 ) Multiplescalemodelforcellmigrationinmono - layers : Elastic mismatch between cells enhances motility . Scientiﬁc Reports 5 ( 1 ) : 11745 . 19 . Löber J , Ziebert F , Aranson IS ( 2015 ) Collisions of deformable cells lead to collective migra - tion . Scientiﬁc reports 5 : 9172 . 20 . SawTB , etal . ( 2017 ) Topologicaldefectsinepitheliagoverncelldeathandextrusion . Nature 544 ( 7649 ) : 212 – 216 . 21 . Winkler B , Aranson IS , Ziebert F ( 2019 ) Conﬁnement and substrate topography control cell migration in a 3D computational model . Communications Physics 2 ( 1 ) : 1 – 11 . 22 . Verkhovsky AB , Svitkina TM , Borisy GG ( 1999 ) Self - polarization and directional motility of cytoplasm . Current Biology 9 ( 1 ) : 11 – S1 . 23 . Keren K , et al . ( 2008 ) Mechanism of shape determination in motile cells . Nature 453 ( 7194 ) : 475 – 480 . 24 . Labouesse C , Verkhovsky AB , Meister JJ , Gabella C , Vianay B ( 2015 ) Cell Shape Dynam - ics Reveal Balance of Elasticity and Contractility in Peripheral Arcs . Biophysical Journal 108 ( 10 ) : 2437 – 2447 . 6 Herr et al . 25 . Mierke CT , Rösel D , Fabry B , Brábek J ( 2008 ) Contractile forces in tumor cell migration . Eu - ropean journal of cell biology 87 ( 8 - 9 ) : 669 – 676 . 26 . DreherA , AransonIS , KruseK ( 2014 ) Spiralactin - polymerizationwavescangenerateamoe - boidal cell crawling . New Journal of Physics 16 ( 5 ) : 055007 . 27 . Xiong Y , Huang CH , Iglesias PA , Devreotes PN ( 2010 ) Cells navigate with a local - excitation , global - inhibition - biasedexcitablenetwork . ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofSciences 107 ( 40 ) : 17079 – 17086 . 28 . Miao Y , et al . ( 2019 ) Wave patterns organize cellular protrusions and control cortical dynam - ics . Molecular Systems Biology 15 ( 3 ) . 29 . Linder S ( 2007 ) The matrix corroded : podosomes and invadopodia in extracellular matrix degradation . Trends in cell biology 17 ( 3 ) : 107 – 117 . 30 . KlymenkoY , etal . ( 2017 ) Cadherincompositionandmulticellularaggregateinvasioninorgan - otypicmodelsofepithelialovariancancerintraperitonealmetastasis . Oncogene 36 ( 42 ) : 5840 – 5851 . 31 . Mogilner A ( 2008 ) Mathematics of cell motility : Have we got its number ? Journal of Mathe - matical Biology 58 ( 1 ) : 105 . 32 . Winkler B , Aranson IS , Ziebert F ( 2016 ) Membrane tension feedback on shape and motility of eukaryotic cells . Physica D : Nonlinear Phenomena 318 : 26 – 33 . 33 . Otsu N ( 1979 ) A threshold selection method from gray - level histograms . IEEE transactions on systems , man , and cybernetics 9 ( 1 ) : 62 – 66 . Herr et al . 7