Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 . Designing for Collaborative Infrastructuring : Supporting Resonance Activities THOMAS LUDWIG , University of Siegen , Germany VOLKMAR PIPEK , University of Siegen , Germany PETER TOLMIE , University of Siegen , Germany ‘Infrastructuring’ as a concept draws attention to the way in which a designed artefact or system is not the end of the development process . Rather , technology development takes place up to , and including , its successful establishment in an associated body of practices . This places emphasis upon the role of practitioners as designers of their own practice environments . While the activities of professional technology development have been reasonably well discussed and conceptualized , activities that practitioners perform to make things work for them are less acknowledged as a systematic contribution to the successful establishment of the use of IT . This paper considers in particular the so - called ‘point of infrastructuring’ : the moment at which practitioners become aware of opportunities to ( re - ) design their infrastructures , usually initiated by breakdowns or the recognition of potential innovations and reconsideration of current infrastructural use . From this point onwards , end users themselves may start configuring , tailoring or developing new conventions until a point has been reached in which a new technology usage has been successfully established . However , points of infrastructuring do not only provoke end - user driven in - situ design ( or ‘infrastructuring’ ) activities . They also evoke so - called ‘resonance activities’ . These encompass all of the observations and communications that attend upon a point of infrastructure as it becomes visible within a work environment . Examination of resonance activities can be a starting point for a better understanding of the practitioner’s activities beyond single infrastructural changes , providing a way of highlighting the relationship between different points of infrastructuring . How to capture and understand resonance activities and how to design technological support for them is still an open question . Based on previous work outlined in the literature and an empirical study that looked at collaborative appropriation activities ( the most important aspect of infrastructuring ) during 3D printing processes , we outline the concept of sociable technologies as a technological approach for capturing and supporting resonance activities and thus enabling infrastructuring activities more broadly .  CCS Concepts : • Human - centered computing → Human computer interaction ( HCI ) ; HCI theory , concepts and models KEYWORDS : I nfrastructuring ; Appropriation ; Resonance Activities ; Sociable Technologies ; CSCW ACM Reference format : Thomas Ludwig , Volkmar Pipek , Peter Tolmie . 2018 . Designing for Collaborative Infrastructuring : Supporting Resonance Activities . In Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , CSCW , Article 113 ( November 2018 ) . ACM , New York , NY . 29 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274382 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . 2573 - 0142 / 2018 / 11 - 113 $ 15 . 00 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274382 113 113 : 2 T . Ludwig et al . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 . 1 INTRODUCTION Information systems have changed over the last decade , shifting towards new kinds of large - scale and interconnected information infrastructures [ 31 ] that transcend workplaces , organizations and societies [ 48 ] . While the term ‘infrastructure’ has traditionally been used mainly to refer to developing layers of hardware and software technology ( e . g . [ 18 , 22 , 66 ] ) , CSCW research began some time ago to recognize the interactional and / or organizational features that influenced the evolution , and ultimately stabilization , of infrastructures . This has included reflections upon network management [ 8 , 11 ] , choosing / configuring software [ 58 ] , integrating and removing functional items [ 55 ] or managing shared infrastructures [ 40 ] . Star and Ruhleder [ 63 ] provided a conceptual basis for considering the socio - material aspects of an information system infrastructure by establishing a relational understanding of an infrastructure : a technology is not per se an infrastructure ; it becomes an infrastructure through the relations users establish between their practices and the technological structures that serve them . In their ‘characteristics of infrastructure’ , traditional notions centering on scope , layers and technical standards that define material artefacts , are combined with socio - material aspects like conventions , group membership and other social arrangements . This insight was further developed by Star and Bowker [ 62 ] and later Karasti and Baker [ 35 ] , who started to widen the design - oriented and product - focused lenses of traditional technology development through the concept of infrastructuring . While the traditional reflections around infrastructuring often maintain an analytical perspective to describe and systematize the phenomena that can be observed around infrastructural innovations , we aim to develop a vocabulary that helps with building the development methods that take place in the realm of and are initiated by practitioners . As a further consequence , we reflect on consequences for interface - oriented , functional and architectural aspects of the design of information technology . We have still appropriated , for this purpose , the concept of Infrastructuring , as described in Pipek and Wulf [ 56 ] . Here , the practitioner’s angle is reflected by not taking the successfully designed technology product as the methodological end point , but instead the successful establishment of its usage in a practice context . One of the major characteristics of infrastructuring as a technology development methodology is the “Point of Infrastructur ( ing ) ” ( PoI ) , which is the moment at which a ( group of ) practitioner ( s ) understand ( s ) that the current use of a technological infrastructure needs to be reconsidered [ 56 ] . By applying the perspective of Infrastructuring as a design approach , we widen the notion of design so as to encompass potentially heterogeneous ( and long term ) shifts in use . Here , design encompasses every creative activity targeting a change within an infrastructure that is intended to last . Our perspective interprets a product as further developing a ‘work infrastructure’ , an infrastructure that is relevant for work practices . This perspective also defines our perception of Star and Ruhleder’s [ 63 ] characteristics , where we particularly look at the emergence and renegotiation of the dependencies between a practice and its infrastructure . In this regard , our perspective suggests that , based on the initial PoI , there is a period of in - situ design , consisting of activities of technology configuration , tailoring and the development of conventions . In the ‘last mile’ of technology development ( for a specific work practice ) activities will be mainly performed by ( not necessarily technologically skilled ) practitioners until finally the point has been reached in which a new technology usage has been successfully established . Inspired by this perspective , we have been able to identify processes of infrastructuring that connect ‘global’ infrastructures to their ‘local’ use with concrete artifacts ( in this paper , 3D printers ) . Here , the appropriation of an infrastructure becomes a part of designing and using it . Designing for Collaborative Infrastructuring : Supporting Resonance Activities 113 : 3 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 Concepts relating to the analysis and design of support for ‘infrastructuring activities1 can be seen to complement other user - oriented , user - centered or participatory design methodologies ( e . g . [ 59 ] ) , where practice - driven approaches focus radically on evolving use . In this case it is not the completed technological artifact that is the focal point of design [ 37 ] . “Each point of infrastructure does not only provoke in - situ design activities and make visible prior preparatory activities , but it also creates resonance activities of observing and communicating aspects of what has become visible within the work environment or to other work environments” [ 55 ] . As every PoI , with subsequent in - situ design activities , is a significant moment for an individual , a group , an organization etc . , resonance activities can be understood as those activities that help transcend this moment , e . g . when infrastructure users observe changes in one practice and are inspired to rethink their own practices , or when users actively share configurations , conventions or narratives they find useful for improving their practice . The separation of infrastructuring activities that target one’s own practice ( directed inward ) from those , which may affect other practices ( directed outward ) may be useful for rethinking technological support for these activities . By examining resonance activities , we are not just provided with an opportunity to capture the social appropriation of an artifact : we are provided with a means of gaining a clearer insight into the relationship between different points of infrastructure ( as different users and groups encounter possibilities with the same technology ) . The question is , given these diverse possibilities , how to capture resonance activities and , if this can be done , how to design technological support for capturing as well as mediating them ? Based on an empirically based design case study around the appropriation of 3D printers in two different communities , we outline the concept of sociable technologies . These represent a scaffolding for ( the collaborative nature of ) infrastructuring and mediating resonance activities directly integrated within the machinery itself . We focus on the analysis of 3D printers as an example of highly digitalized production machines that allow for , even encourage , the creative activities of their users that help them to make these machines work for their practices of 3D printing . In section 2 we will present the discourses around infrastructures and infrastructuring , the concept of resonance activities , and the close connection between resonance activities and other concepts such as ( collaborative ) appropriation . Based on this literature , we present our findings in respect of our comparative study of the appropriation of 3D printers ( section 3 ) . We then use the experiences derived from this research to discuss the appropriation - based concept of design , and draw conclusions about the idea of sociable technologies ( section 4 ) . 2 BACKGROUND We base our research on two discourses , one on infrastructuring and the other one on the concept of ( collaborative ) appropriation infrastructures . By introducing a number of related concepts such as appropriation , sociable technologies , as well as resonance activities , we seek to build a set of terminologies that allow for the comparison of infrastructural activities . 2 . 1 Infrastructure and Infrastructuring The term infrastructure comes from the Latin infra ( below ) and structura ( assemblage ) and comprises all the basic structures that are needed for the operation of a society . Based on its 1 These can be considered to be all of the local activities that contribute to the successful establishment of an infrastructure and its use . 113 : 4 T . Ludwig et al . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 . early definitions and referring to List [ 42 ] , Jochimsen [ 33 ] defined infrastructure as the sum of material , institutional and personal facilities and data that are available to economic agents and that contribute to realizing the equitable remuneration of comparable inputs into economic activity , thus maximizing resource allocation . While some researchers follow this techno - centric perspective on infrastructural approaches to information systems [ 18 , 22 , 66 ] , others outline the social aspects of an infrastructure , demonstrating that users inevitably reshape a new infrastructure during use , and should always be considered as ‘designers’ . In addition , there is a need for mapping all aspects of the artifact and activity chains of the old infrastructure [ 30 ] . The most prominent exponents of this socio - technical perspective on infrastructure are Star and Ruhleder [ 63 ] . Besides simply looking at physical entities , they also took the role of the actors as well as their relationships into account . Based on their study of a distributed information system within a scientific community , they described eight salient characteristics of an infrastructure :  embeddedness in other social and technological structures ;  transparency in invisibly supporting tasks ;  spatial and temporal reach or scope ;  the taken - for - grantedness of artifacts and organizational arrangements , learned as part of membership in a community ;  infrastructures shape and are shaped by conventions of practice ;  infrastructures are plugged into other infrastructures and tools in a standardized fashion , though they are also modified by scope and conflicting ( local ) conventions ;  infrastructures do not grow de novo but wrestle with the inertia of the installed base and inherit strengths and limitations from that base ;  normally invisible , infrastructures become visible upon breakdown . Over time , infrastructure has started to be understood in terms of the dependencies it is operating in as well as producing , with a focus being put upon the social processes that make a network of devices an infrastructure . In this regard , Star and Bowker [ 62 ] have discussed the interplay between the ‘global’ establishment of available technologies and the development of ‘local’ use practices , along with the dependencies between different layers of infrastructures . It was the title ‘How to infrastructure’ that particularly served to inspire a new discourse that studies the actors and activities that ‘do’ the infrastructuring . This discourse now also seeks to advise actors involved in an infrastructuring effort to engage consciously in the process [ 36 ] . When considering work - related information systems as infrastructures , Pipek and Wulf [ 56 ] outlined infrastructural aspects such as interconnectedness , complexity , a layered approach and standardization , as well as ( in - ) visibility in use . They introduced the term ‘work infrastructure’ to highlight the role of an infrastructure in supporting a specific practice or achieving acknowledged goals . The dependency between an infrastructure and its users is not especially defined by the sheer “spatial and temporal reach or scope” that allows it to offer a service . Instead , it develops to the extent that a practice becomes dependent on it , be it by developing routines using the functional components and services of the infrastructure , or be it by ‘forgetting’ alternative ways of doing . Additionally , it does not necessarily cover only technological systems , but – in accordance with Star and Ruhleder [ 63 ] – also the “entirety of devices , tools , technologies , standards , conventions , and protocols on which the individual worker or the collective rely to carry out the tasks and achieve the goals assigned” [ 56 ] . In this Designing for Collaborative Infrastructuring : Supporting Resonance Activities 113 : 5 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 regard , Lee et al . [ 40 ] have highlighted the fact that humans need to be considered as a part of the infrastructure they help to maintain . 2 . 2 Infrastructuring as a Design approach Following Star and Ruhleder’s [ 63 ] idea of treating designed systems not as fixed products , but rather as ongoing infrastructures with emerging ‘local’ socio - technical processes , Pipek and Wulf [ 56 ] understand the reshaping of a work infrastructure and the practice of “re - conceptualizing one’s own work in the context of existing , potential , or envisioned IT tools” as infrastructuring . As Björgvinsson et al . [ 4 ] stated : “Infrastructuring can be seen as an ongoing process and should not be seen as being delimited to a design project phase in the development of a free - standing system . Infrastructuring entangles and intertwines potentially controversial ‘a priori infrastructure activities’ ( like selection , design , development , deployment , and enactment ) , with ‘everyday design activities in actual use’ ( like mediation , interpretation and articulation ) , as well as ‘design in use’ ( like adaptation , appropriation , tailoring , re - design and maintenance ) [ 35 , 56 , 67 ] . ” We will refer to the “design in use” activities and its encompassing concepts such as appropriation and how to support these activities later on . As already introduced , one of the major characteristics of infrastructuring as a technology development methodology is the “Point of Infrastructur ( ing ) ” , which is the moment at which practitioners understand that the current use of a technological infrastructure needs to be reconsidered . The PoI started out as an analytical figuration , capturing a moment of awareness of infrastructure problems or opportunities ( a ) that could happen at the individual , organizational or even societal level , ( b ) in which the political , social , organizational and technological dimensions of an infrastructure become tangible for the practitioners that depend on it , ( c ) that initiates a set of activities of a variety of stakeholders targeting the infrastructure problem or opportunity , and ( d ) that ultimately may result in a modified infrastructure and / or a modified ( use ) practice . In our perspective , we can identify layers of infrastructuring activities around that ‘point of infrastructure’ . In the timeline of a technological systems’ existence , the PoI covers the moment where in - situ design and / or in - situ work activities become manifest . PoIs do not happen arbitrarily during the course of performing a practice . Instead , there are specific factors that are likely to trigger this reconsideration where there is a dependency between a ( work ) practice and its supporting ( work ) infrastructure that has developed previously and that hence becomes largely invisible to the actors who engage the practice in question . This dependency is what causes the reconsideration , based on four motivational forces [ 56 ] :  Actual infrastructure breakdown : The infrastructure is not able to deliver the service it is expected to provide , often because parts of the technologies have become inoperable ( e . g . power failure when trying to stream a video ) .  Perceived infrastructure breakdown : The infrastructure does provide its service technologically , but not to the level of expectations of its user ( e . g . the low quality of a streamed video in a mobile network when there is limited bandwidth available ) .  Extrinsically motivated practice innovation : The framing conditions , the task , and goals associated with a practice , have changed in such a way that it is impossible to maintain the old practice ( e . g . a video streaming platform develops a new pricing / subscription scheme and the customer requires a new device , accompanied by new process documentation ) . 113 : 6 T . Ludwig et al . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 .  Intrinsically motivated practice innovation : The framing conditions , tasks and goals associated with a practice remain unchanged , but practitioners discover the potential for performing the practice in a new way , possibly because it is more cost efficient , simpler , quicker , or simply more fun ( e . g . equipping the home with new sensors and technology to be able to start streaming a video two minutes after arrival in the living room ) . Here , the method of infrastructuring suggests that , based on this initial impulse , there is a period of technology configuration , tailoring and development of new conventions , in which the ‘last mile of technology development’ will be mainly performed by ( not necessarily technologically skilled ) practitioners until finally the point has been reached in which a new technology usage has been successfully established [ 56 ] . The four motivations for reconfiguring one’s infrastructure suggest different approaches to re - building the interrupted practice , although ongoing infrastructuring activities will follow the practical necessities of the lack of fit between a practice and its infrastructure :  If an infrastructure actually breaks down , one may aim to repair it .  If an infrastructure is perceived as breaking down , one may find complementary technology to overcome the problem .  If the framing conditions of a practice change , one may want to change use conventions , but also look for complementary technology .  If there is an intrinsic motive , then there is probably an alternative or complementary technology already at hand that needs to be explored and integrated into a practice . 2 . 3 CSCW and Infrastructuring Although the infrastructure / infrastructuring discourse first developed mainly in Science and Technology Studies ( STS being initially research on ‘large technological systems’ ) , numerous HCI / CSCW approaches have since developed that essentially all deal with the relation between a practice , the tools that support it , and the way these tools are , or should be developed . 2 . 3 . 1 Software Design / Redesign as a Collaborative Effort . Jones [ 34 ] pointed out very early on that re - designing something is different to designing it from scratch . The acknowledgement of what is already there and – for all parties involved - being able to rely on experiences acquired in an earlier design process , allows for an understanding of design not as a discrete process , but as a continuous effort . The methodological discourses in Software Engineering came to similar conclusions . Here , Böhm’s spiral model [ 6 ] aimed to address the failures of using the earlier waterfall model of software development ( in particular the difficulties of managing requirements that change during the development process ) by establishing iterative cycles of doing a risk analysis of the ties between the technology and the users ( their practice ) during development . Floyd’s STEPS model [ 27 ] , however , suggested iterative development involving the actual practice / practitioners , something later echoed by various flavors of Participatory Design [ 5 , 49 ] . A different approach to the problem of finalizing the design of IT systems aimed to support practitioners in completing the development on their own . Fischer’s [ 24 ] ‘Domain - Oriented Design Environments’ , for instance , were later generalized into a strategy for ‘meta - design’ , which suggested designing software so that user - designers could give it a ‘final touch’ [ 25 , 26 ] . This resulted in a further set of diverse discourses regarding ‘End - User Development’ [ 14 , 41 ] or ‘End - User Software Engineering’ ( e . g . [ 9 ] ) . At a more conceptual level , Ehn [ 23 ] pointed out that Designing for Collaborative Infrastructuring : Supporting Resonance Activities 113 : 7 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 every designed thing carries with it the notion of an arena that allows / supports its ‘becoming’ . This leans on the old Germanic notion of a ‘thing’ as a decision - making council / meeting . This then formed the basis of a discussion regarding a more sensitive integration of professional methods and terminologies in what amount to political processes . 2 . 3 . 2 Tailoring and Tailorability . Parallel to ( and partially intertwined with ) these practice - oriented refinements of technology development methods and tools , CSCW scholars also started to discuss the importance of supporting ‘tailoring’ activities by practitioners and the ‘tailorability’ of technologies . Henderson & Kyng [ 32 ] initially focused the discourse less on the methodological issues of technology development and more on a continuous change perspective in social / collaborative settings . This required that technologies be flexible and manageable by end users throughout their entire use phase . MacLean et al . [ 46 ] had previously established that , in order to allow end users to ‘tinker’ with IT tools , their evident complexity should not be hidden from them under the guise of simplistic customization interfaces . Instead , a variety of interface - or architecture - oriented approaches were required to provide a ‘gentle slope of complexity’ that would allow users to familiarize themselves with a technology and develop an appropriate investment in understanding the consequences of configuring it during use . Later approaches focused more on the infrastructural aspects of IT tools , for instance , addressing the layeredness of IT technologies ( e . g . [ 16 – 18 , 71 ] ) or supporting the collaborative nature of tailoring processes ( see the overview in [ 54 ] ) . 2 . 3 . 3 Supporting Appropriation Work . While the discourses on tailorability and end - user development focus on changing / configuring a technology during its use , the term ‘appropriation’ has been used to address issues beyond technology configuration . Thus , it is also understood to refer to the individual and collaborative sensemaking of technologies , not to mention organizational issues [ 1 , 10 , 13 , 15 , 19 , 53 , 64 ] . This can also encompass fundamental changes in practice and embrace the possibility of users adopting and using the technology in ways usually not anticipated by its designers [ 53 ] . Furthermore , appropriation is associated with processes of exchange and interaction in networks of ( co - ) end users where experiences and stories are shared between all involved in the appropriation process [ 10 , 29 , 45 , 53 , 54 ] . Thus , a ‘user’ is reconstructed as a creator of actions who precedes an identity rather than a user with an identity that prescribes actions [ 68 , 69 ] . On the basis of this , designing for appropriation can become an inherent design goal . This “asks that professional designers design artifacts so they are open to and even invite use in ways that were not intended in the original design . For example , in the IT equivalent of paper , rather than consider it as a medium that supports written text and drawings , we can design toward an action space that invites rolling , folding , folding together , marking , ripping , making holes , gluing together , and so on” [ 69 ] . Focusing on the ‘doing’ of configuration as well as sensemaking work involves , additionally , aspects of collaborative knowledge management , residing under the overarching topic of discussing and re - inventing technology - based practices [ 60 ] . An intense discourse already exists that focuses on designing tools for supporting the appropriation of a system . Sevaldson [ 61 ] introduces GIGA - mapping as a technique for easing the conceptualization of a system across multiple layers and scales inducing an investigation of relations between seemingly separate categories . From a more technical perspective , Stevens et al . [ 64 ] look at ensembles of software tools and suggest an appropriation framework that also addresses the developer’s interest in improving the technology . Aside from the core features of an interactive system , this framework adds second - level functionality to support all associated appropriation activities . Examples of appropriation frameworks for software - centered domains include the development and integration of a participatory feedback tool into the Eclipse IDE 113 : 8 T . Ludwig et al . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 . [ 20 , 21 ] or attempts at formalizing a theoretical appropriation model based on the evolution of digital artifacts and information structures that support identifying particular user operations , and related digital transformations [ 3 ] . The integration of appropriation frameworks directly in the information systems that they are intended to support have been thoroughly investigated , tested and seem to have some merit [ 53 , 64 , 72 ] . Traditionally , if hardware is involved in such studies , it is mostly considered in a systemic way in conjunction with software [ 12 , 47 ] . Generally speaking , this makes sense , since complex hardware usually also has software components , meaning that the analysis of software vs . hardware appropriation needs to be achieved in a mutually elaborative fashion . We will be focusing on how to design for appropriation within more intensely hardware - related settings in the next section . 2 . 3 . 4 Towards Infrastructuring . To some extent one can claim that many of the features that now surface in discourses around infrastructuring have been informed or even influenced by earlier HCI and CSCW discourses . The tangible difference lies not necessarily in adding previously unheard of observations , but in tearing down boundaries between discourses that aimed to inform certain professions or sets of roles , thereby allowing a more neutral perspective on the variety of contributions that help to establish the use of a technology . In other words : establishing a dependency that makes a technology an infrastructure for someone . This allows for the possibility of discovering and describing things like interaction patterns / techniques ( Parmiggiani et al . [ 52 ] , who describe ‘bootstrapping’ and ‘enactment’ as recurring patterns in infrastructuring ) , or changing involvement levels and groups [ 28 ] . These are only two examples of how infrastructure - related observations can become useful in changing / supporting methods and terminologies around the establishment or change of infrastructures . 2 . 4 Sociable Technologies as Hardware - Oriented Appropriation Infrastructures Since we understand infrastructure as a socio - technical construct with emerging practices [ 63 ] , focusing only on software ecosystems is insufficient . Physical technologies and entities also have to be taken into account in order to support appropriation . This is an important part of infrastructuring and typically requires some kind of sociability . The idea of sociability embedded in technology was first brought into the spotlight by Reeve and Nass [ 57 ] , who argued that people interact with computers in ways that demonstrate an existing sociality . Barraqand [ 2 ] builds on this notion but argues that technologies need to facilitate sociability as a feature of their explicit design . He tries to foster this by building a framework for technology that is rooted in psychological considerations and emphasizes the importance of collaboration and contextual information . Norman [ 50 ] connects the notion of sociality being embedded in technologies with the need to support communication , teamwork , and an approach to troubleshooting that , for him , means careful design with the cultural and social factors of the technology’s field of application in mind . As a first test of using improved functional components that are grounded in this way of thinking Ludwig et al . [ 43 , 44 ] turned to 3D printing infrastructures ( encompassing the mix of the 3D printer itself , the modelling and slicing software , the physical tools for shaping the artifact , etc . ) and argued that new hardware - based technologies are particularly capable of supporting the ( collaborative ) appropriation activities of their users by making their devices more ‘sociable’ . In relation to this they coined the term ’sociable technologies’ to capture the kinds of hardware - integrated affordances that can support communicating , documenting and sharing ( almost all ) practices of use . For the purposes of our own argument here we want to Designing for Collaborative Infrastructuring : Supporting Resonance Activities 113 : 9 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 build upon these observations by noting that sociable technologies need to operate at three contextual levels : ( 1 ) The internal context , where they provide information about their inner workings and current state as well as about their component and behavioral structure ; ( 2 ) The socio - material context ; which encompasses things like their location and surroundings , environmental data , and maintenance or user / usage data ; ( 3 ) The task / process context : which relates to things like the immediate purpose and ultimate goal of using a device [ 43 , 44 ] . 2 . 5 Resonance Activities as the Social Aspects of Appropriation Infrastructuring occurs in a manner based on the nature of the dependency between a practice and its work infrastructure . This makes it difficult to suggest a general model that might help to pin down and describe the specific details of infrastructuring . Activities regarding the final modification of technology are less a predefined division of labor ( although this may be possible ) , but more a developing network of cooperation between practitioners . This network may also incorporate the original developers of a technology ( e . g . to debug software that has ‘broken down’ ) . As a network of cooperation it is inspired and driven by other ‘points of infrastructuring’ that have happened earlier in related practices . To describe the connections between different points of infrastructuring , Pipek and Wulf [ 56 ] developed the concept of ‘resonance activities’ . These currently underexplored aspects of infrastructuring can be understood to be all of those kinds of activities that may become visible to other users engaged in related practices , or to technology developers who laid the technological foundation of an ongoing practice innovation ( see Fig . 1 ) . Fig . 1 . Resonance Activities in Infrastructuring Resonance activities are not closed off from the technological foundations that constitute the infrastructure . Relevant activities here might include : a colleague observing at work how another colleague modifies a software tool to meet the needs of some specific practice ; or a worker describing his problem with a specific printer at the pub and getting feedback about this from the others around him ; or a user discussing in online forums how to best repair the 113 : 10 T . Ludwig et al . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 . connection for his telephone . With these resonance activities , the changes that emerge around previous PoIs become accessible to others engaged in similar practices or to those that have a connection with the practices where a PoI occurred . Observing or supporting these activities helps us to understand and / or influence the diffusion of practice innovations amongst different PoIs . As we have already argued , capturing resonance activities may reveal the ( social ) appropriation of certain technology usages . To summarize the concepts and discourses present in related work , we have focused on the socio - technical treatment of the notion of an infrastructure and infrastructuring as a design - oriented methodology . Infrastructuring encompasses the ‘point of infrastructure’ ( POI ) - triggered appropriation and re - conceptualizing of an infrastructure in the context of existing , potential , or envisioned artifacts and systems . The concept of appropriation is particularly associated here with the processes of exchange and interaction in networks of ( co - ) end users . Within these networks , experiences and stories are shared between all involved in the appropriation process and resonance activities occur . Resonance activities are all those kinds of activities involved in accessing changes that emerge around a PoI that can then become visible to other users with related practices . When focusing on the design of supportive appropriation infrastructures , the mix of highly context - dependent hardware and software requires the design of sociable technologies that provide hardware - integrated affordances for communicating , documenting and sharing practices of an artifact’s use . As we will argue , these sociable technologies can now be used for the detection and support of resonance activities as part of the process of social appropriation . 3 EMPIRICAL STUDY ON COLLABORATIVE INFRASTRUCTURING Building on previous work around the ( social ) appropriation of software environments [ 12 , 21 , 39 , 45 ] , we felt that more design - related studies were needed to connect community interactions , material foundations ( in terms of materials and devices / technologies used in practices ) and the emergence of infrastructuring practices and resonance activities . We therefore conducted a comparative study in two different 3D printing ‘maker’ communities . Parts of this empirical study and the theoretical concept of sociable technologies have already been published in Ludwig et al . [ 43 ] . Our aim was to examine appropriation and infrastructuring activities . These can encompass individual , communicative or collaborative activities aimed at changing technologies , conventions or patterns of use once a practice has been interrupted , either by a breakdown or by new ideas about the ways a technology might be used that extend beyond those originally envisaged . In this paper we extend upon our prior work by focusing on how sociable technologies could specifically be used to support resonance activities within the broader process of infrastructuring . We concentrated on 3D printing because it was , and still is , an emergent phenomenon , where rules , conventions and technologies may be less well developed . There are , still , relatively few previous or established practices users can relate to when handling 3D printers . Unexpected errors and breakdowns as well as complex configurations can still lead to difficulties in understanding and appropriating these machines for current practices of ‘making’ . These ‘learning moments’ allowed us not only to look for patterns of appropriation , but also for any kinds of collaborative infrastructuring practices or resonance activities that might exist . We will briefly outline the applied methodology as well as the specific results of our empirical study that are of importance for the framing of our concept . Designing for Collaborative Infrastructuring : Supporting Resonance Activities 113 : 11 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 3 . 1 Methodology We conducted our empirical study in 2014 in two ‘maker’ communities that are located in Germany . The first community was a group of HCI researchers at a University ( HCI - UNI ) . At that point in time , two Fused Deposition Molding ( FDM ) printers ( MakerBot and MakerBot 2X ) and one full color powder composite printer ( ZPrinter ) were available . These were located centrally in a so - called HCI - Laboratory ( Fig . 2 , left ) , together with other workshop tools . The HCI - Laboratory was also used for team meetings , by project groups , and was often frequented by students . The second community was a group of artists at a German Academia of Media Arts ( HCI - ART ) . They had just one FDM printer ( a MakerBot 2 ) . It was located in an outbuilding , which was mainly used for printing purposes ( Fig . 2 , middle and right ) . Since the study , the HCI - Laboratory has evolved into a more professional fabrication laboratory ( FabLab ) that is also accessible to citizens and local companies . Fig . 2 . 3D printer environments : HCI - UNI ( left ) and HCI - ART ( middle , right ) To understand people’s practices we used a mixture of ( participatory ) observations , workshops and interviews . We conducted the observations in both communities . The workshops and interview study , however , were only conducted at HCI - UNI . Most of the people we met during our observations were also able to participate in the workshops . All of the workshop participants , except for one , participated in the later interview study . The observations ( 20 hours in sum , 2 x 5 hours in both communities ) were used to acquire knowledge about practical work in 3D printing and its process . We used participatory observation so that users could ‘instruct’ us about the process steps involved in 3D printing and the activities needed to accomplish a successful 3D printing process . During the observations we took field notes and quickly jotted bullet points about the what , the how , the when , and the why of an activity . After the on - site observations , we used the notes and bullet points to create a narrative that described the setting and the 3D printing process in detail . We added further reflections about the situation regarding the appropriation of such a complex technology and , specifically , the social aspects of collaborative appropriation . These primarily relate to situations in which the users were discussing the steps and showing us how to handle a printer . In addition to this , we held two workshops that allowed us to understand people’s communicative practices regarding printer - specific knowledge and information sharing . The workshops brought together those actors in the communities who were already handling 3D printing and gave them an opportunity to discuss current practices and problems we had previously noticed during our observations . This was not prescriptive , however , and the participants frequently moved on to discussing practices we had not previously observed . The workshops lasted about two hours and consisted of eight participants : two females and six males . Their ages ranged from 23 to 32 years old . Six of them were research associates and two 113 : 12 T . Ludwig et al . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 . were research students . Although most of the participants were experienced in the field of HCI and design , only one had more than two years’ experience of 3D printing . The first part of the workshop consisted of an introduction to the topic , which helped the participants to familiarize themselves with the context . The second part encompassed a brainstorming session in which the participants were asked to reflect upon their ways of printing and in what kinds of situations breakdowns or problems occur . Semi - structured interviews with seven users ( I01 - I07 ) allowed us to analyze the work context , the use of printing tools and communication systems of relevant users , as well as their cooperative activities . The interviews lasted about one hour each and were organized in three parts : 1 . The participant’s work context , qualification and work steps with the 3D printers . 2 . Entry obstacles , problems and their articulation . 3 . 3D modeling , tools and related problems . The questions as well as the structure of the interviews were derived from the previous fieldwork ( i . e . the workshops and observations ) . All of the interviews were audio - recorded and transcribed for subsequent analysis . The analysis was based on an inductive , grounded theory approach [ 65 ] in so far as we used open coding techniques associated with grounded theory to derive categories from the empirical data by careful reading and the aggregation of categories . Statements by the participants were divided into textual groupings and then into categories . Alongside of this , knowledge previously acquired by studying the literature was used to heighten our theoretical sensitivity [ 65 ] . Much of the empirical study itself has already been published [ 44 ] , but we briefly present parts of it again here as a basis for developing our concept of supporting resonance activities . In this paper , we focus upon what the data had to say about patterns of appropriation and the activities that support resonance activities . 3 . 2 Results : 3D Printing - Related Resonance Activities In order to foreground aspects of the empirical study that are of particular relevance for our interest in resonance activities we are going to concentrate on certain key aspects . One of these relates to how resonance activities arise in specific settings with specific situated characteristics that cannot simply be set aside when trying to understand what is going on or how the activities are practically accomplished . Another relates to the extent to which practical appropriation and , by extension , the accomplishment of resonance activities , is intrinsically cooperative in character . Beyond this , we will be looking at how appropriation and resonance activities are actively made visible in the work of infrastructuring . 3 . 2 . 1 The Situatedness of 3D Printers and their Practical Appropriation . The empirical study demonstrates that both groups were chiefly motivated to start 3D printing through private and playful interests . Having playful motivations is , in itself , scarcely unique or new . However , during the ludic moments in 3D printing a great deal of experimenting is done , often far in excess of the possibilities that might be found in manuals and other literature . Indeed , the use of documentation only seems to happen occasionally . This explains why , in the groups studied , understanding of the 3D printers and how they work was mostly limited to operational handling . It also explains why some problems were not easily comprehended . “The real problem is to experiment with the specification values for the different materials , to find the optimum value , look at how fast you can let the extruder run , because less speed leads to more precision and if you have a large model , then the printer runs perhaps the whole day , which you might want to avoid . ( I04 ) ” These kinds of difficulties in understanding were compounded by issues with identifying , locating and fixing problems encountered in the printing process e . g . matching them Designing for Collaborative Infrastructuring : Supporting Resonance Activities 113 : 13 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 conceptually to hardware , software or external factors . If you print with 3D printers , which are effectively a construct of an entire infrastructure consisting of hardware as well as software components , a problem cannot always be traced directly to one of these components and may possibly arise only through specific , situated interactions or constellations of both types of component ( cp . [ 63 ] ) : “The issue is always of course that the problem is deeply embedded in its own specific context . So maybe it is the particular model , maybe it is the software just now . ( I01 ) ” In addition to software and hardware as possible error sources , there is another crucial aspect that can decide the success or failure of a 3D print . This is the physical conditions and environmental context , such as the temperature or even the breeze from an open window , which can count as exceptions for hardware settings : “It just takes a long time to figure out something like this . At first , it takes some prints and eventually someone notices by accident that it [ errors ] happens whenever we have the window open . A lot of luck is involved in noticing this . ( I01 ) ” Aside from the breeze from the open windows , which resulted in uneven cooling of the printer , the general temperature of the room also provides an example of another important environmental factor that could have an effect on printing : „So , temperature is always a problem concerning the plastic printer . Whether it is winter now and inside the room there are 20 degrees or because the heating is on or the sun shines directly on the model and you print in black ABS plastic . That makes a big difference . ” ( I02 ) This , then , constitutes a problem that cannot easily be identified or specified , because of there being other factors that are not obvious and therefore not usually taken into consideration . 3D printing differs here from things like writing program code and the specific exceptions thrown up by a compiler . Despite the difficulty , however , to effectively report and discuss a problem , it is essential to capture all possible contributing factors so that the problem is properly framed in accordance with its overall context ( I02 ) . „It would not help people when I say : " I wanted to print something today and had the following error message " . This won’t help anyone . I would have to say to them , I printed with the powder printer [ Zprinter ] and maybe there were such and such specifics in the model or something . All those things like that… All that could be important to solve the problem , but you often do not know exactly what it could be . ” ( I01 ) If a problem is identified reasonably in this way , it can still be very difficult to find a solution for it or even to search for it because of the difficulty of capturing and phrasing a question in an appropriately context - oriented fashion ( I02 ) . To make things worse , the hacker and maker community is a highly domain - specific culture where a very particular terminology and vocabulary has evolved . Thus : “There are certain keywords like the ‘raising’ , where everybody is talking of warping . Then you search for ‘warping’ , ‘Replicator2’ and other keywords . Anyway , you need the device and then those keywords every time . ” ( I03 ) 3 . 2 . 2 Appropriation as a Set of Profoundly Cooperative Activities . Solutions to tackle these sorts of problems were sought both internally and externally by the two groups we studied . Amongst these , we observed different kinds of resonance activities . In the case of internal solutions face - to - face conversations with colleagues as well as observations of each other’s 3D printing processes were preferred as a way of gathering experience : „Before I have started with 3D printing , my colleague David has worked with those printers and gathered a lot of experience . I have benefitted much of his knowledge and he told me whether the quality of a print was okay or whether I did something wrong . ( I07 ) ” 113 : 14 T . Ludwig et al . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 . The constant mix of the technological aspects such as the 3D printer or the material and the social aspects such as the printing culture , experience or network of colleagues together define a socio - technical 3D printing infrastructure . We mean this in the sense used by Star and Ruhleder [ 63 ] , i . e . the practice of 3D printing shapes the infrastructure itself . Within the entire 3D printing process , observing the activities of other people and collaborative printing practices were much more important than anything else . As another user put it : “If Sebastian had not said that we print together , I would not dare . I have observed him and after we print a few times together , I became more experienced and did some prints by my own . ( I03 ) ” Of particular note were the kinds of resonance activities where Sebastian had a problem and shared his handling of the 3D printer , making this visible to his colleague , who acknowledged the importance of this in how he came to learn 3D printing . Attempts to keep hold of these kinds of activities and the gathered knowledge within the groups resulted , first of all , in a poster and , secondly , in a collaborative web blog at HCI - UNI . The poster was printed and hung up close to the printer , visualizing important information about the printing process . “It was about a poster for presenting some best practices and providing an introduction to those people that might be interested in 3D printing : Especially the basic settings and tips . How can I start with the modeling of 3D models and what is Thingiverse and so on . ” ( I04 ) A problem with this , however , is that there is no one single standard process to achieve 3D printing objectives . Furthermore , the numerous possible contextual print - or model - specific problems that might arise cannot be anticipated in advance and thus provided for in an externalized form prior to their occurrence . ”It is not that easy to devise a standard process and document it somehow that a person who has no idea may reproduce it easily because the machine is in my opinion bit too complicated . ( I02 ) ” To support a more dynamic way of sharing expertise and to preserve best practices and challenges before , during and after 3D printing processes a blog was set up . The blog was a first attempt at trying to capture resonance activities in a central way . However , the blog was maintained and read only very irregularly , because the entries had to be made by hand and after a print , thus entailing a post - hoc overhead . „The platform [ an internal web blog ] is not really appropriate for that because you have right now a model in front of you and run into an error or functionality does not work and you really want to solve the specific problem on time and then print the model . I do not want to write something on the blog in this situation somehow . ( I01 ) ” In HCI - ART , a basic seminar was established to provide students with a practical introduction to the 3D printing process . Through this seminar , they wanted the students to learn from the experience other users had acquired during 3D printing processes . However , such hands - on seminars require semi - professional rather institutional settings . With regard to external resources , users in both communities often searched for problem solutions on bulletin boards and followed discussions on the web . ”I have already clicked through bulletin boards for a long time , because first you have to know how to create a file , what should I take care of in order to build these STLs [ Surface Tesselation Language ] . It has almost taken two or three months until I got the results , I had imagined or rather that I could imagine what the result would be . ( I06 ) ” As described above , searching these , however , poses a problem in itself , which emanates from the domain specific slang and wording . Indeed , this can be considered an infrastructure breakdown in itself . For novices , who are typically the ones who require the most support , it is especially hard to learn the appropriate terms . This serves to prevent them from participating , Designing for Collaborative Infrastructuring : Supporting Resonance Activities 113 : 15 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 pushing them back towards learning over - the - shoulder and through discussions on - site with colleagues . On platforms such as Thingiverse or similar websites , 3D models are typically presented as final versions rather than processes to be discussed . As one study participant commented , “seeing a nice cake , does not allow you to bake a cake ( I02 ) ” . However : “But if you are lucky , then you can find something [ discussions on Thingiverse ] already . Thingiverse is quite large . It was operated by the Replicator printer MakerBot Industries . Here you can upload your own models . As I said , if you are lucky , you can find something there already . ( I02 ) ” Thus , online platforms such as Thingiverse do have the potential to help the users sometimes . However , due to the situatedness of 3D printing and its infrastructure , they do not fully support the appropriation of 3D printers and the entire process . Users can be faced with similar problems during subsequent prints and have to try to identify the problems de novo . The way Thingiverse does support resonance activities is this : “I see what other people do , how they do certain approaches and how to discuss it” ( I05 ) . The platforms also enable users to give feedback based on their own work : “At some point , I signed up for a Thingiverse account and placed just a few models that I have designed myself online [ . . . ] I think it is actually quite a nice feature of Thingiverse that you get a bit of feedback , that someone likes it or includes it into his Things - to - Make - Collection or writes a comment . ( I02 ) ” 3 . 2 . 3 Appropriation as a Feature of Infrastructuring . Beyond communicative resonance activities , we did find other evidence of appropriation activities , such as users modifying their own work infrastructure . They had , for instance , added a webcam that ran on a Raspberry Pi and that was coupled with a Skype account . When the account was called it automatically responded in order to monitor the current printing process remotely ( Fig . 3 ) . Fig . 3 . Monitoring” Webcam 113 : 16 T . Ludwig et al . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 . These infrastructuring activities were happening in ways that the manufacturers clearly did not plan for , but this is something that could certainly be incorporated in future generations of their machines . However , the empirical study shows that most infrastructuring activities are communicative or collaborative activities , involving not only manipulations and combinations of technology of various kinds , but also articulations of use or breakdowns , with reference to the technologies at hand and their context [ 44 ] . The resonances the detected activities cause are of varying degrees of intentionality . Some activities are just directed towards the re - configuration problems at hand within the infrastructure of one practice . The resonance just occurs because practitioners with a different background or with different experience observe a process . Sometimes this can even happen accidentally , e . g . when more experienced actors solve problems with their 3D printing process or discuss the process locally in the group of colleagues or in an online forum such as Thingiverese , with other people interested in 3D printing happening to observe or participate in these discussions . Yet , the observed activities resonate through such observations to other fields of application . Platforms such as Thingiverse play a particularly important role when considering the support of resonance activities . However , these kinds of internet platforms have shortcomings with regard to presenting the context of 3D printing processes . This missing link between online support for resonance activities and the hardware and physical setting itself is one of the major issues we revealed within our empirical study . The users are unable to either articulate their problems adequately or properly enact any suggestions made by the user community . Other activities may cause a resonance intentionally , e . g . a practitioner might want to verify the long - term consequences of using a configuration they have just discovered by posting it on an online forum for fellow practitioners to discuss the potential pros and cons of using such a configuration . For our design considerations , intentional activities are easier to define and more open to design evaluation because the source of the information flow between two PoIs is actually aware of the process . In the following sections we examine the challenges confronting the design of support for resonance activities and some of the ways it might be accomplished . 4 DISCUSSION The above findings focused on making visible how resonance activities are already to be found within a specific body of practice surrounding 3D printing . In this section we are going to draw upon those findings to articulate more broadly aspects of resonance activities and their support that we feel need to be foregrounded to both inform and inspire future related design activities . To do this we are going to concentrate on the lessons that can be drawn from the empirical study regarding what kinds of things underpin resonance activities and enable them to take place . We will start by considering how resonance activities have to somehow be made visible to other people . At first sight , the mechanisms for this are very diverse . Activities can be represented in a synchronous or asynchronous fashion . Recipients of such representations can be co - present or distributed . They can also be shared by pretty well any channel or medium . However , there are constraining features . As we shall see , the mode of representation has to be adequate for capturing how an infrastructure is being modified , configured , or used . The infrastructural artefact ( s ) in question will need to be open to representation as well . The latter , as a matter for design , presents specific challenges because this is not just a matter of capturing the technical character of the infrastructure , but also the physical environment within which it Designing for Collaborative Infrastructuring : Supporting Resonance Activities 113 : 17 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 is embedded and the surrounding social milieu ( which can pertain to relationships , specific activities and even associated bodies of reasoning ) . We are also going to look at how resonance activities depend upon the extent to which infrastructural arrangements are open to being tailored and augmented in various ways , which we argue relates to the extent to which the associated technologies might be deemed to be ‘sociable’ . More than this , we find that configuration and re - configuration activities depend upon the possibility of sharing things that objectively capture states and changes of state . Such processes of sharing also have a dependency on being able to share configurations that are openly accountable and subject to trust on the part of their recipients . Beyond this , there is a need to provide process support . In other words , resonance activities involve not just sharing configurations but providing recipients with support in bringing those configurations about by not just conveying what to do but how to do it . In order to underpin these various aspects of resonance activities , there is an ever - present need for several different kinds of sense - making to take place , so we also examine various aspects of individual , collective and general sense - making and the role these have to play . At the end of the section we discuss how developing technological arrangements relating to the IoT provide some promising avenues for providing the kinds of support that are required . 4 . 1 The Representability Challenge for Supporting Resonance Activities Based on our empirical study , there are crucial characteristics for activities to be considered resonance activities . At the very least there needs to be a medium through which these kinds of activities can be rendered visible . Within this medium , the activities do not necessarily need to be immediately visible to others ( such as discussions on Thingiverse or on - site discussion between colleagues during 3D printing processes ) , but they do need to be traceable , or at least representable , such that the narratives associated with the activities can provide a clear picture of the relevant aspects of a developing infrastructure’s modification , configuration or use . To support this , the infrastructure artifact itself ( in our case this would be a 3D printer ) needs to be representable – what we refer to as a sociable technology . Building upon previous literature that has discussed the contextual levels of sociable technologies , it is useful to distinguish three dimensions of representability :  Representations of the inner workings of a technology , making the technological processes that are necessary to maintain the technology’s services transparent and describable . As the empirical study has shown , users mainly learned by doing and experimentation outweighs extensive reading of user manuals or background literature . The users therefore often have just a vague understanding of the printer’s capabilities and functionalities , so all kinds of problems arise . The 3D printer itself is a kind of black box for the users and lacks any way of articulating its inner workings . This also relates to the interfaces the technology provides to users , not to mention any other technologies they may use to build the technical infrastructure , such as 3D scanners or post - processing tools such as grinders . Sociable technologies would provide users with more detail about the current printing process . Providing the right kind of information allows the users to get a deeper understanding of how the machinery works and the users can become more aware of what happens when and where . This also relates to descriptions of the state of the technology , so that detailed descriptions of breakdown situations can be preserved and innovation opportunities revealed . We anticipate that these representations may require an additional layer of 113 : 18 T . Ludwig et al . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 . sensors to be implemented ( facilitated , perhaps , by the increasing realization of the Internet of Things ) . These sensors may not be central to the functioning of the technology , but may nonetheless support and facilitate the articulation of technological issues ( e . g . a built - in camera monitoring the printing process in a 3D printer , or an additional sensor monitoring air movement ) . In the printing industry at large a rich infrastructure of support is already premised upon the use of sensors in this way ( cf . [ 51 ] ) .  Representations of the physical context a technology is working in , addressing the physical , spatial and technological dimensions of the context , including all relevant information and descriptions of the ways in which technologies are connected or how the physical environment may influence the technology’s services . As we saw in the empirical study , 3D printers have a high dependency on the physical context , with things like temperature , draughts ( and their collective cooling effect ) , or even concussions all having a possible impact . Sociable technologies should provide options for relating the inner workings of a technology to the physical context the technology is working in , so as to offer potential sources of errors and to deepen a user’s understanding . Again , this may suggest the integration of additional sensors to monitor the physical context and states of connected technologies ( e . g . temperature sensors , humidity sensors ) , but it also indicates there being a need for intuitive ways of visualizing and promoting understanding of different values and their relationships .  Representations of the work context a technology is supporting , including descriptions of processes and states . The empirical study revealed that over - the - shoulder - learning and colleagues’ explanations are crucial to the success of establishing 3D printing practices . Sociable technologies should be able to both gather and articulate descriptions of processes and states , ideally in the terminology associated with that particular body of practice . This may include required qualities of the infrastructure service ( e . g . extruder speed or bandwidth ) as well as descriptions of processes and tasks that the technology helps to perform ( i . e . it is a part of their infrastructure ) , and descriptions of the social context ( e . g . other users and / or maintenance personnel ) that are relevant to providing the technology’s services . In professional environments this information may already be available through other information technologies , for instance where software is used to structure or coordinate the running of work processes . By analyzing this information , users would be able to comprehend the entire creation process . Again , this information could also be supported by installing ‘sensors’ and implementing middleware as a secondary layer that focuses on data connections between the software environment and the infrastructure technology . 4 . 2 Designing to Support Resonance Activities By taking into account the findings coming out of our empirical study with regard to infrastructuring and resonance activities , the step we argue for now is to use the ubiquitous interconnectedness of devices and sensors to support the collaborative nature of infrastructuring and resonance activities by making the technologies more ‘sociable’ . Sociable technologies should provide all of the three representational forms presented above in section 4 . 1 . By integrating these representational forms into technologies themselves it should be possible to capture resonance activities that are currently realized beyond the bounds of the Designing for Collaborative Infrastructuring : Supporting Resonance Activities 113 : 19 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 technology in other places , such as the internet in general ( e . g . manufacturers websites ) , community forums ( e . g . Thingiverse ) , or in neighboring offices ( e . g . discussing with colleagues ) . When technologies provide both a medium and articulation support for allowing their re - configuration as well as all other infrastructuring activities , they become more ‘sociable’ in their infrastructural ( technological and social ) context , thereby justifying the name ‘sociable technologies’ . The connection through resonance activities between two PoIs based on sociable technologies is illustrated in Figure 4 . How to deal with sociable technologies when aiming to support infrastructuring activities in general and resonance activities in particular , is an important research question . Both Pipek [ 53 ] and Ludwig et al . [ 44 ] have provided lists of technological opportunities and structures to support the appropriation activities that users perform , thereby facilitating changes in software or hardware and its use . However , in the following we reflect more specifically upon what kinds of characteristics and forms of support might give more concrete shape to sociable technologies for supporting resonance activities . Within this we also target ‘digitalized’ technologies that are likely to become prominent in the era of the Internet of Things . The overall aim here is to explore how the design of sociable technologies might better support resonance activities and collaborative infrastructuring . Fig . 4 . : Sociable Technologies to Support Resonance Activities in Infrastructuring 4 . 2 . 1 In - practice Flexibility of an Infrastructure Technology . The level at which a sociable technology can be modified and configured in its functionality is an important resource for discussing support options . This is the level at which it can be combined with other technologies ( e . g . the combination of a webcam and Skype that we saw in the empirical study ) to form an ensemble that constitutes an enhanced infrastructure , thereby enabling rather more than constraining relevant activities . Based on Pipek and Kahler [ 54 ] we would refer to this as the inward and outward tailorability of a technology . In general , we assume that the more tailorable a technology is , the more sociability and resonance support can be integrated in its design . A 3D printer , for example , could allow the reading of machine code for the extruder 113 : 20 T . Ludwig et al . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 . movements ( thereby opening up the black box ) or temperature ( as a first indication of contextual factors that might affect a 3D print ) . It is , however , important to note that pretty well any physical device or machine could be considered as sociable if the designers make an effort to provide descriptions , information and data that could help users to discuss usage , conventions or other relevant aspects that have import for their practices bound up the device . Gathering , articulating and mediating the use of a physical entity ( e . g . gathering print histories including all sensor values , configurations and contextual features by using a monitoring device and providing a space for discussing these histories in almost real time with other users ) implements a secondary layer approach as an additional layer for mediating issues that extend the primary use of the physical entity . 4 . 2 . 2 Support for the Objectification of Parameters of Infrastructure Technologies . Once a technology has been rendered , in principle , sociable , there is a need to reflect upon the kinds of artifices required for configurations to actually be shared , such that specific states and changes of state are properly conveyed . The objectification of parameters relates to in - practice flexibility , but deserves special consideration when talking about digital infrastructures . Infrastructures consisting of digital devices and technologies always have a software component ( e . g . the modelling or slicing software of a 3D printer , which can pose additional challenges for a user ) . Software 2 has a unique quality of immateriality that allows it to be loosely transferred and copied using the same digital infrastructure ( the internet ) through which its hosting devices communicate . As users , we may have grown familiar with devices updating themselves ( sometimes repairing functionality , sometimes complementing functionality ) , but it is this unique characteristic of the self - adjustment and reflexivity of digital infrastructures that we can make use of to design sociable technologies ( e . g . the 3D printer offers functionality for describing its inner workings ) . We borrow here the idea of ‘objectification’ from the discourse on ‘tailorability’ of cooperation technologies in CSCW [ 32 ] . The argument here is that , in order to make a configuration change tangible and shareable , it is necessary to encapsulate the intended state or state transition of a technology in a ‘tailoring object’ . This allows the state change to travel between different users and fields of use . A technology allows for different qualities of sociability depending on how well it supports this sharing of configurations by providing objectifications of states and state transitions . It is a prerequisite for fostering sharing and delegation patterns within digital infrastructures . A 3D printer , for example , could allow saving a print history including all data about the model , specifications of the printer and information captured by further external hardware such as ( integrated ) webcams . One can also see that screenshots of interfaces or other schematics capturing aspects of a printer set - up that might currently be shared via emails , or on posters , in forums or in blogs are already moving towards these kinds of objectifications . 4 . 2 . 3 Integrated Sharing and Delegation Support in Infrastructure Technologies . Something we saw in the empirical study was users setting up posters and creating blogs to share information about the use of 3D printers . This serves as an apt reminder that there is a need to build upon the potential objectification of state transitions of infrastructure technologies and to consider how sharing and delegation support might be integrated within infrastructure technologies . One might argue here that this integration is not really required because the provided objectifications could equally be shared using separate , external channels , as was the case for 2 In connection with a specific hardware device , this could be ‘firmware’ or an ‘operating system’ . Designing for Collaborative Infrastructuring : Supporting Resonance Activities 113 : 21 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 the users in our empirical study who were using posters and online forum to accomplish this . However , it may make sense to integrate the sharing of use configurations to increase the level of comfort for practitioners and to reduce privacy and security risks . Externally shared objectifications may make technology usage more transparent and wrong configuration settings could lead a technology to fail . These considerations can be easily extended to support the delegation of configuration issues to other practitioners ( to overcome the cumbersome over - the - shoulder learning or sharing of information out - of - context ) . We have seen this kind of delegation of configuration details to colleagues and have noted in particular that there is a sense in which users are delegating responsibility by saying that they are only comfortable during the print process when other more experienced users are available ( I03 ) . Delegation , in our case , implies that the initiative and control for the reconfiguration remains at the receiving end of the configuration effort . Clearly , then , there are ways in which the mechanisms for handing over configurations need to be openly accountable and ‘trustworthy’ on the part of their recipients . This may require that the interaction system be able to exercise certain kinds of control , for instance by some kind of access token or access rights management , which may require complete user authentication management . This needs to be provided by the infrastructure technology at hand and could be addressed by concepts such as block chain or directed acyclic graphs . 4 . 2 . 4 Integrated Infrastructuring Process Support in Infrastructure Technologies . Whilst the sharing of configurations through sociable technologies in accountably appropriate ways may already provide significant support for resonance activities , to practically bring about infrastructuring it may be necessary to convey more . So , if an infrastructuring effort after a PoI requires organized or managed progression 3 , a sociable technology may provide a means of organizing negotiations and decision - making by further developing the connected practices . The empirical study showed that , after breakdowns , users often start trying to search online and / or discuss their issues on bulletin boards . This sets off a process of configuring , tailoring or developing new conventions until the point has been reached where the printer has been restored to good working order . The configurations , tailoring and development of new conventions is usually a collaborative practice and demands highly networked activities . Documenting and discussing issues via things like web blogs or using comment functionality is cumbersome and requires tasks to be performed out - of - context . A sociable technology should be able to organize as well as mediate processes of negotiation and decision - making . This may require functionality to not only enable modelling and management of the process , but also to involve the installation of some means of controlling access to the process ( see above ) . 4 . 2 . 5 Supporting Sense - making in Infrastructure Technologies . Underpinning all of the above is a question of sense - making . The empirical study has shown that collaborative sense - making plays and important role within the process of appropriation . As the literature shows , users usually learn within networks . Supporting practitioners in the sense - making of all aspects of an infrastructure relevant to their own practice is therefore one of the most important elements to provide within sociable technologies . It addresses all resonance activities to some degree , especially communication . Based on the empirical study we are able to distinguish three dimensions of support here : 3 This could be a sequence of steps to be followed , or process visibility / awareness being provided to various stakeholders . 113 : 22 T . Ludwig et al . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 .  Integrated support for individual sense making : This dimension addresses all information and descriptions that a technology provides ( and that are currently enquired at colleagues ) that might allow users to understand the workings of the technology and its potential relation to a practice context . We want to stress here that the quality of this support depends on how the information and descriptions are able to address the relational aspects between the infrastructure technology and supported practices . It is not enough to describe the functionality or service . It is necessary to address how the functionality might support a specific practice . This may include giving examples . It may also include information derived from previous experiences of use within this or a similar practice . All characteristics of a technology that support its active exploration also fall into this category ( e . g . the ability to create “save points” or undo functionality to return to after experimenting with different configurations to prevent the fear of destroying anything was something that was mentioned by the participants in the study ) . At this point , historical support deserves specific attention so that users may get access to previous experiences collected in the same or a similar field of practice ( e . g . configuration settings , conventions , processes an infrastructure has been used in , narratives of use experiences , printing documentation on Thingiverse , etc . ) . To establish this kind of historical support a technology needs to provide support for documenting and preserving this kind of experience within a field of practice without unduly augmenting the overhead involved in doing this .  Integrated support for collective sense making : Many sense making activities involve practitioners of different levels of expertise who either teach themselves ( by using online resources such as bulletin boards or videos ) or find some other effective ways of exploring an infrastructure technology by trial and error ( e . g . “the proof is in the pudding” ) . These activities can be observations of technology configuration and use , the demonstration of different configurations , or simply a joint effort to discuss important aspects of use , all of which were manifest in the empirical study . Most of the issues raised in the previous paragraph are relevant here as well , but may require additional services to provide collaborative means for exploring a technology in the context of some particular practice , or to provide historicity support .  Support for general communicability : It should be clear by now that resonance activities involve interactions within one field of practice ( concerning one PoI ) or between two PoIs that can be connected through direct observation or narratives that transfer experiences and usage between different fields of practice . These communications regarding technological as well as use - related issues that relate to an infrastructure technology can be supported by providing good communicative anchors in the technology itself in order to avoid ambiguities . This covers mundane issues like using clear terminologies ( as one of the issues that prevents users from searching effectively online ) or specific colors for buttons on user interfaces ( ‘knowing how’ ) . It also involves complex issues like providing a process description of the service that a technology can provide here and now , e . g . the speed of an intelligent printer extruder and its current state derived from sensor information about the current printing process in relation to things like room temperature . These kinds of measures do not aim to help users in primarily understanding the technology ; they rather aim at just helping users to talk about the technology appropriately . Designing for Collaborative Infrastructuring : Supporting Resonance Activities 113 : 23 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 We acknowledge that most of these resonance activities already take place today in most technological settings , without any targeted support through ‘sociable technologies’ . Expertise - sharing platforms like Thingiverse or StackOverflow , or the support forums of large software providers like Apple or Microsoft , or ( as we saw in our empirical study ) even the web blog set up within one of the 3D printing communities , cover many of the interactions that are resonance activities and therefore extend infrastructuring around a single PoI in our eyes . However , the way these kinds of support are structured according to specific software products and functionalities , and the limited depth discussions can reach in terms of addressing the actual relation between software / hardware infrastructure technologies and the concrete practices and means of appropriation where a PoI has occurred , show that there is much room for improvement . Within our study we focused on 3D printing and how improved functional concepts could promote a 3D printer to the status of a sociable technology whereby it might mediate resonance activities in order to ease appropriation and infrastructuring activities . There are lots of other settings , in which we could think of turning devices into sociable technologies . Another such example could be the field of modern photography . Taking nice pictures is not straightforward and there is a whole ecology of support forums and best practice videos online . However , it is , still , difficult to adapt the practices of expert to own practices based just on explanations because there is a very complex mix of ( a ) the hardware ( the photo camera itself ) , ( b ) the software that runs on the photo camera and allows users to configure the settings of the camera , ( c ) the physical context or environment , and ( d ) and of course the user’s physical abilities . By applying the concept of sociable technologies , the digital camera itself would be able to mediate and describe the colleagues’ professional camera - handling practices and connect different types of users . A camera , when designed as a sociable technology , is also able to gather information e . g . about the width of a wide - angle lens or the resolution of a high - contrast display ( the internal context ) ; the lighting conditions and the position in which the camera is being held ( the socio - material context ) ; and current interests such as acquiring a sharply focused image of a specific object in a broader landscape ( the task / process context ) . All of this documented information ( as resonance activities ) can then be shared via a camera’s integrated network technology and proposed to another camera user who has similar interests and who is working in a similar socio - material context ( but who perceives a possible infrastructure breakdown ) directly in situ . In this way the digital cameras of other users can themselves be adapted to meet a shared internal context . Thus , we have also argued that new IoT - based technologies are particularly capable of supporting the ( collaborative ) appropriation activities and resonance activities of their users by making the devices more ‘sociable’ . In relation to this we have applied the term ’sociable technologies’ to capture the kinds of hardware - integrated affordances for communicating , documenting and sharing practices of use that can arise through the appropriation of new IoT technologies . Sociable technologies aim to lower the burden of documenting and sharing insights about PoI - triggered practices by gathering as well as communicating information about software - incorporated hardware artifacts . This , in our view , goes to the heart of resonance activity support . This perspective supports the practice paradigm by encompassing bodies , artifacts , performances , and routines in a more encompassing frame [ 38 ] . It also begins to illustrate how the dependencies of practices on new and complex layers of technologies might be managed by continuous infrastructuring effort and appropriate methodologies that not only address the 113 : 24 T . Ludwig et al . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 . development of an IoT product , but the preparation of , and reflection upon how it is used and situated in practice . In relation to the theoretical framework we articulated earlier , documented aspects regarding the practices through which a technology is used are able to promote resonance activities towards other users who are using the same technology ( or where there are similar practices ) , thereby helping other users to appropriate similar bodies of practice . 5 CONCLUSION When considering infrastructuring as an approach to technology development , the final modifications of specific practices in use are mainly performed by the end users of the technology not by designers . This continues until the practices are successfully established [ 56 ] . To understand this process we can look to Star and Ruhleder’s [ 63 ] framing , where the focus is not on what an infrastructure is from a technological point of view , but on what it is to its users . By approaching things in this way , we are obliged to concentrate on the relationship between a technology or network of technologies and the practices that it supports . In terms of practice , a technology is not only ‘used’ : by choosing to use it its users grow dependent on it , often not maintaining alternative technologies and potentially even forgetting about the possibility of using anything else . This dependency is at the core of the relationship between a network of technologies and associated practices ; it is what makes something an infrastructure to its users . Based on this interpretation of infrastructuring , users perceive ‘points of infrastructure ( ing ) ’ ( PoIs ) as moments that are constituted in breakdowns or innovation - driven reconsiderations of current infrastructure use . These are the moments where they begin to configure , tailor or develop new conventions , with the process continuing until a point has been reached where the new technology use has been successfully established . As we have argued in this paper through our use of the example of 3D printing , activities around the PoI create resonance activities that encompass all the observable and communicative aspects of what has become visible within the work environment or in other work environments . What distinguishes resonance activities from other activities is their distance from the technological foundations that constitute the infrastructure . While an activity addressing concrete configuration parameters within an infrastructure ( e . g . setting up printer parameters such as temperature ) can be considered as very much concerned with the existing technological foundations of an infrastructure , activities such as discussing the pros and cons of using a webcam to monitor a 3D printing process or using different types of process documentation , or perhaps discussing the legal basis of using an infrastructure , are at some remove from the purely technological level . Activities addressing design issues within the infrastructure at hand may also be more relevant to considerations associated with resonance activities . Of course , 3D printing is a specific field of application and our aim is not to generalize or build a one - size - fits - all theory about workplace technologies . Instead , our goal has been to present a new theoretical framework regarding the concept of resonance activities and how to design for supporting resonance activities in software - incorporated hardware artifacts By supporting resonance activities , the ( social and collaborative ) appropriation of an artifact can be improved . Studies of these kinds of communicative practices are not entirely new ( see [ 70 ] , for instance ) . However , existing practices repay a second look because the practices of communication and appropriation support are changing in tandem with the communication infrastructures that users have evolved as a result of developments in miniaturization , mobile and ubiquitous computing . The step we argue for now is to use the increasingly ubiquitous Designing for Collaborative Infrastructuring : Supporting Resonance Activities 113 : 25 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 interconnectedness of devices to make technologies more ‘sociable’ . This means that the support that users currently find outside of the technology itself , for instance in internet searches , in community forums or in neighboring offices , could be integrated into the technology . When trying to conceptualize sociable technologies as technologies encompassing support for resonance activities , we have outlined five different design considerations that the technology should seek to incorporate : ( 1 ) In - practice flexibility , ( 2 ) Objectification of parameters , ( 3 ) Integrated sharing and delegation support , ( 4 ) Integrated infrastructuring process support ( 5 ) Sense - making support . In relation to this , we have discussed three key notions :  Infrastructuring – as a practice - based account of all creative activities that contribute to the establishment of a practice ;  Resonance activities – to identify those activities that create an echo of possible problem solutions or innovations , thereby improving the relation between an infrastructure technology and the practices it supports , which are in turn able to inspire or inform related fields of practice ;  Sociable technologies – as a mix of hardware and software technologies that are able to provide services that allow the collective potential of resonance activities to unfold and inform other fields of practice . In our view , these three notions taken together offer a significant contribution to the field of CSCW as a way to improve the quality of , and participation in the conceptualization as well as development of digital infrastructures . We argue here for a perspective on infrastructuring that has the potential of complementing or even replacing traditional technology development methods and traditional considerations of infrastructure architectures . We are aware that this represents only a fraction of the wider discourse on infrastructuring [ 7 ] that strongly addresses the political and social dimensions of further infrastructure development . Looking at current social trends , participation in the development and establishment of digital infrastructures will become more important as people become increasingly dependent on large - scale , complex networks of technology . The rise of the IoT , with its dependency on technology and all of its associated challenges , such as users often not knowing what functionality a ‘thing’ might provide or what data or practices might be collected , makes manifest a paradigmatic change in our practices – in particular when it comes to their digitalization . Digitalization has dramatically reduced the transaction cost for interactions associated with many practices , both professional and mundane ( e . g . navigation , payment , information seeking , consuming media , etc . ) and we tend to accept new dependencies with relative ease . These new dependencies often become tangible to practitioners only after the initial investment in new technology has been made , e . g . if there is no internet available to connect to the cloud service you have recently subscribed to . This being the case , there is enormous potential for making more visible the ‘network of cooperation’ between practitioners that develops to overcome these kinds of challenges and their associated PoIs . In our view , this reflects the huge potential of the infrastructuring concept as a whole . By acknowledging and supporting resonance activities through sociable technologies , we can also think about reorganizing the further development of infrastructures in a way that allows for the possible consequences of their use to become tangible for practitioners at an earlier stage . For example , if technologies can describe their own behavior , for instance with regard to the standards they use , or the data processing they require and the kinds of data they may be 113 : 26 T . Ludwig et al . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 . rendering visible , the consequences of different decisions regarding infrastructural change ( as described in Star and Ruhleder ' s original conception of infrastructures ) could be discussed within the very technologies that people are considering changing . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Ellen Balka and Ina Wagner . 2006 . Making things work : dimensions of configurability as appropriation work . In Proceedings of the 2006 20th anniversary conference on Computer supported cooperative work , 229 – 238 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1180875 . 1180912 [ 2 ] Rémi Barraqand . 2012 . Designing Sociable Technologies . Universtiy of Grenoble . [ 3 ] Amaury Belin and Yannick Prié . 2012 . DIAM : Towards a model for describing appropriation processes through the evolution of digital artifacts . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference , 645 – 654 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2318053 [ 4 ] Erling Björgvinsson , Pelle Ehn , and Per - Anders Hillgren . 2010 . Participatory design and “democratizing innovation . ” In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference , 41 – 50 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1900441 . 1900448 [ 5 ] Kerl Bodker , Finn Kensing , and Jesper Simonsen . 2004 . Participatory It Design : Designing for Business and Workplace Realities . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , USA . [ 6 ] Barry W Boehm . 1988 . A Spiral Model of Software Development and Enhancement . Computer 21 , 5 : 61 – 72 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / 2 . 59 [ 7 ] Claus Bossen , Pelle Ehn , Helena Karasti , Carl Di Salvo , Andrew Clement , Volkmar Pipek , and Yvonne Dittrich . 2014 . Infrastructuring , collaboration and evolving socio - material practices of changing our world . In Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference on Short Papers , Industry Cases , Workshop Descriptions , Doctoral Consortium papers , and Keynote abstracts - PDC ’14 - volume 2 , 221 – 222 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2662155 . 2662211 [ 8 ] John Bowers . 1994 . The work to make a network work : studying CSCW in action . In Proceedings of the ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work - ( CSCW ’94 ) , 287 – 298 . Retrieved from http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 193030 % 5Cnhttp : / / portal . acm . org / citation . cfm ? doid = 192844 . 193030 [ 9 ] Margaret Burnett . 2010 . End - User Software Engineering and Why it Matters . Journal of Organizational and End User Computing . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4018 / joeuc . 2010101904 [ 10 ] Jennie Carroll . 2004 . Completing Design in Use : Closing the Appropriation Cycle . European Conference of Information Systems , January 2004 . [ 11 ] Andrew Clement . 1993 . Looking for the designers : Transforming the ` invisible’ infrastructure of computerised office work . AI & SOCIETY 7 , 4 : 323 – 344 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF01891415 [ 12 ] Nick Dalton , Gordon MacKay , and Simon Holland . 2012 . Kolab : Appropriation & Improvisation in Mobile Tangible Collaborative Interaction . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’12 ) , 21 – 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2317960 [ 13 ] Gerardine DeSanctis and Marshall Scott Poole . 1994 . Capturing the Complexity in Advanced Technology Use : Adaptive Structuration Theory . Organization Science . https : / / doi . org / doi : 10 . 2307 / 2635011 [ 14 ] S . Diniz Junqueira Barbosa , S . , Markopoulos , P . , Paternò , F . , Stumpf , S . , Valtolina . 2017 . End - User Development . In Proceedings of the 6th International Symposium ( IS - EUD ) . [ 15 ] Alan Dix . 2007 . Designing for Appropriation . In Proceedings of the 21st British HCI Group Annual Conference on People and Computers : HCI . . . But Not As We Know It - Volume 2 ( BCS - HCI ’07 ) , 27 – 30 . Retrieved from http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1531407 . 1531415 [ 16 ] Christian Dörner , Jan Heß , and Volkmar Pipek . 2008 . Fostering user - developer collaboration with infrastructure probes . In Proceedings of the international workshop on cooperative and human aspects of software engineering ( CHASE ) , 45 – 48 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1370114 . 1370126 [ 17 ] Paul Dourish . 1996 . Open Implementation and Flexibility in CSCW Toolkits . [ 18 ] Paul Dourish . 1999 . Software Infrastructures . Retrieved from https : / / www . lri . fr / ~ mbl / Trends - CSCW / references . html [ 19 ] Paul Dourish . 2003 . The Appropriation of Interactive Technologies : Some Lessons from Placeless Documents . Computer Supported Cooperative Work 12 , 4 : 465 – 490 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A : 1026149119426 [ 20 ] Sebastian Draxler , Adrian Jung , Alexander Boden , and Gunnar Stevens . 2011 . Workplace Warriors : Identifying Team Practices of Appropriation in Software Ecosystems . In Proceeding of the 4th international workshop on Cooperative and human aspects of software engineering - CHASE ’11 , 57 . Retrieved February 10 , 2014 from http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1984642 . 1984656 [ 21 ] Sebastian Draxler and Gunnar Stevens . 2011 . Supporting the collaborative appropriation of an open software ecosystem . Computer Supported Cooperative Work 20 , 4 – 5 : 403 – 448 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 011 - 9148 - 9 Designing for Collaborative Infrastructuring : Supporting Resonance Activities 113 : 27 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 [ 22 ] W Keith Edwards , Mark W Newman , and Erika Shehan Poole . 2010 . The infrastructure problem in HCI . In Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computer Systems ( CHI ) , 423 – 432 . [ 23 ] Pelle Ehn . 2008 . Participation in design things . Conference on Participatory Design . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1795234 . 1795248 [ 24 ] Gerhard Fischer . 1994 . Domain - oriented design environments . Automated Software Engineering . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF00872289 [ 25 ] Gerhard Fischer and Andreas Girgensohn . 1990 . End - user modifiability in design environments . CHI ’90 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 97243 . 97272 [ 26 ] Gerhard Fischer and E . Scharff . 2000 . Meta - Design – Design for Designers . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Designing Interactive Systems , 396 – 405 . [ 27 ] Christiane Floyd , Wolf - Michael Mehl , Fanny - Michaela Reisin , Gerhard Schmidt , and Gregor Wolf . 1989 . Out of Scandinavia : Alternative Approaches to Software Design and System Development . Human - Computer Interaction 4 , 4 : 253 – 350 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15327051hci0404 _ 1 [ 28 ] Sarah Fox and Christopher A . Le Dantec . 2014 . Community Historians : Scaffolding Community Engagement through Culture and Heritage . In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Designing interactive systems , 785 – 794 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2598510 . 2598563 [ 29 ] Michelle Gantt and Ba Bonnie A . Nardi . 1992 . Gardeners and gurus : patterns of cooperation among CAD users . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 107 – 117 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 142750 . 142767 [ 30 ] Ole Hanseth and Nina Lundberg . 2001 . Designing work oriented infrastructures . Journal of Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( JCSCW ) 10 , 3 – 4 : 347 – 372 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A : 1012727708439 [ 31 ] Ole Hanseth , Eric Monteiro , and Morten Hatling . 1996 . Developing information infrastructure : the tension between standardisation and flexibility . Science , Technology and Human Values 11 , 4 : 407 – 426 . [ 32 ] Austin Henderson and Morten Kyng . 1991 . There’s no place like home : Continuing Design in Use . In Design at work cooperative design of computer systems , J Greenbaum and M Kyng ( eds . ) . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , 219 – 240 . Retrieved from http : / / books . google . co . kr / books ? hl = ko & amp ; lr = & amp ; id = BCGM7GQFyqYC & amp ; oi = fnd & amp ; pg = PA219 & amp ; d q = There’s + no + place + like + home & amp ; ots = BghnneB4l0 & amp ; sig = WdDuQAUfHZ6jfWoLQEQ2V6p - lYo [ 33 ] Reimut Jochimsen . 1966 . Theorie der Infrastruktur , Grundlagen der marktwirtschaftlichen Entwicklung . J . C . B . Mohr ( Paul Siebeck ) , Tübingen . [ 34 ] J . Christopher Jones . 1983 . Continuous design and redesign . Design Studies 4 , 1 : 53 – 60 . https : / / doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0142 - 694X ( 83 ) 90008 - X [ 35 ] H . Karasti and K . S . Baker . 2004 . Infrastructuring for the long - term : ecological information management . In Proceedings of the Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , 2004 . Proceedings of the , 1 – 10 . [ 36 ] Helena Karasti , Volkmar Pipek , and Geoffrey C . Bowker . 2018 . An Afterword to ‘Infrastructuring and Collaborative Design . ’ Computer Supported Cooperative Work : CSCW : An International Journal . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 017 - 9305 - x [ 37 ] Helena Karasti and Anna - Liisa Syrjänen . 2004 . Artful infrastructuring in two cases of community PD . In Proceedings of the eighth conference on Participatory design : Artful integration : interweaving media , materials and practices , 20 – 30 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1011870 . 1011874 [ 38 ] Kari Kuutti and Lj Bannon . 2014 . The turn to practice in HCI : towards a research agenda . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) , 3543 – 3552 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557111 [ 39 ] Jonathan Lazar and Jennifer Preece . 2002 . Social considerations in online communities : Usability , sociability , and success factors . In Cognition in the Digital world , Herre Van Oostendorp ( ed . ) . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc . Publishers , 1 – 46 . Retrieved from http : / / books . google . com / books ? hl = en & amp ; lr = & amp ; id = WwCfUeaa _ ZoC & amp ; oi = fnd & amp ; pg = PA118 & amp ; dq = Social + considerations + in + online + communities : + usability , + sociability , + and + success + factors & amp ; ots = yKKsQc meB5 & amp ; sig = Rskl8T4MKPiOHfUdYGIJ - AK5j0k [ 40 ] Charlotte P Lee , Paul Dourish , and Gloria Mark . 2006 . The human infrastructure of cyberinfrastructure . Proceedings of the 20th anniversary conference on Computer supported cooperative work ( CSCW 06 ) 12 , 2 – 3 : 483 – 492 . Retrieved from http : / / portal . acm . org / citation . cfm ? doid = 1180875 . 1180950 [ 41 ] Henry Lieberman , Fabio Paternò , and Volker Wulf . 2006 . End User Development : An Emerging Paradigm . End User Development . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 1 - 4020 - 5386 - X [ 42 ] Friedrich List . 1841 . Das nationale System der politischen Ökonomie . Cotta Verlag , Stuttgart / Tübingen . 113 : 28 T . Ludwig et al . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 . [ 43 ] Thomas Ludwig , Alexander Boden , and Volkmar Pipek . 2017 . 3D Printers as Sociable Technologies : Taking Appropriation Infrastructures to the Internet of Things . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 24 , 2 . [ 44 ] Thomas Ludwig , Oliver Stickel , Alexander Boden , and Volkmar Pipek . 2014 . Towards Sociable Technologies : An Empirical Study on Designing Appropriation Infrastructures for 3D Printing . In Proceedings of DIS14 Designing Interactive Systems , 835 – 844 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2598510 . 2598528 [ 45 ] Wendy E . Mackay . 1990 . Patterns of sharing customizable software . In Proceedings of the 1990 ACM conference on Computer - supported cooperative work , 209 – 221 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 99332 . 99356 [ 46 ] A . MacLean , K . Carter , L . Lövstrand , and L . Moran . 1990 . User - Tailorable Systems : Pressing the Issues with Buttons . In Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computer Systems ( CHI ) . [ 47 ] Wendy March , Margot Jacobs , and Tony Salvador . 2005 . Designing technology for community appropriation . In CHI 05 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems CHI 05 , 2126 – 2127 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1056808 . 1057120 [ 48 ] Eric Monteiro , Neil Pollock , Ole Hanseth , and Robin Williams . 2013 . From Artefacts to Infrastructures . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : The Journal of Collaborative Computing ( JCSCW ) 22 , 4 : 575 – 607 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 012 - 9167 - 1 [ 49 ] M . J . Muller . 2003 . Participatory design : The third space in HCI . Human - Computer Interaction Handbook . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 153571 . 255960 [ 50 ] Donald A Norman . 2008 . Sociable Design . Retrieved November 1 , 2016 from http : / / www . jnd . org / ms / 1 . 1 Sociable Design . pdf [ 51 ] Jacki O’Neill , Stefania Castellani , Antonietta Grasso , Frederic Roulland , and Peter Tolmie . 2005 . Representations Can be Good Enough . In Proceedings of the Ninth European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( ECSCW ) , 267 – 286 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 1 - 4020 - 4023 - 7 _ 14 [ 52 ] Elena Parmiggiani , Eric Monteiro , and Vidar Hepsø . 2015 . The Digital Coral : Infrastructuring Environmental Monitoring . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 24 , 5 : 423 – 460 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 015 - 9233 - 6 [ 53 ] Volkmar Pipek . 2005 . From Tailoring to Appropriation Support : Negotiating Groupware Usage . University of Oulu . [ 54 ] Volkmar Pipek and Helge Kahler . 2006 . Supporting Collaborative Tailoring . In End - User Development . Srpinger , 315 – 345 . [ 55 ] Volkmar Pipek and Volker Wulf . 1999 . A Groupware’s Life . In European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( ECSCW’99 ) , 199 – 218 . [ 56 ] Volkmar Pipek and Volker Wulf . 2009 . Infrastructuring : Toward an Integrated Perspective on the Design and Use of Information Technology . Journal of the Association for Information Systems ( JAIS ) 10 , 5 : 447 – 473 . [ 57 ] Byron Reeves and Clifford Nass . 1996 . The Media Equation : How People Treat Computers , Television , and New Media Like Real People and Places . Cambridge University Press , New York , NY , USA . [ 58 ] Toni Robertson . 1998 . Shoppers and Tailors : Participative Practices in Small Australian Design Companies . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 7 , 3 – 4 : 205 – 221 . Retrieved from http : / / link . springer . com / article / 10 . 1023 / A % 3A1008626803428 % 5Cnhttp : / / link . springer . com / article / 10 . 1023 % 2FA % 3 A1008626803428 [ 59 ] John Stanislav Sadar and Gyungju Chyon . 2011 . 3D Scanning and Printing As a New Medium for Creativity in Product Design . In Procedings of the Second Conference on Creativity and Innovation in Design ( DESIRE ’11 ) , 15 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2079216 . 2079218 [ 60 ] D Schön . 1983 . The Reflective Practitioner : How professional think in action . Design . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1542 / peds . 2005 - 0209 [ 61 ] Birger Sevaldson . 2011 . Giga - mapping : Visualisation for complexity and systems thinking in design . Nordes ’11 : the 4th Nordic Design Research Conference . [ 62 ] Susan Leigh Star and Geoffrey C Bowker . 2002 . How to infrastructure . In Handbook of New Media - Social Shaping and Consequences of ICTs , L . A . Lievrouw and S . Livingstone ( eds . ) . SAGE Pub , London , UK , 151 – 162 . [ 63 ] Susan Leigh Star and Karen Ruhleder . 1996 . Steps Toward an Ecology of Infrastructure : Design and Access for Large Information Spaces . Information Systems Research 7 , 1 : 111 – 134 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / isre . 7 . 1 . 111 [ 64 ] Gunnar Stevens , Volkmar Pipek , and Volker Wulf . 2009 . Appropriation Infrastructure : Supporting the Design of Usages . In Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on End - User Development ( LNCS ) , 50 – 69 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 00427 - 8 [ 65 ] Anselm L . Strauss . 1987 . Qualitative analysis for social scientists . Cambridge University Press . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO9780511557842 [ 66 ] Andrew S Tanenbaum . 2002 . Computer Networks ( 4th Edition ) . Designing for Collaborative Infrastructuring : Supporting Resonance Activities 113 : 29 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 2 , No . CSCW , Article 113 , Publication date : November 2018 [ 67 ] Michael B Twidale and Ingbert Floyd . 2008 . Infrastructures from the bottom - up and the top - down : Can they meet in the middle ? In Proceedings of the Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design ( PDC ) , 238 – 241 . Retrieved from http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1795234 . 1795286 [ 68 ] Ron Wakkary and Leah Maestri . 2007 . The resourcefulness of everyday design . In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI conference on Creativity & cognition - C & C ’07 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1254960 . 1254984 [ 69 ] Ron Wakkary and Leah Maestri . 2008 . Aspects of everyday design : Resourcefulness , adaptation , and emergence . International Journal of Human - Computer Interaction . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447310802142276 [ 70 ] David Wellman and Julian E . Orr . 1997 . Talking about Machines : An Ethnography of a Modern Job . Contemporary Sociology 26 , 626 . [ 71 ] Volker Wulf , Volkmar Pipek , and Markus Won . 2008 . Component - based Tailorability : Enabling Highly Flexible Software Applications . Int . J . Hum . - Comput . Stud . 66 , 1 : 1 – 22 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2007 . 08 . 007 [ 72 ] Fahri Yetim , Sebastian Draxler , Gunnar Stevens , and Volker Wulf . 2012 . Fostering Continuous User Participation by Embedding a Communication Support Tool in User Interfaces . AIS Transactions on Human - Computer Interaction 4 , 2 : 153 – 168 . Received April 2018 ; revised July 2018 ; accepted September 2018 .