The Rab5 Effector Rabankyrin - 5 Regulates and Coordinates Different Endocytic Mechanisms Carsten Schnatwinkel 1 , Savvas Christoforidis 2 , Margaret R . Lindsay 3 , Sandrine Uttenweiler - Joseph 4¤ , Matthias Wilm 4 , Robert G . Parton 3 , Marino Zerial 1 * 1 Max - Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics , Dresden , Germany , 2 Laboratory of Biological Chemistry , Medical School , University of Ioannina , Ioannina , Greece , 3 Institute for Molecular Bioscience , Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis , School of Biomedical Sciences , University of Queensland , Brisbane , Queensland , Australia , 4 European Molecular Biology Laboratory , Heidelberg , Germany The small GTPase Rab5 is a key regulator of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . On early endosomes , within a spatially restricted domain enriched in phosphatydilinositol - 3 - phosphate [ PI ( 3 ) P ] , Rab5 coordinates a complex network of effectors that functionally cooperate in membrane tethering , fusion , and organelle motility . Here we discovered a novel PI ( 3 ) P - binding Rab5 effector , Rabankyrin - 5 , which localises to early endosomes and stimulates their fusion activity . In addition to early endosomes , however , Rabankyrin - 5 localises to large vacuolar structures that correspond to macropinosomes in epithelial cells and fibroblasts . Overexpression of Rabankyrin - 5 increases the number of macropinosomes and stimulates fluid - phase uptake , whereas its downregulation inhibits these processes . In polarised epithelial cells , this function is primarily restricted to the apical membrane . Rabankyrin - 5 localises to large pinocytic structures underneath the apical surface of kidney proximal tubule cells , and its overexpression in polarised Madin - Darby canine kidney cells stimulates apical but not basolateral , non - clathrin - mediated pinocytosis . In demonstrating a regulatory role in endosome fusion and ( macro ) pinocytosis , our studies suggest that Rab5 regulates and coordinates different endocytic mechanisms through its effector Rabankyrin - 5 . Furthermore , its active role in apical pinocytosis in epithelial cells suggests an important function of Rabankyrin - 5 in the physiology of polarised cells . Citation : Schnatwinkel C , Christoforidis S , Lindsay MR , Uttenweiler - Joseph S , Wilm M , et al . ( 2004 ) The Rab5 effector rabankyrin - 5 regulates and coordinates different endocytic mechanisms . PLoS Biol 2 ( 9 ) : e261 . Introduction In mammalian cells multiple mechanisms of endocytosis operate within a single cell to perform nutrient uptake , cellular homeostasis , neurotransmission , signal transduction , antigen presentation , and defence against pathogens . Endo - cytosis comprises two major categories , phagocytosis and pinocytosis , depending on the uptake of particles or ﬂuid , respectively ( reviewed in Conner and Schmid 2003 ) . Pinocy - tosis encompasses various membrane entry routes and mechanisms . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis , the best - studied route at the molecular level to date , primarily serves receptor - mediated uptake . Caveolae assemble on sphingoli - pid and cholesterol rafts and may internalise molecules partitioning in these lipid microdomains . To a certain extent , ligand - receptor complexes and raft components can follow both entry routes but can also be internalised via clathrin - and caveolae - independent endocytosis . Large volumes of ﬂuid are engulfed by the closure of plasma membrane protrusions in a process termed macropinocytosis . Although it was the ﬁrst mode of pinocytosis reported ( Lewis 1931 ) , little is known on the molecular mechanisms underlying this physiologically very important endocytic process . Constitu - tively active in immature dendritic cells , macropinocytosis favors antigen sampling ( Steinman and Swanson 1995 ) . However , it can be transiently induced in most cells by growth factors ( Haigler et al . 1979 ; Shao et al . 2002 ) , tumor - promoting chemicals such as phorbol 12 - myristate 13 - acetate ( PMA ) , or oncogenes like H - Ras or v - Src ( Bar - Sagi and Feramisco 1986 ; Veithen et al . 1996 ) , and it has been proposed to downregulate signalling molecules from the cell surface . Since macropinosomes arise from membrane rufﬂes , regions of intense actin remodelling which are also a trait of motile cells , they have been implicated in directed cell locomotion ( Carpentier et al . 1991 ) . Macropinocytosis is exploited by several invasive pathogens as entry route ( Francis et al . 1993 ; Sansonetti 1997 ) but differs from phagocytosis with respect to regulation ( e . g . , receptor mediated ) and cargo ( e . g . , uptake and degradation of opsonised particles ) ( Galan and Zhou 2000 ) . Macropinosomes are distinct from early endosomes , morphologically and Received December 19 , 2003 ; Accepted June 11 , 2004 ; Published August 24 , 2004 DOI : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020261 Copyright : (cid:1) Schnatwinkel 2004 et al . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . Abbreviations : ANK , ankyrin ; CCV , clathrin - coated vesicle ; CFP , cyan fluorescent protein ; EGF , epidermal growth factor ; esiRNA , endoribonuclease - prepared small interfering RNA ; GAP , GTPase - activating protein ; GPI , glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol ; GST , glutathione S - transferase ; GTP , guanine nucleotide trisphosphate ; HRP , horseradish peroxidase ; IgG , immunoglobulin G ; IM , incubation medium ; MDCK cells , Madin - Darby canine kidney cells ; PI ( 3 ) P , phosphatidylinositol - 3 - phosphate ; PI3 - K , phosphatidylinositol - 3 kinase ; PMA , phorbol 12 - myristate 13 - acetate ; YFP , yellow fluorescent protein Academic Editor : Peter Walter , University of California at San Francisco * To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : zerial @ mpi - cbg . de ¤ Current address : IPBS , CNRS , Toulouse Cedex , France PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org September 2004 | Volume 2 | Issue 9 | e261 0001 Open access , freely available online PLoS BIOLOGY biochemically . In epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) - stimulated A431 cells , whereas macropinosomes can fuse homotypically , they seldom fuse with early endosomes ( Hewlett et al . 1994 ) . However , this partition is not absolute , since in dendritic cells macropinosomes do fuse with endosomes ( Racoosin and Swanson 1993 ) . The intracellular trafﬁcking properties of macropinosomes may therefore be governed by cell type - speciﬁc mechanisms and fulﬁl specialised functions . Finally , macropinocytosis shares mechanistic features with apical ﬂuid - phase endocytosis in polarised cells ( Gottlieb et al . 1993 ; Jackman et al . 1994 ; Holm et al . 1995 ; Amyere et al . 2002 ) . In kidney , apical pinocytosis contributes an essential function to the physiology of the renal system by contributing to vectorial ﬂuid - phase transport across the membranes ( Goli - gorsky and Hruska 1986 ) . Given the dependence on actin remodelling , it is no surprise that Rho GTPases ( West et al . 2000 ) , ARF6 ( Radhakrishna et al . 1996 ) , and type 1 phosphatidylinositol - 3 kinases ( PI3 - Ks ) ( Hooshmand - Rad et al . 1997 ) are involved in macropinocytosis , presumably through their role in membrane rufﬂing . Much less clear is the function of two Rab GTPases , Rab5 and Rab34 / Rah , both of which are implicated in the formation of macropinosomes ( Li et al . 1997 ; Sun et al . 2003 ) . Rab34 / Rah colocalises with actin to membrane rufﬂes and nascent macropinosomes and its overexpression promotes macropinocytosis ( Sun et al . 2003 ) . Rab5 regulates ﬂuid - phase and receptor - mediated uptake ( Bucci et al . 1992 ; McLauchlan et al . 1998 ) , and its activity has been linked to Ras - stimulated ﬂuid - phase endocytosis ( Li et al . 1997 ) . However , Rab5 colocalises to some , but not all , macropinosomes harbouring Rab34 / Rah ( Sun et al . 2003 ) . Furthermore , Rab5 together with its effector PI3 - K , hVPS34 , regulates the recruitment of a set of cytosolic FYVE - ﬁnger effector proteins on early endosomes . These molecules cooperate in the tethering and fusion of clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) with early endosomes and homotypic endosome fusion ( Gorvel et al . 1991 ; Bucci et al . 1995 ; Rubino et al . 2000 ) as well as the motility of early endosomes along microtubules ( Nielsen et al . 1999 ) . However , in view of the function of Rab5 on the early endosomes , its role in macropinocytosis is difﬁcult to assess . Speciﬁcally , it is unclear whether the large vacuoles induced by Rab5 activation , either via the expression of activated mutants ( Stenmark et al . 1994 ) or via signalling molecules that stimulate the GTP loading on Rab5 ( Lanzetti et al . 2000 ; Tall et al . 2001 ) , correspond to either macropinosomes or enlarged endosomes originated by increased homotypic early - endosome fusion , or both ( Hewlett et al . 1994 ) . Here , the identiﬁcation of a novel Rab5 FYVE - ﬁnger effector , Rabankyrin - 5 , led us to revisit the role of Rab5 in ﬂuid - phase ( macro ) pinocytosis in both nonpolarised and polarised cells . Results Identification of a Novel 130 - kDa Rab5 Effector We have previously puriﬁed a large number of Rab5 effectors by an afﬁnity chromatography approach based on glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) - Rab5 - GTP c S ( Christoforidis et al . 1999a ) . Among the numerous proteins puriﬁed , we focused on a prominent 130 - kDa protein ( Figure 1A ) . The protein was digested with trypsin and the amino acid sequences of the tryptic fragments were determined by nanoelectrospray tandem mass spectrometry ( Wilm et al . 1996 ) . The identiﬁed peptides matched the mouse sequence Figure 1 . A Protein of 130 kDa Is a New Rab5 Effector ( A ) GST - Rab5 - GDP and GST - Rab - GTP c S were loaded on beads and incubated with bovine brain cytosol . Bound proteins were eluted and analysed by SDS - PAGE followed by Coommasie Blue staining . The positions of the already known Rab5 effectors ( EEA1 , Rabaptin - 5 , hVps34 , p110 b , and Rabenosyn - 5 ) and of the new Rab5 effector are indicated . ( B ) Schematic representation of the domain organisation in Rabankyrin - 5 . ANK , ankyrin repeats . ( C ) Bovine brain cytosol or HeLa cell cytosol was incubated with GST - Rab5 - GDP – or GST - Rab5 - GTP c S – loaded beads . Subsequently the beads were washed , and bound proteins were eluted and analysed by Western blotting using anti – Rabankyrin - 5 antibodies . ( D ) GST - Rab4 , - 5 , - 7 , and - 11 fusion proteins were preloaded with GDP or GTP c S and incubated with in vitro - translated 35 S - methionine – labelled Rabankyrin - 5 full - length protein . As a control , bound and unbound material was analysed by SDS - PAGE followed by phosphoimager analysis . ( E ) Rabankyrin - 5 binds most strongly to PI ( 3 ) P . Recombinant full - length Rabankyrin - 5 was incubated with liposomes containing 2 % of the indicated phosphoinositide . Bound Rabankyrin - 5 was detected by Western blotting . DOI : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020261 . g001 PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org September 2004 | Volume 2 | Issue 9 | e261 0002 Rabankyrin - 5 in Macropinocytosis of Ankhzn ( unpublished data ) . The corresponding human cDNA was obtained by PCR , using primers derived from the mouse DNA sequence and a random primed HeLa cDNA library as template ( Zerial et al . 2001 ) . The sequence of the human cDNA matched the recently revised hAnkhzn gene sequence ( NP 057460 . 2 ) ( Kuriyama et al . 2000 ) . The predicted human p130 primary sequence consists of an N - terminal BTB / POZ domain , a C - terminal FYVE - ﬁnger , and 21 succes - sive ankyrin ( ANK ) repeats in between these two domains ( Figure 1B ) . In light of the fact that p130 is a Rab5 effector ( this study ) , we propose to amend its name to Rabankyrin - 5 ( Rab5 binding and ankyrin repeats containing protein ) . To investigate the function of human Rabankyrin - 5 , we raised antibodies against the recombinant full - length protein . By Western blotting , these antibodies detected a predom - inant band of 130 kDa in both bovine brain and HeLa cytosol , in the corresponding GST - Rab5 - GTP c S but not GST - Rab5 - GDP afﬁnity column eluates ( Figure 1C ) . Evidence for a direct interaction with Rab5 was obtained by incubating in vitro - translated Rabankyrin - 5 with beads displaying GST - Rab5 , - Rab4 , - Rab7 , and - Rab11 , preloaded with either GDP or GTP c S . Figure 1D shows that human Rabankyrin - 5 binds to GST - Rab5 - GTP c S , but neither to beads containing GST - Rab5 - GDP nor to other Rab proteins . We conclude that Rabankyrin - 5 binds to Rab5 speciﬁcally , directly , and GTP dependently . Association of Rabankyrin - 5 with Two Types of Rab5 - Positive Vesicles After EEA1 ( Stenmark et al . 1996 ) and Rabenosyn - 5 ( Nielsen et al . 2000 ) , Rabankyrin - 5 is the third Rab5 effector containing a FYVE - ﬁnger . Since the FYVE - ﬁnger is a key determinant for targeting these proteins to early endosomes via its binding to phosphatidylinositol - 3 - phosphate [ PI ( 3 ) P ] ( Kutateladze et al . 1999 ) , we tested whether this holds true also for Rabankyrin - 5 . First , recombinant Rabankyrin - 5 interacted signiﬁcantly with PI ( 3 ) P in a liposome - binding assay ( Figure 1E ) . Second , endogenous Rabankyrin - 5 colocal - ised signiﬁcantly with EEA1 and Rab5 - positive early endo - somes ( approximately 80 % ) in A431 cells by confocal immunoﬂuorescence microscopy analysis ( see Figure 3A and 3B below ) . We next investigated whether Rabankyrin - 5 plays a role in homotypic early endosome fusion as well as fusion of CCVs with early endosomes , similar to EEA1 ( Christoforidis et al . 1999a ) and Rabenosyn - 5 ( Nielsen et al . 2000 ) . Quantitative immunodepletion of the cytosolic pool of Rabankyrin - 5 using anti – Rabankyrin - 5 antibodies ( Figure 2A ) had only minor effects on early endosome fusion in vitro compared to preimmune serum ( Figure 2B ) . Considering the possibility that the early - endosome – associated pool of Rabankyrin - 5 may still be sufﬁcient for fusion , we attempted to neutralise its function by the addition of anti – Rabankyrin - 5 antibodies on top of Rabankyrin - 5 – depleted cytosol . This treatment strongly inhibited early - endosome fusion ( Figure 2B ) . The fusion of CCVs with early endosomes was minimally affected under these conditions ( Figure 2C ) , suggesting that Raban - kyrin - 5 is not essential in this process , at least in vitro . However , addition of increasing amounts of recombinant Rabankyrin - 5 ( at concentrations in the range of the endog - enous protein ; see Materials and Methods ) on either immunodepleted cytosol or nontreated cytosol signiﬁcantly enhanced both homo - and heterotypic fusion activity . We conclude from these experiments that endogenous Raban - kyrin - 5 colocalises with EEA1 on Rab5 endosomes in vivo , through the interaction with Rab5 ( see Figure 1D ) and PI ( 3 ) P ( see Figure 1E ) . It plays a modulatory role in early - endosome fusion since it can stimulate both homotypic and heterotypic fusion of CCVs with early endosomes . However , it does not appear to be strictly required in the latter reaction in vitro . Surprisingly , we noted that some peripheral structures harbouring Rabankyrin - 5 overlapped with Rab5 but either poorly or not at all with EEA1 in A431 cells ( Figure 3A , arrows ) . Upon overexpression , Rabankyrin - 5 induced the accumulation of several vesicles of variable size in the periphery of the cells , most of them lacking EEA1 ( Figure 3B , arrows ) . The irregular size , intracellular distribution ( Swanson 1989 ) , and lack of endosomal markers ( see ‘‘ Rabankyrin - 5 localises to macropinosomes ’’ below ) ( Hewlett et al . 1994 ) of these structures were suggestive of ( macro ) - pinocytic vesicles . We therefore set out to investigate the putative role of Rabankyrin - 5 in macropinocytosis . Rabankyrin - 5 Localises to Macropinosomes Macropinosomes have been so far deﬁned by a combina - tion of criteria rather than speciﬁc molecular markers . To test whether the Rabankyrin - 5 vesicles fulﬁl the previously described requirements of macropinosomes , we determined whether they ( 1 ) are stimulated by growth factors ( Haigler et al . 1979 ; West et al . 1989 ; Amyere et al . 2000 ) , ( 2 ) do not promote receptor - mediated endocytosis of transferrin , ( 3 ) engulf large amounts of extracellular ﬂuid ( Hewlett et al . 1994 ; Amyere et al . 2000 ) , ( 4 ) depend on PI3 - K activity ( Araki et al . 1996 ; Zhou et al . 1998 ) , and ( 5 ) follow actin rearrange - ments at the plasma membrane . A431 and NIH3T3 cells are established experimental systems that exhibit different features in the regulation of macropinocytosis . In A431 cells , macropinocytosis can be transiently induced upon growth factor stimulation ( Hewlett et al . 1994 ) , whereas NIH3T3 cells exhibit constitutive macropinocytic activity ( Dharmaward - hane et al . 2000 ) . We ﬁrst tested whether EGF can induce the formation of Rabankyrin - 5 – positive macropinocytic struc - tures . Upon treatment of A431 cells with rhodamine - conjugated EGF , endogenous Rabankyrin - 5 colocalised to enlarged structures which , importantly , were largely devoid of simultaneously internalised transferrin ( Figure 3C ) . Inter - estingly , EGF was not excluded but rather enriched in these structures . In addition , we observed that such vesicles were also enriched in tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins , presum - ably EGF - receptor and downstream signalling molecules ( Figure 3D ) . In NIH3T3 ﬁbroblasts , the staining pattern of endogenous Rabankyrin - 5 was similar to that of EGF - stimulated A431 cells . Rabankyrin - 5 was detected on enlarged structures , predominantly at the outermost periphery and in membrane protrusions of the cell ( Figure 4A , arrows ) . Consistent with these observations , immunoelectron microscopy revealed that antibodies to Rabankyrin - 5 labelled electron - lucent vesicular structures underlying the plasma membrane in the cell periphery and in cell protrusions ( Figure 5 ) . The labelled structures were sparse in untransfected cells , but in Raban - kyrin - 5 – overexpressing cells fortuitous sections revealed concentrated areas of Rabankyrin - 5 – labelled structures . Unfortunately , we failed to distinguish these structures from PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org September 2004 | Volume 2 | Issue 9 | e261 0003 Rabankyrin - 5 in Macropinocytosis Figure 2 . Rabankyrin - 5 Stimulates Homo - typic Fusion between Early Endosomes and Heterotypic Fusion between Early Endosomes and CCVs In Vitro ( A ) Rabankyrin - 5 was efﬁciently immu - nodepleted from HeLa cytosol without affecting the EEA1 concentration . Twenty micrograms of HeLa cell cytosol , either treated with control IgGs and immunodepleted for Rabankyrin - 5 or nontreated , was applied to SDS - PAGE and probed for the indicated antigens by Western blotting . Anti - c tubulin was used as a loading control . ( B and C ) Addition of recombinant Rabankyrin - 5 stimulates homotypic and heterotypic fusion . Fusion ( B ) between early endosomes ( EE - EE fusion ) and ( C ) of early endosomes to CCVs ( CCV - EE fusion ) in vitro was performed in the presence of 3 mg / ml HeLa cytosol and an ATP - regenerating system ( basal ) and in the absence or presence of the indicated reagents . For some conditions , cytosol was immunodepleted for Rabankyrin - 5 ( columns 8 – 13 ) and in addition supple - mented with anti – Rabankyrin - 5 antibod - ies to neutralise the function of membrane - associated proteins ( column 10 ) . Background fusion activity is dem - onstrated by ATP ( (cid:1) Energy ) or cytosol ( (cid:1) Cytosol ) omission . DOI : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020261 . g002 PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org September 2004 | Volume 2 | Issue 9 | e261 0004 Rabankyrin - 5 in Macropinocytosis conventional early endosomes by double immunolabelling experiments due to technical limitations . By light micros - copy , the appearance of vacuole - shaped structures devoid of the early endosomal marker EEA1 was dramatically increased upon Rabankyrin - 5 overexpression . In addition , after a 3 - min pulse , these structures were intensively labelled by a ﬂuid - phase marker ( see Figure 4B , arrows ) but not by transferrin ( unpublished data ) . Given the potent induction of macro - pinosomes by Rabankyrin - 5 in NIH3T3 cells , we used this experimental system to explore further the regulatory parameters of macropinocytosis . In NIH3T3 cells , Rabankyrin - 5 – enlarged structures were labelled by an 8 - min uptake of ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) - dextran ( MW , 10 . 000 ) . Consistent with their macro - pinocytic nature , these structures were largely depleted of transferrin ( see Figure 4C , arrows ) and susceptible to the PI3 - K inhibitors wortmannin ( see Figure 4D ) and LY 294002 ( unpublished data ) . These drugs both reduced the formation of peripheral enlarged vesicles and almost completely blocked the internalisation of high - molecular - weight dextran ( MW , 70 . 000 ) ( Figure S1A ) that enters the cell almost exclusively via macropinocytosis ( Dharmawardhane et al . 2000 ) . Interestingly , we noted that , unlike EEA1 , Rabankyrin - 5 did not readily dissociate from membranes ( see Figure 4D ) upon inhibition of PI3 - K activity , suggesting that endosome - targeting determinants other than PI ( 3 ) P contribute to its localisation . Neither markers of late endosomes ( Rab7 ) ( Chavrier et al . 1990 ) , nor of caveosomes ( caveolin ) ( Pelkmans et al . 2001 ) , nor of the clathrin - independent pathway which is used by glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored pro - teins ( GFP - GPI ) ( Sabharanjak et al . 2002 ) overlapped signiﬁ - cantly with the peripheral enlarged Rabankyrin - 5 structures ( unpublished data ) . To conﬁrm that the Rabankyrin - 5 structures originated from the plasma membrane through an actin - driven process , we employed time - lapse video ﬂuorescence microscopy on NIH3T3 cells transiently coexpressing yellow ﬂuorescent protein ( YFP ) - Rabankyrin - 5 and cyan ﬂuorescent protein ( CFP ) - b - actin . In the sequence depicted in Figure 4E ( see also Video S1 ) , membrane rufﬂing driven by actin resulted in the formation of a large , plasma membrane - derived vesicle acquiring Rabankyrin - 5 . Some newly formed vesicles shed off Rabankyrin - 5 over time and seemed to regurgitate back to the plasma membrane via an actin comet - tail . Altogether , the data support the hypothesis that the enlarged structures containing Rabankyrin - 5 are macropinosomes and can be molecularly distinguished from early endosomes by being mostly , albeit not exclusively , devoid of EEA1 . Moreover , and contrary to earlier ﬁndings ( West et al . 1989 ) , we found that in A431 cells , EGF but not transferrin could be enriched in macropinosomes . Both Rab5 and Rabankyrin - 5 Are Required for Macropinocytosis The GTP - dependent interaction with Rab5 suggests that Rabankyrin - 5 may function as a downstream effector of Rab5 in the macropinocytic pathway . Accordingly , one would expect that Rab5 localises to macropinosomes and , together with Rabankyrin - 5 , is required for macropinocytosis . We found that Rab5 indeed colocalises with Rabankyrin - 5 on macropinosomes ( see Figure 3B , 3D , and 6A ; unpublished data ) , which are operationally deﬁned as vesicles ( 1 ) enriched in ﬂuid - phase marker but depleted of transferrin receptor ( Racoosin and Swanson 1992 ) , ( 2 ) of large size ( 0 , 2 – 2 l m ) ( Swanson 1989 ; Hewlett et al . 1994 ) , and ( 3 ) negative for EEA1 but positive for Rabankyrin - 5 . Consistent with a requirement for Rab5 in macropinocytosis , overexpression of RN - tre , a GTPase - activating protein ( GAP ) for Rab5 ( Lanzetti et al . 2000 ) , signiﬁcantly reduced ( by 60 % 6 10 % ) the uptake of large ﬂuorescent dextran ( MW , 70 . 000 ) into transferrin - and EEA1 - negative structures in NIH3T3 cells ( Figure 6B and 6C ) . Similar results were also obtained when NIH3T3 cells were cotransfected for Rab5S34N and Rabankyrin - 5 ( unpublished data ) , implying that Rabankyrin - 5 induces macropinocytosis Rab5 - GTP dependently . Whereas the aforementioned results demonstrate a general requirement for Rab5 and Rabankyrin - 5 in pinocytosis , they do not discriminate between clathrin - dependent and - independent endocytosis . To distinguish between the two pathways , we compared the effects of Rabankyrin - 5 over - expression on transferrin and horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) uptake in NIH3T3 cells , biochemically . A recombinant adenovirus was generated to overexpress Rabankyrin - 5 in these cells . In comparison with mock - infected cells , Raban - kyrin - 5 overexpression increased the uptake of HRP , partic - ularly after longer ( 10 min ) incubation times ( Figure 7A ) . In contrast , the rate of transferrin uptake was unaffected , suggesting that the increase of ﬂuid phase was not due to increased clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Figure 7C ) . The increased intracellular accumulation of HRP induced by Rabankyrin - 5 seems to be due to increased uptake rather than inhibited recycling , as the latter process was only slightly decreased ( Figure 7B ) . To determine whether Rabankyrin - 5 is also required for macropinocytosis , we attempted to ablate the protein by RNA interference using endoribonuclease - prepared small inter - fering RNA ( esiRNA ) ( Yang et al . 2002 ) . Since we optimised this technique in human cells , we conducted these experi - ments in EGF - stimulated A431 cells where an approximately 55 % knock - down of Rabankyrin - 5 was achieved ( Figure 7D ) . EGF stimulation of control - treated cells enhanced HRP uptake 2 - fold versus control - treated , non - EGF - stimulated cells , as reported previously . Reduction of Rabankyrin - 5 expression in esiRNA - transfected cells caused an inhibition of HRP of up to approximately 50 % by selectively affecting the burst of pinocytosis induced by EGF ( within 5 min ) ( Figure 7E ) . Under the same conditions , transferrin uptake was marginally inhibited ( Figure 7F ) . We conclude from these experiments that inhibition of ﬂuid - phase uptake occurs due to an inhibition of ( macro ) pinocytosis rather than of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . To conﬁrm the requirement of Rabankyrin - 5 for ﬂuid - phase endocytosis we used an independent method : quanti - ﬁcation of the uptake of ﬂuorescent dextran in NIH3T3 cells microinjected with afﬁnity - puriﬁed anti – Rabankyrin - 5 anti - bodies . Following microinjection , FITC - dextran uptake was internalised for 30 min to label macropinosomes . Micro - injection of anti – Rabankyrin - 5 antibodies inhibited FITC - dextran uptake by 53 % 6 5 % when compared with cells injected with preimmune serum ( Figure S2 ) , whereas the uptake of rhodamine - transferrin was not signiﬁcantly changed . Altogether , these results suggest that Rabankyrin - 5 is a Rab5 effector required for the formation of macro - pinosomes . PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org September 2004 | Volume 2 | Issue 9 | e261 0005 Rabankyrin - 5 in Macropinocytosis Figure 3 . Rabankyrin - 5 Associates with Two Types of Rab5 - Containing Vesicles in A431 Cells , Early Endosomes , and Macropinosomes ( A ) A431 cells stably transfected for GFP - Rab5wt were immunostained for endogenous Rabankyrin - 5 and EEA1 . While there is perinuclear overlap between Rab5 , Rabankyrin - 5 , and EEA1 in nontransfected cells ( arrowheads ) , some smaller peripheral structures are devoid of EEA1 ( arrows ) . ( B ) Overexpression of Rabankyrin - 5 in A431 by using a recombinant adenovirus construct of Rabankyrin - 5 causes an accumulation of peripheral , enlarged Rab5 - positive structures , costained mainly by Rabankyrin - 5 ( arrows ) but not detectable for EEA1 . ( C ) Rabankyrin - 5 localises on EGF - induced and - enriched macropinosomes . Serum - starved A431 cells ( 16 h ) were incubated for 7 min with 100 ng / ml rhodamine - conjugated EGF to induce macropinocytosis and 1 l g / ml Cy5 - labelled transferrin . Endogenous Rabankyrin - 5 localises to PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org September 2004 | Volume 2 | Issue 9 | e261 0006 Rabankyrin - 5 in Macropinocytosis Rabankyrin - 5 Regulates Apical Fluid - Phase Endocytosis in Polarised Epithelial Cells Apical pinocytosis in polarised epithelial cells and growth factor - induced macropinocytosis share mechanistic proper - ties , like dependence on actin ( Gottlieb et al . 1993 ) and PI3 - K activity ( Tuma et al . 1999 ; Sandvig et al . 2000 ) . In view of the role of Rab5 in endocytic trafﬁcking of polarised cells such as epithelial cells and neurons ( Bucci et al . 1994 ; de Hoop et al . 1994 ) , we explored the role of Rabankyrin - 5 in apical endocytosis in polarised epithelial cells . First , we determined the intracellular localisation of Rabankyrin - 5 on cryosections of adult mouse kidney , since the epithelial cells in this organ , especially proximal tubule cells ( Christensen et al . 1998 ) , exhibit high levels of apical pinocytosis under physiological conditions . Apical endocytic vesicles were pulse - labelled by injecting mice with HRP followed by ﬁxation of the kidney through perfusion after 5 min . Prominin - 1 was used as marker for the apical brush border of proximal tubules ( Weigmann et al . 1997 ) in combination with afﬁnity - puriﬁed anti – Rabankyrin - 5 antibodies . Basement membrane staining was demonstrated by immunolabelling of endogenous mouse immunoglobulin G ( IgG ) . As illustrated in Figure 8 , Raban - kyrin - 5 immunoreactivity was mainly detected on vesicle - like structures underneath the apical , prominin - 1 – labelled brush border . Most of the vacuole - like Rabankyrin - 5 structures contained HRP , suggesting that they correspond to apical endocytic structures ( Figure 8D , arrows ) . By further inves - tigating the nature of these Rabankyrin - 5 – and HRP - labelled structures , we observed that some vesicles were immuno - reactive for LAMP - 1 ( Figure 8D , arrowheads ) , suggesting that Rabankyrin - 5 ( macro ) pinocytic vesicles can acquire charac - teristics of late endocytic compartments . This was conﬁrmed and extended by immunogold electron microscopy on ultrathin frozen sections of mouse proximal tubule . Rabankyrin - 5 showed weak labelling of the apical microvilli - covered surface of proximal tubule cells but labelled large electron - lucent structures underlying the apical surface ( Figure 9A and 9B ) . Consistent with the immuno - ﬂuorescence analysis , double labelling with LAMP - 1 anti - bodies conﬁrmed that many of these structures were LAMP - 1 negative or weakly labelled . However , a signiﬁcant number of Rabankyrin - 5 – positive structures were also LAMP - 1 positive . Rabankyrin - 5 immunoreactivity was also observed in distal tubule cells and other segments of the nephron . To functionally address the role of Rabankyrin - 5 in pinocytosis , we used ﬁlter - grown Madin - Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells as an established system to study polarised trafﬁcking . Alexa 488 dextran was internalised for 13 min from either the apical or the basolateral chamber . Although endogenous Rabankyrin - 5 exhibited partial colocalisation with ﬂuid - phase marker internalised from the basolateral side ( unpublished data ) , a striking degree of overlap between the internalised tracer and Rabankyrin - 5 on often ring - shaped structures underlying the apical region was observed ( Figure 10A ) . These large vesicles were neither detectable in the nuclear area ( Figure 10B ) nor close to the basolateral domain ( Figure 10C ) . We next tested whether Rabankyrin - 5 over - expression could stimulate ﬂuid - phase uptake from the apical plasma membrane domain . Rabankyrin - 5 was overexpressed using the recombinant adenovirus system in MDCK cells grown on coverslips and the cells stained for Rabankyrin - 5 and EEA1 . As in A431 and NIH3T3 cells , and similar to endogenous Rabankyrin - 5 in MDCK cells ( Figure 11A ) , the overexpressed protein exhibited signiﬁcant colocalisation with endogenous EEA1 , but in addition , it induced the formation of enlarged structures devoid of EEA1 in the periphery of the cell ( Figure 11B ) . The recombinant adenovirus was next applied to infect ﬁlter - grown MDCK cells . In these cells , it induced enlarged Rabankyrin - 5 structures predominantly underlying the apical domain that contained dextran internalised from the apical side . Some of these structures were EEA1 positive , whereas others lacked this marker of early endosomes ( see Figure 10D , arrows ) . These structures were also detectable to some extent in the nuclear region ( see Figure 10E ) and basolateral membrane domain ( see Figure 10F ) . In addition , there were some enlarged Rabankyrin - 5 vesicles that were labelled for neither dextran nor EEA1 . These may correspond to macropino - somes that were formed prior to the labelling with the ﬂuorescent ﬂuid - phase marker . We next measured ﬂuid - phase uptake biochemically by quantifying the internalisation of HRP either from the apical or the basolateral side for various periods of time . Filter - grown MDCK cells were either infected with adenovirus encoding Rabankyrin - 5 or control virus prior to HRP internalisation . While internalisation of HRP from the basolateral plasma membrane did not signiﬁcantly vary ( Figure 11D ) , uptake from the apical membrane was increased up to 65 % in cells overexpressing Rabankyrin - 5 when compared with control cells ( Figure 11C ) . Given that Rabankyrin - 5 was overexpressed in only 50 – 60 % of the cells , this value may be an underestimate . Since the kinetic proﬁles resembled the ones obtained in NIH3T3 cells , we also tested whether the increase in HRP uptake may have been due to an inhibition of recycling or transcytosis . Neither of these trafﬁcking pathways was signiﬁcantly affected ( unpublished data ) . To verify that the increase in ﬂuid - phase uptake was not due to stimulation of clathrin - mediated endocytosis , we measured the internalisation of FcLR 5 – 27 , a chimeric receptor between the IgG Fc receptor and the LDL receptor which , when expressed in MDCK cells , is targeted to , and internalised from , both apical and basolateral plasma membrane domains ( Matter et al . 1992 ) . Rabankyrin - 5 over - expression did not affect signiﬁcantly the internalisation of FcLR 5 – 27 , as revealed by the uptake of a biotinylated Fab - fragment of the 2 . 4G2 monoclonal anti - FcRII antibody ( Figure 11E and 11F ) . Taken together , these ﬁndings indicate that Rabankyrin - 5 is predominantly localised to apical endocytic structures and speciﬁcally stimulates apical , non - enlarged EGF - containing macropinosomes , indicated by the lack of transferrin labelling ( arrows ) , but also to EGF - and transferrin - containing endosomes ( arrowheads ) . ( D ) Rabankyrin - 5 structures contain tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins . A431 cells , stably transfected for GFP - Rab5 , were stimulated with 50 ng / ml EGF for 7 min and immediately processed for immunoﬂuorescence . Costaining of Rabankyrin - 5 and tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins ( a - 4G10 ) reveal the localisation of Rabankyrin - 5 to plasma membrane rufﬂes . Scale bars represent 10 l m . DOI : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020261 . g003 PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org September 2004 | Volume 2 | Issue 9 | e261 0007 Rabankyrin - 5 in Macropinocytosis PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org September 2004 | Volume 2 | Issue 9 | e261 0008 Rabankyrin - 5 in Macropinocytosis clathrin - mediated ﬂuid - phase endocytosis upon overexpres - sion in polarised epithelial cells . Discussion Rabankyrin - 5 in Macropinocytosis Since the pioneering work of Bar - Sagi and Feramisco ( 1986 ) almost two decades ago , it has been established that certain oncogenes and signalling molecules induce actin - dependent membrane rufﬂing and macropinocytosis . Sub - sequent work has advanced our understanding of the signal - ling pathway that led to growth factor - dependent actin remodelling and membrane rufﬂing ( Ridley 1994 ) . Despite macropinocytosis being the most ancient form of pinocytosis and an endocytic process of high physiological importance ( Amyere et al . 2002 ) , progress in determining the molecular mechanisms that regulate the generation and trafﬁcking of macropinosomes has advanced to a lesser extent . It has been demonstrated that macropinocytosis differs from clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( West et al . 1989 ) and that the two pathways lead to distinct endocytic structures ( Hewlett et al . 1994 ) . Rab5 , an established regulator of clathrin - mediated endocytosis and endosome dynamics ( Gorvel et al . 1991 ; Bucci et al . 1992 ; McLauchlan et al . 1998 ) , has also been implicated in macropinocytosis ( Li et al . 1997 ) . This hypothesis was based on the expression of mutants that induced or inhibited ﬂuid - phase endocytosis and formation of giant endocytic vesicles . In those studies , however , an accurate assessment of whether the enlarged compartments corresponded to macropinosomes or were produced by the coalescence of multiple endosomes by homotypic fusion was not determined . Here , we provide evidence that Rabankyrin - 5 is a novel Rab5 effector which , in addition to being localised to early endosomes , is associated with macropinosomes and promotes their formation according to previously established criteria . First , Rabankyrin - 5 localised to enlarged vesicles that were stimulated by growth factors ( e . g . , EGF ) . Second , these vesicles differed from early endosomes by the lack of constitutively endocytosed molecules , such as transferrin , and components of the transport machinery , such as EEA1 . Third , the vacuoles originated from the plasma membrane and engulfed extra - cellular ﬂuid . Fourth , their formation depended on PI3 - K activity , and ﬁfth , they followed actin rearrangements at the plasma membrane . Possible Functions of Rabankyrin - 5 Macropinosomes are formed by the closure of membrane protrusions generated upon actin - mediated membrane ruf - ﬂing . Although membrane rufﬂing is required for macro - pinocytosis , it seems not to be sufﬁcient for macropinosome formation ( Araki et al . 1996 ; West et al . 2000 ) . Our data suggest that Rabankyrin - 5 is a novel regulator of this endocytic mechanism . One possibility is that it could play an active role in the generation of macropinosomes ( see Figure 7 ) . The deduced primary structure of Rabankyrin - 5 predicts the existence of several protein - protein interaction motifs , suggesting a role as a multifunctional adaptor protein . The N terminus of Rabankyrin - 5 contains a BTB / POZ motif , which is present in proteins involved in signalling , develop - ment , and tumorigenesis and mediates homo - and hetero - dimerisation ( Bardwell and Treisman 1994 ; Kobayashi et al . 2000 ) . It contains 21 ANK repeats which , by analogy with the function of ANKs ( Bennett and Chen 2001 ; Denker and Figure 5 . Immunolocalisation of Endogenous and Overexpressed Rabankyrin - 5 in NIH3T3 Cells Untransfected NIH3T3 cells or cells transfected with Rabankyrin - 5 were labelled with antibodies to Rabankyrin - 5 followed by 10 nm protein A gold . ( A ) Transfected cell showing labelling of a group of vesicular structures underlying the plasma membrane ( pm ) . ( B and C ) In control ( untransfected ) cells , low but speciﬁc labelling for Rabankyrin - 5 ( arrowheads ) is associated with compartments close to the pm . Scale bars represent 200 nm . DOI : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020261 . g005 Figure 4 . Rabankyrin - 5 Localises to Macropinosomes in NIH3T3 Cells ( A ) NIH3T3 cells directly ﬁxed and immunostained for endogenous Rabankyrin - 5 and EEA1 reveal segregation of Rabankyrin - 5 from EEA1 - containing structures ( arrows ) in the cell periphery , while there is colocalisation in the cell centre ( arrowheads ) . ( B ) Overexpression of Rabankyrin - 5 increases the number of peripheral enlarged structures devoid of EEA1 . NIH3T3 cells were infected with recombinant adenovirus for Rabankyrin - 5 for 18 h . Dextran ( 2 , 5 mg / ml ) uptake was performed for 3 min at 37 8 C , ﬁxed , and immunostained for the indicated antigens . ( C and D ) Formation of enlarged Rabankyrin - 5 structures requires PI3 - K activity . NIH3T3 cells either ( C ) DMSO treated or ( D ) pretreated for 20 min with wortmannin ( WM ; 100 nM ) were incubated for 8 min with 0 , 5 l g / ml rhodamine - labelled transferrin and 2 , 5 mg / ml FITC - labelled dextran ( MW , 10 . 000 ) , ﬁxed , processed for immunoﬂuorescence , and analysed by confocal scanning microscopy . ( E ) NIH3T3 cells transiently transfected for YFP - Rabankyrin - 5 and CFP - actin were imaged using time - lapse video microscopy to visualise the formation of macropinosomes by actin - driven membrane rufﬂes . Images were taken for the indicated time points . The arrowhead points towards Rabankyrin - 5 association to an enlarged vesicle driven by actin dynamics over time . Scale bars represent 10 l m . DOI : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020261 . g004 PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org September 2004 | Volume 2 | Issue 9 | e261 0009 Rabankyrin - 5 in Macropinocytosis Figure 6 . Inhibition of Rab5 Activity Decreases Fluid - Phase Uptake NIH3T3 cells transiently transfected for either ( A ) GFP - Rab5wt or ( B ) RN - tre were subjected to a 30 - min uptake of rhodamine - conjugated transferrin ( 1 l g / ml ) or dextran ( MW , 70 . 000 ; 3 mg / ml ) at 37 8 C and further processed for confocal imaging with indicated antibodies . ( A ) Rab5wt transfected cells show colocalisation of Rabankyrin - 5 – labelled macropinocytic structures , indicated by the lack of transferrin accumulation , with Rab5 . ( B ) Cells transiently transfected for RN - tre ( asterisk ) show a signiﬁcant reduction of ﬂuid - phase uptake compared to nontransfected cells . ( C ) Fluid - phase dextran quantiﬁcation of single cells transfected for RN - tre by measuring internalised ﬂuorescence intensity ( p . 0 , 001 ) . Values shown are means 6 standard deviation of at least 15 cells . Scale bars represent 10 l m . DOI : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020261 . g006 Figure 7 . Rabankyrin - 5 Overexpression Increases , whereas Knock - Down Decreases Fluid - Phase Uptake , Specifically ( A – C ) NIH3T3 cells were either mock - infected or infected with recombinant adenovirus encoding Rabankyrin - 5 . Simultaneous uptake of HRP ( 5 mg / ml ) and biotinylated transferrin ( 2 l g / ml ) was performed at 37 8 C for the indicated time points . ( C ) NIH3T3 cells were pulsed with HRP ( 10 mg / ml ) for 10 min . Recycled HRP into the medium was determined after the indicated time points . ( D – F ) A431 cells were treated with esiRNA against Rabankyrin - 5 or control treated for 4 d . ( D ) Western blot analysis revealed a ~ 50 % reduction of Rabankyrin - 5 in whole - cell lysate . ( E and F ) Serum - starved cells ( 1 h ) were stimulated with 50 ng / ml EGF in complete medium for the indicated time points in the presence of 5 mg / ml HRP and 2 l g / ml biotinylated transferrin . Values shown are means 6 standard deviation and were performed in duplicates . The results are representatives of at least two independent experiments . DOI : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020261 . g007 PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org September 2004 | Volume 2 | Issue 9 | e261 0010 Rabankyrin - 5 in Macropinocytosis Barber 2002a ) , could interact with different proteins on the membrane , including Rab5 , and mediate the assembly of a multiprotein complex . Such a scaffolding function has been postulated to bridge the membrane to the actin cytoskeleton but also to link proteins involved in endocytosis and signal transduction ( Pryciak and Hartwell 1996 ; Lubman et al . 2004 ) . Rabankyrin - 5 could assemble a membrane - cytoskeleton scaf - fold committing the rufﬂing membrane to generate a pinocytic vesicle or directly participate in the closure of the plasma membrane sealing the vesicle . Alternatively , Raban - kyrin - 5 could be recruited onto macropinosomes concom - itantly or following their formation to prevent their back - fusion with the plasma membrane or regulate their onward trafﬁcking . This possibility receives support from our time - lapse video microscopy analysis , where the dissociation of Rabankyrin - 5 from the membrane precedes what appears to be the regurgitation of macropinosomes back to the plasma membrane ( as shown in Video S1 ) . Interestingly , it has recently been proposed that ANK repeats may not be simply anchoring domains but may be part of a mechanical sensory system that transmits tension from the cytoskeleton to ion channels in the membrane ( Corey and Sotomayor 2004 ; Howard and Bechstedt 2004 ) . In the case of Rabankyrin - 5 , the ANK repeats may confer a sensory function to detect and adapt to rearrangements of the actin cytoskeleton during membrane rufﬂing and membrane closure . Interactions of the ANK repeats with ion channels may sense changes in water - salt homeostasis and pH , and respond to them via modulation of macropinocytosis and macropinosome traf - ﬁcking ( de Baey and Lanzavecchia 2000 ; Morris and Homann 2001 ; Denker and Barber 2002b ) . Functional Relation between Macropinosomes and Endosomes How does the function of Rab5 and Rabankyrin - 5 in macropinocytosis relate to early endosome trafﬁcking ? We have previously proposed a model whereby Rab5 , via the recruitment of its effectors , generates and maintains a spatially restricted and functionally specialised membrane domain on the early endosomes ( Zerial and McBride 2001 ) . The Rab5 effector hVps34 ( Christoforidis et al . 1999b ) is a PI3 - K that generates PI ( 3 ) P . Together with Rab5 , this phosphoi - Figure 8 . Rabankyrin - 5 Localises on Vesicular Structures Underlying the Apical Brush Border in Mouse Kidney Proximal Tubules Mice were perfused either ( A – C ) directly with 4 % PFA or ( D ) 5 min after injection of HRP into the femoral vein . Immunoﬂuorescence was performed on semi - thin cryosections ( 500 nm ) . ( C ) Higher magniﬁcation of the inset in ( B ) . Scale bars represent 10 l m . DOI : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020261 . g008 PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org September 2004 | Volume 2 | Issue 9 | e261 0011 Rabankyrin - 5 in Macropinocytosis nositide serves as a binding determinant for the FYVE - ﬁnger Rab5 effectors EEA1 ( Simonsen et al . 1998 ) and Rabenosyn - 5 on the early - endosome membrane ( Nielsen et al . 2000 ) . The Rab5 effectors form oligomeric complexes ( McBride et al . 1999 ) and play distinct but cooperative roles in membrane tethering , fusion , and motility of early endosomes along microtubules ( Nielsen et al . 1999 ) . Our data extend the list of PI ( 3 ) P - binding Rab5 effectors to Rabankyrin - 5 . Rabankyrin - 5 colocalises with Rab5 and EEA1 to early endosomes and plays a role in homotypic early - endosome fusion , further under - scoring the activity of Rab5 as organiser of an endosomal Rab5 domain enriched in PI ( 3 ) P - binding effector proteins . Raban - kyrin - 5 played a minor modulatory role in the fusion of CCVs with early endosomes , suggesting mechanistic differences between homotypic early - endosome fusion and the hetero - typic fusion of CCVs with early endosomes . Clearly , Raban - kyrin - 5 exerted the most striking effects on ﬂuid - phase rather than clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Clathrin - dependent endocytosis and macropinocytosis are independent but interconnected pathways . Whereas macro - pinosomes and early endosomes remain segregated in EGF - stimulated A431 cells ( Hewlett et al . 1994 ) , they can fuse in other cells , such as dendritic cells and macrophages ( Racoosin and Swanson 1993 ) . Rabankyrin - 5 alone may not be sufﬁcient for macropinosomes to fuse with endosomes , and this activity may require the additional recruitment of EEA1 and Rabenosyn - 5 . The extent to which macropinosomes can recruit Rabankyrin - 5 , release or retain it , and further acquire late endocytic components or other Rab5 effectors acting in endosome tethering and fusion may depend on the cellular context . In kidney cells , for example , several Rabankyrin - 5 – positive structures appeared also to contain EEA1 and late endocytic markers ( LAMP - 1 ) , suggesting that macropino - somes can communicate with other endocytic organelles and undergo maturation as it has been described for phagocytosis ( Allen and Aderem 1996 ) . Also intriguing is the weak interaction of Rabankyrin - 5 with PI ( 5 ) P ( see Figure 1E ) and recent ﬁndings that BTB domain - containing proteins inter - act with ubiquitin ligases ( Furukawa et al . 2003 ) . Since both components have been implicated in the biogenesis of multivesicular bodies ( Katzmann et al . 2001 ) , Rabankyrin - 5 may function in the trafﬁcking to late endocytic components , as it was described previously for PIKfyve , another FYVE - ﬁnger – containing protein ( Ikonomov et al . 2003 ) . Stimulation of epithelial cells with either EGF or phorbol esters increases ﬂuid - phase uptake while reducing internal - isation via clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Sandvig and van Deurs 1990 ) . Our results provide a possible explanation for how the two endocytic routes can be quantitatively balanced . Since Rab5 appears to be rate limiting for both receptor - mediated and ﬂuid - phase endocytosis , its activity could be shifted between these two endocytic pathways , depending on the stimuli and the cell type . The shared activity of Rab5 and Rabankyrin - 5 would ensure coordination between endosome trafﬁcking and macropinocytosis , regulate the kinetics , and limit the extent of both endocytic processes , thus preserving plasma membrane homeostasis . Figure 9 . Immunolocalisation of Rabankyrin - 5 in the Mouse Kidney Mouse kidney cortex was processed for frozen section immunoelec - tron microscopy . Sections were ( A and B ) single labelled for Rabankyrin - 5 ( arrowheads , 10 nm ) or ( C and D ) double labelled ( arrows , 5 nm ) for Rabankyrin - 5 and LAMP - 1 . ( A ) Low - magniﬁcation view of the apical region of two proximal tubule cells demonstrates low labelling for Rabankyrin - 5 on apical microvilli ( M ) but stronger labelling ( arrowheads ) of large subapical electron - lucent vesicular structures ( asterisks ) . One of these struc - tures is shown at higher magniﬁcation in ( B ) . L , lateral membrane . ( C ) Rabankyrin - 5 labels LAMP - 1 – negative subapical structures as well as compartments showing low LAMP - 1 labelling ( arrows and asterisk ) . ( D ) Rabankyrin - 5 ( arrowheads ) associates with compartments , which show no or weak labelling for LAMP - 1 ( asterisks ) . In addition , low Rabankyrin - 5 labelling is associated with more strongly labelled LAMP - 1 – positive compartments . Note that there is some nonspeciﬁc labelling of mitochondria ( m ) . Scale bars represent 500 nm . DOI : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020261 . g009 Figure 10 . Rabankyrin - 5 Colocalises to Apically Labelled Structures in Filter - Grown MDCK Cells MDCK cells were seeded on polycarbonate ﬁlters for 4 d and either ( A – C ) mock - infected or ( D – F ) infected with an adenovirus construct expressing full - length Rabankyrin - 5 for another 18 h . Cells were then incubated for 13 min with 5 mg / ml Alexa 488 dextran , added to the apical medium , ﬁxed , and stained for the indicated antigens . Images represent confocal scans just beneath ( A and D ) the apical plasma membrane , ( B and E ) the nuclear area , and ( C and F ) the basal plasma membrane . Endogenous Rabankyrin - 5 and EEA1 localise to several dextran - labelled structures , often with ring - shaped appearance in the apical region . Overexpression of Rabankyrin - 5 seems to increase the number of enlarged and dextran - labelled structures , some of which are depleted of EEA1 ( arrows ) ( B ) . Scale bars represent 10 l m . DOI : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020261 . g010 PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org September 2004 | Volume 2 | Issue 9 | e261 0012 Rabankyrin - 5 in Macropinocytosis PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org September 2004 | Volume 2 | Issue 9 | e261 0013 Rabankyrin - 5 in Macropinocytosis PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org September 2004 | Volume 2 | Issue 9 | e261 0014 Rabankyrin - 5 in Macropinocytosis Rabankyrin - 5 in Apical , Actin - Dependent Endocytosis in Polarised Epithelial Cells In addition to macropinocytosis in nonpolarised cells , we have found that Rabankyrin - 5 regulates apical , non - clathrin - mediated pinocytosis in polarised epithelial cells . The role of apically stimulated pinocytosis is crucial for the physiology of various organs . For example , it plays an important role in the reabsorption of proteins from the glomerular ﬁltrate in the renal proximal tubule ( Christensen et al . 1998 ) . Rabankyrin - 5 may be a regulator of this process and this possibility is supported by our ﬁndings , which show that it ( 1 ) localises to subapical compartments in kidney proximal tubules and ( 2 ) induces ﬂuid - phase , clathrin - independent uptake from the apical but not basolateral side in polarised MDCK cells . As for macropinocytosis , apical endocytosis depends on actin remodelling mediated by Rho family GTPases ( Gottlieb et al . 1993 ; West et al . 2000 ) and ARF6 ( Altschuler et al . 1999 ) . Since macropinocytosis appears to occur primarily from the apical side , the involvement of epidermal growth factor receptor as demonstrated for nonpolarised cells ( Haigler et al . 1979 ; West et al . 1989 ) is unlikely since it is primarily localised to the basolateral domain of polarised epithelial cells ( Gesualdo et al . 1996 ) . However , apical pinocytosis depends on other components of receptor tyrosine kinase signalling pathways such as PI3 - K ( Tuma et al . 1999 ) and protein kinase C and can be induced by oncogenes ( e . g . , v - Src ) that stimulate macropinocytosis in nonpolarised cells ( Holm et al . 1995 ; Amyere et al . 2002 ) . It is not known which PI3 - K subtype functions in apical pinocytosis , but an attractive candidate is PI3 - K b , as it has been identiﬁed as a Rab5 effector ( Christoforidis et al . 1999b ) . Its activity could be regulated by Rab5 constitutively and / or be subjected to stimulation by apical or axonal signalling molecules ( Pillion et al . 1989 ; Kryl et al . 1999 ) . In neurons , Rac - and actin - dependent endocytosis of Eph receptor - ephrin complexes is required to control repulsive versus attractive cell movement during tissue patterning in embryonic development ( Marston et al . 2003 ; Zimmer et al . 2003 ) and may play a role in the structural plasticity of synapses ( Holt et al . 2003 ) . It will be interesting to determine whether Rabankyrin - 5 and the macropinocytic machinery play a role in this event . In conclusion , the identiﬁcation of Rabankyrin - 5 opens new opportunities for investigating the molecular principles underlying macropinocytosis and its regulation by signalling molecules . The dual role of Rab5 and Rabankyrin - 5 in endosome and macropinosome function argues for a role in coordinating these two different endocytic mechanisms . Future work is required to identify the molecular partners of Rabankyrin - 5 and to establish the mechanisms responsible for its membrane targeting and its role in endocytic membrane dynamics . Materials and Methods Reagents and cell lines . Phospholipids were purchased from Sigma ( St . Louis , Missouri , United States ) and Calbiochem ( San Diego , California , United States ) . FITC - or Texas Red - conjugated dextran ( lysine ﬁxable ; MW , 10 . 000 and 70 . 000 ) , rhodamine - conjugated EGF , and rhodamine - conjugated transferrin were purchased from Molec - ular Probes ( Eugene , Oregon , United States ) . Wortmannin and LY 294002 were from Calbiochem . A431 and NIH3T3 cells were grown in DMEM ( high glucose ) supplemented with 10 % ( v / v ) heat - inactivated foetal calf serum , 100 U / ml penicillin , 100 l g / ml streptomycin , and 2 mM L - glutamine . MDCK II cells were grown in MEM plus 10 % FCS . MDCK II cells stably transfected for FcLR 5 – 27 ( Matter et al . 1992 ) were a gift of Professor Ira Mellman . Amino acid sequence determination and Rabankyrin - 5 cloning . The 130 - kDa protein band was excised from gels and enzymatically digested . The tandem mass spectroscopy protein sequencing proce - dure was performed as described previously ( Wilm et al . 1996 ) . Bovine peptides determined from Rabankyrin - 5 were from bovine brain and were used to identify corresponding expressed sequence tags using BLAST similarity searches at NCBI . A random primed HeLa cDNA library was used in a PCR reaction with primers based on the mouse cDNA to obtain the full - length clone of Rabankyrin - 5 . Preparation of recombinant Rabankyrin - 5 . Recombinant proteins of Rabankyrin - 5 were expressed in SF plus insect cells according to the manufacturer’s instructions using Rabankyrin - 5 cDNA subcloned into pfastBAC vector or subcloned into pGEX - 6P series and expressed in BL21 cells . Antibodies , plasmids , and recombinant adenovirus . Human anti - EEA1 serum ( 1 : 10 . 000 ) was a gift from Ban Hok Toh ( Monash Medical School , Adelaide , Australia ) , whereas a mouse monoclonal EEA1 antibody , a sheep polyclonal anti - HRP antibody and an antibody against phosphotyrosine ( a - 4G10 ) were purchased from BD Bio - science ( Heidelberg , Germany ) , Abam ( Cambridge , United Kingdom ) , and Upstate Biotechnology ( Lake Placid , New York , United States ) , respectively . Fluorescently labelled secondary antibodies were pur - chased from Molecular Probes . Recombinant full - length Rabankyrin - 5 was used to raise a polyclonal antibody in rabbit . Human full - length Rabankyrin - 5 was cloned into pEYFP vectors containing an N - terminal tag ( pEYFP - C1 ; Clontech , Palo Alto , California , United States ) . Recombinant adenovirus encoding full - length Rabankyrin - 5 was generated according to the manufacturer’s protocol ( AdEasy ) . cDNAs encoding Rab5wt were fused to the amino termini of ECFP or EYFP , as previously described ( Sonnichsen et al . 2000 ) . The antibody for the FcLR 5 - 27 chimeric receptor was puriﬁed from 2 . 4G2 hybridoma supernatant ( Unkeless 1979 ) by ammonium sulfate precipitation . For the preparation and biotinylation of Fab fragments of 2 . 4G2 , 6 mg of puriﬁed 2 . 4G2 IgG was digested with insoluble papain enzyme as described by the manufacturer ( Sigma ) . Fab fragments were biotinylated with NHS - LC - biotin or NHS - SS - biotin ( Pierce , Rockford , Illinois , United States ) . In vitro binding assays . The GST - Rab5 afﬁnity chromatography was performed as in Christoforidis and Zerial ( 2000 ) . 35 S - Methio - nine – labelled proteins were transcribed and translated in vitro using a TnT - coupled transcription - translation kit ( Promega , Madison , Wisconsin , United States ) . For Rab5 effector recruitment assays , in vitro - translated proteins were incubated with glutathione - sepharose beads complexed with GST - Rab5 - GTP c S or GST - Rab5 - GDP and eluted as described previously ( Christoforidis et al . 1999a ) . Confocal immunoﬂuorescence microscopy and transfection . Cells were transfected with plasmids using FuGENE6 according to the manufacturer’s instructions ( Roche , Basel , Switzerland ) . After 16 – 24 h , transfected cells were washed twice with PBS and ﬁxed with 3 % paraformaldehyde and immunoﬂuorescence labelling was performed according to standard procedures . Cells were mounted in moviol and examined on a confocal microscope ( Leica TCS SP2 ; Leica , Wetzlar , Germany ) with a 100 3 / 1 . 40 plan - Apochromat objective . Fluorescent Figure 11 . Overexpression of Rabankyrin - 5 Stimulates Fluid - Phase Uptake from the Apical Plasma Membrane ( A and B ) MDCK cells plated on coverslips were ( A ) mock - infected or ( B ) infected with Rabankyrin - 5 and processed for immunoﬂuorescence . Under both conditions EEA1 colocalised almost completely with Rabankyrin - 5 , while there were some Rabankyrin - 5 structures devoid of EEA1 . Upon Rabankyrin - 5 overexpression these EEA1 - lacking structures were enlarged macropinocytic - like vesicles localised predominantly in the periphery of the cell , while other enlarged compartments containing EEA1 were centripetally located . ( C – F ) Filter - grown MDCK cells were either mock - infected or infected with recombinant adenovirus for full - length Rabankyrin - 5 . HRP ( 5 mg / ml ) or biotinylated Fab fragments ( 50 l g / ml ) were internalised from the indicated chambers for various time points . Whereas Rabankyrin - 5 overexpression ( C ) speciﬁcally increased HRP uptake from the apical domain , ( D ) basolateral HRP uptake and ( E and F ) Fab uptake at both domains were unaffected ( p , 0 , 01 ) . Values shown are means 6 standard deviation of at least three independent experiments . Scale bars represent 10 l m . DOI : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020261 . g011 PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org September 2004 | Volume 2 | Issue 9 | e261 0015 Rabankyrin - 5 in Macropinocytosis images were collected using the Leica IM500 Image Manager and processed using Adobe Photoshop v5 . 5 ( Adobe Systems , San Jose , California , United States ) . Endocytosis of FITC - labelled dextran and rhodamine - labelled transferrin , and quantiﬁcation . NIH3T3 cells grown on glass cover - slips and transfected with plasmids encoding RN - tre were incubated with 3 mg / ml FITC - labelled dextran ( MW , 70 . 000 ) in DMEM supplemented with 1 % FCS and 20 mM HEPES ( pH 7 , 4 ) , ﬁxed , and stained with rhodamine - conjugated antirabbit secondary antibody . Dextran uptake was determined by quantifying grey values of thresholded , ﬂuorescent images of at least 15 cells using MetaVue 6 . 1r3 and ImageJ ( NIH ) . In vitro endosome fusion and early endosome / liposome recruit - ment assays . In vitro fusion assays were performed using early endosomes labelled with biotinylated transferrin or antitransferrin antibody as well as CCVs labelled with biotinylated transferrin prepared from HeLa cells as described previously ( Horiuchi et al . 1997 ) . The concentration of Rabankyrin - 5 in HeLa cell cytosol in the in vitro early - endosome fusion assay was estimated to be approx - imately 50 nM , as determined by comparison with a serial dilution of recombinant Rabankyrin - 5 analysed by SDS - PAGE , followed by Western blotting analysis . Recruitment of cytosolic proteins to early endosomes was performed as described in Christoforidis et al . ( 1999b ) . Recombinant Rabankyrin - 5 was recruited to phosphoinositides as described previously ( Nielsen et al . 2000 ) using liposomes ( 98 % phosphatidylcholine , 2 % phosphoinositides ; 2 mg / ml ﬁnal concen - tration in 30 mM HEPES - NaOH [ pH 7 , 2 ] , 120 mM NaCl , 0 , 5 mM EGTA ) prepared as reported previously ( Otter - Nilsson et al . 1999 ) . Time - lapse video microscopy and data processing . Time - lapse epiﬂuorescence video microscopy was performed using an Olympus IX70 ( Olympus , Hamburg , Germany ) inverted microscope equipped with a polychrome II monochromator ( TILL Photonics , Martinsried , Germany ) , a custom ﬁlter block for simultaneous visualization of YFP and CFP ( AHF Analysentechnik , Tu¨bingen , Germany ) , a 100 3 oil - immersion objective ( NA 1 . 35 , Olympus ) attached to a PIFOC z - SCAN ( Physik Instrumente , Waldbronn , Germany ) , an incubation chamber ( 37 8 C ) , and a 12 - bit CCD digital camera IMAGO ( 0 , 134 l m pixel - 1 ; 2 times 2 binning ) ( TILL Photonics ) , controlled by TILLvisION v3 . 3 software ( TILL Photonics ) . Time - lapse video sequences of YFP and CFP images were merged as RGBs using TILLvisION v3 . 3 . They were exported as single TIFF ﬁles and either further processed using Adobe Photoshop 5 . 5 and Illustrator 8 . 0 or converted into Quick - Time movies using ImageJ ( NIH ) . HRP staining of the apical endocytic machinery in mouse proximal tubules . Anaesthetized mice were perfusion ﬁxed with 4 % PFA , 100 mM HEPES ( pH 7 , 25 ) , and 0 , 2 % sucrose either directly or 5 min after injection with 5 mg / g body weight HRP ( Sigma ) into the femoral vein . Kidneys were excised and postﬁxed 6 h at 4 8 C . Some tissue pieces were cryoprotected in 2 , 3 M sucrose overnight at 4 8 C , frozen in liquid nitrogen , and cryosectioned on a Leica UCT ( Tokuyasu et al . 1984 ) . Adenovirus infection and continuous uptake measurement with HRP , biotinylated transferrin , and biotinylated Fab ( 2 . 4G2 ) . MDCK cells were grown on 12 - mm , 0 , 4 - l m pore Transwell polycarbonate ﬁlters ( Corning Costar , Cambridge , Massachusetts , United States ) . Ninety - six hours after seeding , cells were infected from the apical side for 4 h at 37 8 C with adenoviruses in 250 l l of complete medium . After changing medium , cells were incubated for 18 h at 37 8 C and then used for biochemical assays or microscopy . NIH3T3 and MDCK cells grown on coverslips in 24 - well plates were infected in 500 l l of medium . HRP uptake was performed as described previously ( Bomsel et al . 1989 ) . In brief , cells were incubated in incubation medium ( IM ; DMEM , 1 % FCS , 24 mM HEPES [ pH 7 , 4 ] ) at 37 8 C for 1 h . For internalisation experiments coverslips or Transwell ﬁlters ( Costar ) were incubated with IM containing 5 – 10 mg / ml HRP , 2 l g / ml biotinylated transferrin , or 5 l g / ml biotinylated Fab ( 2 . 4G2 ) . In the case of MDCK cells , HRP and Fab were applied from either the apical or the basolateral side . After internalisation , cells were brieﬂy washed with warm IM followed by three washes with ice - cold PBS supplemented with 1 mM CaCl 2 and 1 mM MgCl 2 ( PBS þþ ) containing 2 mg / ml BSA . Cell surface - bound transferrin was efﬁciently removed ( 95 % ) by three incubations over 10 min in IM ( pH 3 , 4 ) . Extracellular HRP was quenched in the cold by incubating the cells for 20 min with 20 mM MESNA in 100 mM NaCl , 50 mM Tris ( pH 8 , 7 ) , followed by two washes with ice - cold PBS and a further incubation for 10 min with ice - cold 50 mM iodoacetamide in PBS . For recycling experi - ments , cells were transferred again to 37 8 C in fresh medium that was collected at the indicated time points . Thereafter , cells were washed once more with PBS and extracted for 15 min at 4 8 C with 300 l l of lysis buffer ( 1 % w / v Triton X - 100 , 0 , 1 % w / v SDS , 20 mM HEPES [ pH 7 , 4 ] , and 100 U / ml DNase ) . Total HRP activity present in the cells was determined in duplicates out of at least three independent experi - ments using the previously described enzymatic method ( Steinman et al . 1976 ) and standardised to the protein content of each well . Fab and transferrin uptake assay was performed as described previously ( Zacchi et al . 1998 ) . Knock - down of Rabankyrin - 5 in A431 cells by RNA interference . A431 cells were seeded in 24 - well plates the day prior to transfection . Cells were transfected using oligofectamine ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , California , United States ) with either 300 ng / ml double - or single - stranded ( control ) esiRNA derived from the I . M . A . G . E . clone ( IMAGE : 258664 ) according to the protocol of Yang et al . ( 2002 ) . After 4 d , cells were starved in MEM containing 2 mg / ml BSA and 24 mM HEPES ( pH 7 , 3 ) for 1 h and stimulated with 50 ng / ml EGF in complete medium containing 24 mM HEPES ( pH 7 , 3 ) , 5 – 10 mg / ml HRP , and 2 l g / ml biotinylated transferrin for the indicated time points ( see ‘‘ Adenovirus infection and continuous uptake measure - ment with HRP , biotinylated transferrin , and biotinylated Fab ( 2 . 4G2 ) ’’ above ) . Electron microscopy . Cells or tissues were ﬁxed with 8 % PFA in PHEM buffer and then processed for frozen sectioning according to published methods ( Liou et al . 1996 ) . Thawed sections were either single or double labelled . For single labelling a polyclonal anti – Rabankyrin - 5 antibody followed by protein A 10 nm gold ( University of Utrecht ) was used . For double labelling the polyclonal anti – Rabankyrin - 5 antibody was incubated together with rat anti – LAMP - 1 ( 1D4B ; courtesy of Professor M . Desjardins , University of Montreal , Montreal , Canada ) . The sections were then incubated with a mixture of anti - rabbit 10 nm gold and anti - rat 5 nm gold ( BBI International , Cardiff , United Kingdom ) . Supporting Information Figure S1 . Wortmannin Treatment Inhibits Fluid - Phase Uptake into Enlarged Rabankyrin - 5 Structures NIH3T3 cells were pretreated for 20 min with wortmannin ( 100 nM ) and incubated for 25 min with 0 , 5 l g / ml rhodamine - labelled transferrin and 2 , 5 mg / ml FITC - labelled dextran ( MW , 70 . 000 ) , ﬁxed , processed for immunoﬂuorescence , and analysed by confocal scan - ning microscopy . Scale bar represents 10 l m . Found at DOI : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020261 . sg001 ( 8 , 4 MB EPS ) . Figure S2 . Microinjection of a Function - Blocking Antibody against Rabankyrin - 5 Decreases Fluid - Phase Uptake NIH3T3 cells were either microinjected with ( A and D ) preimmune or ( B and C ) afﬁnity - puriﬁed polyclonal a – Rabankyrin - 5 antibodies and subjected to a 30 - min incubation at 37 8 C with ( A and B ) 3 mg / ml FITC - conjugated dextran ( MW , 70 . 000 ) or ( C and D ) 1 l g / ml rhodamine - conjugated transferrin . Cells injected with immune but not preimmune antibodies showed a signiﬁcant reduction of the ﬂuid - phase marker , while the uptake of transferrin was not signiﬁcantly perturbed . ( D ) Fluid - phase dextran quantiﬁcation of single cells microinjected for indicated antibodies by measuring internalised ﬂuorescence intensity ( p . 0 . 001 ) . Values shown are means 6 standard deviation of at least 15 cells . Scale bars represent 10 l m . Found at DOI : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020261 . sg002 ( 44 , 0 MB EPS ) . Video S1 . Rabankyrin - 5 Localizes to Macropinosomes Generated by Actin Dynamics Images were taken every 3 s over a time period of 15 min . RGB stacks were converted to QuickTime format using ImageJ ( NIH ) . The movie is played at 15 frames per second . Found at DOI : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020261 . sv001 ( 11 , 1 MB MOV ) . Accession Numbers The LocusLink ( http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink ) accession numbers of proteins discussed in this paper are H - Ras ( ID 3265 ) , v - Src ( ID 6714 ) , Arf6 ( ID 382 ) , hVps34 ( ID 5289 ) , p110 b ( ID 5291 ) , Rab34 ( ID 83871 ) , Rab5 ( ID 5868 ) , Ankhzn ( ID 51479 ) , Rab4 ( ID 5867 ) , Rab7 ( ID 7879 ) , Rab11 ( ID 8766 ) , Rabenosyn - 5 ( ID 64145 ) , EEA1 ( ID 8411 ) , Caveolin - 1 ( ID 857 ) , RN - tre ( ID 9712 ) , Transferrin ( ID 7018 ) , EGF ( ID 1950 ) , LAMP - 1 ( ID 16783 ) , Prominin - 1 ( ID 8842 ) , PIKfyve ( ID 200576 ) , RhoA ( ID 387 ) , and PKC - a ( ID 5578 ) . Acknowledgments We are indebted to Pierre Courtoy and Marcel Mettlen for valuable comments on the paper during the revision process . Moreover , we PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org September 2004 | Volume 2 | Issue 9 | e261 0016 Rabankyrin - 5 in Macropinocytosis thank D . Corbeil for sharing antibodies against Prominin - 1 and Angelika Giner for excellent technical assistance . We are also grateful to B . Hoﬂack , L . Pelkmans , K . Simons , M . Miaczynska , and J . Rink for comments on the manuscript . This work was supported by grants from the Human Frontier Science Program ( HFSP ) ( RG - 0260 / 1999 - M ) , the European Union ( HPRN - CT - 2000 - 00081 ) , and the Max Planck Society . Conﬂicts of interest . The authors have declared that no conﬂicts of interest exist . Author contributions . CS and SC conceived and designed the experiments . CS , SC , and MRL performed the experiments . CS , SC , MRL , SUJ , RGP , and MZ analyzed the data . CS , SC , MRL , SUJ , and MW contributed reagents / materials / analysis tools . CS and MZ wrote the paper . & References Allen LA , Aderem A ( 1996 ) Mechanisms of phagocytosis . Curr Opin Immunol 8 : 36 – 40 . Altschuler Y , Liu S - H , Katz L , Tang K , Hardy S , et al . ( 1999 ) ADP - ribosylation factor 6 and endocytosis at the apical surface of Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . J Cell Biol 147 : 7 – 12 . Amyere M , Payrastre B , Krause U , Van Der Smissen P , Veithen A , et al . ( 2000 ) Constitutive macropinocytosis in oncogene - transformed ﬁbroblasts de - pends on sequential permanent activation of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase and phospholipase C . Mol Biol Cell 11 : 3453 – 3467 . Amyere M , Mettlen M , Van D , Platek A , Payrastre B , et al . ( 2002 ) Origin , originality , functions , subversions and molecular signalling of macro - pinocytosis . Int J Med Microbiol 291 : 487 – 494 . Araki N , Johnson MT , Swanson JA ( 1996 ) A role for phosphoinositide 3 - kinase in the completion of macropinocytosis and phagocytosis by macrophages . J Cell Biol 135 : 1249 – 1260 . Bardwell VJ , Treisman R ( 1994 ) The POZ domain : A conserved protein - protein interaction motif . Genes Dev 8 : 1664 – 1677 . Bar - Sagi D , Feramisco JR ( 1986 ) Induction of membrane rufﬂing and ﬂuid - phase pinocytosis in quiescent ﬁbroblasts by ras proteins . Science 233 : 1061 – 1068 . Bennett V , Chen L ( 2001 ) Ankyrins and cellular targeting of diverse membrane proteins to physiological sites . Curr Opin Cell Biol 13 : 61 – 67 . Bomsel M , Prydz K , Parton RG , Gruenberg J , Simons K ( 1989 ) Endocytosis in ﬁlter - grown Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . J Cell Biol 109 : 3243 – 3258 . Bucci C , Parton RG , Mather IH , Stunnenberg H , Simons K , et al . ( 1992 ) The small GTPase rab5 functions as a regulatory factor in the early endocytic pathway . Cell 70 : 715 – 728 . Bucci C , Wandinger - Ness A , Lutcke A , Chiariello M , Bruni CB , et al . ( 1994 ) Rab5a is a common component of the apical and basolateral endocytic machinery in polarized epithelial cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 91 : 5061 – 5065 . Bucci C , Lutcke A , Steele - Mortimer O , Olkkonen VM , Dupree P , et al . ( 1995 ) Co - operative regulation of endocytosis by three Rab5 isoforms . FEBS Lett 366 : 65 – 71 . Carpentier JL , Lew DP , Paccaud JP , Gil R , Iacopetta B , et al . ( 1991 ) Internalization pathway of C3b receptors in human neutrophils and its transmodulation by chemoattractant receptors stimulation . Cell Regul 2 : 41 – 55 . Chavrier P , Parton RG , Hauri HP , Simons K , Zerial M ( 1990 ) Localization of low molecular weight GTP binding proteins to exocytic and endocytic compart - ments . Cell 62 : 317 – 329 . Christensen EI , Birn H , Verroust P , Moestrup SK ( 1998 ) Membrane receptors for endocytosis in the renal proximal tubule . Int Rev Cytol 180 : 237 – 284 . Christoforidis S , Zerial M ( 2000 ) Puriﬁcation and identiﬁcation of novel Rab effectors using afﬁnity chromatography . Methods 20 : 403 – 410 . Christoforidis S , McBride HM , Burgoyne RD , Zerial M ( 1999a ) The Rab5 effector EEA1 is a core component of endosome docking . Nature 397 : 621 – 625 . Christoforidis S , Miaczynska M , Ashman K , Wilm M , Zhao L , et al . ( 1999b ) Phosphatidylinositol - 3 - OH kinases are Rab5 effectors . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 249 – 252 . Conner SD , Schmid SL ( 2003 ) Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 : 37 – 44 . Corey DP , Sotomayor M ( 2004 ) Hearing : Tightrope act . Nature 428 : 901 – 903 . de Baey A , Lanzavecchia A ( 2000 ) The role of aquaporins in dendritic cell macropinocytosis . J Exp Med 191 : 743 – 748 . de Hoop MJ , Huber LA , Stenmark H , Williamson E , Zerial M , et al . ( 1994 ) The involvement of the small GTP - binding protein Rab5a in neuronal endocytosis . Neuron 13 : 11 – 22 . Denker SP , Barber DL ( 2002a ) Ion transport proteins anchor and regulate the cytoskeleton . Curr Opin Cell Biol 14 : 214 – 220 . Denker SP , Barber DL ( 2002b ) Cell migration requires both ion translocation and cytoskeletal anchoring by the Na - H exchanger NHE1 . J Cell Biol 159 : 1087 – 1096 . Dharmawardhane S , Schurmann A , Sells MA , Chernoff J , Schmid SL , et al . ( 2000 ) Regulation of macropinocytosis by p21 - activated kinase - 1 . Mol Biol Cell 11 : 3341 – 3352 . Francis CL , Ryan TA , Jones BD , Smith SJ , Falkow S ( 1993 ) Rufﬂes induced by Salmonella and other stimuli direct macropinocytosis of bacteria . Nature 364 : 639 – 642 . Furukawa M , He YJ , Borchers C , Xiong Y ( 2003 ) Targeting of protein ubiquitination by BTB - Cullin 3 - Roc1 ubiquitin ligases . Nat Cell Biol 5 : 1001 – 1007 . Galan JE , Zhou D ( 2000 ) Striking a balance : Modulation of the actin cytoskeleton by Salmonella . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97 : 8754 – 8761 . Gesualdo L , Di Paolo S , Calabro A , Milani S , Maiorano E , et al . ( 1996 ) Expression of epidermal growth factor and its receptor in normal and diseased human kidney : An immunohistochemical and in situ hybridization study . Kidney Int 49 : 656 – 665 . Goligorsky MS , Hruska KA ( 1986 ) Transcytosis in cultured proximal tubular cells . J Membr Biol 93 : 237 – 247 . Gorvel JP , Chavrier P , Zerial M , Gruenberg J ( 1991 ) rab5 controls early endosome fusion in vitro . Cell 64 : 915 – 925 . Gottlieb TA , Ivanov IE , Adesnik M , Sabatini DD ( 1993 ) Actin microﬁlaments play a critical role in endocytosis at the apical but not the basolateral surface of polarized epithelial cells . J Cell Biol 120 : 695 – 710 . Haigler HT , McKanna JA , Cohen S ( 1979 ) Rapid stimulation of pinocytosis in human carcinoma cells A - 431 by epidermal growth factor . J Cell Biol 83 : 82 – 90 . Hewlett LJ , Prescott AR , Watts C ( 1994 ) The coated pit and macropinocytic pathways serve distinct endosome populations . J Cell Biol 124 : 689 – 703 . Holm PK , Eker P , Sandvig K , van Deurs B ( 1995 ) Phorbol myristate acetate selectively stimulates apical endocytosis via protein kinase C in polarized MDCK cells . Exp Cell Res 217 : 157 – 168 . Holt M , Cooke A , Wu MM , Lagnado L ( 2003 ) Bulk membrane retrieval in the synaptic terminal of retinal bipolar cells . J Neurosci 23 : 1329 – 1339 . Hooshmand - Rad R , Claesson - Welsh L , Wennstrom S , Yokote K , Siegbahn A , et al . ( 1997 ) Involvement of phosphatidylinositide 3 9 - kinase and Rac in platelet - derived growth factor - induced actin reorganization and chemo - taxis . Exp Cell Res 234 : 434 – 441 . Horiuchi H , Lippe R , McBride HM , Rubino M , Woodman P , et al . ( 1997 ) A novel Rab5 GDP / GTP exchange factor complexed to Rabaptin - 5 links nucleotide exchange to effector recruitment and function . Cell 90 : 1149 – 1159 . Howard J , Bechstedt S ( 2004 ) Hypothesis : a helix of ankyrin repeats of the NOMPC - TRP ion channel is the gating spring of mechanoreceptors . Curr Biol 14 : R224 – R226 . Ikonomov OC , Sbrissa D , Foti M , Carpentier JL , Shisheva A ( 2003 ) PIKfyve controls ﬂuid phase endocytosis but not recycling / degradation of endocy - tosed receptors or sorting of procathepsin D by regulating multivesicular body morphogenesis . Mol Biol Cell 14 : 4581 – 4591 . Epub 2003 August 4587 . Jackman MR , Shurety W , Ellis JA , Luzio JP ( 1994 ) Inhibition of apical but not basolateral endocytosis of ricin and folate in Caco - 2 cells by cytochalasin D . J Cell Sci 107 : 2547 – 2556 . Katzmann DJ , Babst M , Emr SD ( 2001 ) Ubiquitin - dependent sorting into the multivesicular body pathway requires the function of a conserved endo - somal protein sorting complex , ESCRT - I . Cell 106 : 145 – 155 . Kobayashi A , Yamagiwa H , Hoshino H , Muto A , Sato K , et al . ( 2000 ) A combinatorial code for gene expression generated by transcription factor Bach2 and MAZR ( MAZ - related factor ) through the BTB / POZ domain . Mol Cell Biol 20 : 1733 – 1746 . Kryl D , Yacoubian T , Haapasalo A , Castren E , Lo D , et al . ( 1999 ) Subcellular localization of full - length and truncated Trk receptor isoforms in polarized neurons and epithelial cells . J Neurosci 19 : 5823 – 5833 . Kuriyama H , Asakawa S , Minoshima S , Maruyama H , Ishii N , et al . ( 2000 ) Characterization and chromosomal mapping of a novel human gene , ANKHZN . Gene 253 : 151 – 160 . Kutateladze TG , Ogburn KD , Watson WT , de Beer T , Emr SD , et al . ( 1999 ) Phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate recognition by the FYVE domain . Mol Cell 3 : 805 – 811 . Lanzetti L , Rybin V , Malabarba MG , Christoforidis S , Scita G , et al . ( 2000 ) The Eps8 protein coordinates EGF receptor signalling through Rac and trafﬁcking through Rab5 . Nature 408 : 374 – 377 . Lewis WH ( 1931 ) Pinocytosis . Johns Hopkins Hosp Bull 49 : 17 – 27 . Li G , D’Souza - Schorey C , Barbieri MA , Cooper JA , Stahl PD ( 1997 ) Uncoupling of membrane rufﬂing and pinocytosis during Ras signal transduction . J Biol Chem 272 : 10337 – 10340 . Liou W , Geuze HJ , Slot JW ( 1996 ) Improving structural integrity of cryosections for immunogold labeling . Histochem Cell Biol 106 : 41 – 58 . Lubman OY , Korolev SV , Kopan R ( 2004 ) Anchoring notch genetics and biochemistry ; structural analysis of the ankyrin domain sheds light on existing data . Mol Cell 13 : 619 – 626 . Marston DJ , Dickinson S , Nobes CD ( 2003 ) Rac - dependent transendocytosis of ephrinBs regulates Eph - ephrin contact repulsion . Nat Cell Biol 5 : 879 – 888 . Matter K , Hunziker W , Mellman I ( 1992 ) Basolateral sorting of LDL receptor in MDCK cells : The cytoplasmic domain contains two tyrosine - dependent targeting determinants . Cell 71 : 741 – 753 . McBride HM , Rybin V , Murphy C , Giner A , Teasdale R , et al . ( 1999 ) Oligomeric PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org September 2004 | Volume 2 | Issue 9 | e261 0017 Rabankyrin - 5 in Macropinocytosis complexes link Rab5 effectors with NSF and drive membrane fusion via interactions between EEA1 and syntaxin 13 . Cell 98 : 377 – 386 . McLauchlan H , Newell J , Morrice N , Osborne A , West M , et al . ( 1998 ) A novel role for Rab5 - GDI in ligand sequestration into clathrin - coated pits . Curr Biol 8 : 34 – 45 . Morris CE , Homann U ( 2001 ) Cell surface area regulation and membrane tension . J Membr Biol 179 : 79 – 102 . Nielsen E , Severin F , Backer JM , Hyman AA , Zerial M ( 1999 ) Rab5 regulates motility of early endosomes on microtubules . Nat Cell Biol 8 : 34 – 45 . Nielsen E , Christoforidis S , Uttenweiler - Joseph S , Miaczynska M , Dewitte F , et al . ( 2000 ) Rabenosyn - 5 , a novel Rab5 effector , is complexed with hVPS45 and recruited to endosomes through a FYVE ﬁnger domain . J Cell Biol 151 : 601 – 612 . Otter - Nilsson M , Hendriks R , Pecheur - Huet E - I , Hoekstra D , Nilsson T ( 1999 ) Cytosolic ATPases , p97 and NSF , are sufﬁcient to mediate rapid membrane fusion . EMBO J 18 : 2074 – 2083 . Pelkmans L , Kartenbeck J , Helenius A ( 2001 ) Caveolar endocytosis of simian virus 40 reveals a new two - step vesicular - transport pathway to the ER . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 473 – 483 . Pillion DJ , Haskell JF , Atchison JA , Ganapathy V , Leibach FH ( 1989 ) Receptors for IGF - I , but not for IGF - II , on proximal colon epithelial cell apical membranes . Am J Physiol 257 : E27 – E34 . Pryciak PM , Hartwell LH ( 1996 ) AKR1 encodes a candidate effector of the G beta gamma complex in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae pheromone response pathway and contributes to control of both cell shape and signal transduction . Mol Cell Biol 16 : 2614 – 2626 . Racoosin EL , Swanson JA ( 1992 ) M - CSF - induced macropinocytosis increases solute endocytosis but not receptor - mediated endocytosis in mouse macro - phages . J Cell Sci 102 : 867 – 880 . Racoosin EL , Swanson JA ( 1993 ) Macropinosome maturation and fusion with tubular lysosomes in macrophages . J Cell Biol 121 : 1011 – 1020 . Radhakrishna H , Klausner RD , Donaldson JG ( 1996 ) Aluminum ﬂuoride stimulates surface protrusions in cells overexpressing the ARF6 GTPase . J Cell Biol 134 : 935 – 947 . Ridley AJ ( 1994 ) Membrane rufﬂing and signal transduction . Bioessays 16 : 321 – 327 . Rubino M , Miaczynska M , Lippe R , Zerial M ( 2000 ) Selective membrane recruitment of EEA1 suggests a role in directional transport of clathrin - coated vesicles to early endosomes . J Biol Chem 275 : 3745 – 3748 . Sabharanjak S , Sharma P , Parton RG , Mayor S ( 2002 ) GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Dev Cell 2 : 411 – 423 . Sandvig K , van Deurs B ( 1990 ) Selective modulation of the endocytic uptake of ricin and ﬂuid phase markers without alteration in transferrin endocytosis . J Biol Chem 265 : 6382 – 6388 . Sandvig K , Llorente A , Rodal SK , Eker P , Garred O , et al . ( 2000 ) Apical macropinocytosis in polarized MDCK cells : Regulation by N - ethylmalei - mide - sensitive proteins . Eur J Cell Biol 79 : 447 – 457 . Sansonetti PJ ( 1997 ) Molecular and cellular bases of intestinal epithelial cell invasion by Shigella ﬂexneri . C R Biol 320 : 729 – 734 . Shao Y , Akmentin W , Toledo - Aral JJ , Rosenbaum J , Valdez G , et al . ( 2002 ) Pincher , a pinocytic chaperone for nerve growth factor / TrkA signaling endosomes . J Cell Biol 157 : 679 – 691 . Simonsen A , Lippe R , Christoforidis S , Gaullier JM , Brech A , et al . ( 1998 ) EEA1 links PI ( 3 ) K function to Rab5 regulation of endosome fusion [ comments ] . Nature 394 : 494 – 498 . Sonnichsen B , De Renzis S , Nielsen E , Rietdorf J , Zerial M ( 2000 ) Distinct membrane domains on endosomes in the recycling pathway visualized by multicolor imaging of Rab4 , Rab5 , and Rab11 . J Cell Biol 149 : 901 – 914 . Steinman RM , Swanson J ( 1995 ) The endocytic activity of dendritic cells . J Exp Med 182 : 283 – 288 . Steinman RM , Brodie SE , Cohn ZA ( 1976 ) Membrane ﬂow during pinocytosis . A stereologic analysis . J Cell Biol 68 : 665 – 687 . Stenmark H , Parton RG , Steele - Mortimer O , Lutcke A , Gruenberg J , et al . ( 1994 ) Inhibition of rab5 GTPase activity stimulates membrane fusion in endocytosis . EMBO J 13 : 1287 – 1296 . Stenmark H , Aasland R , Toh BH , D’Arrigo A ( 1996 ) Endosomal localization of the autoantigen EEA1 is mediated by a zinc - binding FYVE ﬁnger . J Biol Chem 271 : 24048 – 24054 . Sun P , Yamamoto H , Suetsugu S , Miki H , Takenawa T , et al . ( 2003 ) Small GTPase Rah / Rab34 is associated with membrane rufﬂes and macropino - somes and promotes macropinosome formation . J Biol Chem 278 : 4063 – 4071 . Swanson JA ( 1989 ) Phorbol esters stimulate macropinocytosis and solute ﬂow through macrophages . J Cell Sci 94 : 135 – 142 . Tall GG , Barbieri MA , Stahl PD , Horazdoversusky BF ( 2001 ) Ras - activated endocytosis is mediated by the Rab5 guanine nucleotide exchange activity of RIN1 . Dev Cell 1 : 73 – 82 . Tokuyasu KT , Maher PA , Singer SJ ( 1984 ) Distributions of vimentin and desmin in developing chick myotubes in vivo . I . Immunoﬂuorescence study . J Cell Biol 98 : 1961 – 1972 . Tuma PL , Finnegan CM , Yi J - H , Hubbard AL ( 1999 ) Evidence for apical endocytosis in polarized hepatic cells : Phosphoinositide 3 - kinase inhibitors lead to the lysosomal accumulation of resident apical plasma membrane proteins . J Cell Biol 145 : 1089 – 1102 . Unkeless JC ( 1979 ) Characterization of a monoclonal antibody directed against mouse macrophage and lymphocyte Fc receptors . J Exp Med 150 : 580 – 596 . Veithen A , Cupers P , Baudhuin P , Courtoy PJ ( 1996 ) v - Src induces constitutive macropinocytosis in rat ﬁbroblasts . J Cell Sci 109 : 2005 – 2012 . Weigmann A , Corbeil D , Hellwig A , Huttner WB ( 1997 ) Prominin , a novel microvilli - speciﬁc polytopic membrane protein of the apical surface of epithelial cells , is targeted to plasmalemmal protrusions of nonepithelial cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94 : 12425 – 12430 . West MA , Bretscher MS , Watts C ( 1989 ) Distinct endocytotic pathways in epidermal growth factor - stimulated human carcinoma A431 cells . J Cell Biol 109 : 2731 – 2739 . West MA , Prescott AR , Eskelinen EL , Ridley AJ , Watts C ( 2000 ) Rac is required for constitutive macropinocytosis by dendritic cells but does not control its downregulation . Curr Biol 10 : 839 – 848 . Wilm M , Shevchenko A , Houthaeve T , Breit S , Schweigerer L , et al . ( 1996 ) Femtomole sequencing of proteins from polyacrylamide gels by nano - electrospray mass spectrometry . Nature 379 : 466 – 469 . Yang D , Buchholz F , Huang Z , Goga A , Chen C - Y , et al . ( 2002 ) Short RNA duplexes produced by hydrolysis with Escherichia coli RNase III mediate effective RNA interference in mammalian cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99 : 9942 – 9947 . Zacchi P , Stenmark H , Parton RG , Orioli D , Lim F , et al . ( 1998 ) Rab17 regulates membrane trafﬁcking through apical recycling endosomes in polarized epithelial cells . J Cell Biol 140 : 1039 – 1053 . Zerial M , McBride H ( 2001 ) Rab proteins as membrane organizers . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2 : 107 – 117 . Zerial M , Christoforidis S , DeRenzis S , Nielsen E , Murphy C ( 2001 ) Assay to detect substances useful for therapy . International patent application CA2384306 . Zhou K , Pandol S , Bokoch G , Traynor - Kaplan AE ( 1998 ) Disruption of Dictyostelium PI3K genes reduces [ 32 P ] phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 bisphos - phate and [ 32 P ] phosphatidylinositol trisphosphate levels , alters F - actin distribution and impairs pinocytosis . J Cell Sci 111 : 283 – 294 . Zimmer M , Palmer A , Kohler J , Klein R ( 2003 ) EphB - ephrinB bidirectional endocytosis terminates adhesion allowing contact mediated repulsion . Nat Cell Biol 5 : 869 – 878 . PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org September 2004 | Volume 2 | Issue 9 | e261 0018 Rabankyrin - 5 in Macropinocytosis