Eukaryotic cells internalize a variety of particles during their lifetime . The uptake of particles > 0 . 5 µ m in size is termed phagocytosis , whereas particles < 0 . 5 µ m are taken up by receptor - mediated endocytosis or pinocytosis . Distinct types of phagocytosis tend to be ligand specific : bacteria ( ~ 0 . 5 – 3 µ m ) or yeast ( ~ 3 – 4 µ m ) are inter nalized by macrophages through scavenger receptors ; micro­ organisms can also be coated with serum components ( for example , complement ) or antibodies and then taken up through complement 1 , 2 or Fc receptors 3 , 4 , respectively . Cells that undergo apoptosis , which can range in size from 5 to 50 µ m , must also be removed ( BOX 1 ) . In fact , in humans ~ 200 billion cells are turned over each day per individual , making apoptotic cell removal one of the most common types of phagocytosis 5 . Thus , under­ standing how apoptotic cells are phagocytosed and pro­ cessed is a fundamentally important biological problem . Apoptotic cell turnover begins with the induction of an apoptotic programme or other cellular changes that mark the cell for removal 6 , 7 . The subsequent recognition of altered features by phagocytes leads to their highly efficient and immunologically silent removal 8 . Apoptotic cells can be taken up either by neighbouring cells or by professional phagocytes , such as macrophages 9 – 11 and dendritic cells 12 , 13 . The contribution of each type of phagocyte to clearance in vivo has not been extensively addressed . Phagosome maturation can be viewed as the end of the phagocytic process , during which internalized apop­ totic cells or bacteria are efficiently degraded . After a particle is internalized , it ‘matures’ through a series of increasingly acidified membrane­bound structures called phagosomes 14 . These phagosomes sequentially acquire different proteins ( for example , the Rab GTPases 15 ) during maturation and eventually fuse with acidic lyso­ some structures . Defects in degradation have a number of consequences that depend on the type of particle to be removed . For example , defects in lysosome­associated membrane protein­2 ( LAMP2 ; see below ) block phago­ some maturation and have been linked to periodontal disease , owing to decreased neutrophil­mediated bacte­ rial killing 16 . Defects in apoptotic cell degradation can result in autoimmune disease 17 . For example , apoptotic cell removal by dendritic cells has been implicated in the establishment of tolerance , the process by which the immune system does not respond to self­derived antigens 9 , 12 , 13 , 18 , 19 . Phagosome maturation is therefore of great importance to normal homeostasis of the immune system , to the response to bacterial pathogens and in influencing the immune response to our normal bacte­ rial flora . Moreover , as certain pathogens seem to use the phagocytic machinery to enter and / or live within the host , understanding the various steps of cargo handling in the context of phagocytosis could be key in therapeutic design . We focus on how apoptotic cell­containing phago­ somes mature within the phagocyte , and on the recent developments in our understanding of the genetic , molecular and functional aspects of phagosome matura­ tion in various contexts . Extensive studies on receptor­ mediated endocytosis over the past few decades have allowed the development of a general paradigm for this process : after the binding of a soluble ligand ( such as a growth factor ) to a receptor , the membrane invaginates Beirne B . Carter Center for Immunology Research and the Department of Microbiology , University of Virginia , Charlottesville , Virginia 22902 , USA . e - mails : kinchen @ virginia . edu ; ravi @ virginia . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2515 Receptor - mediated endocytosis The process by which a ligand - bound receptor is internalized into a membrane - bound vesicle . These vesicles sequentially acquire different Rab GTPases . Pinocytosis The process by which liquids and small particles are internalized by the cell . Complement A protein complex component of the innate immune system that can bind to foreign particles and initiate their phagocytosis . Phagosome maturation : going through the acid test Jason M . Kinchen and Kodi S . Ravichandran Abstract | Phagosome maturation is the process by which internalized particles ( such as bacteria and apoptotic cells ) are trafficked into a series of increasingly acidified membrane - bound structures , leading to particle degradation . The characterization of the phagosomal proteome and studies in model organisms and mammals have led to the identification of numerous candidate proteins that cooperate to control the maturation of phagosomes containing different particles . A subset of these candidate proteins makes up the first pathway to be identified for the maturation of apoptotic cell - containing phagosomes . This suggests that a machinery that is distinct from receptor - mediated endocytosis is used in phagosome maturation . R E V I E W S nATurE rEvIEWs | molecular cell biology voLuME 9 | oCTobEr 2008 | 781 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Apoptotic cell Phagosome CED - 10 ( RAC1 ) CED - 10 CED - 5 ( DOCK180 ) CED - 2 ( CrkII ) CED - 12 ( ELMO ) CED - 7 ( ABCA1 , ABCA7 ) CED - 6 ( GULP ) CED - 1 ( MEGF10 , LRP1 ) DYN - 1 ( dynamin ) VPS - 34 RAB - 5 – GDP Fc receptors A group of proteins that bind to immunoglobulin ( Ig ) G - opsonized particles , leading to the activation of phagocytosis . Rab GTPases A family of proteins that cycle between GDP - bound inactive and GTP - bound active forms and have a role in targeting transport to membrane - bound organelles . and the vesicle that contains the receptor and the ligand or cargo from the plasma membrane is excised 20 – 22 ( FIG . 1a ) . Time­lapse studies have shown that this vesicle moves within the cell through a series of stages ( dur­ ing which they acquire rAb5 and rAb7 ( ReF . 23 ) ) that lead to progressive acidification and eventually to fusion with lysosomes 24 , 25 . During these acidification steps , the cargo dissociates from the receptor , which might be recycled back to the membrane and the cargo might be trafficked for degradation or use within the cell 26 , 27 . Although this paradigm has been useful for our current knowledge of vesicular transport within cells , membrane biogenesis and fusion events , the phagocytic process poses several unique challenges . The first challenge stems from the need of a plasma membrane to temporarily extend over the entire surface area of a neighbouring apoptotic cell during engulf­ ment ; in many cases , the neighbouring cell is as large or larger than the phagocyte 14 . This engulfment is accom­ plished by the mobilization of intracellular vesicles to the plasma membrane ; these vesicles also potentially transport signalling proteins to the site of internaliza­ tion 14 , 28 , 29 . second , the contents of the phagocytic cargo brought into the cell ( for example , bacteria or apoptotic cells ) need to be ‘unpacked’ and processed in a way that allows for either an immunological response ( in the case of microorganisms ) or immunological toler­ ance ( to self­antigens derived from apoptotic cells ; BOX 2 ) 30 , 31 . Third , the engulfment of larger particles , such as apoptotic cells , often involves the simultaneous activation of multiple types of receptors that are distinct from those involved in receptor­mediated endocytosis or phagocytosis of bacteria 8 , 32 ( BOX 1 ) . Therefore , the paradigm that phagocytosed particles mature through progressively acidic structures seems to be true 33 ( FIG . 1b ) . However , how to define which molecules regu­ late phagosome maturation , and our knowledge of how signalling events overlap or differ from endocytosis and other phagocytic events , have become active areas of investigation . Insights from proteomics approaches using targets such as whole bacteria or latex beads , early biochemical and proteomics studies attempted to identify proteins that are involved in phagosome maturation 33 . Although this resulted in the identifica­ tion of a vast number of candidate proteins that are localized to phagosomes , in general these studies did not address the functional requirements for these pro­ teins in phagosome maturation . However , an excellent descriptive analysis of the different stages of phagosome maturation was obtained from these studies , which also led to the development of a basic descriptive model for protein recruitment and release from the nascent phagosome 33 – 35 . various proteins must be delivered to the phagosome , including vacuolar ( v ) ­type ATPases ( which acidify the phagosome ) , acidic proteases ( such as cathepsins ) and major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) class II molecules ( for the presentation of phagosome­derived antigens on the cell surface ) . Box 1 | Removal of apoptotic cells This review mainly deals with phagosome maturation . However , the recognition and subsequent internalization of the target precedes the processing of the cell corpse . Signalling during internalization ( see figure ) seems to regulate phagosome maturation , the specific post‑ engulfment responses of the phagocyte and , in turn , important biological consequences . In the nematode and mammalian models , numerous receptors ( for example , CED‑1 , LRP1 , CD36 , TIM4 , BAI1 and MER ; reviewed in ReFs 8 , 128 ) and adhesion molecules ( for example , CD14 ( ReF . 129 ) ) have been linked to the removal of apoptotic cells . However , the specific ligands of these receptors and the intracellular signalling pathways that lead to cell corpse uptake have only been defined in some cases ( BOX 2 ) . Studies on the simpler nematode model and further studies in mammals have identified two partially redundant pathways that have an evolutionarily conserved role in apoptotic cell removal . In the first pathway , the proteins CED‑2 ( CrkII in mammals ) , CED‑5 ( DOCK180 ) and CED‑12 ( ELMO ) function to activate CED‑10 ( RAC1 ) 130 , 131 . In mammals , this pathway functions downstream of the G‑protein‑coupled‑receptor BAI1 ( ReF . 132 ) during apoptotic cell removal and has been linked to signalling downstream of integrins 133 . In the second pathway , the candidate receptor CED‑1 ( MEGF10 and LRP1 in mammals ) binds to an unknown ligand on the apoptotic cell 104 and signals through its cytoplasmic tail to the adaptor protein CED‑6 ( CED6 or GULP ) 104 , 134 – 136 , which then signals to CED‑10 . CED‑7 ( ABCA1 and ABCA7 ) is thought to have a role in membrane dynamics 137 . This second pathway has also been linked to Rac activation in both nematode and mammalian models 98 , 101 , and both pathways seem to coordinately regulate the actin cytoskeleton 41 . Studies on phagocytic signalling in other models ( such as Drosophila melanogaster and mammalian cells ) have underlined the importance of this pathway for the evolutionarily conserved removal of apoptotic cell corpses 138 . VSP‑34 , vacuolar sorting protein‑34 . R E V I E W S 782 | oCTobEr 2008 | voLuME 9 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Recyclingendosome RAB5 recruitment RAB7 recruitment LAMP1 recruitment Apoptotic cell Phagocyticreceptor Receptor - boundcargo Dynamin Dynamin Clathrin RAB5recruitment RAB7recruitment Fusion to lysosomes Concentration stage Clathrinremoval Loss of RAB5 Recyclingendosome Golgi Golgi Lysosome Lysosome Adaptins a b Recycling endosome A membrane - bound organelle for the recycling of receptors following ligand dissociation . The acid test and its consequences . Acidification of the phagosome is perhaps the most common read­out used for addressing protein function in phagosome maturation . Acidification is essential during phagosome maturation : it is only when the phagosome hits a sufficiently low pH that the cathepsin family of acidic proteases become active and the phagocytosed particle can begin to be degraded 36 . In addition to degrading proteins into peptides for loading onto class II and class I MHC molecules , cathepsin D also has a role in the activation of MHC class II proteins , a role that is essential for peptide loading 37 , 38 . Thus , acidification is a marker of a ‘functional’ phagosome . Figure 1 | endocytosis as a paradigm for phagocytosis . Phagocytosis and receptor - mediated endocytosis are similar processes that also have distinct features . a | During receptor - mediated endocytosis , the activated receptor sinks into the cell , in this case into a clathrin - coated pit 21 . Clathrin is removed from the vesicle after dynamin - mediated scission from the membrane 20 ; receptors are then trafficked to the recycling endosome , where they are eventually sorted back to the cell surface 22 . Activated endocytic receptors are also removed from phagosomes and presumably are also targeted to recycling endosomes ( see part b ) . Endocytosed vesicles acquire the GTPase RAB5 , which is activated by guanine nucleotide - exchange factors ( GEFs ; such as RABEX5 and GAPEX5 ) 150 . Active RAB5 allows homotypic fusion with other RAB5 - positive structures 23 , 57 , as well as heterotypic fusion with RAB4 - positive recycling endosomes 70 . RAB5 is then exchanged for RAB7 through the HOPS ( homotypic fusion and vacuole protein sorting ) complex 23 , which contains the RAB7 GEF vacuolar sorting protein - 39 ( VPS39 ) , resulting in the recruitment of the RAB7 effector RAB7 - interacting lysosomal protein ( RILP ) and , ultimately , fusion with acidic lysosomes 151 and acquisition of the lysosomal markers lysosome - associated membrane protein - 1 ( LAMP1 ) and LAMP2 . b | By contrast , during phagocytosis the plasma membrane is extended around the apoptotic cell , forming the phagosome 8 , 14 . Phagosomes also mature through RAB5 - positive and RAB7 - positive stages , which result in fusion with lysosome structures 28 , 33 , 41 , 52 , 57 , 58 ; however , phagosomes seem to use a distinct mechanism for GTPase regulation . In the nematode , known RAB - 5 GEFs are not required for phagosome maturation , and the HOPS complex is not required for the recruitment of RAB - 7 to the phagosome . This might reflect the observations that phagosomes rarely fuse together and tend to mature individually . Other events have been described 43 , such as the trafficking of proteins from the Golgi to the phagosome , although whether these occur during endocytosis remains to be determined . A number of GTPases are associated with the phagosome during phagosome maturation ( BOX 3 ) , but the roles of many of these on the endosome have not been described . R E V I E W S nATurE rEvIEWs | molecular cell biology voLuME 9 | oCTobEr 2008 | 783 Programmed cell death The process by which a healthy cell is induced to die , undergoes apoptosis and is then cleared and degraded by a phagocyte . Acidification of the phagosome occurs in two stages . First , a poorly understood ‘early’ acidification step results in a relatively small drop in pH 39 . second , v­type ATPases —ATP­hydrolysis­driven proton pumps 40 — are sub­ sequently trafficked to the phagosome at relatively late stages . In the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans , phago­ some acidification begins quite early : rAb­5­positive phagosomes stain weakly with acridine orange , a marker for acidic organelles 41 . However , these phagosomes do not stain as strongly as late­stage apoptotic cells , a pattern that is consistent with multiple modes of acidification that depend on the stage of maturation . Vacuolar ATPases . The v­type ATPase is a multisub unit complex composed of 14 subunits in two separate structures : the v 1 complex mediates ATP hydrolysis , whereas the v 0 complex transports H + across the endo­ somal membrane 40 . v­type ATPases are trafficked to the phagosome and acidify its contents , but where do these ATPases ( and other proteins trafficked to the phagosome ) come from ? In Dictyostelium discoideum , yeast­containing phago­ somes acquire v­type ATPases by fusion with v­type ATPase­containing endosomes 42 . In multicellular organ­ isms , the trafficking of v­type ATPases is more complex , because rather than delivery by endosomal fusion , these proteins seem to be trafficked from the trans ­Golgi to the phagosome along with cathepsins 43 . Proteomics studies have identified a large number of components that local­ ize to phagosomes 33 – 35 , 44 – 48 . However , the mechanism by which many of these components arrive at the phago­ somes has yet to be addressed . Intriguingly , coatomer protein complex­I ( CoPI ) , which is required for vesicle budding from the Golgi , is also required for phagosome maturation 49 , although a role for CoPI in vesicle budding from the phagosome ( or other organelles ) is possible . studies in zebrafish have suggested that v­type ATPases might have roles in phagosome maturation in addition to phagosome acidification : the v­type ATPase A1 subunit is required for apoptotic cell­containing phagosome fusion with lysosomes , although the exact stage at which phagosomes are arrested is unknown 50 . A screen for genes that are required in the early stages of phagosome maturation identified C . elegans vha‑16 , which encodes the D subunit of the v 0 ATPase 41 . A direct role for these ATPases in vesicle fusion seems unlikely , but it is possible that a low pH might induce conformational changes in proteins that are required for phagosome maturation . Alternatively , acidification might result in cleavage of a target protein by activated cathepsins , which would then induce maturation . These are mere speculations , however , and the mechanism by which v­type ATPases regulate maturation remains uncertain . Proteomics and contamination . one must sound a note of caution when analysing proteomics data . A recent study has suggested that proteomics purification schemes suf­ fer from relatively high contamination from other cellular membranes , which could be misleading 51 . Although trans­ ient protein localization to the phagosome might provide an argument for a role in this process , further studies are required to validate such candidates , either by rnA inter­ ference ( rnAi ) or dominant­negative approaches . In this respect , recent studies in model organisms , such as the nematode C . elegans , have for the first time identified a functional pathway for phagosome maturation 41 , 52 , 53 . Defining signalling pathways Whereas studies in cultured cells have been instrumental in identifying the protein components of the phagosome , an understanding of a comprehensive pathway for how phagosome maturation is regulated has been lacking . recent genetic studies , combined with cell biological approaches in model organisms , have begun to define the basic pathway for the acidification of apoptotic cell­containing phagosomes . C . elegans has been a powerful genetic tool for the identification of genes that are involved in programmed cell death ; and genes identified in this model have also been shown to have a role in mammalian phagocytic uptake ( BOX 1 ) . However , the events leading to cell corpse degradation following phagocytosis have been addressed only recently . one of the major impediments to these studies has been the requirement of many endocytic proteins for cell viability ; these challenges necessitate the identification of rare temperature­sensitive muta­ tions 41 or time­consuming clonal screens 28 , 54 . rnAi has bypassed this issue as it is remarkably efficient in the nematode 41 , although complementary studies using mutant alleles are preferable when such mutants are available . rnAi­based approaches , combined with genetic and fluorescent markers that define specific steps in phagosome maturation , allow unbiased screens to identify regulators at various steps in phagosome Box 2 | The consequences of apoptotic cell removal There are several consequences associated with the internalization of apoptotic cell corpses . These consequences fall into three general classes that might also be affected by signalling from the phagosome . First , the removal of apoptotic cells has been linked to the enhanced secretion of ‘pro‑healing’ cytokines ( such as transforming growth factor‑ β 10 and interleukin‑10 ( ReF . 139 ) ) that serve to reduce inflammation in the extracellular surroundings and to promote wound healing . The signalling pathways that alter cytokine secretion are not well characterized , but many phagocytic receptors ( for example , stabilin‑2 ( ReF . 140 ) and CD36 ( ReF . 139 ) ) have been implicated . Intriguingly , endothelial cells have been reported to induce pro‑inflammatory signalling ( increased secretion of tumour‑ necrosis factor‑ α ) following recognition of apoptotic cells 141 ; this signalling has implications for atherosclerotic disease . Second , phagocytes must also dispose of internalized components of the apoptotic cell . Few studies have tracked the fate of apoptotic cell components , but two recent studies have addressed signalling pathways that lead to cholesterol efflux from the cell and suggest that internalization of apoptotic cells ( or targets ) activates the nuclear receptor LXR . LXR activation results in enhanced transcription of the transporter protein ABCA1 ( ReFs 103 , 142 ) . Third , protein components of the cell are degraded and cross‑presented by major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) class I molecules 11 , 143 and tend to be excluded from class II presentation 97 . Processing of apoptotic cell‑associated antigens seems to be especially important , and has been linked to the maintenance of self‑tolerance 12 , 19 , 144 . Potential pathways for DNA degradation have been described in the nematode 145 – 147 and mouse models 17 ; defects in this process , as with defects in cell corpse removal , have been linked to autoimmune disease , emphasizing that efficient phagosome maturation is required for health of the organism . R E V I E W S 784 | oCTobEr 2008 | voLuME 9 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio Prenylated The process by which a hydrocarbon moiety is attached to a conserved CAAX motif in the C terminus of GTPases . maturation ( TABLe 1 ) . several groups have made great strides towards developing the nematode as an in vivo model for phagosome maturation 41 , 52 , 53 . Phagosome maturation : Rab GTPases and protein trafficking . rab GTPases have been implicated in con­ trolling transport between membrane­bound organelles . These proteins function as ‘molecular switches’ : in the inactive conformation , the rab protein is GDP bound and resides in the cytoplasm in complex with a rab GDP­ dissociation inhibitor ( rabGDI ) , which keeps the protein inactive 55 , 56 . The rabGDI releases the rab GTPase follow­ ing a signalling event , thereby exposing the prenylated tail and allowing it to bind membranous organelles . rab proteins can then bind to a guanine nucleotide­exchange factor ( GEF ) , resulting in the exchange of GDP for GTP 55 . The now active rabGTP can bind to effector proteins 57 , resulting in the recruitment of machinery for further steps of maturation . recent genetic studies have shown that rAb­5 ( ReF . 41 ) and rAb­7 ( ReFs 41 , 53 ) are required for the removal of apoptotic cells in the nematode , with both GTPases marking distinct ( but partially overlapping ) stages of maturation 41 . similar to our current knowledge of maturation of internalized particles in mammalian systems 15 , 58 , rAb­5 functions upstream of rAb­7 , as Table 1 | Genes and proteins required for phagosome maturation during apoptotic cell removal categories gene or protein name mammalian or nematode orthologue Function loss - or reduction - of - function phenotypes refs Caenorhabditis elegans Phagocytic genes ced - 1 LRP , MEGF10 Recognition of the apoptotic cell and intracellular signalling Delayed phagocytosis and accumulation of RAB - 7 and FYVE marker 53 , 104 , 134 , 136 , 137 , 153 ced - 6 GULP , human CED6 ced - 7 ABCA1 , ABCA7 ced - 5 DOCK180 GEF for CED - 10 ( also known as RAC1 ) Delayed phagocytosis and accumulation of FYVE marker 53 , 131 , 154 , 155 GTPases rab - 2 RAB2 ER - to - Golgi transport and potentially ER - or Golgi - to - phagosome transport Delayed ( or possibly abnormal ) maturation 52 , 54 rab - 5 RAB5 Early endosome maturation Arrested phagosomes , block in acidification 41 rab - 7 RAB7 Late endosome maturation Arrested phagosomes at the RAB - 5 - positive stage 41 , 53 dyn - 1 Dynamin Recruitment of RAB - 5 Enlarged phagosomes , pre - RAB - 5 arrest 41 RAB - 5 effectors vps - 34 VPS34 PI3K Blocked in RAB - 5 recruitment , no acidification 41 RAB - 7 effectors vps - 11 VPS11 RING - motif - containing protein Arrested phagosomes at RAB - 7 - positive stage 41 vps - 16 VPS16 Unknown vps - 18 VPS18 SNARE binding ? vps - 33 VPS33 Sec1 homologue , SNARE binding ? vps - 39 VPS39 GEF for RAB - 7 Unassigned genes vps - 41 VPS41 Adaptor protein , vacuolar biogenesis No gross effect on recruitment of RAB - 5 or RAB - 7 to phagosomes 41 vps - 45 VPS45 Sec1 homologue , vacuolar biogenesis Mammals RAB5 recruitment Dynamin DYN - 1 Required for RAB5 recruitment Arrested nascent phagosome , block in acidification 28 , 41 GTPases RAB5 RAB - 5 Required for maturation from nascent phagosome to RAB7 - positive stage Block in acidification 41 , 61 RAB7 RAB - 7 Maturation from the RAB5 - positive to LAMP1 - positive phagosome Unknown 89 RAB5 GEF GAPEX5 RME - 6 RAB5 activation Blocked RAB5 activation during phagosome maturation 61 Unknown role RhoA RHO - 1 Regulate early steps of phagosome maturation Blocked RAB7 recruitment , phagosome acidification and protease delivery 89 ERM proteins ERM - 1 Recent studies in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans and mammalian systems have helped identify proteins that are involved in various steps of phagosome maturation during apoptotic cell removal . The genes in the nematode were identified in genetic screens , whereas those in the mammalian systems were identified using a candidate approach that targets individual molecules . ER , endoplasmic reticulum ; ERM , ezrin – radixin – moesin ; GEF , guanine nucleotide - exchange factor ; LAMP1 , lysosome - associated membrane protein - 1 ; PI3K , phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ; SNARE , soluble N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive factor attachment protein receptor ; VPS , vacuolar sorting protein . R E V I E W S nATurE rEvIEWs | molecular cell biology voLuME 9 | oCTobEr 2008 | 785 Dynamin A large GTPase that is involved in membrane scission , actin cytoskeletal dynamics and phagosome maturation . Focal exocytosis small vesicles are targeted to the plasma membrane during phagocytosis . In turn , this is thought to produce a local increase in the volume of plasma membrane , thereby allowing the cell to extend its membrane around large particles . FYVE domain A zinc - finger - containing protein motif that binds to the membrane lipid phosphatidyl - inositol - 3 - phosphate . This results in the targeting of the FYVe - containing protein to the membrane . phagosomes are arrested at the rAb­5­positive stage in rab‑7 ­deficient worms . based on the role of rAb­5 and rAb­7 on endosomes , rab GTPases seem to func­ tion as part of a fusion pore that determines the types of interactions that vesicles have with other membrane­ bound organelles 59 . In this respect , rAb­5 and rAb­7 potentially serve as nodes for recycling proteins back to the plasma membrane and as entry points for vesicles to deposit lysosomal proteases , with ‘effector’ proteins binding to the activated rab protein to mediate this function ( see below ) . A novel recruitment strategy for RAB5 . one of the earliest known maturation events in a number of sys­ tems is the recruitment of rAb5 to phagosomes 41 , 58 , 60 , 61 , although a detailed mechanism for how this is accom­ plished during phagosome maturation is lacking . recent studies in the nematode 41 have implied an unexpected role for dynamin and the rAb­5 effector vacuolar sorting protein­34 ( vPs­34 ) in rAb­5 recruit­ ment to nascent phagosomes ( FIG . 2 ) , which suggests that phagosomal recruitment of GTPases is a complex , regulated process 41 , 62 . The GTPase DYn­1 , the nematode orthologue of dynamin , was identified in forward and reverse genetic screens for genes that are involved in programmed cell death 28 , 41 . Although initial reports linked DYn­1 to the internalization of apoptotic cells ( by having a role in focal exocytosis 28 ) , this view has now been revised 41 , 53 . The current view , based on studies in mammalian cells and nematodes 41 , 62 , is that DYn­1 ( and mam­ malian dynamin ) has a role not in exocytosis or the internal ization of cell corpses , but is instead essential for phagosome maturation , namely the recruitment of rAb­5 to the nascent phagosome . Phagosomes in dyn‑1 loss­of­function mutant worms appear arrested , without recycling of the phagocytic receptor CED­1 back to the plasma membrane 41 . Further genetic and cell biological analysis identified the phosphoinositide 3­kinase ( PI3K ) vPs­34 ( an orthologue of human PIK3C3 or vPs34 ) as another protein that regulates rAb­5 recruitment 41 . biochemical analysis revealed a novel protein complex in which DYn­1 mediates the recruitment of GDP­bound rAb­5 through inter action with vPs­34 , which serves as a bridging protein . To complicate matters , rAb­5 also seems to regulate vPs­34 activity 63 ( this is also shown during removal of immunoglobulin ( Ig ) G­opsonized red blood cells in mammals 58 , 63 ) , and knockdown of rAb­5 blocks the accumulation of PtdIns3P on the phagosome ( see below ) . Although this novel complex explains how rAb­5 is recruited to apoptotic cell­containing phagosomes , it does not suggest a mode of regulation , as rAb­5 must still be converted to the GTP­bound form for phago­ somes to mature 41 , 64 . There are at least three canonical rAb­5 GEFs in the nematode genome , all of which are vPs9­domain­containing proteins 41 : rME­6 , rAbX­5 and TAG­333 ( orthologues of mammalian GAPEX5 , rAbEX5 and rIn1 , respectively ) . However , not one of these proteins is required ( either singly or redundantly ) for the removal of apoptotic cells , suggesting that a novel GEF might have this role . regulation of rAb­5 is thus distinct from other endocytic events ( such as the inter­ nalization of proteins from the extracellular space ) that jointly require rME­6 and rAbX­5 , suggesting that the regulation of phagosome maturation differs from that of receptor­mediated endocytosis . Intriguingly , a recent study in which a fluorescence resonance energy transfer ( FrET ) probe was used to monitor rAb5 activation in swiss 3T3 cells suggested that the GEF GAPEX5 might have a role in regulating GTP loading of rAb5 during removal of apoptotic cells 61 . one caveat to this is that the experimental system is somewhat artificial , requiring overexpression of integrin proteins ( and opsonization with the integrin ligand MFG­E8 ) rather than the monitoring of basal engulfment . The importance of GAPEX5 in the context of endogenous cell corpse removal ( which does not require the opsonin MFG­E8 in most cases 65 ) therefore remains to be determined . Phosphoinositides and RAB5 effectors . The enrichment of PtdIns3P on the surface of the phagosome can be regarded as a sign of phagosome maturation from the rAb5­positive to the rAb7­positive stage in both mam­ malian and nematode models ( see below ) . The recruit­ ment of rAb5 effectors ( such as rabenosyn­5 ( ReF . 66 ) ) by interaction with GTP­bound rAb5 ( in conjunction with PtdIns3P 57 ) results in the subsequent recruitment of rAb7 and continued maturation of the phagosome ( see below ) . There are many known rAb5 effectors in cultured cells that serve diverse functions 57 . Effectors typically mediate homotypic fusion events during endo­ cytosis — for example , among rAb5­positive vesicles , as in the case of early endosome antigen­1 ( EEA1 ) 59 , 67 , 68 — or they mediate heterotypic fusion between structures coated with different rab proteins ( potentially between rAb5­ and rAb7­staining structures , as in the case of rabenosyn­5 ( ReFs 66 , 69 ) , or between rAb5­ and rAb4­ coated structures , as in the case of rabaptin­5 ( ReF . 70 ) ) . Typically , rAb5 effectors share a similar architecture ; they contain a FYVe domain for binding PtdIns3P that is generated on the phagosome by vPs34 ( ReF . 57 ) . In the nematode , vPs­34 is required for the accu­ mulation of PtdIns3P on the phagosome 41 , and green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) ­tagged constructs contain­ ing the FYvE domain from EEA­1 ( a component of the rAb­5 fusion pore ) or HGrs­1 ( which is required for formation of multivesicular endosomes 71 ) have been successfully used to monitor this process 41 , 53 , 54 . vPs­34 is currently the only rAb­5 effector to be linked to phago­ some maturation in the nematode , and worms that are deficient in eea‑1 or hgrs‑1 show no defect in cell corpse removal 41 , although EEA1 is required for maturation of Mycobacterium species­containing phagosomes in mammalian macrophages 72 . Knockdown of another known rAb­5 effector , F22G12 . 4 ( the nematode ortho­ logue of rabankyrin ) , which is required for maturation of pinocytosed particles 73 , suggested that this protein is dispensable for maturation 41 . Moreover , a targeted screen of all FYvE­domain­containing proteins in the genome failed to identify other candidate effectors . R E V I E W S 786 | oCTobEr 2008 | voLuME 9 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio (cid:54)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:94)(cid:88)(cid:21)(cid:88)(cid:90)(cid:97)(cid:97) (cid:75)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:40)(cid:41) (cid:57)(cid:110)(cid:99)(cid:86)(cid:98)(cid:94)(cid:99)(cid:21)(cid:29)(cid:57)(cid:78)(cid:67)(cid:34)(cid:38)(cid:30) (cid:69)(cid:93)(cid:86)(cid:92)(cid:100)(cid:104)(cid:100)(cid:98)(cid:90) (cid:62)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:90)(cid:103)(cid:99)(cid:86)(cid:97)(cid:94)(cid:111)(cid:86)(cid:105)(cid:94)(cid:100)(cid:99) (cid:67)(cid:86)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:103)(cid:90)(cid:21)(cid:71)(cid:90)(cid:107)(cid:94)(cid:90)(cid:108)(cid:104)(cid:21) (cid:113) (cid:21)(cid:66)(cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:106)(cid:97)(cid:86)(cid:103)(cid:21)(cid:56)(cid:90)(cid:97)(cid:97)(cid:21)(cid:55)(cid:94)(cid:100)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:92)(cid:110) (cid:71)(cid:54)(cid:55)(cid:42)(cid:196)(cid:60)(cid:57)(cid:69) (cid:71)(cid:54)(cid:55)(cid:42)(cid:103)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:103)(cid:106)(cid:94)(cid:105)(cid:98)(cid:90)(cid:99)(cid:105) (cid:71)(cid:54)(cid:55)(cid:42)(cid:196)(cid:60)(cid:73)(cid:69) (cid:69)(cid:105)(cid:89)(cid:62)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:40)(cid:69) (cid:71)(cid:54)(cid:55)(cid:42)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:105)(cid:94)(cid:107)(cid:86)(cid:105)(cid:94)(cid:100)(cid:99) (cid:58)(cid:91)(cid:91)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:103)(cid:52) (cid:58)(cid:91)(cid:91)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:103)(cid:103)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:103)(cid:106)(cid:94)(cid:105)(cid:98)(cid:90)(cid:99)(cid:105) (cid:71)(cid:54)(cid:55)(cid:44)(cid:196)(cid:60)(cid:57)(cid:69) (cid:71)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:60)(cid:57)(cid:62) (cid:71)(cid:54)(cid:55)(cid:44)(cid:21)(cid:103)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:103)(cid:106)(cid:94)(cid:105)(cid:98)(cid:90)(cid:99)(cid:105)(cid:100)(cid:103)(cid:21)(cid:90)(cid:109)(cid:88)(cid:93)(cid:86)(cid:99)(cid:92)(cid:90) Phox homology ( PX ) domain A lipid - and protein - interaction domain that consists of 100 – 130 amino acids and is defined by sequences that are found in two components of the phagocyte NADPH oxidase ( phox ) complex . other phospholipid­binding proteins , such as those containing the phox homology ( PX ) domain , have been described to function in endocytic events and can bind to PtdIns3P . Targeted screening of these factors identi­ fied two pre viously uncharacterized genes with weak defects in cell corpse removal , but could not place these genes within the pathway for phagosome maturation 41 . In summary , it seems that the function and regulation of rAb­5 during phagosome maturation is distinct from other endocytic events . Intriguingly , studies in mammalian macrophages have suggested that Mycobacterium species target EEA1 as a means of arresting phagosome matura­ tion 72 , which suggests that the requirements for some proteins might vary depending on the phagosome cargo . Figure 2 | activation of rab5 during phagosome maturation . During internalization of apoptotic cells , dynamin and vacuolar sorting protein - 34 ( VPS34 ) are recruited to the phagosome by an unknown mechanism . VPS34 can interact with inactive ( GDP bound ) or active ( GTP bound ) RAB5 ; the recruitment of dynamin to the forming phagosome results in the recruitment of VPS34 and RAB5 – GDP to the phagosome 41 . Dynamin ( and DYN - 1 in nematodes ) has a role in the maintenance of the actin cytoskeleton ; this role also has implications for phagocytosis 41 , 152 . Once on the phagosome , an unidentified guanine nucleotide - exchange factor ( GEF ) probably activates RAB5 ( converting it to the GTP - bound state ) , thereby activating VPS34 ( ReF . 61 ) , a kinase that generates phosphatidylinositol - 3 - phosphate ( PtdIns3P ) on the phagosome . It is noteworthy that GAPEX5 has been identified as a possible GEF for RAB5 in one mammalian cell context 61 . Effector proteins bind to active RAB5 in the context of PtdIns3P on the phagosome 57 ; the assembly of unidentified effectors on the phagosome results in the exchange of RAB5 for RAB7 and leads to the continued maturation of the phagosome . RabGDI , Rab GDP - dissociation inhibitor . R E V I E W S nATurE rEvIEWs | molecular cell biology voLuME 9 | oCTobEr 2008 | 787 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Receptor - mediated endocytosis RABEX5GAPEX5RIN1 VPS34 Rabenosyn - 5 LAMP1 / 2 CED - 1 CED - 6 CED - 7 a b CED - 2 CED - 5 CED - 12 CED - 10 DYN - 1 VPS - 34 RAB - 5 RAB5 RAB - 7 RAB7 HOPS complex HOPScomplex LMP - 1 LMP - 2 RILP ? ? ? Concentratingendosomes EEA1 Generation of PtdIns3P on phagosome surfaces must have a function in maturation given that knockdown of vPs­34 in nematodes generates a potent inhibition of phagosome maturation 41 , but the identity of other PtdIns3P­binding proteins and rAb­5 effectors , and their roles in phagosome maturation , remain to be determined . Control of RAB7 activation and function . We do not know how rAb7 is recruited to the phagosome , or how recruitment is related to the release of rAb5 . recent studies in cultured cells suggest that rAb5 is simul­ taneously exchanged for rAb7 during endocytosis 23 ( a process called rab conversion ) , rather than by a series of fusion events between rAb5­ and rAb7­positive structures , as was previously proposed 74 . recruitment of rAb­7 independent of vesicle fusion events has also been observed during time­lapse studies during apoptotic cell removal in the nematode 53 . one potential candidate to regulate this process , the HoPs ( homotypic fusion and vacuole protein sorting ) complex , has been implicated in rAb7 recruitment during endocytosis in mammals 23 ; however , this complex seems to serve a different function during phagosome maturation ( FIG . 3 ) . The HoPs complex was first identified in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae 75 , and in the nematode it is com­ posed of the proteins vPs­11 , vPs­16 , vPs­18 , vPs­33 , vPs­39 , vPs­41 and vPs­45 ( TABLe 1 ) . A subset of these proteins are also involved in transport from the Golgi to endosomal structures as part of the CorvET ( class C core vacuole / endosome tethering complex ) 76 . vps39 has been shown to be a GEF for Ypt7 ( the S . cerevisiae ortho­ logue of rAb­7 ) 65 , and vPs­33 and vPs­45 are sec1 orthologues ; these orthologues have been proposed to function in vesicular tethering during fusion events 77 , 78 . Although the function of the HoPs complex has been tied to rAb­5 function during endocytosis 23 , genetic studies in the nematode suggest instead that this com­ plex functions downstream of rAb­7 recruitment during phagosome maturation 41 . Worms with mutated vps‑11 , vps‑16 , vps‑18 , vps‑33 or vps‑39 contain phagosomes that are arrested at the rAb­7­positive stage , which suggests that these proteins might be required for maturation of phagosomes to phagolysosomes ( and / or fusion with existing lysosome structures ) 41 . not all HoPs complex members function downstream of rAb­7 recruitment . one member of the complex , vPs­45 , seems to function after the loss of rAb­5 from the phagosome and before rAb­7 recruitment 41 . vPs45 interacts with the rAb5 effector rabenosyn­5 ( known as rAbs­5 in C . elegans ) during endocytosis in worms 23 and mammals 69 , providing a mechanism for HoPs complex recruitment to rAb5­positive vesi­ cles . However , rAbs­5 is not required for phagosome maturation in C . elegans 41 , suggesting that vPs­45 might interact with another rAb­5 effector ( or might have an alter native , unidentified role ) during phagosome matura­ tion . vPs­41 , however , seems to be required downstream of rAb­7 function , as phagosomes can recruit rAb­5 and rAb­7 in vps‑41 ­depleted worms 41 . The molecular func­ tion of vPs­41 has not been described , although as with most HoPs complex members it is required for vesicle docking 41 , and further studies are needed to address how this protein functions both during phagosome maturation and endocytosis . Figure 3 | Pathways for phagosome maturation and endocytosis . Pathways for phagosome maturation and endosome maturation are derived from publications that describe the requirements of each protein in the different endocytic processes . a | In the nematode , the process of acidification begins with the recruitment of RAB - 5 to the phagosome ( through interaction with DYN - 1 and vacuolar sorting protein - 34 ( VPS - 34 ) 41 ) ; this leads to VPS - 34 activation and the recruitment of unidentified effectors . RAB - 7 is then recruited to the phagosome , resulting in the recruitment of the HOPS ( homotypic fusion and vacuole protein sorting ) complex . The HOPS complex activates RAB - 7 , which promotes further maturation events and the eventual fusion of the phagosome with lysosome structures . b | In mammals , a concentration step is begun by the activation of RAB5 on endocytic vesicles ( by the guanine nucleotide - exchange factors ( GEFs ) RABEX5 , GAPEX5 or RIN1 ) . During this step , vesicles merge and the ligand is concentrated 23 , potentially through the formation of a fusion pore by the RAB5 effector early endosome antigen - 1 ( EEA1 ) , which binds to VPS34 - generated phagosomal phosphatidylinositol - 3 - phosphate ( PtdIns3P ) . Another RAB5 effector , rabenosyn - 5 , binds the HOPS complex component VPS45 , which acts as a GEF and an effector for RAB7 . Rabenosyn - 5 binding to VPS45 might mediate RAB5 recruitment to the maturing vesicle 23 , 66 . The HOPS complex member VPS39 activates RAB7 , resulting in the recruitment of the RAB7 effector RAB7 - interacting lysosomal protein ( RILP ) , potentially resulting in lysosome fusion 151 . Although some of these proteins have been shown to have a role in mammalian engulfment , a step - wise pathway for apoptotic cell - containing phagosome maturation in mammalian systems is only beginning to be defined . R E V I E W S 788 | oCTobEr 2008 | voLuME 9 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio Retrograde transport Transport from the Golgi to the endoplasmic reticulum ( eR ) . This process is the reverse of the normal mode of eR - to - Golgi transport . signalling pathways that are required for the matu­ ration ( or fusion ) of rAb7­positive phagosomes into acidic lysosomes have not been studied in depth ; to date , the HoPs complex has not been implicated in the maturation of bacteria­ or bead­containing phagosomes . one rAb7 effector , rAb7­interacting lysosomal protein ( rILP ) , is required following Fcr­mediated uptake of opsonized red blood cells ; the Gram­negative bacteria Brucella abortus has been shown to require rILP for conversion of the phagosome into an endoplasmic reticulum ( Er ) ­derived replicative organelle , suggesting that this protein is relevant for phagosome maturation 79 . similarly , Mycobacterium bovis secretes a protein that interferes with rAb7 activation , blocking recruitment of rILP to the phagosome 80 . The nematode possesses an orthologue of rILP ( J . M . K . and K . s . r . , unpublished observations ) , but the function of this protein has yet to be linked to phagosome maturation or to endocytosis in the nematode . Other Rab GTPases and the phagosome . Whereas the roles of rAb5 and rAb7 in phagosome maturation can be inferred from mammalian studies , the role of rAb2 is something of an enigma . A number of differ­ ent rab GTPases ( including rAb2 ) have been identified in proteomics studies 34 , 48 , 81 – 84 ( BOX 3 ) ; genetic studies in C . elegans have shown that the loss of rAb­2 delays lysosome fusion 54 , but how rAb­2 mediates this effect has not been addressed . In these studies , matura­ tion markers , such as PtdIns3P­binding proteins , are recruited to the phagosome with normal kinetics 54 , which suggests that the defect that leads to lysosome fusion delay occurs after rAb­5 recruitment . Consistent with this , knockdown of rab‑5 blocks the recruitment of rAb­2 to phagosomes ( J . M . K . and K . s . r . , unpublished observations ) . rAb­2 colocalizes with rAb­5 , rAb­7 , LMP­1 ( the nematode orthologue of LAMP1 ; see below ) ( ReF . 52 ) and PtdIns3P markers 54 on the phagosome , suggesting that rAb­2 localizes to phagosomes throughout their lifespan , rather than at a distinct stage . Indeed , deple­ tion of other phagosome maturation markers invariably results in rAb­2­positive arrested phagosomes ( J . M . K . and K . s . r . , unpublished observations ) . rAb­2 is also not required for phagosome acidification per se : recent studies have shown that apoptotic cell­containing phagosomes in rab‑2 ­deficient worms are acidified and stain with acridine orange 52 . However , another group has suggested that in rab‑2‑ deficient worms , phagosomes might be less acidified compared with wild­type worms 54 . What is the function of rAb2 on phagosomes , if it does not mark a particular stage of maturation ? studies in mammalian cells have shown that rAb2 is specifically localized to the Er and Golgi , and might have a role in retrograde transport or in the movement of proteins from the Er to the Golgi 81 , 82 . It is thus conceivable that the function of rAb2 might be to direct vesicles from the Er or Golgi to the nascent phagosome , delivering cargo­containing degradatory proteases ( and , poten­ tially , MHC molecules in mammals ) . In this context , it should be mentioned that many rab GTPases that are associated with the Er and Golgi have been identified on phagosomes using proteomics approaches 15 , 34 , 35 , 45 – 48 , 60 ( BOX 3 ) . rAb­10 , another GTPase that is associated with Golgi transport 85 and recycling endocytosis 86 , has also been identified in screens for factors that are involved in cell corpse removal in C . elegans 41 . However , at this time we have no clear understanding of which mole­ cular process rAb­2 ( and its mammalian orthologue ) regulates during phagosome maturation . Box 3 | Rab - family GTPases implicated in phagosome maturation Proteomics approaches have identified a number of different Rab GTPases ( see table ) that are localized to the phagosome at different times . However , most of these GTPases seem to be localized to the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) or Golgi bodies ; these observations might have biased previous reports of phagosome – ER fusion 51 , 148 . What are the functions of these GTPases on the phagosome ? The Rab family of GTPases typically mediate transport between membrane‑bound organelles , so the most likely role for them would be the delivery of cargo ( for example , from the Golgi and ER to the phagosome ) , potentially delivering lysosomal proteases and other degradatory components . Recruitment of RAB5 , potentially the most well‑characterized Rab GTPase , seems to be related to the carefully timed acidification of the phagosome and might have consequences for the generation of peptide antigens . Another tantalizing possibility is that one ( or multiple ) of these GTPases mediates transport from the phagosome to the ER , carrying processed antigens that will be presented on the cell surface ( by major histocompatibility complex class I proteins ) . Regardless of function , these GTPases are an important target of bacterial pathogens ; several bacterial pathogens require these GTPases for phagosome arrest ( for example , RAB14 and RAB22 by Mycobacterium tuberculosis 60 , 149 and RAB1 by Legionella pneumophila 119 ) . Protein Function references RAB1 ER - to - Golgi transport 15 , 35 , 46 – 48 RAB2 ER - to - Golgi transport 34 , 48 , 52 , 54 , 81 – 84 RAB3 Exocytosis 34 RAB5 Intermediate between , for example , the plasma membrane and early endosome and / or recycling endosomes 15 , 34 , 35 , 41 , 44 , 47 , 48 RAB6 Retrograde transport , Golgi - to - ER transport 35 RAB7 Trafficking from early to late endosome or lysosome 15 , 34 , 35 , 41 , 44 , 46 – 48 RAB8 Trafficking between Golgi , endosomes and plasma membrane 35 , 47 RAB9 Lysosomal enzyme trafficking , late endosome - to - trans - Golgi transport 15 , 44 , 48 RAB10 Transport from Golgi to polarized membrane ( basolateral face ; might cooperate with RAB8 ) 15 , 34 , 35 , 48 RAB11 Transport from Golgi to polarized membrane ( apical face ) , vacuolar - ATPase transport 15 , 34 , 35 , 44 , 47 RAB14 Phagosome and early endosome fusion , trafficking between early endosomes and Golgi 15 , 34 , 48 RAB20 Localized to apical membranes and Golgi complex , potentially involved in vacuolar - ATPase trafficking 15 RAB22 Trans - Golgi - to - endosome transport 15 RAB23 Localized to endosomes and plasma membrane 15 RAB32 Localized to the mitochondrion 15 , 48 RAB33 Retrograde transport from Golgi to ER 15 RAB35 Cytokinesis 15 R E V I E W S nATurE rEvIEWs | molecular cell biology voLuME 9 | oCTobEr 2008 | 789 Efficient targeting of vesicles to the phagosome ( and appropriate acidification ) also has important implica­ tions for antigen presentation . Dendritic cells isolated from rAb27A­deficient mice show defects in antigen presentation related to overacidification of the phago­ some 87 . Another factor , noX2 , is an nADPH oxidase that generates reactive oxygen species , contributing to the alkalinization of the phagosome 88 . Fusion of latex bead­containing phagosomes with noX2­positive structures slows acidification , allowing the controlled generation of antigenic peptides and loading onto MHC molecules . Loss of rAb27A , which is required for this fusion event , leads to overacidified latex bead­containing phagosomes , thereby greatly reducing efficiency of antigen presentation 87 . This work emphasizes the complex sorting requirements of phagosomes and the importance of rab proteins to phagosome maturation ( BOX 3 ) . other studies have suggested that this method of delayed acidification might also be relevant in apoptotic cell removal , as apoptotic cell­containing phagosomes are acidified more slowly in dendritic cells compared with macrophages 89 . LAMP proteins and lysosome fusion . LAMP1 and LAMP2 ( and the nematode orthologues LMP­1 and LMP­2 ) are glycoproteins that are specifically localized to acidic lysosome structures 90 , although the precise molecular functions of these proteins are unknown . LAMP1 and LAMP2 ( and nematode LMP­1 ) are recruited to the phagosome ; intriguingly , in Lmp1 – / – Lmp2 – / – ‑ mutant mice , phagosomes that contain IgG­opsonized beads appear arrested at the rAb5­positive , PtdIns3P­positive stage 91 , which suggests that these two proteins have roles in the recruitment of rAb7 to the phagosome . rAb7 and its effector rILP can be found on LAMP­positive structures 91 , although a mole cular mechanism for LAMP function during phagosome maturation remains to be determined . Phagocytic receptors and maturation Conceptually , recognition of the target during phago­ cytosis is a desirable signalling mechanism for distin­ guishing cargo . Therefore , the possibility that phagocytic receptors could have a key role in determining how a given target is processed for degradation is enticing . In endocytosis , ligand­bound receptors ( for example , epidermal growth factor receptor ) have been shown to control rAb5 recruitment , although the mechanisms by which this occurs are sketchy 92 – 94 , and the nerve growth factor receptor actively signals from the endo­ some to activate the ras – MAPK signalling pathway 95 . signalling during internalization might be particularly important for generating either a tolerogenic ( apoptotic cells ) or an immunogenic ( bacteria ) immune response . recent studies in both nematode 53 and mouse models 96 , 97 have led to the proposal of a ‘phagosome autonomous’ model , in which signalling proteins that are enriched on the phagosome during internalization determine how the phagosome will mature . This becomes especially relevant in the case of internalized pathogens , some of which can inject factors outside of the phagosome , thereby potentially altering signalling and disrupting maturation . However , our knowledge of how early steps in phagocytosis dictate later events of phagosome maturation is minimal . Do phagocytic receptors control phagosome maturation ? The contribution of proteins that are involved in apoptotic cell phagocytosis to phagosome maturation was recently addressed . In engulfment­deficient worms ( for example , a ced‑1 or ced‑10 mutant ) , the efficiency of phago­ cytosis is greatly decreased , although many cells are eventually engulfed 53 , 98 . using time­lapse microscopy of embryogenesis as a model , it was shown that CED­1 , a trans membrane protein that is thought to function as a phagocytic receptor ( BOX 1 ) , was required for the recruit­ ment of a FYvE­domain marker and of rAb­7 to the phagosome 53 . This work also suggested that another key engulfment protein , CED­5 ( DoCK180 in mammals ; a racGEF that functions in an alternate engulfment path­ way downstream of an unknown receptor ) , also showed reduced phagosomal PtdIns3P and a mild delay in rAb­7 recruitment 28 . studies of apoptotic cell removal in mammalian macrophages have shown that signalling from rhoA ( which negatively regulates apoptotic cell removal 99 ) and ErM ( ezrin – radixin – moesin ) proteins also have a role in the timely recruitment of rAb­7 to the phagosome 89 , suggesting that there might be feed­ back between phagosome maturation and apoptotic cell uptake . Indeed , studies using non­digestible latex beads have shown that the inability to degrade a target can result in decreased uptake 100 . Many of the studies of this process focus on localiza­ tion of rAb7 or other lysosomal markers ( rather than on earlier markers such as rAb5 or vPs34 ) . studies on endocytosis have revealed that internalized receptors can modulate rAb5 activity on vesicles 93 , 94 , and one tantalizing possibility is that a receptor ( or co­receptor ) would recruit rAb5 or a rAb5­regulatory machinery ( such as a GEF or GTPase­activating protein ( GAP ) ) to the phagosome . It is intriguing to note that the punc­ tate localization of dynamin on the phagosome appears similar to the localization pattern of phosphatidylserine ( Ps ) or LrP1 on the phagocytic cup 41 ( Ps is exposed by the apoptotic cell during apoptosis and LrP1 is a phagocytic receptor that is required for apoptotic cell removal ) . These localization patterns suggest that the recruitment of proteins involved in phagosome matur­ ation might indeed be mediated by receptors . studies in mammalian systems have also suggested that GuLP , a mammalian orthologue of the adaptor protein CED­6 ( which binds to the phagocytic receptor CED­1 ( LrP1 in mammals ; see BOX 1 ) ) , can interact with the endocytic machinery 102 , 103 . Whether this is a mechanism for recy­ cling CED­1 to the cell surface or a mechanism to recruit maturation proteins remains to be addressed . one caveat with these studies is that they do not address how delays in phagocytosis might affect phago­ some maturation . For example , one recent study has shown that microtubules are required for delivery of GAPEX5 ( a GEF for rAb5 ) to the phagosome 61 . In this respect , a delay in microtubule attachment to the R E V I E W S 790 | oCTobEr 2008 | voLuME 9 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio Toll - like receptor A transmembrane protein that recognizes bacterial pathogens and induces an inflammatory response . phagosome could affect the timing of maturation with­ out a ‘direct’ role in signalling . Addressing this issue is likely to be difficult and might require the identification of mutant proteins that can affect phagosome maturation but leave phagocytosis intact . In the case of CED­1 ( LrP1 in mammals ) , one study has analysed functional domains of the protein that are required for cell corpse removal 104 . Further clarification of whether higher numbers of apoptotic cells in this case represent defects in uptake versus maturation would strengthen the hypothesis that these proteins direct phagosome maturation . Mammalian TLRs and phagosome maturation . Toll - like receptors ( TLrs ) have many functions and can recog­ nize multiple bacterial antigens to mediate their effects . During phagocytosis , TLrs serve as co­receptors for bacteria ( in conjunction with a primary receptor such as CD14 or CD36 ) 105 ; typically , TLrs do not function as phagocytic receptors , but instead induce macrophage activation in response to bacterial antigens , such as lipopolysaccharide ( LPs ) , resulting in the induction of an inflammatory response 106 . Most importantly in this context , TLr2 and TLr4 seem to control phagosome maturation and steer the bacterial cargo into the ‘fast lane’ for both antigen presentation and the induction of an inflammatory immune response 96 . When bacteria and apoptotic cells ( which do not engage TLrs ) are co­ incubated with phagocytes , the different targets are not present within the same phagosome , and each target matures at a different rate . It is important to note that fast­tracking a phagosome might require multifactorial signalling events , as studies have shown that the addi­ tion of TLr agonists alone is insufficient to enhance the maturation of IgG­opsonized beads and other partic­ les 107 , although this needs to be addressed in greater detail in vivo . one of the consequences at the end of phagosome maturation is the generation of peptide antigens that are subsequently loaded onto MHC molecules and targeted to the cell surface 38 , 108 . The differential maturation of phagosomes seems to be an important regulatory mecha­ nism that excludes apoptotic cell antigens from class II presentation ( and avoids the subsequent stimulation of a self­reactive response ) . MHC class II molecules are typi­ cally activated by a proteolyic event on the phagosome ( as a result of cathepsin activation 37 ) ; engagement of TLr signalling and fast­track maturation results in steps that favour MHC class II loading , leading to phagocyte activa­ tion and induction of an immune response . Apoptotic cell­containing phagosomes do not possess peptide­ loaded MHC class II , and apoptotic cell antigens are not presented on the cell surface on class II molecules 97 . normally , peptides derived from antigens that enter an antigen­presenting cell ( for example , macrophages or dendritic cells ) are presented on class II MHC mole­ cules . However , it is well documented that antigens derived from apoptotic cells are presented by a pro­ cess referred to as antigen cross­presentation on class I MHC molecules , which generally present Er­derived or endogenously produced proteins 11 . This again suggests that early steps in the recognition of targets entering the phagocyte and / or phagosome maturation dictate how the antigens derived from the cargo would be pro­ cessed . This influence on phagosome maturation could have important implications for immune responses to antigens that are derived from the target . similar to mammals , the fly has developed primi­ tive innate and cellular immune systems to target and remove both foreign and self particles 109 . A number of genes that encode phagocytic receptors have been iden­ tified in the fly , including croquemort ( for the removal of apoptotic cells and Staphylococcus aureus ) 110 , 111 , draper ( apoptotic cells and injured axons ) 112 , 113 , eater ( S . aureus , Escherichia coli and Serratia marcescans ) 114 , nimrod C1 ( S . aureus ) 115 and peste ( Mycobacterium fortuitum ) 116 . The corresponding receptors have yet to be linked to phagosome maturation in the fly , but orthologues of the Croquemort protein in mammals ( CD36 ) have been linked to TLr2 and TLr6 signalling , which suggests that these receptors might also modulate phagosome maturation in the fly . In addition , TLrs have been impli­ cated in the innate immune response to bacteria in the nematode : tol‑1‑ deficient worms show significant inva­ sion of Salmonella species into the pharynx 117 . Whether this is true ‘invasion’ or due to deficiencies in phagosome maturation and bacterial degradation remains to be determined . Overlap between signalling pathways . The outcomes of recognizing bacteria ( immunogenic response ) and apop­ totic cells ( tolerogenic response ) are different ; the differ­ ential activation of signalling during both phagocytosis and phagosome maturation might be the molecular basis of this difference . Little is known about how apoptotic cells generate a tolerogenic state , but much work has gone into the identification of signalling pathways that regu­ late the inflammatory response to bacteria ( reviewed in ReFs 105 , 118 ) . The activation of MHC class II molecules on bacterial phagosomes ( but not phagosomes that con­ tain apoptotic cells ) supports distinct signalling during each process 97 . The molecular basis for this difference is difficult to understand because MHC class II molecules are present on phagosomes that contain apoptotic cells 97 , but apoptotic cell­derived antigens are not loaded ; this suggests a negative regulatory event . other signalling events on the phagosome seem to be conserved : the GTPases rAb5 and rAb7 are present on both bacteria­ and apoptotic cell­containing phagosomes ; further , both types of phagosomes accumulate and lose PtdIns3P dur­ ing maturation and require vPs34 ( ReFs 8 , 9 , 15 , 41 , 58 ) . How these rab proteins are regulated during bacterial phagocytosis has yet to be addressed . Escaping a timely death The immune system is incredibly efficient at seeking out and destroying potential pathogens . However , cer­ tain pathogens have developed mechanisms to escape degradation , persisting ( and often replicating ) within phagosomes by co­opting the phagosome­maturation machinery ( TABLe 2 ) . Legionella pneumophila , for example , changes the composition of the phagosomal membrane so that it contains many features of the Er , R E V I E W S nATurE rEvIEWs | molecular cell biology voLuME 9 | oCTobEr 2008 | 791 ARF GTPases ( ADP - ribosylation factor ) . A family of small GTPases that regulate aspects of membrane trafficking that are related to the budding of vesicles from membranes . allowing it to persist and replicate within the cell 119 . To achieve this , the bacteria have developed proteins that act specifically on rAb1 , although how this leads to phagosome transformation is not well understood 120 – 122 . Many other bacteria similarly modify signalling to block their degradation within the cell ( TABLe 2 ) . Furthermore , the yeast Cryptococcus neoformans , rather than blocking phagosome maturation , can induce expulsion of the phagosome from the cell . one can speculate that this yeast might convert the phagosome into an exocytic vesicle , although the mechanism of how this would be accomplished is unknown . Intriguingly , recent work has shown that one patho­ gen , Shigella species , seems to use some of the proteins required for cell corpse removal , for example ELMo1 and DoCK180 , for entry into the mammalian cells 123 ( BOX 1 ) . As phagocytic receptors and co­receptors have been linked to maturation events in other contexts , and ced‑5 is required for aspects of phagosome maturation in the nematode 53 , it is possible that some bacteria might use the apoptotic cell­uptake machinery to disguise itself and avoid detection . A recent study showed that vaccinia virus might disguise itself in a Ps coat to mimic an apop­ totic cell 124 , but the consequence of such Ps­dependent entry to phagosome maturation and presentation of bacterial or viral epitopes is not yet defined . one of the major problems in designing drugs to treat diseases that are associated with these pathogens is our poor understanding of how they adapt the phagosome to their life cycle . A more thorough evaluation of the func­ tional role of different proteins on the phagosome , and an assembly of these proteins into a coherent pathway , is of key importance to the development of therapeutics that can restore ‘normal’ phagosome maturation , rather than inhibiting bacterial growth or replication . Where do we go from here ? The recent identification of genes and proteins involved in phagosome maturation is of key importance to basic science and for the understanding of bacterial patho­ genesis and drug design . unbiased genetic screening approaches have identified > 60 proteins that are poten­ tially involved in phagosome maturation in C . elegans . Further characterization of proteins identified by genetic and proteomics approaches and testing them in mam­ malian systems is likely to shed light on the control of phagosome maturation . Most studies have focused on the acidification of the phagosomes as the primary read­out . However , there are a number of other steps in phagosome matu­ ration , such as the accumulation of specific proteins on the phagosome ( for example , ATPases involved in phagosome acidification , myosin motors and acidic proteases 89 , 125 , 126 ) or other steps in processing ( BOX 2 ) , that could provide new insights . Indeed , a recent study in zebrafish in which v 0 ATPase function was moni­ tored revealed a novel role for the protein in phagosome fusion 50 , although the molecular details ( or the stage at which the phagosome is arrested ) remain to be defined . Moreover , whereas significant attention has been paid to the rab family of GTPases in phagosome matura­ tion ( and justifiably so , given the importance of rab GTPases in vesicular traffic in other systems ; BOX 3 ) , the role of the ARF GTPases , another family that is linked to vesicular traffic in cells , is less well defined . As one of the engulfment proteins , GuLP , has been linked to ArF6­ mediated signalling 103 , this might be worthy of future investigation . similarly , the role of microtubules , which have recently been suggested to have a role in delivery of a rAb5 GEF to the phagosome 61 during phagosome maturation , needs more detailed investigation . Another important topic is whether phagosome maturation and autophagy might share a common mechanism . both processes share a similar aetiology : the degradation of a target ( internalized particles or organelles , respectively ) within a double­membraned vesicle . Markers for autophagy ( such as LC3 and beclin ) are recruited to mammalian phagosomes 127 , and loss of autophagy protein­5 ( ATG5 ) or ATG7 impairs phago­ some acidification . How these proteins are recruited to the phagosome ( and whether they overlap with rAb5 , rAb7 or LAMP1 ) has not been addressed . However , these studies suggest that the view of phagosome maturation as the movement from a phagosome into a lysosomal structure is simplistic , and signalling might be more complex than envisioned . Current knowledge of how bacteria can adapt phago­ cytic and phagosomal signalling to their own designs is sketchy ( BOX 3 ) , and further research on this topic is important for the generation of novel therapeutic tar­ gets . removal of apoptotic cells is important for innate immunity , and defects in apoptotic cell phagocytosis and degradation have been shown to result in autoimmune disease . Comparative studies on how apoptotic cells and bacteria are degraded is therefore of great clinical importance , and further studies into the basic biology of phagosome maturation are crucial to the identification Table 2 | Bacteria have evolved mechanisms to modify the phagosome bacteria mode of action refs Brucella abortus Converts the phagosome into an autophagosome or ER - like vesicle 156 , 157 Chlamydia spp . Form inclusions that are enriched in sphingomyelin 158 , 159 Coxiella burnetii Converts phagosome into a hybrid autophagosome – RAB7 - positive phagosome 160 , 161 Cryptococcus neoformans Phagosome is extruded from living cells by an unknown mechanism 162 , 163 Helicobacter pylori Sequesters RAB7 to block delivery of proteases 164 , 165 Legionella pneumophila Converts phagosome into rough ER 120 – 122 Leishmania spp . Inhibits phagosome maturation 166 , 167 Mycobacterium spp . Block at the RAB5 - positive stage 168 Salmonella spp . Blocks maturation at the RAB5 - positive phagosome , potentially by influencing RAB7 function 166 , 169 Toxoplasma spp . Phagosome has characteristics of host membrane ( non - receptor - mediated uptake ) 164 , 165 ER , endoplasmic reticulum . R E V I E W S 792 | oCTobEr 2008 | voLuME 9 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio 1 . van Lookeren Campagne , M . , Wiesmann , C . & Brown , E . J . Macrophage complement receptors and pathogen clearance . Cell . Microbiol . 9 , 2095 – 2102 ( 2007 ) . 2 . Underhill , D . M . & Ozinsky , A . Phagocytosis of microbes : complexity in action . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 20 , 825 – 852 ( 2002 ) . 3 . Swanson , J . A . & Hoppe , A . D . The coordination of signaling during Fc receptor - mediated phagocytosis . J . Leukoc . Biol . 76 , 1093 – 1103 ( 2004 ) . 4 . Nimmerjahn , F . & Ravetch , J . V . Fc γ receptors : old friends and new family members . Immunity 24 , 19 – 28 ( 2006 ) . 5 . Metzstein , M . M . , Stanfield , G . M . & Horvitz , H . R . Genetics of programmed cell death in C . elegans : past , present and future . Trends Genet . 14 , 410 – 416 ( 1998 ) . 6 . Lettre , G . & Hengartner , M . O . Developmental apoptosis in C . elegans : a complex CEDnario . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 97 – 108 ( 2006 ) . References 5 and 6 are an excellent introduction to the field of apoptosis in the nematode . Reference 5 is a classic in the field and is an excellent introduction to the genetics of programmed cell death , whereas reference 6 extends and updates these findings . 7 . Taylor , R . C . , Cullen , S . P . & Martin , S . J . Apoptosis : controlled demolition at the cellular level . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 231 – 241 ( 2008 ) . 8 . Ravichandran , K . S . & Lorenz , U . Engulfment of apoptotic cells : signals for a good meal . Nature Rev . Immunol . 7 , 964 – 974 ( 2007 ) . 9 . Miyake , Y . et al . Critical role of macrophages in the marginal zone in the suppression of immune responses to apoptotic cell - associated antigens . J . Clin . Invest . 117 , 2268 – 2278 ( 2007 ) . 10 . Fadok , V . A . et al . Macrophages that have ingested apoptotic cells in vitro inhibit proinflammatory cytokine production through autocrine / paracrine mechanisms involving TGF - β , PGE2 , and PAF . J . Clin . Invest . 101 , 890 – 898 ( 1998 ) . The first characterization of the anti - inflammatory cytokine response that is elicited by apoptotic cell recognition by phagocytes . This response occurs in both professional and non - professional phagocytes . 11 . Bellone , M . et al . Processing of engulfed apoptotic bodies yields T cell epitopes . J . Immunol . 159 , 5391 – 5399 ( 1997 ) . 12 . Huang , F . P . et al . A discrete subpopulation of dendritic cells transports apoptotic intestinal epithelial cells to T cell areas of mesenteric lymph nodes . J . Exp . Med . 191 , 435 – 444 ( 2000 ) . 13 . Albert , M . L . et al . Immature dendritic cells phagocytose apoptotic cells via α v β 5 and CD36 , and cross - present antigens to cytotoxic T lymphocytes . J . Exp . Med . 188 , 1359 – 1368 ( 1998 ) . Defects in apoptotic cell removal have long been associated with autoimmune disease ; it was previously thought that the release of cellular contents led to the generation of an immune response . This study suggests that there are defects in the establishment or maintenance of tolerance rather than in the induction of an immune response . 14 . Swanson , J . A . Shaping cups into phagosomes and macropinosomes . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 639 – 649 ( 2008 ) . 15 . Smith , A . C . et al . A network of Rab GTPases controls phagosome maturation and is modulated by Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium . J . Cell Biol . 176 , 263 – 268 ( 2007 ) . Uses dominant - negative approaches to identify the GTPases that are required for the maturation of Salmonella - containing phagosomes . 16 . Beertsen , W . et al . Impaired phagosomal maturation in neutrophils leads to periodontitis in lysosomal - associated membrane protein - 2 knockout mice . J . Immunol . 180 , 475 – 482 ( 2008 ) . 17 . Kawane , K . et al . Chronic polyarthritis caused by mammalian DNA that escapes from degradation in macrophages . Nature 443 , 998 – 1002 ( 2006 ) . 18 . Wallet , M . A . et al . MerTK is required for apoptotic cell - induced T cell tolerance . J . Exp . Med . 205 , 219 – 232 ( 2008 ) . 19 . Albert , M . L . , Jegathesan , M . & Darnell , R . B . Dendritic cell maturation is required for the cross - tolerization of CD8 + T cells . Nature Immunol . 2 , 1010 – 1017 ( 2001 ) . 20 . Ungewickell , E . J . & Hinrichsen , L . Endocytosis : clathrin - mediated membrane budding . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 19 , 417 – 425 ( 2007 ) . 21 . Young , A . Structural insights into the clathrin coat . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 , 448 – 458 ( 2007 ) . 22 . Hanyaloglu , A . C . & von Zastrow , M . Regulation of GPCRs by endocytic membrane trafficking and its potential implications . Annu . Rev . Pharmacol . Toxicol . 48 , 537 – 568 ( 2008 ) . 23 . Rink , J . , Ghigo , E . , Kalaidzidis , Y . & Zerial , M . Rab conversion as a mechanism of progression from early to late endosomes . Cell 122 , 735 – 749 ( 2005 ) . This ground - breaking study used time - lapse microscopy to track endocytic vesicles as they acquired the GTPases RAB5 and RAB7 . This work provides support for the direct exchange of RAB5 for RAB7 on the endosome ; studies in the nematode have also observed this ‘Rab conversion’ during phagosome maturation . 24 . Russell , M . R . , Nickerson , D . P . & Odorizzi , G . Molecular mechanisms of late endosome morphology , identity and sorting . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 422 – 428 ( 2006 ) . 25 . Luzio , J . P . et al . Lysosome – endosome fusion and lysosome biogenesis . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 1515 – 1524 ( 2000 ) . 26 . van Ijzendoorn , S . C . Recycling endosomes . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 1679 – 1681 ( 2006 ) . 27 . Maxfield , F . R . & McGraw , T . E . Endocytic recycling . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 121 – 132 ( 2004 ) . 28 . Yu , X . , Odera , S . , Chuang , C . H . , Lu , N . & Zhou , Z . C . elegans dynamin mediates the signaling of phagocytic receptor CED - 1 for the engulfment and degradation of apoptotic cells . Dev . Cell 10 , 743 – 757 ( 2006 ) . 29 . Lee , W . L . , Mason , D . , Schreiber , A . D . & Grinstein , S . Quantitative analysis of membrane remodeling at the phagocytic cup . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 2883 – 2892 ( 2007 ) . 30 . Albert , M . L . Death - defying immunity : do apoptotic cells influence antigen processing and presentation ? Nature Rev . Immunol . 4 , 223 – 231 ( 2004 ) . 31 . Blander , J . M . Signalling and phagocytosis in the orchestration of host defence . Cell . Microbiol . 9 , 290 – 299 ( 2007 ) . 32 . Akira , S . & Takeda , K . Toll - like receptor signalling . Nature Rev . Immunol . 4 , 499 – 511 ( 2004 ) . 33 . Desjardins , M . , Huber , L . A . , Parton , R . G . & Griffiths , G . Biogenesis of phagolysosomes proceeds through a sequential series of interactions with the endocytic apparatus . J . Cell Biol . 124 , 677 – 688 ( 1994 ) . 34 . Garin , J . et al . The phagosome proteome : insight into phagosome functions . J . Cell Biol . 152 , 165 – 180 ( 2001 ) . 35 . Stuart , L . M . et al . A systems biology analysis of the Drosophila phagosome . Nature 445 , 95 – 101 ( 2007 ) . 36 . Lennon - Dumenil , A . M . et al . Analysis of protease activity in live antigen - presenting cells shows regulation of the phagosomal proteolytic contents during dendritic cell activation . J . Exp . Med . 196 , 529 – 540 ( 2002 ) . 37 . Bryant , P . W . , Lennon - Dumenil , A . M . , Fiebiger , E . , Lagaudriere - Gesbert , C . & Ploegh , H . L . Proteolysis and antigen presentation by MHC class II molecules . Adv . Immunol . 80 , 71 – 114 ( 2002 ) . 38 . Ramachandra , L . , Boom , W . H . & Harding , C . V . Class II MHC antigen processing in phagosomes . Methods Mol . Biol . 445 , 353 – 377 ( 2008 ) . 39 . Hackam , D . J . et al . Regulation of phagosomal acidification . Differential targeting of Na + / H + exchangers , Na + / K + - ATPases , and vacuolar - type H + - ATPases . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 29810 – 29820 ( 1997 ) . 40 . Beyenbach , K . W . & Wieczorek , H . The V - type H + ATPase : molecular structure and function , physiological roles and regulation . J . Exp . Biol . 209 , 577 – 589 ( 2006 ) . 41 . Kinchen , J . M . et al . A pathway for phagosome maturation during engulfment of apoptotic cells . Nature Cell Biol . 10 , 556 – 566 ( 2008 ) . Uses C . elegans as a model to screen for regulators of phagosome maturation , identifies a genetic pathway for phagosome maturation and shows evolutionary conservation of this pathway in mammals . This work also identifies an unexpected role for dynamin in the recruitment of VPS - 34 and RAB - 5 to the phagosome . 42 . Clarke , M . et al . Dynamics of the vacuolar H + - ATPase in the contractile vacuole complex and the endosomal pathway of Dictyostelium cells . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 2893 – 2905 ( 2002 ) . 43 . Fratti , R . A . , Chua , J . , Vergne , I . & Deretic , V . Mycobacterium tuberculosis glycosylated phosphatidylinositol causes phagosome maturation arrest . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 5437 – 5442 ( 2003 ) . 44 . Fratti , R . A . , Vergne , I . , Chua , J . , Skidmore , J . & Deretic , V . Regulators of membrane trafficking and Mycobacterium tuberculosis phagosome maturation block . Electrophoresis 21 , 3378 – 3385 ( 2000 ) . 45 . McCoy , J . J . & Mann , B . J . Proteomic analysis of Gal / GalNAc lectin - associated proteins in Entamoeba histolytica . Exp . Parasitol . 110 , 220 – 225 ( 2005 ) . 46 . Okada , M . et al . Proteomic analysis of phagocytosis in the enteric protozoan parasite Entamoeba histolytica . Eukaryot . Cell 4 , 827 – 831 ( 2005 ) . 47 . Okada , M . et al . Kinetics and strain variation of phagosome proteins of Entamoeba histolytica by proteomic analysis . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 145 , 171 – 183 ( 2006 ) . 48 . Jutras , I . et al . Modulation of the phagosome proteome by interferon - γ . Mol . Cell . Proteomics 7 , 697 – 715 ( 2008 ) . 49 . Botelho , R . J . , Hackam , D . J . , Schreiber , A . D . & Grinstein , S . Role of COPI in phagosome maturation . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 15717 – 15727 ( 2000 ) . 50 . Peri , F . & Nusslein - Volhard , C . Live imaging of neuronal degradation by microglia reveals a role for V 0 - ATPase A1 in phagosomal fusion in vivo . Cell 133 , 916 – 927 ( 2008 ) . 51 . Touret , N . et al . Quantitative and dynamic assessment of the contribution of the ER to phagosome formation . Cell 123 , 157 – 170 ( 2005 ) . 52 . Lu , Q . et al . C . elegans Rab GTPase 2 is required for the degradation of apoptotic cells . Development 135 , 1069 – 1080 ( 2008 ) . 53 . Yu , X . , Lu , N . & Zhou , Z . Phagocytic receptor CED - 1 initiates a signaling pathway for degrading engulfed apoptotic cells . PLoS Biol . 6 , e61 ( 2008 ) . 54 . Mangahas , P . M . , Yu , X . , Miller , K . G . & Zhou , Z . The small GTPase Rab2 functions in the removal of apoptotic cells in Caenorhabditis elegans . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 357 – 373 ( 2008 ) . References 52 – 54 introduce time - lapse microscopy to the study of phagosome maturation in the whole organism and identify UNC - 108 / RAB - 2 ( references 52 and 54 ) and phagocytic signalling ( reference 53 ) as being important for phagosome maturation . 55 . Ullrich , O . , Horiuchi , H . , Bucci , C . & Zerial , M . Membrane association of Rab5 mediated by GDP - dissociation inhibitor and accompanied by GDP / GTP exchange . Nature 368 , 157 – 160 ( 1994 ) . 56 . Seabra , M . C . & Wasmeier , C . Controlling the location and activation of Rab GTPases . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 451 – 457 ( 2004 ) . 57 . Grosshans , B . L . , Ortiz , D . & Novick , P . Rabs and their effectors : achieving specificity in membrane traffic . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 11821 – 11827 ( 2006 ) . An excellent review of Rab effectors and their functions . of relevant therapeutic targets for persistent bacterial diseases . How signalling proteins that are required for phagosome maturation ( TABLe 1 ) can be co­opted by bacterial pathogens ( TABLe 2 ) is a topic of great interest . In particular , the rab GTPases ( BOX 3 ) might be the best targets for study , and the identification of the diverse functions of these proteins in phagosome maturation is of paramount importance to the field . R E V I E W S nATurE rEvIEWs | molecular cell biology voLuME 9 | oCTobEr 2008 | 793 58 . Vieira , O . V . et al . Modulation of Rab5 and Rab7 recruitment to phagosomes by phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 , 2501 – 2514 ( 2003 ) . Shows the requirements of kinase function ( as inhibited by wortmannin ) for fusion of phagosomes with late endosomes or lysosomes . Intriguingly , RAB7 can still be recruited to the phagosome , supporting a model for ‘Rab conversion’ on the phagosome . 59 . McBride , H . M . et al . Oligomeric complexes link Rab5 effectors with NSF and drive membrane fusion via interactions between EEA1 and syntaxin 13 . Cell 98 , 377 – 386 ( 1999 ) . 60 . Roberts , E . A . , Chua , J . , Kyei , G . B . & Deretic , V . Higher order Rab programming in phagolysosome biogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 174 , 923 – 929 ( 2006 ) . 61 . Kitano , M . , Nakaya , M . , Nakamura , T . , Nagata , S . & Matsuda , M . Imaging of Rab5 activity identifies essential regulators for phagosome maturation . Nature 453 , 241 – 245 ( 2008 ) . Uses a Raichu – RAB5 biosensor probe to monitor RAB5 activation during apoptotic cell removal , and suggests that GAPEX5 is a major player in RAB5 activation during lactadherin and MFG - E8 - mediated uptake . 62 . Huynh , K . K . & Grinstein , S . Phagocytosis : dynamin’s dual role in phagosome biogenesis . Curr . Biol . 18 , R563 – R565 ( 2008 ) . 63 . Vieira , O . V . et al . Distinct roles of class I and class III phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinases in phagosome formation and maturation . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 19 – 25 ( 2001 ) . 64 . Bucci , C . et al . The small GTPase rab5 functions as a regulatory factor in the early endocytic pathway . Cell 70 , 715 – 728 ( 1992 ) . 65 . Hanayama , R . et al . Autoimmune disease and impaired uptake of apoptotic cells in MFG - E8 - deficient mice . Science 304 , 1147 – 1150 ( 2004 ) . 66 . Nielsen , E . et al . Rabenosyn - 5 , a novel Rab5 effector , is complexed with hVPS45 and recruited to endosomes through a FYVE finger domain . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 601 – 612 ( 2000 ) . 67 . Christoforidis , S . , McBride , H . M . , Burgoyne , R . D . & Zerial , M . The Rab5 effector EEA1 is a core component of endosome docking . Nature 397 , 621 – 625 ( 1999 ) . 68 . Simonsen , A . et al . EEA1 links PI ( 3 ) K function to Rab5 regulation of endosome fusion . Nature 394 , 494 – 498 ( 1998 ) . 69 . Gengyo - Ando , K . et al . The SM protein VPS - 45 is required for RAB - 5 - dependent endocytic transport in Caenorhabditis elegans . EMBO Rep . 8 , 152 – 157 ( 2007 ) . 70 . Vitale , G . et al . Distinct Rab - binding domains mediate the interaction of Rabaptin - 5 with GTP - bound Rab4 and Rab5 . EMBO J . 17 , 1941 – 1951 ( 1998 ) . 71 . Williams , R . L . & Urbe , S . The emerging shape of the ESCRT machinery . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 355 – 368 ( 2007 ) . 72 . Fratti , R . A . , Backer , J . M . , Gruenberg , J . , Corvera , S . & Deretic , V . Role of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase and Rab5 effectors in phagosomal biogenesis and mycobacterial phagosome maturation arrest . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 631 – 644 ( 2001 ) . 73 . Schnatwinkel , C . et al . The Rab5 effector Rabankyrin - 5 regulates and coordinates different endocytic mechanisms . PLoS Biol . 2 , e261 ( 2004 ) . 74 . Storrie , B . & Desjardins , M . The biogenesis of lysosomes : is it a kiss and run , continuous fusion and fission process ? Bioessays 18 , 895 – 903 ( 1996 ) . 75 . Rothman , J . H . & Stevens , T . H . Protein sorting in yeast : mutants defective in vacuole biogenesis mislocalize vacuolar proteins into the late secretory pathway . Cell 47 , 1041 – 1051 ( 1986 ) . 76 . Peplowska , K . , Markgraf , D . F . , Ostrowicz , C . W . , Bange , G . & Ungermann , C . The CORVET tethering complex interacts with the yeast Rab5 homolog Vps21 and is involved in endo - lysosomal biogenesis . Dev . Cell 12 , 739 – 750 ( 2007 ) . 77 . Seals , D . F . , Eitzen , G . , Margolis , N . , Wickner , W . T . & Price , A . A Ypt / Rab effector complex containing the Sec1 homolog Vps33p is required for homotypic vacuole fusion . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 9402 – 9407 ( 2000 ) . 78 . Peterson , M . R . , Burd , C . G . & Emr , S . D . Vac1p coordinates Rab and phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase signaling in Vps45p - dependent vesicle docking / fusion at the endosome . Curr . Biol . 9 , 159 – 162 ( 1999 ) . 79 . Starr , T . , Ng , T . W . , Wehrly , T . D . , Knodler , L . A . & Celli , J . Brucella intracellular replication requires trafficking through the late endosomal / lysosomal compartment . Traffic 9 , 678 – 694 ( 2008 ) . 80 . Sun , J . et al . Mycobacterium bovis BCG disrupts the interaction of Rab7 with RILP contributing to inhibition of phagosome maturation . J . Leukoc . Biol . 82 , 1437 – 1445 ( 2007 ) . 81 . Tisdale , E . J . A Rab2 mutant with impaired GTPase activity stimulates vesicle formation from pre - Golgi intermediates . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 1837 – 1849 ( 1999 ) . 82 . Tisdale , E . J . & Balch , W . E . Rab2 is essential for the maturation of pre - Golgi intermediates . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 29372 – 29379 ( 1996 ) . 83 . Tisdale , E . J . , Bourne , J . R . , Khosravi - Far , R . , Der , C . J . & Balch , W . E . GTP - binding mutants of rab1 and rab2 are potent inhibitors of vesicular transport from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi complex . J . Cell Biol . 119 , 749 – 761 ( 1992 ) . 84 . Chun , D . K . , McEwen , J . M . , Burbea , M . & Kaplan , J . M . UNC - 108 / Rab2 regulates post - endocytic trafficking in C . elegans . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 2682 – 2695 ( 2008 ) . 85 . Schuck , S . et al . Rab10 is involved in basolateral transport in polarized Madin – Darby canine kidney cells . Traffic 8 , 47 – 60 ( 2007 ) . 86 . Chen , C . C . et al . RAB - 10 is required for endocytic recycling in the Caenorhabditis elegans intestine . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 1286 – 1297 ( 2006 ) . 87 . Jancic , C . et al . Rab27a regulates phagosomal pH and NADPH oxidase recruitment to dendritic cell phagosomes . Nature Cell Biol . 9 , 367 – 378 ( 2007 ) . Highlights the importance of trafficking events for processing of internalized cargo : trafficking of RAB27A - positive vesicles to the phagosome slows acidification , allowing efficient proteolysis of proteins and loading of antigens for presentation . 88 . Savina , A . et al . NOX2 controls phagosomal pH to regulate antigen processing during crosspresentation by dendritic cells . Cell 126 , 205 – 218 ( 2006 ) . 89 . Erwig , L . P . et al . Differential regulation of phagosome maturation in macrophages and dendritic cells mediated by Rho GTPases and ezrin – radixin – moesin ( ERM ) proteins . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 12825 – 12830 ( 2006 ) . The first characterization of maturation relating to apoptotic cell removal . It also suggests a link between RhoA ( the activity of which is downregulated during apoptotic cell engulfment ) and ERM - family proteins for phagosome maturation . 90 . Eskelinen , E . L . , Tanaka , Y . & Saftig , P . At the acidic edge : emerging functions for lysosomal membrane proteins . Trends Cell Biol . 13 , 137 – 145 ( 2003 ) . 91 . Huynh , K . K . et al . LAMP proteins are required for fusion of lysosomes with phagosomes . EMBO J . 26 , 313 – 324 ( 2007 ) . 92 . Barbieri , M . A . , Fernandez - Pol , S . , Hunker , C . , Horazdovsky , B . H . & Stahl , P . D . Role of rab5 in EGF receptor - mediated signal transduction . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 83 , 305 – 314 ( 2004 ) . 93 . Barbieri , M . A . et al . Epidermal growth factor and membrane trafficking . EGF receptor activation of endocytosis requires Rab5a . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 539 – 550 ( 2000 ) . 94 . Lanzetti , L . et al . The Eps8 protein coordinates EGF receptor signalling through Rac and trafficking through Rab5 . Nature 408 , 374 – 377 ( 2000 ) . 95 . Howe , C . L . , Valletta , J . S . , Rusnak , A . S . & Mobley , W . C . NGF signaling from clathrin - coated vesicles : evidence that signaling endosomes serve as a platform for the Ras – MAPK pathway . Neuron 32 , 801 – 814 ( 2001 ) . 96 . Blander , J . M . & Medzhitov , R . Regulation of phagosome maturation by signals from toll - like receptors . Science 304 , 1014 – 1018 ( 2004 ) . 97 . Blander , J . M . & Medzhitov , R . Toll - dependent selection of microbial antigens for presentation by dendritic cells . Nature 440 , 808 – 812 ( 2006 ) . References 96 and 97 present evidence for a phagosome - autonomous model for maturation , in which receptor ligation during internalization determines the fate of the cargo and whether antigens will be presented on MHC class II molecules at the cell surface . 98 . Kinchen , J . M . et al . Two pathways converge at CED - 10 to mediate actin rearrangement and corpse removal in C . elegans . Nature 434 , 93 – 99 ( 2005 ) . 99 . Tosello - Trampont , A . C . , Nakada - Tsukui , K . & Ravichandran , K . S . Engulfment of apoptotic cells is negatively regulated by Rho - mediated signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 49911 – 49919 ( 2003 ) . 100 . Schrijvers , D . M . , De Meyer , G . R . , Kockx , M . M . , Herman , A . G . & Martinet , W . Phagocytosis of apoptotic cells by macrophages is impaired in atherosclerosis . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 25 , 1256 – 1261 ( 2005 ) . 101 . Gardai , S . J . et al . Cell - surface calreticulin initiates clearance of viable or apoptotic cells through trans - activation of LRP on the phagocyte . Cell 123 , 321 – 334 ( 2005 ) . 102 . Martins - Silva , C . et al . A rat homologue of CED - 6 is expressed in neurons and interacts with clathrin . Brain Res . 1119 , 1 – 12 ( 2006 ) . 103 . Ma , Z . , Nie , Z . , Luo , R . , Casanova , J . E . & Ravichandran , K . S . Regulation of Arf6 and ACAP1 signaling by the PTB - domain - containing adaptor protein GULP . Curr . Biol . 17 , 722 – 727 ( 2007 ) . 104 . Zhou , Z . , Hartwieg , E . & Horvitz , H . R . CED - 1 is a transmembrane receptor that mediates cell corpse engulfment in C . elegans . Cell 104 , 43 – 56 ( 2001 ) . 105 . Underhill , D . M . & Gantner , B . Integration of Toll - like receptor and phagocytic signaling for tailored immunity . Microbes Infect . 6 , 1368 – 1373 ( 2004 ) . 106 . Taylor , P . R . et al . Macrophage receptors and immune recognition . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 23 , 901 – 944 ( 2005 ) . 107 . Yates , R . M . & Russell , D . G . Phagosome maturation proceeds independently of stimulation of toll - like receptors 2 and 4 . Immunity 23 , 409 – 417 ( 2005 ) . Questions the phagosome - autonomous model and instead suggests that maturation does not depend on signalling from Toll - like receptors . 108 . Houde , M . et al . Phagosomes are competent organelles for antigen cross - presentation . Nature 425 , 402 – 406 ( 2003 ) . 109 . Stuart , L . M . & Ezekowitz , R . A . Phagocytosis and comparative innate immunity : learning on the fly . Nature Rev . Immunol . 8 , 131 – 141 ( 2008 ) . 110 . Franc , N . C . , Heitzler , P . , Ezekowitz , R . A . & White , K . Requirement for croquemort in phagocytosis of apoptotic cells in Drosophila . Science 284 , 1991 – 1994 ( 1999 ) . 111 . Franc , N . C . , Dimarcq , J . L . , Lagueux , M . , Hoffmann , J . & Ezekowitz , R . A . Croquemort , a novel Drosophila hemocyte / macrophage receptor that recognizes apoptotic cells . Immunity 4 , 431 – 443 ( 1996 ) . 112 . Awasaki , T . et al . Essential role of the apoptotic cell engulfment genes draper and ced - 6 in programmed axon pruning during Drosophila metamorphosis . Neuron 50 , 855 – 867 ( 2006 ) . 113 . Freeman , M . R . , Delrow , J . , Kim , J . , Johnson , E . & Doe , C . Q . Unwrapping glial biology : Gcm target genes regulating glial development , diversification , and function . Neuron 38 , 567 – 580 ( 2003 ) . 114 . Kocks , C . et al . Eater , a transmembrane protein mediating phagocytosis of bacterial pathogens in Drosophila . Cell 123 , 335 – 346 ( 2005 ) . 115 . Kurucz , E . et al . Nimrod , a putative phagocytosis receptor with EGF repeats in Drosophila plasmatocytes . Curr . Biol . 17 , 649 – 654 ( 2007 ) . 116 . Philips , J . A . , Rubin , E . J . & Perrimon , N . Drosophila RNAi screen reveals CD36 family member required for mycobacterial infection . Science 309 , 1251 – 1253 ( 2005 ) . 117 . Tenor , J . L . & Aballay , A . A conserved Toll - like receptor is required for Caenorhabditis elegans innate immunity . EMBO Rep . 9 , 103 – 109 ( 2008 ) . 118 . O’Neill , L . A . When signaling pathways collide : positive and negative regulation of toll - like receptor signal transduction . Immunity 29 , 12 – 20 ( 2008 ) . 119 . Kagan , J . C . , Stein , M . P . , Pypaert , M . & Roy , C . R . Legionella subvert the functions of Rab1 and Sec22b to create a replicative organelle . J . Exp . Med . 199 , 1201 – 1211 ( 2004 ) . 120 . Machner , M . P . & Isberg , R . R . Targeting of host Rab GTPase function by the intravacuolar pathogen Legionella pneumophila . Dev . Cell 11 , 47 – 56 ( 2006 ) . 121 . Machner , M . P . & Isberg , R . R . A bifunctional bacterial protein links GDI displacement to Rab1 activation . Science 318 , 974 – 977 ( 2007 ) . 122 . Ingmundson , A . , Delprato , A . , Lambright , D . G . & Roy , C . R . Legionella pneumophila proteins that regulate Rab1 membrane cycling . Nature 450 , 365 – 369 ( 2007 ) . 123 . Handa , Y . et al . Shigella IpgB1 promotes bacterial entry through the ELMO – Dock180 machinery . Nature Cell Biol . 9 , 121 – 128 ( 2007 ) . 124 . Mercer , J . & Helenius , A . Vaccinia virus uses macropinocytosis and apoptotic mimicry to enter host cells . Science 320 , 531 – 535 ( 2008 ) . R E V I E W S 794 | oCTobEr 2008 | voLuME 9 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio References 123 and 124 suggest that pathogens can co - opt phagocytic receptors for apoptotic cells to gain entry into the cell . Whether such a mode of entry also alters phagosome maturation remains to be determined . 125 . Santic , M . , Asare , R . , Skrobonja , I . , Jones , S . & Abu Kwaik , Y . Acquisition of the vacuolar ATPase proton pump and phagosome acidification are essential for escape of Francisella tularensis into the macrophage cytosol . Infect . Immun . 76 , 2671 – 2677 ( 2008 ) . 126 . Araki , N . Role of microtubules and myosins in Fc γ receptor - mediated phagocytosis . Front . Biosci . 11 , 1479 – 1490 ( 2006 ) . 127 . Sanjuan , M . A . et al . Toll - like receptor signalling in macrophages links the autophagy pathway to phagocytosis . Nature 450 , 1253 – 1257 ( 2007 ) . 128 . Gardai , S . J . , Bratton , D . L . , Ogden , C . A . & Henson , P . M . Recognition ligands on apoptotic cells : a perspective . J . Leukoc . Biol . 79 , 896 – 903 ( 2006 ) . 129 . Devitt , A . et al . Persistence of apoptotic cells without autoimmune disease or inflammation in CD14 – / – mice . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 1161 – 1170 ( 2004 ) . 130 . Reddien , P . W . & Horvitz , H . R . CED - 2 / CrkII and CED - 10 / Rac control phagocytosis and cell migration in Caenorhabditis elegans . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 131 – 136 ( 2000 ) . 131 . Gumienny , T . L . et al . CED - 12 / ELMO , a novel member of the CrkII / Dock180 / Rac pathway , is required for phagocytosis and cell migration . Cell 107 , 27 – 41 ( 2001 ) . 132 . Park , D . et al . BAI1 is an engulfment receptor for apoptotic cells upstream of the ELMO / Dock180 / Rac module . Nature 450 , 430 – 434 ( 2007 ) . 133 . Albert , M . L . , Kim , J . I . & Birge , R . B . α v β 5 integrin recruits the CrkII – Dock180 – rac1 complex for phagocytosis of apoptotic cells . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 899 – 905 ( 2000 ) . 134 . Su , H . P . et al . Interaction of CED - 6 / GULP , an adapter protein involved in engulfment of apoptotic cells with CED - 1 and CD91 / low density lipoprotein receptor - related protein ( LRP ) . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 11772 – 11779 ( 2002 ) . 135 . Su , H . P . et al . Identification and characterization of a dimerization domain in CED - 6 , an adapter protein involved in engulfment of apoptotic cells . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 9542 – 9549 ( 2000 ) . 136 . Liu , Q . A . & Hengartner , M . O . Candidate adaptor protein CED - 6 promotes the engulfment of apoptotic cells in C . elegans . Cell 93 , 961 – 972 ( 1998 ) . References 130 – 136 identify intracellular signalling molecules that function during apoptotic cell removal in the nematode and mammals , and also provide insights into their mechanism of action . 137 . Hamon , Y . , Chambenoit , O . & Chimini , G . ABCA1 and the engulfment of apoptotic cells . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1585 , 64 – 71 ( 2002 ) . 138 . Kinchen , J . M . & Ravichandran , K . S . Journey to the grave : signaling events regulating removal of apoptotic cells . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 2143 – 2149 ( 2007 ) . 139 . Voll , R . E . et al . Immunosuppressive effects of apoptotic cells . Nature 390 , 350 – 351 ( 1997 ) . 140 . Park , S . Y . et al . Rapid cell corpse clearance by stabilin - 2 , a membrane phosphatidylserine receptor . Cell Death Differ . 15 , 192 – 201 ( 2008 ) . 141 . Kirsch , T . et al . Engulfment of apoptotic cells by microvascular endothelial cells induces proinflammatory responses . Blood 109 , 2854 – 2862 ( 2007 ) . The cytokine response of phagocytes to apoptotic cells is typically tolerogenic . However , this paper suggests that , in certain circumstances , the presence of apoptotic cells can elicit an inflammatory response . 142 . Gerbod - Giannone , M . C . et al . TNF α induces ABCA1 through NF - κ B in macrophages and in phagocytes ingesting apoptotic cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 3112 – 3117 ( 2006 ) . 143 . Blachere , N . E . , Darnell , R . B . & Albert , M . L . Apoptotic cells deliver processed antigen to dendritic cells for cross - presentation . PLoS Biol . 3 , e185 ( 2005 ) . 144 . Perruche , S . et al . CD3 - specific antibody - induced immune tolerance involves transforming growth factor - β from phagocytes digesting apoptotic T cells . Nature Med . 14 , 528 – 535 ( 2008 ) . 145 . Wu , Y . C . , Stanfield , G . M . & Horvitz , H . R . NUC - 1 , a Caenorhabditis elegans DNase II homolog , functions in an intermediate step of DNA degradation during apoptosis . Genes Dev . 14 , 536 – 548 ( 2000 ) . 146 . Parrish , J . Z . , Yang , C . , Shen , B . & Xue , D . CRN - 1 , a Caenorhabditis elegans FEN - 1 homologue , cooperates with CPS - 6 / EndoG to promote apoptotic DNA degradation . EMBO J . 22 , 3451 – 3460 ( 2003 ) . 147 . Parrish , J . Z . & Xue , D . Functional genomic analysis of apoptotic DNA degradation in C . elegans . Mol . Cell 11 , 987 – 996 ( 2003 ) . References 145 – 147 report the characterization of DNAses that have roles during the degradation of apoptotic cells in the nematode . 148 . Gagnon , E . et al . Endoplasmic reticulum - mediated phagocytosis is a mechanism of entry into macrophages . Cell 110 , 119 – 131 ( 2002 ) . 149 . Kyei , G . B . et al . Rab14 is critical for maintenance of Mycobacterium tuberculosis phagosome maturation arrest . EMBO J . 25 , 5250 – 5259 ( 2006 ) . 150 . Delprato , A . & Lambright , D . G . Structural basis for Rab GTPase activation by VPS9 domain exchange factors . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 14 , 406 – 412 ( 2007 ) . 151 . Cantalupo , G . , Alifano , P . , Roberti , V . , Bruni , C . B . & Bucci , C . Rab - interacting lysosomal protein ( RILP ) : the Rab7 effector required for transport to lysosomes . EMBO J . 20 , 683 – 693 ( 2001 ) . 152 . Orth , J . D . & McNiven , M . A . Dynamin at the actin - membrane interface . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 31 – 39 ( 2003 ) . This excellent review describes the role of dynamin - 2 in actin - related processes , such as maintenance of the actin cytoskeleton . 153 . Wu , Y . C . & Horvitz , H . R . The C . elegans cell corpse engulfment gene ced - 7 encodes a protein similar to ABC transporters . Cell 93 , 951 – 960 ( 1998 ) . 154 . Wu , Y . C . & Horvitz , H . R . C . elegans phagocytosis and cell - migration protein CED - 5 is similar to human DOCK180 . Nature 392 , 501 – 504 ( 1998 ) . 155 . Brugnera , E . et al . Unconventional Rac - GEF activity is mediated through the Dock180 – ELMO complex . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 574 – 582 ( 2002 ) . 156 . Pizarro - Cerda , J . et al . Brucella abortus transits through the autophagic pathway and replicates in the endoplasmic reticulum of nonprofessional phagocytes . Infect . Immun . 66 , 5711 – 5724 ( 1998 ) . 157 . Pizarro - Cerda , J . , Moreno , E . , Sanguedolce , V . , Mege , J . L . & Gorvel , J . P . Virulent Brucella abortus prevents lysosome fusion and is distributed within autophagosome - like compartments . Infect . Immun . 66 , 2387 – 2392 ( 1998 ) . 158 . Scidmore , M . A . , Fischer , E . R . & Hackstadt , T . Sphingolipids and glycoproteins are differentially trafficked to the Chlamydia trachomatis inclusion . J . Cell Biol . 134 , 363 – 374 ( 1996 ) . 159 . Heinzen , R . A . , Scidmore , M . A . , Rockey , D . D . & Hackstadt , T . Differential interaction with endocytic and exocytic pathways distinguish parasitophorous vacuoles of Coxiella burnetii and Chlamydia trachomatis . Infect . Immun . 64 , 796 – 809 ( 1996 ) . 160 . Romano , P . S . , Gutierrez , M . G . , Beron , W . , Rabinovitch , M . & Colombo , M . I . The autophagic pathway is actively modulated by phase II Coxiella burnetii to efficiently replicate in the host cell . Cell . Microbiol . 9 , 891 – 909 ( 2007 ) . 161 . Beron , W . , Gutierrez , M . G . , Rabinovitch , M . & Colombo , M . I . Coxiella burnetii localizes in a Rab7 - labeled compartment with autophagic characteristics . Infect . Immun . 70 , 5816 – 5821 ( 2002 ) . 162 . Ma , H . , Croudace , J . E . , Lammas , D . A . & May , R . C . Expulsion of live pathogenic yeast by macrophages . Curr . Biol . 16 , 2156 – 2160 ( 2006 ) . 163 . Alvarez , M . & Casadevall , A . Phagosome extrusion and host - cell survival after Cryptococcus neoformans phagocytosis by macrophages . Curr . Biol . 16 , 2161 – 2165 ( 2006 ) . 164 . Terebiznik , M . R . et al . Helicobacter pylori VacA toxin promotes bacterial intracellular survival in gastric epithelial cells . Infect . Immun . 74 , 6599 – 6614 ( 2006 ) . 165 . Allen , L . A . Intracellular niches for extracellular bacteria : lessons from Helicobacter pylori . J . Leukoc . Biol . 66 , 753 – 756 ( 1999 ) . 166 . Scianimanico , S . et al . Impaired recruitment of the small GTPase rab7 correlates with the inhibition of phagosome maturation by Leishmania donovani promastigotes . Cell . Microbiol . 1 , 19 – 32 ( 1999 ) . 167 . Dermine , J . F . , Goyette , G . , Houde , M . , Turco , S . J . & Desjardins , M . Leishmania donovani lipophosphoglycan disrupts phagosome microdomains in J774 macrophages . Cell . Microbiol . 7 , 1263 – 1270 ( 2005 ) . 168 . Chua , J . , Vergne , I . , Master , S . & Deretic , V . A tale of two lipids : Mycobacterium tuberculosis phagosome maturation arrest . Curr . Opin . Microbiol . 7 , 71 – 77 ( 2004 ) . 169 . Meresse , S . , Steele - Mortimer , O . , Finlay , B . B . & Gorvel , J . P . The rab7 GTPase controls the maturation of Salmonella typhimurium - containing vacuoles in HeLa cells . EMBO J . 18 , 4394 – 4403 ( 1999 ) . Acknowledgements The authors wish to thank colleagues in the engulfment field and members of our laboratory for insightful discussions . This work was supported by grants from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences / National Institutes of Health and the Strategic Program for Asthma Research ( K . S . R ) , and an Arthritis Foundation Postdoctoral Fellowship ( J . M . K ) . DATABASES Entrez Gene : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / query . fcgi ? db = gene croquemort | draper | eater | nimrod C1 | peste | vha - 16 UniProtKB : http : / / www . uniprot . org DYN - 1 | EEA - 1 | GAPEX5 | LAMP1 | LAMP2 | LRP1 | RAB2 | RAB5 | RAB7 | RAB27A | RABEX5 | RILP | RIN1 | TLR2 | TLR4 | VPS - 34 | VPS - 45 FURTHER INFORMATION Kodi S . Ravichandran’s homepage : http : / / www . healthsystem . virginia . edu / internet / cmb / immunology . cfm ? uva _ id = kr4h & hideintro = 1 all links are active in the online PdF R E V I E W S nATurE rEvIEWs | molecular cell biology voLuME 9 | oCTobEr 2008 | 795