Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition 1982 , Vol . 8 , No . 5 , 484 - 494 Copyright 1982 by the American Psychological Association , Inc . 0278 - 7393 / 82 / 0805 - 0484 $ 00 . 75 Problem Perception and Knowledge Structure in Expert and Novice Mathematical Problem Solvers Alan H . Schoenfeld Graduate School of Education and Department of Mathematics University of Rochester Douglas J . Herrmann Hamilton College Evidence regarding the relationships between problem perception and expertise has customarily been obtained indirectly , through contrasting - group studies such as expert - novice comparisons . Differences in perception have been attributed to differences in expertise , although the groups compared generally differ on a number of other major attributes ( e . g . , aptitude ) . This study explored the rel - ationship between perception and proficiency directly . Students ' perceptions of the structure of mathematical problems were examined before and after a month - long intensive course on mathematical problem solving . These perceptions were compared with experts ' perceptions . Subjects sorted problems on the basis of similarity . Hierarchical clustering analysis of the sorting data indicated that novices perceive problems on the basis of " surface structure " ( i . e . , words or objects described in the problem statement ) . After the course the students per - ceived problem relatedness more like the experts—according to principles or methods relevant for problem solution . Thus , criteria for problem perception shift as a person ' s knowledge bases become more richly structured ^ Theories of problem solving commonly hold that the mental representation of prob - lems influences how people perceive prob - lems . Moreover , as experience leads to better problem solving , the quality of problem rep - resentation is expected to improve with cor - responding improvement in problem percep - tion ( Chi , Feltovich , & Glaser , 1981 ; Hayes & Simon , 1974 ; Heller & Greeno , 1979 ; Newell & Simon , 1972 ) . At one end of the spectrum , the correct perception of a prob - lem may cue access to a " problem schema " that suggests a straightforward method of solution or a more or less automatic response ( Chase & Simon , 1973 ; Kinsley , Hayes , & Simon , 1977 ) . At the other end , an incorrect perception may send one off on a " wild goose chase . " Since problem perception is con - We thank Chris Hempel , Mike Stankiewicz , Rob Kantrowitz , and Dorcque Schoenfeld for help on this research . This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation Grant SED - 79 19049 at Hamilton College . Requests for reprints should be sent to Alan H . Schoenfeld , Graduate School of Education and De - partment of Mathematics , University of Rochester , Rochester , New York . 14627 . ceived to be a crucial component of problem solving performance , research on the change in problem perception with the acquisition of expertise has received increasing attention ( Larkin , McDermott , Simon & Simon , 1980 ; Reif , 1980 ; Simon & Simon , 1978 ; Eylon & Reif , Note 1 ) . Early evidence consistent with the hy - pothesized relationship between expertise and perception was provided in a series of studies by Shavelson ( 1972 , 1974 ; Shavelson & Stanton , 1975 ) that indicated that as stu - dents learn a discipline , their knowledge of the structural relationships among parts of the discipline become more like that of ex - perts . However , Shavelson ' s ( 1972 , 1974 ) procedures did not directly assess how his subjects perceived problems , and therefore his results do not directly address the per - ception / expertise hypothesis . More direct evidence about problem per - ception and expertise has been provided by a series of studies in various domains that contrast the problem perceptions of a group of experts in each domain with the percep - tions of a group of novices . For example , expert chess players perceive board positions in terms of patterns or broad arrangements , 484 MATHEMATICAL PROBLEM PERCEPTION 485 whereas novices do not ( Chase & Simon , 1973 ; de Groot , 1966 ) . Experts in physics perceive problems to be similar if the prin - ciples used to solve them , called the " deep structure , " coincide . In contrast , novices per - ceive them as similar if the objects referred to in the problem , or the terms of physics used in the statement , called the " surface structure , " coincide ( Chi , Feltovich , & Glaser , 1981 ) . Two studies on problem per - ception in mathematics used algebra as their subject domain ( Chartoff , 1977 ; Silver , 1979 ) . There is a consensus regarding the structural isomorphism of algebra word problems , so in both studies problem struc - tures were assigned a priori by the experi - menters , and no experimental data were col - lected from experts . In both cases , students who were proficient at solving algebra word problems exhibited a greater degree of agreement with the experimenters ' percep - tions of the problems than did less proficient students . The evidence regarding the relationship between expertise and perception , although strong , is indirect . Although expert - novice studies do show that experts and novices differ in problem perception , the design of these studies precludes unequivocal conclu - sions about the origins of these differences . For example , relative to novices , experts are usually older , more trained , more N experi - enced , and most likely possessed of better aptitude for the subject domain . Presumably , expert - novice differences in perception are rooted in differences in ex - pertise ( training and experience ) , but they may also be influenced by other psycholog - ical properties , for example , aptitude . Note that contrasting - group designs involving people of the same age may still confound expertise with aptitude . The ambiguous out - come of contrasting - group design is , of course , not unique to studies of expertise and problem perception ; the difficulties of the design are well known , and in some areas of psychology these difficulties are regarded as presenting insurmountable obstacles to in - ference ( Schaie , 1977 ) . The present study sought to investigate the effects of expertise on perception in a design that avoids these difficulties—a design that examines problem perceptions in a group of individuals who , with training and experience , improved in problem - solving proficiency . The relationship of perception and exper - tise was studied in a repeated measures de - sign involving the discipline of college math - ematics . Problem perception was assessed before and after training by having students sort a set of math problems . One group of students ( the experimental group ) took a month - long problem - solving course between the sortings . Another group ( the control group ) took a month - long course in com - puter programming between the sortings . In addition , a group of mathematics experts also completed the sort once . This study per - mits clear assessment of the relationship of problem perception and expertise : The influ - ence of mathematical training on problem perception may be assessed by comparing the sorting of experimental < and control sub - jects before and after training . If the exper - imental subjects show sorting after training different than control subjects , inferences about the mathematical improvements in the experimental subjects may be drawn relative to the sorting of the experts . Evidence show - ing that training affects problem perception and that training fosters problem perception of the kind that experts employ cannot be attributed in this study to differences in in - dividuals ( age , maturity , ability , and atten - tional levels ) . Although it is not suggested here that the findings of previous contrast - ing - group studies were not due to differences in expertise , the present procedure provides a clearer assessment of the relationship of problem perception and expertise . Method Subjects Nineteen freshmen and sophomores at Hamilton Col - lege , novices , participated in the experiment . All of the students had 1 - 3 semesters of college mathematics prior to the experiment . Eleven of the students ( the experi - mental group ) served without pay as a condition of en - rollment in a problem - solving course , which was the experimental treatment . Eight of the students ( the con - trol group ) were paid a total of $ 20 each for partici - pating . In addition , nine mathematics professors from Hamilton College and Colgate University participated without pay . 486 ALAN H . SCHOENFELD AND DOUGLAS J . HERRMANN Materials Thirty - two problems were chosen for the study . Each was accessible to students with a high school background in mathematics , and dealt with objects familiar from the high school curriculum ; none required calculus for its solution . Each problem was assigned an a priori mathematical " deep structure " and a mathematical " surface structure " characterization . The problems used in the study are listed in Appendix A . ( The character - izations of the problems may be seen in the cluster dia - grams , Figures 1 , 2 , 3 . ) " Deep structure " refers to the mathematical princi - ples necessary for solution , as identified by the first au - thor , who is a mathematician . For example , Problems 15 and 17 are both " uniqueness " arguments to be solved by contradiction , although Problem 15 deals with geo - metric objects and Problem 17 with functions . These characterizations were independently corroborated by another mathematician . Of the 32 problems , the deep - structure assessments were literally ' or essentially agreed upon by the other mathematician for all but three prob - lems ( which were perceived in a different but not con - tradictory fashion ) . This level of agreement on deep - structure assignments is comparable to that recently reported for physics ' problems ( Chi et al . , 1981 ) . " Sur - face structure " represents a naive characterization of a problem , based on the most prominent mathematical objects that appear in it ( polynomials , functions , whole numbers ) or the general subject area it comes from ( plane or solid geometry , limits ) . Thus Problems 15 and 17 discussed above would be considered a " plane ge - ometry " and a " function " problem , respectively . In addition , two forms of a mathematical problem - solving test were used in the study . The tests each had five problems worth 20 points , and were matched for mathematical content . These examinations and a pre - determined scheme for awarding partial credit had been pilot tested , with the grading scheme achieving inter - judge reliability of greater than . 90 . Form 1 of the test is given in Appendix B . Procedure Both the experimental and control groups performed the card sort and took Form 1 of the mathematics test immediately preceding the intensive winter term at Hamilton College . Both groups repeated the card sort and took Form 2 of the mathematics test a month later , immediately following the conclusion of the winter term . The experts performed the sort once , at their conve - nience . The sorting procedures were as follows : Each of the 32 problems was typed on a 3 - X 5 - in . card . Each subject read through the problems in a random order and de - cided which problems , if any , were " similar mathemat - ically in that they would be solved the same way . " A problem that was deemed dissimilar to others was to be placed in a " group " containing one card . Subjects were told that they might return from 1 to 32 groups to the experimenter . All subjects finished the task in approx - imately 20 min . Between the first and second sortings , the experimen - tal treatment consisted of enrollment in a course , " Tech - niques of Problem Solving , " taught by the first author . The class met for 2 ' / 2 hours per day for 18 days , with daily homework assignments that averaged 4 - 5 hours in length . The course focused on general mathematical problem - solving strategies called " heuristics " ( P61ya , 1957 ) and stressed a systematic , organized approach to solving problems ( Schoenfeld , 1979 ; 1980 ) . Problems studied in the course were similar to , but not identical to , those used in the sort ; Appendix B gives five problems similar to those studied in the course . No mention of problem perception was made during the course . How - ever , students were encouraged to make certain that they had a full understanding of the problem statement before proceeding with a solution . They were told to examine the conditions of the problem carefully , to look at examples to get a feel for the problem , to check for consistency of given data and plausibility of the results , etc . These instructions may well foster the development of improved problem perception . The control treatment consisted of enrollment in a course , " Structured Programming . " The course taught a structured , hierarchical , and orderly way to solve non - mathematical problems using the computer . The stu - dents in the course had backgrounds comparable to those of the students in the mathematical problem - solv - ing course , and the course made similar demands in terms of time and effort from the students . Thus this course served as a control for the subject - specific knowl - edge and skills that might be acquired by the experi - mental group . Results For purposes of comparison with the re - sults of the student sortings , we first present the results for the experts . Figure 1 presents a clustering analysis , using Johnson ' s ( 1967 ) method , ( of the experts ' card sort . Collections of problems exhibiting strong agreement ( proximity level exceeding . 5—a minimum of 16 of 32 possible clusters ) are bracketed . A brief inspection of Figure 1 indicates that the strong clusters are consistently homo - geneous with regard to deep structure char - acterizations : In 8 of the 11 strong clusters , all of the elements share a common deep - structure characterization . In contrast , only 4 of the 11 strong clusters are homogeneous with regard to surface structure—and 3 of these with regard to deep structure as well . Two measures of the degree of structural homogeneity of Figure 1 are given in Table 1 . Measure 1 provides , for surface and deep structure respectively , the proportion of strongly clustered pairs that have the same structural representation . 1 Of the 22 pairs ' We wish to thank Jim Greeno for suggesting the measure and strengthening the discussion . MATHEMATICAL PROBLEM PERCEPTION 487 Surface Structure Characterization Deep Structure Characterization 1 . f Sum of odd numbers . ^ Patterns ; induction 3 . V . A sum of fractions X . P atter n s ; induction 26 . ^ Powers of 7 ' s / " Patterns ; induction ; number representations 32 , ^ Division by 9 V . Number representations 2 . ft and 11 pound weights ^ Linear diophantine equation ll . j 13 ' and 17 * costs I Linear diophantine equation . 25 . | Sand 7 quart jugs | Linear diophantine equation 8 . V . . 3 and ? point scores ^ Special diophantine equation 14 , f Division ; remainders f Patterns ; number representations— 20 . \ , , Factorsof 5 \ . Number representations 5 . / " Points , loci , minima ( " Diagram ; analytic geometry . , 2B . \ »Circles \ , Diagram ; analytic geometry 16 . f Squares ^ " Special cases ; diagram 31 - X . Spheres , curves . . \ . Analogy 29 , Polynomials ; roots Diagram 6 , ^ Triangles flJnclear ; Herron ' s formula ; Anal . Geom— 23 . Xjriangle ^ Diagram 9 . f " prime numbers [ Contradiction 15 . < Points , lines < Uniqueness ; contradiction . 17 . [ Functions , inverses [ Uniqueness ; contradiction 13 . ( Constructions ; tangents . ( Special cases 30 . < Constructions ; spheres ( Analogy . , 18 . ( squares , triangles [ Auxiliaryelements 4 . A polynomial inequality Analogy ( fewer variables ) 7 . A limit Special cases 10 . Polynomials ; roots Contradiction 24 . Polynomials ; roots Special cases 12 . TSets , counting ( " Patterns ; DeMorgan ' s Law , 2l , \ . Subsct sum \ . DeMorgan * s Law ; combinatorics ; induction related problem ; patterns . _ / BK . " X J s 21 . ^ Subset sum V . DeMorgan 19 . ( " points , lines ( " Patterns : < 27 . ( Count a set < Patterns ; i 22 . grower of Hanoi ( spikes ) ^ Easier rela Proximity Level Figure 1 . Cluster analysis of experts ' card sort . strongly clustered in Figure 1 , 13 ( . 59 ) share the same surface structure and 18 ( . 82 ) the same deep structure . We should observe , however , that the surface and deep struc - tures coincided in 10 of the 22 pairs used in the computation of Measure 1 . To indicate perceptual preference when the two types of structures conflict , these 10 pairs were de - Table 1 Proportion of Strongly Clustered Pairs in Which Both Problems Share the Same Representation Measure 1 ( all pairs ) Test group ExpertsExperimental , pretest Control , pretest Combined , pretest Experimental , posttest Control , posttest Surfacestructure % n . 59 22 . 81 26 . 91 23 . 76 21 . 58 24 . 83 24 Deep structure % . 82 . 58 . 57 . 62 . 79 . 58 n 222623212424 Measure 2 ( noncoinciding pairs ) Surfacestructure % n . 25 12 . 58 12 . 82 11 . 67 9 . 09 11 . 64 11 Deep structure % . 67 . 08 . 09 . 11 . 55 . 09 n 12121191111 488 ALAN H . SCHOENFELD AND DOUGLAS J . HERRMANN Surface Structure Characterization 1 . I Sum of odd numbers . . . Deep Structure Characterization 32 . < Division by 9 9 . ( j ' rime numbers 14 . / ' Division ; remainders 20 . factors of 5 4 . / " A polynomial inequality . . 17 . functions , inverses 10 . ( Polynomials ; roots 29 . < Polynomials ; roots 24 . ( ^ Polynomials ; roots . . . ( patterns ; induction . . . . . . \ Number representation : . . . ( ^ Contradiction ( Patti Num . . . / " Analoi . . . \ . Uniqui ^ Patterns ; number representations lumber representations , . nalogy ( fewer variables ) iqueness ; contradiction . ( Contradiction t Diagram ( Special cases 3 . < A sum of fractions / " Patterns ; induction 26 . \ Powers of 7 ' s ( patterns ; induction ; number representations 21 . Subset sum DeMorgan ' s Law 7 . A limit Special cases 12 . Sets , counting Patterns ; DeMorgan ' s Law 2 . Cl and 11 pound weights ( " Linear diophantine equation 11 . 1 13 ' and 17 ' costs I Linear diophantine equation 25 . 1 5 and 7 quart jugs | Linear diophantine equation 8 . V ^ 3 and 7 point scores ^ Special diophantine equation 22 . / " Tower of Hanoi ( spikes ) / " Easier related problem ; patterns . . . 27 . \ Count a set V . Palterns ; induction Diagram ; analytic geometry Patterns ; combinatorics Unclear ; Herron ' s formula ; Anal . Oeom . 5 . Points , loci , minima 19 . Points , lines 6 . Triangles 16 . ^ Squares ( Special cases ; diagram 28 . ( Circles ( Diagram ; analytic geometry 23 . ( Jriangle [ ^ Diagram 13 . / ' Constructions , tangents ^ Special cases 30 . ( ^ Constructions ; spheres \ . Analogy 15 . / " Points , lines / " Uniqueness ; contradiction 18 . \ ^ Squares , triangles . V . Auxiliary elements 31 . Spheres , curves Analogy Proximity Level Figure 2 . Cluster analysis of combined novices ' card sort . leted from the sample for Measure 2 . With noncoinciding pairs , the proportion of sur - face - homogeneous pairings for the experts is . 25 ( 3 of 12 ) , and the proportion of deep - homogeneous pairs is . 67 ( 8 of 12 ) . ' Figure 2 presents the cluster diagram of the sorting performed by the combined group of novices ( « = 19 ) prior to instruc - tion . In the interest of saving space , the clus - ter diagrams for the separate experimental and control groups are not given . 2 Inspection of Figure 2 indicates a reversal from Figure 1 , with emphasis on surface structure as the criterion for sorting problems together : 8 of 10 strong clusters are homogeneous with re - gard to surface structure , 6 of 10 with regard to deep structure . Of these 6 , 5 are also ho - mogeneous with regard to surface structure . The data in Table 1 confirm these impres - sions . Table 1 also provides the data for the separate experimental and control groups prior to instruction . These data , like those for the combined group , indicate that the deep structural relationships between prob - lems were rarely perceived when they ran in contradiction to perceptions of surface struc - ture . After training , the students who took the problem - solving course demonstrated a marked improvement in problem - solving performance , whereas those enrolled in the computer course did not . The mean scores on the mathematics test for the experimental subjects were 21 prior to the course and 73 2 All three diagrams are quite similar . The matrix from which Figure 2 was derived was strongly corre - lated with both the experimental pretest matrix , K496 ) = . 918 , p < . 001 , and the control pretest matrix , K496 ) = . 889 , p < . 001 . MATHEMATICAL PROBLEM PERCEPTION 489 afterwards . For the control subjects , the mean scores were 14 before and 24 ' after the course . Analysis of variance on these means showed that scores increased across the term , F ( l , 17 ) = 47 . 5 , p < . 001 , were greater for experimental rather than for control sub - jects , F ( l , 17 ) = 130 . 6 , p < . 001 ; and that the increase across the term was not equiv - alent for experimental and control subjects , F ( l , 17 ) = 48 . 2 , / x . OOl . Simple effects tests indicated that the term effect was sig - nificant for the experimental subjects ( p < . 01 ) but not for the control subjects . A de - tailed description of scoring procedures for this measure and of collateral measures may be found in Schoenfeld ( 1982 ) . The effect of instruction on problem per - ception was measured in the ways described above , and also by correlation with the ex - perts ' sorting matrix . Figure 3 presents the cluster analysis of the experimental group ' s sorting after instruction . An examination of Figure 3 indicates the shift in the students ' perceptions . After training , six of eight strong clusters were homogeneous with regard to deep structure , and only four with regard to surface struc - ture ; moreover , surface and deep structures coincided in all four of those clusters . In contrast , the control group ' s postin - struction sorting shows little change from preinstruction perceptions . ( Again to con - serve space , the cluster diagram derived from that sorting , which closely resembles Figure 2 , is not given . Of 10 strong clusters in it , 7 are homogeneous with regard to sur - Surface Structure Characterization Deep Structure Characterization 1 . [ Sum of odd numbers 3 . ( A sum of fractions 21 . ( Subset sum 14 . j Division ; remainders 20 . C Factors of 5 — 32 . | j > ivisionby9 2 . ( 1 and 11 pound weights . . . 8 . J 3 and 7 point scores 11 . 1 13 ' and 17 * costs 25 . ^ 5 and 7 quart jugs 6 . Triangles 19 . / " Points , lines 26 . \ . Powers of 7 ' s 22 . f Tower of Hanoi ( spikes ) . . 27 . vjCount a set ^ . Patterns ; induction 4 . A polynomial inequality Analogy ( fewer variables ) 7 . A limit Special cases 24 . Polynomials ; roots . Special cases 5 . Points , loci , minima Diagram ; analytic geometry , 12 . Sets , counting . Patterns , DeMorgan ' s Law 9 . [ Prime numbers ( Contradiction 17 , c Functions , inverses— 10 . ( Polynomials ; roots 29 . Polynomials ; roots Patterns ; induction Patterns ; induction JeMorgan ' s Law ' atterns ; number representations . Number representations Jumber representations . , inear diophantine equation . Special diophantine equation . Linear diophantine equation Linear diophantine equation . . . , Unclear ; Herron ' s Formula or Anal . Geom Patterns ; - combinatorics itterns ; induction ; number representations - . ier related problem ; patterns C i < ti > Y Uniqueness ; contradiction Contradiction . . . . . . . . . . . Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 . Points , lines Uniqueness ; contradiction . f Special cases 13 . / ^ Constructions ; tangents . . . 30 . 1 Constructions ; spheres I Analogy 18 . 1 Squares , triangles j Auxiliary elements 31 . Spheres , curves ^ Analogy 16 . / " Squares / ' Special cases ; diagram 28 . Xprcles \ piagram ; analytic geometry 23 . Triangle Diagram . 50 Proximity Level Figure 3 . Cluster analysis of experimental group ' s card sort , after instruction . 490 ALAN H . SCHOENFELD AND DOUGLAS J . HERRMANN face structure and only 4 with regard to deep structure ; moreover those 4 share common surface structures as well . ) These results , which indicate a strong change towards deep structure perceptions on the part of the ex - perimental group and little or no change on the part of the control group , are given in Table 1 . Differences between deep and sur - face proportions were compared across the various conditions with the t approximation to the binomial . Each of the following com - parisons ( with one exception noted ) was sig - nificant to at least the ( p < . 05 ) level , both in direction and size of the differences . Scores within parentheses are reported first for Measure 1 ( all pairs ) , then for Measure 2 ( noncoinciding pairs ) . The difference for the experts differed , in direction and mag - nitude , with the difference in the preinstruc - tion proportions from the experimental group , f ( 18 ) = 2 . 33 ; f ( 18 ) = 4 . 09 ; the control group , r ( 15 ) = 2 . 61 ; r ( 15 ) = 4 . 98 , and the combined novice group , t ( 26 ) = 1 . 88 , p < . 1 ; t ( 26 ) = 4 . 81 ; also with the postinstruction difference from the control group , t ( 15 ) = 2 . 31 ; t ( 15 ) = 3 . 99 . Similarly , the differences from the ex - perimental group after instruction differed ( p < . 05 ) from the preinstruction differences from the experimental group , t ( ll ) = 2 . 38 ; t ( l l ) = 4 . 51 , control group , t { 17 ) = 2 . 65 ; t ( ll ) = 5 . 48 , and combined novice group , * ( 28 ) = 2 . 39 ; f ( 28 ) = 5 . 41 ; also from the control group ' s postinstruction scores , * ( 17 ) = 2 . 34 ; f ( 17 ) = 4 . 37 . The comparison of surface and deep - structure proportions given above provides an indirect indication that the experimental group ' s perceptions became more " expert - like " with instruction , whereas the control group ' s did not . This relationship was ex - amined more directly by correlating the sort - ing matrices for each of the treatment groups , before and after instruction , with the sorting matrix obtained from the experts . The correlations were as follows : Control , pretest = . 551 ; Experimental , pretest = . 540 ; Combined , pretest = . 602 ; Control , post - test = . 423 ; Experimental , posttest = . 723 . With df = 496 , all correlations are signifi - cant . The pretest correlations and the control posttest correlations are significantly less ( / > < . 01 ) than the experimental group ' s posttest correlation . Discussion The design of this study allows for the direct attribution of the students ' changes in problem perception to changes in their problem - solving proficiency . This attribution cannot be made unequivocally from any of the contrasting - group studies conducted to date , for example the standard expert - nov - ice studies . Note that professors or advanced graduate students in a discipline differ from lower - division undergraduates in maturity , cohort group , comfort in testing situations , and most notably , aptitude . A clear under - standing of how novices ' performance im - proves in a discipline cannot be obtained by comparing them to a group of experts whose aptitude for the discipline is , in all likelihood , far beyond that of the novices . Similarly , an understanding of expert perception cannot be obtained by taking as the starting point of that development people whose perfor - mance alone makes it unlikely that they will ever be expert in that domain . One might obtain experimental confirmation of the rel - ationship between perception and expertise in contrasting - group designs in which the groups had been matched on all variables except expertise ( a difficult proposition , and a condition not present in any expert - novice studies with which we are familiar ) . How - ever , the most direct way to ascertain that relationship is with a repeated measures ( longitudinal ) design like the one used here . Two other points should be considered before the specifics of the data are elabo - rated . First , the nature of deep structure in mathematics is different from that of other domains . For example , elementary physics is strongly principle - driven , and the subject matter is organized and taught according to those principles . Mathematics is not orga - nized and taught that way , however . One talks about methods of solution , rather than principles ; and the curriculum is organized around topics rather than around those methods , which are simply the tools used to solve them . Thus , there does not exist an a priori consensus about the structure of the problems used in this study that would lead one to predict with confidence the particular pattern of results repeated in Figure 1 . The absence of such a consensus makes the con - MATHEMATICAL PROBLEM PERCEPTION 491 sistency of the present results more impres - sive . The word " novice " in this study does not mean " rank beginner " ; the students in this study had extensive mathematical back - grounds and were , in the sort task , reading problems accessible to them . The surface labels reflect this , for example in the labels for Problems 2 and 11 . Surely , one would be surprised if college students could not see that integer combinations of weights and in - teger combinations of costs called for the same mathematics ! ( This would not neces - sarily be the case with fifth graders , for ex - ample ) . The data in Table 1 provide a strong in - dication that the experimental group ' s per - ceptions of problem structure shifted from a basis in surface structure to a basis in deep structure . An examination of the experi - mental group ' s postinstruction cluster ( 9 , 17 , 10 ) illustrates the change in problem per - ception . Problem 9 deals with whole num - bers and , prior to instruction , was sorted with two other whole - number problems in a homogeneous surface structure cluster . Problem 17 deals with abstract functions , and , prior to instruction , was ( barely ) clus - tered with a problem that presented a very complex polynomial function for analysis . Problem 10 deals with polynomials , and was placed in a strong cluster all three of whose terms had the surface label " polynomials , roots . " Each of these problems is solved by the mathematical techique known as proof by contradiction and , despite their differing surface characterizations , they are all placed in the same cluster after instruction . The broad shift towards expert perceptions is confirmed ( see data above ) , which shows that the correlation between experts ' and the experimental group ' s sorting matrices jumped from . 540 ( before instruction ) to . 723 ( after instruction ) —the only significant ( p < . 01 ) change in correlation . This rather dramatic shift after a short period of time indicates that instructional treatments that focus on understanding and performance can have a strong impact on perceptions . Despite the strong shift in the students ' sort , the experimental group ' s performance after instruction cannot be truly called ex - pertlike . The experts ' extended knowledge and experience allow them perceptions in - accessible to the novices . Consider , for ex - ample , the three braced clusters in Figures 2 , 3 , and 1 respectively that include Problem 1 : novice ( 1 , 32 , 9 ) ; experimental ( 1 , 3 , 21 ) ; expert ( 1 , 3 ) . The experimental group drops Problems 32 ' and 9 , which are similar to Problem 1 only in that they deal with whole numbers . Problem 3 , which shares the same deep structure as Problem 1 , is added . The mimicry of expert perceptions is not exact , however : Problem 21 is added as well . The addition of Problem 21 provides an indica - tion of the " intermediate " status of the ex - perimental group . Problems 12 and 21 were included in the card sort to see if the experts would cluster them together . Underlying the experts ' perception of Problem 21 is the ob - servation that multiples of 9 and multiples of 4 both include multiples of 36 ( their in - tersection ) , and that one must compensate for subtracting the first two sets by adding the third . This is structurally similar to the rule N ( A U B ) = N ( A ) + N ( B ) - N ( A n B ) upon which Problem 12 is based . This is a rather subtle observation . Although experts ' experience with combinatorics problems might make such an observation readily ac - cessible , novices even with training cannot be expected to see such subtleties . In the absence of such knowledge , it is plausible to think that " looking for patterns " will help to solve Problem 21—and thus to sort it with two other " patterns " problems . The research described here supports and extends previous research on problem per - ception . The novices ' card sort indicated that , in the broad domain of general math - ematical problem solving , students with sim - ilar backgrounds will perceive problems in similar ways . This is consistent with previous research in mathematics , which had consid - ered only word problems in algebra ( Char - toff , 1977 ; Kinsley et al . , 1977 ; Silver , 1979 ) . Like research in physics ( Chi et al . , in press ) , it suggests that surface structure is a primary criterion used by novices in de - termining problem relatedness . Moreover , it verifies directly that students ' problem per - ceptions change as the students acquire problem - solving expertise . Not only their performance , but their perceptions , become more like experts ' . In general , questions regarding the deep 492 ALAN H . SCHOENFELD AND DOUGLAS J . HERRMANN structures in individual disciplines and the nature of experts ' perceptions in those dis - ciplines are more complex than those re - garding surface structures and novices ' per - ceptions in them . The differences between the structures of mathematics and physics were discussed above . In another discipline , research on chess perception ( Chase & Si - mon , 1973 ; de Groot , 1966 ) indicates that experts ' perceptions of routine problems ( similar in a way to the routine physics and mathematics problems discussed above ) may be based on the acquisition of a " vocabu - lary " of known situations ; this " vocabulary " is not necessarily principle based . Further research might profitably be directed toward the elucidation of how deep structures differ across disciplines and how problem percep - tions evolve with the acquisition of expertise in different domains . Reference Note 1 . Eylon , B . , & Reif , F . Effects of internal knowledge organization on tasjk performance . Unpublished manuscript , 1979 . ( Available from F . Reif , Depart - ment of Physics , University of California , Berkeley , Berkeley , California 94720 . ) References Chartoff , B . T . An exploratory investigation utilizing a multidimensional scaling procedure to discover clas - sification criteria for algebra word ' problems used by students in grades 7 - 13 ( Doctoral dissertation , North - western University , 1976 ) . Dissertation Abstracts In - ternational , 1977 , 37 , 7006A . ( University Microfilms No . 77 - 10 , 012 ) . Chi , M . , Feltovich , P . , & Glaser , R . Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts and novices . Cognitive Science , 1981 , 5 , 121 - 152 . Chase , W . G , , & Simon , H . A . Perception in chess . Cognitive Psychology , 1973 , 4 , 55 - 81 . de Groot , A . Perception and memory versus thought : Some old ideas and recent findings . In B . Kleinmunz ( Ed . ) , Problem solving . New York : Wiley , 1966 . Hayes , J . R . , & Simon , H . A . Understanding written problem instructions . . In L . W . Gregg ( Ed . ) , Knowl - edge and cognition . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum , 1974 . Heller , J . I . , & Greeno , J . G . Information processing analyses of mathematical problem solving . In R . Lesh , D . Mierkiewicz , & M . Kantowski ( Eds . ) , Applied mathematical problem solving . Columbus , Ohio : ERIC , 1979 . ( ERIC Document Reproduction Service No . ED 180 816 ) Kinsley , D . A . , Hayes , J . R . , & Simon , H . A . From words to equations : Meaning and representation in algebra word problems . In P . A . Carpenter & M . A . Just ( Eds . ) , Cognitive processes in comprehension . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum , 1977 . Johnson , S . C . Hierarchical clustering schemes . Psy - chometrika , 1967 , 32 , 241 - 54 . Larkin , J . , McDermott , J . , Simon , D . , & Simon , H . A . Expert and novice performance in solving physics problems . Science , 1980 , 208 , 1335 - 1342 . Newell , A . , & Simon , H . S . Human problem solving . Englewood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice - Hall , 1972 . P61ya , G . How to solve it ( 2nd ed . ) . Garden City , N . Y . : Doubleday , 1957 . Reif , F . Theoretical and educational concerns with prob - lem solving : Bridging the gap with human cognitive engineering . In D . Tuma & F . Reif ( Eds . ) , Problem solving and education : Issues in teaching and re - search . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum , 1980 . Schaie , K . W . Quasi - experimental research designs in the psychology of aging . In J . E . Birren , and K . W . Schaie ( Eds . ) , Handbook of the psychology of aging . New York : Van Nostrand Reinhold , 1977 . Schoenfeld , A . H . Can heuristics be taught ? In J . Loch - head & J . Clement ( Eds . ) , Cognitive process instruc - tion . Philadelphia , Pa . : Franklin Institute Press , 1979 . Schoenfeld , A . H . Teaching problem solving skills . American Mathematical Monthly , 1980 , S7 ( 10 ) , 794 - 805 . Schoenfeld , A . H . Measures of problem solving perfor - mance and of problem solving instruction . Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 1982 , 13 , 31 - 49 . Shavelson , R . J . Some aspects of the correspondence between content structure and cognitive structure in physics instruction . Journal of Educational Psychol - ogy , 1972 , 63 , 225 - 234 . Shavelson , R . J . Methods for examining representations of a subject - matter structure in a student ' s memory . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 1974 , / } , 231 - 249 . Shavelson , R . J . , & Stanton , G . C . Construct validation : Methodology and application of three measures of cognitive structure . Journal of Educational Mea - surement , 1975 , 12 , 67 - 85 . Silver , E . A . Student perceptions of relatedness among mathematical verbal problems . Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 1979 , 70 , 195 - 210 . Simon , D . P . , & Simon , H . A . Individual differences in solving physics problems . In R . Siegler ( Ed . ) , Chil - dren ' s thinking : What develops ? Hillsdale , N . J . : Erl - baum , 1978 . MATHEMATICAL PROBLEM PERCEPTION 493 Appendix A : Problems Used in Card Sort 1 . Show that the sum of consecutive odd num - bers , starting with 1 , is always a square . For example , 1 + 3 + 5 + 7 = 16 = 4 2 . 2 . You have an unlimited supply of 7 - pound weights , 11 - pound weights , and a potato that weighs 5 pounds . Can you weigh the potato on a balance scale ? A 9 - pound potato ? 3 . Find and and verify the sum , 12 3 1 - 2 1 - 2 - 3 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 1 - 2 - 3 - - • ( « + 1 ) ' 4 . Show that if x , y , and z are greater than 0 , - > 8 . xyz 5 . Find the smallest positive number m such that the intersection of the set of all points { ( jc , mx ) } in the plane , with the set of all points at distance 3 from ( 0 , 6 ) , is nonempty . 6 . The lengths of the sides of a triangle form an arithmetic progression with difference d . ( That is , the sides are a , a + d , a + 2d . ) The area of the triangle is t . Find the sides and angles of this triangle . In particular , solve this prob - lem for the case d = 1 and t = 6 . 7 . Given positive numbers a and b , what is 8 . In a game of " simplified football , " a team can score 3 points for a field goal and 7 points for a touchdown . Notice a team can score 7 but not 8 points . What is the largest score a team cannot have ? 9 . Let n be a given whole number . Prove that if the number ( 2 " - 1 ) is a prime , then n is also a prime number . 10 . Prove that there are no real solutions to the equation x 10 + jc 8 + x 6 + x 4 + x 2 + 1 = 0 1 1 . If Czech currency consists of coins valued 1 3 cents and 17 cents , can you buy a 20 - cent newspaper and receive exact change ? 12 . If N ( A ) means " The number of elements in A , " then N ( A U B ) = N ( A ) + N ( B ) - N ( A n B ) . Find a formula for N ( A U B U C ) . 13 . Construct , using straightedge and compass , a line tangent to two given circles . 14 . Take any odd number ; square it ; divide by 8 . Can the remainder be 3 ? or 7 ? 15 . You are given the following assumptions : ( i ) Parallel lines do not intersect ; nonparallel lines intersect , ( ii ) Any two points P and Q in the plane determine an unique line which passes between them . Prove : Any two distinct nonparallel lines LI and L 2 must intersect in an unique point P . 16 . Two squares ' V on a side overlap , with the corner of one on the center of the other . What is the maximum area of possible overlap ? 17 . Show that if a function has an inverse , it has only one . 18 . Let P be the center of the square constructed on the hypotenuse AC of the right triangle ABC . Prove that BP bisects angle ABC . 19 . How many straight lines can be drawn through 37 points in the plane , if no 3 of them lie on any one straight line ? 20 . If you add any 5 consecutive whole numbers , must the result have a factor of 5 ? 21 . What is the sum of all numbers from 1 to 200 , which are not multiples of 4 and 9 ? You may use the fact that ( 1 + 2 + • •• + « ) = l / 2 ( n ) ( n + 1 ) 22 . Your goal is to convert the figure on the left to the one on the right . You may move only one disk at a time from one spike to another , and you may never put a larger disk on top of a smaller one . How to ? 23 . Determine the area of a triangle whose sides are given as 25 , 50 , and 75 . 24 . If P ( x ) and Q ( x ) have " reversed " coeffi - cients , for example P ( x ) = x 5 + 3x 4 + 9x 3 + 1 lx 2 + 6x + 2 , Q ( x ) = 2x 5 + 6x 4 + 1 lx 3 + 9x 2 + 3x + 1 , 494 ALAN H . SCHOENFELD AND DOUGLAS J . HERRMANN What can you say about the roots of P ( x ) and Q ( x ) ? 25 . You have 2 unmarked jugs , one whose ca - pacity you know to be 5 quarts , the other 7 quarts . You walk down to the river and hope to come back with precisely 1 quart of water . Can you do it ? 26 . What is the last digit of ( • • • ( ( 7 7 ) 7 ) 7 • • • ) 7 , where the 7th power is taken 1 , 000 times ? 27 . Consider the following magical configuration . In how many ways can you read the word " ABRACADABRA ? " AB B R R R A A A A C C C C C A A A A A A D D D D 0 A A A A B B B R R A 28 . A circular table rests in a corner , touching both walls of a room . A point on the rim of the table is eight inches from one wall , nine from the other . Find the diameter of the table . 29 . Let a and b be given real numbers . Suppose that for all positive values of c , the roots of the equation ax 2 + bx + c = 0 are both real , positive numbers . Present an argument to show that a must equal zero . 30 . Describe how to construct a sphere that cir - cumscribes a tetrahedron ( the 4 corners of the pyramid touch the sphere . ) 31 . Let S be a sphere of radius 1 , A an arc of length less that 2 whose endpoints are on the boundary of S . ( The interior of A can be in the interior of S . ) Show there is a hemisphere H which does not intersect A . 32 . Show that a number is divisible by 9 if and only if the sum of its digits is divisible by 9 . For example , consider 12345678 : 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7 + 8 = 36 = 4X9 , so 12345678 is divisible by 9 . Appendix B : Mathematics Test Form 1 1 . If S is any set , we define O ( 5 ) to be the number of subsets of S which contain an odd number of elements . For example : the " odd " subsets of { A , B , C } are { A } , { B } , ' { C } , and { A , B , C } ; thus O ( { A , B , C } ) = 4 . Determine O ( S ) if S is a set of 26 objects . 2 . Suppose you are given the positive numbers p , q , r , and s . Prove that 16 . pqrs Suppose T is the triangle given at the left be - low . Give a mathematical argument to dem - onstrate that there is a square , S , such that the 4 corners of S lie on the sides of T , as in the figure to the right . 4 . Consider the set of equations ( ax + y = a 2 } \ x + ay = l } - For what values of a does this system fail to have solutions , and for what values of a are there infinitely many solutions ? 5 . Let G be a ( 9 X 12 ) rectangular grid , as shown below . How many different rectangles can be drawn on G , if the sides of the rectangles must be grid lines ? ( Squares are included , as are rectangles whose sides are on the boundaries of G . ) Received December 22 , 1980 Revision received December 9 , 1981