a r X i v : 2302 . 00594v1 [ c s . C V ] 29 D ec 2022 Inching Towards Automated Understanding of the Meaning of Art : An Application to Computational Analysis of Mondrian’s Artwork Alex Doboli 1 , Mahan Agha Zahedi 1 , and Niloofar Gholamrezaei 2 1 Stony Brook University , Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering , Stony Brook NY 11794 - 2350 , USA { alex . doboli , mahan . zahedi } @ stonybrook . edu 2 School of Art , Texas Tech University , Lubbock TX , USA niloofar . gholamrezaei @ ttu . edu Abstract . Deep Neural Networks ( DNNs ) have been successfully used in classifying digital images but have been less succesful in classifying images with meanings that are not linear combinations of their visu - alized features , like images of artwork . Moreover , it is unknown what additional features must be included into DNNs , so that they can possi - bly classify using features beyond visually displayed features , like color , size , and form . Non - displayed features are important in abstract repre - sentations , reasoning , and understanding ambiguous expressions , which are arguably topics less studied by current AI methods . This paper at - tempts to identify capabilities that are related to semantic processing , a current limitation of DNNs . The proposed methodology identiﬁes the missing capabilities by comparing the process of understanding Mon - drian’s paintings with the process of understanding electronic circuit designs , another creative problem solving instance . The compared enti - ties are cognitive architectures that attempt to loosely mimic cognitive activities . The paper oﬀers a detailed presentation of the characteristics of the architectural components , like goals , concepts , ideas , rules , proce - dures , beliefs , expectations , and outcomes . To explain the usefulness of the methodology , the paper discusses a new , three - step computational method to distinguish Mondrian’s paintings from other artwork . The method includes in a backward order the cognitive architecture’s com - ponents that operate only with the characteristics of the available data . Keywords : classiﬁcation of art · computational methods · cognitive ar - chitecture . 1 Introduction Classifying items based on their deﬁning characteristics as well as identify - ing these characteristics has been a major research topic in Machine Learning ( ML ) [ 38 ] . Driven by applications in computer vision and text processing , like text summarization and translation , numerous ML algorithms have been de - vised including both procedural methods as well as data modeling techniques . 2 F . Author et al . The latter methods compute the parameters of parameterized models to mini - mize the error between training sets and model predictions . Deep Neural Net - works ( DNNs ) pertain to this approach , including Convolutional Neural Net - works ( CNNs ) a popular type of DNNs . CNNs have been successful in classifying digital images [ 50 ] . However , recent work explored the CNN’s capability to classify images with meanings that are not linear combinations of their visualized features [ 103 ] . This work showed that CNNs cannot correctly distinguish artwork presenting complex , hard - to - grasp non - exhibited properties ( NEXP ) , even though they perform well for art objects described mainly by exhibited properties ( EXP ) . EXP are visual features , like form , color , scene , and NEXP represent meaning , like an artist’s intention and an observer’s perception [ 103 ] . For example , paintings from the Renaissance period display a rich set of EXPs , and abstract paintings , because of their abstraction , include NEXPs that are hard to learn . Even though there has been a hope that DNNs capability to be universal approximators will somehow support the picking - up of EXP combinations that describe well NEXPs too , experiments showed that such descriptions are not learned with current CNNs [ 103 ] . It is unclear what features are missing from present CNNs , so that they can eﬀectively identify and use NEXPs in classiﬁcation of artwork . In spite of artiﬁ - cially generated art [ 11 ] , e . g . , using Genetic Algorithms and other evolutionary algorithms , it is arguable if the produced outputs are similar to the artwork created by humans and analyzed by domains , like aesthetics [ 10 ] . It has been argued that art expresses human experiences [ 10 , 61 , 62 ] , which is obviously not the case with generated artwork . The meaning of human experiences relates to human intention and understanding , which depend on numerous historical , eco - nomic and social factors [ 10 , 61 ] . For example , intentional historical theory argues that an artist had an intention to create art of a certain kind [ 52 ] . Then , this kind must be inferred ( understood ) by the viewer [ 12 ] . It is possible that dis - similar artwork ( including dissimilar EXPs ) still belongs to the same kind [ 12 ] . Hence , it is important to understand how knowledge about meaning ( semantics ) is used by humans during the process of creating ( intention ) and understanding ( perception ) art . We believe that the signiﬁcance of creating computational methods towards understanding how NEXPs ( e . g . , meaning ) operate in art is well beyond creating immediate applications , like automatically generating museum inventories , art - work explanations , and interactive avatars to guide visitors . NEXPs are tightly connected to abstract representations , reasoning , and understanding of abstract and ambiguous expressions , which are diﬀerent in nature than processing and learning EXPs ( i . e . using features on form and structure for classiﬁcation ) , the focus of current AI methods . Abstract reasoning and understanding ambiguous expressions are critical in human problem solving by individuals and teams of individuals . Starting from the observation that current DNN approaches are arguably insuﬃcient to tackle semantic abstractions [ 103 ] , this work focused on identify - ing the capabilities that must be added to DNNs to improve their capabilities Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 3 of semantic processing . The used methodology identiﬁes the missing features by comparing the process of understanding artwork with the process of un - derstanding and creating electronic circuits , a well - known domain of creative problem solving . Our previous work proposed a cognitive architecture , a compu - tational structure loosely based on human cognitive reasoning , to automatically synthesize electronic circuits [ 53 ] . We leveraged this work to propose a cogni - tive architecture meant to understand the abstract paintings of Piet Mondrian . The comparison of the two processes referred to two semantic layers : The ﬁrst layer has eight elements : goals , concepts , ideas , rules , procedures , beliefs , expec - tations , and outcomes . These elements are part of the cognitive process during problem solving and can be further linked to more detailed cognitive activities , like memory , concept learning , representation and combination , aﬀect , insight , and so on . The eight elements are discussed and compared for the process of understanding and performing circuit design and the process of understanding Mondrian’s paintings . The second layer describes the solving process and in - cludes ﬁve elements : the nature of the problem , knowledge representation in the memory , the attention and prediction subsystem , the reasoning subsystem , and knowledge updating . The comparison of the elements of the two semantic layers indicates what capabilities must be modiﬁed or added to a cognitive architecture geared towards understanding Mondrian’s paintings as compared to the archi - tecture in [ 53 ] . The functional requirements and evaluation metrics for these capabilities can be then stated . We argue that this work is a step towards connecting a computational ap - proach to understanding abstract paintings by Mondrian to cognitive activities , even though it is not a connection to the neural activity of the brain , as in neu - roaesthetics [ 10 , 66 , 105 ] . Subsequent work can attempt to relate the cognitive activities to DNN processing , similar to [ 23 ] . We believe that Mondrian’s work is appropriate for this goal : EXPs are less important as it is visually simple ( e . g . , uses vertical ad horizontal lines and surfaces colored with fundamental colors , e . g . , red , blue , yellow , and white ) , but complex in terms of its meaning deﬁned using NEXPs . Note that other work discusses problem solving in domains , like physics and mathematics [ 71 , 91 , 98 ] , but does not propose equivalent algorithmic methods even though they discuss common - sense strategies to solve problems . The paper has the following structure . Section 2 presents related work . Sec - tion 3 oﬀers an overview of the model used to identify the requirements of com - putational methods to classify using meaning . Section 4 focuses on a case study that compares the computational needs for electronic circuit design and Mon - drian’s paintings . A discussion follows in Section 5 . Conclusions end the paper . 2 Related Work Modern ML methods , like CNNs , have been proposed to automatically analyze artwork , including activities , like style recognition , classiﬁcation , and genera - tion [ 49 , 86 , 95 , 106 ] . As large training sets are often hard to assemble for art , the traditional approach pre - trains a CNN using large databases of images , e . g . , 4 F . Author et al . ImageNet , and then retrains only the output and intermediate layers using art images [ 49 , 73 , 95 , 106 ] . Style recognition ﬁnds the artistic style of artwork using mainly visual at - tributes , like color and texture [ 49 , 73 , 95 , 106 ] . Seven diﬀerent CNN models were tested for three art datasets to classify genres ( e . g . , landscapes , portraits , ab - stract paintings , etc . ) , styles ( i . e . Renaissance , Baroque , Impressionism , Cubism , Symbolism , etc . ) , and artists [ 106 ] . The method uses mostly color . It achieves for some styles an accuracy similar to human experts . However , other styles are hard to recognize , like Post Impressionism and Impressionism , Abstract Expression - ism and Art Informel , or Mannerism and Baroque [ 49 ] . CNN are also suggested to recognize non - traditional art styles , like Outsider Art style [ 73 ] . CNNs are used to identify the author from a group of artists by learning the visual features of the artist’s work [ 95 ] . The method utilizes features , like texture , color , edges , and empty areas [ 95 ] . However , it is necessary to also use higher - level features , like localized regions or semantic features , e . g . , scene content and composition [ 78 ] . Work on uncovering semantic information about artwork intends to under - stand the content of art objects , like the orientation of an object , the objects in a scene , and the central ﬁgures of an object [ 37 , 51 , 85 ] . Object orientation , e . g . , deciding if a painting is correctly displayed , uses simple , local cues , image statistics , and explicit rules [ 51 , 57 , 104 ] . The methods have been reported to be as eﬀective as human interpretation for some painting styles [ 51 ] . They perform better in portrait paintings than in abstract art . The distinguishing features among classes include localized parts of large objects , low intra - class variability of the parts , and speciﬁc semantic parts , such as wheels for cars and windows for buses . Generative Adversarial Networks ( GANs ) are proposed for hierarchical scene understanding [ 102 ] . Early layers are likely to learn physical positions , like the spatial layout and conﬁguration , the intermediate layers detect categorical objects , and the latter layers focus on scene attributes and color schemes . 3 Model Components Creating works of art , like paintings , can be seen as the process of solving open - ended problems [ 10 ] , similar to open - ended problem - solving in engineering , like imagining and devising new functional capabilities that are beyond those of the current solutions . Both represent instances of human creative activities . Sub - section 3 . 1 compares conceptually the two types of problem - solving endeavors . Next , we presented the elements used in the comparison . Culture includes the goals , concepts , ideas , rules , procedures , beliefs and outcomes of a certain population , and the expectations of their outcomes [ 10 ] . ( 1 ) Goals are high - level objectives ( problems ) in response to needs . For example , it has been mentioned that one of the goals for art is to produce pleasure [ 66 , 105 ] or to make a donor proud [ 10 ] . ( 2 ) Concepts are the building blocks of knowl - edge . They are characterized by common , deﬁning features and by features that distinguish them from other concepts [ 20 , 21 ] . ( 3 ) Ideas are sets of related con - Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 5 cepts that serve / produce a certain purpose , e . g . , enable a certain situation or create a certain output . ( 4 ) Rules indicate the way of relating concepts to each other , and ( 5 ) procedures are sequences of rules that produce a desired outcome . ( 6 ) Beliefs are ideas and rules that are somewhat constant ( invariant ) within a certain culture . ( 7 ) An outcome is an expression ( materialization ) of cultural components in an object of art as well as the degree to which the new expression diﬀers or improves of previous similar expressions . ( 8 ) An expectation correlates with the priority associated to a cultural component , and subsequently to an emotion . Multiple expectations can exist within a population , which results in multiple priorities and emotions . Expectations can be common to a population or can be diﬀerent depending on the subjects experiences [ 10 , 66 ] . Example : We referred to Baxandall’s discussion of the painting “Baptism of Christ” by Piero della Francesci [ 10 ] . Baxandall presents the cultural environ - ment in which the painting was produced . ( 1 ) It includes the painter’s goal in response to a customer’s request , which refers to a place of display ( e . g . , an altar piece ) , a topic ( i . e . Christ’s baptism ) , and a speciﬁc artist to create the artwork . As Baxandall explains in [ 10 ] , the painting was meant to have three functions : “to narrate scripture clearly , to arouse appropriate feeling about the narrated mat - ter , and to impress that matter on the memory” ( page 106 ) . ( 2 ) Concepts include all items that form the “language” of a culture , like Christ , angels , baptism , wa - ter , and so on , and their associated meanings , including symbolisms . ( 3 ) Ideas are a set of concepts , in this painting , the idea that Christ’s baptism by a hu - man indicates his humility [ 10 ] . The meaning of the idea might result through inference based on its concepts , through the using of analogies and metaphors , and so on . ( 4 ) Rules include the application of mathematical principles to paint - ing , such as rules related to perspective , proportions , and Euclidean analysis of forms [ 10 ] . Onians oﬀers an interesting presentation of the evolution of the rules embedded into artwork , starting from empirical rules deﬁned by ancient Greeks and Romans , and followed by rules based on geometry , the physiology of the eye and brain , psychology , and neuroscience [ 66 ] . ( 5 ) Procedures include the es - tablished templates and routines for devising a painting , like selection of colors , its design , and composition [ 10 ] . Procedures also include the way of assigning purpose and intention to an art object , such as a certain way of interpreting its meaning through causal inference [ 10 ] . ( 6 ) Beliefs refer to certain widely ac - cepted meanings and facts , like the interpretation of Scripture . ( 7 ) The outcome is the actual painting in this example . ( 8 ) As Baxandall explains , expectations include the following attributes : “clear , moving , memorable , sacramental , and creditable image of the subject” ( page 106 in [ 10 ] ) . Expectations can also refer to the characteristics of the physical place of display , like its size , shape , etc . . Arguably , the state - of - the - art in technology is the equivalent of culture , as it includes the goals pursued by a certain technological domain , its laws , theories and models , procedures , and designs . Expectations are based on the functional - ity and performance of the previous designs . Similarly to culture , expectations deﬁne a priority of the components deﬁning the state - of - the - art , and an emotion originating in the satisfaction of the expectations through the actual designs . 6 F . Author et al . Multiple expectations are possible as community members can have diﬀerent predictions on how previous designs will shape future outcomes . Example : We referred to the electronic circuit designs discussed in [ 21 , 42 , 53 , 94 ] . The state - of - the - art , which describes the context in which the circuits were dis - cussed , includes the following elements that are analogous to the elements dis - cussed for the previous example . ( 1 ) The goal was to design circuits with open - ended functions , like the problem description referred to using state - of - the - art technology for embedded systems and a set of building blocks ( BBs ) , like sen - sors and actuators , to improve campus life [ 94 ] . However , once the desired func - tionality is identiﬁed , the associated performance requirements become deﬁned too . Performance requirements are numerical values that must meet minimum ( maximum ) limits or are minimized ( maximized ) as part of the design process . ( 2 ) Concepts are the BBs used in design , like MOSFET transistors , resistors , capacitances , and subcircuits . Similar to concepts in art , they can have multiple meanings , e . g . , as a MOSFET transistor can have multiple functions ( behaviors ) depending on its region of operation , however , the semantics of these meanings is much simpler than in art . Also , their meanings can be described in a precise , formal way using mathematics or logic . ( 3 ) Ideas represent a set of BBs with a precise meaning , like subcircuits built out of MOSFETs . ( 4 ) Rules indicate how BBs should be connected to each other in a design , such as the rules that de - scribe the connections of the four MOSFET transistor terminals . ( 5 ) Procedures represent the steps to be pursued to solve a design problem , like the steps to create a circuit structure ( schematics ) and the steps to size the MOSFET tran - sistor . ( 6 ) Beliefs refer to the paradigms considered to be valid for the considered state - of - the - art , such as its functional and performance capabilities as well as its advantages and disadvantages compared to other alternative state - of - the - art in technology . ( 7 ) Outcomes is the set of all circuit designs that have been created for the given state - of - the - art . ( 8 ) Expectations refer to the degree to which a designed electronic circuit meets its functional and performance requirements . 3 . 1 Semantics of Creative Activities in Painting and Electronic Circuit Design This section compares the semantic elements of the creative processes in painting and electronic circuit design . ( 1 ) Goals : High - level goals are expressed through the set of concrete problems that must be solved . These problems are characterized by four variables : topic , relationship to previous problems , physical constraints , and authorship . The topics of paintings might encompass a broad range that goes from a well - deﬁned set of ideas and symbolisms , i . e . the meaning that results from Scripture for Christian religious paintings , to a broad range of emotions and meanings that attempt to establish a dialog between the artwork and viewers , like in abstract painting [ 10 ] . Therefore , while the end goal of a painting is to produce pleasure to the viewer [ 10 , 66 ] , it can achieve it by using a broad range of meanings , on one Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 7 end based on a well - deﬁned meaning ( closed semantic space ) and at the other end based on primary cues that originate a sensation of pleasure in the brain ( physiological space of the brain ) , like color [ 66 , 105 ] . In engineering , problem framing is an important design step and mainly refers to deﬁning the precise functionality of the solution and its expected per - formance [ 28 ] . Problem - framing can co - evolve with the solving process [ 10 , 22 ] . New problems are often deﬁned with respect to previously developed designs ( incremental design ) . While there are relationships to previous work , there is ar - guably more ﬂexibility in deﬁning the topic of a new art object , as there are no concrete functional or performance requirements other than being original and improving the well - being and pleasure of customers [ 10 ] ( physiological space of the brain ) . As opposed to art where topic identiﬁcation is usually decided by the customer and / or artist [ 10 ] , polls are used in circuit design to identify appealing functions , or the actual opportunities might become evident only after a number of attempts , such as in mobile computing . However , as opposed to art , after the function of a design is well deﬁned , the degree to which the goal is attained can be characterized through well - deﬁned metrics on cost , accuracy , speed , energy and power consumption , reliability , and so on [ 30 ] . The place of display of a painting can be well deﬁned , like it was for “Baptism of Christ” , or might be initially undeﬁned , as in the case of a painting an artist creates on his / her own . However , in both cases , the physical dimensions of the painting are set before the artist commences the painting . Similarly , the physical attributes of an electronic design , i . e . weight and size , are decided after its functionality and envisioned way of use are decided . As opposed to art , where physical constraints are ﬁxed ( constraint satisfaction problem ) , e . g . , the painting must entirely occupy the assigned 2D surface , in electronic design , the goal might be to minimize the size and weight ( minimization problem ) . Finally , the author of an artwork is well deﬁned ( ﬁxed ) while the authors of an electronic circuit design do not indicate a certain person but rather refer to a group of persons that possess a required skill set ( constraint satisfaction ) . ( 2 ) Concepts : Concepts are collections of items that share common features and are distinguishable from other concepts [ 21 , 25 , 59 ] . Studying concepts has been a main topic in cognitive psychology [ 16 ] . There are various concept mod - els , like using prototypes to represent concepts [ 77 ] , class membership models based on primitives and deﬁning conditions [ 4 , 16 , 25 , 77 ] , class membership mod - els using graded membership [ 99 ] , and concept typicality and vagueness [ 65 , 68 ] . Concept formation and learning discusses topics , like concept alignment [ 47 ] , concept similarity [ 33 ] and dissimilarity [ 72 ] , perceptual symbols [ 8 ] , natural categories [ 75 , 76 ] , ad - hoc categories [ 5 ] , goal - based concepts [ 6 ] , incremental for - mation [ 29 ] , and complex concept formation [ 64 ] . Work also studied the diﬀerence between physical concepts and its image in the memory [ 99 ] , situated simula - tion [ 9 ] and thematic relations [ 54 ] , categorization adaptation [ 2 ] , and concept typicality [ 39 ] . Next , the diﬀerences between concepts in paintings and electronic 8 F . Author et al . circuit design were discussed with respect to their possible meanings , descrip - tions , and meaning understanding . In [ 10 ] , Baxandall states that “In systems like classical mythology and Chris - tian theology , matured and elaborated over centuries , almost anything can sig - nify something - trees , rivers , the various colors , groups of twelve , seven , three and even one ; many things can signify various things” ( page 132 ) . For example , he indicates seven diﬀerent meanings for Baptism , and the various meanings of a dove , plants , forms , and colors ( meaning transfer from another space ) [ 10 ] . The many meanings of the concepts originate a very large of possible meanings for the composition of forms ( concepts ) in a painting ( size of the semantic space ) . Moreover , diﬀerent concepts can have similar meanings , therefore there is signif - icant redundancy in the semantic space ( redundancy of the semantic space ) . In contrast , the concepts ( e . g . , BBs ) in an electronic design can have multiple mean - ings , but the number of possible meanings is small . For example , a MOSFET transistor can act as a switch that is on or oﬀ or as an amplifying element . How - ever , these meanings ( behaviors ) are few and in general restricted to a certain BB . Moreover , the meaning of the concepts in paintings is tightly integrated with the other concepts to achieve unity and balance , including requirements expressed in the laws of aesthetics [ 19 ] and Gestalt theory [ 3 ] ( integration ) . A concept’s meaning must be consistent with that of the entire composition , and new meanings can result in this process . BBs can be tightly coupled to each other , like in electronic designs of small size , like analog circuits , but modular - ization through local and hierarchical coupling of BBs was proposed to manage the complexity of large size design , thus , to achieve scalability ( scalability re - quirement ) . The meaning of concepts in art can continuously change over time and from one culture to another due to dialog between the artist , participants ( members of the same culture as the artist ) , and observers ( members of a diﬀerent culture ) [ 10 ] ( dynamics of meanings ) . A circuit design has a precise meaning that rarely changes over time ( unless new applications are discovered for it ) , however , there can be a translation process from one state - of - the - art to another when de - signs are migrated across diﬀerent fabrication technologies [ 30 ] . The translation is then always complete , while certain painting features might be diﬃcult to map to a new culture , like the concept of “commensurazione” as explained in [ 10 ] . In design , the meaning of a BB is often speciﬁed using formal descriptions , like closed - form mathematical expressions ( e . g . , diﬀerential equations ) , logic for - mulas ( i . e . ﬁrst or higher - order logic ) , and executable / simulatable speciﬁcations in a programming language ( like VHDL - AMS ) [ 30 ] . These descriptions are often grounded in laws of physics . When such descriptions are not available , the BB meaning is expressed by enumerating the behavior in the main cases , like the corner points of a MOSFET device . In general , it can be argued that methods have been devised to produce tractable descriptions of behavior , so that they cover as much as possible of the possible behavior of a BB . Unexpected BB behaviors are unwanted as they usual end - up in failures , and additional design features might be incorporated into an electronic circuit to avoid such situations ( maximize the deterministic , fully known semantics of BBs ) . In contrast , the Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 9 features of the concepts in painting are rarely fully and well - deﬁned , as enabling the inference of multiple meanings of a painting’s concepts and composition is a main goal of art [ 66 , 105 ] . Having new , unusual concept features , like a purple tree or a strange posture of an angel , can express new meanings , and are part of the creative process in art . Also , the level of detailing of a concept ( and vice versa its level of abstract representation ) can be important in painting for con - veying a certain message , like emphasizing a certain aspect . In contrast , BBs in a complete engineering design are fully speciﬁed , even though partial descriptions can be used during the previous drafting stages . The physical representation of concepts in paintings can be subjected to geometrical rules , like placement of objects and perspective , which is similar to devising the structure of a circuit and sizing the BBs in electronic design . However , such rules are not imposed , e . g . , in modern art , while they are a strong requirement in circuit design . Finally , the process of understanding the meaning of a concept in painting in - volves inference and using symbols , analogies , and metaphors . Insight is gained in the process . Baxandall explains that this process is similar to formulating hypotheses , and then validating them [ 10 ] . The process is a sequence of steps , in which the meaning of a composition produces a hypothesis that is applied top - down to understand the meaning of concepts . Any identiﬁed inconsistencies serve then bottom - up as cues to modify the hypothesis and re - execute the pro - cess . The end result is a story that explains a painting . There are similarities with understanding the meaning of BBs in electronic designs , as humans might formulate hypotheses about the purpose ( e . g . , function ) of unknown BBs , and then verifying the hypotheses , followed by readjusting a hypothesis if needed and repeating the process . However , it can be argued that the formulated hypotheses are simpler due to the signiﬁcantly less ambiguous meaning of BBs than concepts in painting . This likely impacts the utilized strategies to ﬁnd valid hypotheses . ( 3 ) Ideas : Ideas are sets of related concepts assembled to satisfy a certain pur - pose , like to enable something or to create an output or consequence . Hence , an idea has an associated meaning . The purpose and meaning can be diﬀerent for diﬀerent cultures , including changes over time . For example , the idea of Christ’s baptism expresses the cleansing of sins in Christian religions with all the associ - ated consequences , like the “unbaptised are damned” ( in [ 10 ] , page 123 ) . Or , the idea that a painting meant to be an altarpiece has a precise function . Similarly , in electronic circuit design , collections of related BBs ( concepts ) form a design with a precise purpose , like functionality and performance . Idea representation and organization has been studied in psychology [ 1 , 7 , 70 ] . The discussed comparison of ideas in painting and electronic circuit design considered the following dimensions : the type of ideas as deﬁned by the nature of their purpose , meaning , origin , characteristics , grouping , and evolution ( change ) . Moreover , ideas can be explicit or implicit . Explicit ideas are stated and commu - nicated to others , hence become part of the shared culture or state - of - the - art in circuit design . For example , the laws of proportions and perspective were ideas that were stated and shared by medieval painters . Similarly , textbook descrip - 10 F . Author et al . tions of subcircuits represent ideas on how to obtain a certain functionality and performance . Implicit ideas refer to situations in which the idea produces a well - deﬁned purpose without that this purpose was consciously intended by the artist or designer ( emergence ) . Also , a painter might prefer a certain color or organi - zation of a composition . Similarly , designers might prefer a speciﬁc subcircuit , even though other possibly superior alternatives exist . Regarding their type , ideas in art can serve diﬀerent purposes , like inquiry , hypothesizing , explanation ( including causality ) , critique , constraint , general - ization , detailing , expectations , purposing , intention , conﬁrmation , support , re - inforcement , messaging ( propagation ) , expression of emotions , and so on . For example , ideas can express how a certain intention is produced through the se - lected colors and organization . Depending on their purpose , e . g . , problem solving or knowledge communication , ideas in circuit design can have the same types , with less emphasis on expression of emotions . It can be argued that meaning can be deﬁned as a black box model , if it only explains the purpose of an idea ( what ) , or a white box model , if it explains how the purpose is achieved ( how ) . For example , Gombrich argued the importance of forming a visual image of an idea [ 35 ] . The meaning of ideas result through diﬀerent processes in painting and circuit design . In art , the meaning is tightly dependent of the context , such as the time when an artwork was created and interpreted , and the perspective [ 36 , 66 ] . Diﬀerent meanings can result depending on the viewer’s perspective . New insight is likely to result . Therefore , ambiguity is arguably a desirable features , as it supports novel , constructive and creative reinterpretations of an art object . Moreover , physiological and psychological re - action can be important , such as body reactions , unconscious reactions to shapes and colors , and empathy [ 34 , 66 ] . Therefore , it can be argued that the meaning of an artwork is not self - contained , but itself results from the subjective inter - pretation of the observer embedded in his / her culture . Instead , the meaning of ideas in circuit design is well - deﬁned , mostly self - contained , and less dependent on possible interpretations . While multiple meanings can exist , alternatives are usually few , known , and precisely deﬁned . Ideas also diﬀer by the process used to assign them a meaning , i . e . to un - derstand them . Ideas in paintings are understood through processes that involve hypothesis formulation and veriﬁcation , using symbols , analogies and metaphors , abstraction , utilizing exaggerations , paradoxes and contradictions , satire , allu - sions , logic inference , identifying associations , and so on [ 10 ] . Hence , it is im - portant to formulate , focus , and pursue multiple meanings through cognitive activities , like separation , classiﬁcation , and understanding the whole before fo - cusing on the parts ( top - down reasoning ) [ 66 ] . The importance of sequential understanding has been also argued , especially for modern art [ 10 ] . Note that there is a physiological biasing of the process due to the brain’s built - in priority in focusing on forms , like face and eyes [ 66 ] . The importance of idea organiza - tion in the memory , as well as the diﬀerences between experts and amateurs have been also explained in the literature [ 66 ] . Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 11 Idea characteristics include the following attributes : Precision refers to the degrees of ambiguity , such as in the case of metaphors , as well as if an idea has a quantitative or qualitative evaluation . Ideas can describe diﬀerent degrees of abstraction , and can have diﬀerent levels of rigidity depending on their ﬂexibility to support changes and to be combined ( related ) with other ideas . Their invari - ance describes the degree to which ideas remain unchanged as a result of the idea combination process , e . g . , their meaning remains the same in spite their change . They can have diﬀerent degrees of validity , like ideas which are always true ( tru - isms ) , are valid under certain circumstances , and are always false . They have a certain organization and structure , including a hierarchical structure . Ideas can have diﬀerent social attributes too , cogency ( degree of authority ) , visibility , importance , and impact for a culture . An idea is usually part of a larger group of ideas , therefore it has charac - teristics with respect to the ideas of the entire group . Idea similarity describes the similarity of two ideas with respect to their concepts , structure , or meaning . Hence , similarity expresses the degree to which ideas are aligned with each other , including situations in which an idea is a transformed or evolved descendant of another idea . Ideas described by diﬀerent sets can have similar meanings ( syn - onyms ) . Alternatively , distinct ideas are described by their degree of diﬀerentia - tion . The capability to compare two ideas with respect to a metric , such as their utility , supports the deﬁnition of an idea’s quality . Familiarity is the frequency with which an idea has been repeated within a culture . Ideas can be organized ( structured ) in an ontology , such as hierarchies of clusters of similar ideas [ 21 ] . Groups of ideas can be described by patterns , which express conditions valid for all ideas in the group . Ideas can be characterized by their consistency , e . g . , the degree to which their meanings are logically not conﬂicting ( contradicting ) with each other , continuity which is the possibility of understanding them as an evolving sequence , and integrality which is the degree to which the set speciﬁes a unitary , complete system ( ensemble ) . Ideas can be described by a degree of unexpectedness ( including oddity ) , like whether they can be predicted based on the context or other ideas , and degree of redundancy , such as their meaning is articulated by other ideas too . Ideas can be learned through experience , from others , or obtained through insight . Ideas can change over time and can be common , opposite , diﬀerent , and partially diﬀerent for the members of the same culture or of diﬀerent cultures . The degree of idea similarity can depend on conditions of the context . Baxandall explains that there is a continuity over time between ideas in art , such as an idea can be related to previous ideas [ 10 ] . Also , ideas in art can be continuously reinterpreted for any new time period [ 10 ] . ( 4 ) Rules : Rules present a way to connect concepts , ideas , or other rules with each other . The latter two kinds are called metarules . Concept combinations have been studied in cognitive psychology as a mechanism to relate separate concepts [ 63 ] . There are two types of combinations : property - based and relation - based combinations [ 100 ] . Property - based combinations transfer features from 12 F . Author et al . one concept to another while the interpretation is plausible [ 67 ] . Relation - based combinations connect two nouns through modiﬁers that relates to causes , struc - ture , purpose , and location [ 26 ] . The parameters that inﬂuence the selection of diﬀerent relation types has been also studied , like cueing , stimuli sequencing , memory [ 27 ] . Rules are described in our model by the following elements that are detailed next : conditions for applying the rule , including constraints , a rule’s structure and elements , the expected goals and real outcomes of applying a rule , the characteristics of a rule , its interpretation , and its origin and gradient ( change ) . The conditions for applying a rule describe the situations ( conditions ) un - der which a rule becomes available to be used and then selected to be used . In general , models distinguish between making a rule available ( cuing / activating it ) [ 26 ] and selecting ( deciding ) the rule from the set of available rules [ 26 , 27 ] . Constraints can cause the activation of a rule , like a certain structure of a paint - ing’s physical display ( like the speciﬁc place of display of an altar piece in a church ) which imposes rules on the structuring of the composition [ 10 ] . Rules are also activated by a certain pursued goal and established beliefs about how the goal can be achieved . For example , art was dominated for some time by the belief that paintings must be nature - accurate images , which triggered the need to apply rules on proportion and perspective , so that 3D images were accurately presented on 2D surfaces [ 10 ] . The using of rules is also decided by the meaning associated in certain contexts and cultures , like the connection between the im - portance of an object and the centrality of its representation in a composition . Universal rules are always true , even though they might not be always selected , such as in situation when the author wants to communicate a paradox or an oddity . A rule’s structure and elements indicate its constitution . Rules can connect concepts , features of concepts , and ideas to a certain outcome , or connect rules into higher level structures , like hierarchical structures . For example , rules can express the structure of a composition or design . When higher - level structures are created , the connection can use all the components of the lower elements ( lossless case ) or only some ( loss case ) while possibly adding new elements that are not present in the lower structures ( extension case ) . The expected goals and real outcomes of applying a rule can be global , if it refers to an entire image , or local , if it relates to certain parts and details . Depending on their structural activity , rules can serve to decompose and aggre - gate an entire , to produce associations between concepts and ideas , to compare and diﬀerentiate , to generalize instances and to de - generalize ( instantiate ) ab - stractions . With respective to their cognitive goal , rules can serve as part of producing inquiry , hypothesis , analysis , discussion , pairing and comparison ( in - cluding alignment , similarity , separation / diﬀerence , and prominence / supe - riority ) , explanation , necessity , evaluation , insight , articulation and persuasion , reinforcement ( memorizing ) , support , predictions , expectations , achieving a cer - tain sentiment , impression , and emotion , and so on . Depending on the preciseness of their expectations and goals , rules can introduce diﬀerent levels of ambiguity Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 13 ( including metaphors , symbols , analogies , and allusions ) , backward references to old goals , and new meanings and reinterpretations of an existing rule . Spe - ciﬁc rules can communicate truth . Rules can be used to communicate repetition , patterns , or movement , such as placing opposite colors at the opposing ends of horizontal and vertical lines [ 18 ] . Rules can also suggest correspondences be - tween diﬀerent images , between an image in nature and its corresponding artistic image , between outputs and goals , between attention and action . The characteristics of a rule include whether a rule is explicit or implicit , externalized or internalized . Explicit rules consciously identify the involved el - ements ( i . e . concepts , ideas or other rules ) , while the precise nature of their connection might ( i . e . through mathematical expressions ) or might not be de - ﬁned ( e . g . , through qualitative or approximate expressions ) . Implicit rules are executed without the awareness of the user . Externalized rules are those de - scribed in a communication media , like formal rules , speech , image , and so on . Internalized rules do not have such a description . Rules can be deterministic or stochastic , which is a consequence of their activation and selection processes . Self - contained rules are fully expressed only based on their description . Rules can be also approximate ( if they describe reality within a certain error range ) , precise ( if they express the desired relation without unnecessary or redundant information ) , structuring ( if there is an organization of large rules , i . e . using hi - erarchical structures ) , robust ( if they are supported by a large set of real - world situations suggesting a certain organization of the experience ) , ﬂexible ( if they can be changed into other rules ) , invariant over conditions , including time ( if the rule remains valid for a broad set of changing conditions , i . e . contexts and cultures ) , and relatable to other rules ( if there is a sequence of rules that es - tablishes the connection between two rules , i . e . deductive reasoning , inference , contradiction , or exploring alternatives ) . The interpretation of a rule indicates the meaning of a rule , as described by its structure , concepts , eﬀects , and conditions of application . As a rule can have multiple meanings and ambiguity , depending on the degree of consistency ( validity ) of its meanings , rules are needed to assign and update rigor , address un - expected features , strangeness / peculiarities , oddities , seeming , paradoxes , and their connection to attention . The meaning of a rule can change depending on the broader context and the user’s subjective experience and perspective . Rules can also link material , natural elements to internal , subjective representations , such as in using lines , positions , and colors the achieve harmony , balance , and ul - timately beauty [ 62 ] , or communicating the feeling of grandiosity through a rule that decides the viewing position of the viewer with respect to the painting [ 62 ] . Rules can also decide the target of the viewer’s attention during observation , such as through large surfaces of the same color or by placing objects in the cen - tral part of a painting . Rules can produce a global viewing of an entire painting ( overview ) or guide viewing towards local details , such as through the crowding and dimensions of the emerging forms and surfaces . For example , many , small patches of colors can suggest an interpretation focus on details , while few , large surfaces encourage a global view of the entire painting . 14 F . Author et al . Rules can originate in math and sciences or in various social conventions . For example , it is argued that the rules used in art were grounded over time in geometry , physiology of the eye and brain , psychology , and neuroscience . Alter - natively , rules have been grounded in beliefs , like rules on the origin of harmony and beauty [ 62 ] , or communicating a certain moral or ethical message [ 10 ] . Rules can be learned from others , like mentors , or learned through own experience , like using certain brush strokes to convey a certain message or the way of con - structing compositions to achieve the desired visual harmony and balance of the composition [ 62 ] . Rules can be also set by the client of an art object . Another aspect is the degree to which new rules are embraced by the larger community , the degree of propagation , and the degree to which a rule changes over time as a result of personal and collective experience and depending on the conditions and context it is applied , the rule’s ﬂexibility . An interesting interplay arises be - tween the goals of an outcome and rule modiﬁcation ( evolution ) . For example , the goal of creating nature - accurate paintings supported the continuous search for rules that would accurately represent a 3D image on a 2D surface . Note that this problem requires ﬁnding rules to project from a higher dimension space into a space of lower dimension with minimum information loss . ( 5 ) Procedures : Procedures represent problem - solving sequence of steps , where each step applies rules to concepts and ideas . Problem solving has been a main research topic in psychology [ 31 , 44 , 82 , 83 , 87 ] . The studied topics include the nature ( e . g . , clauses like what ( declarative ) , how ( procedural ) , etc . ) and or - ganization of memory structures ( including diﬀerences between experts and novices [ 15 , 17 , 41 , 81 , 91 ] and memory cuing [ 15 , 40 ] ) , learning [ 46 , 89 ] , such as con - cept formation [ 15 ] , new rule induction [ 15 ] and priority formation [ 91 ] , dual - process reasoning [ 69 ] , solving heuristics and their motivations [ 14 , 31 ] , problem solving processes through problem decomposition based on categorization using similarity with previous problems [ 15 , 55 , 81 ] , solution synthesizing through an ordered , sequenced tackling [ 55 ] of categorized schemata , templates and selected knowledge snippets [ 32 , 48 , 83 , 91 , 101 ] and solution veriﬁcation through redun - dant perspectives [ 40 ] , and understanding , including insight [ 13 , 80 , 90 , 93 ] and knowledge restructuring [ 56 , 96 ] . The comparison of the procedures used in problem solving in art and circuit design refers to the following elements : the devising of the step sequence to solve a problem , connection to previous and future problem solving instances , and learning and getting insight while conducting the procedure . There is abundant literature on problem solving procedures in mathematics , science , and engineering [ 71 , 98 ] . These approaches are geared towards solving well - deﬁned and ill - deﬁned problems with known requirements and constraints . For example , the steps suggested in [ 71 ] require ﬁrst identifying the problem vari - ables and structure , followed by relating it to similar , previously solved problems . Problem solving using analogies is often used too [ 97 ] . If the problem cannot be solved , the process should attempt solving a simpler yet related problem , cre - ated either by decomposing the original problem ( divide - and - conquer ) or by Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 15 simplifying the problem while keeping its main variables and unknowns ( prob - lem approximation ) . Depending on how problems are simpliﬁed and then their solutions integrated into the ﬁnal solutions , the process uses various nuances of concept combinations , in which property combinations decide the features of the concepts ( BBs ) used in the solution [ 67 ] , and relation - based combina - tions decide how concept functions are integrated together [ 100 ] . Using methods grounded in logic , such as inference , is an example of relation - based combination . However , other ways to achieve relation - based combinations are possible too , as explained in [ 42 , 53 ] . Verifying the correctness of the solution ends the process . Relation - based combinations have been used in some artistic genres , like com - mensurazione . Art theory presents rules on how paintings should be executed , like using of hue and luster [ 10 ] . Also , analogies with other painting were uti - lized as well as analogies originated in scientiﬁc theories [ 10 ] . Artists use nature as inspiration , as they select and amplify certain aspects [ 62 ] . Insight is also important . However , procedures in art also pursue a generative process [ 10 , 62 ] , in which existing images are deconstructed and reconstructed to produce a new meaning , like the equivalence between natural and spiritual [ 62 ] . Such a proce - dure is similar to hypothesis design and testing [ 10 , 62 ] , in which a new hypothesis is tested against previous artwork and the artist’s rational ( intentional ) behav - ior [ 10 ] . Intentionality suggest the existence of causal relationships that use the spatial and temporal structure of a composition to support the story told by a painting [ 10 ] . This procedure creates not only a new artistic object , but also a new expression language , as explained by Shapiro : “discriminating the good in an unfamiliar form that is often confused by the discouraging mass of insensi - tive imitations” [ 79 ] ( pp . 16 ) . The pursued constraints guarantee the novelty of the created art [ 61 , 79 ] . For example , Mondrian used constraints like using only vertical and horizontal lines , pure colors , and opposition of colors to remove vagueness and tragic , thus , oﬀering a precise meanings to his paintings [ 61 ] . The selection of the features to be highlighted is arguably based on intuition [ 61 ] to achieve the artist’s intentions related to broad societal goals and beliefs as well as artistic requirements , like balance , harmony , and order [ 62 , 79 ] . It can be argued that the trial - and - error steps created mutated descendants of previous artistic features [ 10 , 79 , 84 ] , however , these descendants are only tokens of the new expression language that is created . An important characteristics of the language used in abstract art , including Mondrian’s work , is its capability to describe ambiguity , so that understanding ambiguity is tractable ( solvable ) . Depending on how the decomposed subproblems are tackled and integrated , there are two opposite approaches in problem solving , top - down and bottom - up procedures . Both consider a hierarchical description of concepts , ideas , and relations . Top - down procedures assume that there is a general plan that de - ﬁnes the main concepts and their relations . Details are progressively added until the design is completed . Top - down design is popular in circuit design [ 30 , 60 ] . In painting , commensurazione assumes a three - step , top - down process : devising the general plan that includes proﬁles and contours , deﬁning relations through proportions between contours , and devising the features , like detailing and color - 16 F . Author et al . ing [ 10 ] . Another instance of top - down design is to deﬁne creating artwork as the process of assigning values to the variables of a visual template ( e . g . , position , dimension , color , and cues to engage the viewer , like expected visual scanning ) , so that the desired meaning is communicated [ 62 ] . Bottom - up procedures focus on devising ﬁrst the detailed concepts , which are then gradually integrated into the overall solution . A broad range of procedural approaches can be imagined by combining top - down and bottom - up solving of the subproblems into which a problem is decomposed . Applying a procedure to solve a problem is connected to previous and fu - ture work , including inﬂuence of earlier paintings and other traditions [ 10 ] . The current application continues previous applications of the procedure , and is continued by future applications [ 79 ] . Therefore , it has been argued that an artist’s work is a logical development of previous art , including the work of oth - ers [ 61 , 79 ] . However , the continuation also includes a distinction between two art objects [ 10 , 61 ] . Therefore , a procedure extend beyond solving the current problem , like creating a certain painting , to pursuing a broad idea ( goal ) of the artist [ 10 ] . The reinforcement ( through repetition ) of artistic features with a cer - tain purpose can establish beliefs , like elimination of form in painting serving the purpose of cementing freedom of expression [ 61 ] ( pp . 38 ) . Finally , learning and getting insight while conducting the procedure is crit - ical considering the evolutive nature of the process . Learning can be conscious or unconscious [ 61 , 62 ] . Mondrian argues that art is an evolution process dur - ing which the artist uses multiple points of view , discovers new ways to express certain ideas , and learns about them by comparing them with known features ( including features from other domains , like architecture [ 62 ] ) and further med - itating ( generalizing ) about their expression power [ 62 ] . For example , the artist can learn about the eﬀect amplifying or reducing illumination on the expressed meaning [ 62 ] . Other learned elements include new constraints , rules , and invari - ant relationships . A better understanding of the artist’s intentions and goals might also result by observing the meanings obtained through the new features and concept associations [ 10 ] . More precisely , Mondrian argues the importance of “looking deeply” to “perceive abstractly” [ 62 ] . This suggests a repeated anal - ysis of an artwork during which any newly acquired knowledge is used for the next analysis iteration [ 61 ] . Learning can also refer to the execution of a physical painting , like materials , textures , detailing , ﬁnishing , and so on [ 62 ] . ( 6 ) Beliefs - ( 7 ) Expectations : Beliefs are invariant ideas , rules , or their char - acteristics . These invariants over a certain time period can apply to an indi - vidual , group , or an entire culture . Hence , the large variety of ideas , rules , and characteristics implies that there is a large variety of beliefs too . The proposed model argues that beliefs are necessary in real life to tackle the huge complexity of the semantic space , if all variables are free . Many variables are correlated , and therefore analyzing the entire space of possibilities for a new idea , rule , or routine might be diﬃcult in a reasonable amount of time . Instead , beliefs lock some of the free variables through priorities , importance , speciﬁc meanings ( in - Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 17 cluding symbolism , like the religious meaning of water and doves ) , a certain way of solving a problem , and so on , hence signiﬁcantly reducing the semantic space of possible meanings , and making problem solving more tractable . Due to their existence over longer periods of time , beliefs are expected to produce a certain cognitive development of the members , such as adhering to common ideas , and also certain priorities , habits and skills to be used in the future . As they are invariant over a period of time , beliefs are likely to produce a certain set of central objectives ( problems , needs ) , a speciﬁc way of communica - tion , a particular set of metrics through which an artwork is evaluated to achieve its set intentions , as well as distinct way in which the observers are expected to interpret an artwork . Moreover , beliefs that exist over longer time periods are likely to produce knowledge that is systematized into top - down sequences of ac - tivities for the creation of a new painting , like the painting process that has three steps , general planning , painting the proﬁles and contours , and coloring [ 10 ] . In this top - down problem - solving process , general planning decides the overall com - position , the position , size , and relations between the main forms , followed by detailing the overall composition through precise proﬁles and contours . Finally , coloring completes the detailing of the composition . This top - down process re - quires less experimenting through trial - and - error to identify the best painting outcome , as many of the related variables , like an optimized way of communi - cating a message through a composition were already decided . In this scenario , arguably , the main solution in achieving the intention of the customer was ﬁnd - ing a painter that possessed the required knowledge and skills , not so much an artist that would innovate . It might explain the importance of prestige and the transmitting of the craft through mentorship . Beliefs can be explicit , such as the meaning of religious episodes as explained by Scripture , or implicit , i . e . following certain actions of a community , even though the beliefs behind those actions might not be known . Beliefs can evolve over time , such through reﬁnements and adaptations , as their future expressions do not conﬂict with the present forms . Alternatively , beliefs can be replaced over time by newer beliefs that contradict them . Beliefs can originate in mathematics , sciences , religion , philosophy , and social norms of a culture . For example , the invariant ideas and rules used in paintings of the romantic period are based in geometry of planes , proportions , and per - spective . Similarly , beliefs used in the paintings of the Viennese school of the XIX century are arguably grounded in insight from psychology [ 45 ] . Religion imposed beliefs not only about the precise meaning of the episodes in the Bible , but also about the fact that their representation through art must be visually precise , pious , and memorable [ 10 ] . Beliefs over the superiority of rationality over emotions lead to goals of eliminating the subjective in an attempt to show ab - solute beauty [ 62 ] . Social norms imposed beliefs , like the preference of religious and historical themes over landscape [ 10 ] and depicting in detail rich garments to suggest a status of prestige and power of the clients that ordered a certain artwork . Beliefs can also originate in constraints related to previous artwork , such as the goal of not painting motion [ 61 ] and the subsequent beliefs about 18 F . Author et al . the connection between natural , emotion and diminishing beauty , the limita - tions of natural representations , the importance of lines , colors , and integration of duality to achieve harmony and balance , the purpose of art , the evolution of life from natural to abstract , and the characteristics of the societies of the future [ 62 ] . ( 8 ) Outcomes : Outcomes refers to completed circuit designs or ﬁnished paint - ings in the case of Mondrian’s work . 4 Case Study : Understanding Mondrian’s Paintings Vs . Understanding Electronic Circuit Designs 4 . 1 Circuit Design Addressed problems . Electronic circuit design usually implies solving ill - deﬁned problems , for which solutions must tackle conﬂicting requirements , like satisfying or improving one requirement simultaneously worsens another require - ment [ 20 ] . Conﬂicting requirements originate performance tradeoﬀs in circuit design , and are an essential aspect of the design process [ 30 ] . Typical tradeoﬀs between conﬂicting requirements are ampliﬁcation Vs . bandwidth and stability , and speed Vs . low power consumption . The meaning ( semantics ) of the utilized design elements , e . g . , BBs ( including MOSFET transistors ) and design rules , is deﬁned to a large degree by laws of physics , even though there is some ambi - guity due to electrical properties that were previously minor ( e . g . , eﬀects due to shrinking sizes of MOSFET transistors ) or unwanted poles and zeros when connecting subcircuits together [ 92 ] . Main economic constraints of design require producing solutions in the shortest amount of time , with the lowest costs , and with as few errors as possible . Utilizing novel design features is not justiﬁed unless it has been proven that current solutions cannot address the application needs . Therefore , reuse of previous design features is often pursued . Moreover , design solutions can be objectively compared with each other based on their numerical performance [ 30 ] , leaving little room for subjective interpretations . Figure 1 illustrates the cognitive architecture ( called InnovA ) that was pro - posed for devising new electronic circuits by computationally mimicking the cognitive activities in problem solving [ 53 ] . Memory . The cognitive architecture has a memory system organized as three parts : First , the Memory system includes the design knowledge available for problem solving . It is organized as Long - term memory that includes all de - sign knowledge , Short - term memory that keeps the recently used knowledge , and Episodic memory that stores the previous experience of using speciﬁc de - sign knowledge in problem solving . Second , the Semantic memory represents the meaning of the design knowledge stored in the memory system . It is represented using three structures : the Associative structure groups the design elements into hierarchical sets based on the similarity of the elements in a set . Associ - ations connect subcircuits with similar functions ( synonyms ) or similar struc - tures ( homonyms ) . Connections to goals structure indicates the purpose of Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 19 restructuring Knowledge Context−dependent preferences Context−depedentemotions Beliefs Preferences Emotions Associativestructure Connectionsto goals Causalsequences ( justifications ) Short term memory Episodicmemory Long term memory Attentionwindow Predictions about outcomes about causality Predictions Population of solutions Select alternatives Understandingneeds Simulation ( embodiment ) Produce alternatives using incremental operations and combinations Identify new BBs loop ( ii ) : identify new BBs loop ( iii ) : decide abstraction level Semantic memory Memory system Context−dependent memory Subjective memory loop ( i ) : identify bottlenecks of a solution Context−dependent beliefs Fig . 1 . The cognitive architecture InnovA for the design of new electronic circuits . each design element , and Causal sequences structure presents how the design elements are linked together to produce a design solution . Third , Subjective memory stores beliefs and preferences about using speciﬁc design knowledge ( e . g . , subcircuits ) in a design solution . They are important in assessing the importance and hence in ordering the way in which unwanted features of a solution are ad - dressed , like noise and nonlinear behavior . Emotions module mimics the pur - pose of human emotions during decision making , like controlling the switching between pursuing a global or a local view of the design problem . For example , addressing very precise design needs focuses the process on certain local parts of a design , similar to how local processing is achieved through negative emo - tions , like anxiety and frustration . In contrast , positive emotions , like easiness , encourage a global perspective on the design problem [ 74 ] . Context - dependent memory module retains the elements of Subjective memory that have been used for solving the current problem . In addition , the architecture has three subsystems : ( i ) the attention and pre - diction subsystems to relate ( compare ) a new problem or solution to previous similar instances and to predict the impact of the diﬀerences both in terms of overall operation and outcomes , ( ii ) the reasoning subsystem to produce an ex - plained solution ( e . g . , a circuit structure ) for a problem , and ( iii ) the knowledge extension subsystem , which creates new subcircuits ( BBs ) for future problem solving , and restructures the knowledge to incorporate the new information that was acquired during design . The operation of the cognitive architecture real - 20 F . Author et al . izes three feedback loops . The three subsystems and the associated loops are presented next . Attention and prediction subsystem . It is the part highlighted in blue in Figure 1 . The process starts by having the Attention window module being activated by unexpected features of the design requirements or circuit design , which is being analyzed as a potential solution to a posed design problem . For ex - ample , the design requirements that supported the devising discussed in [ 43 , 58 ] required creating a solution for low voltage , low power applications and suﬃ - cient ampliﬁcation and speed , e . g . , slew rate , requirements . Attention is focused on the conﬂicting requirements , such as low voltage Vs . low power , and am - pliﬁcation and speed Vs . low power . Addressing one of the requirements adds supplementary constraints on the opposing requirement . For example , a solu - tion might use sub - structures ( BBs ) from two diﬀerent circuits : adaptive biasing class AB input and a three - stage with frequency compensation to improve sta - bility . Based on their previous usages , hence the knowledge about the causal connection of the sub - structures ( module Predictions about causality ) to their outcomes ( module Predictions about outcomes ) , adaptive biasing class AB input with common - mode feedback is expected to oﬀer high ampliﬁcation and speed ( e . g . , slew rate ) . Similarly , the three - stage structure with frequency compensation is expected to improve the stability of the solution . Making pre - dictions about causality and outcomes might involve the Context - dependent memory module , which includes beliefs , priorities , and emotions speciﬁc to the application that is being addressed . As the current application might be similar to previous applications , Context - dependent memory module is connected also to Subjective memory module that stores the beliefs , priorities , and emotions previously acquired during design . Reasoning subsystem . The part highlighted in green in Figure 1 indi - cates the reasoning part to create a solution that is veriﬁed to satisfy the re - quirements . The substructures selected through attention and prediction become part of Population of solutions , which includes all the circuit elements that can be relevant in devising the solution . Module Produce alternatives using incremental operations and combinations modiﬁes the selected substruc - tures to adjust them to the problem requirements , and / or combines them to build new designs ( concept combinations ) . Incremental operations create local changes to a substructure without changing the main nature of the substructure . Module Select alternatives selects among the alternatives available to solve a problem the alternative that is further considered at the current step . Mod - ule Simulation produces a complete characterization of the design , hence fully describing its meaning ( semantics ) with respect to the problem requirements . Module Understanding needs compares the characteristics of the current de - sign with the requirements , and then identiﬁes the causes for their mismatches , including the reasons for the unsatisﬁed requirements . Updating . Module Identify new BBs recognizes new substructures that are generated by adjusting present BBs . A BB is a subcircuit that can be used for solving a wider set of problems , hence is not customized only for the current Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 21 application . Module Knowledge restructuring changes the semantic memory because its current structuring does not lead to ﬁnding a solution that addresses the application requirements . The architecture memory and subsystems implement three nested loops as shown on the ﬁgure . The inner most loop , called loop ( i ) , aims at ﬁnding the bottlenecks of a solution . This is critical in ill - deﬁned problem solving , as de - vising solutions that tackle opposing requirements is the main challenge of such problems . It repeatedly identiﬁes unexpected or unusual features , which are then used through reasoning to understand the next design need to be addressed . This loop can lead to situations in which new subcircuits ( BBs ) are being created as a result of incremental changes of the existing design features because of the needs that must be tackled . A second loop emerges , called loop ( ii ) , because a new sub - circuit draws attention and supports new predictions , which then subsequently can be used in adjustments by incremental operations and in combinations with other subcircuits . The outermost loop , called loop ( iii ) in the ﬁgure , is executed if the two previous loops fail in addressing the conﬂicting requirements by using the available subcircuits or by creating new BBs . In this case , the design pro - cess must consider a higher abstraction level that would present the source that causes the unreconcilable performance requirements . The attention and predic - tion subsystem focuses on the cause and then reasons about solutions that would reduce the impact and nature of the causes on the overall solution characteristics . This loop produces knowledge restructuring . 4 . 2 Mondrian’s Paintings Addressed problems . Mondrian oﬀers a detailed presentation of the ideas be - hind his work , including the factors that originated the originality of his paint - ings [ 61 , 62 ] . For example , he stated in [ 61 ] that he “disliked particular move - ment” ( pp . 10 ) and that he wanted to paint “not bouquets , but a single ﬂower a time” ( pp . 10 ) . Mondrian belonged to the abstractionist movement in art , and was inspired by a number of art styles , like Impressionism , Fauvism , and Cu - bism [ 61 ] . However , his goal of creating original artwork led to the observation that Cubism , to which he initially participated , does not eliminate all triggers of subjective feelings , like natural forms , and hence , a logical extension would be to pursue representations that achieve pure , timeless beauty by presenting pure reality that is void of particulars [ 61 , 62 ] . The goal for art would be to describe human condition in a modern age , such as a mechanized age dominated by ma - terialism [ 62 ] . His beliefs , ideas , and their expression in paintings evolved over time , as he explored new ideas and approaches . [ 61 ] argues that art styles follow a continuous evolution process towards a “clearer content of art” ( page 17 ) . The evolution process incorporates new ideas in science , philosophy , and society . Therefore , restructuring should reﬂect this evo - lution . It oﬀers legitimacy to a new art style within a speciﬁc cultural frame [ 10 ] . Moreover , there is a consistency ( coherence ) of the artwork within a certain style with respect to agreeing with the beliefs and goals of other work of the style , as well as a consistency with the artists previous work [ 10 ] . Finally , there is a 22 F . Author et al . necessity element that justiﬁes the need for restructuring and new beliefs and goals as requirements to express the new characteristics of a society [ 10 ] . Artistic constraints Identify limitations of current art Identify limitations in peer’s work Set constraints Identify natural evolution ( progress ) Evolve new artistic elements and rules Produce new artwork Analyze their broader potential and meaning Adjust goals , constraints , meanings Understand their characteristics within the artist’s goals Set goals Artist’s goals Elements and Elements and rules to be pursued rules to be avoided Societal characteristics Artistic purpose Fig . 2 . Open - ended problem - solving process corresponding to Mondrian’s painting . Problem - solving process . It can be argued that Mondrian’s eﬀorts to cre - ate new paintings is an open - ended problem - solving process that was based on a number of constraints on the ideas to be pursued and avoided , as well as his personal goal to produce paintings that are original and contribute to the mis - sion of art as opposed to other domains like architecture and decorations . While his work was not rooted from the beginning in a precise set of rules and ele - ments to be used in constructing new outcomes , it was guided by the elements that were not be utilized in the creative process , thus by a precise evaluation mechanism . The focus on distinguishing from previous work leads to evolving new elements that articulate this distinction , and which lead to the identiﬁcation and exploration of a new solution space that can be only partially predicted by the previous work . Solving the open - ended problem posed by the goal of creat - ing original art in - tune with the current society meant devising a new expression language ( not only particular paintings ) , including the elements , rules , and ob - jectives of the language . The uncovered solution space is formed by all paintings created using this expression language . The ambiguity of the BBs , ideas , and rules is broad , as Mondrian’s work proposes a reinterpretation of the meaning ( semantics ) of lines , forms , and colors in a way that departs from their tradi - tional meanings based on nature . The interpretation of his eﬀort is subjective , even though newer work attempts to oﬀer a more quantitative evaluation based on the neural processing of the brain [ 66 , 105 ] . While the new meanings support expressions beyond visual elements , they raise signiﬁcant challenges in terms of understanding the semantic ambiguity that emerges , so that new meanings are possible based on an observer’s interpretation [ 66 ] . Hence an outcome does not have a deterministic meaning anymore , but is rather a guiding template to generate new interpretations by the viewers . Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 23 Figure 2 depicts this process of solving open - ended problems . The process continuously uses two kinds of constraints : elements and rules to be avoided as they express limitations of previous artistic styles , and artistic elements and rules to be pursued as they reﬂect the natural evolution ( progress ) of the artistic style with which the artist identiﬁes himself with . These two kinds of constraints support then the evolving of new artistic elements and rules that are used by the artist to produce new artwork . The artwork is evaluated to understand its characteristics within the artist’s goals , and then analyzed to understand its broader meaning and potential to further support original work . The analysis can lead to an adjustment of the artist’s goals , constraints , and meanings of the utilized concepts . Note that the process does not only generate individual art objects , but it produces a new language to express the solution space of the open - ended problem . Figure 3 depicts a possible cognitive architecture for getting insight into Mondrian’s work . It corresponds to the problem solving ﬂow in Figure 2 . To easy the comparison with the architecture for circuit design , the presentation of the architecture was devised similarly to the architecture in Figure 1 . meaningRestructure P1 P2 . . . Pk Instances Associativestructure Causalsequences ( procedures ) Short term memory Episodicmemory Long term memory Context−dependent beliefs Context−dependent preferences Context−depedentemotions Beliefs Preferences Emotions Context−dependent memory Subjective memory Combination ( integration ) with other meanings consistent integration ? Coherent , legitimate & Scan for cues Population of meanings of combination about meaning Predictions window Attention Cued concepts Cues Semantic memory Constraints Meaning Needs Beliefs from science Beliefs from society Implicit knowledge General beliefs and goals Goals Goals Memory system Connectionsto goals Painting related knowledge Beliefs and goals of peers Select meaning of concepts consistent integration ? Coherent , legitimate & loop ( i ) : identify starting point Identify new meaning for concept loop ( iii ) : reinterpret and restructure loop ( iii ) : reinterpret and restructure not successful successfulnot yes loop ( ii ) : identify structure successful Fig . 3 . Possible cognitive architecture for insight into Mondrian’s paintings . 24 F . Author et al . Memory . The memory system of the cognitive architecture in Figure 3 has the same broad structure as that of the cognitive architecture for electronic design in Figure 1 , but the stored knowledge and knowledge organization is dif - ferent , e . g . , shown for the Semantic memory module . Instead of a hierarchical structure organized based on similarities , causal connections to goals , and causal sequences to create a design solution like in Figure 1 , the semantic memory is based on Instances of paintings , i . e . paintings P1 , P2 , . . . , Pk , which represent the artwork with unique and deciding inﬂuence on the artist . For example , Mon - drian mentions Futurism , Dadaism , Surrealism , and Cubism as currents that inﬂuenced him ( page 18 in [ 61 ] ) , so the module would include a sample of paint - ings of these artistic currents . However , these instances are not organized in a hierarchical structure along features ( like in circuit design ) , but instead are kept as separate instances . Instances materialize the constraints , like features to be pursued and to be avoided , and hence , they can be encoded over time into gen - eralizations and abstractions that can originate new beliefs and goals . Module General beliefs and goals includes explicit ideas and facts largely accepted by a society , and which originate in science ( e . g . , quantum physics and the the - ory of relativity ) , philosophy and aesthetics ( like dualism and harmony [ 62 ] ) , and society ( i . e . the dual nature , natural and spiritual of men [ 62 ] ) . In addi - tion to explicit beliefs , implicit beliefs are those accepted without a motivation , like trends in a society , like an increased emphasis on material aspects of life . Goals represent the broader goals set for society , such as the desire to build a happier , more intellectual society [ 62 ] . This module corresponds to Societal characteristics in Figure 2 . Module Beliefs and goals of peers provides focused , art - related beliefs and goals of the art community to which the artist participated , like beliefs about the role and color in artistic expression or the purpose of art , such as its role in the formation and preservation of beauty [ 62 ] . Their purpose is to articulate the speciﬁcs of current art through constraints , like diﬀerences from previous art styles and means to emphasize these diﬀerences [ 88 ] , needs , i . e . limitations that an art trend attempts to address as compared to pre - vious art styles , goals set for the present style , and the meaning assigned to speciﬁc forms of representation , like line and color . They store the Artistic purpose and Artistic constraints in Figure 2 . From a formal point of view , they are rules expressed using various logic systems . Modules Subjective memory and Context - dependent memory include the artist’s subjective beliefs and goals , which are instantiated , adapted , and mod - iﬁed from the general beliefs and goals as well as those of his / her peers . For example , Mondrian’s writings [ 61 , 62 ] mention a large set of goals , constraints , needs , meanings and goals , which were pursued in his artwork . Some of his be - liefs and goals are as follows : constraints - avoid natural forms and colors as they produce subjective , tragic reactions , and deny normal perspective to force a new way of understanding art ; needs - ﬁnd a new way of expression to avoid the di - minishing appreciation of natural beauty , use pure color ( like black , white , red , blue , yellow ) , and devise abstract representations based on lines but no forms ; meaning - establish the equivalence of beauty with harmonious , equilibrated du - Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 25 ality , use straight lines to avoid the variability in nature , and utilize horizontal and vertical lines to express opposite relations ; and goals - remove the individ - uality to produce universality , describe the immensity of nature by expressing expansion , rest and unity , and express the multiple facets of truth . The two modules store Elements and rules to be avoided and Elements and rules to be pursued in Figure 2 . Attention and prediction subsystem . The subsystem is highlighted in blue in the ﬁgure . Cues are diﬀerences between the current image ( e . g . , a Mon - drian painting ) and instances in the semantic memory as well as beliefs in the subjective memory . Cues guide attention ( through module Attention window ) . Cues that draw attention pertain to the embedding of the architecture in the real world as well as to learned and observed features . Cues related to embedding mimic elements that are hardcoded in the brain [ 105 ] , like cue centrality , size , colors , contrast and opposition , and globality Vs . detailing . Learned cues include situations that have been discussed in the literature , e . g . , using unﬁnished lines in a composition [ 18 ] , or interpreting a painting as an image observed through a window ( analogy ) . Cues can also represent unexpected observations , like sud - denly noticing diﬀerent shades of white of neighboring surfaces . For example , the granularity of the painting focuses attention on the entire image , while crowded images focus attention on the details . Other cues are large and central elements , like having long , black lines or bright , red patches in the middle of an image . Cues can also be known ( in the semantic memory ) or previously seen , visual elements ( in the subjective memory ) . As a result of cuing , concepts are retrieved from the semantic memory ( mod - ule Cued concepts ) together with their associated meaning , also from the se - mantic memory ( module Predictions about meaning ) . For example , colors in - troduce a certain feeling , like black , purple and orange can produce a negative feeling of impersonality and lifelessness . Feelings induced by colors can also sug - gest movement , like the positioning of opposite colors on the diagonal , or 3D stacking , like the placing side by side of black and yellow . Similarly , paintings with few lines and a lot of white spaces create feelings of simplicity , order , and lightness , while crowded images of many colors produce feelings of diﬃculty and tension . The association of the predicted meanings to the cued concepts hap - pens automatically as stored in module Painting related knowledge , such as Associative structure and Connections to goals . The subsystem corre - sponds to activities Understand their characteristics within the artist’s goals and Analyze their broader potential and meaning in Figure 2 . Cues have an important role in understanding the meaning of an image , as they act as starting points in piecing together that meaning . A cue decomposes an image into components that can have an associated meaning . For example , vertical and horizontal black lines are used to separate yellow , red , or black surfaces , which create feelings , like heat , positivity , or movement in 3D . Lines do not act towards producing a composition made from forms , like in traditional painting , but as separators between elements with meanings . 26 F . Author et al . Each meaning of a painting element acts as a hypothesis that is further vali - dated or modiﬁed as the remaining elements of a painting are understood . Pre - dictions about meaning might incorporate laws of logic , geometry , and physics , i . e . the formation of shadows and how shadows relate to the positioning of lay - ered surfaces . Also , using the continuation principle to explain the appearance of surfaces of color can lead to insight about the positioning of the surfaces , such as which surface is on top , and which is at the bottom . However , ambiguity of this meaning can emerge if the continuation principle is partially limited , so that surfaces are stripes . Analyzing the ambiguity can produce multiple meanings for the same image . Cues can force new interpretations , like instead of seeing the intersecting horizontal and vertical lines as a cross , they are used together with color to suggest the idea of movement [ 18 ] . This subsystem corresponds to module Evolve new artistic elements and rules in Figure 2 . Reasoning subsystem . The subsystem is highlighted in green , and it uses the meanings of the elements identiﬁed based on the cues to produce a meaning for the entire painting . Population of meanings module stores the meanings that have been identiﬁed for the cued concepts , as explained in the previous paragraphs . A meaning to be further considered in reasoning is selected for integration ( Select meaning of concepts module ) . This meaning can be in - dependently identiﬁed for the cued element , such as if a decision was made to sample diﬀerent parts of the image , or it can be selected in conjunction with the meanings of the previously analyzed elements , such as the considered se - mantics includes horizontal , stacked layers of surfaces of color . The integration of new meanings into a previously hypothesized meaning serves to reinforce the correctness of the hypothesis . Integration must be coherent with the pre - viously assumed meanings and the meaning of the cued concept ( e . g . , no con - tradictions ) , legitimate with respect to all stored beliefs , and consistent with previous semantic integrations ( module Coherent , legitimate & consistent integration ? ) . The subsystem corresponds to Evolve new artistic elements and rules , Understand their characteristics within the artist’s goals , and Analyze their broader potential and meaning in Figure 2 . The cognitive architecture implements three feedback loops . The ﬁrst loop attempts to ﬁnd the starting points for deciphering the meaning of a painting . If the meaning selection for a concept is not successful , the architecture scans for new cues ( module Scan for cues ) , which can lead to diﬀerent semantic interpretations . The scanning process can jump to the next dominant cue or follow a systematic scanning of the entire image , such as from left to right and top to bottom . The second feedback loop searches for the structure that integrates the meanings of the cued elements . If the integration of the individual meanings is unsuccessful , the process considers diﬀerent integrations ( combinations ) or diﬀerent meanings for the concepts . The third loop reinterprets the meanings of concepts and restructures their integration , if the ﬁrst two loops failed or if additional meanings were to be found . Updating . Figure 4 summarizes the process of updating the semantic mem - ory over time . It refers to two generic art styles , called A 1 and A 2 in the ﬁg - Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 27 Evolution of science , philosophy , society , art Understand limitations of beliefs and goals Understand limitations of beliefs and goals Understand limitations of beliefs and goals State constraints State distinguishingfeatures State new goals restructuring Belief and goal Artwork Reach bottleneck in expression Adopt personal beliefs and goals Artist Personal artwork Beliefs and goals Style A1 of the art style Artwork Reach bottleneck in expression Style A2 Beliefs and goals of the art style Fig . 4 . Updating the semantic memory . ure . Artwork is created along the beliefs and goals set for style A 1 . By eval - uating the expression capabilities of the produced artwork , the limitations of style A 1 are understood , including the way these limitations origin in the be - liefs and goals set for the style . Eventually , a bottleneck for style A 1 is reached , when it cannot further evolve to create new , original artwork beyond that al - ready created . Belief and goal restructuring follows after reaching the bottleneck starting from the identiﬁed limitations of the style A 1 [ 61 ] . Restructuring in - cludes identifying constraints on what should and what should be not pursued by a new art style , stating of distinguishing features that supports diﬀeren - tiating it from previous styles , and stating of new goals . The new art style , called style A 2 , develops its own beliefs and goals that are in sync with the restructuring elements . Within this new art style , an artist adopts his / her own personal beliefs and goals , which match to some degree the beliefs and goals of style A 1 , but might also include diﬀerent beliefs and goals based on the subjective interpretation of the artwork within the style . New personal art - work is created to reﬂect the personal beliefs and goals , which through anal - ysis and evaluation leads to further adaptation ( evolution ) of the personal be - liefs and goals , as well as new insight about the understanding , including lim - itations , of another artwork . This process corresponds to activities Identify limitations of current art , Set constraints , Identify limitations in peer’s work , Identify natural evolution ( progress ) , and Adjust goals , constraints , meanings in Figure 2 . 5 Discussion This section summarizes the main diﬀerences between problem - solving in elec - tronic circuit design and understanding Mondrian’s paintings as a starting point in identifying the computational methods that could attempt to characterize Mondrian’s work similar to a human expert . Previous work showed that current 28 F . Author et al . Deep Neural Networks , like Convolutional Neural Networks , cannot classify well abstract artwork [ 103 ] . There is a large body of work on computational meth - ods for automated circuit design [ 30 ] , but there is signiﬁcantly less research on algorithmic approaches to characterizing art . The goal is to identify the new fea - tures required to process artwork as compared to other Computer Aided Design ( CAD ) activities . Addressed problems . There are fundamental diﬀerences between the na - ture of ill - deﬁned problems , like in electronic circuit design , and open - ended problems , such as creating new artwork . Ill - deﬁned problems pose conﬂicting requirements and constraints , but which are usually known , such as expressed through numerical thresholds or ranges . Instead , open - ended problems impose a signiﬁcant departure from the current solution space , as creating novel solutions is a main goal . There are usually no numerical descriptions for this departure . Also , there are no requirements for reducing cost and minimizing errors , like in engineering design . Due to their numerical descriptions , ill - deﬁned problems in engineering can be objectively evaluated through mathematical methods based on physical mod - els and precisely deﬁned metrics , such as by using numerical simulators . They support introducing precise quality metrics , procedures to compare solutions , and to build surfaces that reﬂect the nature of tradeoﬀs between conﬂicting re - quirements , like Pareto surfaces . There are no similar approaches for open prob - lem solving in art . There are currently no equivalent methods based on theories in science , which could lead to mathematical evaluations , even though recent work in neuroscience and neuroaesthetics suggests that such an eﬀort might be possible to some degree [ 45 ] [ 105 ] . Evaluation of artwork , including its meaning , degree of innovation , and comparison between individual paintings , is performed by experts . Problem solving process . Solving ill - deﬁned problems in engineering in - volves mainly searching for the desired features in the space of previous solutions , and if searching fails then creating ( generating ) new solutions to address the issue that produced the failure . Each solution has a well - deﬁned meaning and purpose , like satisfying precise requirements . The process uses three steps : ( i ) searching among previous solutions to ﬁnd the features that are likely to address the prob - lem requirements by ﬁnding the best balance between competing requirements , and then integrating these features , ( ii ) if step ( i ) fails , using analogies ( which are abstractions ) previously used in similar problems , e . g . , problems that posed the same kind of constraints even though their numerical values were diﬀerent , and ( iii ) if steps ( i ) and ( ii ) fail , generating new solutions for speciﬁc needs guided by the limitations observed in the current solutions . Hence , the solving process does not have to generate novel solutions unless they are required , such as after the current solution space was exhaustively explored to lead to the conclusion that it cannot tackle a speciﬁc need . The nature of problem solving as well as engi - neering constraints , i . e . requirements rooted in day - to - day operation , minimizing cost and number of errors , emphasize reusing previous work and solutions , hence impose a Bayesian memory character to the problem solving process . Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 29 In contrast , solving open - ended problems in Mondrian’s artwork is less of a search among previous solutions , but mainly a generative process that produced a new way of visual expression , and thus uncovered an entire solution space represented by the paintings of this space . Each painting has an ambiguous meanings and purpose for an observer , even though the artist had well purpose when creating the work under his attempt to meet the overall goals of art . Hence , a painting acts as a template that guides the association of new meanings by an observer . The generative process is based on the need to be novel and unique , thus , to be distinguishable from previous artwork . This is achieved through a set of well - deﬁned beliefs , goals , and examples of elements and features that must be avoided . The problem - solving process evolves a sequence of features that are based on previous work by the author while still meeting the avoidance criteria , and are legitimate , consistent , and necessary . The process has less of a Bayesian memory character , but more of a restructuring ( redeﬁnition ) of the expression mechanism used in creating art . Note that work on computational methods in circuit design has proposed us - ing evolutionary mechanism , like Genetic Algorithms , to devise new circuits [ 30 ] . However , these evolutionary processes do not contemplate the legitimacy , consis - tency , and necessity of each incremental modiﬁcation step . These solutions have a low level of creativity [ 24 ] and have not been adopted by circuit designers , even though they meet their requirements . Memory . As discussed , the memory system for circuit design stores associ - ations between design elements , connections between design elements and their roles , like the purpose they serve , and causal sequences describing procedures to solve a design problem . Associations indicate design elements with similar func - tions in a design and similar structures . Connections to roles serve as precise cues to access the memory depending on the speciﬁc design needs . The structure and meaning of each element are precisely deﬁned by numerical values , like the val - ues of physical concepts ( i . e . charge , current , voltage ) , and metrics . Hence , each element is unique , and the similarity of their structure and functions also repre - sents an approximation . Design elements are connected with each other through theories and laws in mathematics , science , and previous design experiences . The preference for reusing existing design elements supports understanding their ca - pabilities and limitations . Abstractions in hierarchical knowledge representations are created , in which the abstractions describe general principles , which are in - stantiated by distinct design elements with diﬀerent capabilities and limitations . The hierarchical structure supports design through high - level reasoning . Hence , the nature of memory organization supports a design process that evolves from bottom - up design during the initial stages to top - down design during the latter stages , as the hierarchical knowledge structure is created . The memory system for understanding Mondrian’s paintings includes spe - ciﬁc instances of paintings and painting features , but they are not grouped in hierarchical structures . Each instance is unique , and representative for a cer - tain objective or subjective purpose . There can be , however , a clustering of the paintings based on their topic , structure ( composition ) , or speciﬁc features ( i . e . 30 F . Author et al . color ) . Separately , the memory system stores beliefs and goals from mathemat - ics , science , and society as well as constraints , needs , meanings , and goals of peers and the artist . The last memory component changes through the com - pleted artwork over time , some of the changes being explicitly articulated as a result of new insight while others remain implicit . There is a causality link be - tween certain artistic features and subjective attention , feelings , and emotions as well as broader about the purpose of art , like pleasure and prestige . The con - nections to attention serve as cues and the connections to emotions and feelings to activating the broad meanings used in understanding a painting . However , the causality link is less based on explanations . The memory system has fewer solving procedures describing a causal sequence to create a new painting . The three memory subsystems are not related to each other through laws of mathematics and science ( like in circuit design ) but through analysis and discussions by experts . However , the connections between the three subsystems might not be fully explainable . The understanding of an artwork is consistent with the main beliefs and goals of the artist , but there can be inconsistencies with other beliefs and goals , including previous features that the artist stopped using , such as curved lines , which Mondrian stopped using in his later work . Artistic features and paintings can be ambiguous as there is no numerical deﬁnition grounded in the theories and laws of mathematics and science . The meaning of a feature can be extended or redeﬁned by using it in a new context or for a new purpose . The degree to which the new meaning is valid depends on social aspects , like its acceptance by peers and public as well as its reusing to create new paintings . Attention and prediction . In circuit design , attention goes to associating the design features , such as BBs , to the performance requirements . BBs are identiﬁed based on their structural similarity ( e . g . , form ) based on BBs that are agreed on by the design community , hence vetted solutions . The prediction part assigns meaning to the identiﬁed BBs by causally connecting the BBs to the expected performance . Attention is also drawn to changes of the BBs from their previous structures , such as adding MOSFET transistors to the BB or sharing MOSFETs between diﬀerent BBs . Assigning meaning to the changes by causally associating them to the changes in performance as demanded by requirements . Meaning assignment considering the information learned about capabilities and limitations from previous designs . Considering that new solutions reuse or adapt previous design features , the BB meaning has a Bayesian memory character as previous roles ( purposes ) in design are critical in understanding future meanings too . Therefore , understanding a design can be done only in the context of the design knowledge of previous solutions . The meaning of BBs is deterministic ( i . e . with minimal ambiguity ) as it is based on laws and theories in mathematics and sciences . Moreover , a complete meaning for all conditions and situations can be produced . This meaning does not change over time . Attention for Mondrian’s work is drawn by visual cues , like color , size , cen - trality , contrasts , and unusualness . Recognizing these cues does not require any speciﬁc training , even though art training makes cue identiﬁcation more eﬀective Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 31 and robust ( e . g . , certain cues are not missed ) . Cues can be of diﬀerent kinds , including local and global cues , like the granularity of the grid in Mondrian’s work . Cues also induce certain emotions and feelings to the observer . Thus , they can induce the overall template used to understand the meaning of a painting , like joy , energy , sadness , or motion . As identifying cues is important in under - standing the meaning of a painting , the procedure for cue searching is critical , such as sequential search or search after repetitive patterns . Cues start the process of decomposing a painting into its composing elements or forcing a new perspective by forcing the viewer outside his / her comfort zone , such as contemplating another understanding than previous ones . Hence , cues might serve to annul the Bayesian memory character . Meaning can also change over time based on new beliefs and goals . The meaning of the elements composing a painting is ambiguous and de - pends on subjective interpretation . During the understanding process , hypothe - ses about their meaning are formulated and validated during the further under - standing of a painting . Multiple meanings can result . The composition of the element meanings can follow a hypothesis testing process , in which the main hypothesis of what the composition means integrates the meanings associated to the composing elements , or a process that integrates bottom - up the element meanings , which are separately identiﬁed . The meaning of a painting acts as a semantic template that can accommodate diﬀerent interpretations by distinct observers . Reasoning . In circuit design , reasoning creates and veriﬁes a circuit solu - tion by explaining its operation . Reasoning is mostly performed locally through incremental modiﬁcations and combination of existing sub - structures and BBs to solve the requirements not met by the current design . The overall solution structure within which changes are made stays the same for most situations . The incremental steps are selected from a set of alternatives from previously de - vised solutions . Causal reasoning justiﬁes a solution by indicating how a design feature is needed to accommodate the problem requirements . Restructuring the global structure of a design solution is justiﬁed only after the solution space of an existing structures are completely analyzed , hence changes are driven by un - derstanding the limitations of the existing designs . The repetitive nature of the process can support the replacement over time of the initial , bottom - up design process with a more top - down process . In art , the reasoning process is guided by the cues on which the observer’s attention focuses . The cued concepts have an associated meaning that is used in reasoning and can also suggest a global meaning into which the meaning of other identiﬁed concepts is integrated . Reasoning implements hypothesis testing but without having an evaluation method based on mathematical or scientiﬁc theories and methods or numerical evaluations using metrics . Instead , the cor - rectness of meaning integration is based on criteria , like legitimacy , consistency , and necessity , which are reinforced by previous , successful integrations . Update . In circuit design , new knowledge about BB and substructure mean - ings and design procedures is learned by comparing the requirements of the cur - 32 F . Author et al . rent problem with the requirements of previously solved problems . Knowledge updates are justiﬁed by their causal connections with their roles in circuit design . The capabilities and limitations of BBs , substructures , and design procedures are updated as new designs are completed . New BBs and other circuit substructures are also devised and learned . Further understanding of the design challenges of ill - deﬁned problems results by relating the diﬀerences in requirements and the speciﬁc designs to address the diﬀerences . Over time , solving similar problems supports the understanding of the eﬀectiveness of the constructed solutions . In art , previous using of artistic ideas and features explores the capabilities and limitations of the artist’s approach and the style of the paintings , and then connects the capabilities and limitations to beliefs and goals . Knowledge update also includes the constraints about ideas and features that should not be pur - sued by the artist , hence supporting the identiﬁcation over time of elements that should be pursued , as part of the artist’s goals , beliefs , and expressive language . Note that these constraints are very diﬀerent in nature than constraints in cir - cuits design , as they do not indicate that the entire solution space eliminated through constraints was already explored . 5 . 1 ML Approach to Identify Mondrian’s Work in a Set of Paintings Sections 3 . 1 and 4 . 2 give a comprehensive description of the characteristics ( e . g . , ontology ) of the eight components and the computational ﬂow of a cognitive ar - chitecture that uses the components to understand artwork , such as Mondrian’s paintings . This subsection explains how the components and ﬂow can be utilized as a starting point to devise new computational processing , such as distinguish - ing artwork that is mainly based on non - exhibited properties ( NEXP ) , like in modern art . As explained in [ 103 ] , NEXPs correlate less to visual features , hence are hard to process using traditional DNNs . Hence , it is important to devise ac - curate and robust processing ﬂows that can exploit the available data while minimizing the impact of missing information . Figure 3 illustrates a comprehensive cognitive architecture that we proposed to analyze and understand Mondrian’s abstract paintings . However , implement - ing the architecture is challenging because of the implications on the architecture operation due to context dependency ( e . g . , culture , peers , and personal experi - ence ) , emotions , and implicit processing . These elements inﬂuence knowledge organization and recall from the memory , including general beliefs and goals , perceived needs , meaning and goals by peers as well as identiﬁed constraints , and the agent’s subjective associative connections , connection to goals and causal se - quences . Subsequently , they impact the operation of the attention and prediction subsystem , reasoning subsystem , and updating of the architecture . These depen - dencies suggest the diﬃculty to devise an ML - based approach to understand and classify abstract painting , like Mondrian’s work . This subsection presents a possible methodology that attempts to address the problem of distinguishing Mondrian’s work from other paintings by incorpo - rating activities that can be reliably performed with arguably less information about context , emotions , and implicit processing . It relies on the observation Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 33 that artists , including Mondrian , identiﬁed explicit constraints that distinguished them from previous work and guided their work , including the considered topics , overall concepts , and implementations [ 61 , 88 ] . They are due to the diﬀerent be - liefs and preferences of the artist . These constraints produced observable features of paintings , which can be found by comparing them with previous work . Fol - lowing the reverse path from the output of the cognitive architecture in Figure 3 , the second step uses the observed diﬀerences to identify the rules and procedures that were likely used by the artist to create the observed diﬀerences . Finally , the third step identiﬁes any invariants and patterns on how the artist used rules and procedures over time relate to the constraints that Mondrian used to distinguish his work from previous paintings . Among the characteristics in Section 3 . 1 , the three steps are based only on those that can be extracted from visual features . Figure 5 ( a ) illustrates the three steps . invariants Eliminatedconcepts , features , and relations Invariantconcepts , features , and relations Invariantconcepts , features , and relations concepts , features , and relations Painting ( t ) Painting ( t−1 ) New what concepts , features , relations Find the difference between the artist’s paintings and previous art Find the rules and procedures that were applied to produce the observed differences Predict the constraints that explain the found rules and procedures over time Set of paintings Set of constraints ( a ) ( b ) understandingof how ( c ) when co−occurringconcepts , features , relations degree of flexibility identify Fig . 5 . Proposed ML ﬂow to identify Mondrian’s paintings . The ﬁrst step should identify the diﬀerences between a painting by Mon - drian and previous paintings by other artists and by Mondrian himself . The identiﬁed diﬀerences pertain to the category of concepts and ideas , discussed in Subsection 3 . 1 . Without using information about context , emotions , and implicit knowledge , the concept characteristics that can be identiﬁed based on visual fea - tures relates mainly to concept description , like features and connection between features . It is diﬃcult to precisely identify the concept meaning and the related meaning understanding process . However , some insight about concept meaning can be found , without understanding what that meaning is , since meaning de - pends on the used visual features and the other co - occurring concepts . Hence , partial information on concept similarity and integration with other concepts can be found . The speciﬁc metrics that can be computed include the following : feature similarity and diﬀerences with previously used concepts , new features , new concepts , frequency of concept occurrence in previous paintings , frequency of concept co - occurrences , new co - occurrences , and previous co - occurrences that were dropped in future work . The characteristics of ideas enumerated in Sec - 34 F . Author et al . tion 3 . 1 are partially covered by the metrics on groups of concepts , even though it is hard to infer more detailed insight on idea purpose , meaning , origin , char - acteristics , grouping , and evolution . The second step should ﬁnd the rules and procedures that were likely used by Mondrian to produce the observed diﬀerences . A set of rules used to create a new painting , e . g . , Painting ( t ) in Figure 5 ( b ) , is expressed by the new concepts and features added to the painting as compared to previous paintings by Mon - drian , i . e . Painting ( t − 1 ) , and the concepts and features that were eliminated in the new painting conditioned by the concepts and features that kept being used , hence remained invariant . The relations between new and previous con - cepts and features are also captured . From the rule characteristics enumerated in Section 3 . 1 , the visual painting features utilized over time can be used to monitor when a rule is selected and used , the used concepts and features , presence of new concepts and features , inclusion of unexpected cues that could guide the viewer’s attention , its degree of relatedness to other rules , its changes over time , its ﬂexi - bility , and if it is global or local , deterministic or stochastic , ﬂexible or invariant . Other characteristics about rules and procedures are hard to extract , like cuing , connection to goals and beliefs , achieved decomposition and aggregation , pro - duced eﬀects like associations , comparisons , generalizations , etc . , purpose , i . e . inquiry , hypothesis formulation , analysis , explanation , etc . , addressing of am - biguity , reinterpretation , rule origin and gradient , degree of subjectivity , and dependency on context . The third step identiﬁes the invariants of the rules and procedures applied by the artist for his sequence of paintings . Figure 5 ( c ) illustrates the step . Each rule identiﬁed in the previous step is characterized by the four shown components : component what refers to the concepts , features and relations that were added and eliminated in a new painting as compared to the previous , component when describes the unchanged concepts , features , and relations that co - occur with the new ones , component understanding of how presents the sequence of individual changes that are the diﬀerence of a new painting from the previous paintings , and component degree ﬂexibility expresses the amount of change between the sequence of individual changes for the current painting and the sequences of individual changes for the most similar paintings . Invariants are elements that tend to remain constant for the four components or the co - occurrence of elements from the four categories . 6 Conclusions This paper aims to discuss and identify missing capabilities of popular parame - terized computational models in Machine Learning , like Deep Neural Networks ( DNNs ) , so that their semantic processing capabilities can possibly address ac - tivities beyond traditional classiﬁcation tasks . Our previous work showed that existing DNNs cannot tackle well classiﬁcation using semantic information ( like abstractions and ambiguities ) that is not a linear combination of visual features . The discussed work identiﬁes the missing features by comparing the process Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 35 of understanding artwork with the process of understanding electronic circuit design . Like art , circuit design is also a creative problem - solving activity , and for which our previous work proposed a cognitive architecture , a computational structure that loosely mimics human problem solving . The comparison method - ology considers two semantic layers . The ﬁrst layer tackles eight components , which are discussed in detail : goals , concepts , ideas , rules , procedures , beliefs , expectations , and outcomes . These elements are part of the cognitive process during problem solving and can be tied to the parts of a cognitive architecture for that activity , like memory , concept learning , representation and combination , aﬀect , insight , and so on . The second layer describes a cognitive architecture for problem solving . It incorporates ﬁve elements : the nature of the problem , knowl - edge representation in the memory , the attention and prediction subsystem , the reasoning subsystem , and knowledge updating . The methodology was used to devise a computational method that can separate Mondrian’s paintings from other paintings . Future work will further investigate the discussed ideas . References 1 . Anderson , J . : Concepts , Propositions , and Schemata : What are the Cognitive Units ? Nebraska Symposium on Motivation 28 , 121 – 62 ( 1980 ) 2 . Anderson , J . : The Adaptive Nature of Human Categorization . Psychological Review 98 ( 3 ) , 409 – 429 ( 1991 ) 3 . Arnheim , R . : Art and Visual Perception . A Psychology of the Creative Eye . Uni - versity of California Press ( 1974 ) 4 . Ashby , F . and Maddox , W . : Human Category Learning . Annual Review in Psychol - ogy 56 , 148 – 178 ( 2005 ) 5 . Barsalou , L . : Ad hoc Categories . Memory & Cognition 11 ( 3 ) , 211 – 227 ( 1983 ) 6 . Barsalou , L . : Deriving Categories to Achieve Goals . The Psychology of Learning and Motivation 27 , 1 – 64 ( 1991 ) 7 . Barsalou , L . : Frames , Concepts , and Conceptual Fields . In A . Lehrer and E . Feder Kittay , Frames , Fields , and Contrasts . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Pub - lishers , 21 – 74 ( 1992 ) 8 . Barsalou , L . : Perceptual Symbol Systems . Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22 , 577 – 660 ( 1999 ) 9 . Barsalou , L . : Situated Simulation in the Human Conceptual System . Language and Cognitive Processes 18 ( 5 / 6 ) , 513 – 562 ( 2003 ) 10 . Baxandall , M . : Patterns of Intention . On the historical explanation of pictures . Yale University Press , New Haven and London ( 1985 ) 11 . Bentley , P . and Corne , D . : Creative Evolutionary Systems . Morgan Kufmann Pub - lishing ( 2002 ) 12 . Bloom , P . : Intention , history , and artifact concepts . Cognition 60 ( 1 ) , 1 – 29 ( 1996 ) . 13 . Bowden , E . , Jung - Beeman , M . , Fleck , J . , and Kounios , J . : New approaches to demistifying insight . Trends in Cognitive Sciences 9 ( 7 ) , 322 – 328 ( 2005 ) 14 . Chen , S . , Duckworth , K . and Chaiken , S . : Motivated Heuristic and Systematic Processing . Psychology Inquiry 10 ( 1 ) , 44 – 49 ( 1999 ) 15 . Chi , M . and Glaser , R . : Categorization and Representation of Physics Problem by Experts and Novices . Cognitive Science 5 , 121 – 152 ( 1981 ) 16 . Cohen , B . and Murphy , G . : Models of Concepts . Cognitive Science 8 , 27 – 58 ( 1984 ) 36 F . Author et al . 17 . Cross , N . : Expertise in Design : An Overview . Design Studies 25 , 427 – 441 ( 2004 ) 18 . Deicher , S . : Mondrian . Taschen , Koln ( 1999 ) 19 . Dickie , G . : Introduction to Aesthetics . An Analytical Approach . Oxford University Press ( 1997 ) 20 . Doboli , A . and Umbarkar , A : The role of precedents in increasing creativity during iterative design of electronic embedded systems . Design Science 35 ( 3 ) , 298 – 326 ( 2014 ) 21 . Doboli , A . , Umbarkar , A . , Doboli , S . , Betz , J . : Modeling semantic knowledge struc - tures for creative problem solving : Studies on expressing concepts , categories , asso - ciations , goals and context . Knowledge - Based Systems 78 , 34 – 50 ( 2015 ) 22 . Dorst , K . and Cross , N . : Creativity in the Design Process : Co - evolution and Problem - solution . Design Studies 22 , 425 – 437 ( 2001 ) 23 . Eliasmith , C . : How to Build a Brain . A Neural Architecture for Bilological Cogni - tion . Oxford University Press ( 2013 ) 24 . Ferent , C . , Doboli , A . : Measuring the Uniqueness and Variety of Analog Circuit Design Features . Integration , the VLSI Journal 44 ( 1 ) , 39 – 50 ( 2011 ) 25 . Ferent , C . and Doboli , A . : An Axiomatic Model for Concept Structure Description and Its Application to Circuit Design . Knowledge - based Systems 45 114 – 133 ( 2013 ) 26 . Gagne , C . : Relation - based Combinations versus Property - based Combinations : A Test of the CARIN Theory and the Dual - Process Theory of Conceptual Combina - tions . Journal of Memory and Language 42 , 365 – 389 ( 2000 ) 27 . Gagne , C . : The Competition - among - relations - in - nominals Theory of Conceptual Combination : Implications for Stimulus Formation and Class Expansion . Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 78 , 551 – 565 ( 2002 ) 28 . Gao S . and Kvan , T . : An Analysis of Problem Framing in Multiple Settings . In : Gero , J . S . ( editor ) Design Computing and Cognition ’04 . Springer , Dordrecht ( 2004 ) 29 . Gennari , J . , Langley , P . and Fisher , D . : Models of Incremental Concept Formation . Artiﬁcial Intelligence 40 ( 1 – 3 ) , 11 – 61 ( 1989 ) 30 . Gielen , G . and Rutenbar , R . : Computer - aided design of analog and mixed - signal integrated circuits . Proceedings of IEEE 88 1825 – 1854 ( 2000 ) 31 . Gigerenzer , G . , Todd , P . and The ABC Research Group : Simple Heuristics that Make Us Smart . Oxford University Press ( 1999 ) 32 . Gobet , F . and Jackson , S . : In Search of Templates . Cognitive Systems Research 3 ( 1 ) , 35 – 44 ( 2002 ) 33 . Goldstone , R . , Medin , D . and Gentner , D . : Relational Similarity and the Noninde - pendence of Features in Similarity Judgement . Cognitive Psychology 23 , 222 – 262 ( 1991 ) 34 . Gombrich , E . : The Mask and the Face : the Perception of Physiognomic Likeness in Life and in Art . in “Art , Perception , and Reality” , Gombrich , E . Hochber , J . , Black , M . , 1 – 44 ( 1982 ) 35 . Gombrich , E . : The Image and the Eye . Phaidon Press ( 1982 ) 36 . Gombrich , E . : The Sense of Order : A study in the psychology of decorative art . Oxford ( 1984 ) , 12 – 32 ( 1988 ) 37 . Gonzalez - Garcia , A . , Modolo , D . and Ferrari , V . : Do Semantic Parts Emerge in Convolutional Neural Networks ? International Journal of Computer Vision 126 ( 5 ) , 476 – 494 ( 2018 ) 38 . Goodfellow , I . , Bengio , Y . and Courville , A . : Deep Learning . The MIT Press ( 2016 ) 39 . Hampton , J . : Overextension of Conjuctive Concepts : Evidence for a Unitary Model of Concepty Tipicality and Class Inclusion . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition 14 ( 1 ) Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 37 40 . Heller , J . and Reif , F . : Cognitive Mechanisms Facilitating Human Problem Solving in Physics : Empirical Validation of a Prescriptive Model . Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association ( 1982 ) 41 . Ho , C . - H . : Some Phenomena of Problem Decomposition Strategy for Design Think - ing : Diﬀerences between Novices and Experts . Design Studies 22 , 27 – 45 ( 2001 ) 42 . Jiao , F . , Montano , S . , Ferent , C . , Doboli , A . , and Doboli , S . : Analog circuit de - sign knowledge mining : Discovering topological similarities and uncovering design reasoning strategies . IEEE Transactions on CADICS 34 ( 7 ) , 1045 – 1059 ( 2015 ) 43 . Jiao , F . and Doboli , A . : A low - voltage , low - power ampliﬁer created by reasoning - based , systematic topology synthesis . in Proceedings of the International Sympo - sium on Circuits and Systems ( ISCAS ) , 2648 – 2651 ( 2015 ) 44 . Jonassen , D . : Learning to Solve Problems . A Handbook for Designing Problem - Solving Environments . Routledge ( 2011 ) 45 . Kandel , E . : Reductionism in Art and Brain Science : Bridging the Two Cultures . Columbia University Press ( 2016 ) 46 . Langley , P . and Rogers , S . : An Extended Theory of Human Problem Solving . Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society 27 ( 2005 ) 47 . Lassaline , M . and Murphy , G . : Alignment and Category Learning . Journal of Ex - perimental Learning : Learning , Memory , and Cognition 24 ( 1 ) , 144 – 160 ( 1998 ) 48 . Lawson , B . : Schemata , Gambits and Precedents : Some Factors in Design Expertise . Design Studies 35 , 443 – 457 ( 2004 ) 49 . Lecoutre , A . Negrevergne , B . and Yger , F . : Recognizing Art Style Automatically in Painting with Deep Learning . In : Zhang , M . , Noh Y . ( eds . ) , Proceedings of the Ninth Asian Conference on Machine Learning . vol . 77 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research . Yonsei University , Seoul , Republic of Korea , 327 – 342 . ( 2017 ) 50 . LeCun , Y . , Kavukcuoglu , K . and Farabet , C . : “Convolutional networks and appli - cations in vision” . in Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems ( ISCAS ) , 253 – 256 ( 2010 ) 51 . Lelievre , P . and Neri , P . : A deep - learning framework for human perception of abstract art composition . Journal of Vision 21 ( 5 ) ( 2021 ) 52 . Levinson , J . : Extending Art Historically . The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criti - cism 51 ( 3 ) , 411 – 423 ( 1993 ) . 53 . Li , H . , Liu , X . , Doboli , A . , and Doboli , S : Innova : A cognitive architecture for computational innovation through robust divergence and its application for analog circuit design . IEEE Transactions on Computer Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 37 ( 10 ) , 1943 – 1956 ( 2018 ) 54 . Lin , E . and Murphy , G . : Thematic Relations in Adults’ Concepts . Journal of Ex - perimental Psychology : General 130 ( 1 ) , 3 – 28 ( 2001 ) 55 . Liikkanen , L . and Pettula , M . : Exploring Problem Decomposition in Conceptual Design among Novice Designers . Design Studies 30 , 38 – 59 ( 2009 ) 56 . Little , D . , Lewandowsky , S . and Heit , E . : Ad Hoc Category Restructuring , Memory & Cognition 34 ( 7 ) , 1398 – 1413 ( 2006 ) 57 . Liu , J . , Dong , W . , Zhang , X . and Jiang , Z . : Orientation judgment for abstract paintings . Multimedia Tools and Applications 76 ( 1 ) , 1017 – 1036 ( 2017 ) 58 . Lopez - Martin , A . , Baswa , S . , Ramirez - Angulo , J . and Carvajal , R . : Low - voltage super class AB CMOS OTA cells with very high slew rate and power eﬃciency . IEEE Journal on Solid - State Circuits 40 ( 5 ) , 1068 – 1077 ( 2005 ) 59 . Markman , A . and Wisniewski , E . : Similar and Diﬀerent : The Diﬀerentiation of Basic - Level Categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition 23 ( 1 ) , 54 – 70 ( 1997 ) 38 F . Author et al . 60 . Medeiro , F . , Perez - Verdu , A . and Rodriguez - Vazques , A . : Top - down Design of High - Performance Sigma - Delta Modulators , Kluwer Academic Publishers ( 1999 ) 61 . Mondrian , P . : Plastic art and pure art , Wittenborn and Company , New York ( 1945 ) 62 . Mondrian , P . : Natural Reality and Abstract Reality . An essay in trialogue form , George Braziller , New York ( 1995 ) 63 . Mumford , M . , Baughman , W . , Maher , M . , Costanza , D . and Supinski , E . : Process - based Measures of Creative Problem - Solving Skills : Category Combinations . Cre - ativity Research Journal 10 ( 1 ) , 59 – 71 ( 1997 ) 64 . Murphy , G . : Comprehending Complex Concepts . Cognitive Science 12 , 529 – 562 ( 1988 ) 65 . Murphy , G . and Ross , B . : The Two Faces of Tipicality in Category - based Induction . Cognition 95 , 175 – 200 ( 2005 ) 66 . Onians , J . : Neuroarthistory . From Aristotle and Pliny to Baxandall and Zeki , Yale University Press , New Haven and London ( 2007 ) 67 . Osherson , D . and Smith , E . : Gradeness and Conceptual Combination . Cognition 12 , 299 – 318 ( 1982 ) 68 . Osherson , D . and Smith , E . : On Tipicality and Vagueness . Cognition 64 , 189 – 206 ( 1997 ) 69 . Osman , M . : An Evaluation of Dual - Process Theories in Reasoning . Psychomomic Bulletin & Review 11 , 988 – 1010 ( 2004 ) 70 . Petrou , M . , Tabacchi , M . and Piroddi , R . : Networks of Concepts and Ideas . The Computer Journal 53 ( 10 ) , 1738 – 1751 ( 2010 ) 71 . Polya , G . : How to Solve It , Doubleday Anchor Books , Double Day & Company Inc . , Garden City , New York ( 1957 ) 72 . Ranjan , A . and Srinivasan , N . : Dissimilarity in Creative Categorization . Journal of Creative Behavior 44 ( 2 ) , 71 – 83 , ( 2010 ) 73 . Roberto , J . , Ortego , D . and Davis , B . : Toward the Automatic Retrieval and Anno - tation of Outsider Art images : A Preliminary Statement . In : Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Historical Image Enrichment and Access . Marseille , France : European Language Resources Association ( ELRA ) , 16 – 22 ( 2020 ) 74 . Romero , M . : Global Versus Local Processing . In : Kreutzer , J . S . , DeLuca , J . , Ca - plan , B . ( eds . ) Encyclopedia of Clinical Neuropsychology . Springer , New York ( 2011 ) 75 . Rosch , E . , Mervis , C . , Gray , W . , Johnson , D . and Boyes - Braem , P . : Basic Objects in Natural Categories . Cognitive Psychology 8 ( 3 ) , 382 – 439 ( 1976 ) 76 . Ross , B . and Murphy , G . : Food for Thought : Cross - Classiﬁcation and Category Organization in a Complex Real - World Domain . Cognitive Psychology 38 , 495 – 553 ( 1999 ) 77 . Rouder , J . and Ratcliﬀ , R . : Comparing Exemplar - and Rule - based Theories of Categorization . Current Directions in Psychological Studies 15 ( 1 ) , 9 – 13 ( 2006 ) 78 . Saleh , B . , Abe , K . , Arora R . and Elgammal , A . : Toward automated discovery of artistic inﬂuence . Multimedia Tools and Applications . 75 ( 7 ) , 3565 – 3591 ( 2016 ) 79 . Schapiro , M . : Mondrian . On the humanity of abstract painting , George Braziller , New York ( 1995 ) 80 . Schilling , M . : A “Small - World” Network Model of Cognitive Insight . Creativity Research Journal 17 ( 2 & 3 ) , 131 – 154 ( 2005 ) 81 . Schvaneveldt , R . , Durso , F . , Goldsmith , T . , Breen , T . and Cooke , N . : Measuring the Structure of Expertise . International Journal on Man - Machine Studies 23 , 699 – 728 ( 1985 ) 82 . Simon , H . and Newell , A . : Human problem solving : The state of the theory in 1970 . American Psychologist 26 ( 2 ) , 145 – 159 ( 1971 ) Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 39 83 . Simon , H . : Models of Thought . Yale University Press ( 1979 ) 84 . Simonton , D . : Creative Thought as Blind - variation and Selective - retention : Com - binatorial Models of Exceptional Creativity . Physics of Life Reviews , 7 , 156 – 179 ( 2010 ) 85 . Simonyan , K . and Zisserman , A . : Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large - Scale Image Recognition . CoRR ( 2015 ) 86 . Spratt , E . and Elgammal , A . : Computational Beauty : Aesthetic Judgment at the Intersection of Art and Science . In : Agapito , L . , Bronstein , M . and Rother , C . ( eds . ) . Computer Vision - ECCV 2014 Workshops . Springer International Publishing , 35 – 53 ( 2015 ) 87 . Stenning , K . and Van Lambalgen , M . : Human Reasoning and Cognitive Science . The MIT Press ( 2008 ) 88 . Stokes , P . : Creativity from constraints , Springer Publishing Company ( 2006 ) 89 . Sun , R . , Slusarz , P . and Terry , C . : The Interaction of the Explicit and the Implicit in Skill Learning : A Dual - Process Approach . Psychological Review 112 ( 1 ) , 159 – 192 ( 2005 ) 90 . Suwa , M . , Gero , J . and Purcell , T . : Unexpected Discoveries : How Designers Dis - cover Hidden Features in Sketches . In Gero , J . & Tversky , B . ( eds . ) , Visual and Spatial Reasoning in Design , Sydney , Australia : Key Centre of Design Computing and Cognition , University of Sydney , 145 – 162 ( 2001 ) 91 . Swanson , H . , O’Conner , J . and Cooney , J . : An Information Processing Analysis of Expert and Novice Theachers’ Problem Solving . American Educational Research Journal 27 ( 3 ) , 533 – 556 ( 1990 ) 92 . Tang , H . , Zhang , H . and Doboli , A . : Reﬁnement - based synthesis of continuous - time analog ﬁlters through successive domain pruning , plateau search , and adaptive sampling . IEEE Transactions on Computer - Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 25 ( 8 ) , 1421 – 1440 ( 2006 ) 93 . Thagard , P . and Stewart , T . : The AHA ! Experience : Creativity Through Emergent Binding in Neural Networks . Cognitive Science 35 , 1 – 33 ( 2011 ) 94 . Umbarkar , A . , Subramanian , V . , Doboli , A . , Doboli , S . : Two experimental studies on creative concept combinations in modular design of electronic embedded systems . Design Studies 35 ( 1 ) , 80 – 109 ( 2014 ) 95 . van Noord , N . , Hendriks , E . and Postma , E . : Toward Discovery of the Artist’s Style : Learning to recognize artists by their artworks . IEEE Signal Processing Magazine . 32 ( 4 ) , 46 – 54 ( 2015 ) 96 . Vosniadou , S . and Brewer , W . : Theories of Knowledge Restucturing in Develop - ment 57 ( 1 ) , 51 – 67 ( 1987 ) 97 . Vosniadou , S . and Ortony , A . : Similarity and Analogical Reasoning . Cambridge University Press ( 1989 ) 98 . Wang , Y . and Chiew , V . : On the cognitive process of human problem solving . Cognitive Systems Research 11 ( 1 ) , 81 – 92 ( 2010 ) 99 . Ward , T . , Patterson , M . , Sifonis , C . , Dodds , R . and Saunders , K . : The Role of Graded Category Structure in Imaginative Thought . Memory & Cognition 30 ( 2 ) , 199 – 216 ( 2002 ) 100 . Wisniewski , E . and Love , B . : Relations versus Properties in Conceptual Combi - nations . Journal of Memory and Language 38 , 177 – 2002 ( 1998 ) 101 . Yamauchi , T . and Markman , A . : Inference using Categories . Jpurnal of Experi - mental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition 26 ( 3 ) , 776 – 795 ( 2000 ) 102 . Yang , C . , Shen , Y . , Zhou , B . : Semantic Hierarchy Emerges in Deep Genera - tive Representations for Scene Synthesis . International Journal of Computer Vision 129 ( 5 ) , 1451 – 1466 ( 2021 ) 40 F . Author et al . 103 . Zahedi , M . , Gholamrezaei , N . , Doboli , A : How Deep is Your Art : An Experimental Study on the Limits of Artistic Understanding in a Single - Task , Single - Modality Neural Network . arXiv . org , 2022 . 104 . Zafar , B . , Ashraf , R . , Ali , N . , Ahmed , M . , Jabbar , S . and Chatzichristoﬁs , S . : Image classiﬁcation by addition of spatial information based on histograms of or - thogonal vectors . PLOS ONE 13 ( 6 ) , 1 – 26 ( 2018 ) 105 . Zeki , S . : A Vision of the Brain , Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications , Oxford ( 1993 ) 106 . Zhao , W . , Zhou , D . , Qiu , X . and Jiang W . : Compare the performance of the models in art classiﬁcation . PLOS ONE 16 ( 3 ) , 1 – 16 ( 2021 )