J . FLUENCY DISORD . 24 ( 1999 ) , 1 – 24 © 1999 Elsevier Science Inc . All rights reserved . 0094 - 730X / 99 / $ – see front matter 655 Avenue of the Americas , New York , NY 10010 PII S0094 - 730X ( 98 ) 00024 - 2 PERSON - FIRST LABELING AND STUTTERING KENNETH O . ST . LOUIS Department of Speech Pathology and Audiology , West Virginia University , Morgantown , West Virginia Four groups of subjects , speech - language - hearing impaired clients , parents of clients , speech - language pathology students , and the general public , reacted to 28 words used to la - bel individuals . Twelve words were either person - first ( e . g . , “Stutterer” ) or direct labels ( e . g . , “Person who stutters” ) and 16 were identical anchor labels in alternate forms of ques - tionnaires . Nine labels identified speech , language , or hearing disorders . Highly variable subjects groups were surprisingly similar in judgments about their own personal impres - sions and experiences as well as the appropriateness of use by others for all the labels . Per - son - first labeling was regarded as significantly more positive in only 2 % of the compari - sons , and all of these in favor of “Person with leprosy” or “Person with psychosis” over “Leper” or “Psychotic . ” Person - first labeling did not make a difference in any of the speech - language terms , including variants for “stuttering” or “stammering . ” Overall , person - first terminology did little to lessen negative beliefs and attitudes for the speech - language pathol - ogy labels assessed . This study draws into question recent policies promoting person - first labeling . © 1998 Elsevier Science Inc . Key Words : Stuttering ; Disfluency ; Terminology ; Person - first labels ; Stereotypes Address correspondence to the author at Department of Speech Pathology and Audiology , West Vir - ginia University , Morgantown , West Virginia 26506 - 6122 . e - mail : kstlouis @ wvu . edu INTRODUCTION Person - first labeling refers to identifying someone first , and most importantly , as a person and second , and less importantly , by a descriptive word or phrase . The rationale for such labeling is to make it clear that the individual is being labeled is regarded primarily as a “person” and secondarily as a member of some descriptive class . It is often used for the purpose of showing as much sensitivity as possible to a person who has an identifiable condition or charac - teristic that is deemed by most people to be undesirable . Such conditions or characteristics are known to result sometimes in behavior or attitudes of others toward the person that are belittling , unfavorable , derogatory , or even stigma - tizing . For example , the term “person who stutters” is purported to communi - cate less implicit negative judgment , prejudice , or disrespect to a person who manifests the disorder of stuttering than the direct label “stutterer . ” 2 K . O . ST . LOUIS Advocating person - first labeling began in the field of special education in the 1980s , an area that has struggled to use labels that do not carry unintended negative meanings . For example , the terms “idiot” and “moron” were origi - nally descriptive terms referring to various levels of intelligence similar to se - vere or moderate “mental retardation , ” “mental impairment , ” “cognitive im - pairment , ” and so on . As terms have acquired unintended negative meanings beyond the original usage , professionals in this area have tended to suggest less pejorative alternatives . Person - first labeling is one form of linguistic “de - perjoration” and in the past several years has spread to other areas , including speech - language pathology in general and stuttering in particular . Following the lead of some in the stuttering self - help movement , the American Speech - Language - Hearing Association ( ASHA ) began to advocate the use of first - person labeling . Since 1991 , ASHA has recommended that authors use per - son - first terminology in all ASHA publications for the purpose of demonstrat - ing that speech - , language - , or hearing - disordered individuals are recognized as persons first and communicatively disordered second . In 1993 , ASHA adopted this as a policy for all documents and publications ( Executive Board Meeting Minutes , 1993 ) . But the recommended changes did not stop there . A short article , presumably written by those in charge of editorial policy ap - peared in ASHA’s house organ , Asha , entitled , “Person First , Please” ( ASHA News , 1994 ) . In addition to recommending person - first language , the article suggested that authors use terms such as “disability” or “disorder” but avoid terms like “impairment” and “handicap . ” It also recommended using the term , “disfluent” but avoiding “dysfluent , ” presumably because the prefix “dys” connotes abnormality and “dis” connotes difference . “Older” was recom - mended , but “old , ” “aging , ” and “elderly” were not . 1 There has been very little public debate—and indeed little research ( but see Robinson & Robinson , 1996 below ) —to justify the adoption of such a policy by professional associations or individuals . For these reasons , this study was undertaken to determine the extent to which person - first versus direct - label terminology affects beliefs and attitudes associated with fluency disorders and selected other speech - language disorders . 1 As of this writing , the policy of the Journal of Fluency Disorders is ambiguous relative to person - first language . The editor has maintained an author preference policy with respect to using person - first terminology ( Gene J . Brutten , personal communication , April 23 , 1998 ) . Authors may use the term “stutterer” or “person ( child ) who stutters” at their own discretion . Nevertheless , beginning with the last issue of Volume 20 in 1995 , the “Information for Authors” section references the Fourth Edition of the Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association ( American Psychological Association , 1994 ) as guidelines for authors . The manual directs authors to do the following : “1 . Put people first , not their disability” ( e . g . , preferring “person with [ who has ] a disability” to “disabled person” ) and “2 . Do not label people by their disability or overextend its severity” ( e . g . , preferring “individuals with epilepsy” to “epileptics” ) ( pp . 59 – 60 ) . Although many articles now are written with person - first labels , and whereas some editorial consultants firmly believe the Journal should insist on such nomenclature , the policy is currently unclear . PERSON - FIRST LABELING AND STUTTERING 3 METHOD Four related investigations were carried out with speech and / or language - dis - ordered clients , parents of clients , speech - language pathology students , and the general public . All four investigations utilized questionnaires with the same 28 labels , listed in Table 1 . Half of 12 pairs of person - first and direct la - bels appeared on alternate versions of questionnaires , each containing an equal number of person - first and direct labels . For example , one version con - tained “ Person who stutters ” and “ Smoker ” ; the alternate version contained “ Stutterer ” and “ Person who smokes ” ( Table 2 ) . Additionally , all question - naires had the same 16 “anchor labels” to disguise the purpose of the study and provide anchor points for comparing the person - first versus direct labels ( e . g . , “ Crazy ” ; “ Disfluent ” ) . Identical anchor labels in alternate versions of the Table 1 . Twelve Person - first versus Direct Labels and 16 Anchor Labels Presented to Subjects Person - First and Direct Labels “Person who composes” / “Composer” “Person who gambles” / “Gambler” “Person with leprosy” / “Leper” “Person who murders” / “Murderer” “Person who smokes” / “Smoker” “Person who wets the bed” / “Bed wetter” “Person with psychosis” / “Psychotic” “Person with aphasia” / “Aphasic” a “Person who lisps” / “Lisper” a “Person who clutters” / “Clutterer” a “Person who stammers” / “Stammerer” a “Person who stutters” / “Stutterer” a Anchor Labels “Disfluent” a “Hoarse” a “Cleft palate” a “Deaf mute” a “Mentally retarded” “Overweight”“Obese”“Person with cancer” “White”“Black”“African American” “Crazy”“Moron”“Articulate”“Trustworthy”“Genius” a Speech - language - hearing labels . 4 K . O . ST . LOUIS questionnaires were also included to allow estimates of normal variability among subject groups as well as to provide benchmarks from which to evalu - ate differences between the responses for direct versus person - first labels . Of the 28 total labels , nine identified speech - language - hearing disorders , includ - ing five pairs with person - first versus direct labels and four as anchor labels . Subjects in each study were assigned at random to one of two components ( see below ) and to the alternate versions and word orders of questionnaires . College senior and graduate students enrolled in courses in stuttering were trained to administer the questionnaire and were assigned to locate from one to five respondents ( or to take it themselves ) , depending on the subject group being tested . Past and current clients or parents of young clients were solicited as part of a client audit at West Virginia University Speech Clinic or at other locations . Public respondents were required not to be speech - language - hear - ing professionals but were recruited by , and generally well acquainted with , the students soliciting questionnaires . Each of the four investigations actually contained two separate but related components , one dealing with respondent’s own impressions and experiences regarding the labels ( “I / E” Component ) and the other , their views of appropri - ate use of the same labels by others ( “A” Component ) . Following each label in the questionnaires were five different dependent variables . Examples of each are shown in Table 2 . The I / E Component variables asked subjects to scale their first impressions of each label , their desire to be like a person named by the label , the semantic intent of the label from ridicule or oppression on the negative side to praise or empowerment on the positive side , their own per - sonal experience with the labeled condition or characteristic , and their degree of knowledge of the label . These variables assessed what the respondents , themselves , believed or felt . The A Component variables were assumed to be related to the I / E Component variables but asked respondents to make judg - ments about the appropriateness of others’ use of the labels in certain situations . The variables included use of the label : by professionals such as doctors , teachers , therapists , and researchers ; by family members and close friends of the person labeled ; by persons who have illnesses , handicaps , or disabilities ; by those who have been victims of discrimination ; and in joking , even when the intent of the humor was not to hurt , offend , or oppress . Importantly , for both components , respondents were instructed to assume that the label fits the per - son being described , e . g . , that if the label were “liar , ” the respondent should as - sume that the person being described had a reputation for not telling the truth . For the I / E Component , respondents rated labels on equal - appearing inter - val scales . The first four ratings were made by circling a number from a nega - tive ( 2 5 ) to neutral ( 0 ) to positive ( 1 5 ) scale where 0 5 “neutral , ” 1 5 “slight , ” 3 5 “moderate , ” and 5 5 “maximum imaginable . ” These data were later converted to a 1 – 11 scale with 6 being neutral . The fifth variable , i . e . , “What I know about [ the ] name , ” used a scale from 1 to 5 in which 1 5 “nothing” and PERSON - FIRST LABELING AND STUTTERING 5 5 5 “very much . ” Respondents to the A Component were asked to rate the same labels according to their appropriateness of use as “inappropriate” ( 2 ) , “neutral” ( 0 ) , or “appropriate” ( 1 ) . These categorical judgments were con - verted to a 1 – 3 scale in which 1 5 inappropriate , 2 5 neutral , 3 5 appropriate . Table 2 . Samples From Questionnaires Showing , First , the I / E Component Instructions and Variables and , Second , the A Component Instructions and Variables . Alternate Versions of the Questionnaires Reflecting Person - first versus Direct Labels are Also Shown Please use this rating scale for the first four judgments under each name Negative ( 2 ) Neutral Positive ( 1 ) 2 5 2 4 2 3 2 2 2 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 Maximumimaginable Moderate Slight Slight Moderate Maximumimaginable “Crazy”My first impression : ( Negative ﬁ Positive ) 2 5 2 4 2 3 2 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 My reaction : ( I don’t want to be ﬁ I want to be ) 2 5 2 4 2 3 2 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 Intent : ( Ridicule / Oppress ﬁ Praise / Empower ) 2 5 2 4 2 3 2 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 My personal experience : ( Negative ﬁ Positive ) 2 5 2 4 2 3 2 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 What I know about name : ( Nothing ﬁ Very much ) 1 2 3 4 5 “Stutterer”My first impression : ( Negative ﬁ Positive ) etc . “Person who smokes” My first impression : ( Negative ﬁ Positive ) etc . Please use the rating scale below for the five judgments under each name Circle ( 1 ) , ( 2 ) , or ( 0 ) after each situation . Appropriate : 1 Don’t know or unsure : 0 Inappropriate : 2 “Crazy”Discussions by doctors , lawyers , teachers , therapists , scientists , or researchers 1 0 2 Conversations about the named person by his / her close friends and family members 1 0 2 Conversations with persons who have illnesses , handicaps , or disabilities 1 0 2 Conversations with persons who have been victims of discrimination 1 0 2 Joking with others when the humor is not intended to hurt , offend , or oppress 1 0 2 “Person who stutters” Discussions by doctors , etc . “Smoker”Discussions by doctors , etc . 6 K . O . ST . LOUIS Person - first scores were compared with direct label scores in the two ver - sions of each questionnaire . Similarly , identical anchor labels were compared for the two versions . For all comparisons , t tests using the Bonferroni correc - tion were applied . Respondent Profile Respective biographical data for subjects in the I / E and A Components ( di - vided by a diagonal slash ) of each investigation are shown in Table 3 . The cli - ent , parent , and student groups each contained 60 subjects , 30 in each of the two components . The public group was much larger , with 109 respondents in the I / E Component and 117 in the A Component . The majority of subjects lived in West Virginia , but subjects were obtained from surrounding states , e . g . , Pennsylvania , Ohio , Maryland , New York , New Jersey , and Washington , D . C . A few subjects lived as far away as Florida . The gender profile was markedly different : both sexes were represented in substantial proportions among the public and client groups , but nearly all of the parent and student re - Table 3 . Description of Respondents in Each of the Two Components ( I / E Component / A Component ) Descriptor Clients Parents Students Public Number of subjects 30 / 30 30 / 30 30 / 30 109 / 117 Gender ( % ) Female 43 / 33 93 / 87 93 / 97 56 / 63 Male 57 / 67 7 / 13 7 / 3 44 / 37 Age ( years ) Mean 33 / 37 40 / 37 23 / 22 36 / 32 Range 15 – 72 / 18 – 80 23 – 76 / 22 – 57 21 – 40 / 21 – 33 18 – 61 / 18 – 74 Education ( mean years ) 15 / 15 15 / 15 16 / 16 15 / 16 English as first language ( % ) 93 / 100 100 / 96 100 / 100 100 / 99 Speech / language / hearing impaired ( % ) 79 / 100 9 / 18 2 / 16 11 / 11 Victim of discrimination ( % ) Have been 27 / 24 14 / 30 26 / 27 26 / 30 May have been 12 / 36 10 / 11 10 / 24 16 / 23 Occupation ( % ) Student 11 / 7 0 / 13 100 / 100 15 / 7 Teaching / helping 11 / 19 22 / 17 0 / 0 39 / 35 Medical and related 7 / 15 17 / 33 0 / 0 7 / 12 Homemaker 0 / 0 21 / 13 0 / 0 2 / 2 Other profession 64 / 50 35 / 25 0 / 0 28 / 43 Retired 7 / 8 4 / 0 0 / 0 9 / 1 PERSON - FIRST LABELING AND STUTTERING 7 spondents were women . The means ages for the client , parent , and public groups varied from 32 to 40 years ; mean ages of the student groups were 22 and 23 years . As can be seen from the table , the range of ages represented var - ied widely , from teenagers to older adults , among clients , parents , and public groups ; however , nearly all of the students were in their early 20s . Nearly all of the subjects reported English as their first language . From 2 % to 18 % of the parent , student , and public groups reported a history of a speech , language , or hearing impairment . All of the A Component client respondents reported a communicative disorder , but only 79 % of the I / E Component clients did so , no doubt due to the fact that 21 % no longer regarded themselves as having a disorder . Roughly one - fourth of the clients considered that they had been vic - tims of discrimination ( unspecified ) , but so did the student and public groups . The parent groups in the two components for this appraisal were variable , 14 % and 30 % , respectively . In addition , 10 to 36 % of the subjects indicated that they may have been a victim of discrimination . Predictably , the profiles for occupations showed considerable diversity . Disorders represented in the client and parent groups are provided in Table 4 . Efforts were made to ensure that stutterers were represented ; about one - fourth ( 23 % ) of the I / E Component clients and more than half ( 53 % ) of the clients in the A Component clients were stutterers . Ten to 20 % of the parents had stuttering children . Most of the rest of the client group had either articula - tion or hearing disorders . About 40 % of all the parents had an articulation - dis - ordered child and 20 % – 27 % , a child with a language disorder . Reliability About 1 / 5 ( 46 or 20 . 3 % ) of the public and 1 / 6 ( 10 or 16 . 7 % ) of the student re - spondents re - rated an identical questionnaire at least 24 h later for test - retest reliability . The results are shown in Table 5 . For the I / E Component , 79 % – Table 4 . Disorder Categories of Clients and the Children of Parents for the I / E and A Components Clients Parents ( Children’s disorders ) Disorder I / E Component A Component I / E Component A Component Stuttering ( % ) 23 53 20 10 Articulation ( % ) 27 30 40 43 Voice ( % ) 13 3 3 0 Language ( % ) 3 3 20 27 Hearing ( % ) 23 10 7 7 Other ( % ) 10 0 10 13 8 K . O . ST . LOUIS 86 % of the subjects re - rated labels within 1 scale value of the original rating . For the A Component , 80 % – 89 % of the re - rated labels were identical . These results suggest that subjects were reasonably consistent in rating names . RESULTS All Studies Mean results for the I / E and A components are shown in 10 graphs , Figures 1 – 10 . Each graph plots individual mean values for the variable in question for each of the subject groups ( clients , parents , students , and public ) as well as for person - first , direct , and anchor labels . To provide an overall impression of the findings , mean values across all four subject groups for person - first versus di - rect label comparisons are plotted at the top of each graph in solid versus closely spaced dashed lines . Similarly , means for the anchor labels are plotted at the bottom of each graph in wider - spaced dashed lines . Importantly , anchor label means for the two versions of each questionnaire are combined into one overall mean in the graphs ( for the sake of visual clarity ) , even though data on the same anchor words from the two versions of each questionnaire were com - pared statistically . The unmistakable impression from all of the graphs ( except Figure 5 refer - ring to “What I know about the name” ) is that the means from the four pairs of entirely different groups of subjects were very similar . As predicted , “ Person who composes ” / “ Composer , ” “ Trustworthy , ” and “ Genius ” were uniformly rated positively . Similarly , “ Person with leprosy ” / “ Leper ” and “ Moron ” were uniformly rated negatively . Moreover , differences between person - first and direct labels were small and did not appear to be nearly as great as differences among labels . The latter impression is buttressed by the fact that of 480 per - son - first versus direct label comparisons ( 12 labels 3 4 subject groups 3 5 variables 3 2 components ) , only 10 t tests ( 2 . 1 % ) were significantly different Table 5 . Test - retest Reliability for Public and Student Groups Public Students I / E Component ( four 11 - point scales and one 5 - point scale ) 2nd ratings identical to original 59 % 65 % 2nd ratings within 1 scale value 79 % 86 % 2nd ratings within 2 scale values 90 % 95 % 2nd ratings within 4 scale values 100 % 100 % A Component ( five 3 - point categories ) 2nd ratings identical 80 % 89 % 2nd ratings within 1 judgement 92 % 95 % 2nd ratings within 2 judgments 100 % 100 % PERSON - FIRST LABELING AND STUTTERING 9 at the family - wise alpha of p , . 0018 ( using the Bonferroni correction in which the alpha level of . 05 was divided by the number of words being com - pared , 28 ) . For all of the remaining comparisons ( 97 . 9 % ) , person - first versus direct labels were not significantly different . And of 640 anchor label compar - isons ( 16 labels 3 4 subject groups 3 5 variables 3 2 components ) , no t tests ( 0 % ) were statistically significant . Figure 1 . Summary of mean ratings for person - first labels , direct labels , and anchor labels for the I / E Component variable , “First Impression . ” 10 K . O . ST . LOUIS All of the significant differences did favor person - first over direct labeling : seven comparisons for “ Person with leprosy ” versus “ Leper ” and three for “ Person with psychosis ” versus “ Psychotic . ” Student and public groups each accounted for half ( five ) of the comparisons , providing oblique but important evidence that the much larger sample size for the public groups was not the critical factor in determining the significance of differences . There were no Figure 2 . Summary of mean ratings for person - first labels , direct labels , and anchor labels for the I / E Component variable , “My Reaction . ” PERSON - FIRST LABELING AND STUTTERING 11 person - first versus direct label differences in comparisons for the client or par - ent groups . Individual Variables One way to understand the various ways subjects rated the labels in this study is to compare individual variables within each of the two components . Mean Figure 3 . Summary of mean ratings for person - first labels , direct labels , and anchor labels for the I / E Component variable , “Intent . ” 12 K . O . ST . LOUIS ratings of the four variables in the I Component that could vary from 2 5 to 1 5 are comparable . The most positive ratings were given for “Personal experi - ence” with the label ( negative to positive ) ( Mean 5 5 . 97 [ Clients 5 5 . 88 ; Par - ents 5 6 . 07 ; Students 5 5 . 89 ; Public 5 6 . 04 ] ) ( Figure 4 ) . For this variable , mean values for most speech - language - hearing terms were near neutral , and the lowest ratings occurred for student ratings of Person who smokes . The Figure 4 . Summary of mean ratings for person - first labels , direct labels , and anchor labels for the I / E Component variable , “My Personal Experience . ” PERSON - FIRST LABELING AND STUTTERING 13 variable , “Intent” of the label ( from ridicule or oppression to praise or empow - erment ) , was next most positive ( Mean 5 5 . 45 [ Clients 5 5 . 28 ; Parents 5 5 . 50 ; Students 5 5 . 49 ; Public 5 5 . 51 ] ) ( Figure 3 ) . In this case , the lowest rat - ings occurred for “ Person who murders ” / “ Murderer , ” “ Obese , ” and “ Moron . ” “First impression” ratings ( negative to positive ) were next ( Mean 5 5 . 10 [ Cli - ents 5 5 . 11 ; Parents 5 5 . 26 ; Students 5 4 . 93 ; Public 5 5 . 12 ] ) ( Figure 1 ) . Figure 5 . Summary of mean ratings for person - first labels , direct labels , and anchor labels for the I / E Component variable , “What I Know About [ the ] Name . ” 14 K . O . ST . LOUIS And similar to the “Intent” variable , the lowest ratings were observed for “ Person who murders ” / “ Murderer , ” “ Moron , ” “ Psychotic , ” “ Obese , ” “ Leper , ” “ Person who smokes ” / “ Smoker , ” and “ Bed wetter . ” First impression ratings were below neutral for all speech - language - hearing terms . The highest ratings were given for “ Trustworthy , ” “ Genius , ” “ Composer ” / “ Person who composes , ” “ Articulate , ” and “ White . ” It should be noted that the vast major - Figure 6 . Summary of mean ratings for person - first labels , direct labels , and anchor labels for the A Component variable , “Discussions by doctors , lawyers , teachers , thera - pist , scientists , or researchers . ” PERSON - FIRST LABELING AND STUTTERING 15 ity of subjects were Caucasian , which very likely affected scores for “ White , ” “ Black , ” and “ African American . ” Finally , the variable for “Reaction” ( how much like the person labeled did the respondent “want to be” ) was the most negative of the four comparable I / E Component variables ( Mean 5 3 . 60 [ Cli - ents 5 3 . 68 ; Parents 5 3 . 75 ; Students 5 3 . 37 ; Public 5 3 . 60 ] ) ( Figure 2 ) . This variable was rated very low for “ Murderer ” / “ Person who murders , ” Figure 7 . Summary of mean ratings for person - first labels , direct labels , and anchor labels for the A Component variable , “Conversations about the named person by his / her close friends and family members . ” 16 K . O . ST . LOUIS “ Smoker , ” “ Bed wetter , ” “ Psychotic ” / “ Person with psychosis , ” “ Stutterer , ” “ Men - tally retarded , ” “ Overweight , ” “ Obese , ” “ Person with cancer , ” and “ Moron . ” The variable , “What I know about [ the ] name , ” is not directly comparable to the others ; still , the results are both interesting and somewhat predictable ( Mean 5 3 . 46 [ Clients 5 3 . 31 ; Parents 5 3 . 34 ; Students 5 3 . 88 ; Public 5 Figure 8 . Summary of mean ratings for person - first labels , direct labels , and anchor labels for the A Component variable , “Conversations with persons who have illnesses , handicaps , or disabilities . ” PERSON - FIRST LABELING AND STUTTERING 17 3 . 29 ] ; maximum 5 5 ) ( Figure 5 ) . Respondents reported knowing the most about : “ Person who smokes ” / “ Smoker , ” “ White , ” and “ Trustworthy . ” Students generally believed they knew more about the terms than any of the other groups , especially—and predictably—the speech - language - hearing terms . Overall , mean knowledge ratings were above neutral for all of the anchor terms except “ Disfluent , ” with a few lower than neutral ratings for “ Hoarse , ” Figure 9 . Summary of mean ratings for person - first labels , direct labels , and anchor labels for the A Component variable , “Conversations with persons who have been vic - tims of discrimination . ” 18 K . O . ST . LOUIS “ Cleft palate , ” and “ Deaf mute . ” Among the speech - language - hearing labels , subjects reported knowing least about “ Person with aphasia ” / “ Aphasic ” and “ Disfluent , ” and most about “ Person who stutters ” / “ Stutterer . ” Comparing the five A component variables , as expected , the most positive ratings were given for “Discussions by doctors , lawyers , teachers , therapists , scientists , or researchers” ( Mean 5 2 . 61 [ Clients 5 2 . 61 ; Parents 5 2 . 62 ; stu - Figure 10 . Summary of mean ratings for person - first labels , direct labels , and anchor labels for the A component variable , “Joking with others when the humor is not in - tended to hurt , offend , or oppress . ” PERSON - FIRST LABELING AND STUTTERING 19 dents 5 2 . 59 ; Public 5 2 . 60 ] ) ( Figure 6 ) . “ Crazy ” and “ Moron ” were re - garded as clearly inappropriate for these professionals to use . Somewhat sur - prisingly , “ Deaf mute ” was regarded as neutral or above , even by speech - language pathology seniors and graduate students who had taken coursework in audiology . The term , “ Clutterer , ” was questioned by parents ( and many subjects indicated to examiners that they interpreted the term to mean “messy” or “untidy” ) . Slightly less positive were ratings for “Conversations about the named person by close friends and family members” ( Mean 5 2 . 54 [ Clients 5 2 . 49 ; Parents 5 2 . 52 ; Students 5 2 . 58 ; Public 5 2 . 57 ] ) ( Figure 7 ) . In this case , “ Leper ” was regarded less appropriate than “ Person with leprosy ” by stu - dents and clients . The variable , “Conversations with persons who have ill - nesses , handicaps , or disabilities” ( Mean 5 2 . 30 [ Clients 5 2 . 27 ; Parents 5 2 . 22 ; Students 5 2 . 39 ; Public 5 2 . 32 ] ) ( Figure 8 ) , received the next most pos - itive ratings . “ Stutterer ” was preferred to “ Person who stutters ” in such con - versations , but “ Person who stammers ” was preferred to “ Stammerer . ” Sur - prisingly , clients , of whom 53 % were stutterers , rated the term , “ Stutterer , ” more appropriate than did any other group for “ Stutterer ” or “ Person who stut - ters . ” The greatest difference for speech - language terms in favor of person - first labeling occurred for “ Person who lisps ” versus “ Lisper . ” The next most positively rated variable was “Conversations with person who have been vic - tims of discrimination” ( Mean 5 2 . 22 [ Clients 5 2 . 14 ; Parents 5 2 . 17 ; Stu - dents 5 2 . 33 ; Public 5 2 . 25 ] ) ( Figure 9 ) . The individual profiles for this vari - able were very similar to those for “Conversations with person who have illnesses , handicaps , or disabilities . ” Labels were regarded as being least appro - priate in “Joking with others [ even ] when the humor is not intended to hurt , of - fend , or oppress” ( Mean 5 2 . 04 [ Clients 5 2 . 16 ; Parents 5 1 . 85 ; Students 5 2 . 04 ; Public 5 2 . 09 ] ) ( Figure 10 ) . The only labels identifying problems deemed appropriate in jokes ( i . e . , above 2 or neutral ) related to gambling , murdering , smoking , and being hoarse . Respondents rated “ Stutterer ” slightly more appropriate than “ Person who stutters ” for jokes as well . “ White ” and “ African American ” were regarded by these predominately Caucasian subjects as somewhat appropriate for joking ; “ Black ” was slightly below neutral . DISCUSSION This study might best be viewed as a preliminary study of negative beliefs and attitudes associated with certain labels for persons with identifiable differ - ences or handicaps , with special reference to terms referring to fluency disor - ders . Considering all the labels evaluated , groups of people representing a wide range of age , education , and occupation have similar connotations and rules of use for labels . That is to say , diverse subjects sampled in this study ba - sically agree on which labels are pejorative , which ones are not pejorative , and—more surprisingly—the degree to which certain labels are pejorative in 20 K . O . ST . LOUIS English . In 98 % of 480 comparisons , person - first terminology did not make a significant difference . Only 10 t tests ( 2 % ) using the Bonferroni correction were statistically significant . Seven comparisons with “ Person with leprosy ” were more positive than “ Leper , ” as were three for “ Person with psychosis ” over “ Psychotic . ” Student and public groups each accounted for half of the significant results . There were no significant differences for the client or par - ent groups . For 640 anchor label comparisons , no t tests ( 0 % ) were signifi - cantly different . There were a number of interesting trends . The rank order ( and means ) of the ratings for the first four variables in the I / E component , from highest to lowest , was as follows : “Personal experience” ( 5 . 97 ) , “Intent” ( 5 . 45 ) , “First impression” ( 5 . 10 ) , and “Reaction” ( 3 . 60 ) . In the first three of these , most flu - ency - related terms were rated below but near neutral . Subjects ranked “ Stut - terer ” lowest of nine speech - language - hearing terms for their reaction ( i . e . , “I want to be” ) . The mean for “What I know about [ the ] name” for stuttering was 3 . 46 , and , for this variable , “ Stutterer ” was rated highest of the nine communi - cation disorders labels . The rank order of the five A component ratings , from most to least appro - priate , were as follows : “Doctors and other professionals” ( 2 . 61 ) , “Friends and family” ( 2 . 54 ) , “Illnesses , etc . ” ( 2 . 30 ) , “Victims of discrimination” ( 2 . 22 ) , and “Joking” ( 2 . 04 ) . Interestingly , clients , of whom 53 % had a past or current stuttering problem , rated the term “ Stutterer ” more positively than the other three subject groups for joking and among the highest for three of the other four variables . Except for the low ratings for stuttering for “My reaction” ( i . e . , “I want to be” ) , in general , there were no systematic differences observed between the direct or person - first labels for stuttering and stammering , or the anchor label , disfluency . This is somewhat surprising since clinicians often prefer the term “ disfluency ” to “ stuttering ” because it is felt to be less negative . The labels “ Clutterer ” or “ Person who clutters ” were generally perceived about the same as the aforementioned terms for fluency disorders , although , as noted , clutter - ing labels were often interpreted anecdotally by subjects as meaning “messy” or “untidy , ” rather than as a label for a fluency disorder . These analyses suggest that groups of people representing a wide range of age , education , and occupation , but also representing personal knowledge and experience with communicative disorders , or presumed lack thereof , make judgements based on similar connotations and rules for labels used to identify people . For example , with the exception of widely known terms that have stig - matized individuals ( e . g . , “ Moron ” ) , terms identifying serious mental illness ( “ psychosis ” ) or dreaded diseases ( “ leprosy ” ) , person - first nomenclature made little difference in minimizing negative reactions . In addition , none of the nine speech - language - hearing labels were perceived to be negative in any form . The inescapable conclusion for the speech - language labels assessed is PERSON - FIRST LABELING AND STUTTERING 21 that person - first terminology has little effect on lessening negative ratings . Even such archaic and questionable terms as “ Deaf mute ” and “ Lisper ” are not viewed by the public with nearly the negative valence as “ Moron . ” These two terms have been replaced by more accurate labels already , and “ Moron ” has been replaced by several variants of “ Mentally retarded . ” With respect to the decision of whether or not to use the term “ Stutterer ” versus “ Person who stutters , ” this study clearly indicates that the former will not communicate any less sensitivity than the latter to most people , even those who suffer from speech - language disorders ( including stuttering ) . Of course there are exceptions , especially among those who were in the forefront of the movement to promote person - first terminology in the stuttering self - help movement and in ASHA . One unpublished study concluded that person - first terminology does result in less negative attitudes and beliefs about stuttering than direct labels ( Robin - son & Robinson , 1996 ) . The authors coded short , open - ended responses of 24 adult subjects to the directive , “Please list the first five things that come to mind when you hear the term [ ‘stutterer’ ] or [ ‘person who stutters’ ] ”as “posi - tive , ” “neutral , ” or “negative . ” The direct label resulted in fewer “positive” and more “negative” responses than the person - first label . Aside from the lim - ited number of subjects tested and lack of detail about them , this study is hard to interpret for three reasons . First , it is not clear whether subjects responded to one or both versions of the study , and , if both , then in what order . Second , respondent’s comments referred to characteristics of the disorder ( e . g . , “Don’t call attention to the stuttering , concentrate on what they have to say” [ coded as “positive” ] or “nervous” [ coded as “negative” ] ) . It is possible , therefore , that some subjects may have responded to “stutterer” as a person with a disorder and to “person who stutters” as a normal speaker with occasional disfluency . The latter criticism could also be leveled at the current study , but , given the number of serious disorders mentioned herein , it is likely that respondents were “primed” to some extent to interpret ambiguous conditions as disorders or handicaps . Third , the Robinson and Robinson study did not compare re - actions to the terms for stuttering with any other conditions , making it impossi - ble to estimate subject biases about fluency versus other disorders or condi - tions . In a larger sense , it seems important to differentiate the suffering that is in - herent in a condition from the suffering that is caused by the labels used to name it . Conditions such as intellectual deficiency , brain damage , cancer , bed wetting ( at certain ages ) , and obesity are , to varying degrees , negative and un - fortunate . Persons with these problems do suffer and , from time to time , no doubt encounter belittling or derogatory attitudes , comments , and reactions from others . Similarly , “ stuttering ” conjures up images of helplessness , strug - gle , and derision . But it is equally true that modifying the name of an unfortu - nate condition typically neither eliminates nor reverses the hard realities faced 22 K . O . ST . LOUIS by those suffering from it . In fact , it can be argued that changing the name of a dreaded condition may have the undesired effect of euphemistically promot - ing the conclusion that something is not what it really is . The author has ob - served cases in which “disfluency , ” used in lieu of “stuttering” in order to lessen the negativity of the diagnosis , has resulted in confusion ( e . g . , a client claiming not to “stutter”—only to be “disfluent” ) . There are other ramifica - tions of person - first terminology as well . In the past few years , “PWS” ( mean - ing “person who stutters” ) or “CWS” ( or “child who stutters” ) have become acronyms , at first only in writing , but recently in verbal descriptions as well . One might question whether referring to someone orally as a “PWS” really communicates more sensitivity than referring to him as a “stutterer . ” Sykes ( 1992 ) makes a thought - provoking case that , in the U . S . A . , we have become a “nation of victims , ” in which more and more groups who have suf - fered through no perceived fault of their own , have rallied around that suffer - ing , much as Blacks did so ( legitimately ) in the Civil Rights movement . In - tending to empower their members , many groups have found themselves competing for evidence of the greatest degree of victimization by society . And language , i . e . , the words or labels used to label their “conditions , ” is taken as a major type of evidence . ( Of course , there are well - known examples of the way that labeling can and has been used to harass or oppress , e . g . , “ Moron . ” ) Lan - guage is also used to further empower group members . Many groups have adopted the common strategies of coining new words or acronyms ( e . g . , “oth - erly - abled” or “PWS” ) , redefining existing words ( e . g . , “disfluency” and “dys - fluency” ) , or blacklisting various labeling conventions ( e . g . , “handicapped” or “stutterer” ) , all to the presumed benefit of their members ( cf . ASHA News , 1994 ) . Of course , knowing and abiding by the most recent suggested changes in one’s own language is known popularly as being “politically correct . ” Taken to its current extreme , however , Sykes argues that instead of empower - ing those who suffer , such measures can—and often do—trivialize serious vi - olations or infringements against those who truly are victims . Another reason to be cautious about changing terminology is that new terms inevitably invite confusion . The following partly contrived example il - lustrates the sort of unintended confusion that person - first labeling has engen - dered . The author has repeatedly carried out the following informal exercise in undergraduate and graduate classes in fluency disorders . First , normal speaking adults who know something about the clinical picture of stuttering are asked to raise their hand if they have ever—even once—truly stuttered , that is , not being able to get their desired word out and thereby repeating or prolonging a syllable or feeling “blocked . ” Typically , the majority put an arm in the air . Next , they are asked to keep their hand up if they regard themselves as a “stutterer . ” Rarely do any uplifted hands remain . Trying to use person - first labeling , the ensuing conundrum then follows in answer to the question , “Who are these people ? ” PERSON - FIRST LABELING AND STUTTERING 23 “Stutterers ? ” No , they do not have the clinical picture of stuttering . “Nonstutterers ? ” No , because the name has an unacceptable direct label . “Persons who stutter ? ” Yes , but the name does not differentiate them from real “persons who stutter . ” “Persons who stuttered once or twice but don’t really stutter ? ” Not very good . “Nonstuttering persons who stutter ? ” This ridiculous description is probably the best label available using per - son - first nomenclature . On a more serious note , many have recognized that the terminology in flu - ency disorders is in disarray . Accordingly , a task force of the Special Interest Division of ASHA on Fluency and Fluency Disorders recently drafted guide - lines for consumers , clinicians , and researchers on terminology that reflected the greatest degree of professional consensus ( American Speech - Language - Hearing Association , in press ) . Person - first terminology is recognized as a le - gitimate option within these Guidelines , primarily for use with clients when it is important to communicate that stuttering symptoms are not what primarily define a person with a stuttering problem but constitute only a few of many characteristics that make up that person . Nevertheless , direct labeling is pre - ferred when incisive definition is important , such as in clinical diagnosis and description of research subjects . CONCLUSION The results of this study suggest that for the speech - language pathology labels assessed , person - first terminology does very little to lessen negative attitudes of the public . Consequently , and to lessen the “trivialization” and confusion mentioned earlier , the author submits that policies by self - help groups , profes - sional associations or journal editors , the media , publishers , and others pro - moting person - first and other types of labeling terminology , while clearly beneficial in some contexts , should not be made lightly . If policies are justi - fied by the argument that certain labels will lessen or remove negative atti - tudes , or that certain labels will increase or promote positive attitudes or sensi - tivity , then public and professional opinion should be garnered for support . And , the information gathered should be shared and discussion encouraged . It is possible that a policy insisting on person - first terminology in the area of speech - language pathology , in general , or in fluency disorders , in particular , while well intentioned , may not be helpful in fostering appreciation of clients as people but simply confuse everyone concerned by suggesting that past la - bels—for which the overwhelming consensus is that they are not pejorative— are now unacceptable . 24 K . O . ST . LOUIS Furthermore , if labels are to be changed in the interest of enhancing sensi - tivity to those with communication disorders , the author submits that words or phrases used to label or describe people or disorders ( e . g . , “stutterer” versus “person who stutters” ) need to be considered carefully and individually . That is , the categories or types of words to which a certain policy applies should not be allowed to expand haphazardly , thoughtlessly , or needlessly . Whole - sale decisions involving groups of seemingly related words may create more problems than they solve . It is never too late to debate questions such as the following in regard to la - beling terminology . In the interest of better understanding the people we serve , where should lines be drawn between labels that are pejorative and those that are acceptable ? By whom should the lines be drawn ? Should lines even be drawn ? And , how are lines that have been drawn unnecessarily either erased or redrawn ? This study could not have been completed without a great deal of help . The author gratefully acknowledges the help of Rae Jean V . Sielen , Renee Jones , Matthew E . McCulty , and Paula S . Townsend for their assistance in experi - mental design and analyzing data . He also is indebted to all of the students , clients , parents , and others who so willingly participated . REFERENCES American Psychological Association ( 1994 ) . Publication manual of the American Psychological Association ( 4th ed . ) . Washington , DC : Author . American Speech - Language - Hearing Association ( In press ) . Guidelines : Ter - minology pertaining to fluency and fluency disorders . Rockville , MD : Au - thor . ASHA News ( 1994 , September ) . Asha 36 , 10 . Executive Board Meeting Minutes ( 1993 , December ) . Asha 35 , 127 – 129 . Robinson , B . W . , & Robinson , B . F . ( 1996 ) . Person - first language and atti - tudes toward individuals who stutter . Poster presented at the annual con - vention of the American Speech - Language - Hearing Association . Seattle , WA . Sykes , C . J . ( 1992 ) . A nation of victims : The decay of the American charac - ter . New York : St . Martin’s Press .