iCat , the chess player : the influence of embodiment in the enjoyment of a game ( Short Paper ) André Pereira , Carlos Martinho , Iolanda Leite and Ana Paiva INESC - ID , Instituto Superior Técnico Av . Prof . Cavaco Silva - Taguspark 2780 - 990 Porto Salvo , Portugal { andre . pereira , carlos . martinho , iolanda . leite } @ tagus . ist . utl . pt , ana . paiva @ inesc - id . pt ABSTRACT This paper presents an experiment that evaluates and compares the user enjoyment when playing a game of chess in two situations : against a physically embodied robotic agent and against a virtually embodied agent , displayed on screen . The results of the study suggest that embodiment has implications on user enjoyment , as the experience against a robotic agent was classified as more enjoyable than against a virtually embodied agent . Categories and Subject Descriptors I . 2 . 9 [ Artificial Intelligence ] : Robotics – Commercial robots and applications General Terms Experimentation Keywords Autonomous Agents , Embodiment , Synthetic Characters , User Enjoyment , Chess . 1 . INTRODUCTION Synthetic characters can be seen as agents that have an embodied representation and interact with users or other agents in an autonomous manner . These character’s embodiment have usually a 2D representation [ 15 ] or a 3D representation [ 7 ] , but may also have a physical robotic embodiment [ 20 ] . There is a common understanding about the importance of emotion and expressive behaviour in synthetic characters , as they lead to more natural and believable interactions with humans [ 2 ] . We studied the relevance of another attribute of synthetic characters : embodiment . More concretely , we studied the implications that embodiment has on user enjoyment in a gaming scenario that uses synthetic characters with social behavior . Understanding what makes players enjoy a game is perhaps the most important issue in successful game design [ 8 ] . Thus , the main research question addressed is : do people have more fun using the version of our game with a virtually embodied opponent ? Or have they higher enjoyment while playing against a physically embodied one ? To provide a preliminary answer to this question , we created a scenario in which the user played chess game on a physical electronic chessboard that detects the board state and sends it to the computer , against a synthetic character whose affective state is influenced by every move the player makes . One of the setups uses a physically embodied agent , the other a virtually embodied agent . 2 . RELATED WORK Although the literature on synthetic virtual agents is vast [ 6 , 13 , 17 ] , the link with robotic agents is small as there are not so many situations where both virtual and robotic agents are involved or compared . On the other hand , many researchers are studying the impact of robotic agents interacting with users [ 9 ] . Pfeifer et al [ 18 ] pointed out the importance of embodiment to represent “intelligent” behavior : “Intelligence cannot merely exist in the form of an abstract algorithm but requires a physical instantiation , a body . ” In computer science , the choice to embody a synthetic character is most of the times through a virtual 2D screen representation . Some authors prefer this type of embodiment [ 14 ] because they believe that today’s robots ( physically embodied synthetic characters ) are still not adequately embodied . The main reasons pointed by those authors are that robot’s movements are yet not natural and their motors still make too much noise . Wainer’s et al study [ 20 ] suggests that physical or “material” embodiment in a task - oriented setting can make a difference in perception of a social agent’s capabilities and the user’s enjoyment of a task . However , another ( contradictory ) study evaluating an embodied intelligent home character ( eMuu ) [ 1 ] , that provides intuitive feedback in the form of conversational and emotional body language in order to investigate the influence of its embodiment ( virtual and physical ) and its emotional expressiveness on the enjoyment of the interaction , suggests that embodiment has no significant influence on user enjoyment . 3 . APPLICATION Computer chess is extremely popular and in certain situations it surpasses the original game , for instance by allowing a one player game against an opponent of custom strength at any time of the day . By using a Graphical User Interface the social possibilities of the game , in which both opposing players are able to interact , become limited and we cannot see hesitation or any expressed emotion on the opponent . Playing chess in its original form , with a real chessboard against a human opponent , shares the social advantages , physical controls and physical information offered by most board games . Inspired by that , we built an agent with the advantages of both computer chess applications and traditional chess , and maintained the experience as close as possible to the traditional where we face an opponent and play in a physical chessboard . Hence , the embodiment of the agent was a critical element for our chess game . In Figure 1 we display the Cite as : iCat , the chess player : the influence of embodiment in the enjoyment of a game , André Pereira , Carlos Martinho , Iolanda Leite and Ana Paiva , Proc . of 7th Int . Conf . on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems ( AAMAS 2008 ) , Padgham , Parkes , Müller and Parsons ( eds . ) , May , 12 - 16 . , 2008 , Estoril , Portugal , pp . 1253 - 1256 . Copyright © 2008 , International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems ( www . ifaamas . org ) . All rights reserved . 1253 components of our application and their interaction . The components are : ( 1 ) an electronic board that detects the user’s moves ( 2 ) the agent’s embodiment which can be physical or virtual ( 3 ) an agent mind that uses a chess engine and an emotion system to determine the agent’s behaviour ( 4 ) an animation module that controls the embodiment of our agent . In the remaining of this section we will further describe the first three components . Figure 1 . Game Application 3 . 1 Electronic Board To maintain the physical interaction of traditional table top chess game and preserve the virtual possibilities offered by computers , we needed one chess tangible user interface to replace the virtual chessboard of computer chess applications with a real chessboard with augmented computation ( electronic board ) . For our electronic board we used a programmable commercial tangible user interface : the DGT Electronic Chessboard from DGT Projects [ 5 ] . There is one drawback though : the DGT electronic chessboard does not have a physical mechanism to move its chess pieces . As such , the user has to play the agent’s moves on the chessboard . We used speech and gestures provided from the chess playing agent in order to communicate the engine’s move to the user . Initial tests showed that users sometimes needed to hear the computer’s move more than once . As we did not want to annoy the users by constantly repeating the move , we connected a DGT XL clock [ 5 ] to the chessboard , using it to display the computer’s last move . 3 . 2 Agent Embodiment The chess playing agent must have a social component , allowing the user to understand what the agent is thinking , simulating in this way the human to human interaction of a traditional two player chess game . The natural manner used to perform these interactions is by body gestures and facial expressions . To evaluate the influence that the embodiment of the chess playing agent has on user enjoyment we used both a physical and a virtual embodiment . The choice for both the embodiments was the iCat platform from Phillips Research [ 3 ] . This platform contains a user - interface robot named iCat that is capable of mechanically rendering facial expressions and the OPPR ( Open Platform for Personal Robotics ) . For the physically embodied agent , we used the iCat robot . This robot uses 11 servos and 2 motors to control individual parts of its body , such as eyelids and neck . Located on the robot’s front , there is a loudspeaker controlled by an internal soundcard device . The speaker is used for speech and sounds . With all these capabilities , the iCat robot can embody a social agent since it has many of the characteristics needed to simulate human - to - human interaction . As such , we chose it to embody our physical chess playing agent . For the virtual agent we used a 3D animated version of the iCat , available in the OPPR software . With this software we are able to launch a window with a virtual iCat that behaves in exactly the same manner as the robotic one and has the same appearance . 3 . 3 Agent’s Mind To build a one player computerized chess game , we needed to integrate our application with a chess engine . Our focus was to make the experience of playing chess close to the real game , and we did not have the need of a grandmaster level virtual chess opponent . As such , we integrated Tom Kerrigan’s simple chess engine [ 10 ] in our agent’s mind . The agent’s mind is a time - based execution module created to run on the OPPR system . This module comprises the “mind” of our application , a chess game named “iCat , the Chess Player” where a user plays a chess game against an embodied social agent . The agent’s sensors are the automatically updated information given by the electronic chessboard which detects the user’s moves . The chess game can begin from the initial chess position or from any valid position ( e . g . a chess problem ) . In this game , the user can take hints about the state of the game by analyzing iCat’s facial expressions , generated by an emotion system . The emotion system is based on the emotivector , an anticipatory mechanism [ 16 ] . This system is triggered after the user plays his move . At this moment the agent’s mind receives the board evaluation from the chess engine , processes it and updates the agent’s state . The agent has two main emotional components : emotional reactions ( computed after every user’s move using anticipatory mechanisms ) and mood ( longer lasting affective state controlled by a valence variable ) . The affective state is then reflected in the embodied agent’s behaviour , which is controlled by the OPPR’s animation module , responsible for animating the iCat’s body parts . In this game , if the iCat is expressing a very happy face it means that it is winning . Likewise , after every move played , iCat also gives feedback about what he “thinks” . If the user plays a bad move iCat reacts with a happy animation . When this happens the user can take back the move and play another one . By repeating this process , chess can be learned by distinguishing the bad from the good moves . The complete design and implementation of the anticipatory emotion system used in this experiment is described in [ 11 ] [ 12 ] . 4 . EVALUATION This section describes the preliminary experiment we performed on our chess playing agent’s implementation . By measuring the user’s enjoyment while varying between a physical and a virtual setup of our game we were able to answer our proposed research question . The following sub - sections will discuss the methodology involved in our experiment and the obtained results . 4 . 1 Methodology In the experiment , participants had the opportunity to play a chess game against the iCat using the DGT electronic chessboard . 4 . 1 . 1 Measurements Each participant played chess against either a physical or a virtual opponent . Our independent variable is the type of test : physical or virtual . Our dependent variable is user enjoyment , and to measure it we followed the design of an independent test where each participant only played against one of the two possible embodiments . 1254 4 . 1 . 2 GameFlow To evaluate our dependent variable , the user enjoyment , we chose a model designed to evaluate user enjoyment in games , the GameFlow [ 19 ] model . GameFlow is based in the Flow theory analysed by Csikszentmihalyi , stating that “ Flow experiences can be divided in eight elements and a combination of these elements provokes a sensation of deep enjoyment that people , just for the sake of feeling it , spend a great deal of energy and time” [ 4 ] . The Flow model can be used to evaluate user enjoyment in any task , but since we want to measure user enjoyment specifically in a game we used the adaptation constructed for games , the GameFlow model . This model maps the eight elements from Flow to elements of the game literature and concludes that to have Flow ( i . e . user enjoyment ) in a game the elements that must be present are : concentration ( games should require concentration and the player should be able to concentrate on the game ) ; challenge ( games should be sufficiently challenging and match the player’s skill level ) ; player skills ( games must support player skill development and mastery ) ; control ( players should feel a sense of control over their actions in the game ) ; clear goals ( games should provide the player with clear goals at appropriate times ) ; feedback ( players must receive appropriate feedback at appropriate times ) ; immersion ( players should experience deep but effortless involvement in the game ) ; s ocial interaction ( games should support and create opportunities for social interaction ) . To evaluate each one of these elements we have used and extended some criteria formulated in the GameFlow model . The “clear goals” element was removed because the only existing goal in our game is clear : to win the chess game against the iCat . Similarly to the GameFlow model , each question is a five point evaluation Likert scale where the user may choose to strongly disagree , disagree , neither agrees or disagrees , agree or strongly agree . User enjoyment is calculated by a simple mean of the seven elements’ values . These elements are the dependent variables of our experiment . 4 . 1 . 3 Participants There was a total of 18 participants , all of them knew how to play chess and had some experience with computerized chess . Since a regular chess game without time restrictions usually takes up to 2 hours or more to play , we decided to test users in a predefined mid - game position . This position gave some advantage to the user and was designed with the intention of entering early in the end part of the game . We tested our application in 2 different locations . The first sessions took place in a chess club , “Clube de Xadrez de Sintra” , where we had 5 participants with the target age from 8 to 12 years old . The second location was at the Instituto Superior Técnico ( Technical University of Lisbon ) , where 13 participants with ages between 19 and 32 participated in the experiment . After each game against our agent , participants filled up a questionnaire where an evaluation of the GameFlow elements described above was made . 4 . 1 . 4 Setting The experiment was conducted in the two different scenarios , physical and virtual . The participants who played in the first scenario did not play on the second one and vice versa , because they would have played the same position twice and therefore compromise the results of the second experiment . Physical Setup In this set up ( see Figure 2 ) , participants sat on a chair in front of a table containing the DGT electronic chessboard , DGT XL clock and the Phillips iCat . Even though the player did not interact with it , the table also contained a laptop running our application , connected to the iCat robot and the electronic chessboard . In this scenario the participants played their moves on the electronic chessboard and watched over iCat’s behaviour and its reactions to the same moves . Figure 2 . Physical setup Virtual Setup In the virtual setup ( Figure 3 ) the iCat is virtually embodied and displayed on a 17 inch TFT computer full screen . We have chosen a 17 inch screen to make the experience as close as possible to the physical one where the iCat have a height of 38 centimeters . Figure 3 . Virtual setup 4 . 2 Results In this section , we present the results of our preliminary testing sessions . Because we did not obtain a normal distribution with our test samples , all our test are non - parametric . 4 . 2 . 1 User Enjoyment – Virtual versus Physical To study the differences in user enjoyment between the physical and virtual embodiment of the iCat , we used the Mann - Whitney U test to analyse the questionnaires . First we ran the Mann - Whitney U test using the “type of test” as the grouping variable and the “user enjoyment” as the test variable . Table 1 . User Enjoyment Mann - Whitney U Test Ranks Type of Test N Mean Rank Sum Of Ranks Physical 9 12 , 1 108 , 5 Virtual 9 6 , 94 62 , 5 Total 18 The columns mean rank and sum of ranks from Table 1 show that the direction of the difference in user enjoyment is physical towards virtual . Table 2 . User Enjoyment Mann - Whitney U Test Statistics Item Z - Score р - Value Direction User Enjoyment - 2 , 035 0 , 042 Physical > Virtual Table 2 presents the results of the Mann - Whitney test which gives us the information that we have a significant result ( р - value < 1255 0 . 05 ) and a z - score of - 2 , 035 with the difference direction of physical > virtual . Therefore , our preliminary experiment , suggests that playing chess with a virtual embodied social agent gives the user less enjoyment that with a physically embodied one . Why did the participants enjoyed less the virtual embodied character ? To answer this question we have again used the Mann - Whitney U test but this time we made it to the seven different game elements used to calculate the user enjoyment variable . The results are shown in Table 3 . Table 3 . Game Elements Mann - Whitney U Test Statistics Item Z - Score р - Value Direction Concentration - 0 , 536 0 , 605 Physical > Virtual Challenge - 0 , 461 0 , 666 Physical > Virtual Player Skills - 0 , 946 0 , 387 Physical > Virtual Control - 0 , 409 0 , 73 Physical > Virtual Feedback - 2 , 249 0 , 031 Physical > Virtual Immersion - 2 , 114 0 , 04 Physical > Virtual Social Interaction - 2 , 184 0 , 031 Physical > Virtual Feedback , Immersion and Social interaction values are significantly higher in the chess game setup that uses a physical embodied agent than with the setup that uses a virtual one . 5 . CONCLUSIONS We implemented a chess playing application with two different setups . The first setup comprised the iCat robot as the physical embodiment for our chess playing agent , and the other one incorporated a virtual representation with the same appearance on a computer screen . Then we performed an experiment to answer our research question , which was : do people have more fun playing against the virtual or the physically embodied opponent ? Similarly to Wainer’s work ( discussed in the related work section ) and in contradiction to the eMuu study , this experiment showed that participants who had played against the physically embodied agent had higher enjoyment experiences than those who had played with the virtually embodied chess playing agent . We have supported Wainer’s results and using the GameFlow model we were able to analyze each game element individually . This evaluation showed that the main reasons behind the difference of enjoyment in the two employed setups , was that the physical embodied agent had a more immersive user experience , an improved game feedback and a more believable social interaction . The dissimilar results presented in the related work may be explained by the fact that in those works different definitions of enjoyment were applied . 6 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This paper is supported by the EU projects MindRACES : from Reactive to Anticipatory Cognitive Embodied Systems ( IST - 511931 ) and LIREC : LIving with Robots and intEractive Companions ( FP7 - ICT - 2007 - 1 with grant agreement no . 215554 . ) , and by a scholarship ( SFRH / BD / 41585 / 2007 ) granted by the Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia . 7 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Bartneck , C . 2003 . Interacting with an embodied emotional character In Proceedings of the 2003 international conference on Designing pleasurable products and interfaces . Pittsburgh , PA , USA ACM Press . [ 2 ] Bates , J . 1994 . The Role of Emotion in Believable Agents . Communications of the ACM , 37 ( 7 ) , 122 - 125 . [ 3 ] Breemen , A . 2004 . Animation Engine for Believable Interactive User - Interface Robots . In IEEE / RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems . Sendai , Japan , 2873 - 2878 . [ 4 ] Csikszentmihalyl , M . 1990 . Flow : The Psychology of Optimal Experience . New York : Harper Perennial . [ 5 ] DGT . DGT Projects . 2007 [ cited 18 / 01 / 2007 ] ; Available from : http : / / www . dgtprojects . com / [ 6 ] Elliot , C . , Lester , J . , & Rickel , J . 1997 . Integrating affective computing into animated tutoring agents . In Proceedings of the IJCAI Workshop on Animated Interface Agents : Making Them Intelligent . Nagoya , Japan . [ 7 ] I . Poggi , C . Pelachaud , F . de Rosis , Carofiglio , V . , & Carolis , B . D . 2005 . GRETA . A Believable Embodied Conversational Agent . In Zancarano , O . S . a . M . ed . Multimodal Intelligent Information Presentation . Kluwer . [ 8 ] Jegers , K . 2007 . Pervasive game flow : understanding player enjoyment in pervasive gaming Comput . Entertain . , 5 ( ACM Press ) , 1544 - 3574 . [ 9 ] Kanda , T . , Hirano , T . , & Daniel , E . 2004 . Interactive Robots as Social Partners and Peer Tutors for Children : A Field Trial . Human - Computer Interaction , 19 , 61 - 84 . [ 10 ] Kerrigan’s , T . Tom Kerrigan’s Home Page . 2007 [ cited 18 / 01 / 2007 ] ; Available from : http : / / home . comcast . net / ~ tckerrigan / . [ 11 ] Leite , I . 2007 . iCat , the Chess Tutor . MSc Thesis , Instituto Superior Técnico - Technical University of Lisbon . [ 12 ] Leite , I . , Martinho , C . , Pereira , A . , & Paiva , A . 2008 . iCat : an Affective Game Buddy Based on Anticipatory Mechanisms . In Padgham , et al . eds . 7th Int . Conf . on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems ( AAMAS 2008 ) . Portugal , Estoril . [ 13 ] Lester , J . C . , Stone , B . A . , & Stelling , G . D . 1999 . Lifelike pedagogical agents for mixed - initiative problem solving in constructivist learning environments . User Modeling and User - Adapted Interaction , 9 ( 1 ) , 44 . [ 14 ] Looije , R . 2006 . iCat for you : A comparison between different personal e - health assistants . MSc Thesis . [ 15 ] Marsella , S . C . 2003 . Interactive Pedagogical Drama : Carmen’s Bright IDEAS Assessed . In Intelligent Virtual Agents . 1 - 4 . [ 16 ] Martinho , C . , & Paiva , A . 2006 . Using Anticipation to Create Believable Behaviour . AAAI 2006 , Jul , 175 - 180 . [ 17 ] Paiva , A . , & Machado , I . 2002 . Lifelong training with Vincent , a web - based pedagogical agent . International journal of continuing engineering education and life - long learning , 12 , 254 - 266 . [ 18 ] Pfeifer , R . , & Scheier . , C . 1999 . Understanding Intelligence . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . [ 19 ] Sweetser , P . , & Wyeth , P . 2005 . GameFlow : a model for evaluationg player enjoyment in games . Comput . Entertain . , 3 ( 3 ) , 3 - - 3 . [ 20 ] Wainer , J . , Feil - Seifer , D . J . , Shell , D . A . , & Mataric , M . J . 2006 . The role of physical embodiment in human - robot interaction . In IEEE Proceedings of the International Workshop on Robot and Human Interactive Communication . Hatfield , United Kingdom , 117 - 122 . 1256