a r X i v : 2112 . 05676v1 [ c ond - m a t . s o f t ] 10 D ec 2021 D R A F T Optimal transport and control of active drops Suraj Shankar a , 1 , Vidya Raju b , 1 , and L . Mahadevan a , b , c , 2 a Department of Physics , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA 02138 , USA ; b Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA 02138 , USA ; c Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA 02138 , USA This manuscript was compiled on December 13 , 2021 Understanding the complex patterns in space - time exhibited by ac - tive systems has been the subject of much interest in recent times . Complementing this forward problem is the inverse problem of con - trolling active matter . Here we use optimal control theory to pose the problem of transporting a slender drop of an active ﬂuid and de - termine the dynamical proﬁle of the active stresses to move it with minimal viscous dissipation . By parametrizing the position and size of the drop using a low - order description based on lubrication the - ory , we uncover a natural “gather - move - spread” strategy that leads to an optimal bound on the maximum achievable displacement of the drop relative to its size . In the continuum setting , the competition be - tween passive surface tension , and active controls generates richer behaviour with futile oscillations and complex drop morphologies that trade internal dissipation against the transport cost to select op - timal strategies . Our work combines active hydrodynamics and opti - mal control in a tractable and interpretable framework , and begins to pave the way for the spatiotemporal manipulation of active matter . Optimal transport | Control | Active ﬂuids | Drops I n recent years , active ﬂuids composed of internally driven units have emerged as a powerful platform to manipulate and morph matter far from equilibrium ( 1 – 3 ) . Such ﬂuids have been assembled from a variety of biological and syn - thetic constituents , including self - propelled colloids , driven bioﬁlaments and living cells ( 4 – 7 ) . These systems often ex - hibit complex spatiotemporal dynamics and pattern forma - tion that has been the focus of intense research eﬀorts in the past two decades or so . While a great deal is now understood about the emergent collective dynamics in active ﬂuids ( 8 ) , much less is known about how we can control or harness such collective phenom - ena to achieve functional goals . Recent experimental advances in microfabrication and optogenetic techniques have allowed the development of novel bacterial and synthetic reconsti - tuted systems to begin addressing this question in diﬀerent contexts , such as active engines for eﬃcient work extraction ( 9 , 10 ) , the dynamic control of reconﬁgurable density patterns ( 11 , 12 ) , and the targeted creation and transport of localized structures such as defects ( 13 , 14 ) . On a diﬀerent scale , the collective control of migrating and proliferating cellular mono - layers through patterned substrates ( 15 , 16 ) or external ﬁelds ( 17 , 18 ) also presents new possibilities for the control of active biological matter . The capacity for spontaneous and autonomous motion in active ﬂuids raises a natural question : what are the optimal strategies to spatially transport active materials ? The general problem of optimal mass transport , i . e . , ﬁnding the easiest or cheapest way to move mass from one place to another , began with early work by Monge ( 19 ) and Kantorovich ( 20 ) , and has been explored extensively in mathematics , economics and the physical sciences for over two centuries now ( 21 ) . While the conventional Monge - Kantorovich formulation of optimal transport relies on a single constraint of global mass conserva - tion and eschews any explicit dynamics , Benamou and Brenier ( 22 ) converted the problem to one of trajectory optimization by reformulating its solution in terms of ﬂuid dynamics , albeit of a ﬁctional inviscid ﬂuid obeying pressure - less potential ﬂow . But real ﬂuids , including active ﬂuids , obey complex physical dynamics without immediate counterparts in standard opti - mal transport formulations , leading us to ask , how can we construct optimal transport policies to move physical materi - als ? Here we pose this question in the simplest setting of trans - porting an active drop by dynamically controlling its internal activity in space - time . By incorporating the dynamical con - straints of droplet motion using the lubrication approxima - tion , and expressing the cost of transport in terms of the dis - sipation rate , we ask if we can determine the internal activity to move the drop from one place to another while minimizing the total dissipation , thus bringing it within the framework of optimal control theory . By projecting the continuum description of droplet motion onto a ﬁnite dimensional slow manifold , we derive a reduced system of ordinary diﬀerential equations for the position and size of the droplet . Interestingly , for a range of parameters , an intuitive “gather - move - spread” style strategy emerges nat - urally as an optimum within our framework . Numerical sim - ulations of the continuum equations using an evolutionary al - gorithm to determine the optimal activity proﬁle conﬁrms the qualitative nature of the results obtained from the reduced or - der model . Together these solutions provide a comprehensive yet interpretable framework ( Fig . 1 ) to understand the opti - . . Signiﬁcance Statement Transportation in its broadest sense is an important task in a variety of ﬁelds including engineering , physics , biology and economics , and a great deal is known about optimal and efﬁcient strategies to move matter , energy and information around . But can we craft similar optimal protocols to transport autonomously moving ( active ) matter such as self - propelled active drops or migrating cells ? We develop an optimal con - trol framework to transport such active ﬂuid drops with the least amount of energy dissipated , by manipulating the spatio - temporal proﬁle of its internal active stresses . By combining numerical solutions and analytical insight , we uncover simple principles and characteristic trade - offs that govern the optimal policies , suggesting general strategies for optimal transporta - tion in a wide variety of synthetic and biological active systems . The authors declare no competing interests . 1 S . S . and V . R . contributed equally to this work . 2 Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to L . M . Email : lma - hadev @ g . harvard . edu . www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . XXXXXXXXXX PNAS | December 13 , 2021 | vol . XXX | no . XX | 1 – 8 D R A F T Fig . 1 . Optimal transport of an active drop . A schematic illustrating our framework to solve the problem of transporting an active drop by minimizing a speciﬁed cost function , such as the mechanical work . The spatiotemporal proﬁle of activity ζ ( x , t ) is the control variable and the transport task involves moving the drop from position X 0 and size R 0 to a ﬁnal position X T and size R T in a ﬁnite time T . We employ two complementary approaches - ( i ) ﬁnite dimensional optimal control using Pontryagin’s maximum principle on an ODE based reduced order model that capture parametrized features of the drop , ( ii ) constrained numerical optimization of the nonlinear continuum PDE using a gradient - free evolutionary algorithm such as Covariance Matrix Adaptation ( CMA - ES , see main text ) . mal solutions obtained , and highlights the resulting trade - oﬀs between cost , transport precision and eﬃciency that can be tuned by the interplay of passive and active stresses in the system . Mathematical model for optimal droplet transport Lubrication dynamics of an active drop . We describe the dy - namics of a slender drop of an active suspension on a solid surface in the asymptotic limit exempliﬁed by viscous lubri - cation theory ( 23 , 24 ) . For simplicity , we consider a two - dimensional drop ( 2D ) moving in the x - direction ( see Fig . 2 ) and neglect gravity by assuming the drop size to be smaller than the capillary length . Fluid incompressibility requires that ∇ · u = ∂ x u + ∂ z v = 0 , where u = ( u ( x , z , t ) , v ( x , z , t ) ) is the local ﬂow velocity . Upon depth integrating the incom - pressibility equation , and noting the free surface boundary condition v | z = h = ∂ t h + u∂ x h | z = h , where h ( x , t ) is the height proﬁle of the drop , we obtain the conservation law ∂ t h + ∂ x q = 0 . [ 1 ] Here the mass ﬂux q = h h u i , with the average horizontal velocity h u i = ( 1 / h ) ´ h 0 d z u . Assuming that there is no addi - tion or loss of mass of the drop , we can write this as a global condition ˆ d x h ( x , t ) = 1 , [ 2 ] to ﬁx our units of length . In the low - Reynolds number regime appropriate for small viscous drops , we operate in the Stokesian limit , wherein force balance implies ∇ · σ = 0 , where the total stress σ = − p I + η [ ∇ u + ( ∇ u ) T ] + σ a is the sum of the pressure p , a viscous stress ( in a liquid with shear viscosity η ) and an active stress . We assume that the active stress σ a = ζh ( ˆ n ˆ n − I / 2 ) ( 8 , 25 ) is proportional to the local density ∼ h , while depend - ing on the local orientation ˆ n of anisotropic active agents ∗ . ∗ An isotropic active pressure that is constant across the thickness of the drop does not change anything as it can be absorbed into p . The activity ζ ( x , t ) depends on space and time and originates from the density of force dipoles exerted by elongated active units , which can be of either sign , with ζ > 0 for contractile systems and ζ < 0 for extensile systems . This form of the ac - tive stress is applicable to drops of coherently swimming dense bacterial suspensions or ordered collections of motor protein driven cytoskeletal ﬁlaments present in synthetic drops or liv - ing cells ( 23 , 24 ) . For simplicity , we shall assume strong or - dering along the horizontal direction and neglect any rapid orientational relaxation to set ˆ n ≃ ˆ x to lowest order in gradi - ents ( | ∂ x h | ≪ 1 ) . The active forcing nonetheless survives in this limit , as the active stress directly depends on the local density of the drop ( ∼ h ) , unlike previous models ( 23 , 24 ) that rely on splay - bend deformations of orientational order . In the lubrication limit corresponding to a slender drop , | ∂ x h | 2 ≪ 1 so that we can neglect longitudinal ﬂow gradi - ents as | ∂ 2 x u | ≪ | ∂ 2 z u | and | ∂ x v | ≪ | ∂ z u | . Then the stress in the ﬂuid is dominated by the pressure , which is deter - mined by the capillary boundary condition on the drop surface σ zz | z = h = γ∂ 2 x h , where γ is the interfacial tension , and yields p = − ( ζ / 2 ) h − γ∂ 2 x h . Using this in the horizontal force balance equation , along with the no - slip ( u | z = 0 = 0 ) and free surface ( ∂ z u | z = h = 0 ) boundary conditions , yields the horizontal ve - locity proﬁle u = z ( 2 h − z ) ∂ x σ / 2 η where σ = ζh + γ∂ 2 x h is the eﬀective uniaxial stress . Averaging the velocity through the thickness of the drop shows that the net ﬂux is q = h h u i = h 3 3 η ∂ x ( ζh + γ∂ 2 x h ) . [ 3 ] Eqs . 1 and 3 complemented by boundary and initial condi - tions on the height of the ﬁlm and its derivatives completely describe the macroscopic dynamics of an active drop on a substrate , once the activity ﬁeld ζ ( x , t ) is speciﬁed . For ﬁnite drops , in the neighborhood of the contact line the bound - ary conditions associated with partial slip , pre - wetting ﬁlms and / or ﬁnite contact angles have to be accounted for ( 26 , 27 ) ( see SI ) . In our formulation , the passive surface tension γ 2 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . XXXXXXXXXX Shankar et al . D R A F T Fig . 2 . Model of an active drop moving on a substrate . The horizontal ﬂow veloc - ity u ( x , z , t ) driven by active internal stresses ( σ a ) and surface tension ( γ ) adopts a Poiseuille - like proﬁle in the drop interior , characteristic of lubrication theory . The drop height h ( x , t ) obeys the continuity equation ( Eq . 1 ) with a ﬂux q that encodes the constitutive relation ( Eq . 3 ) for how activity drives ﬂuid ﬂow . The spatial proﬁle of activity ( ζ ( x , t ) ) is a simple linear ramp with a constant offset , allowing for both drop translation and size change ( Eq . 7 ) . serves to regulate the drop curvature , while the ( controllable ) activity ζ ( x , t ) enters as an unknown spatiotemporally vary - ing nonlinear diﬀusivity , but is analogous to gravity ( 26 ) . Optimal transport . The optimal transport of an active drop requires ﬁnding an actuation protocol for the activity proﬁle ζ ( x , t ) that moves the drop at a minimal cost . We choose a physically motivated cost C = W + T which includes two terms , an integrated bulk cost that tracks the total mechan - ical work ( W ) done by the active and passive forces , and a terminal cost ( T ) that penalizes any discrepancy between the ﬁnal and desired state of the drop . Within the lubrication approximation , the viscous dissipation in the drop ∼ η ( ∂ z u ) 2 is dominated by shear , so that the total mechanical work is given by W = ˆ T 0 d t ˆ d x h 3 3 η ( ∂ x σ ) 2 . [ 4 ] As expected , the total amount of energy expended and lost via dissipation by the system is always non - negative ( W ≥ 0 ) . We note that this is equivalent to stating that the eﬀective mechanical energy in the drop E = ( 1 / 2 ) ´ d x [ γ ( ∂ x h ) 2 − ζh 2 ] satisﬁes the condition d E / d t = − ´ d x ( h 3 / 3 η ) ( ∂ x σ ) 2 < 0 if ∂ t ζ = 0 and boundary ﬂuxes are absent , i . e . , the system is dissipative . The work done by the active stress alone ( W a = ´ T 0 d t ´ d x h h u i ∂ x ( ζh ) ) on the other hand is not guaranteed to be a well - behaved cost function as W a can be of either sign in general ( though W a = W ≥ 0 when γ = 0 ) , reﬂecting the possibility of both energy consumption and extraction from the nonequilibrium system ( 28 ) . Here , we have not included the energy cost required to maintain the active machinery ( 29 ) ; in the simplest setting this is proportional to the total amount of the active ﬂuid , which in our case is a constant . For simplicity , we have assumed that the total time dura - tion T is ﬁxed , though , other strategies such as minimal time control are possible . However , we do account for a terminal cost to minimally captures the intent of the task , which is to translate the drop by a ﬁxed distance and control its ﬁ - nal spread as well . We incorporate this in a simple quadratic term T = µ X (cid:18) X ( T ) − X T X T (cid:19) 2 + µ R (cid:18) R ( T ) − R T R T (cid:19) 2 , [ 5 ] where X T and R T are the desired values for the drop center of mass and the drop size at the end of the transport . The corresponding penalties are µ X and µ R for the terminal posi - tion and size terms . As mentioned previously , the drop has compact support and ﬁnite size which is denoted by R ( t ) and its position is given by the center of mass , namely X ( t ) = ˆ d x xh ( x , t ) , [ 6 ] both of which can be evaluated at the ﬁnal time t = T to compute T ( Eq . 5 ) . We will always set the initial position of the drop to be at the origin , X ( 0 ) = 0 , without loss of generality . It is worthwhile to pause here to compare our formula - tion of optimal droplet transport with the classical Monge - Kantorovich formulation of optimal transport ( 19 – 22 ) . Un - like the conventional formulation , where the sole constraint is global mass conservation ( Eq . 2 ) , here we constrain the dynamics to account for both local mass and momentum con - servation . The latter is a direct consequence of the physics of ﬂuid motion that dictates how the material responds to local actuation of active stresses , as speciﬁed by Eqs . 1 and 3 . As a result , our transport plan does not simply rely on a regis - tration solution of a static Monge - Ampére equation ( 21 ) . A further salient feature worth emphasizing is the parabolic na - ture of our dynamics where the control ( activity ) enters as a nonlinear diﬀusivity by virtue of the geometric reduction intrinsic to drops and thin ﬁlms . This is distinct from the hyperbolic setting present in Benamou - Brennier style formu - lations ( 22 ) where the velocity ﬁeld is the control variable . Protocol for optimal droplet transport With this minimal physical framework in hand , how can we compute the optimal transport policies ? We choose two dif - ferent routes of solving the problem ( Fig . 1 ) . First , we project our nonlinear partial diﬀerential equation ( PDE ) for the drop dynamics ( Eqs . 1 , 3 ) onto a ﬁnite number of low order modes that correlate with the location , size and shape of the droplet . We propose a strategy that minimizes or eliminates drift terms in the reduced description by considering the active controlled dynamics within a low - dimensional slow manifold that is ap - proximately invariant to the passive ( non - controlled ) forces . The resulting ordinary diﬀerential equations ( ODEs ) can then be handled using standard optimal control theory ( 30 ) , which we solve both analytically and numerically . We then com - pare this reduced order description to the full PDE model , for which we analyze the optimal control problem numeri - cally . However , unlike conventional forward problems that are solved with initial values in time , the controlled dynam - ics requires the solution to a much harder boundary - value - problem in time . One way to solve this problem is to stochas - tically search for diﬀerent initializations using a large num - ber of forward runs to ﬁnd an appropriate solution satisfying the required boundary condition . We implement this using a gradient - free covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy ( CMA - ES ) ( 31 ) , as explained later and in the SI . Shankar et al . PNAS | December 13 , 2021 | vol . XXX | no . XX | 3 D R A F T 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 - 4 - 2 2 4 6 8 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 0 Fig . 3 . ODE optimal control . ( A - B ) Sample trajectories for the globally optimal mean ( ζ 0 ) and gradient ( ∆ ζ ) activity are shown in A , and the associated controlled dynamics for the drop position ( X ) and size ( R ) are shown in B . The parameters chosen are X T = 0 . 8 , R 0 = √ 6 , R T = 3 , T = 1 and η = 0 . 1 . Note that as η sets a time scale , only the ratio T / η is important . For these parameter values , we see that the size change is non - monotonic , which is reﬂected in the sign change in the mean activity ζ 0 ( t ) . The initial contractile activity ( ζ 0 > 0 ) causesthe drop to shrink and consequentlyaccelerate its translation , and later the activity switches over to become extensile ( ζ 0 < 0 ) to allow the drop to reach its larger ﬁnal size R T . ( C ) The phase diagram here represents the feasibility region for optimal transport of a parabolic active drop , as a function of the non - dimensionalized drop displacement ( X T / R 0 ) and the its size disparity ( R T / R 0 ) . The black curve is the maximum achievable displacement X T for a given relative change in size ( R T / R 0 ) , beyond which no smooth optimal controls exist . Below the black curve is the feasible region , with the shaded colour representing the total work done ( nondimensionalized as W T / ( ηR 40 ) ) by the globally optimal policy , with the cost increasing from blue to red . The blue curves in the shaded region demarcate the parameter space where the global optimizer has a monotonic or non - monotonic size dependence as a function of time . Non - monotonic changes in size are favoured in the region bordered by the blue and black curves , and only occur when R T > R 0 . For R T < R 0 , the optimal policies have a monotonic size dependence . The black dot corresponds to the solution shown in ( A - B ) . ODE control . For simplicity , we consider a minimal setting where the spatial variation of the activity is ﬁxed , but its time variation is arbitrary . As we are primarily interested in controlling the position and size of the drop , the simplest spatial variation of activity that can accomplish both is a linear proﬁle , ζ ( x , t ) = ζ 0 ( t ) + ∆ ζ ( t ) (cid:18) x − a ( t ) R ( t ) − 1 2 (cid:19) , [ 7 ] where ζ 0 ( t ) is a time - varying mean activity and ∆ ζ ( t ) is a time - varying gradient in activity ( Fig . 2 ) . We choose this spe - ciﬁc form which depends explicitly on the drop size R ( t ) and the position of the left edge of the drop a ( t ) , so that the ( spa - tial ) average activity in the drop is ( 1 / R ( t ) ) ´ h > 0 d x ζ ( x , t ) = ζ 0 ( t ) . We note that while ζ 0 essentially controls the size of the drop , with ζ 0 > 0 leading to contraction and ζ 0 < 0 leading to expansion , the linear gradient in activity ∆ ζ controls the drop translation , the direction of which is determined by the sign of ∆ ζ . In contrast with recent works that have explored bulk contractility driven crawling of cells ( 24 , 32 ) and shown how it optimizes the mechanical eﬃciency of steady motion ( 29 ) , here we address the unsteady dynamics and its control problem . The relative importance of the active drive versus surface tension is quantiﬁed by a dimensionless active capillary num - ber Ca ζ = (cid:28) | ∆ ζ ( t ) | R ( t ) 2 γ (cid:29) T , [ 8 ] where the time average h A i T = ( 1 / T ) ´ T 0 d t A . As will be clear later , Eq . 8 is akin to the conventional deﬁnition of a capillary number ( 27 ) , only now with the velocity scale set by the activity gradient ( ∆ ζ ) which is essential to drive drop motion † . For large Ca ζ ≫ 1 , active forcing dominates surface † Similarly , we can deﬁne an active Bond number Bo ζ = h | ζ 0 ( t ) | R ( t ) 2 / γ i T to characterize the relative importance of the average activity ( associated with size change ) compared to surface tension . Since Ca ζ is more directly relevant for transport and in most of our results , for instance inFig . 4 , both Bo ζ and Ca ζ areempiricallycorrelated ( not shown ) , we donot considerthe active Bond number any further . tension and we can safely neglect boundary eﬀects , while for Ca ζ ∼ 1 − O ( 10 ) , active and passive forces compete and the equations have to be generalized to include the dynamics of the contact lines , as detailed in the SI . We project the nonlinear PDE ( Eqs . 1 and 3 ) onto a trun - cated set of modes that we choose so that the resulting ODE system is as drift - free as possible , i . e . , the system lacks dy - namics in the absence of the controls ( here , activity ) . This is achieved by noting that the ﬂux due to capillary forces van - ishes when ∂ 3 x h ( x , t ) = 0 and the drop adopts a parabolic pro - ﬁle . This permits a simple parametrization of the drop proﬁle via two modes of deformation - a translation in the center of mass X ( t ) and a change in the size R ( t ) , which along with Eq . 2 gives h ( x , t ) = 6 R ( t ) 3 (cid:20) R ( t ) 2 4 − ( x − X ( t ) ) 2 (cid:21) . [ 9 ] Note that h ( x , t ) = 0 at the two ends of the drop , x = X ( t ) ± R ( t ) / 2 , and vanishes outside this region . While trans - lation is a genuine zero mode of capillarity , size change of the drop is only an approximate zero mode that is violated near the boundaries where wetting and contact angle physics be - comes important ( 27 ) . Nonetheless , by focusing on the bulk dynamics , we obtain a two - dimensional manifold spanned by X ( t ) and R ( t ) that remains approximately invariant under the action of capillary forces . Employing a Galerkin approximation allows us to compute spatial moments of the ﬂux q ( x , t ) and project the continuum equations onto this manifold to obtain a pair of nonlinearly coupled ODEs ( see SI ) ˙ X ( t ) = 18∆ ζ ( t ) 35 ηR ( t ) 4 , ˙ R ( t ) = − 24 ζ 0 ( t ) 7 ηR ( t ) 4 . [ 10 ] As expected , the mean ( ζ 0 ) and gradient ( ∆ ζ ) components of the active stress independently control the drop size and position respectively . By construction , surface tension γ is absent in Eq . 10 and the equation is drift - free . The existence 4 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . XXXXXXXXXX Shankar et al . D R A F T of optimal controls is predicated on an important property of the dynamics , namely controllability ( 33 , 34 ) , i . e . the ex - istence of a path connecting any two points in the state or conﬁguration space , spanned here by X and R ( see SI for a more detailed explanation ) . As the two controls ( ζ 0 , ∆ ζ ) en - ter linearly and independently , and the dynamics has no ﬁxed points for nonvanishing controls , one can easily conﬁrm that Eq . 10 is controllable , allowing us to guarantee the ability to steer the system from any state to any other state within the space of drop conﬁgurations labeled by ( X , R ) . The absence of any drift ( control independent ) terms presents a technical advantage as the system permits a global rather than local notion of controllability even when the dynamics is nonlinear ( see SI ) , thereby justifying our mode reduction strategy . For simplicity , we consider the ﬁxed end point problem where the terminal conditions are imposed strictly ( X ( T ) = X T , R ( T ) = R T ) , in which case , the total cost reduces to the net dissipation ( C = W ) . The drop parametrization ( Eq . 9 ) allows us to easily compute the dissipation rate to be L = 1 ηR 6 h 72 35 ζ 2 0 + 54 77 ∆ ζ 2 i , [ 11 ] whose time integral gives the cost ( W = ´ T 0 d t L ) . As ex - pected , we obtain a simple sum of squares in terms of the two active drives , along with a strong size dependence aris - ing from the geometry of the drop . To solve the optimal control problem , we employ Pontryagin’s Maximum Princi - ple that provides the necessary conditions for optimality ( 35 ) . Upon introducing the costates ( Lagrange multipliers ) p X ( t ) and p R ( t ) to enforce the dynamical constraints in Eq . 10 , a necessary condition for optimality is the maximization of the control Hamiltonian H = p X 18∆ ζ 35 ηR 4 − p R 24 ζ 0 7 ηR 4 − L , [ 12 ] with respect to the controls ( see SI ) . This gives ζ ∗ 0 = − 5 p R R 2 / 6 and ∆ ζ ∗ = 11 p X R 2 / 30 , which when substituted back into Eq . 12 gives the conserved Hamiltonian H = H ( ζ ∗ 0 , ∆ ζ ∗ ) . The candidate extremals for the optimal con - trol problem satisfy Hamiltonian dynamics in terms of the state variables ( ˙ X = ∂ p X H , ˙ R = ∂ p R H ) and corresponding costates ( ˙ p X = − ∂ X H , ˙ p R = − ∂ R H ) . For the state variables , this gives back Eq . 10 driven now by the optimal controls ( ζ ∗ 0 , ∆ ζ ∗ ) ; translational invariance enforces that ∂ X H = 0 , hence p X is conserved along the optimal trajectory . These coupled dynamical equations along with the initial and terminal conditions can be solved analytically to obtain the optimal transport protocols ( see SI ) to displace an active drop by a distance X T and change its size from R 0 to R T in a ﬁnite time interval T . A representative solution is plotted in Fig . 3 ( A - B ) for X T = 0 . 8 , R 0 = √ 6 and R T = 3 . The ﬁrst order necessary conditions generally allow for non - uniqueness of the candidate extrema , but we only show the global opti - mizer in Fig . 3 . For the chosen parameters , the optimal pro - tocol leads to a non - monotonic change in drop size ( Fig . 3B ) , ﬁrst decreasing and later increasing to reach the ﬁnal size R T . This is reﬂected in the sign change of the mean active stress ζ 0 ( Fig . 3A ) , which switches from being contractile ini - tially ( ζ 0 > 0 ) to extensile at later times ( ζ 0 < 0 ) . The drop translates smoothly with a maximal velocity precisely when the drop size is the smallest , even though the drive ( ∆ ζ ) is minimal at this point ( Fig . 3A ) . Hence , the drop executes a continuous version of an intuitive “gather - move - spread” like strategy that naturally emerges as an optimal transport plan in our framework . A simple concentration eﬀect that enhances the active drive in smaller drops underlies this phenomenon by allowing for faster transport at lower activity . Our solu - tion reveals a further striking result - for certain values of the target parameters ( set by X T and R T ) with strict terminal constraints , no continuous optimal policies for the transport problem exist ! This does not contradict the fact that the dy - namical system ( Eq . 10 ) is controllable , but rather highlights a subtlety . While controllability guarantees the presence of a trajectory in conﬁguration space that steers the drop to its desired ﬁnal state , and hence the existence of optimal con - trols , it does not in general guarantee this transport is either continuous or achievable in ﬁnite time . As shown by the coloured region bounded by the black curve in Fig . 3C , we have a feasible or reachable regime where smooth optimal solutions exist and the net dissipation is ﬁnite ( shown in the heat map , with the cost increasing from blue to red ) , while in the infeasible region , no smooth solution satis - ﬁes the terminal conditions . The blue curve in Fig . 3C further demarcates the parameter regime where the global optimum corresponds to polices with a monotonic change in drop size , where the mean activity ( ζ 0 ) maintains a ﬁxed sign . These appear either for suﬃciently small displacements or when the ﬁnal drop size is smaller than the initial one ( R T < R 0 ) . Non - smooth protocols can be constructed to access points in the in - feasible region in Fig . 3C , but they lack a natural parametriza - tion . As a result , the search for an optimal policy in this larger function space is analytically intractable and we focus only on smooth protocols for simplicity . The feasibility curve can alternatively be viewed as solving a maximin problem , where we maximize the minimum dissipation protocol over the translation X T for a ﬁxed change in drop size ( R T / R 0 ) , the solution for which roughly equipartitions the transport cost ( black curve in Fig . 3C , see SI for further details ) . Extending the ODE analysis to include changes in the drop shape via an asymmetry in the height proﬁle ( see SI for de - tails ) and solving the resulting equations using CasADi ( 36 ) and homotopy continuation techniques , we obtain optimal so - lutions that progressively deviate from the analytical solution ( Fig . 3 ) computed for the symmetric drop ( Eq . 9 ) . While small variations in the drop asymmetry result in smooth opti - mal policies , that are similar to those in Fig . 3A , larger values of drop asymmetry lead to solutions that depend sensitively on the terminal constraints and exhibit sharp jumps in the dy - namics of the drop conﬁguration that are not easy to interpret ( see SI ) . This suggests that a simple Galerkin - approximation and truncation beyond two modes ( the position and size ) re - quires more care and is susceptible to spurious instablities that do not faithfully capture the full continuum dynamics of the drop ( as will be evident in the following section ) . In light of this , we switch to the full PDE model . PDE control . As the PDE model permits complex shape change of the drop , we lift the restriction of the controlled dynamics on the slow manifold selected by capillarity and allow aritrary shape variations by tuning γ ( conversely Ca ζ , Eq . 8 ) . In order to select smooth control policies , we gen - eralize the cost function C = W + T + R ( SI ) to include a regularizing term R in addition to the total dissipation ( W , Shankar et al . PNAS | December 13 , 2021 | vol . XXX | no . XX | 5 D R A F T 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 10 1 10 2 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 1 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 0 . 15 0 . 20 0 . 25 0 . 30 0 . 35 0 . 40 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 (cid:1) 5 0 5 10 15 20 25 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 (cid:0) 10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 Fig . 4 . PDE optimal control . ( A ) The optimal activity controls ( ζ 0 ( t ) , ∆ ζ ( t ) , left ) and corresponding trajectories for the state variables ( X ( t ) , R ( t ) , middle ) and the full drop proﬁle ( h ( x , t ) , right ) , obtained by numerical optimization for small surface tension or large active capillary number ( γ = 0 . 15 , Ca ζ = 383 . 66 ) . The drop adopts a strongly asymmetric shape , with an advancing peak and receding tail , like in Ref . ( 24 ) . ( B ) Similar plots with the optimal activity controls ( ζ 0 ( t ) , ∆ ζ ( t ) , left ) , and corresponding drop trajectory ( X ( t ) , R ( t ) , middle ; h ( x , t ) , right ) , now obtained for large surface tension or small active capillary number ( γ = 2 , Ca ζ = 30 . 91 ) . The transport plan fares poorly as the drops fails to reach the desired ﬁnal position and size , and wastes a signiﬁcant amount of energy in futile size oscillations ( R ( t ) , middle ) that don’t aid in transport . Both ( A - B ) are computed using X T = 0 . 8 and R T = 3 ( X 0 = 0 and R 0 = √ 6 is kept ﬁxed throughout ) , though similar policies are obtained for other values of X T / R T as well . ( C - E ) The total cost ( C opt , C ) , efﬁciency [ ǫ W ( Eqs . 13 , 14 ) , D ] , and precision ( X ( T ) / R ( T ) , E ) of the numerically computed optimal transport protocol plotted against Ca ζ , for different tasks labeled by increasing X T / R T ( blue to green ) . Remarkably , the performance curves present an optimal trade - off in balancing active forces against passive ones to attain improved drop transport plans at intermediate values of Ca ζ . Eq . 4 ) and a ﬁnite terminal cost ( T with µ X , µ R < ∞ , Eq . 5 ) . The regularization cost penalizes temporal jumps or changes in activity ( see SI ) and it implements a discretized version of minimal attention control ( 37 ) . In the presence of a ﬁnite surface tension γ , we must also correctly implement contact line motion at the boundary of the drop , which we do by simply introducing a thin precursor ﬁlm that coats the entire surface and a disjoining potential ( 26 ) that sets both the ﬁlm thickness and the equilibrium contact angle of a sessile drop ( see SI for details ) . These additional terms are negligible in the bulk of the drop , but are dominant near the contact lines , which will become important when active and capillary forces are comparable ( Ca ζ . O ( 10 ) ) , similar to recently explored scenarios the context of steady migration of cells ( 24 ) in the absence of any dynamic control . We numerically integrate the dynamical equations using a ﬁnite element method implemented using the FEniCS open source package ( 38 , 39 ) and perform constrained optimization using a gradient - free covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy ( CMA - ES ) ( 31 ) ( see SI for details ) . Multiple runs are sequentially minimized with independent initializations for the activity proﬁle and we choose the lowest cost solution as an estimate for the optimum . As before , the drop is initially at the origin ( X 0 = 0 ) with a size R 0 = √ 6 , which corresponds to an equilibrium contact angle of φ eq = π / 4 . The viscosity η = 0 . 1 and total time T = 1 are ﬁxed in all the runs . To probe the caliber of the optimal policies obtained across tasks of increasing diﬃculty , we vary the imposed drop translation X T along with the surface tension γ . For small surface tension or strong active driving ( large Ca ζ ) , the dynamics of the drop is dominated by bulk dissi - pation . A typical trajectory of the drop proﬁle ( see Movie S1 ) and the controls is shown in Fig . 4A , for X T = 0 . 8 and Ca ζ ∼ 383 . The drop develops a prominent advancing peak and a thin receding tail ( Fig . 4A , right and Movie S1 ) , sim - ilar to steadily translating drop shapes recently obtained in Ref . ( 24 ) . The optimal controls and the drop motion vary smoothly ( Fig . 4A , left and middle ) and successfully accom - 6 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . XXXXXXXXXX Shankar et al . D R A F T plish the transport task . Although the drop undergoes dra - matic shape changes , the optimal controls are qualitatively consistent with our ODE results ( Fig . 3A - B ) . In particular , we note that the mean activity ( ζ 0 ) changes sign , switching from contractile to extensile activity , as predicted by our reduced order description ( Fig . 3A ) . Larger values of surface tension ( smaller Ca ζ ) lead to a qualitatively diﬀerent scenario . As shown in Fig . 4B and Movie S2 , for X T = 0 . 8 and Ca ζ ∼ 31 , the drop remains nearly stationary for a ﬁnite time period , af - ter which it advances by a small amount . This is reminiscent of “waiting - time” solutions ( 40 ) that are present in nonlin - ear diﬀusion equations of the form we have here . The drop performs rapid small scale oscillations of its shape and size ( Fig . 4B , middle and right ; Movie S2 ) that arise from a compe - tition between the active and passive ( capillary ) forces . While the active controls drive droplet motion , surface tension and substrate wetting resist variations in the drop shape and the contact angle , thereby limiting the translation achieved by the drop . The resulting “futile” oscillations wastefully dissipate large amounts of energy , performing poorly in the transport task ( Fig . 4B , left and middle ) . The varied optimal strategies obtained upon tuning sur - face tension suggests a potential trade - oﬀ between active and passive forces . While large Ca ζ allows for robust and eﬃcient transport , it also generates dramatic shape changes which dis - sipate excessive energy . Smaller Ca ζ restricts shape change , but consequently dissipates energy into futile oscillations that fail to complete the transport task . This suggests that an in - termediate surface tension or Ca ζ would serve as the best choice to tune the optimal transport plan by balancing ac - tive and passive forces . To quantify this trade - oﬀ , we employ three diﬀerent performance metrics as a function of Ca ζ and the task diﬃculty characterized by increasing X T / R T . The ﬁrst is simply the total cost of the optimal solution ( C opt ) , plotted in Fig . 4C . Second , we use a simple measure of eﬃ - ciency ( ǫ W ) to quantify the excess dissipation in the optimal solution ( Fig . 4D ) . We note that , for any arbitrary drop tra - jectory starting at the origin , there is a minimal amount of work that must necessarily be expended , given by ( see SI for a derivation ) W min = 3 η 2 T k h k 2 ∞ (cid:20) X ( T ) 2 + ( ∆ ( T ) − ∆ ( 0 ) ) 2 4 h ∆ i T (cid:21) , [ 13 ] where k h k ∞ = sup x , t h ( x , t ) is the maximum value of the drop height attained throughout its trajectory and ∆ ( t ) = ´ d x ( x − X ( t ) ) 2 h ( x , t ) is the variance in the drop height , which is related to the size of the drop ( ∆ ∝ R 2 ) . Note that Eq . 13 is independent of the rheology and constitutive law for the ﬂuid stress , and simply relies on the existence of a ﬂux q ( x , t ) that directly determines the dissipation ( see SI ) . As the work done in the optimal solution is bounded below by construction ( W opt ≥ W min ) , we deﬁne the mechanical eﬃciency for the optimal solution ǫ W = W min W opt ≤ 1 , [ 14 ] which quantiﬁes the extent to which energy is dissipated in in - ternal modes rather than transporting the drop ( Fig . 4D ) . Fi - nally , we also use the coeﬃcient of variation of the height , i . e . , the ratio of the ﬁnal displacement to size achieved by the drop , X ( T ) / R ( T ) , as a measure of transport precision ( Fig . 4E , solid ) , and compare it against the prescribed value X T / R T for a given transport task ( Fig . 4E , dashed ) . Interestingly , the optimal solutions for X T / R T = 0 . 2 , 0 . 27 achieve a higher precision ( solid curves , Fig . 4E ) than required by the task ( dashed lines , Fig . 4E ) across a large range of Ca ζ , but this enhanced performance degrades for larger X T / R T = 0 . 33 , 0 . 4 . As anticipated , all three performance metrics are nonmono - tonic and display an optimal trade - oﬀ at intermediate values of Ca ζ ( Fig . 4C - E ) , with both the eﬃciency and the preci - sion being maximized around Ca ζ ∼ 100 − 200 , while the optimal cost is minimal at a slightly higher Ca ζ ∼ 250 − 380 . Qualitatively similar trends appear as we vary the transport task via X T / R T ( Fig . 4C - E ) , though for larger values of X T / R T = 0 . 33 , 0 . 4 ( in the infeasible region of the symmet - ric ODE optimal transport , Fig . 3C ) , the performance curves exhibit more kinks , perhaps suggestive of a rougher cost land - scape with many nearly degenerate local minima when the task diﬃculty increases . Discussion Complementing classical optimal transportation and its hy - drodynamic analogies that use a very speciﬁc form of the cost ( 22 ) , we have formulated a new framework to address ques - tions of optimal mass transport in physical continua obeying complex dynamical constraints , and illustrated its utility in a simple yet rich problem of transporting a drop of an active sus - pension by dissipating the least amount of energy . Our strat - egy combines a ﬁnite dimensional ( ODE ) description based on a physically motivated mode reduction scheme , along with the full inﬁnite dimensional ( PDE ) model , both of which we couch within optimal control theory to obtain a tractable and inter - pretable characterization of the resulting optimal transport policies . An important outcome is the prediction of intuitive “gather - move - spread” style strategies and simple trade - oﬀs be - tween active and passive forces that emerge naturally within our formulation of optimal drop transport , with implications for a wide range of synthetic and living active matter . In synthetic systems , digital microﬂuidics ( 41 ) and bi - component volatile liquids ( 42 ) might provide an immediate platform to deploy our framework , while in a the biological context , our work is directly relevant to the control of self - propelled drops composed of microtubule - kinesin nematic gels ( 4 ) , swimming bacteria ( 43 ) , and isolated motile cells ( 44 , 45 ) that are often viewed as active drops ( 24 , 32 , 46 , 47 ) . Our results could also be tested using optogenetically controlled living motile cells ( 48 ) or in reconstituted active drops ( 4 , 49 ) . Since the cortical tension of individual cells varies in the range of γ ∼ 0 . 1 − 1 mN / m ( 50 ) , and the characteristic active stress ζh ∼ 1 kPa ( 46 ) , Ca ζ ∼ 10 2 − 10 3 for a R = 10 µ m size cell ( assuming an average height h ∼ 1 µ m ) , allowing for an explo - ration of the transport cost versus internal dissipation trade - oﬀ at intermediate Ca ζ ∼ O ( 100 ) that we have uncovered here . This suggests that contractility driven cellular motility may be optimal even beyond steady translation ( 29 ) by har - nessing dynamic optimal protocols and internally regulating diﬀerential contractility against surface tension . Extensions of our framework can also easily be used to address the con - trol and patterning of localized structures such as defects in active ﬂuids , which has been the focus of much research in recent years ( 13 , 14 , 51 , 52 ) . More broadly , beyond the control of active systems , our Shankar et al . PNAS | December 13 , 2021 | vol . XXX | no . XX | 7 D R A F T formulation of optimal transport oﬀers an alternative choice of transport metrics that are physically motivated and po - tentially richer than the conventional L 2 - Wasserstein norm common to standard optimal transport ( 21 ) , yet their math - ematical properties remain to be uncovered . A tantalizing possibility is to exploit thermodynamic analogies connecting minimum dissipation protocols in stochastic systems to opti - mal transport ( 53 ) . In this regard , a generalization of our framework to include ﬂuctuations within stochastic optimal control ( 54 ) would be a promising future direction . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . We acknowledge partial ﬁnancial sup - port from the Harvard Society of Fellows ( SS ) , the Harvard MRSEC DMR - 2011754 ( LM ) , The NSF Simons Center for Mathematics and Complex Biological Systems DMR - 1764269 ( LM ) the Simons Foundation ( LM ) and the Seydoux Fund ( LM ) and gratefully ac - knowledges illuminating discussions during the virtual 2020 KITP program on “Symmetry , Thermodynamics and Topology in Active Matter” , which was supported in part by the National Science Foun - dation under Grant No . NSF PHY - 1748958 . 1 . D Needleman , Z Dogic , Active matter at the interface between materials science and cell biology . Nat . Rev . Mater . 2 , 1 – 14 ( 2017 ) . 2 . RZhang , AMozaffari , JJde Pablo , Autonomous materialssystemsfromactiveliquidcrystals . Nat . Rev . Mater . 6 , 437 – 453 ( 2021 ) . 3 . S Shankar , ASouslov , MJ Bowick , MC Marchetti , V Vitelli , Topological active matter ( 2020 ) . 4 . T Sanchez , DT Chen , SJ DeCamp , M Heymann , Z Dogic , Spontaneous motion in hierarchi - callyassembled activematter . Nature 491 , 431 – 434 ( 2012 ) . 5 . A Bricard , JB Caussin , N Desreumaux , O Dauchot , D Bartolo , Emergence of macroscopic directed motion in populations of motile colloids . Nature 503 , 95 – 98 ( 2013 ) . 6 . SZhou , ASokolov , ODLavrentovich , ISAranson , Livingliquidcrystals . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 111 , 1265 – 1270 ( 2014 ) . 7 . G Duclos , et al . , Spontaneous shear ﬂow in conﬁned cellular nematics . Nat . physics 14 , 728 – 732 ( 2018 ) . 8 . MC Marchetti , et al . , Hydrodynamics of soft activematter . Rev . Mod . Phys . 85 , 1143 ( 2013 ) . 9 . G Vizsnyiczai , et al . , Light controlled 3d micromotors powered by bacteria . Nat . communica - tions 8 , 1 – 7 ( 2017 ) . 10 . S Krishnamurthy , S Ghosh , D Chatterji , R Ganapathy , A Sood , A micrometre - sized heat engine operating between bacterialreservoirs . Nat . Phys . 12 , 1134 – 1138 ( 2016 ) . 11 . J Arlt , VA Martinez , A Dawson , T Pilizota , WC Poon , Painting with light - powered bacteria . Nat . communications 9 , 1 – 7 ( 2018 ) . 12 . G Frangipane , et al . , Dynamic density shaping of photokinetic e . coli . Elife 7 , e36608 ( 2018 ) . 13 . TD Ross , et al . , Controlling organization and forcesin active matter through opticallydeﬁned boundaries . Nature 572 , 224 – 229 ( 2019 ) . 14 . R Zhang , et al . , Spatiotemporal control of liquidcrystalstructureand dynamicsthrough activ - itypatterning . Nat . Mater . 20 , 875 – 882 ( 2021 ) . 15 . TTuriv , etal . , Topologycontrolofhuman ﬁbroblastcellsmonolayerbyliquidcrystalelastomer . Sci . Adv . 6 , eaaz6485 ( 2020 ) . 16 . KD Endresen , M Kim , M Pittman , Y Chen , F Serra , Topological defects of integer charge in cellmonolayers . Soft Matter 17 , 5878 – 5887 ( 2021 ) . 17 . DJ Cohen , WJ Nelson , MM Maharbiz , Galvanotactic control of collective cell migration in epithelial monolayers . Nat . materials 13 , 409 – 417 ( 2014 ) . 18 . TJ Zajdel , G Shim , L Wang , A Rossello - Martinez , DJ Cohen , Scheepdog : programming electriccuestodynamicallyherdlarge - scalecellmigration . Cellsystems 10 , 506 – 514 ( 2020 ) . 19 . GMonge , Mémoire sur lathéorie desdéblais et des remblais . Histoirede l’AcadémieRoyale des Sci . de Paris , 666 – 704 ( 1781 ) . 20 . LV Kantorovich , On the translocation of masses in Dokl . Akad . Nauk . USSR ( NS ) . Vol . 37 , pp . 199 – 201 ( 1942 ) English translation : J . Math . Sci . , 133 , 4 ( 2006 ) , 1381 - 1382 . 21 . C Villani , Optimal transport : old and new . ( Springer Science & Business Media ) Vol . 338 , ( 2008 ) . 22 . JD Benamou , Y Brenier , A computational ﬂuid mechanics solution to the monge - kantorovich mass transfer problem . Numer . Math . 84 , 375 – 393 ( 2000 ) . 23 . JF Joanny , S Ramaswamy , A drop of active matter . J . Fluid Mech . 705 , 46 – 57 ( 2012 ) . 24 . A Loisy , J Eggers , TB Liverpool , Tractionless self - propulsion of active drops . Phys . review letters 123 , 248006 ( 2019 ) . A Loisy , J Eggers , TB Liverpool , How many ways a cell can move : the modes of self - propulsion of an activedrop . Soft matter 16 , 3106 – 3124 ( 2020 ) . 25 . RA Simha , S Ramaswamy , Hydrodynamic ﬂuctuations and instabilities in ordered suspen - sionsof self - propelled particles . Phys . review letters 89 , 058101 ( 2002 ) . 26 . PGDe Gennes , Wetting : staticsand dynamics . Rev . modern physics 57 , 827 ( 1985 ) . 27 . PG De Gennes , F Brochard - Wyart , D Quéré , Capillarity and wetting phenomena : drops , bubbles , pearls , waves . ( SpringerScience & Business Media ) , ( 2013 ) . 28 . P Pietzonka , É Fodor , C Lohrmann , ME Cates , U Seifert , Autonomous engines driven by activematter : Energetics and design principles . Phys . Rev . X 9 , 041032 ( 2019 ) . 29 . P Recho , JF Joanny , L Truskinovsky , Optimality of contraction - driven crawling . Phys . Rev . Lett . 112 , 218101 ( 2014 ) . 30 . DLiberzon , Calculusofvariationsand optimal controltheory : aconciseintroduction . ( Prince - ton universitypress ) , ( 2011 ) . 31 . NHansen , TheCMAEvolutionStrategy : AComparing Review , eds . JALozano , PLarrañaga , I Inza , E Bengoetxea . ( Springer BerlinHeidelberg , Berlin , Heidelberg ) , pp . 75 – 102 ( 2006 ) . 32 . P Recho , T Putelat , L Truskinovsky , Contraction - driven cell motility . Phys . review letters 111 , 108102 ( 2013 ) . 33 . RW Brockett , Nonlinear systems and differential geometry . Proc . IEEE 64 , 61 – 72 ( 1976 ) . 34 . R Hermann , A Krener , Nonlinear controllabilityand observability . IEEETransactions on auto - matic control 22 , 728 – 740 ( 1977 ) . 35 . L Pontryagin , Mathematical Theory of Optimal Processes . ( CRC Press ) , ( 2018 ) . 36 . JA Andersson , J Gillis , G Horn , JB Rawlings , M Diehl , Casadi : a software framework for nonlinear optimization and optimal control . Math . Program . Comput . 11 , 1 – 36 ( 2019 ) . 37 . W Brockett , Minimum attention control in Proceedings of the 36th IEEEConference on Deci - sion and Control . ( IEEE ) , Vol . 3 , pp . 2628 – 2632 ( 1997 ) . 38 . M Alnæs , et al . , The fenicsproject version 1 . 5 . Arch . Numer . Softw . 3 ( 2015 ) . 39 . ALogg , KAMardal , GWells , Automated solutionofdifferentialequations bytheﬁniteelement method : The FEniCSbook . ( Springer Science & BusinessMedia ) Vol . 84 , ( 2012 ) . 40 . A Lacey , J Ockendon , A Tayler , “waiting - time” solutions of a nonlinear diffusion equation . SIAM J . on Appl . Math . 42 , 1252 – 1264 ( 1982 ) . 41 . RB Fair , Digital microﬂuidics : is a true lab - on - a - chip possible ? Microﬂuid . Nanoﬂuidics 3 , 245 – 281 ( 2007 ) . 42 . NJ Cira , A Benusiglio , M Prakash , Vapour - mediated sensing and motility in two - component droplets . Nature 519 , 446 – 450 ( 2015 ) . 43 . M Rajabi , H Baza , T Turiv , OD Lavrentovich , Directional self - locomotion of active droplets enabled by nematic environment . Nat . Phys . 17 , 260 – 266 ( 2021 ) . 44 . K Keren , et al . , Mechanism of shape determination in motile cells . Nature 453 , 475 – 480 ( 2008 ) . 45 . DB Brückner , et al . , Stochastic nonlinear dynamics of conﬁned cell migration in two - state systems . Nat . Phys . 15 , 595 – 601 ( 2019 ) . 46 . K Kruse , J Joanny , F Jülicher , J Prost , Contractility and retrograde ﬂow in lamellipodium motion . Phys . biology 3 , 130 ( 2006 ) . 47 . E Tjhung , A Tiribocchi , D Marenduzzo , M Cates , A minimal physical model captures the shapes of crawling cells . Nat . communications 6 , 1 – 9 ( 2015 ) . 48 . YI Wu , et al . , A genetically encoded photoactivatable rac controls the motility of living cells . Nature 461 , 104 – 108 ( 2009 ) . 49 . H Boukellal , O Campás , JF Joanny , J Prost , C Sykes , Soft listeria : actin - based propulsion of liquid drops . Phys . Rev . E 69 , 061906 ( 2004 ) . 50 . G Salbreux , G Charras , E Paluch , Actin cortex mechanics and cellular morphogenesis . Trends cellbiology 22 , 536 – 545 ( 2012 ) . 51 . S Shankar , MC Marchetti , Hydrodynamics of active defects : from order to chaos to defect ordering . Phys . Rev . X 9 , 041047 ( 2019 ) . 52 . MM Norton , PGrover , MF Hagan , SFraden , Optimalcontrolof activenematics . Phys . review letters 125 , 178005 ( 2020 ) . 53 . E Aurell , C Mejía - Monasterio , P Muratore - Ginanneschi , Optimal protocols and optimal trans - port in stochasticthermodynamics . Phys . review letters 106 , 250601 ( 2011 ) . 54 . YChen , TTGeorgiou , MPavon , Optimaltransportinsystemsandcontrol . Annu . Rev . Control . Robotics , Auton . Syst . 4 ( 2020 ) . 8 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . XXXXXXXXXX Shankar et al . This figure " pnas - logo . png " is available in " png " (cid:10) format from : http : / / arxiv . org / ps / 2112 . 05676v1