a r X i v : 2111 . 03121v1 [ c ond - m a t . s o f t ] 4 N ov 2021 Activity - induced instabilities of brain organoids Kristian Thijssen , 1 , ∗ Guido L . A . Kusters , 2 , † and Amin Doostmohammadi 3 , ‡ 1 Yusuf Hamied Department of Chemistry , University of Cambridge , Lensﬁeld Rd , Cambridge CB2 1EW , UK 2 Department of Applied Physcis , Eindhoven University of Technology , Eindhoven , The Netherlands 3 The Niels Bohr Institute , University of Copenhagen , Copenhagen , Denmark We present an analytical and numerical investigation of the activity - induced hydrodynamic in - stabilities in model brain organoids . While several mechanisms have been introduced to explain the experimental observation of surface instabilities in brain organoids , the role of activity has been largely overlooked . Our results show that the active stress generated by the cells can be a , previously overlooked , contributor to the emergence of surface deformations in brain organoids . I . INTRODUCTION The surface of the human brain is characterised by a complex pattern of folds ( gyri ) and troughs ( sulci ) , allowing for a high area - to - volume ratio [ 1 – 3 ] . This in - tricate structure has increasingly been linked to intel - lectual ability , marking reduced cortical folding as in - dicative of cerebral impairments such as “smooth brain” ( lissencephaly ) . Indeed , aﬄicted human brains exhibit a markedly lower degree of gyriﬁcation , resulting in re - duced life expectancy and intellectual disability [ 4 , 5 ] . Recent advancements in the ﬁeld of stem - cell research provide a controlled , in vitro model system allowing the study of gyriﬁcation in the form of brain organoids : cultured , three - dimensional arrangements of pluripotent stem cells replicating some of the key features of human brain development [ 6 , 7 ] . Although the brain organoid model has been widely used in furthering understanding of a wealth of diseases [ 8 – 10 ] , the underlying physical mechanism governing gyriﬁcation has yet to be pinned down decisively . In this context , recent experimental work by Karzbrun et al . broke new ground by experimentally probing brain organoids for the onset of an interface instability that re - sults in the formation of folds on the organoid [ 11 ] ( see Figure 1a ) . In particular , they show the development of brain organoids over the course of several days , ob - serving the self - organisation of a concentric shell of cells around a spherical cavity ( lumen ) . Due to their active motility , the cell nuclei continually move radially inward and outward , dividing at the inner surface and eventu - ally accumulating at the outer surface . They ﬁnd prior to the onset of mechanical instability an increase in the density of the nuclei , as well as the aspect ratio , which indicates compression . Taking inspiration from polymer gel models [ 12 ] , they subsequently argue that these insta - bilities emerge from the diﬀerential swelling of the inner and outer cortex , inducing compressive stress [ 1 , 3 ] . Building on these observations , Balbi et al . [ 13 ] showed that an interplay between the lumen compression and the remodelling of the cortex determines the interface insta - ∗ K . T . contributed equally to this work with G . K . † G . L . A . K . contributed equally to this work with K . T . ‡ doostmohammadi @ nbi . ku . dk bility of the organoids . Riccobelli and Bevilasqua further showed [ 14 ] that surface tension generated by intercellu - lar adhesion in cellular aggregates also contributes to de - termining the onset of the interface instability . Recently , Engstrom et al . [ 15 ] argued that such elastic instabilities based on diﬀerential growth sketch an incomplete picture of the folding of brain organoids . Instead , they introduce a system - spanning ﬁbrous model of organoids with an elastic core ensnared by a growing , ﬂuid - like ﬁlm , sug - gesting that the details of the microstructure play an im - portant role in the emergence and structure of the wrin - kles . Notwithstanding these important contributions , here we consider a hitherto overlooked aspect of the mi - crostructural complexity of brain organoids in active stress generation by the cells , showing that activity can induce folding at the surface of model organoids in the form of hydrodynamic instabilities . Active stress be - tween cells has been shown to induce surface instabilities in epithelial cell layers [ 16 , 17 ] and surface deformations in membranes [ 18 ] . The model presented here expands on this list and is motivated by experiments in which the brain organoids are treated with cytoskeletal - inhibiting drugs [ 19 ] , where a marked decrease in the number of folds exhibited and the sharpness of the folds are observed [ 11 ] . Since the cytoskeletal ﬁlaments inside the cells con - tinuously generate active stress , we conjecture that in addition to a purely elastic wrinkling phenomenon fol - lowing diﬀerential swelling , the activity - driven instability can also contribute to the observed folding behaviour . The concept of active stress generation by cells is well established in the context of active matter , which de - scribes a material class that exists far from thermody - namic equilibrium by virtue of a local supply of energy . This energy is then converted into work by the con - stituents , resulting in active stress [ 20 ] . Examples ex - ude biological systems such as actin ﬁlaments [ 21 ] , micro - tubule bundles [ 22 ] and eukaryotic epithelial cells [ 23 , 24 ] . Furthermore , recent discrete numerical modelling of ep - ithelial shells [ 25 ] has demonstrated the role of activity in inducing morphological changes of the interface by con - sidering the cell - cell tension in the apical and basal sur - face planes of the cells . Here , we present a generic , continuum , two - phase framework , in which we describe the brain organoid as an active gel , to study the spatiotemporal dynamics of 2 active , self - deforming surfaces . This generic approach al - lows us to eﬀectively describe organisation of cells on long time and length scales in terms of the hydrodynamics of the active gel , as well as include the orientational order and contractile activity of the cell cytoskeleton , without reference to the microscopic details [ 26 ] . The hydrody - namic nature of the model , that accounts for the ﬂow of cells , together with the explicit role of the contractile active stress generation by the cell cytoskeleton , is what sets it apart from those mentioned above . We perform coarse - grained , continuum simulations in two - dimensions , showcasing that the number of folds is dependent on active stress generation by the contractile actomyosin machinery of the cells . An activity threshold needs to be surpassed for folding to occur , similar to ex - periments where the organoid needs to surpass a critical nuclear cell density for folding to occur . In this vein , our model naturally incorporates the eﬀect of cytoskeletal - inhibiting drugs on the folding behaviour of the organoid , whereas alternative approaches , e . g . , based on diﬀerential swelling , generally require the assumption of an actively contracted organoid core [ 13 ] . Additionally , we present a linear stability analysis of the governing equations in or - der to characterise the onset of the activity - driven insta - bilities . Taken together , our results suggest that active stress generation provides a currently - overlooked mecha - nism for cortical folding that is complementary to exist - ing models . II . MODEL We model the brain organoid ( see Figure 1 ) as a ring of an active gel ( with inner radius a and outer radius b ) [ 27 ] , representing the cortex , surrounding a passive isotropic cavity ( within the inner interface at radius a ) , which represents the lumen . Here , we diﬀerentiate be - tween the cortex and lumen region by introducing a bi - nary order parameter φ , with φ ∼ 1 in the cortex and φ ∼ 0 within the lumen region . Within this cortex re - gion , the cells and their associated cytoskeletal ﬁlaments are extended radially with clear orientational order ( see Figure 1a ) . To account for the orientational order asso - ciated with this microstructural feature of the cortex , we introduce a nematic order parameter Q that is a symmet - ric , traceless tensor Q αβ = S (cid:0) q α q β − 12 δ αβ (cid:1) [ 28 ] , where S represents the magnitude of the orientational order , and q indicates direction [ 29 ] . The use of this nematic order parameter is well established in the study of cellu - lar and subcellular systems with elongated constituents such as the cell cytoskeleton [ 30 , 31 ] and conﬂuent tissues of epithelial or ﬁbroblast cells [ 32 , 33 ] . By employing this nematic order parameter , our formulation allows for the dynamics of cell alignment within the cortex to be ex - plicitly accounted for . Furthermore , this mapping allows us to describe the cortex as an active nematic system , for which the continuum equations are well established in the literature [ 34 ] . Within the active nematic framework we evolve the FIG . 1 : Depiction of brain organoids observed in experiments and the active nematic model we use to illustrate the role of contractile stress in folding . ( a ) Fluorescence image during organoid growth . Actin ﬁlaments found in the organoid cells are coloured green , and the cell nuclei are coloured red . Figure adapted from [ 11 ] and the scale bar is 200 µm . ( b ) Schematic representation of the theoretical model . Filled red ellipsoids represent cell alignment , and the corresponding black arrows indicate contractile stress . The model assumes uniform active stress , which is suﬃcient to capture the folding of the interfaces . The remainder of the organoid is coloured green to represent the organoid cells . Solid black lines indicate undeformed organoid ( low activity ) and dashed black lines indicate a deformed organoid ( high activity ) due to the active stress . binary order parameter φ and the orientational order pa - rameter Q through the Cahn - Hilliard [ 35 ] and the Beris - Edwards equations [ 36 , 37 ] , respectively : ∂ t φ + ∂ k ( v k φ ) = µ , ( 1 ) ( ∂ t + v k ∂ k ) Q ij − ˜ S ij = H ij , ( 2 ) where v is the velocity that advects order parameter ﬁelds , and ˜ S represents the co - rotation terms describing the response of elongated particles to velocity gradients . 3 The latter is given by ˜ S ij = ξE ij + Q ik Ω kj − Ω ik Q kj , ( 3 ) with the strain rate tensor E ij = ( ∂ i v j + ∂ j v i ) / 2 and the vorticity tensor Ω ij = ( ∂ i v j − ∂ j v i ) / 2 describing the symmetric and asymmetric parts of the velocity gradi - ent tensor , respectively . In addition , ξ denotes a ﬂow - alignment parameter , which determines the collective re - sponse of the orientation ﬁeld to gradients in the velocity ﬁeld . These relaxation dynamics are governed by min - imising the free energy of the system with respect to φ and Q through the normalised chemical potential µ = Γ φ (cid:18) δ F δφ − ∂ k (cid:18) δ F ∂ k δφ (cid:19)(cid:19) ( 4 ) and the normalised molecular ﬁeld H ij = − Γ δ F δQ ij , ( 5 ) respectively . Here , Γ φ is a mobility coeﬃcient and Γ in - dicates the rotational diﬀusion coeﬃcient , both of which set the rate of relaxation towards the minimum of the free energy F [ Q , φ ] = R d 2 r ( f Q + f ∇ Q + f φ + f ∇ φ ) . It can be seen that this free energy includes both bulk and gradient contributions in terms of the tensor order pa - rameter Q and the binary order parameter φ , which read f Q = 12 C ( φS n − 2 Q ij Q ij ) 2 , ( 6 ) f ∇ Q = 12 L∂ k Q ij ∂ k Q ij , ( 7 ) f φ = 12 A φ 2 ( 1 − φ ) 2 , ( 8 ) f ∇ φ = 12 K∂ k φ∂ k φ , ( 9 ) where S n denotes the equilibrium value of the orienta - tional order parameter S , and C , L , A , K are model pa - rameters . For a more detailed discussion of the model , as well as the used parameter values , see the SI . The evolution of the binary and orientational order pa - rameters is subsequently completed by means of a cou - pling to the evolution of the velocity ﬁeld v that is de - scribed by the generalised , incompressible Navier - Stokes equations ∂ i v i = 0 , ρ ( ∂ t + v k ∂ k ) v i = ∂ j Π ij , ( 10 ) where Π ij describes the full stress tensor that includes pressure and is given in the SI . The dominant terms in the stress tensor are the viscous and capillary stress , which depend on the viscosity of the ﬂuid η and the surface tension σ of the binary order parameter φ [ 38 ] . We point out that , in our simulations , the surface tension is no in - dependent model parameter , but rather it is accessed in terms of existing model parameters through the expres - sion σ = 1 6 s(cid:18) K + 1 2 L (cid:19) ( A binary + C LQ ) , ( 11 ) which can be derived by considering the free - energy cost of the interface ( see the SI for details ) . Similar surface tensions have been calculated for solely φ - dependent free energies [ 35 ] , but here we have expanded the description to account for the Q dependence of the free energy ex - plicitly . For simplicity , we assume surface properties are equal between the outer and inner surfaces . Importantly , we also take into account the eﬀect of ac - tive stress generated within the cortex . While the activ - ity of the cells is clearly manifested in the brain organoid experiments in the form of active contraction of cells within the cortex [ 11 , 39 ] , rather surprisingly , to our cur - rent knowledge , no prior work has explored the impact of this apparent activity in the dynamics and morphology of the organoids . To account for this contractile activity , we introduce an active stress in the form of coarse - grained stresslets that represent the contractile force dipoles that are generated by the actomyosin machinery of the cell cytoskeleton [ 20 , 40 , 41 ] ( see Figure 1b ) . For simplicity , and to show the generic eﬀect of including active stress we assume a uniform spread of dipoles throughout the organoid , resulting in uniform active stress throughout the active ring . Coarse - graining over the dipolar force ﬁelds leads to an additional , active contribution to the stress tensor [ 40 , 41 ] Π activeij = αQ ij , ( 12 ) with α a proportionality constant scaling with activity . The sign of α determines the nature of the active stress , with α > 0 for contractile and α < 0 for extensile active stress . Due to the contractility of the stem cells , we use α > 0 in the case of the model brain organoid consid - ered here . However , the activity - induced instability is a generic mechanism that is also expected for extensile ac - tivities corresponding , for example , to stress generation due to cell division events [ 42 , 43 ] . The simulations start with zero velocity and the direc - tor ﬁeld oriented along the radial direction ( Figure 2a ) , corresponding to the radially elongated cells between the lumen and the outer interface of the organoid observed in the experiments [ 11 ] . Unless otherwise speciﬁed , the ac - tive region is initialised with the inner interface at radius a = 45 and outer interface at radius b = 170 . III . SIMULATION RESULTS We investigate the onset of the interface instability , which resembles gyriﬁcation ( Figure 2 ) , by determining the number of folds that form on the initially circular interface of the active ring . We measure the number of folds ( also referred to as the folding or wrinkling num - ber N [ 11 ] ) by ﬁrst measuring the radial distance of the 4 Time FIG . 2 : Temporal evolution of the surface folding . The modelled cortex region starts as a circle ( green denotes the organoid region φ = 1 ) , but due to the onset of an active nematic instability , the surfaces fold over time for high activity ( depicted here is α = 0 . 0008 ) . Displayed timesteps are ( 0 , 100000 150000 , 175000 ) LB times from left to right . Red lines illustrate modelled cell nuclei direction q . ( d ) ( e ) ( f ) ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( c ) FIG . 3 : Folding transition through an increase of contractility . The folding number N for diﬀerent activities and surface tensions found from simulations ( a ) and the linear stability analysis in a linear ( b ) and log ( c ) scale . Simulation snapshots of the organoid for surface tension σ = 0 . 0014 and activities α = 0 . 000025 ( d ) , α = 0 . 0003 ( e ) and α = 0 . 0008 ( f ) . ( e - f ) are taken just before formation of ﬁrst topological defects . points on the outer interface from the center of the ring . The number of folds is then determined from the num - ber of maxima in the radial distance signal as a func - tion of azimuthal coordinates at the onset of the insta - bility . While small perturbations dominate this initial amplitude signal , we notice that a well - deﬁned number of peaks is established relatively quickly . This number remains constant until secondary , non - linear eﬀects be - gin to dominate the bulk active system , leading to the nucleation of topological defects and the emergence of active turbulence [ 34 , 44 ] . To establish the role of activ - ity in the interface instability and determine the number 5 of folds we focus only on the time span before the bulk instability and the creation of topological defects . We begin by characterising the number of folds for varying activity and surface tension . The results are represented in the stability diagram ( Figure 3a ) , which clearly demonstrates the competition between the desta - bilising eﬀect of active stress and the stabilising impact of the surface tension . Increasing activity results in a larger number of folds on the interface , while larger sur - face tension suppresses the instability and leads to a smaller number of folds . The latter phenomenology is in line with predictions of a purely elastic model of a brain organoid [ 14 ] . Interestingly , no folding is observed for suﬃciently small activities , indicating that there ex - ists a threshold for the active stress exerted by the cells in order to create folds on the interface . This distin - guishes the interface instability in the ring geometry from the well - known thresholdless hydrodynamic instability of unconﬁned active nematics [ 40 ] . More importantly , since we expect the activity to increase with cell nuclear den - sity in the cortex , we conjecture that this observation explains the experimental results of Ref . [ 11 ] , in which no folding was observed for cell nuclear densities below a critical threshold . Together , these results show that active stress alone can result in hydrodynamic instabil - ity of a model organoid , suggesting that activity - induced instabilities can provide a previously overlooked , generic and complementary mechanism to the diﬀerential growth mechanism to govern the emergence of folds on brain organoids . To draw more parallels between the experimental re - sults on brain organoids and the active nematic ring model presented here , we reproduce two measurements of the experimental paper [ 11 ] . First , we measure the wrinkling index L of the active nematic ring for diﬀerent activities at a ﬁxed time ( see Figure 4a ) . The wrinkling index is a measurement of the curvature of the interface , deﬁned as the ratio of the contour length normalised to the length of the maximally - protruding outer convex con - tour . With this deﬁnition , L = 1 denotes a perfect cir - cle without any folding . We ﬁnd that for low activities , the wrinkling index remains 1 , indicating the active ring remains a circle and no wrinkles are detected . If we in - crease the activity further , the wrinkling index starts to increase linearly , similar to the linear increase with nu - clear cell density found in experiments . We also measure the eﬀect of changing the active ne - matic ring thickness t . The experiments of Karzbrun et al . [ 11 ] demonstrated that treating the organoid with blebbistatin resulted in a change in organoid thickness and that the wavelength between diﬀerent convective wrinkles depends on the thickness . We mimic this set - up by varying the inner radius of the isotropic cavity ( lu - men ) , while keeping the outer surface radius constant , and deﬁne the wavelength λ as the contour length over the folding number N . In line with the experimental re - sults , the wavelength λ increases with the thickness t up until a certain thickness threshold . After this , the wave - length becomes independent of the thickness ( see Figure 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 10 - 4 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 10 15 20 ( a ) ( b ) FIG . 4 : Quantiﬁcation of the role of activity and organoid thickness . ( a ) The wrinkling index as a function of activity . For low activity , the wrinkling index is 1 ( circular ) while it increases linearly after a contractile stress threshold . Measurements are performed at a ﬁxed simulation time t = 300000 . ( b ) Wavelength ( deﬁned as the inverse of the folding number times the outer radius ) for diﬀerent organoid thicknesses , where the inner radius a is varied while retaining the same outer radius b . 4b ) . Together , these numerical results show that mod - elling brain organoids as a rings of active nematics can replicate several experimental observations . Next , in or - der to gain more insight into the nature of the activity - induced instability of the interface , we present a linear stability analysis of the governing equations of the model system . IV . LINEAR STABILITY ANALYSIS The simulation results point to a possible role of activ - ity in driving the interface instability . To provide a better understanding of the possible activity - induced instability , we perform a linear stability analysis on the surfaces of the model organoid at inner radius a and outer radius b . For simplicity we consider sharp interfaces , and retain identical surface tensions σ a = σ b = σ . Furthermore , in order to allow for further analytical treatment we per - form the stability analysis in the limit of overdamped friction . The active forces that put the organoid surfaces under contractile stress originate at the perturbed sur - faces , as—in line with experimental observations [ 11 ] — we assume the orientation ﬁeld of the cells retains perpen - 6 dicular alignment to the interfaces . This corresponds to the limit of strong active anchoring [ 45 ] . The perturba - tions of the interfaces thus directly induce nematic distor - tions , which in turn give rise to active forces . Through this mechanism , we probe the model organoid surfaces for instabilities that resemble gyriﬁcation by applying in - ﬁnitesimal sinusoidal perturbations of the inner and outer interface of the ring of the form : a ( t ) = a 0 + δ a ( t ) e inθ , ( 13 ) b ( t ) = b 0 + δ b ( t ) e inθ , ( 14 ) where δ ( t ) denotes the inﬁnitesimal perturbation ampli - tude , n is an integer wavenumber and θ denotes the az - imuthal coordinate . The wavenumber with the fastest - growing instability is the folding number N that corre - sponds to the number of folds observed numerically from random perturbations ( Figure 3b - c ) . We take the expansion around the quiescent state v r = 0 , v θ = 0 and p ( r ) = R d r αS / r . The perturba - tions to the surface then result in perturbative correc - tions to the velocity of the form v r ( r , t ) = v r + R ( r , t ) e inθ and v θ ( r , t ) = v θ + Θ ( r , t ) e inθ , as well as a perturba - tive correction to the pressure p ( r , t ) = p ( r ) + P ( r , t ) e inθ . The perturbations evolve according to the Navier - Stokes equations , Eqn . ( 10 ) , where we include only the isotropic and active contributions to the stress tensor . Discarding terms of higher order than linear in perturbation , we ﬁnd   ∂ t R = − 1 ρP ′ + αS ρ n 2 − 1 b − a (cid:26) b − r a 2 δ a + r − a b 2 δ b (cid:27) − χR ∂ t Θ = − in ρ P r − χ Θ R ′ + R r + in Θ r = 0 , ( 15 ) where ρ denotes the density of the active nematic , we introduced the overdamped friction coeﬃcient χ to model viscous eﬀects using an argument similar to Stokes’ law [ 46 ] ( see SI ) and primes denote derivatives with respect to the radial coordinate r . The last term on the ﬁrst line represents the active forces induced by the perturbed surfaces , which we assume decay linearly away from the surface . Next , we search for exponential solutions of the form ∝ e ωt , where we tacitly assume both surfaces exhibit the same growth rate ω [ 47 ] . This presupposes a hy - drodynamic coupling between the organoid surfaces , in accordance with our numerical simulations , and ratio - nalises the dependence of the wrinkling wavelength λ on the organoid thickness ( see Figure 4b ) . In the SI we make this coupling explicit . Upon inserting this ansatz , Eqn . ( 15 ) reduces to a set of ODEs for the perturbative velocities and pres - sure , which we solve sequentially . Subsequently demand - ing continuity and stress balance at the surfaces of the model organoid ( see SI ) yields a dispersion relation for the growth rate ω : ω 4 + 2 χ ρ ω 3 + Aω 2 + χBω + C = 0 , ( 16 ) where the coeﬃcients A , B , C embed dependency on the wave number and model parameters ( see the SI for explicit form of these terms ) . To determine the stability of a perturbation with wavenumber n , we inspect the real part of the corre - sponding growth rate ω and associate the wrinkling num - ber N with the fastest - growing mode . Interestingly , nu - merical checks of our analytical results show that all un - stable surface perturbations are of the same sign , indicat - ing an undulation mode in accordance with experiments [ 11 ] . Furthermore , we recover a clear folding transition , as—for a given surface tension σ —non - zero wrinkling numbers are only recovered past a critical activity - to - surface tension ratio ( see Figure 3b - c and the SI ) . This is in agreement with the numerical simulations found in Figure 3a , as well as with the experiments of Ref . [ 11 ] , where no wrinkling instability is observed for low cell nu - clear densities . V . CONCLUSION We present an active matter model system for describ - ing the experimentally - observed folds on brain organoids . By treating the organoid as a contractile , active , bipha - sic annulus , we demonstrate a generic instability mech - anism for the interface deformation due solely to active stress generation by the cytoskeleton of the cells within the active cortex that surrounds a passive lumen without introducing growth , swelling , or any other planar sur - face forces . Combining numerical simulations with linear stability analyses , we show that the activity - induced in - stability mechanism occurs over a well - deﬁned activity threshold that depends on the mechanical properties of the system , such as surface tension and the thickness of the model organoid . Since the active stress generation is expected to increase with increasing cell nuclear density within the cortex , these results are in line with the ex - perimental measurements that establish the emergence of folds on the organoid surface above a critical nuclear density [ 11 ] . Furthermore , the increase in folding number N upon increasing activity α ( see Figure 3 ) lends credence to the proposed model in light of molecular perturbation exper - iments on blebbistatin - treated brain organoids that show a marked decrease in the number of folds the organoids exhibit upon treatment with the contractility - inhibiting drug [ 11 ] . The activity - induced mechanism proposed here com - plements previously suggested mechanisms of diﬀeren - tial swelling between the inner and outer cortex [ 48 ] , adhesion - induced surface tension [ 14 ] , and the ﬂuid - elastic ﬁbrous model [ 15 ] for the generation of organoid surface deformations . It is important to note that the model presented here 7 provides a generic framework based on accounting for ( i ) microstructural complexity of the organoid cortex based on the orientational order of the cells , ( ii ) the biphasic nature of the organoid based on an active , viscoelastic cortex surrounding a ﬂuid - like lumen region , and ( iii ) ac - tive stress generation by the cells . As such , the model allows for isolating the eﬀects of active stress generation from potential impacts of growth - induced mechanisms on the formation of surface instabilities . A more com - plete picture of the relative importance of diﬀerent mech - anisms leading to brain organoid deformation should al - low for activity - induced , growth - induced , and diﬀerential adhesion - induced mechanisms to be accounted for in one unifying framework , which should be the focus of future studies . VI . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank Alain Goriely , Paul van der Schoot , and Ju - lia M . Yeomans for illuminating discussions . This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Lu - biss the Marie Sklodowska - Curie Grant Agreement No . 722497 and the EPSRC grant EP / T031247 / 1 for K . T . G . L . A . K . acknowledges funding from the Dutch Research Council ( NWO ) in the framework of the ENW PPP Fund for the top sectors and from the Ministry of Economic Af - fairs in the framework of the ‘PPS - Toeslagregeling’ . A . D . acknowledges support from the Novo Nordisk Foun - dation ( grant No . NNF18SA0035142 ) , Villum Fonden ( Grant no . 29476 ) , Danish Council for Independent Re - search , Natural Sciences ( DFF - 117155 - 1001 ) , and fund - ing from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under the Marie Sklodowska - Curie grant agreement No . 847523 ( INTERACTIONS ) . [ 1 ] L . Ronan , N . Voets , C . Rua , A . Alexander - Bloch , M . Hough , C . Mackay , T . J . Crow , A . James , J . N . Giedd , and P . C . Fletcher , “Diﬀerential tangential expansion as a mechanism for cortical gyriﬁcation , ” Cerebral Cortex , vol . 24 , no . 8 , pp . 2219 – 2228 , 2013 . [ 2 ] T . Tallinen , J . Y . Chung , J . S . Biggins , and L . Ma - hadevan , “Gyriﬁcation from constrained cortical expan - sion , ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol . 111 , no . 35 , pp . 12667 – 12672 , 2014 . [ 3 ] T . Tallinen , J . Y . Chung , F . Rousseau , N . Girard , J . Lef ` evre , and L . Mahadevan , “On the growth and form of cortical convolutions , ” Nature Physics , vol . 12 , no . 6 , p . 588 , 2016 . [ 4 ] O . Reiner , R . Carrozzo , Y . Shen , M . Wehnert , F . Faustinella , W . B . Dobyns , C . T . Caskey , and D . H . Ledbetter , “Isolation of a miller – dicker lissencephaly gene containing g protein β - subunit - like repeats , ” Na - ture , vol . 364 , no . 6439 , p . 717 , 1993 . [ 5 ] O . Reiner and T . Sapir , “Lis1 functions in normal devel - opment and disease , ” Current opinion in neurobiology , vol . 23 , no . 6 , pp . 951 – 956 , 2013 . [ 6 ] M . A . Lancaster , M . Renner , C . - A . Martin , D . Wenzel , L . S . Bicknell , M . E . Hurles , T . Homfray , J . M . Pen - ninger , A . P . Jackson , and J . A . Knoblich , “Cerebral organoids model human brain development and micro - cephaly , ” Nature , vol . 501 , no . 7467 , p . 373 , 2013 . [ 7 ] A . M . Pa¸sca , S . A . Sloan , L . E . Clarke , Y . Tian , C . D . Makinson , N . Huber , C . H . Kim , J . - Y . Park , N . A . O’rourke , K . D . Nguyen , et al . , “Functional cortical neu - rons and astrocytes from human pluripotent stem cells in 3d culture , ” Nature methods , vol . 12 , no . 7 , p . 671 , 2015 . [ 8 ] H . Clevers , “Modeling development and disease with organoids , ” Cell , vol . 165 , no . 7 , pp . 1586 – 1597 , 2016 . [ 9 ] M . Bershteyn , T . J . Nowakowski , A . A . Pollen , E . Di Lullo , A . Nene , A . Wynshaw - Boris , and A . R . Kriegstein , “Human ipsc - derived cerebral organoids model cellular features of lissencephaly and reveal pro - longed mitosis of outer radial glia , ” Cell stem cell , vol . 20 , no . 4 , pp . 435 – 449 , 2017 . [ 10 ] E . Di Lullo and A . R . Kriegstein , “The use of brain organoids to investigate neural development and dis - ease , ” Nature Reviews Neuroscience , vol . 18 , no . 10 , p . 573 , 2017 . [ 11 ] E . Karzbrun , A . Kshirsagar , S . R . Cohen , J . H . Hanna , and O . Reiner , “Human brain organoids on a chip reveal the physics of folding , ” Nature Physics , vol . 14 , p . 515 , 2018 . [ 12 ] T . Tanaka , S . - T . Sun , Y . Hirokawa , S . Katayama , J . Kucera , Y . Hirose , and T . Amiya , “Mechanical insta - bility of gels at the phase transition , ” Nature , vol . 325 , no . 6107 , p . 796 , 1987 . [ 13 ] V . Balbi , M . Destrade , and A . Goriely , “Mechanics of human brain organoids , ” Physical Review E , vol . 101 , no . 2 , p . 022403 , 2020 . [ 14 ] D . Riccobelli and G . Bevilacqua , “Surface tension con - trols the onset of gyriﬁcation in brain organoids , ” Jour - nal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , vol . 134 , p . 103745 , 2020 . [ 15 ] T . Engstrom , T . Zhang , A . Lawton , A . Joyner , and J . M . Schwarz , “Buckling without bending : a new paradigm in morphogenesis , ” Physical Review X , vol . 8 , no . 4 , p . 041053 , 2018 . [ 16 ] E . Hannezo , J . Prost , and J . - F . Joanny , “Mechanical in - stabilities of biological tubes , ” Physical review letters , vol . 109 , no . 1 , p . 018101 , 2012 . [ 17 ] E . Hannezo , J . Prost , and J . - F . Joanny , “Theory of ep - ithelial sheet morphology in three dimensions , ” Proceed - ings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol . 111 , no . 1 , pp . 27 – 32 , 2014 . [ 18 ] C . Simon , R . Kusters , V . Caorsi , A . Allard , M . Abou - Ghali , J . Manzi , A . Di Cicco , D . L´evy , M . Lenz , J . - F . Joanny , et al . , “A direct proof that sole actin dynamics drive membrane deformations , ” bioRxiv , p . 307173 , 2018 . [ 19 ] A . F . Straight , A . Cheung , J . Limouze , I . Chen , N . J . Westwood , J . R . Sellers , and T . J . Mitchison , “Dissecting temporal and spatial control of cytokinesis with a myosin ii inhibitor , ” Science , vol . 299 , no . 5613 , pp . 1743 – 1747 , 2003 . 8 [ 20 ] S . Ramaswamy , “The mechanics and statistics of active matter , ” 2010 . [ 21 ] N . Chakrabarti and P . Das , “Isotropic to nematic phase transition in f - actin , ” Journal of Surface Science and Technology , vol . 23 , no . 3 / 4 , p . 177 , 2007 . [ 22 ] T . Sanchez , D . T . Chen , S . J . DeCamp , M . Heymann , and Z . Dogic , “Spontaneous motion in hierarchically assembled active matter , ” Nature , vol . 491 , no . 7424 , p . 431 , 2012 . [ 23 ] M . Poujade , E . Grasland - Mongrain , A . Hertzog , J . Jouanneau , P . Chavrier , B . Ladoux , A . Buguin , and P . Silberzan , “Collective migration of an epithelial mono - layer in response to a model wound , ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol . 104 , no . 41 , pp . 15988 – 15993 , 2007 . [ 24 ] L . Petitjean , M . Reﬀay , E . Grasland - Mongrain , M . Pou - jade , B . Ladoux , A . Buguin , and P . Silberzan , “Velocity ﬁelds in a collectively migrating epithelium , ” Biophysical journal , vol . 98 , no . 9 , pp . 1790 – 1800 , 2010 . [ 25 ] J . Rozman , M . Krajnc , and P . Ziherl , “Collective cell me - chanics of epithelial shells with organoid - like morpholo - gies , ” Nature communications , vol . 11 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 9 , 2020 . [ 26 ] A . Zumdieck , R . Voituriez , J . Prost , and J . Joanny , “Spontaneous ﬂow of active polar gels in undulated chan - nels , ” Faraday discussions , vol . 139 , pp . 369 – 375 , 2008 . [ 27 ] J . Prost , F . J¨ulicher , and J . - F . Joanny , “Active gel physics , ” Nature physics , vol . 11 , no . 2 , pp . 111 – 117 , 2015 . [ 28 ] M . Doi , Soft matter physics . Oxford University Press , 2013 . [ 29 ] J . Prost , The physics of liquid crystals , vol . 83 . Oxford university press , 1995 . [ 30 ] N . Kumar , R . Zhang , J . J . de Pablo , and M . L . Gardel , “Tunable structure and dynamics of active liquid crys - tals , ” Science Advances , vol . 4 , no . 10 , p . eaat7779 , 2018 . [ 31 ] Y . Maroudas - Sacks , L . Garion , L . Shani - Zerbib , A . Livshits , E . Braun , and K . Keren , “Topological de - fects in the nematic order of actin ﬁbers as organization centers of hydra morphogenesis , ” Nature Physics , vol . 17 , no . 2 , pp . 251 – 259 , 2021 . [ 32 ] G . Duclos , C . Blanch - Mercader , V . Yashunsky , G . Sal - breux , J . - F . Joanny , J . Prost , and P . Silberzan , “Spon - taneous shear ﬂow in conﬁned cellular nematics , ” Nature Physics , p . 1 , 2018 . [ 33 ] C . Blanch - Mercader , V . Yashunsky , S . Garcia , G . Duclos , L . Giomi , and P . Silberzan , “Turbulent dynamics of ep - ithelial cell cultures , ” Physical Review Letters , vol . 120 , May 2018 . [ 34 ] A . Doostmohammadi , J . Ign´es - Mullol , J . M . Yeomans , and F . Sagu´es , “Active nematics , ” Nature communica - tions , vol . 9 , no . 1 , p . 3246 , 2018 . [ 35 ] J . W . Cahn and J . E . Hilliard , “Free energy of a nonuni - form system . i . interfacial free energy , ” The Journal of chemical physics , vol . 28 , no . 2 , pp . 258 – 267 , 1958 . [ 36 ] A . N . Beris and B . J . Edwards , Thermodynamics of ﬂow - ing systems : with internal microstructure . No . 36 , Oxford University Press on Demand , 1994 . [ 37 ] L . Giomi , L . Mahadevan , B . Chakraborty , and M . Ha - gan , “Banding , excitability and chaos in active nematic suspensions , ” Nonlinearity , vol . 25 , no . 8 , p . 2245 , 2012 . [ 38 ] A . Doostmohammadi , M . F . Adamer , S . P . Thampi , and J . M . Yeomans , “Stabilization of active matter by ﬂow - vortex lattices and defect ordering , ” Nature communica - tions , vol . 7 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 9 , 2016 . [ 39 ] G . G . Gundersen and H . J . Worman , “Nuclear position - ing , ” Cell , vol . 152 , no . 6 , pp . 1376 – 1389 , 2013 . [ 40 ] R . A . Simha and S . Ramaswamy , “Hydrodynamic ﬂuc - tuations and instabilities in ordered suspensions of self - propelled particles , ” Physical review letters , vol . 89 , no . 5 , p . 058101 , 2002 . [ 41 ] A . Goriely , “Five ways to model active processes in elas - tic solids : active forces , active stresses , active strains , active ﬁbers , and active metrics , ” Mechanics Research Communications , vol . 93 , 2017 . [ 42 ] D . Volfson , S . Cookson , J . Hasty , and L . S . Tsimring , “Biomechanical ordering of dense cell populations , ” Pro - ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol . 105 , no . 40 , pp . 15346 – 15351 , 2008 . [ 43 ] A . Doostmohammadi , S . P . Thampi , T . B . Saw , C . T . Lim , B . Ladoux , and J . M . Yeomans , “Celebrating soft matter’s 10th anniversary : cell division : a source of ac - tive stress in cellular monolayers , ” Soft Matter , vol . 11 , no . 37 , pp . 7328 – 7336 , 2015 . [ 44 ] S . P . Thampi , R . Golestanian , and J . M . Yeomans , “In - stabilities and topological defects in active nematics , ” EPL ( Europhysics Letters ) , vol . 105 , no . 1 , p . 18001 , 2014 . [ 45 ] M . L . Blow , S . P . Thampi , and J . M . Yeomans , “Bipha - sic , lyotropic , active nematics , ” Physical review letters , vol . 113 , no . 24 , p . 248303 , 2014 . [ 46 ] C . K . Batchelor and G . Batchelor , An introduction to ﬂuid dynamics . Cambridge university press , 2000 . [ 47 ] J . Dumbleton and J . Hermans , “Capillary stability of a hollow inviscid cylinder , ” The Physics of Fluids , vol . 13 , no . 1 , pp . 12 – 17 , 1970 . [ 48 ] V . Balbi , M . Destrade , and A . Goriely , “The me - chanics of human brain organoids , ” arXiv preprint arXiv : 1811 . 01893 , 2018 .