A 3 - D Reconstruction of Smooth Muscle a - Actinin by CryoEm Reveals Two Different Conformations at the Actin - binding Region Jun Liu , Dianne W . Taylor and Kenneth A . Taylor * Institute of Molecular Biophysics , Florida State University , Tallahassee FL 32306 - 4380 , USA Cryoelectron microscopy was used to obtain a 3 - D image at 2 . 0 nm resolu - tion of 2 - D arrays of smooth muscle a - actinin . The reconstruction reveals a well - resolved long central domain with 90 8 of left - handed twist and near 2 - fold symmetry . However , the molecular ends which contain the actin binding and calmodulin - like domains , have different structures oriented , 90 8 to each other . Atomic structures for the a - actinin domains were built by homology modeling and assembled into an atomic model . Model building suggests that in the 2 - D arrays , the two calponin homology domains that comprise the actin - binding domain have a closed conformation at one end and an open conformation at the other end due to domain swapping . The open and closed conformations of the actin - binding domain suggests ﬂexibility that may underlie Ca 2 þ regulation . The , 90 8 orientation difference at the molecular ends may underlie a - actinin’s ability to crosslink actin ﬁlaments in nearly any orientation . q 2004 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Keywords : actin - binding protein ; muscle protein ; image processing ; 2 - D crystals ; lipid monolayer ; electron microscopy * Corresponding author Introduction a - Actinin is the smallest member of the spectrin superfamily of actin - binding proteins . It is found in both muscle and non - muscle cells at points where actin ﬁlaments are anchored within a var - iety of intracellular structures . a - Actinin is well known for its structural role in the Z - disk of striated muscle 1 and homologous structures in smooth muscle and in stress ﬁbers of non - muscle cells , 2 where it crosslinks antiparallel actin ﬁla - ments to form a bipolar ﬁlament array . a - Actinin is also found at anchoring sites of polar arrays of actin ﬁlaments , such as the membrane - associated adhesion plaques of smooth muscle , 3 the focal adhesions of non - muscle cells 4 and to regions of poorly oriented actin ﬁlaments in the leading edge of motile cells . 5 All a - actinins consist of two elongated subunits of molecular mass 95 – 103 kDa that form a rod - shaped antiparallel dimer . 6 , 7 Each subunit is com - posed of three distinct domains . The N terminus contains the actin - binding domain ( ABD ) which itself consists of two tandem calponin homology domains ( CH1 and CH2 ) . The central region con - sists of four tandem 3 - helix motifs ( R1 – R4 ) that are homologous to similar repeats in spectrin and dystrophin . The C - terminal domain ( Cam ) contains four EF hand motifs organized like calmodulin into N - terminal ( EF12 ) and C - terminal ( EF34 ) domains . Other proteins of the spectrin family , dystrophin , utrophin and spectrin , share a similar domain structure with an ABD , a variable number of 3 - helix repeats , and a pair of C - terminal EF - hand Ca 2 þ - binding motifs although the larger members of the family have other domains not found in a - actinin . The CH domains of the spectrin family are also homologous to a wide range of actin cross - linking proteins such as ﬁmbrin , ﬁlamin and ABP120 . 8 Therefore , a - actinin is a useful example for the structural study of modular actin - binding proteins . To date , there is no atomic structure of a com - plete a - actinin or any of its homologs . However , structures of a number of its domains or those of homologs have been reported . X - ray crystal struc - tures have been completed of ABDs of four related 0022 - 2836 / $ - see front matter q 2004 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . E - mail address of the corresponding author : taylor @ bio . fsu . edu Abbreviations used : ABD , actin - binding domain ; TMV , tobacco mosaic virus . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2004 . 02 . 034 J . Mol . Biol . ( 2004 ) 338 , 115 – 125 human proteins ; ﬁmbrin , 9 utrophin , 10 dystrophin 11 and plectin . 12 In the crystal form of the ﬁmbrin and plectin ABDs , the constituent paired CH1 and CH2 domains have a closed structure with intra molecular contacts between CH domains . In con - trast , CH1 and CH2 in utrophin and dystrophin ABDs are in an extended , open conﬁguration but form dimers in the crystals , where the interactions between CH domains involve separate polypep - tide chains . In each , the pairing between CH1 and CH2 structures is very similar even when the two CH domains originate from different polypeptide chains . The preservation of an interface between two domains whether in monomer or oligomer form is known as domain swapping . 13 The phenomenon is often observed as a crystallization artifact . 14 The ABDs of all four of these proteins exist as monomers in solution 7 , 15 although dystro - phin can be detected as a dimer when in high concentration . 11 The central regions of molecules in the spectrin superfamily contain tandem homologous repeats that are 3 - helix bundles 106 residues long in spec - trin , 109 residues long in dystrophin and 122 residues long in a - actinin . 16 , 17 The characteristics of two and four consecutive 3 - helix motifs in a - actinin have been deﬁned in two recent crystal structures . 18 , 19 These structures show that the bundles have a left - handed twist of 90 8 which may contribute to the nature of the actin bundles formed by a - actinin . In addition to binding Ca 2 þ in non - muscle iso - forms , the Cam domain has a number of protein binding partners including , but not limited to , vinculin , a component of the focal adhesion , 20 and the titin Z - repeats which are structures that are thought to determine the thickness of the Z - disk in striated muscle . 21 However , relatively little 3 - D structural information exists for the Cam domain of a - actinin . Recently , an NMR structure was reported for the EF34 domain from skeletal muscle a - actinin in complex with the seventh titin Z - repeat . 22 Lipid monolayers have successfully been used to grow 2 - D arrays of intact a - actinin . 23 These speci - mens are suitable to deﬁne the overall arrangement of the individual domains in a - actinin . This was recently done from a 3 - D image at , 2 nm resolu - tion determined by cryoelectron microscopy ( cryoEM ) of frozen , hydrated specimens of rabbit skeletal muscle a - actinin . 24 The molecule was shown to have a molecular 2 - fold rotation axis with a single conformation for the ABD . The 3 - D reconstruction of a - actinin from chicken gizzards ( CG a - actinin ) obtained by cryoEM of fro - zen hydrated 2 - D arrays provides an opportunity to observe the structure of this class of actin - binding protein in a completely different crystal form . The earlier reconstruction from skeletal muscle a - actinin had a molecular 2 - fold rotation axis and only a single conformation for the ABD and Cam domains . 24 The present reconstruction lacks a molecular 2 - fold rotation axis and reveals two different structures for the actin - binding ends . By homology modeling high - resolution X - ray and NMR structures , we have constructed an atomic model , docked it into the 3 - D map and reﬁned it using a real space protocol . 25 The reconstruction shows conformational variability in the actin - binding ends of the molecule . The assembled atomic model suggests a mechanism for cross - Figure 1 . Projection and 3 - D image of the ice embedded a - actinin crystals . The projection appears in the background . Overlayed at the bottom at the same magniﬁcation is the 3 - D image with the model and at the top , a schematic diagram of the domain assignments . The unit cell axes and location of 2 - fold axes are over - layed on both projection and 3 - D image . In the schematic diagram at the top , one a - actinin molecule is tinted yellow and the other cyan . To illustrate the domain locations , the “free” end ABD is colored dark blue and the “paired” end ABDs are colored red for one molecule and magenta for the other . The Cam - like domains are yellow ( free end ) and green ( paired end ) . The Cam domain at the paired end produces an intense peak because its long axis is oriented approximately perpen - dicular to the plane of the 2 - D array whereas at the free end , the long axis of the Cam domain is angled closer to the plane of the array . The CH1 domains of the ABD are the furthest from the center of the R1 – R4 domain ; the CH2 domains are closer to the R1 – R4 center . In the 3 - D image at the bottom , one polypeptide chain of the atomic model is colored red ( CH1 ) , magenta ( CH2 ) , orange ( R1 – R4 ) and yellow ( Cam ) while the other is colored light blue ( CH1 ) , blue ( CH2 ) , cyan ( R1 – R4 ) and green ( Cam ) . In violet are the ends of the symmetry related molecules . This color scheme for the atomic model is maintained in Figures 2 and 3 . 116 Smooth Muscle a - Actinin Structure linking both parallel and antiparallel F - actin ﬁlaments to form either polar or bipolar structures . Results and Discussion a - Actinin is a dimer in its native state due to the extremely high association constant for the R1 – R4 domain . 26 In the discussion that follows , we will refer to a - actinin molecules as the native dimer unless otherwise speciﬁed . Interactions between a - actinin molecules will refer to interactions between native molecules ( i . e . dimers ) . In building the atomic model , the densities in the reconstruction that must accommodate R1 – R4 , the ABD and the Cam domains were clearly iden - tiﬁable due to their differences in size and shape . For the smaller ABD and the Cam domains , an additional constraint comes from the lengths of the peptides that must link them to R1 and R4 . These domain linkers limit the possible positions of the atomic models because they must be capable of connecting the domains along a reasonably unobstructed path . For this reason , we built linkers into all of the plausible models to test whether a connection was possible . However , the linker structure is entirely conjecture because a single polypeptide chain cannot be resolved at the resolution of the 3 - D image . Chicken gizzard a - actinin lacks molecular symmetry Electron micrographs of the unstained , frozen - hydrated , 2 - D arrays are virtually featureless , but their Fourier transforms reveal strong diffraction spots to a resolution in excess of 2 nm . Image processing showed strong 2 - fold symmetry , indica - tive of the presence of two a - actinin molecules in one unit cell of dimensions a ¼ 26 : 31 nm , b ¼ 20 : 37 nm , c , 8 nm , g ¼ 107 . 10 8 , based on the calibration against TMV . Crystallographic 2 - fold axes perpendicular to the plane of the crystal relate the pair of a - actinins in one unit cell ( Figure 1 ) , but there is no symmetry element within the indi - vidual molecules that relates its two polypeptide chains . There are four sets of 2 - fold rotation axes per - pendicular to the array plane but the obvious center of the a - actinin molecule is not close to any of them ( Figure 1 ) . At the corners of the unit cell , one end each of two a - actinins are related by the crystallographic 2 - fold . We tested extensively for a non - crystallographic molecular 2 - fold rotation axis without success . A reasonable 2 - fold axis was found for just the R1 – R4 domain ( Figure 2A and B ) but no 2 - fold axis could be found that related the two ends of same a - actinin that comprise the ABD and Cam domains . We will therefore refer to the two end domains as either “paired” , indicating a location at the crystallographic 2 - fold , or “free” , indicating that the ABD is free of interaction with the ABD of a second a - actinin molecule . The R1 – R4 rod domain is both twisted and bent The extensive solvent spaces facilitate identiﬁ - cation of the R1 – R4 domain of a - actinin within the 3 - D density map ( Figure 1 ) . Earlier work with projection images of negatively stained specimens of this isoform suggested twist in the R1 – R4 domain but could not quantitate the amount of twist or the hand . 23 The X - ray crystal structures indicated left - handed twist of , 90 8 but also showed that the entire domain is distinctly bent . 18 , 19 Both of these observations are conﬁrmed here . The homology model of the R1 – R4 domain could be docked in the EM maps in a unique way based on two criteria . First , the bend of the R1 – R4 domain causes signiﬁcant density to be unoccu - pied by model when the rod is rotated 180 8 about its long axis . This difference was quantitated using real space reﬁnement . When the rod domain is rotated about its long axis and ﬁt into the map with this rotation ﬁxed , the resulting curve resembles a sine wave with correlation maxima of 0 . 65 for the best orientation and 0 . 59 when rotated 180 8 . The worst correlation was 0 . 3 when the rod was oriented , 90 8 to the best orientation . When the initial rotation of the rod atomic model was varied up to 75 8 from its ideal location and then ﬁt allowing free movement , the rms deviation from the best position averaged 3 . 8 A˚ ( range 2 . 7 A˚ – 5 . 3 A ˚ ) , values well below the resolution of the Figure 2 . The R1 – R4 domain . A , Homology model docked manually . B , Homology model after real space reﬁnement . In this alignment , the R1 , R2 – R3 and R4 domains were permitted rigid body movements . C , View looking down the R1 – R4 domain showing the overall twist . Smooth Muscle a - Actinin Structure 117 reconstruction but within expectations based on other cryoEM reconstructions . 27 The accuracy in position of the R1 – R4 domain model within the long density of the reconstruction was quantiﬁed by starting the reﬁnement at differ - ent locations along the rod density and proceeding while ﬁxing this “axial” position , i . e . rotation about the long axis and Z - shift were minimized . This minimization was done absent the other domains of the atomic model . The results show a drop in correlation coefﬁcient to , 0 . 5 with a 20 A˚ shift from the ideal position . However , correlation coef - ﬁcient is less useful an indicator with respect to positioning along the length of this density because the reconstruction itself places some limits . For example , regions of low density at the free end adjacent to the P352 – D358 loop restrict this location . The R1 – R4 domain cannot be located closer to the free end without the unlikely place - ment of part of R1 within a region of clearly deﬁned low density . Placing it closer to the paired end puts the R1 – R4 model in steric conﬂict with densities that must be assigned to the ABD and Cam domains . A second strong consideration occurs , when the rod domain is rotated 180 8 . In this location there is no reasonable density at the free end in which to place the Cam domain , whose ﬁve residue linker dictates a position close to the C terminus of R4 . Therefore , we believe that the R1 – R4 domain is uniquely and reliably positioned in the reconstruc - tion providing a ﬁrm basis on which to build the rest of the molecule . The calmodulin - like “Cam” domain The position of the Cam domain homology model within the density envelope is restricted by the short length ( ﬁve residues ) of its N - terminal linker to R4 . The N terminus of the Cam domain is located near the center of its two lobes . Accord - ingly the Cam domain is conﬁned to a density adjacent to R4 that is too small to contain the ABD . Thus , given the reliability of the R1 – R4 positioning , the location of the Cam domains at both the free and paired ends of the molecule is well deﬁned . However , the Cam domain orien - tation within its assigned density is ambiguous because the EF12 and EF34 domains are similar in size and the N terminus is located between them . We found that , the Cam domain can be rotated 180 8 about its linker to R4 , thereby interchanging EF12 and EF34 domains , and ﬁt equally well into the density envelope . This ambiguity cannot be resolved based on the reconstruction alone . We therefore selected the orientation consistent with the known orientation of the Z - repeat when a - actinin is bound to actin in the Z - disk . We also examined known Cam domain inter - actions for signiﬁcance to our model . In the Z - disk of striated muscle , the Cam domain interacts with the Z7 repeat of the giant protein titin through a site in the EF34 domain . 28 , 29 In the NMR structure of this complex binding of the EF34 domain to titin - Z7 induces an a - helical structure in the Z7 peptide . 22 Additionally , residues 259 – 287 in human skeletal muscle a - actinin 2A , have been shown to be a competitive inhibitor for the titin Z7 repeats using peptide assays . 21 This region , a “pseudo Z - repeat” , includes the N terminus of R1 and part of the linker to the ABD . It is highly homologous across all vertebrate a - actinins ( 85 % identical ) . In addition the key residues in the EF34 domain involved in binding the Z - repeat are 100 % identical between CG a - actinin and human a - actinin 2A . The afﬁnity between EF34 and the pseudo Z - repeat is high in a - actinin 2A implying that binding should also occur in CG a - actinin , although at the present time , such an interaction has not been demonstrated . The helical structure of the Z - repeat when bound to EF34 of a - actinin suggests that the pseudo repeat may have a helical structure when bound as well . However , reason - able models could not be built in the CG a - actinin reconstruction incorporating binding of the EF34 domain to the pseudo repeat in the intact molecule . In no model could EF34 be placed in proximity with this region and still ﬁt the density , even when the linker in this region was modeled as a helical extension off of R1 . In all cases , either EF12 , EF34 or nearly the entire Cam domain fell outside the envelope . The R1 – R4 placement is the most reliable in the model . The lack of a plausible interaction may reﬂect steric factors present in the intact molecule that inhibit the Cam domain from interacting with the pseudo repeat as well as packing considerations within the 2 - D arrays . The actin - binding domain There are several ways that the ABD atomic model can be built and still explain the observed density . X - ray crystallography has yielded four atomic structures of homologous ABDs , demon - strating more than one way that the CH1 and CH2 domains can associate . Therefore , it seems at least possible that utrophin and dystrophin - like dimerizations can occur in a - actinin . In addition , all the 2 - D arrays of a - actinin that we have formed to date have had at least one end of a pair of molecules linked at crystallographic 2 - fold axes . This is probably not a coincidence . The signiﬁcance of this for a - actinin is that it suggests CH domains of a - actinin may likewise form an open structure through domain swapping to produce a ﬁmbrin - shaped domain but using CH domains from different a - actinins . In the 3 - D reconstruction , both ends of the molecule have features that correspond in size and shape to the closed , ﬁmbrin - shaped ABD . However , the positioning of the ABD model within these densities is ambiguous because the CH domains are so similar in size and may associate with other polypeptides through domain swap - ping . To decide among possibilities , we built all 118 Smooth Muscle a - Actinin Structure the possible models and looked at several charac - teristics : ( 1 ) length and possible path bridged by the different linkers , either between CH1 and CH2 , or between the ABD and R1 ; ( 2 ) the relative placement of the Cam domain relative to the ABD in order to make the two end arrangements as topologically similar as possible ; ( 3 ) possible steric clashes when the model was docked onto actin ; and ( 4 ) consequences of the domain assignment on orientation of a - actinin when bound to actin . At the free end , which is the least complicated region of the 3 - D map , the ABD has two possible orientations related by an , 180 8 rotation that would interchange CH1 and CH2 and ﬂip the ABD over . Domain swapping is not involved at the free end . The shape of the ABD density restricts other possible orientations within the 3 - D map . The only feature that distinguishes the two possibilities is the orientation of a pair of cross - linked actin ﬁlaments as described below . For both possibilities , the placement of the center of the Cam domain relative to the center of the ABD is the same , independent of any ambiguity in the ABD interpretations . In the preferred model , the distance that the linker between CH2 and R1 must span is , 50 A˚ which requires the linker to be nearly fully extended . Interpreting the density at the paired end is more complicated because of the possibility of domain swapping and the relatively densely packed nature of this region of the map . There are six ways of building a model that are consistent with the density ( Figure 3 ) . Two of these would involve domain swapping of an open ABD con - formation and four that would involve the closed conformation . Only one of these possibilities main - tained the placement of the Cam domain relative to the ABD the same as at the free end , had accep - table distances and paths for building the linker and had no severe steric clashes when docked onto actin . That possibility was one of the two domain swapped models ( Figure 3A ) . This model is also the one most similar to that by Tang et al . 24 Domain swapping among the spectrin family of proteins has only been observed in crystal struc - tures of the utrophin and dystrophin ABDs 10 , 11 and in one structure of a 3 - helix bundle . 14 In solution , the ABDs of dystrophin and utrophin are for the most part monomers . 7 , 11 , 15 a - Actinin , is dimeric due to the strong association between the R1 – R4 domains , 26 and is not known to form higher order aggregates that might be due to ABD – ABD interactions . This suggests that all of these ABDs may adopt a closed conformation similar to ﬁmbrin while in solution . However , in the crystal the CH domains of a - actinin could have an open conformation capable of an intermolecular inter - action similar to that of utrophin and dystrophin probably induced through the high concentration of protein in the monolayer phase . The a - actinin 2 - D arrays , which are of intact molecules , also differ from the crystals of dystrophin and utrophin ABDs by the Cam domain which may contribute Figure 3 . Three possible interpretations at the paired end of the reconstruction . A , Open ABD involving domain swapping . B and C , Closed ABDs without domain swapping . In reality , there are six possible models because at this resolution , CH1 and CH2 are indistinguishable . The three other possible models could be created by turning over each of the closed con - formation ABDs , thereby interchanging CH1 and CH2 and rebuilding the linkers to make the alternative open conformation model . Smooth Muscle a - Actinin Structure 119 to possible domain swapping due to its proximity with the ABD . The ABDs of a - actinin can rotate 90 8 relative to each other To determine the relationship between the two most plausible end domain structures in the intact molecule , we used the R1 and R4 3 - helix bundles to align the free end with the paired end . When the two atomic models are overlayed , it is apparent that the CH1 – CH2 axis of the free end is rotated , 90 8 to that of the paired end ( Figure 4 ) . This con - clusion is robust even for the closed conformation models that can be built for the paired end , because the four CH domains approximate a plane whose orientation is unchanged when domains are regrouped . This has some signiﬁcance for the relative orientation of actin ﬁlaments cross - linked by a - actinin . The 90 8 difference can either add to or subtract from the 90 8 twist of the R1 – R4 domain to produce ABDs that are oriented in the opposite or same directions . Model for crosslinked actin ﬁlaments a - Actinin is localized to actin containing struc - tures in which the ﬁlaments can be either parallel , at focal contacts and other membrane attachments , or antiparallel , at Z - disks and homologous struc - tures . These localizations imply ﬂexibility in the actin - binding ends of the molecule but the present reconstruction is the ﬁrst to show this ﬂexibility in a 3 - D image . In contrast to the 3 - D image of skeletal muscle a - actinin , 24 in which there is a single conformation at the ends of the molecule , the smooth muscle a - actinin reconstruction is a hybrid structure with two conformations at the molecular ends . One end may have an open con - formation of the ABD while the other clearly has a closed conformation . In addition , the ABDs in the present reconstruction are oriented , 90 8 apart when aligned using the R1 and R4 domains . This combined with the 90 8 twist in the R1 – R4 domain 19 provides a range of motion adequate to bind a pair of actin ﬁlaments as much as 180 8 or 0 8 apart in orientation . The primary function of a - actinin is to crosslink actin ﬁlaments . We therefore examined the mor - phology of a crosslinked pair of actin ﬁlaments formed using identical conformations placed at both ends of R1 – R4 . We used the R1 and R4 domains to determine the alignment of the end domains and produced two models , a paired end - paired end model and a free end - free end model . Each ABD was docked onto an actin ﬁlament using the ﬁmbrin – F – actin atomic model as a guide . 30 Both conformations could ideally have 2 - fold symmetry when not bound to actin . How - ever , we did not enforce 2 - fold symmetry onto the R1 – R4 domain so both structures do not have exact 2 - fold symmetry . The free end – free end conformer has the ABDs facing in opposite directions , which would be suitable for crosslinking antiparallel actin ﬁla - ments . We built models based on both of the pos - sible interpretations of the free end ABD . In one of the models ( Figure 5B and D ) the crosslinked actin ﬁlaments are co - planar and antiparallel and the a - actinin has the same orientation with respect to the ( þ ) end of the actin ﬁlament as it has in the Z - disk . The a - actinin is located to one side of the actin ﬁlament pair and the bowed structure of the R1 – R4 domain extends outward to accentuate this sidedness . The actin ﬁlaments are spaced by 20 nm center to center . The structure is highly reminiscent of the “basket weave” conformation of the vertebrate muscle Z - disk 31 in both appear - ance as well as interﬁlament spacing . The sepa - ration between antiparallel actin ﬁlaments in the Z - disk ranges from 15 nm to 20 nm so our model is at the upper end of the range . In constructing the bipolar actin crosslink , it was necessary to move the Cam domain to reduce a steric clash with actin . In order to minimize the number of different domain conﬁgurations , we did this by simply replacing the free end Cam domain with the paired end Cam domain . The amount of shift is , 30 A˚ . The movement applied leaves the Cam domain so that a Z - repeat when bound would be oriented with its N terminus Figure 4 . Paired and free ends aligned to R1 and R4 . A and B , Paired and free ends looking approximately per - pendicular to the plane of the 2 - D array . C and D , Paired and free ends looking down the axis of the R1 – R4 domain . In A and B the orientation of the R1 – R4 domain is identical in both views and is similarly identical in C and D . Note the 90 8 orientation difference in the ABD in C and D . 120 Smooth Muscle a - Actinin Structure toward the center of the Z - disk , which is the cor - rect orientation . 21 The paired end – paired model is very similar to the skeletal muscle a - actinin structure reported which was believed to be a conformation suitable for crosslinking parallel actin ﬁlaments . 24 Building the parallel actin ﬁlament crosslink required some assumptions to be made regarding the confor - mation of the actin - binding domain . Although there is controversy whether the closed or open conformations are present when the utrophin ABD is bound to actin , 32 – 34 at the present time , the only structural evidence for a - actinin itself favors a closed actin - binding conformation . 35 In addition , the ﬁmbrin – actin atomic model used for aligning the ABDs also corresponds to a closed conformation . 30 We therefore assumed the closed conformation in building the actin crosslinks . We built a closed ABD conformation for the paired end that maintained the same angle for the CH1 – CH2 axis as the open conformation in the 2 - D arrays . The resulting closed ABD can be docked on actin without steric hindrance . The two actin ﬁlaments crosslinked by this ABD conformation at both ends are coplanar but not parallel . When parallel crosslinked actin bundles are formed in vitro 36 a - actinin makes an acute angle with respect to one actin ﬁlament and an obtuse angle with respect to the other . This morphology cannot be duplicated with an a - actinin molecule possessing even approximate 2 - fold symmetry ( a symmetric a - actinin crosslink would be possible only if oriented perpendicular to the actin ﬁlaments ) . To reproduce the angled appearance , the “tilt” of one or both of the ABDs must be changed but not their rotation relative to the rod domain . The dis - tance separating actin ﬁlaments in the resulting model is 39 nm center to center ( Figure 5A and C ) , which is the same as that found in vitro in well ordered rafts . 36 In summary , the changes in the atomic model with the free end conformation needed to form the bipolar model were minimal . Only a 30 A˚ movement of the Cam domain was needed to reduce a steric clash . The polar crosslinking model required the 2 - fold symmetry of a - actinin be removed and the open conformation for the paired end ABD be changed to the closed conformation . Note that substitution of open conformations for the closed conformation at the free end could also have been done with little consequence for the crosslinked ﬁlament orientation . Implications for Ca 2 1 regulation At the paired end of the model , the Cam domain is located between CH1 and CH2 and is oriented with its long axis approximately perpen - dicular to the CH1 – CH2 axis . This location and orientation is very similar to that observed in a previous cryoEM reconstruction of skeletal muscle a - actinin 24 and is also similar to the position of the Ca 2 þ - binding domain in human ﬁmbrin . 30 In this location , the Cam domain could contribute to the domain swapping that we hypothesize occurs at the paired end . It may also be a position that facilitates a Ca 2 þ affect on actin binding in non - muscle isoforms . The two effects may be related . A previous cryoEM reconstruction of skeletal muscle a - actinin suggested that the conformation of the ABD in the intact molecule is open with the Cam domain located between the two CH domains . This suggested an obvious mechanism for Ca 2 þ dependent inhibition for actin binding in non - muscle isoforms in which the Cam domain binds to the linker between CH domains thereby separating them and interposing itself in a position to sterically inhibit actin binding . Tang et al . 24 had only a single ABD conformation in their recon - struction and therefore assumed that the open conformation was the active , actin - binding confor - mation . However , the present reconstruction shows a closed conformation for one ABD , which based on the available evidence of a - actinin bound to F - actin , is the actin binding conformation . 35 If the closed ABD is the actin - binding confor - mation , what conformation does the open form represent with respect to the Tang et al . model ? The underlying basis of the Tang et al . model is Figure 5 . Models for polar and bipolar actin cross - linking . A and C , are longitudinal and axial views of the polar crosslink model produced using modiﬁed paired end conformations for the a - actinin ends . B and D , Longitudinal and axial views of the bipolar crosslink model produced using free end conformations for the a - actinin ends . The color scheme is CH1 ( magenta ) , CH2 ( red ) , R1 – R4 ( cyan ) and Cam ( yellow ) . The actin ﬁlament is green . In B and D the titin Z7 repeat is colored blue . In the polar crosslinking model , the ABD was changed from the open conformation that ﬁt the map to a closed orientation suitable for actin binding . In addition , one ABD was reoriented so that the actin ﬁla - ments could be coplanar . The a - actinin model in this case has no symmetry . In the bipolar crosslinking model , there are minimal changes from the reconstruc - tion model and the model . The model has only near 2 - fold rotational symmetry because 2 - fold symmetry was not enforced for the R1 – R4 domain . Smooth Muscle a - Actinin Structure 121 that the Cam domain interposes between CH1 and CH2 on Ca 2 þ binding . If we assign the closed conformation to the active , actin - binding confor - mation , then the open conformation could corre - spond to the inhibited structure . If the open conformation is the active , actin - binding confor - mation , then Ca 2 þ binding would either have to increase the separation of CH1 and CH2 or other - wise further alter their relative orientations , or alternatively the Cam domain could bind in an orientation that causes steric hindrance to actin binding . Tang et al . suggested that the Cam domain with Ca 2 þ bound would bind to the linker peptide between CH1 and CH2 . However , CH1 – CH2 linker , though it has bulky hydrophobic residues characteristic of calmodulin target peptides , lacks their overall basic character . 37 This would suggest that if mechanistically related to calmodulin - target peptide interactions that the afﬁnity would be low . On the other hand , the close proximity between the ABD and the Cam domain in the intact molecule would maintain a high local concen - tration of the ABD and Cam domains so that the afﬁnity between Cam domain and its potential tar - get peptide on the ABD need not be as high in order to produce an effect in the intact molecule as it would if the domains were free in solution . Conclusion The 3 - D image of CG – a - actinin shows confor - mational variability in the actin - binding ends of the molecule that underlies its ability to crosslink actin ﬁlaments in any orientation . In addition , the atomic model built to ﬁt the reconstruction envel - ope suggests two additional features that are amenable to experimental veriﬁcation . One of these suggests a mechanism for Ca 2 þ regulation in non - muscle isoforms and the second the possibility of dynamic changes in the ABD that lead to alternate arrangements of the CH domains . Methods Specimen preparation and microscopy CG a - actinin was puriﬁed based on a reﬁnement of the Feramisco & Burridge protocol . 38 Arrays were formed on a positively charged lipid monolayer as described . 23 Arrays were recovered from the lipid monolayer using 200 mesh copper grids covered with a thin , hydrophobic , reticulated carbon ﬁlm and frozen as described . 24 Reticu - lated support ﬁlms were prepared as described by Fukami & Adachi . 39 Tobacco mosaic virus ( TMV ) was applied to some grids before freezing to internally cali - brate the microscope magniﬁcation for accurate unit cell determination . The grids were mounted in a Gatan 626 cryoholder ( Gatan , Inc . , Pleasanton , NJ ) cooled with liquid nitrogen . Low dose images were taken at tilt angles ranging from 0 8 to 68 8 on a Philips CM300FEG electron microscope at an accelerating voltage of 300 kV . Micrographs were recorded at 24 , 000 £ on Kodak SO163 ﬁlm with a one second exposure and developed for 12 minutes in full strength Kodak D19 developer . Image processing and 3 - D reconstruction The best images selected by optical diffraction were digitized on a Perkin Elmer PDS 1010M microdensi - tometer at a scanning raster of 12 m m . A total of 104 images obtained at tilt angles of 0 8 ( 14 ) , 20 8 ( 24 ) , 40 8 ( 33 ) , 60 8 ( 23 ) and 68 8 ( 10 ) were processed using standard procedures . 40 , 41 SPECTRA , 42 which integrates software from the MRC program suite , 43 was used for indexing the transforms and for controlling the unbending and structure factor calculation . All digitized images were subjected to two cycles of unbending to correct the distortion and improve signal to noise ratio . The contrast transfer function ( CTF ) was treated simply by correcting the phases of Fourier coefﬁcients whose contrast had changed sign . For those images that revealed Thon rings , 44 the CTF was determined using ICE . 45 For those that did not , we utilized a grid search algorithm which applied a test value of the CTF to a reference obtained from previously merged images that had been CTF corrected . 24 , 46 All of the CTF corrected images were merged together at a common phase origin in the two - sided plane group p 2 . The ﬁnal average phase residue was 21 8 ( range 12 – 27 8 ) . Because the unit cell has extensive solvent space , solvent ﬂattening was performed on the initial 3 - D map using software within the CCP4 crystallographic program suite . 47 The individual images were reﬁned with respect to origin , tilt axis , tilt angle , CTF and scale factor to references obtained from the transform of the solvent ﬂattened map . However , solvent ﬂattening had very little effect on the reconstruction . Regular sampling of the ﬁnal merged lattice line data was done by Whittaker – Shannon least squares ﬁtting . 48 Homology modeling The primary sequence of chicken smooth muscle a - actinin ( accession no . A28450 ) 49 was used to search the PDB database to identify the template proteins for homology modeling . This search was carried out using SWISS - MODEL . 50 The multiple sequence alignment ser - ver ( ClustalW ) at the European Bioinformatics Institute was used to determine the optimal sequence alignment between the a - actinin domain and the template protein . After identifying the template proteins and aligning the sequences , homology modeling was carried out using SWISS - MODEL , which generated three homology models for CG a - actinin : the ABD , rod and the Cam domain . Each model was subjected to energy minimization . The atomic structure of the dystrophin ABD 11 ( PDB code 1DXX ) , was used as the template for the actin - binding domain ( ABD ) . Dystrophin has , 40 % sequence identity with residues 32 – 257 of the CG a - actinin ABD . However , all of the possible templates have longer linkers between CH1 and CH2 than a - actinin . In the homology model , the linker appeared as an extended peptide chain . The R1 – R4 domain from skeletal muscle a - actinin 19 ( PDB code 1HCI ) , which has 80 % sequence identity to 122 Smooth Muscle a - Actinin Structure that of CG a - actinin , was used as the template for the R1 – R4 domain of CG a - actinin . Calmodulin was selected as the structural template for the Cam domain based on earlier work 24 which identi - ﬁed it as having the highest sequence identity with the Cam domain ( 27 % ) of those structures in the Protein Data Bank . The Ca 2 þ free calmodulin solution structure 51 ( PDB 1CFD ) , which has the two E – F hand containing lobes in an extended arrangement connected by a non - helical peptide was chosen as the template . In addition , we modeled the EF34 domain of the a - actinin Cam domain using the recent NMR structure ( PDB code 1H8B ) even though that structure has a titin Z - repeat bound to it . 22 Model ﬁtting and reﬁnement The models were constructed by manually ﬁtting the three domains , ABD , R1 – R4 and Cam , to the 3 - D density map using the crystallographic modeling program O . 52 The density at the ends of the R1 – R4 domain suggested that two conformations of the ABD were present . One , a closed conformation , was similar to that observed in the ﬁmbrin crystal structure . The other was an open struc - ture , due to domain swapping . To build the open ABD into the reconstruction , a closed ABD was ﬁrst built into the density and reﬁned in real space using the linker to R1 as a constraint . Crystal symmetry was imposed during the reﬁnement , insuring that the second closed motif from an adjacent molecule was identically placed , although rotated 180 8 about the 2 - fold axis . CH1 and CH2 were then swapped by rebuilding the linker between them . The domain linkers for the ABD were deﬁned as resi - dues L133 – A147 for the linker between CH1 and CH2 and residues F250 – A268 for the linker between CH2 and R1 and R739 – I744 for the linker between R4 and the Cam domain . The distances bridged by the CH1 – CH2 linker , measured from C a atoms of residues L133 and A147 , were 9 . 1 A˚ for all the closed conformation ABD models , 24 . 7 A˚ for the preferred open conformation model and 40 . 1 A˚ for the alternative open conformation model . Both open conformations were constructed at the paired end . The distance between R739 and I744 ( R4 - Cam ) was 8 . 4 A˚ at the paired end , and 13 A˚ at the free end . The C a distances between residues F250 and A268 ( CH2 – R1 ) ranged from 22 . 6 A˚ to 52 . 5 A˚ for the four closed conformations at the paired end , 35 A˚ for the preferred open conformation model , and 22 . 6 A ˚ for the alternative open conformation . At the free end , which was only interpreted as a closed conformation , the CH2 – R1 distance is 50 A˚ for the preferred model and 31 A˚ for the alternative model . Real space reﬁnement 25 was applied to quantitatively position the domains as rigid bodies within the density map . For the reﬁnement , the two chains ( A and B ) of a - actinin were divided into ten rigid bodies ( A26 - A260 , A261 - A388 , A389 - A620 A621 - A740 , A740 - A888 , B26 - B260 , B261 - B388 , B389 - B620 , B621 - B740 , B741 - B888 ) . Constraints were used in the reﬁnement to maintain connectivity of the polypeptide chain between the indi - vidual domains . Neighboring a - actinins in the 2 - D array , which were generated based on the crystallo - graphic symmetry , also served to constrain the domain movements . The resolution range for the real space reﬁnement was 1 . 5 nm to 30 nm . A temperature factor ð B ¼ 100 Þ was applied to the structure factors . Real space reﬁnement ran for 20 cycles after which , the cross - correlation coef - ﬁcient improved from 0 . 6 to 0 . 75 . We tested the accuracy of the Cam and ABD align - ments from nine starting positions that differed in both shift and rotation from the best model . This was done in the presence of atomic models for the other domains , which were held ﬁxed during the reﬁnement , thereby providing a constraint . The reﬁnement program prevents a domain whose position is being reﬁned from moving into density already occupied by other parts of the model . We did not build in a distance constraint for the linkers with R1 – R4 because this test was done to see how well the shape of the density and the initial position constrained the ﬁnal reﬁned position . For the Cam domain , at the free end , the mean rms difference for C a was 10 . 4 A˚ ( range 1 . 9 – 17 . 2 A˚ ) and 6 . 1 A˚ ( range 1 . 0 – 13 . 3 A˚ ) for the paired end . For the ABD , the mean rms difference was 9 . 3 A˚ ( range 4 . 7 – 13 . 0 A˚ ) at the free end and 7 . 0 A˚ ( range 2 . 1 – 10 . 0 A˚ ) at the paired end . To put this into perspective , when the Cam ( or ABD ) domain is rotated 180 8 thereby interchanging EF12 with EF34 ( or CH1 and CH2 ) the calculated ( without reﬁning the position ) rms difference is , 40 A˚ . The average differences obtained are smaller at the paired end because that part of the reconstruction is more crowded with domains than the free end . Domains at the free end have fewer restrictions to their movement caused by neighboring domains . After reﬁnement of the domains and construction of the linkers , the model judged the best was subject to energy minimization by the same procedure used for the homology modeling of the individual domains . Protein Data Bank accession codes The coordinates of this atomic model have been deposited in the PDB under accession code 1SJJ . The coordinates for the polar and bipolar actin crosslinking model can be obtained from our website ( http : / / www . sb . fsu . edu / , taylor / html / downloads . html ) . Acknowledgements We would like to thank Drs H . Winkler , T . Wendt , J . Tang , and Mr G . Connors for assistance , Dr R . Diaz - Avalos for the gift of TMV and Dr Dorit Hanein for the ﬁmbrin – actin coordinates . This research was supported by NIH grant AR42872 and GM64346 . The PDS 1010M densi - tometer was purchased with funds from NSF grant PCM - 8400167 . The Philips CM300 - FEG was purchased with funds from NSF grant BIR - 9512954 , NIH grant RR11357 and the Markey Charitable Trust . References 1 . Masaki , T . , Endo , M . & Ebashi , S . ( 1967 ) . Localization of 6 S component of a alpha - actinin at Z - band . J . Biochem . ( Tokyo ) , 62 , 630 – 632 . 2 . Lazarides , E . & Burridge , K . ( 1975 ) . Alpha - actinin : immunoﬂuorescent localization of a muscle struc - tural protein in nonmuscle cells . Cell , 6 , 289 – 298 . Smooth Muscle a - Actinin Structure 123 3 . Stromer , M . H . ( 1998 ) . The cytoskeleton in skeletal , cardiac and smooth muscle cells . Histol . Histopathol . 13 , 283 – 291 . 4 . Burridge , K . , Nuckolls , G . , Otey , C . , Pavalko , F . M . , Simon , K . & Turner , C . ( 1990 ) . Actin – membrane interaction in focal adhesions . Cell Differ . Dev . 32 , 337 – 342 . 5 . Langanger , G . , De Mey , J . , Moeremans , M . , Daneels , G . , de Brabander , M . & Small , J . V . ( 1984 ) . Ultrastructural localization of alpha - actinin and ﬁlamin in cultured cells with the immunogold staining ( IGS ) method . J . Cell Biol . 99 , 1324 – 1334 . 6 . Blanchard , A . , Ohanian , V . & Critchley , D . ( 1989 ) . The structure and function of alpha - actinin . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 10 , 280 – 289 . 7 . Broderick , M . J . & Winder , S . J . ( 2002 ) . Towards a complete atomic structure of spectrin family pro - teins . J . Struct . Biol . 137 , 184 – 193 . 8 . Matsudaira , P . ( 1991 ) . Modular organization of actin crosslinking proteins . Trends Biochem . Sci . 16 , 87 – 92 . 9 . Goldsmith , S . C . , Pokala , N . , Shen , W . , Fedorov , A . A . , Matsudaira , P . & Almo , S . C . ( 1997 ) . The structure of an actin - crosslinking domain from human ﬁmbrin . Nature Struct . Biol . 4 , 708 – 712 . 10 . Keep , N . H . , Winder , S . J . , Moores , C . A . , Walke , S . , Norwood , F . L . & Kendrick - Jones , J . ( 1999 ) . Crystal structure of the actin - binding region of utrophin reveals a head - to - tail dimer . Struct . Fold Des . 7 , 1539 – 1546 . 11 . Norwood , F . L . , Sutherland - Smith , A . J . , Keep , N . H . & Kendrick - Jones , J . ( 2000 ) . The structure of the N - terminal actin - binding domain of human dystro - phin and how mutations in this domain may cause Duchenne or Becker muscular dystrophy . Struct . Fold . Des . 8 , 481 – 491 . 12 . Garcia - Alvarez , B . , Bobkov , A . , Sonnenberg , A . & de Pereda , J . M . ( 2003 ) . Structural and functional analy - sis of the actin - binding domain of plectin suggests alternative mechanisms for binding to F - actin and integrin beta4 . Structure ( Camb ) , 11 , 615 – 625 . 13 . Schlunegger , M . P . , Bennett , M . J . & Eisenberg , D . ( 1997 ) . Oligomer formation by 3D domain swapping : a model for protein assembly and misassembly . Advan . Protein Chem . 50 , 61 – 122 . 14 . Yan , Y . , Winograd , E . , Viel , A . , Cronin , T . , Harrison , S . C . & Branton , D . ( 1993 ) . Crystals structure of the repetitive segments of spectrin . Science , 262 , 2027 – 2030 . 15 . Gimona , M . , Djinovic - Carugo , K . , Kranewitter , W . J . & Winder , S . J . ( 2002 ) . Functional plasticity of CH domains . FEBS Letters , 513 , 98 – 106 . 16 . Davison , M . & Critchley , D . ( 1988 ) . Alpha - actinins and the DMD protein contain spectrin - like repeats . Cell , 52 , 159 – 160 . 17 . Davison , M . D . , Baron , M . D . , Critchley , D . R . & Wootton , J . C . ( 1989 ) . Structural analysis of homolo - gous repeated domains in alpha - actinin and spectrin . Int . J . Biol . Macromol . 11 , 81 – 90 . 18 . Djinovic - Carugo , K . , Young , P . , Gautel , M . & Saraste , M . ( 1999 ) . Structure of the alpha - actinin rod : molecu - lar basis for cross - linking of actin ﬁlaments . Cell , 98 , 537 – 546 . 19 . Ylanne , J . , Scheffzek , K . , Young , P . & Saraste , M . ( 2001 ) . Crystal structure of the alpha - actinin rod reveals an extensive torsional twist . Structure ( Camb ) , 9 , 597 – 604 . 20 . McGregor , A . , Blanchard , A . D . , Rowe , A . J . & Critchley , D . R . ( 1994 ) . Identiﬁcation of the vinculin - binding site in the cytoskeletal protein alpha - actinin . Biochem . J . 301 , 225 – 233 . 21 . Young , P . , Ferguson , C . , Banuelos , S . & Gautel , M . ( 1998 ) . Molecular structure of the sarcomeric Z - disk : two types of titin interactions lead to an asym - metrical sorting of alpha - actinin . EMBO J . 17 , 1614 – 1624 . 22 . Atkinson , R . A . , Joseph , C . , Kelly , G . , Muskett , F . W . , Frenkiel , T . A . , Nietlispach , D . & Pastore , A . ( 2002 ) . Ca 2 þ - independent binding of an EF - hand domain to a novel motif in the a - actinin – titin complex . Nature Struct . Biol . 8 , 853 – 857 . 23 . Taylor , K . A . & Taylor , D . W . ( 1993 ) . Projection image of smooth muscle a - actinin from two - dimensional crystals formed on positively charged lipid layers . J . Mol . Biol . 230 , 196 – 205 . 24 . Tang , J . , Taylor , D . W . & Taylor , K . A . ( 2001 ) . The three - dimensional structure of alpha - actinin obtained by cryoelectron microscopy suggests a model for Ca ( 2 þ ) - dependent actin binding . J . Mol . Biol . 310 , 845 – 858 . 25 . Chapman , M . S . ( 1995 ) . Restrained real - space macro - molecular atomic reﬁnement using a new resolution - dependent electron - density function . Acta Crystallog . sect . A , 51 , 69 – 80 . 26 . Kahana , E . & Gratzer , W . B . ( 1991 ) . Properties of the spectrin - like structural element of smooth - muscle alpha - actinin . Cell Motil . Cytoskel . 20 , 242 – 248 . 27 . Baker , T . S . & Johnson , J . E . ( 1996 ) . Low resolution meets high : towards a resolution continuum from cells to atoms . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 6 , 585 – 594 . 28 . Ohtsuka , H . , Yajima , H . , Maruyama , K . & Kimura , S . ( 1997 ) . The N - terminal Z repeat 5 of connectin / titin binds to the C - terminal region of alpha - actinin . Bio - chem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 235 , 1 – 3 . 29 . Ohtsuka , H . , Yajima , H . , Maruyama , K . & Kimura , S . ( 1997 ) . Binding of the N - terminal 63 kDa portion of connectin / titin to alpha - actinin as revealed by the yeast two - hybrid system . FEBS Letters , 401 , 65 – 67 . 30 . Hanein , D . , Volkmann , N . , Goldsmith , S . , Michon , A . M . , Lehman , W . , Craig , R . et al . ( 1998 ) . An atomic model of ﬁmbrin binding to F - actin and its impli - cations for ﬁlament crosslinking and regulation . Nature Struct . Biol . 5 , 787 – 792 . 31 . Luther , P . K . ( 2000 ) . Three - dimensional structure of a vertebrate muscle Z - band : implications for titin and alpha - actinin binding . J . Struct . Biol . 129 , 1 – 16 . 32 . Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , VanLoock , M . S . & Egelman , E . H . ( 2003 ) . Do the utrophin tandem cal - ponin homology domains bind F - actin in a compact or extended conformation ? J . Mol . Biol . 331 , 967 – 972 . 33 . Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , VanLoock , M . S . , Rybakova , I . N . , Ervasti , J . M . & Egelman , E . H . ( 2002 ) . The utro - phin actin - binding domain binds F - actin in two different modes : implications for the spectrin super - family of proteins . J . Cell Biol . 157 , 243 – 251 . 34 . Sutherland - Smith , A . J . , Moores , C . A . , Norwood , F . L . , Hatch , V . , Craig , R . , Kendrick - Jones , J . & Lehman , W . ( 2003 ) . An atomic model for actin bind - ing by the CH domains and spectrin - repeat modules of utrophin and dystrophin . J . Mol . Biol . 329 , 15 – 33 . 35 . McGough , A . , Way , M . & DeRosier , D . ( 1994 ) . Deter - mination of the a - actinin - binding site on actin ﬁlaments by cryoelectron microscopy and image analysis . J . Cell Biol . 126 , 433 – 443 . 36 . Taylor , K . A . , Taylor , D . W . & Schachat , F . ( 2000 ) . Iso - forms of alpha - actinin from cardiac , smooth , and skeletal muscle form polar arrays of actin ﬁlaments . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 635 – 646 . 124 Smooth Muscle a - Actinin Structure 37 . Rhoads , A . R . & Friedberg , F . ( 1997 ) . Sequence motifs for calmodulin recognition . FASEB J . 11 , 331 – 340 . 38 . Feramisco , J . R . & Burridge , K . ( 1980 ) . A rapid puriﬁ - cation of alpha - actinin , ﬁlamin , and a 130 , 000 - dalton protein from smooth muscle . J . Biol . Chem . 255 , 1194 – 1199 . 39 . Fukami , A . & Adachi , K . ( 1965 ) . A new method of preparation of a self - perforated micro plastic grid and its application . J . Electron Microsc . 14 , 112 – 118 . 40 . Henderson , R . , Baldwin , J . M . , Ceska , T . A . , Zemlin , F . , Beckmann , E . & Downing , K . H . ( 1990 ) . Model for the structure of bacteriorhodopsin based on high - resolution electron cryo - microscopy . J . Mol . Biol . 213 , 899 – 929 . 41 . Henderson , R . , Baldwin , J . M . , Downing , K . H . , Lepault , J . & Zemlin , F . ( 1986 ) . Structure of purple membrane from halobacterium halobium : recording , measurement and evaluation of electron micro - graphs at 3 . 5 A˚ resolution . Ultramicroscopy , 19 , 147 – 178 . 42 . Schmid , M . , Dargahi , R . & Tam , M . ( 1993 ) . SPECTRA : a system for processing electron images of crystals . Ultramicroscopy , 48 ( 3 ) , 251 – 264 . 43 . Crowther , R . A . , Henderson , R . & Smith , J . M . ( 1996 ) . MRC image processing programs . J . Struct . Biol . 116 , 9 – 16 . 44 . Thon , F . ( 1966 ) . Zur Defokussierungsabha¨ngigkeitdes Phasenkontrastes bei der elektronenmikroskopischen Abbildung . Z . Naturforsch . 21a , 476 – 478 . 45 . Zhou , Z . H . , Hardt , S . , Wang , B . , Sherman , M . B . , Jakana , J . & Chiu , W . ( 1996 ) . CTF determination of images of ice - embedded single particles using a graphics interface . J . Struct . Biol . 116 , 216 – 222 . 46 . Avila - Sakar , A . J . & Chiu , W . ( 1996 ) . Visualization of b - sheets and side - chain clusters in two - dimensional periodic arrays of streptavidin on phospholipid monolayers by electron crystallography . Biophys . J . 70 , 57 – 68 . 47 . Project , C . C . ( 1994 ) . The CCP4 suite : programs for protein crystallography . Acta Crystallog . sect . D , 50 , 760 – 763 . 48 . Crowther , R . A . ( 1971 ) . Procedures for three - dimen - sional reconstruction of spherical viruses by Fourier synthesis from electron micrographs . Phil . Trans . Roy . Soc . ser . B , 261 , 221 – 230 . 49 . Baron , M . D . , Davison , M . D . , Jones , P . & Critchley , D . R . ( 1987 ) . The sequence of chick alpha - actinin reveals homologies to spectrin and calmodulin . J . Biol . Chem . 262 , 17623 – 17629 . 50 . Guex , N . & Peitsch , M . C . ( 1997 ) . SWISS - MODEL and the Swiss - PdbViewer : an environment for comparative protein modeling . Electrophoresis , 18 , 2714 – 2723 . 51 . Kuboniwa , H . , Tjandra , N . , Grzesiek , S . , Ren , H . , Klee , C . B . & Bax , A . ( 1995 ) . Solution structure of cal - cium - free calmodulin . Nature Struct . Biol . 2 , 768 – 776 . 52 . Jones , T . A . , Zou , J . Y . , Cowan , S . W . & Kjeldgaard , M . ( 1991 ) . Improved methods for binding protein models in electron density maps and the location of errors in these models . Acta Crystallog . sect . A , 47 , 110 – 119 . Edited by W . Baumeister ( Received 6 October 2003 ; received in revised form 5 February 2004 ; accepted 11 February 2004 ) Smooth Muscle a - Actinin Structure 125