College of Law Publications 1 - 1 - 1989 William J . Wilson , The Truly Disadvantaged : The Inner City , the Underclass , and Public Policy Marc Linder © 1989 Marc Linder 23 Clearinghouse Review 263 ( 1989 ) , 3 pages . Hosted by Iowa Research Online . For more information please contact : lib - ir @ uiowa . edu . Title : The Truly Disadvantaged : The Inner City , the Underclass , and Public Policy Author : William Julius Wilson Reviewed by : Marc Linder In The Truly Disadvantaged : The Inner City , the Underclass , and Public Policy , William Julius Wilson , ' a soci - ologist at the University of Chicago , has once again provoca - tively analyzed a number of important issues that vitally affect the provision of legal assistance to the urban " underclass , " a group that constitutes a significant share of the eligible clients of legal services programs . In an earlier book that made him a controversial figure a decade ago , Wilson argued that with the historical transition " from economic racial oppression experi - enced by virtually all blacks to economic subordination for the black underclass . . . the Negro class structure has become more differentiated . " 2 Although Wilson maintains that the growth of the urban black underclass is more a function of economic class 3 subordination than one of ( contemporary ) racial discrimi - nation , he concedes that as a consequence of past racial dis - crimination , blacks bear the brunt of " marginality and redundancy . . , under advanced capitalism . ' 4 [ Clomplex problems in the American and world - wide economies that ostensibly have little or nothing to do with race , problems that fall heav - ily on much of the black population but require solutions that confront broader issues of eco - nomic organization , are not made more under - standable by associating them directly or indirectly with racism . [ I ] t would be less ambiguous and more effective to state simply that a racial divi - sion of labor has been created due to decades , even centuries , of discrimination and prejudice ; and that because those in the low - wage sector of the economy are more adversely affected by impersonal shifts in advanced industrial society , the racial division of labor is reinforced . One 1 . Although Wilson is listed as the sole author , approximately one third of the text was coauthored by Kathryn Neckerman and Robert Aponte , who also " helped to collect and analyze data for this study . " Because the redactional process has failed to integrate the chapters , most of which had appeared earlier as articles , unneces - sarily repetitive material interrupts the flow of the argument . 2 . W . WILSON , THE DECLINING SIGNIFICANCE OF RACE 152 - 53 ( 1978 ) . 3 . Although nowhere in his new book does Wilson define " class , " in his earlier work he referred to it as " any group of people who have more or less similar goods , services , or skills to offer for income and who therefore receive similar remuneration in the market - place . " WILSON , supra note 2 , at ix . 4 . Id . at 154 . does not have to " trot out " the concept of racism to demonstrate . that blacks have been severely hurt by deindustrialization because of their heavy concentration in the . . , smokestack industries . 5 At the same time , Wilson has argued that the basis of racial conflict in the United States has " shifted from the economic sector to the sociopolitical order . " 6 In other words , " the issues now have more to do with racial control of residen - tial areas , schools , municipal political systems , and recreational areas , than with the control of jobs . " 7 In his new book , Wilson repeats all of these themes , but also compiles a formidable catalog of empirical indicia of the " pathology " of the underclass , who by the 1980s had become virtually the sole residents of the ghetto . Their characteristics include long - term unemployment ; declining labor force partici - pation rates ; criminal and aberrant behavior8 ; and long - term spells of poverty and welfare dependency . One of Wilson ' s chief purposes in pursuing this research project is to regain , for liberal social policy analysis , the terrain that was abdicated to conservatives in the backlash against the Moynihan report in the 1960s . For fear of being excoriated as racists , liberal social scientists became reluctant " even to acknowl - 5 . W . WILSON , THE TRULY DISADVANTAGED : THE INNER CITY , THE UNDERCLASS , AND PUBLIC POLICY 12 ( 1987 ) . 6 . WILSON , supra note 2 , at 23 . 7 . Id . at 121 . Inasmuch as Wilson asserts that " [ a ] ccess to the means of production is increasingly based on educational criteria , " id . at 151 , political struggles over schools must , in his theoretical frame - work , assume an immediately economic class function . 8 . Here Wilson has in mind the increase in black illegitimacy ratios , which he finds to be the result not of a rising rate of extramarital births , but rather of a decline in the percentage of married women and the rate of marital fertility . WILSON , supra note 5 , at 21 , 63 - 72 . This situation , in turn , has been triggered by the shrinkage of the pool of marriageable black men , whose increasing ineligibil - ity as husbands is a function of their diminishing attachment to the labor market . Id . at 42 - 43 , 81 - 89 . Despite the eminent plausibility of this economic - demographic argument , it does not explain why , during a period of significant increase in female labor force participation rates , economic potency must be an indispensable qualification of a prospective husband for a woman of any color . Nor does the argument explain why black adolescent mothers report far fewer of their pregnancies to be unwanted than other mothers or why fifteen times as many ( male and female ) black high school students expect to become parents before marriage as their white counterparts . Id . at 73 - 74 . JULY 1989 HeinOnline - - 23 Clearinghouse Rev . 263 1989 - 1990 edge the sharp increase in social pathologies in ghetto communities " 9 that Moynihan had prophetically analyzed . Con - sequently , conservatives rushed in to fill the vacuum with influential works dedicated to the proposition that the welfare state had reinforced rather than eroded the causes of black urban poverty . In order to distinguish his position from the pessimistic , resignationist analysis and political consequences that " culture of poverty " theorists have developed , ' 0 Wilson adopts " [ t ] he key theoretical concept " of " social isolation . " Together with the subsidiary notions of " social buffer " and " concentration effects , " social isolation is intended to describe mechanisms that enhance dislocation originally caused by racial subjugation but that have been strengthened recently by changes in class and economic structure . Wilson means that the exodus of working and middle class blacks from the ghetto removes the " ' social buffer ' that could deflect the full impact " of prolonged and rising unemployment , inasmuch as they were traditionally able to sustain basic institutions , such as churches , schools , stores , and recreational facilities . 1 The mere presence of such families " provides mainstream role models that help keep alive the perception that education is meaningful , that steady employ - ment is a viable alternative to welfare , and that family stability is the norm . ' 12 The culture of poverty thesis implies that values and attitudes have been internalized and therefore influence behav - ior ; in order to improve life chances , social policies must change these subcultural traits . Social isolation , in contrast , focuses on the constraints and opportunities caused by concen - tration effects . By stressing social isolation , however , Wilson is not suggesting that cultural traits are irrelevant - " rather , it highlights the fact that culture is a response to social structural constraints and opportunities . " ' 13 Consequently , public policy initiatives must shift from changing subcultural traits to chang - ing the structure of constraints and opportunities . What distinguishes social isolation from the culture of poverty is that although both theories emphasize the association of cultural traits with the structure of social constraints and opportunities , the culture of poverty approach " places strong emphasis on the autonomous character of the cultural traits once they come into existence . In other words , these traits ' assume a life of their own ' and continue to influence behavior even if opportunities for social mobility improve . ' 14 Wilson ' s own ambivalence with regard to the two approaches is reflected in his reluctance " to rule out the possibility that some cultural traits may in fact take on a life of their own for a period of time and thereby become a constraining or liberating factor . " 15 Moreover , the notion of social isolation implies that the underclass was always a " pathology " ready to metastasize as soon as the respectable ( i . e . , middle and working class ) immune system fled the ghetto for " safer or more 9 . WILSON , supra note 5 , at 6 , 173 . 10 . Although some critics have labeled Wilson a " neoconservative , " he is a " social democrat . " WILSON , supra note 5 , at viii . 11 . Id . at 50 , 56 , 144 . 12 . Id . at 56 . 13 . Id . at 61 . 14 . Id . at 137 . 15 . Id . at 138 . desirable neighborhoods . " This , in turn , implies that the black ghetto social system was never " mainstream . " Consequently , at least during periods in which across - the - board macroeconomic growth is not available to sustain opportunities for social mobil - ity and thus to alter individual behavior , the question arises as to whether the social isolation approach does not in fact collapse into the culture of poverty . 16 The ambiguities inherent in Wilson ' s analysis reemerge in connection with his examination of the inadequacies of the race - specific policies emanating from the civil rights revolution . In his view , " neither programs based on equality of individual opportunity nor those organized in terms of preferential group treatment are sufficient to address the problems of truly disad - vantaged minority group members . " ' 7 What Wilson apparently means by the supplanting of race by class as a determinant of individual life chances is the ascendancy of behavior conforming to the cash - nexus stimuli , which are imposed on all rational actors with purchasing power in a market economy . " I believe that we would not improve the health of the ghetto underclass , in either the long or the short run , even if we tripled the number of black physicians in our large central cities . " ' 1 8 The ultimate determinant of black access to physicians is Medicare and Medicaid . " There are plenty of doctors for those who can afford them . " 1 9 . It is reasonable to assume that the typical black physician , like the typical white physician , would seek out the areas of practice providing the greatest financial and professional rewards . Accordingly , the more opportunities a black phy - sician has to practice in attractive areas , the less likely that he or she will choose to serve poor blacks . . . . It is ironic that the removal of racial barriers would result in a decrease in the percent - age of the most qualified black physicians prac - ticing medicine in the black community . 20 By lapsing into a confusion of money , income , and class , Wilson implies that greater racial and economic equality will neutralize the class behavior ( be it oppressive or solidary ) of atomized market individuals . Wilson criticizes the architects of the War on Poverty - which also gave rise to the current legal services system - for not having viewed poverty " as a problem of American eco - nomic organization . " 2 1 Because they emphasized " the environ - 16 . Wilson ' s ambivalence is further reflected in the following formula - tions . It is necessary to emphasize " the dynamic interplay between ghetto - specific cultural characteristics and social and economic opportunities . " WILSON , supra note 5 , at 18 . " The social prob - lems of urban life in the United States are , in large measure , the problems of racial inequality . " Id . at 20 . " There is no single explanation for the racial or ethnic variations in the rates of social dislocations . " Id . at 29 . 17 . Although Wilson supports the principle of equality of life chances in order to compensate for family background disadvantages ( regard - ing competitive resources associated with economic class ) regard - less of past discrimination , even this principle must be supplemented by macroeconomic policies . WILSON , supra note 5 , at 112 , 117 - 18 . 18 . Id . at 116 . 19 . Id . 20 . Id . at 210 , n . 16 . 21 . Id . at 131 . CLEARINGHOUSE REVIEW HeinOnline - - 23 Clearinghouse Rev . 264 1989 - 1990 ments of the poor , " they sought " to alter the characteristics of individuals through employment and training programs . " 22 Instead , he urges adoption of " a comprehensive and integrated frame - work . . , that shows how contemporary racial problems . . . . or issues perceived to be racial problems , are often part of a more general . . , set of problems whose origin and / or development may have little or no direct or indirect connection with race . ' 23 Because of the political divisiveness of such issues , however , Wilson urges the need for a " hidden agenda " of improving the life chances of the underclass by emphasizing programs that more advantaged groups of all races can support . These include macroeconomic policies designed to promote growth and a tight labor market , a national AFDC standard , nonmeans - tested child support to all single parents , and day care . Although Wilson concedes that such programs will not revitalize inner - city neighborhoods or recreate the social organi - zation that once permeated them , 24 he believes that they will ultimately foster the social mobility of the underclass . The ensuing geographic mobility might then promote the deconcen - tration , if not dissolution , of the ghetto . 25 Considering that the courts have thus far been little disposed to recognize the actionability of discrimination and inequality based on economic class - - as opposed to race - Wilson ' s endorsement of legislative initiatives to deal with " the broader problems of American economic organization " 26 raises obvious questions about the most effective contribution legal services advocates can make toward the elimination of poverty and inequality . The Truly Disadvantaged : The Inner City , the Underclass , and Public Policy , by William Julius Wilson . Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1987 . 254 pp . $ 19 . 95 . Marc Linder is a staff attorney at Texas Rural Legal Aid , 259 South Texas , Weslaco , TX 78596 , ( 512 ) 968 - 9574 . 22 . Id . 23 . Id . at 132 . 24 . Before the waves of social dislocations began transforming the ghettos in the 1960s , the ghettos had been socially organized communities characterized by vertical integration of the lower , working , and middle classes . WILSON , supra note 5 , at 3 , 7 . 25 . At that point they may become more similar to urban poor whites , most of whom live in nonpoverty areas with different ecological and economic situations . WILSON , supra note 5 , at 58 - 60 , 157 - 158 . 26 . Id . at 187 . A Guide to Implementing the Child Support Provisions of the Family Support Act Turning Promises into Realities : A Guide to Implementing the Child Support Provisions of the Family Support Act of 1988 , by Paula Roberts , describes the actions that states will need to take in order to establish an effective IV - D system under the Family Support Act of 1988 ( FSA ) . Under Title I of FSA , states must amend their family laws to require in every case that ( 1 ) decisionmakers use the state ' s child support guidelines in establishing or modifying support awards unless to do so would be unjust or inappropriate ; ( 2 ) all new child support orders provide for collection through immediate wage withholding unless both parties agree to an alternate arrangement or unless there is a finding of good cause for not ordering it ; ( 3 ) all parties to a contested paternity action be required to submit to genetic testing ; and ( 4 ) parents be required to furnish their social security numbers to the state ' s birth records agency as part of the process involved in the issuance of a birth certificate . In addition , all child support orders must be amenable to review and adjustment under the child support guidelines at least once every three years if either parent requests such action . States must also increase the number of paternities that they establish . In AFDC cases , FSA requires that states ( 1 ) clarify that the $ 50 pass through is available on any child support payment made by the absent parent in the month when due , ( 2 ) send monthly notices of support collections to the family , and ( 3 ) extend for an additional year a provision in the law giving Medic - aid coverage for four months to families leaving the AFDC program due to child support collections . State legislators , judges , administrative agency personnel , community advo - cates , and parents ' groups are going to be asked by states to make recommendations or decisions to effect these changes in state law and policy . This manual is designed to assist the reader who is asked to participate in this decision - making process . It suggests state law and policy changes that will meet the federal requirements in the area of child support , and offers samples of appropriate statutory lan - guage to implement some of the author ' s key recommen - dations . Copies of the 119 - page draft manual are available for $ 15 from the Center for Law and Social Policy , 1616 P St . , NW , Suite 350 , Washington , DC 20036 , ( 202 ) 328 - 5140 . JULY 1989 Joint Conference on Law and Aging The second annual Joint Conference on Law and next month or contact Al Chiplin , National Senior Citi - Aging will be held Oct . 6 - 8 , 1989 at the Crystal City zen ' s Law Center , 2025 M . St . , NW , Suite 400 , Washing - Gateway Marriot Hotel in Crystal City , Virginia . For more ton , D . C . , 20036 ( phone : 202 - 887 - 5280 ) . information , see the special issue of the Review on Elderlaw HeinOnline - - 23 Clearinghouse Rev . 265 1989 - 1990