Academy of Management Review , 1989 , Vol . 14 , No . 3 , 333 - 349 . Improving Interactional Organizational Research : A Model of Person - Organization Fit JENNIFER A . CHATMAN Northwestern University In order for researchers to understand and predict behavior , they must consider both person and situation factors and how these fac - tors interact . Even though organization researchers have developed interactional models , many have overemphasized either person or situation components , and most have failed to consider the effects that persons have on situations . This paper presents criteria for improving interactional models and a model of person - organization fit , which satisfies these criteria . Using a Q - sort methodology , individual value profiles are compared to organizational value profiles to determine fit and to predict changes in values , norms , and behaviors . Researchers in organizational behavior are concerned with understanding and predicting how people behave in organizational settings . Although they may agree about the importance of understanding behavior , their research has traditionally taken two very different forms - the individual difference approach and the situa - tional approach . The individual difference ap - proach proposes that a person ' s behavior can best be predicted by measuring his or her per - sonality traits , values , motives , abilities , and af - fect because such elements are both stable and are reflected in behavior ( e . g . , Allport , 1937 , 1966 ; Block , 1978 ; Bowers , 1973 ; Staw & Ross , 1985 ; Weiss & Adler , 1984 ) . In contrast , the situ - ationist approach proposes that a person ' s be - havior can best be predicted by assessing the characteristics of his or her situation ( e . g . , Mis - chel , 1968 ; Salancik & Pfeffer , 1977 , 1978 ; Skin - ner , 1971 ; Thorndike , 1906 ) . The basic question underlying the well - known person - situation de - bate has been whether persons or situations ac - count for more variation in behavior ( cf . Epstein & O ' Brien , 1985 ; Kenrick & Funder , 1988 ; Rowe , 1987 ; Sarason , Smith , & Diener , 1975 ) . Most behavioral scientists agree that both per - sonal and situational characteristics influence behavior ( e . g . , Lewin , 1951 ; Magnusson & End - ler , 1977 ; Schneider , 1983 ; Terborg , 1981 ) . How - ever , the challenge has been to develop con - cepts and methods that not only determine if person and situation variables are valid predic - tors of behavior but also determine when and to what extent person and situation variables pre - dict behavior ( cf . Schneider , 1987 ) . This is no easy task , however , because interactive re - search must accurately represent both person elements and situation elements . A laboratory experiment by psychologists Monson , Hesley , and Chernick ( 1982 ) underscored the impor - tance of simultaneously considering the effects that person and situation characteristics have on behavior . They attempted to discover when extroversion predicted talkativeness by placing 333 extroverts and introverts in either a strong or weak situation . Drawing on Mischel ' s ( 1977 ) dis - tinction , a strong situation is one in which ev - eryone construes the situation similarly , the sit - uation induces uniform expectancies , the incen - tives of the situation induce a response to it , and everyone has the skills to perform in the situa - tion . Results showed that extroversion predicted talkativeness only when the situation was weak . In strong situations , extroverts were no more talkative than introverts . As this study illustrates , we can gain more refined information by pay - ing serious attention to both person and situa - tion elements . However , when we move out of the lab into the real world , examining interactive issues be - comes complex and difficult . For example , the strength of a situation may not be enduring , multiple values and norms may define a situa - tion , and even a single individual ' s traits , abili - ties , and motives may interact and change over time ( cf . McClelland , 1985 ) . However , organiza - tion researchers , many of whom have expertise in conducting research in real - world settings , are in a good position to contribute to the devel - opment of both balanced and realistic interac - tive explanations because organizational set - tings are highly complex contexts in which peo - ple spend a great deal of time . Consider the following real - world problem : Assume that you are a personnel recruiter for a firm that conducts its business through teams . Your dilemma is , How should you allocate your resources ? Should you invest heavily in tradi - tional selection procedures , such as applica - tions , inteviews , recommendations , and person - ality tests ? Or , should you spend your resources developing an extensive employee socialization program that emphasizes the importance of co - operation and conveys the specific norms of the organization to newcomers ? A person theorist would argue that you should devote your re - sources to selection activities . The person theo - rist assumes that once you ' ve identified a highly cooperative person , he or she will be coopera - tive across most organizational contexts ( cf . Ep - stein & O ' Brien , 1985 ) . A situational theorist would argue that regardless of how the person has scored on a personality scale , if your orga - nizational context promotes cooperation you can expect new entrants to engage in cooperative activities . Therefore , you should make sure that newcomers understand that the culture of your organization emphasizes cooperation ( cf . Louis , 1980 ; Van Maanen & Schein , 1979 ) . In contrast , an interactional theorist would ar - gue that the above plans are incomplete and that you need information both about the person and the situation . An interactionist would point out that a cooperative person would be most co - operative in an organization that emphasizes cooperation , but he or she might be competitive in an organization that strongly promotes com - petitive behavior . Conversely , a competitive person would be most competitive in an organi - zation that emphasizes competition , but he or she might engage in cooperative activities if the organization strongly promoted such activities . Furthermore , a truly interactive model would in - clude the effects that people have on situations ( Schneider , 1987 ) . Therefore , when a mis - match occurs , for example , when a coopera - tive organization hires a competitive person , the organization may change over time - in this case , a norm for competition may begin to over - shadow the previous norm for cooperation ( Bet - tenhausen & Murnighan , 1985 ; Nemeth & Wachtler , 1983 ) . Clearly , models that indicate the joint contri - butions of persons and situations are not new in organizational research . For example , models have been developed of leader traits and tasks ( e . g . , Fiedler , 1976 ) , personality traits and voca - tions ( e . g . , Holland , 1985 ) , abilities and jobs ( e . g . , Dunnette , 1976 ) , and personality traits and job characteristics ( e . g . , Hackman & Oldham , 1980 ) . However , three limiting features of previ - ous work are apparent . First , person and situa - tion characteristics have not been as accurately conceptualized as they , perhaps , could be . Re - searchers on the person side have criticized re - search that fails to consider how person charac - teristics are uniquely patterned within individu - als and research that fails to use multiple act 334 criteria to track a person ' s behavior over time and during situations ( cf . Luthans & Davis , 1982 ; Staw , Bell , & Clausen , 1986 ; Weiss & Adler , 1984 ) . Likewise , little attention has been devoted to conceptualizing situations ( cf . Moos , 1973 ) . To meaningfully test person - situation interactions , we must consider the extent to which a situation either induces conformity or is ambiguous ( Mis - chel & Peake , 1982 ) , and we must find ways of making meaningful comparisons between situ - ations and persons ( Lewin , 1951 ) . Thus , the em - pirical results of previous interactive models may be clouded by inaccuracies in conceptual - izations of either person or situation contribu - tions to behavior . A second problem is that few researchers have considered the effects that people have on situations ( Bell & Staw , in press ; Schneider , 1987 ) . This is perhaps the greatest strength of interactional models when compared to contin - gency models ( e . g . , Fiedler , 1976 ) . Although contingency theorists consider person factors such as leader style and situation factors such as how routine the task is , they fail to consider that the task itself may change over time ( e . g . , be - come more exceptional ) because of the leaders ' or subordinates ' personal characteristics . The effects that people have on situations are difficult to document because this may require many data collection periods and highly sensitive measurement instruments . However , the few empirical studies that have been conducted re - veal that people do affect their situations ( Kohn & Schooler , 1978 ; Miner , 1987 ) . A final problem with current models is that their conceptualiza - tions of persons and situations have been lim - ited . For example , few researchers have consid - ered the importance of the context at the orga - nization level , such as an organization ' s system of norms and values that have a great deal of influence over people ' s behavior ( cf . Jackson , 1966 ; Katz & Kahn , 1978 ) . The next section of this paper reviews previ - ous approaches in terms of the criteria estab - lished above . A person - organization fit model is then proposed to illustrate how interactional models in organizational research can begin to fulfill these criteria . Drawing on the conceptual distinction between strong and weak situations , the person - organization fit model treats organi - zation values and norms as the situational side of the model . On the person side , individual val - ues and some personality characteristics are ex - amined . Higher levels of person - organization fit exist when there is congruence between the norms and values of organizations and the val - ues of persons . Selection and socialization pro - cesses are seen as the antecedents to person - organization fit . Once person - organization fit is assessed , predictions can be made about spe - cific outcomes ( e . g . , changes in values ) , global behavioral outcomes ( e . g . , extra - role behavior ) , and changes in organization norms and values . The methods for measuring the components are described . In particular , Q - sorts ( Block , 1978 ) may be appropriate for measuring interactions between persons and situations over time . Interactional Concepts and Methods Interactional researchers incorporate the ele - ments of both persons and environments ( cf . Fredericksen , 1972 ; Ekehammar , 1974 ; Magnus - son & Endler , 1977 ; Moos , 1973 ) . This view has a fairly long theoretical tradition , beginning with Lewin ' s ( 1951 ) proposition that behavior is a function of the person and the environment . To be accurate and complete , interactional re - searchers in organizations must ( a ) accurately conceptualize and measure persons and situa - tions , ( b ) document the reciprocal effects of per - sons on situations and situations on persons , and ( c ) be comprehensive and externally valid . Although an exhaustive review of explicitly and implicitly interactional research is beyond the scope of this paper , particular approaches that illustrate strengths or common weaknesses are evaluated in light of each of these requirements . Conceptualizing Persons and Situations Accurately Person Research . Two weaknesses have been mentioned on the person side ( cf . Schneider , 1983 ; Staw & Ross , 1985 ; Weiss & Adler , 1984 ) . First , one individual may differ from another in 335 the way his or her traits , values , abilities , and motives are related to each other . Also , a given trait may or may not be relevant for the person in question . Therefore , we should use idio - graphic methods , which can capture the rele - vance of individual differences . The well - known job characteristics model ( cf . Hackman & Old - ham , 1980 ) illustrates this issue . According to Hackman and Oldham , some ideal configura - tion of task elements exists for each person , de - pending on that person ' s growth need strength ( GNS ) . However , the outcome of their analyses takes on a prescriptive and nomothetic quality ( Roberts & Glick , 1981 ) . They provided only a limited set of options for task design , and by pro - viding the same solution ( job enrichment ) for ev - eryone , they underemphasized the extent to which GNS is differentially relevant across peo - ple . Therefore , low correlations between en - riched jobs and outcome behaviors may be at - tributed to GNS ' s not being particularly impor - tant for a certain individual . This criticism also can be directed at many contingency models that isolate either one or a few individual differ - ences without measuring how relevant those characteristics are to the particular respondent ( Weiss & Adler , 1984 ) . Whether traits , motives , values , or attitudes are being examined , we should recognize that these may be patterned differently across people and that such differen - tial relevance will affect research results . The larger problem in interactional research is that even though we should capture the dif - ferential relevance of traits through idiographic methods , we also should compare people either to one another or to themselves over time , and these comparisons require nomothetic methods ( Luthans & Davis , 1982 ) . Two techniques that can work in this capacity include standardized personality profiles ( e . g . , Gough , 1976 ) and Q - sorts ( e . g . , Block , 1978 ; Stephenson , 1953 ) . The template matching approach , for example , draws on the Q - sort methodology ( Bem & Allen , 1974 ; Bem & Funder , 1978 ) . First , templates are based on expert ratings of how a hypothetical person who is high on a specific trait ( e . g . , dom - inance , achievement ) would behave in a spe - cific situation ( e . g . , a job interview ) . Next , real people are given personality tests , and their be - havior is predicted on the basis of how similar or different their scores are from the hypothetical person ' s scores . The closer the real person is to the hypothetical profile , the more likely it is that the real person ' s behavior can be predicted by the situation - specific template . The strength of this method is that both a profile of traits and the relevance of any particular trait to a particular individual are considered . The second major problem with many current interactional models is that often individual characteristics are not collected across a num - ber of situations . This is important because even though it may not be possible to predict single instances of behavior from individual differ - ences , it is possible to predict behavior aver - aged over a sample of situations ( Epstein , 1979 ) . Because the data are cross - situational , system - atic longitudinal research designs must be used ( e . g . , Buss & Craik , 1983 ; Staw et al . , 1986 ) , and a taxonomy of important situational components must be developed so that one situation can be compared to another . Situation Research . As Terborg ( 1981 ) noted , the interactional perspective allows researchers to conceptualize the situation in a variety of ways . In models that include both aspects of per - sons and aspects of situations , organizational situations have been variously and , in many cases , elaborately defined as the characteristics of a task or a job ( e . g . , Dunnette , 1976 ; Kohn & Schooler , 1978 ; Miner , 1987 ; O ' Reilly , 1977 ) , and as the characteristics of a profession ( e . g . , Hol - land , 1985 ) , but only rarely as the characteristics of the organization ( Feldman , 1976 ; Jones , 1983 ) . However , researchers have not identified what the important parameters of situations are . Uni - fying dimensions that can guide future concep - tualizations of situations , regardless of the spe - cific situation element being examined , would help researchers to build a comprehensive framework of interactions in organizations ( Fred - eriksen , 1972 ; Moos , 1973 ) . 336 One construct that may cut across all , or at least many , such conceptualizations is the strength of the situation in question . For exam - ple , if a situation is defined in terms of occupa - tions , job holders of strong or conformity - inducing occupations may have salient values that can be transmitted in the form of objective standards of work , binding codes of ethics , li - censing requirements , and a strong professional association ( cf . Van Maanen & Barley , 1984 ; Wilensky , 1964 ) . In contrast , weak occupations would be characterized by a lack of consensus among job holders about values and either few or no mechanisms to transmit such information . By using the strong / weak distinction , we can move toward a more comprehensive organiza - tion taxonomy of situations . As Bell and Staw ( in press , p . 11 ) asked , " are organizations ( actually ) powerful situations capable of homogenizing behavior in the face of individual differ - ences ? " To answer this question , we need to as - sess the relative strengths and weaknesses of important organization factors . A second criterion for accurately representing situations was suggested by Lewin in 1951 , but it has been difficult to address . Lewin suggested that the relevance of persons to situations would be maximized if we could conceptualize and measure them in commensurate terms . Accord - ing to Lewin ' s criteria , one potential problem with Bem and Allen ' s ( 1974 ) template - matching procedure is that the person is overemphasized . In other words , situations are construed only in terms of the personality characteristics of indi - viduals acting within them . By assuming that the only important elements about a situation are how a person would behave in it , we may overlook aspects of situations that cannot be de - scribed in person terms . Tom ( 1971 ) developed a measure to investigate the similarities between people ' s self - profiles and the profiles of their most preferred organization . By using two per - sonality profiles , Tom showed that people pre - ferred organizations that were most similar to their self - descriptions . However , Tom ' s work has the same problem as Bem ' s - the personality items can be only metaphorically applied to or - ganizations because the items were designed to measure personality . Graham ( 1976 ) also recog - nized the importance of measuring both person and organization characteristics . He attempted to create a scale ( the Trait Ascription Question - naire ) that could characterize persons and orga - nizations in similar terms , so the two could be compared . However , the problem with Gra - ham ' s work is that it is not clear if his scale char - acterizes people within firms or the firm as an entity . In sum , the problem with each of these ap - proaches is that situations are anthropomor - phized because they are defined in the same terms as individuals . Organizations are different than people ; therefore , the same adjective may have a very different meaning when applied to an organization , rather than a person . For ex - ample , describing an individual as cooperative may be very different than describing an orga - nization as cooperative . The term a cooperative individual refers to a person who tends to assist others in order to achieve some joint benefit , whereas the term a cooperative organization may refer to the actual financial structure ( jointly owned by the consumers or members ) of that organization . Therefore , we need to find ways of characterizing persons and situations in mutu - ally relevant and comparative forms . How Persons and Situations Affect Each Other If we do not consider the influence that people have on situations , our interactive models will be sorely incomplete . People are not passive agents subject to environmental forces . First , there is evidence that people actively choose their situations ( cf . Emmons & Diener , 1986 ; Swann , 1983 ) . In fact , the tendencies exist for people both to choose situations and to perform best in situations that are most compatible to themselves . For example , high achievers are more comfortable in and prefer challenging sit - uations which require high levels of achieve - ment . " People tend to be happier when they are 337 in settings that meet their particular needs or are congruent with their dispositions " ( Diener , Larsen , & Emmons , 1984 , p . 582 ) . Second , there is evidence to suggest that peo - ple change situations . For example , Kohn and Schooler ( 1978 ) gathered two decades ' worth of data to determine the relative effects of a person characteristic ( intellectual flexibility ) and a situ - ation characteristic ( work complexity ) . They found that people influenced their jobs more than their jobs influenced them - people who were more intellectually flexible enhanced the complexity of their work . Along the same lines , Miner ( 1987 ) showed that the unique interests and abilities of a job incumbent evolved into for - malized job descriptions , which were subse - quently used by later job incumbents . Taken to - gether , these studies send a clear message : Peo - ple have pervasive and enduring effects on situations , which we must continue to investi - gate . Relevant Situations and Comprehensive Coverage From the above review , we might believe that many relevant situation and person factors have been tested interactively ; however , this is only partly true . For example , although person - job interactions ( cf . Neiner & Owens , 1985 ; O ' Reilly , 1977 ; Seybolt , 1976 ) and person - vocation inter - actions ( cf . Holland , 1985 ) have been examined extensively , person - organization interactions have not been examined as thoroughly . Two re - searchers have conceptualized such organiza - tion - level issues . Schneider ( 1987 ) developed a promising theoretical model ( the Attraction - Selection - Attrition model ) that attempted to identify the process through which people and organizations become more similar to each other over time . House ( 1988 ) presented a com - prehensive interactive conceptualization of or - ganizational power . In House ' s scheme , organi - zations are described in terms of their struc - tural characteristics . Structure is predicted to interact with people ' s power - striving predisposi - tions . When the structural constraints are weak , House hypothesized that people with power - striving predispositions will acquire power . No direct empirical tests of House ' s hypotheses have been made . Jones ( 1986 ) and Feldman ( 1976 ) presented two of the few explicitly interactional and empiri - cally tested models at the organization level . They both examined the extent to which per - sonal characteristics and socialization tactics contribute to new members ' adjustment to their organizations . These two studies are relatively unique because they also consider how people influence organizations . Feldman ( 1976 ) found that employees were more likely to suggest changes at the accommodation stage of social - ization , whereas Jones ( 1986 ) found that institu - tionalized socialization tactics resulted in stron - ger conformity when individuals possessed low , rather than high , levels of self - efficacy . How - ever , neither of these studies tracked the extent to which employees ' making suggestions and conforming to the organization influenced orga - nizational values . In sum , interactional research in organization settings has generated some concrete findings , but improvements can be made . First , concep - tualizations of both persons and situations must be simultaneously idiographic and nomothetic . On the person side , attention to the differential relevance of characteristics and cross - situa - tional data is essential . On the situation side , we may need to assess the relative strengths and weaknesses of a situation and to compare situations and persons in mutually relevant and commensurate terms . Second , complete models should include how people choose and influ - ence their situations . Finally , interactive organi - zational research should be more comprehen - sive . A Model of Person - Organization Fit This section describes one illustration of an in - teractional model , person - organization fit . Be - 338 cause organization factors provide an important contextual level , the third criterion for interac - tive models , relevance and comprehensiveness , is automatically addressed . The model draws on the Q - sort method , which is both nomothetic and idiographic , and through it the differential relevance of individual characteristics are con - sidered . Additionally , the Q - sort allows for both a distinction between strong and weak situa - tions and for comparisons to person character - istics . Finally , the design of the model is explic - itly longitudinal ; therefore , both the effects that people have on organizations and the effects that organizations have on people are consid - ered . Defining Person - Organization Fit The impact that organizational membership has on people and the impact that people have on organizations are predicted through informa - tion gathered about people and information gathered about organizations . The questions become , what aspects of people and what as - pects of organizations are important to consider ? Although many aspects of organizations and people are important in determining behavior ( e . g . , abilities , job requirements , personality characteristics , and vocations ) , a fundamental and enduring aspect of both organizations and people is their values ( Katz & Kahn , 1978 ) . On the person side , individual values are de - fined as enduring beliefs through which a spe - cific mode of conduct or end - state is personally preferable to its opposite ( Rokeach , 1973 ) . Val - ues are a type of social cognition that facilitate a person ' s adaptation to his or her environment , and values have implications for his or her be - havior ( cf . Fishbein & Ajzen 1975 ; Weiner , 1988 ) . On the organization side , value systems provide an elaborate and generalized justification both for appropriate behaviors of members and for the activities and functions of the system ( Enz , 1988 ; Katz & Kahn , 1978 ; McCoy , 1985 ) . Norms are closely related to values in that they make explicit the forms of behavior that are appropri - ate for members of that system ( Kilmann , Sax - ton , & Serpa , 1985 ) . Organizational norms and values are a group product ; even though all members of the group would not have the same values , a majority of active members would agree on them and members of the group would be aware of the group ' s support for a given value ( Katz & Kahn , 1978 ; Weiner , 1988 ) . In addition to a description of their content , both organizational and individual values can be described in terms of their intensity , or how strongly held they are , relative to other values . Organizational value systems also can be de - scribed in terms of crystallization , or how widely shared they are ( Jackson , 1966 ; O ' Reilly , 1983 ) . Strong organizational values are both intensely held and widely shared , which is how many researchers define strong culture firms ( e . g . , Davis , 1984 ; Deal & Kennedy , 1982 ) . Drawing again on the strong / weak distinction ( Mischel , 1977 ) , we can explain organizations that have intense and crystallized values as strong situa - tions . Person - organization fit is defined here as the congruence between the norms and values of organizations and the values of persons . In or - der to determine the effects that organizational membership will have on an individual ' s values and behaviors and the effects that an individual will have on an organization ' s norms and val - ues , we must first assess the extent of agreement between the person ' s values and the organiza - tion ' s values . Additionally , much of the interac - tional research discussed previously has exam - ined personality traits as important determi - nants of behaviors . However , as mentioned above , if personality traits are compared di - rectly to organization contexts , there is a risk of misrepresenting ( anthropomorphizing ) organi - zations . Therefore , particular traits ( e . g . , self - monitoring ) are seen here as determinants of the particular behavioral manifestation of person - organization fit . A model of person - organization fit is presented in Figure 1 , and the ways of mea - 339 a ) U 0 0 0 Z d G oa ) ) 0 ~ ~ ~ ~ ( 1 ) ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ - 4 - U ) ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ - O ul ~ ~ ~ 340 suring each of the components are discussed below . Measuring Person - Organization Fit According to the conceptual requirements for interactional research listed above , the assess - ment of individual and organizational values should be both idiographic , so that the rele - vance of particular values and the uniqueness of patterns of values across people and organi - zations are represented , and nomothetic , so that person and situation factors can be compared . In addition , the situation should be assessed in terms of how strong or weak it is . The Q - sort method is one viable method for developing a simultaneously idiographic and nomothetic in - strument to assess values and for determining whether an organization ' s value system pre - sents a strong or weak situation to individuals . Although the Q - sort method traditionally has been used to assess personality characteristics ( Block , 1978 ) , organizational researchers have developed two Q - sort item sets . The Organiza - tional Culture Profile ( OCP ) assesses person - organization fit , and the Knowledge , Skills , and Abilities Profile , which will not be discussed here , assesses person - job fit ( Chatman , 1988 ; O ' Reilly , Chatman , & Caldwell , 1988 ) . The OCP contains 54 value statements ( e . g . , quality , re - spect for individuals ) that can generically cap - ture individual and organizational norms and values . The OCP can be used to measure per - son - organization fit in the following way : To as - sess an individual ' s values , job seekers or new firm members are asked to sort the 54 items into 9 categories , with a specified number of cards in each category . Fewer cards are allowed at ex - treme categories , and more cards are allowed in the central , more neutral , categories . The question new members are asked to keep in mind while sorting the deck is , " How important is it for this characteristic to be a part of the or - ganization I work for ? " The anchors given for the 9 categories range from the most desirable val - ues to the most undesirable values , and the mid - dle category is neutral . The result is an individ - ual profile that represents the person ' s values in any organizational context . To assess an organizational value system , a broad representation of organization members who have been with the organization for at least 1 or 2 years ( so they are familiar with whatever value system exists ) are asked to sort the same 54 value statements . The only differences be - tween the individual profile and the member profiles are that the anchors are labeled most characteristic to most uncharacteristic ( as op - posed to most desirable and most undesirable ) and the question they are asked is , " How much does this attribute characterize your organiza - tion ' s values ? " Member profiles are then com - bined by averaging each item to form an orga - nization profile . Crystallization of organizational values is as - sessed by calculating a reliability coefficient for the mean organization profile . A strong organi - zational value system would be indicated by a high reliability coefficient ( e . g . , above . 70 , ac - cording to Nunnally , 1967 ) , which shows that or - ganization members perceive the content and ordering of the organizational value system sim - ilarly . Intensity and content of both individual and organizational values are gauged by exam - ining the top and bottom ranked items . ( As a rule of thumb , the top and bottom three categories represent intensely held values , Block , 1978 . ) Person - organization fit is measured by first comparing the organization profile to the indi - vidual profile and then calculating the correla - tion between them . Two cautions should be noted . First , if organizational values are not highly crystallized ( e . g . , the alpha is below . 70 ) , the organization profile will not be reliable . Low crystallization is equated with a weak situation ; therefore , the organizational values cannot be represented with a single profile . Of course , low crystallization at the organization level may in - dicate that strong factions exist within the orga - nization . To determine this , member crystalliza - tion could be calculated according to various subgroups , such as departments , job levels , or divisions . Second , an overall high correlation 341 between an organizational value profile and an individual profile would indicate a general con - gruence between the person and the organiza - tion . However , an item - by - item comparison of the top and bottom 12 items also is warranted . Large disparities ( e . g . , greater than 3 catego - ries ) between top firm values and top individual values should be noted - these may be the ones in which the most individual or organizational change occurs over time . In sum , the Q - sort method allows for a rich assessment of individual and organizational values . First , the breadth and complexity of val - ues are captured because a large number of items are used in the OCP ( Chatman , 1988 ) , and each item is implicitly compared to each other item ( Cattell , 1944 ) . Thus , a distinct advantage of the Q - sort method is that more items can be used reliably . ( Ranking the 54 items would be too cog - nitively complex to generate reliable results . ) Second , the personal relevance of values is rep - resented because the ordering of items reflects the relative importance of values for a specific person or organization . Third , situation strength can be assessed . Crystallization , or the extent to which the members perceive the value system similarly , is captured by looking at the alpha coefficient for organizational values , and the in - tensity with which values are held is captured by examining the pivotal items ( the top and bot - tom 12 ) . Taken together , crystallization and in - tensity reflect how strong or weak an organiza - tional value system is . Finally , comparisons be - tween profiles are made possible by using the same set of items for individual and organiza - tional values and by varying the anchor and question associated with individual versus orga - nization raters . Although the Q - sort method can address many of the criteria for assessment , research still must be designed to capture the dynamic as - pects of person - organization fit . Changes in a person ' s values over time can be assessed by comparing a person ' s value profile at one pe - riod to his or her value profile at other periods . Likewise , changes in organizational value pro - files can be assessed by comparing an organi - zation ' s profile at one time period to subsequent periods . Thus , changes in person - organization fit can be assessed in terms of whether the per - son or the organization has changed and in terms of the direction of the change . Further , specific changes can be assessed by examining specific changes in the placement of items . For example , if a person who highly values risk tak - ing enters an organization that values risk aver - sion , subsequent value profiles can be exam - ined to see who the change agent was : If the person subsequently rates risk - taking signifi - cantly lower , the organization has influenced the person . If , however , according to the orga - nization profile risk taking is rated significantly higher and the profile is still highly crystallized , the person has influenced the organization value system . More formal propositions of these issues are discussed in the following section . Outcomes of Person - Organization Fit What can we learn by knowing the extent to which a person ' s values are similar to an orga - nization ' s shared values ? Person - organization fit is useful because it enhances our ability to pre - dict the extent to which a person ' s values will change as a function of organizational member - ship and the extent to which he or she will ad - here to organizational norms . Organization membership can shape and modify people ' s values ( Whyte , 1959 ) . For example , Mortimer and Lorence ( 1979 ) found that various work values ( e . g . , people orientation , autonomy ) changed as a function of work experiences . Spe - cifically , people adopted the values that were rewarded in previous organizations or occupa - tions . Similarly , Weiss ( 1978 ) found that people aligned their values with the values of their leaders if they perceived their leader to be con - siderate , competent , and successful . Calibrat - ing person - organization fit also allows us to de - termine the likelihood of particular individuals ' causing an organization ' s values to change . For example , when strong organizational values and important individual values conflict , so that 342 what the organization thinks is important is dif - ferent than what the individual thinks is impor - tant ( low person - organization fit ) , a number of predictions could be made . Low person - organization fit could have at least three imme - diate outcomes : The person ' s values could change and become more similar to the organi - zation ' s value system , the organization ' s values could change , or the person could leave the or - ganization . This general prediction is not as spe - cific as one would hope for . By considering other individual differences , we may be able to spec - ify which of the three outcomes is likely to occur . Although space constraints prevent a consider - ation of all relevant individual differences ( e . g . , ability , demographic characteristics , etc . ) a few personality characteristics that directly influ - ence person - organization fit will be used as il - lustrations of how individual differences could be integrated into the model . Proposition 1 : When a person with discrepant values enters an organization characterized by strong values , the person ' s values are likely to change if that person is open to influence . Fur - thermore , this person is more likely to behave in accordance with specified norms of the organi - zation . Proposition 2 : When a person with discrepant values enters an organization characterized by strong values , the person ' s values will not be expected to change if the person is not open to influence . This person would be likely to leave the organization . Proposition 3 : When a person with discrepant values enters an organization characterized by strong values and he or she scores high on self - efficacy ( Jones , 1986 ) or personal control ( Bell & Staw , in press ) , or when many new members enter at once who share the same values with one another , but not with the organization , the organization ' s values and norms will become more like the individual ' s over time . Proposition 4 follows through with the logic of the distinction between strong and weak situa - tions : Proposition 4 : In organizations characterized by weak values ( low crystallization and intensity ) , a person ' s values are likely to remain the same ; that is , his or her values will not change as a function of organizational membership . In addition to individual or organizational value change and exit , another relevant type of outcome might be extra - role behaviors . Extra - role behaviors are defined as prosocial acts that are not directly specified by an individual ' s job description and that primarily benefit the orga - nization as opposed to the individual . People who share organizational values may be more likely to contribute to the firm in constructive ways . O ' Reilly and Chatman ( 1986 ) found that congruence between individual and organiza - tional values predicted a higher likelihood of ex - tra - role behaviors , such as individuals pledging money to a university or helping others , even when it was not required by their formal job descriptions . In a similar vein , Van Maanen and Schein ( 1979 , p . 228 ) argued that creative indi - vidualists are people who score high on person - organization fit . A creative individualist is a re - former who " rarely seeks to change the [ values ] of the [ organization ] , but rather may seek to im - prove or make more efficient or less corrupt the existing . . . strategies . " This suggests the fol - lowing proposition : Proposition 5 : Person - organization fit will be positively related to extra - role behavior . Thus , high levels of person - organization fit are beneficial for individuals and organizations . High person - organization fit increases the likeli - hood that both extra - role behaviors will occur and individuals will feel more comfortable and competent in organizations that have similar values ( Morse , 1975 ; Swann , 1983 ) . However , extremely high levels of person - organization fit among numerous organizational members may lead to ineffective individual and organizational behavior . For example , person - organization fit may lead to conformity , homogeneity , and low - ered innovation as people and organizations become unable to adapt to new environmental contingencies ( cf . Janis & Mann , 1977 ; Kanter , 1988 ) . In fact , low fit between people and orga - nizations may be desirable because " mis - fit " 343 may cause a person to grow and learn , and the act of bringing in people who do not have the same - values as the organization may slow or reverse ineffective inertia and allow an organi - zation to adapt to or take advantage of new op - portunities ( cf . Brown , 1982 ) . Therefore , some optimal level of person - organization fit may exist both in terms of how close the fit is for any one individual and in terms of the proportions of high and low " fitters " within an organization . Of course , a lower boundary exists as well , and extremely low ( negative ) person - organization fit may result in sabotage or dissent ( Graham , 1986 ) . Using the methods and model presented , researchers could explore this notion of what constitutes an optimal level , or mix , of person - organization fit . Antecedents to Person - Organization Fit Organizations enhance person - organization fit by both selecting and socializing employees to handle more than a specific job . That is , they find potential employees who will be responsive to organizational practices , and by molding them to abide by prevailing norms and values , they provide a more robust and stable attach - ment between the person and the organization . Likewise , on the person side , we have seen that people search for and prefer when organiza - tions ' situational norms and values match those they believe are important , and they perform better in such situations ( Diener et al . , 1984 ) . Therefore , people have such characteristics in mind when they select organizations , and once they are members , they may try to change norms either through personal control ( Bell & Staw , in press ) or through power ( Enz , 1988 ; House , 1988 ) in order to establish congruence with their own values . Selection . Selection is the set of procedures through which an organization chooses its members . According to traditional views , the selection processes should assess a candidate ' s knowledge , skills , and abilities ( KSAs ) , so that organizations hire persons whose KSAs are compatible with the job requirements . Although consideration of a candidate ' s abilities is impor - tant , selection processes may be more loosely linked to person - job fit than industrial psycholo - gists have claimed . Selection processes partly serve a more subtle function - for recruiting firms , the screening out of people who have val - ues that are incompatible with the organiza - tion ' s norms and values and for job seekers , the screening out of firms that have undesirable norms and values . Why , for example , do orga - nizations continue to interview job candidates , even though this process is a poor predictor of how well a person will perform a particular job ( Arvey & Campion , 1982 ) ? One reason is that an interview may assess how well a person ' s val - ues fit the organization ' s values and norms ( Dawes , 1988 ; Rothstein & Jackson , 1980 ; Snyder , Berscheid , & Matwychk , 1988 ) . It is proposed here that a major function of selection processes is to select individuals who have values that are compatible with the orga - nization ' s values . Further , for incoming recruits whose values are more closely aligned with their hiring firm before joining the firm , their val - ues may become more similar to the organiza - tion ' s values and , ultimately , they may achieve a closer fit with the organization . This is because of the committing nature and salience of choos - ing an organization - high person - organization fit at entry may become even more stable after a person spends more time with the hiring orga - nization . Further , individuals who have more of - fers to choose from initially may cognitively re - evaluate their values as more similar to the val - ues of the organization they join ( cf . O ' Reilly & Caldwell , 1981 ; Salancik , 1977 ) . Of course , se - lection is not merely a process of organizations selecting people ; people actively seach for and choose an organization to join . From the per - son ' s perspective , time , effort , initiative , and breadth of information may predict person - organization fit . Although industrial psycholo - gists have looked at personnel selection almost exclusively from the point of view of the organi - zation selecting employees , some organiza - tional researchers have acknowledged the im - 344 portance of the individual selecting an organi - zation ( cf . Kulik & Rowland , 1986 ) . Empirical research conducted among teachers ( Betz & Jud - kins , 1975 ) , newspaper reporters ( Sigelman , 1975 ) , and forest service workers ( Hall , Schnei - der , & Nygren , 1970 ) has shown that people tend to choose organizations on the basis of the sim - ilarity between their values and those espoused by the organization they are considering . More formally , the following propositions are sug - gested : Proposition 6 : Potential recruits who either initi - ate or are asked to spend more time with an organization and who are involved in a variety of organizational activities ( e . g . , interviews , phone calls , receptions ) before being hired will have profiles of values similar to those of the firm upon entry . Proposition 7 : The behavioral outcome of high person - organization fit at entry will be that the person conforms to the pivotal norms of the or - ganization . Further , changes in individual val - ues will be negatively associated with high per - son - organization fit at entry . Socialization . Organizational socialization is the process through which an individual comes to understand the values , abilities , expected be - haviors , and social knowledge that are essential for assuming an organizational role and for par - ticipating as an organizational member ( Louis , 1980 ; Van Maanen & Schein , 1979 ) . According to traditional theories , socialization processes lead directly to various desirable organizational out - comes ( cf . Fisher & Weekley , 1982 ) . In contrast , it is proposed here that person - organization fit mediates the relationship between socialization experiences and outcome variables . In other words , socialization processes actually teach employees the norms and values of the organi - zation . Louis ( 1980 ) described socialization activities as opportunities for newcomers to make sense out of their organizational experiences . These activities also are opportunities for organizations to influence the values of members . Further , the influence of socialization programs will be espe - cially pronounced in the early stages of organi - zational membership ( cf . Berlew & Hall , 1966 ) . The following proposition is suggested : Proposition 8 : In organizations that have strong values , a greater variety and number of social - ization processes , which include such activities as social and recreational events , formal train - ing , and mentor programs , will be positively as - sociated with person - organization fit and will bring about greater changes in individual val - ues , resulting in a closer fit over time . Integrating Selection and Socialization . Orga - nization researchers have recognized that the costs of selecting new employees can partly off - set the costs of the socialization processes ( Etzi - oni , 1975 ; Schmidt & Hunter , 1981 ) . If an organi - zation is highly selective ( assuming that clear and valid criteria for selection have been estab - lished ) , socialization costs , such as training , ori - entation , and other informal methods of teach - ing new employees how things are done in the organization , are presumably lowered . Con - versely , as selection ratios become less favor - able to the organization ( due to fewer qualified applicants ) , socialization mechanisms will need to be enhanced so that those entering the orga - nization will become appropriately assimilated . It is argued here that selection and socialization are not competitive hypotheses ; these processes operate jointly to shape a firm ' s work force . That is , organizations may seek out and select indi - viduals whose values are already similar to cur - rent members ' values ( Schneider , 1987 ) , making it easier to socialize them . Thus , the following hypothesis is suggested : Proposition 9 : At early stages in organization membership ( 0 - 1 year ) , selection experiences will explain more variance in person - organi - zation fit than socialization experiences . How - ever , as the recruit becomes " less new " in the organization , the number and type of socializa - tion experiences will explain more variance in person - organization fit than person variables will . Conclusion Person - organization fit provides an initial in - dex that can signal what specific values and 345 norms we should investigate further . Specifi - cally , we can begin to predict changes both in individual values and behavior and in organi - zational values and norms . The following aca - demic example summarizes the contributions of a model of person - organization fit . Consider what would happen when a new professor , who values research more than teaching , enters a university department in which members co - hesively and intensely value teaching more than research . The first contribution of the model and methods described here is that we can iden - tify initial discrepancies in values . Once large discrepancies of important values have been identified , the model would then help to deter - mine what behaviors to focus on - will the new professor ' s values change ( research begins to decline as a priority ) ? Will his or her behaviors change ( e . g . , he or she begins to spend more time on teaching preparations and in office hours with students than he or she has in the past ) ? Or , will the new professor inspire his or her colleagues to begin research projects and , eventually , to recruit more research - oriented candidates for the department ? The person - organization fit model can identify discrepan - cies and similarities between people and orga - nizations , can track such changes over time , and can identify what kinds of behavior and normative changes may occur . The goal of this paper has been to identify specific criteria with which we can construct meaningful and useful interactional models in organizational research . By paying more atten - tion to how we conceptualize people and orga - nizations , through specific methods and longitu - dinal research designs , we will be able to an - swer important questions . Using an illustration of one such model , this paper may have raised more questions than it answered . For example , how enduring are individual characteristics ? How strong must organizational values be in or - der to influence different types of people ? How likely is it that individual characteristics will shine through despite strong values ? Are there optimal combinations of heterogeneity and ho - mogeneity among organization members ? How - ever , it is hoped that by clarifying important cri - teria for conducting interactional organization research , we can come closer to understanding how organizational membership can have en - during and dramatic effects on people and how people can have enduring and dramatic effects on organizations . References Allport , G . ( 1937 ) Personality : A psychological interpretation . New York : Holt . Allport , G . W . ( 1966 ) Traits revisited . American Psychologist , 21 , 1 - 10 . Arvey , R . , & Campion , J . ( 1982 ) The employment interview : A summary and review of recent research . Personnel Psy - chology , 35 , 281 - 322 . Bell , N . , & Staw , B . ( in press ) People as sculptors versus sculptor : The roles of personality and personal control in organizations . In M . Arthur , D . Hall , & B . Lawrence ( Eds . ) , The handbook of career theory . New York : Cambridge University Press . Bem , D . J . , & Allen , A . ( 1974 ) On predicting some of the people some of the time : The search for cross - sectional consistencies in behavior . Psychological Review , 81 , 506 - 520 . Berm , D . J . , & Funder , D . C . ( 1978 ) Predicting more of the people more of the time : Assessing the personality of sit - uations . Psychological Review , 85 , 485 - 501 . Berlew , D . , & Hall , D . ( 1966 ) The socialization of managers : Effects of expectations on performance . Administrative Science Quarterly , 11 , 207 - 223 . Bettenhausen , K . , & Murnighan , K . ( 1985 ) The emergence of norms in competitive decision - making groups . Adminis - trative Science Quarterly , 30 , 350 - 372 . Betz , M . , & Judkins , B . ( 1975 ) The impact of voluntary asso - ciation characteristics on selective attraction and social - ization . The Sociological Quarterly , 16 , 228 - 240 . 346 Block , J . ( 1978 ) The Q - sort method in personality assessment and psychiatric research . Palo Alto , CA : Consulting Psy - chologist Press . Bowers , K . ( 1973 ) Situationism in psychology : An analysis and critique . Psychological Review , 80 , 307 - 336 . Brown , M . C . ( 1982 ) Administrative succession and organi - zational performance : The succession effect . Administra - tive Science Quarterly , 29 , 245 - 273 . Buss , D . M . , & Craik , K . H . ( 1983 ) The act frequency ap - proach to personality . Psychological Review , 90 , 105 - 126 . Cattell , R . B . ( 1944 ) Psychological measurement : Ipsative , normative , and interactive . Psychological Review , 51 , 292 - 303 . Chatman , J . ( 1988 ) Matching people and organizations : Se - lection and socialization in public accounting firms . Un - published doctoral dissertation , University of California , Berkeley . Davis , S . M . ( 1984 ) Managing corporate culture . Cam - bridge , MA : Ballinger . Dawes , R . ( 1988 ) Rational choice in an uncertain world . Or - lando , FL : Harcourt Brace Jovanovich . Deal , T . E . , & Kennedy , A . A . ( 1982 ) Corporate cultures . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Diener , E . , Larsen , R . , & Emmons , R . ( 1984 ) Person X situa - tion interactions : Choice of situations and congruence re - sponse models . Journal of Personality and Social Psychol - ogy , 47 , 580 - 592 . Dunnette , M . D . ( 1976 ) Aptitudes , abilities , and skills . In M . D . Dunnette ( Ed . ) , Handbook of industrial and organi - zational psychology ( pp . 473 - 520 ) . Chicago : Rand Mc - Nally . Ekehammar , B . ( 1974 ) Interactionism in personality from a historical perspective . Psychological Bulletin , 81 , 1026 - 1048 . Emmons , R . A . , & Diener , E . ( 1986 ) Situation selection as a moderator of response consistency and stability . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 51 , 1013 - 1019 . Enz , C . ( 1988 ) The role of value congruity in intraorganiza - tional power . Administrative Science Quarterly , 33 , 284 - 304 . Epstein , S . ( 1979 ) The stability of behavior : I . On predicting most of the people much of the time . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 37 , 1097 - 1126 . Epstein , S . , & O ' Brien , E . J . ( 1985 ) The person - situation de - bate in historical and current perspectives . Psychological Bulletin , 98 , 513 - 537 . Etzioni , A . ( 1975 ) A comparative analysis of complex orga - nizations : Revised and enlarged edition . New York : Free Press . Feldman , D . ( 1976 ) A contingency theory of socialization . Administrative Science Quarterly , 21 , 433 - 452 . Fiedler , F . ( 1976 ) The leadership game : Matching the man to the situation . Organizational Dynamics , 4 ( 3 ) , 6 - 16 . Fishbein , M . , & Ajzen , I . ( 1975 ) Belief , attitude , intention and behavior . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Fisher , C . , & Weekley , J . ( 1982 ) Socialization in work orga - nizations . Working paper , Texas A & M University , Depart - ment of Management and Department of Psychology , Col - lege Station . Frederiksen , N . ( 1972 ) Toward a taxonomy of situations . American Psychologist , 27 , 114 - 123 . Gough , H . ( 1976 ) Personality and personality assessment . In M . D . Dunnette ( Ed . ) , Handbook of industrial and organi - zational psychology ( pp . 571 - 608 ) . Chicago : Rand Mc - Nally . Graham , J . ( 1986 ) Principled organizational dissent : A theo - retical essay . In B . M . Staw & L . L . Cummings ( Eds . ) , Re - search in organization behavior ( Vol . 8 , pp . 1 - 52 ) . Green - wich , CT : JAI Press . Graham , W . ( 1976 ) Commensurate characterization of per - sons , groups , and organizations : Development of the trait ascription questionnaire ( TAQ ) . Human Relations , 29 , 607 - 622 . Hackman , J . R . , & Oldham , G . R . ( 1980 ) Work redesign . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Hall , D . T . , Schneider , B . , & Nygren , H . T . ( 1970 ) Personal factors in organizational identification . Administrative Sci - ence Quarterly , 15 , 176 - 190 . Holland , J . ( 1985 ) Making vocational choices : A theory of vocational personalities and work environments ( 2nd ed . ) . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . House , B . ( 1988 ) Power and personality in complex organi - zations . In B . M . Staw & L . L . Cummings ( Eds . ) , Research in organizational behavior ( Vol . 10 , pp . 305 - 358 ) . Green - wich , CT : JAI Press . Jackson , J . ( 1966 ) A conceptual and measurement model for norms and roles . Pacific Sociological Review , 9 , 35 - 47 . Janis , I . , & Mann , L . ( 1977 ) Decision making : A psychological analysis of conflict , choice , and commitment . New York : Free Press . Jones , G . R . ( 1983 ) Psychological orientation and the process of organizational socialization : An interactionist perspec - tive . Academy of Management Review , 8 , 464 - 474 . Jones , G . R . ( 1986 ) Socialization tactics , self - efficacy , and newcomers ' adjustments to organizations . Academy of Management Journal , 29 , 262 - 279 . Kanter , R . ( 1988 ) When a thousand flowers bloom : Struc - tural , collective , and social conditions for innovation in an 347 organization . In B . M . Staw & L . L . Cummings ( Eds . ) , Re - search in organizational behavior ( Vol . 10 , pp 169 - 211 ) . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Katz , D . , & Kahn , R . ( 1978 ) . The social psychology of orga - nizations ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : Wiley . Kenrick , D . T . , & Funder , D . C . ( 1988 ) Profiting from contro - versy : Lessons from the person - situation debate . Ameri - can Psychologist , 43 , 23 - 35 . Kilmann , R . J . , Saxton , M . J . , & Serpa , R . ( Eds . ) ( 1985 ) Gain - ing control of the corporate culture . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Kohn , M . , & Schooler , C . ( 1978 ) The reciprocal effects of the substantive complexity of work and intellectual flexibility : A longitudinal assessment . American Journal of Sociol - ogy , 84 , 24 - 52 . Kulik , C . , & Rowland , K . ( 1986 , August ) College seniors ' job search : An attributional approach . Paper presented at the meeting of the Academy of Management , Chicago . Lewin , K . ( 1951 ) Field theory in social science . New York : Harper & Row . Louis , M . ( 1980 ) Surprise and sense making : What newcom - ers experience in entering unfamiliar organizational set - tings . Administrative Science Quarterly , 25 , 226 - 251 . Luthans , F . , & Davis , T . ( 1982 ) An idiographic approach to organizational behavior research : The use of single case experimental designs and direct measures . Academy of Management Review , 7 , 380 - 391 . Magnusson , D . , & Endler , N . ( 1977 ) Interactional psychol - ogy : Present status and future prospects . In D . Magnusson & N . Endler ( Eds . ) , Personality at the crossroads : Current issues in interactional psychology ( pp . 3 - 35 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . McClelland , D . ( 1985 ) How motives , skills , and values deter - mine what people do . American Psychologist , 40 , 812 - 825 . McCoy , C , ( 1985 ) Management of values . Marshfield , MA : Pitman . Miner , A . ( 1987 ) Idiosyncratic jobs in formal organizations . Administrative Science Quarterly , 32 , 327 - 351 . Mischel , W . ( 1968 ) Personality and assessment . New York : Wiley . Mischel , W . ( 1977 ) The interaction of person and situation . In D . Magnusson & N . S . Endler ( Eds . ) , Personality at the crossroads : Current issues in interactional psychology ( pp . 333 - 352 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Mischel , W . , & Peake , P . K . ( 1982 ) Beyond d6j & vu in the search for cross - situational consistency . Psychological Re - view , 89 , 730 - 755 . Monson , T . C . , Hesley , J . W . , & Chernick , L . ( 1982 ) Specify - ing when personality traits can and cannot predict behav - ior : An alternative to abandoning the attempt to predict single - act criteria . Journal of Personality and Social Psy - chology , 43 , 385 - 399 . Moos , R . H . ( 1973 ) Conceptualizations of human environ - ments . American Psychologist , 28 , 652 - 665 . Morse , J . ( 1975 ) Person - job congruence and individual ad - justment . Human Relations , 28 , 841 - 861 . Mortimer , J . , & Lorence , J . ( 1979 ) Work experience and oc - cupational value socialization . American Journal of Soci - ology , 84 , 1361 - 1385 . Neiner , A . , & Owens , W . ( 1985 ) Using biodata to predict job choice among college graduates . Journal of Applied Psy - chology , 70 , 127 - 136 . Nemeth , C . , & Wachtler , J . ( 1983 ) Creative problem solving as a result of majority versus minority influence . European Journal of Social Psychology , 13 , 45 - 55 . Nunnally , J . ( 1967 ) Psychometric theory . New York : McGraw - Hill . O ' Reilly , C . ( 1977 ) Personality - job fit : Implications for individ - ual attitudes and performance . Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 18 , 36 - 46 . O ' Reilly , C . ( 1983 , August ) Corporations , cults and organi - zational culture : Lessons from Silicon Valley firms . Paper presented at the meeting of the Academy of Management , Dallas . O ' Reilly , C . A . , & Caldwell , D . F . ( 1981 ) The commitment and job tenure of new employees : Some evidence of post - decisional justification . Administrative Science Quarterly , 26 , 597 - 616 . O ' Reilly , C . A . , & Chatman , J . A . ( 1986 ) Organization com - mitment and psychological attachment : The effects of compliance , identification , and internalization on proso - cial behavior . Journal of Applied Psychology , 71 , 492 - 499 . O ' Reilly , C . A . , Chatman , J . A . , & Caldwell , D . F . ( 1988 ) People , jobs , and organizational culture . Working paper , University of California at Berkeley . Roberts , K . H . , & Glick , W . ( 1981 ) The job characteristics ap - proach to task design : A critical review . Journal of Applied Psychology , 66 , 193 - 217 . Rokeach , M . ( 1973 ) The nature of human values . New York : Free Press . Rothstein , M . , & Jackson , D . ( 1980 ) Decision making in the employment interview : An experimental approach . Jour - nal of Applied Psychology , 65 , 271 - 283 . Rowe , D . ( 1987 ) Resolving the person - situation debate : Invi - tation to an interdisciplinary dialogue . American Psychol - ogist , 42 , 218 - 227 . 348 Salancik , G . ( 1977 ) Commitment and the control of organi - zational behavior and belief . In B . Staw & G . Salancik ( Eds . ) , New directions in organizational behavior ( pp . 1 - 54 ) . Chicago : St . Clair . Salancik , G . , & Pfeffer , J . ( 1977 ) An examination of need - satisfaction models of job attitudes . Administrative Sci - ence Quarterly , 22 , 427 - 456 . Salancik , G . , & Pfeffer , J . ( 1978 ) A social information process - ing approach to job attitudes and task design . Adminis - trative Science Quarterly , 23 , 224 - 253 . Sarason , I . , Smith , R . , & Diener , E . ( 1975 ) Personality re - search : Components of variance attributed to the person and the situation . Journal of Personality and Social Psy - chology , 32 , 199 - 204 . Schneider , B . ( 1983 ) Interactional psychology and organiza - tional behavior . In B . M . Staw & L . L . Cummings ( Eds . ) , Research in organizational behavior ( Vol . 5 , pp . 1 - 31 ) . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Schneider , B . ( 1987 ) The people make the place . Personnel Psychology , 14 , 437 - 453 . Schmidt , F . L . , & Hunter , J . E . ( Eds . ) ( 1981 ) Public personnel administration : Policies and procedures for personnel . New York : Prentice - Hall . Seybolt , J . W . ( 1976 ) Work satisfaction as a function of the person - environment interaction . Organization Behavior and Human Performance , 17 , 66 - 75 . Sigelman , L . ( 1975 ) Reporting the news : An organizational analysis . American Journal of Sociology , 79 , 132 - 151 . Skinner , B . F . ( 1971 ) Beyond freedom and dignity . New York : Knopf . Snyder , M . , Berscheid , E . , & Matwychk , A . ( 1988 ) Orienta - tions toward personnel selection : Differential reliance on appearance and personality . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 54 , 972 - 979 . Staw , B . M . , Bell , N . E . , & Clausen , J . A . ( 1986 ) The disposi - tional approach to job attitudes : A lifetime longitudinal test . Administrative Science Quarterly , 31 , 56 - 77 . Staw , B . M . , & Ross , J . ( 1985 ) Stability in the midst of change : A dispositional approach to job attitudes . Journal of Ap - plied Psychology , 70 , 469 - 480 . Stephenson , W . ( 1953 ) The study of behavior . Chicago : Uni - versity of Chicago Press . Swann , B . ( 1983 ) Self verification : Bringing social reality into harmony with the self . In J . Suls & A . Greenwald ( Eds . ) , Psychological perspectives on the self ( Vol . 2 , pp . 132 - 151 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Terborg , J . R . ( 1981 ) Interactional psychology and research on human behavior in organizations . Academy of Man - agement Review , 6 , 569 - 576 . Thorndike , E . ( 1906 ) Principles of teaching . New York : Seiler . Tom , V . ( 1971 ) The role of personality and organizational images in the recruiting process . Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 6 , 573 - 592 . Van Maanen , J . , & Barley , S . ( 1984 ) Occupational commu - nities : Culture and control in organizations . In B . M . Staw & L . L . Cummings ( Eds . ) , Research in organizational be - havior ( Vol . 6 , pp . 287 - 365 ) . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Van Maanen , J . , & Schein , E . ( 1979 ) Toward a theory of or - ganizational socialization . In B . M . Staw ( Ed . ) , Research in organizational behavior , ( Vol . 1 , pp . 209 - 264 ) . Green - wich , CT : JAI Press . Weiner , Y . ( 1988 ) Forms of value systems : A focus on orga - nizational effectiveness and culture change maintenance . Academy of Management Review , 13 , 534 - 545 . Weiss , H . ( 1978 ) Social learning of work values in organiza - tions . Journal of Applied Psychology , 63 , 711 - 718 . Weiss , H . , & Adler , S . ( 1984 ) Personality and organizational behavior . In B . M . Staw & L . L . Cummings ( Eds . ) , Re - search in organizational behavior ( Vol . 6 , pp . 711 - 718 ) . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Whyte , W . F . ( 1959 ) Man and organization . Homewood , IL : Irwin . Wilensky , H . ( 1964 ) The professionalization of everyone ? The American Journal of Sociology , 70 , 137 - 158 . Jennifer A . Chatman ( Ph . D . , University of California , Berkeley ) is an Assistant Professor of Organization Be - havior at Northwestern University . Correspondence regarding this article can be sent to her at the Kellogg Graduate School of Management , Northwestern Uni - versity , Evanston , IL 60208 . The author would like to thank Robert Bies , Elizabeth Mannix , and Denise Rousseau for their insightful comments on earlier drafts of this paper . 349