Eur . Phys . J . E 16 , 5 – 16 ( 2005 ) DOI : 10 . 1140 / epje / e2005 - 00002 - 5 T HE E UROPEAN P HYSICAL J OURNAL E Generic theory of active polar gels : a paradigm for cytoskeletal dynamics K . Kruse 1 , J . F . Joanny 2 , F . J¨ulicher 1 , a , J . Prost 2 , 3 , and K . Sekimoto 2 , 4 1 Max - Planck Institut f¨ur Physik komplexer Systeme , N¨othnitzerstr . 38 , 01187 Dresden , Germany 2 Physicochimie Curie ( CNRS - UMR168 ) , Institut Curie , Section de Recherche , 26 rue d’Ulm , 75248 Paris Cedex 05 , France 3 E . S . P . C . I , 10 rue Vauquelin , 75231 Paris Cedex 05 , France 4 LDFC Institut de Physique , 3 rue de l’Universit´e , 67084 Strasbourg Cedex , France Received 14 May 2004 Published online 31 January 2005 – c (cid:1) EDP Sciences , Societ ` a Italiana di Fisica , Springer - Verlag 2005 Abstract . We develop a general theory for active viscoelastic materials made of polar ﬁlaments . This theory is motivated by the dynamics of the cytoskeleton . The continuous consumption of a fuel leads to a non equilibrium state characterized by the generation of ﬂows and stresses . Our theory can be applied to experiments in which cytoskeletal patterns are set in motion by active processes such as those which are at work in cells . PACS . 87 . 17 . Jj Cell locomotion ; chemotaxis and related directed motion – 82 . 70 . Gg Gels and sols – 82 . 35 . Gh Polymers on surfaces ; adhesion 1 Introduction Molecular biology has scored an impressive number of suc - cess stories over the last forty years . It has provided us with a vast knowledge about molecules at work in liv - ing systems , about their involvement in speciﬁc biological functionalities and about the structure of their chemical networks [ 1 – 3 ] . Yet one is still unable to take advantage of this knowledge for constructing a comprehensive de - scription of cell behavior . Assuming that we had all de - sired molecular informations , the computer time required to describe meaningful cell behavior would be totally pro - hibitive . Meanwhile there is a clear need for a generic de - scription of cells . An alternative approach consists in identifying a re - duced number of key characteristics and construct a phe - nomenological description of a “simpliﬁed” but relevant cell . Again this task is currently too complex at the scale of a whole cell , but it can be envisioned for some of its constituents . A good example is provided by the descrip - tion of membranes : for length scales of the order of a few tens of nanometers up , it can be considered as a ﬂuctuat - ing surface on which a few densities are distributed and through which a few other densities permeate passively or actively [ 4 , 5 ] . The construction of the theory has been going on for more than thirty years . It sheds light on the physics of membrane shape , topology changes such as bud - ding , equilibrium and non equilibrium ﬂuctuations , mem - a e - mail : julicher @ mpipks - dresden . mpg . de brane adhesion , long range interactions on membranes etc . It is still under development to include out of equilibrium features such as lipid and protein exchange with the bulk , but much has been learned already . Eﬀorts towards understanding the cytoskeleton are more recent . They have been focused on the description of its passive visco - elastic properties which are now fairly well understood in terms of gels made of cross - linked semi - ﬂexible polymers [ 6 , 7 ] . Such materials which can be pre - pared in vitro , are equilibrium systems which obey conven - tional thermodynamics . In eukaryotic cells , the problem is however qualitatively new : the cross - links can be made of motor proteins which have their own dynamics driven by chemical energy . Experiments , simulations and analytical descriptions , have shown that such systems have a rich and complex behavior [ 8 – 21 ] . One can grasp the degree of complexity with the remark that cross - links deﬁne dis - tances , in other words they deﬁne a metric . The cross - linking agents being motor proteins they move and the metric evolves with time . In fact the problem is even more complex since cy - toskeletal ﬁlaments are polar and out of equilibrium : they polymerize at one end while depolymerizing at the other end . Such a process called treadmilling is well known to biologists . The description of eukaryotic cytoskeletal gels should include all these features . We call these gels and more generally all gels working in the presence of a per - manent energy consumption “active” gels . On large length scales and long time scales , the properties of complex ma - terials can be captured by a generalized hydrodynamic 6 The European Physical Journal E theory based on conservation laws and symmetry consid - erations . Such theories have been very successful in de - scribing complex ﬂuids such as liquid crystals , polymers , conventional gels , superﬂuids etc . [ 22 – 24 ] . For instance all liquid crystal display devices can be described by such theories . More recently active liquid crystals have been considered within this same logic [ 25 , 26 ] . Here , we de - velop a hydrodynamic theory of active gels . An example of such gel is the network of actin cytoskeletal ﬁlaments in the presence of chemical processes which locally induce ﬁlament sliding and generate motion . These active pro - cesses are mediated by motor proteins which hydrolyze a fuel , Adenosinetriphosphate ( ATP ) . Since cytoskeletal ﬁlaments are structurally polar , each ﬁlament deﬁnes a vector . This ﬁlamental structure can on large scales give rise to a polarity of the material if ﬁlaments are aligned on average . We develop the hydrodynamic theory of active po - lar gels systematically in several steps , following standard procedures . First , we identify the relevant ﬁelds and write conservation laws for conserved quantities . We identify the generalized ﬂuxes and conjugate forces in the sys - tem . These ﬂuxes and forces deﬁne the rates of entropy production and dissipation . Using the signature of forces and ﬂuxes with respect to time reversal , we deﬁne dissi - pative and reactive ﬂuxes . These ﬂuxes can be expressed by a general expansion in terms of forces , by writing all terms allowed by symmetry and by respecting the signa - tures with respect to time reversal . By keeping the rele - vant terms to lowest order , this ﬁnally results in generic dynamic equations which are valid in the vicinity of ther - mal equilibrium . We then provide examples by analyzing the active gel mode structure and by discussing the spon - taneous dynamical behavior of topological singularities such as disclinations ( asters and vortices ) in two dimen - sions . Eventually we discuss the merits of our approach , its current limitations and ways to extend its domain of validity to the more relevant far from equilibrium regime . Some of the results discussed here have been presented in reference [ 27 ] . 2 Fields , densities and conservation laws We develop the hydrodynamic description of active gels starting with conservation laws . The number density of monomers in the gel is denoted by ρ . The gel is cre - ated by polymerization of ﬁlaments from monomers . The monomers have a density ρ ( a ) in solution . The treadmilling process and the active stresses in the gel create a ﬂow of the actin gel monomers with a local velocity v . The gel current is then convective and mass conservation implies that ∂ρ ∂t + ∇ ( v ρ ) = − k d ρ + k p δ S . ( 1 ) Here k d is the depolymerization rate ; we assume , as seems to be the case for actin , that the depolymerization which occurs mostly at the branching points of the gel , has a rate proportional to the local density . In some cases treated be - low , we will consider for simplicity that depolymerization does not occur in the bulk but at the surface of the gel . In many situations , ﬁlament polymerization is highly con - trolled and localized for example at the surface of the gel . This is taken into account in equation ( 1 ) by introduc - ing the surface polymerization rate k p and δ S denotes a Dirac - like distribution which is non - vanishing only at the gel surface S . Similarly , we write a conservation law for free diﬀusing monomers , ∂ρ ( a ) ∂t + ∇ j ( a ) = k d ρ − k p δ S ( 2 ) here , we have introduced the diﬀusive current j ( a ) of free monomers . Active processes are mediated by molecular motors . The concentration of motors bound to the gel c ( b ) is an important quantity to characterize the eﬀects of active processes in the gel . Assuming for simplicity that the total number of motors is conserved , we write conservation laws for c ( b ) and the concentration of freely diﬀusing motors in the solvent c ( m ) which read ∂c ( m ) ∂t + ∇ j ( m ) = k oﬀ c ( b ) − k on ρ ( c ( m ) ) n ∂c ( b ) ∂t + ∇ c ( b ) v + ∇ j ( b ) = − k oﬀ c ( b ) + k on ρ ( c ( m ) ) n . ( 3 ) The attachment and detachment rates of motors to and from the gel are characterized by the chemical rates k on and k oﬀ . Here , we have taken into account that bound mo - tors are convected with the gel . The current of free motors is j ( m ) and we denote j ( b ) the current of bound motors rel - ative to gel motion . In general , binding of motors to the gel is cooperative , and cannot be described as a second order reaction : groups of motors could bind together . We use here an n th order chemical kinetics where the rates is proportional to ( c ( m ) ) n . A ﬁnal important conservation law is momentum con - servation . In biological gels on scales of micrometers , in - ertial forces are negligible and momentum conservation is replaced by the force balance condition which reads ∂ α ( σ tot αβ − Πδ αβ ) + f ext β = 0 ( 4 ) where f ext β is an external force density . Locally , there are two forces acting on the gel , the total stress tensor σ tot αβ and the pressure Π . The dynamics of the system is speciﬁed if the ﬂow velocity v and the currents j ( a ) , j ( m ) and j ( b ) are known . The physical description of the currents is discussed in the following sections . Furthermore , we have to take into account the polar nature of the gel . Individual ﬁlaments are rod - like objects with two diﬀerent ends which therefore have a vectorial symmetry . If the ﬁlaments in the gel are on average aligned , the material is oriented . We introduce a polarization ﬁeld p to describe this orientation . The ﬁeld p is deﬁned by associating with each ﬁlament a unit vector pointing to one end . The vector p is given by the local average of a large number of these unit vectors . Note eventually , that equations ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) are written in a reference frame in which the embedded solvent is at