UNIT 26 . 1 Production of Papillomavirus - Based Gene Transfer Vectors Christopher B . Buck 1 and Cynthia D . Thompson 1 1 National Cancer Institute , Center for Cancer Research , Bethesda , Maryland ABSTRACT Papillomaviruses are a diverse group of pathogens that infect the skin and mucosal tissues of humans and various animal species . The viral genome is a circular , double - stranded DNA molecule ∼ 8 - kb in length . The non - enveloped papillomavirus capsid is composed of a virally encoded major coat protein , L1 , and a minor coat protein , L2 . L1 and L2 co - assemble when expressed in mammalian cells , and can promiscuously encapsidate essentially any < 8 - kb plasmid present in the cell nucleus . In the last several years , there has been rapid development of techniques for intracellular production of papillomavirus - based gene transfer vectors ( also known as pseudoviruses ) . This unit outlines the production and propagative ampliﬁcation of papillomaviral vectors . The system represents a highly tractable method for converting pre - existing mammalian expression plasmids into infectious virus stocks . The resulting vectors have utility for in vitro , as well as in vivo gene delivery applications . Curr . Protoc . Cell Biol . 37 : 26 . 1 . 1 - 26 . 1 . 19 . C (cid:2) 2007 by John Wiley & Sons , Inc . Keywords : papillomavirus (cid:1) HPV (cid:1) pseudovirus (cid:1) pseudovirion (cid:1) virus - like particle (cid:1) VLP INTRODUCTION The papillomavirus capsid proteins L1 and L2 can , when co - expressed in mammalian cells , co - assemble and package heterologous nonviral DNA into infectious particles that resemble authentic papillomavirus virions ( Buck et al . , 2004 , 2005 ) . Essentially any transfected < 8 - kb expression plasmid present in the cell nucleus can be encapsidated . The high degree of promiscuity of packaging makes it possible to convert transfected reporter plasmids into papillomaviral vector stocks capable of delivering the encapsi - dated plasmid to a wide variety of cultured cell types . Until recently , such papillomaviral vectors ( also known as pseudoviruses ) have primarily been used for analysis of papillo - mavirus neutralization and infectious entry pathways . However , papillomaviral vectors are beginning to show promise as tractable general - purpose gene transfer vehicles . Ap - plications include high - level overexpression of genes of interest in cultured cells , as well as in vivo gene delivery in mouse model systems ( Roberts et al . , 2007 ) . The production system relies on a human embryonic kidney cell line , 293TT , which ex - presses high levels of the simian virus 40 ( SV40 ) large T antigen ( Buck et al . , 2004 ) . In primate cell lines , SV40 T antigen drives high - level replication of plasmids carrying the SV40 early promoter / origin of replication ( ori ) , which is present on a wide variety of com - mercially available mammalian expression plasmids . In Basic Protocol 1 , an expression plasmid encoding a gene or genes of interest , as well as the SV40 ori , is co - transfected into 293TT cells along with a second plasmid , p16L1L2 , that drives expression of the L1 and L2 proteins of human papillomavirus type 16 ( HPV16 ) . After transfection , both the expression plasmid of interest and p16L1L2 are taken up ( encapsidated ) into infectious L1 / L2 capsids . The resulting viral seed stock can be used to infect fresh 293TT cells , permitting high - yield , low - cost ampliﬁcation of the vector ( Basic Protocol 2 ; Buck et al . , submitted ) . Although crude vector stocks can be used for a variety of applications , it Current Protocols in Cell Biology 26 . 1 . 1 - 26 . 1 . 19 , December 2007 Published online December 2007 in Wiley Interscience ( www . interscience . wiley . com ) . DOI : 10 . 1002 / 0471143030 . cb2601s37 Copyright C (cid:2) 2007 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . Viruses 26 . 1 . 1 Supplement 37 Production of Papillomavirus - Based Gene Transfer Vectors 26 . 1 . 2 Supplement 37 Current Protocols in Cell Biology is also possible to purify infectious capsids by ultracentrifugation ( Support Protocol 1 ) or gravity - ﬂow gel ﬁltration ( Support Protocol 2 ) . Fractions containing capsids can be screened by the BCA assay , agarose gel electrophoresis ( Support Protocol 3 ) , or SDS - PAGE ( UNIT 6 . 1 ) . Although it should not generally be necessary to do so , puriﬁed capsids can be concentrated by dialysis against a concentrating reagent ( Support Protocol 4 ) . If the plasmid being packaged expresses a ﬂuorescent protein , the infectivity of the vector stock can readily be titered using ﬂow cytometry or ﬂuorescent microscopy ( Support Protocol 5 ) . Alternative Protocols 1 and 2 cover , respectively , the production of ampliﬁcation - incompetent papillomaviral vectors ( see Fig . 26 . 1 . 1 ) and bulk production of papillomavirus capsids . NOTE : All solutions and equipment coming into contact with cells must be sterile , and proper aseptic technique should be used accordingly . Figure 26 . 1 . 1 Ampliﬁcation competent ( top ) versus incompetent ( bottom ) vector production . Viruses 26 . 1 . 3 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Supplement 37 BASICPROTOCOL 1 GENERATION OF A PAPILLOMAVIRAL VECTOR STOCK BY TRANSFECTION An initial vector seed stock is generated by co - transfecting an HPV16 L1 / L2 expression plasmid , p16L1L2 , together with an expression plasmid of interest into 293TT cells . After transfection , p16L1L2 and the expression plasmid are each replicated to high - copy number and packaged separately into L1 / L2 capsids . Note that Alternate Protocol 2 discusses the use of a different L1 / L2 expression plasmid , p16sheLL , which cannot be packaged into L1 / L2 capsids and thus allows production of ampliﬁcation - incompetent papillomaviral vector stocks . Capsids are harvested by lysing the cells with Brij - 58 ( a nonionic detergent ) 48 hr after transfection . The resulting cell lysate must be allowed to mature for 24 hr , then can be diluted and used directly as an infectious vector stock or puriﬁed as described in Support Protocol 1 or 2 . In some instances it may be useful to amplify the vector stock by using it to infect fresh 293TT cells ( Basic Protocol 2 ) . Materials DMEM ( Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle medium ) with 10 % ( v / v ) FBS ( DMEM - 10 ) Fetal bovine serum , heat - inactivated at 56 ◦ C for 30 min ( FBS ) 293TT cells 0 . 05 % ( w / v ) trypsin / EDTA solution ( Invitrogen or other supplier ) 2 × freeze medium : 82 % ( v / v ) FBS / 18 % ( v / v ) dimethylsulfoxide 50 mg / ml hygromycin B stock ( Roche ) Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) OptiMEM - I ( Invitrogen ) p16L1L2 plasmid < 8 - kb mammalian expression plasmid with SV40 ori ( see Commentary ) DPBS - Mg ( see recipe ) 10 % ( v / v ) Brij - 58 ( see recipe ) RNase A / T1 cocktail ( Ambion , no . AM2286 ) or RNase A stock 225 - cm 2 and 75 - cm 2 cell culture ﬂask Humidiﬁed 37 ◦ C , 5 % CO 2 incubator 37 ◦ C water bath 2 - ml gasketed cryovials Cryocooler ( e . g . , Nalgene Mr . Frosty isopropanol bath ) chilled to 4 ◦ C Liquid nitrogen freezer 15 - ml conical centrifuge tubes 1 . 5 - ml siliconized centrifuge tubes , preferably screw - cap ( e . g . , VWR , no , 60828 - 818 ) Siliconized pipet tips ( optional ) Establish the 293TT cell culture 1 . Dispense 27 ml of DMEM - 10 into a 225 - cm 2 ﬂask . Add 3 ml of FBS for a ﬁnal FBS concentration of 20 % . Place the ﬂask in a humidiﬁed 37 ◦ C 5 % CO 2 incubator and loosen the cap . Allow the ﬂask to equilibrate for at least 10 min . It is important to omit hygromycin B ( see below ) from the culture medium during recovery from thawing . The Laboratory of Cellular Oncology ( http : / / home . ccr . cancer . gov / LCO / ) freely distributes 293TT cells to nonproﬁt researchers . Production of Papillomavirus - Based Gene Transfer Vectors 26 . 1 . 4 Supplement 37 Current Protocols in Cell Biology 2 . Thaw a frozen vial of 293TT cells in a 37 ◦ C water bath . Immediately upon thawing , pipet the cells into the ﬂask . It is not necessary to spin the cells out of their freeze medium . Like other human embryonic kidney 293 - derived cell lines , 293TT cells do not adhere tightly to plastic . Placing the cells in a relatively small volume with large surface area promotes attachment , which may take up to two days . 3 . Incubate the cells in a humidiﬁed 37 ◦ C , 5 % CO 2 incubator for 2 to 3 days . 4 . Remove the supernatant and gently wash cells with 1 to 2 ml of trypsin / EDTA . Remove trypsin wash and replace with 1 to 2 ml of fresh trypsin / EDTA . Return the ﬂask to the incubator , loosen the cap , and incubate for at least 5 min , gently rocking the ﬂask once or twice . Neutralize the trypsin by suspending the cells in 9 ml of DMEM - 10 . Although 293TT cells are easily dislodged from plastic , the cells can adhere to one another fairly tightly . If the cells are not fully trypsinized , the resulting cell clumps may be partially lysed by shear forces during resuspension . Insufﬁcient trypsinization also results in the appearance of unhealthy piles of cells after replating . 5 . On the ﬁrst or second passage , retain enough cells to freeze archive vials in liquid nitrogen . When trypsinizing the cells , retain some of the spent culture medium . After trypsinization , resuspend the cells in the retained spent medium . Gently mix the suspended cells 1 : 1 with 2 × freeze medium . Distribute the suspension as 1 - ml aliquots in cryovials ( roughly 2 to 5 × 10 6 cells per vial ) . Transfer the vials to a cryocooler and freeze at − 80 ◦ C overnight . Transfer the frozen cells to a liquid nitrogen freezer for long - term storage . 6 . For routine passaging , split the culture 1 : 10 or 1 : 20 every 2 to 3 days . After re - covery from thawing , supplement the culture medium with hygromycin B at a ﬁnal concentration of 400 µ g / ml to promote maintenance of SV40 T antigen expression . Transfect 293TT cells 7 . Preplate 7 . 5 × 10 6 293TT cells in a 75 - cm 2 ﬂask in 20 ml of DMEM - 10 without hygromycin B . Incubate the cells overnight in a humidiﬁed 37 ◦ C , 5 % CO 2 incubator . A 75 - cm 2 ﬂask is used as an example , but the transfection can easily be scaled up or down based on the surface area of the culture vessel . See the Lipofectamine 2000 package insert for details . 8 . Transfect the cells with Lipofectamine 2000 , essentially according to package insert . Mix 80 µ l of Lipofectamine 2000 reagent with 2 ml of OptiMEM - I in a 15 - ml tube . Incubate 10 min . 9 . In a separate 15 - ml tube , mix 19 µ g each of p16L1L2 and expression plasmid of interest in 2 ml of OptiMEM - I . 10 . Combine the Lipofectamine 2000 and DNA mixtures and incubate 20 to 30 min to form lipid / DNA complexes . 11 . Add the complexes directly to the preplated cells and incubate 6 hr . IMPORTANT NOTE : From this point forward , the culture should be handled under proper biosafety conditions approved by an institutional biosafety committee ( see Biosafety heading in the Commentary section ) . It is essential that the cells be < 50 % conﬂuent at the time of transfection . Higher levels of conﬂuency tend to reduce the transfection efﬁciency for 293TT cells . Ideally , the cells should be preplated late in the day , then transfected the next morning . It is not necessary to change the medium on the cells before adding the lipid / DNA complexes , provided the cells were preplated in DMEM - 10 without antibiotics or selective agents . Incubation of the cells with the lipid / DNA complexes for 4 to 8 hr gives similar results . Viruses 26 . 1 . 5 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Supplement 37 12 . Carefully remove the supernatant from the culture and add 20 ml of fresh DMEM - 10 prewarmed to 37 ◦ C . Care should be taken not to dislodge the cells when adding fresh medium . For example , it may help to turn the ﬂask upside - down and add the medium to the top surface of the ﬂask . Medium can be supplemented with antibiotics ( e . g . , pen - strep ) at this point , although this is not generally necessary . 13 . Return the transfected cells to the incubator for 2 days . It should not be necessary to split the culture . Harvest capsids 14 . Remove supernatant from the culture . Generally , there will be very few detached cells and the supernatant can be discarded . If there are substantial numbers of ﬂoating cells , recover them by centrifugation . 15 . Harvest cells by trypsinization ( see step 4 above ) . Transfer suspended cells to a 15 - ml conical centrifuge tube . Collect residual cells by rinsing the ﬂask with 4 ml of fresh DMEM - 10 . Pool rinse in the same 15 - ml conical tube . Pellet the cells by centrifuging 10 min at 200 × g , 4 ◦ C . 16 . Remove the supernatant and resuspend the cells in 0 . 5 ml of DPBS - Mg . Transfer the suspension to a 1 . 5 - ml siliconized tube . Rinse the 15 - ml conical tube with 0 . 5 ml of fresh DPBS - Mg . Pool rinse into the 1 . 5 - ml siliconized tube . Pellet the cells by centrifuging 10 min at 200 × g , 4 ◦ C . Papillomavirus capsids interact nonspeciﬁcally with polypropylene and other types of surfaces ( Shi et al . , 2005 ) . Siliconized tubes appear to be less prone to disruptive nonspe - ciﬁc interactions with the capsids . Blocking of polypropylene surfaces with excess protein or detergent also helps prevent capsid - plastic interactions . Thus , the use of siliconized tubes is desirable but not absolutely essential for the purposes of Basic Protocols 1 and 2 . The use of siliconized tubes becomes more important when handling puriﬁed capsids ( Support Protocols 1 and 2 ) , particularly if the capsids are to be stored for extended periods of time at 4 ◦ C . Although siliconized screw - cap tubes can be difﬁcult to obtain , they are easier to keep sterile than more widely available ﬂip - cap siliconized tubes . The use of siliconized pipet tips is optional . 17 . Carefully remove the supernatant . Estimate the volume occupied by the cell pellet by side - by - side comparison to ﬂuid in a dummy tube . Pellet volume for a 75 - cm 2 ﬂask of cells is typically 60 to 80 µ l . 18 . Add 1 . 5 × cell pellet volumes of DPBS - Mg . For example , add 120 µ l of DPBS - Mg to a cell pellet of 80 µ l ( total volume of about 200 µ l ) . Resuspend the cells by gently vortexing or ﬂicking the tube . It is critical that the cells be suspended at a density of at least 100 × 10 6 cells / ml . Lower - density lysates can suffer from nonspeciﬁc protein aggregation that reduces the purity of capsid stocks and can also reduce titer yield . Estimating suspension density based on pellet size is safer and more reliable than performing hemacytometer counts . 19 . Add 10 % Brij - 58 to achieve a ﬁnal concentration of ∼ 0 . 35 % . For example , add 7 µ l of 10 % Brij - 58 to 200 µ l cell suspension . 20 . Add ∼ 1 µ l of RNase A / T1 cocktail ( or ∼ 5 RNase A units ) and mix . Intact ribosomes are large enough to partially co - purify with capsids . Digestion of ri - bosomes with RNase thus facilitates puriﬁcation ( see Support Protocols 1 and 2 ) . The suggested amount of RNase stock is more than enough enzyme to adequately digest ribosomes—lower doses of enzyme stock are also effective . Production of Papillomavirus - Based Gene Transfer Vectors 26 . 1 . 6 Supplement 37 Current Protocols in Cell Biology 21 . Allow capsids to mature by incubating the lysate at 37 ◦ C for 24 hr . Although this step of the protocol may seem counterintuitive , it is essential to allow the capsids to undergo a slow process of maturation , in which disulﬁde bonds between neighboring L1 molecules stabilize the structure of the capsid ( Buck et al . , 2005 ) . Prior to maturation , capsids are infectious but physically fragile , such that immature capsids lose infectivity during puriﬁcation or freeze - thaw cycles . The maturation process also renders the capsid more soluble , allowing clariﬁcation of the lysate ( step 22 ) . It may be helpful to gently mix the lysate once or twice during the maturation period . Note that effective sterile technique is critical during harvest of capsids , since contaminating microbes have ample opportunity to grow during the capsid maturation period . 22 . After maturation , chill the lysate on ice for 5 to 10 min . Clarify the chilled lysate by centrifuging 10 min at 5 , 000 × g , 4 ◦ C . The resulting clariﬁed supernatant is the vector stock . Freeze at − 80 ◦ C in 20 to 50 µ l aliquots or proceed to purifying the stock ( Support Protocols 1 and 2 ) . The clariﬁed supernatant can be used directly as a crude papillomaviral vector stock to infect cells of interest . The residual Brij - 58 in the lysate is not toxic to most cell types , provided the stock is diluted least 1 : 500 ( ﬁnal dilution in culture well ) . The clariﬁed lysate can also be used as a seed for amplifying the vector in fresh 293TT cells ( Basic Protocol 2 ) . Although ampliﬁcation allows high - yield production of a more concentrated vector stock , initial seed stocks are usually of sufﬁcient titer for use in most applications . BASIC PROTOCOL 2 PROPAGATIVE AMPLIFICATION OF A PAPILLOMAVIRAL VECTOR STOCK In this protocol , the vector seed stock from Basic Protocol 1 is ampliﬁed by infection of fresh 293TT cells . In principle , the ampliﬁed vector stock can in turn be further ampliﬁed by additional rounds of infection of 293TT cells . However , as the viral stock is passaged , smaller collapsed plasmid recombinants begin to dominate the propagated plasmid swarm . By the third passage , ∼ 3 kb collapsed species are predominant and , as a consequence , titer yield begins to decline . Materials 293TT cells DMEM with 10 % ( v / v ) FBS Vector seed stock ( Basic Protocol 1 ) 225 - cm 2 ﬂask Humidiﬁed 37 ◦ C 5 % CO 2 incubator 1 . Plate 12 × 10 6 293TT cells in 50 ml of DMEM - 10 in a 225 - cm 2 ﬂask . Incubate overnight in a humidiﬁed 37 ◦ C , 5 % CO 2 incubator . 2 . Infect the preplated cells by adding 20 µ l of vector seed stock ( Basic Protocol 1 ) . Return the ﬂask to the incubator . Incubate the culture with the vector inoculum for 20 to 40 hr , then change the cells into fresh DMEM - 10 . Rocking the ﬂask occasionally during the ﬁrst 2 hr of incubation will help to promote virus attachment . The change of medium may improve infectious titer yield , but can be considered optional . 3 . About 72 hr after initial infection , harvest capsids from the cells as described in Basic Protocol 1 , steps 14 to 22 . Freeze the clariﬁed supernatant at − 80 ◦ C in 100 - µ l aliquots or purify the vector stock ( Support Protocols 1 and 2 ) . Viruses 26 . 1 . 7 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Supplement 37 ALTERNATEPROTOCOL1 PRODUCTION OF AMPLIFICATION - INCOMPETENT VECTOR STOCKS For some applications , co - delivery of p16L1L2 along with the expression plasmid of interest may be undesirable . An alternative strategy is to produce an ampliﬁcation - incompetent vector stock by transiently co - transfecting an expression plasmid of interest together with the packaging plasmid p16sheLL . In contrast to p16L1L2 , p16sheLL lacks the SV40 ori and is too large to be packaged within papillomavirus capsids . Thus , when p16sheLL is co - transfected with an expression plasmid of interest , only the expression plasmid is packaged into nascent infectious capsids . A variety of other papillomavirus types have been adapted to the “sheLL” format and are freely available to nonproﬁt researchers . Note that the L1 and L2 open reading frames in these plasmids have been “codon - modiﬁed” ( subjected to extensive silent mutation ) in order to eradicate expression - inhibitory elements present in native papillomavirus L1 and L2 genes ( Leder et al . , 2001 ) . Ampliﬁcation - incompetent vectors can be pro - duced using the methods outlined in Basic Protocol 1 by simply substituting p16sheLL ( or other sheLL series plasmid ) for p16L1L2 . See the Web page http : / / home . ccr . cancer . gov / LCO / packaging . htm for maps of available packaging plasmids . Because of their relatively large size , sheLL series plasmids are occasionally subject to recombinant collapse during re - growth in bacteria . The chance of inadvertent recom - bination can be reduced by using STBL2 ( Invitrogen ) or other reduced - recombination bacterial strains . Alternatively , standard bacterial subcloning strains can be grown at 30 ◦ C during recovery from transformation and during growth on selective agar plates . Growth of bacteria at 30 ◦ C tends to result in maintenance of ColE1 - based plasmids at lower copy number , thus reducing the chance of recombination . Subsequent liquid cul - ture scale - up of a single colony at 37 ◦ C improves plasmid yield and has not resulted in detectable amounts of plasmid collapse in our hands . ALTERNATEPROTOCOL2 BULK PRODUCTION OF PAPILLOMAVIRUS CAPSIDS The promiscuity of DNA packaging by HPV16 L1 and L2 applies not just to various expression plasmids , but also to cellular DNA . At the time of cell lysis , at least 90 % of the proto - capsids present in the cell nucleus exist in complex with cellular DNA . In the basic protocols , most capsid / cellular DNA complexes sediment away from the vector stock during the lysate clariﬁcation step . However , if DNases are added to the cell suspension during cell lysis , capsids associated with cellular DNA are liberated with an encapsidated 8 - kb linear fragment of cellular DNA ( Buck et al . , 2005 ) . For applications aimed using infectious reporter capsids , the presence of “cold” ( reporter - less ) capsids containing cellular DNA is undesirable , since the cold capsids may compete against the infectivity reporter capsids . The infectious delivery of random fragments of 293TT cell DNA to target cells also presents a theoretical biosafety risk . In this protocol , the addition of DNases to the cell lysate allows for recovery of capsids containing linear fragments of cellular DNA . This boosts the yield of capsids by at least 10 - fold , making this approach desirable when the production of virus - like particles , rather than titerable infectious units , is the primary goal . In some instances it may be desirable to produce L1 capsids that do not contain L2 . HPV16 L1 particles can encapsidate a limited amount of DNA in the absence of L2 , but are at least 10 , 000 - fold less infectious than L1 / L2 capsids . A limited seed stock for production of L1 - only capsids can be generated by co - transfecting p16sheLL together with a packageable L1 expression plasmid , such as p16L1 - GFP . The resulting seed stock can be used for a single - round infection of fresh 293TT cells . The infected cells will be transduced only with the L1 expression plasmid and will thus produce capsids lacking L2 . Production of Papillomavirus - Based Gene Transfer Vectors 26 . 1 . 8 Supplement 37 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Additional Materials ( also see Basic Protocol 1 ) Benzonase endonuclease ( ∼ 250 U / µ l ; Sigma - Aldrich or other supplier ) Plasmid Safe ATP - Dependent DNase ( 10 U / µ l ; Epicentre ) 5 M NaCl Additional reagents and equipment for production of an initial vector seed stock ( Basic Protocol 1 ) 1 . Follow Basic Protocol 1 for production of an initial vector seed stock , omitting the expression plasmid of interest and transfecting with p16L1L2 alone . 2 . Amplify the vector seed stock using Basic Protocol 2 . Instead of adding RNase to the cell lysate ( Basic Protocol 1 , step 20 ) , add Benzonase and Plasmid Safe stocks to a ﬁnal concentration of ∼ 0 . 25 % each . Mature the lysate for 24 hr ( Basic Protocol 1 , step 21 ) . Benzonase is an RNA / DNA endonuclease , while Plasmid Safe is a processive exo - DNase . The two nucleases act in concert to “slice and dice” any DNA outside the protective environment of the capsid . There is enough residual ATP in the lysate to support Plasmid Safe’s ATP - dependent exonuclease activity . Final nuclease stock concentrations of 0 . 05 % to 0 . 1 % each are also adequate for effective fragmentation of unencapsidated DNA . 3 . After maturation , chill the matured lysate on ice for 5 to 10 min . Add 0 . 17 volume of 5 M NaCl to achieve a ﬁnal NaCl concentration of ∼ 0 . 85 M . Incubate on ice 10 min , mixing once or twice . Treating the lysate with high salt helps solubilize the lysate , facilitating the puriﬁcation of capsids . It is not possible to add high salt to the lysate prior to clariﬁcation in the basic ( DNase - less ) protocols , because the salt would solubilize the undigested cellular DNA , rendering the lysate too viscous to handle . 4 . If desired , purify capsids out of the clariﬁed lysate using Support Protocols 1 or 2 . SUPPORT PROTOCOL 1 PURIFICATION OF VECTOR STOCKS USING OPTIPREP GRADIENTS Although clariﬁed cell lysates can serve as useful vector stocks , the residual Brij - 58 , undigested DNA , and expressed proteins of interest in the lysate may cause problems for some applications . This protocol outlines the use of ultracentrifugation to purify vector stocks . Virologists have traditionally relied on two main ultracentrifugation strategies to purify capsids : buoyant density ultracentrifugation , which typically employs CsCl solutions , and velocity ultracentrifugation , which typically employs concentrated sucrose solutions . The method described here makes use of a newer ultracentrifugal gradient medium called Optiprep ( iodixanol ) . Optiprep is a relatively nontoxic iodinated di - hexanol compound used clinically as an injectable X - ray contrast agent . It has the useful feature of being both high - density ( like CsCl solutions ) and high - viscosity ( like sucrose solutions ) . It is thus possible to employ Optiprep for velocity and buoyant density ultracentrifugation simultaneously in a single tube . The clariﬁed capsid - containing cell lysate is layered on top of a preformed Optiprep step - gradient . At the top of the gradient , the relatively large size of the capsids allows them to rapidly sediment through the upper portion of the gradient while other , smaller diameter solutes in the lysate traverse the gradient slowly . Once the capsids reach the middle portion of the gradient , their migration is dominated by buoyancy . This allows separation of empty capsids from DNA - containing capsids . Ultracentrifugation is a relatively advanced laboratory technique and should not be at - tempted without the guidance of an experienced operator . Although Optiprep puriﬁcation is a highly effective way to purify papillomaviral vector stocks , the simpler gel ﬁltration strategy described in Support Protocol 2 also gives reasonable purity and would be a Viruses 26 . 1 . 9 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Supplement 37 better choice for investigators lacking easy access to the equipment or expertise required for ultracentrifugation . The protocol describes the use of a Beckman SW - 55 rotor . Other types of rotors can be used successfully , although some adjustment of spin time may be necessary . An SW32 rotor at 32 , 000 rpm ( 125 , 000 × g ) for 5 . 75 hr or an SW40 . 1ti rotor at 40 , 000 rpm ( 200 , 000 × g ) for 4 . 75 hr work reasonably well . Additional Materials ( see also Basic Protocol 1 ) 46 % ( v / v ) Optiprep / DPBS ( see recipe ) DPBS / 0 . 8 M NaCl ( prepare by adding 0 . 15 volume of 5 M NaCl to DPBS ) Thin - wall 1 / 2 × 2 – in . Polyallomer tubes ( Beckman , no . 326819 ) or appropriate ultracentrifuge tubes 3 - ml syringe ﬁtted with a 2 - in . or longer large - bore ( ∼ 16 - G ) needle ParaﬁlmUltracentrifugeBeckmanSW - 55 ultracentrifuge rotor ( or other swing - bucket rotor ) Ring stand with tube clamp Siliconized collection tubes ∼ 25 - G needle Prepare a 27 % , 33 % , and 39 % Optiprep step gradient by underlayering 1 . Dilute 46 % Optiprep / DPBS to 27 % , 33 % , and 39 % using DPBS / 0 . 8 M NaCl Although our laboratory has traditionally used DPBS as a dilution medium , Optiprep gradients prepared using plain PBS ( lacking CaCl 2 , MgCl 2 , and KCl ) are probably equally effective . Use of high ( 0 . 8 M ) NaCl concentrations in the gradient results in more effective separation of the capsids from cellular proteins , but gradients prepared with physiologic ( 0 . 15 M ) NaCl concentrations can give acceptable results . 2 . Set up a minimum of two ultracentrifuge tubes : one for the clariﬁed lysate , one for balance . 3 . Using a pipet , add 1 . 5 ml of 27 % Optiprep to each tube . A gradient with three 1 . 5 ml steps will leave enough room for about 0 . 5 ml of lysate . Up to 3 ml of lysate can be loaded into a single tube by shortening the gradient to 0 . 7 ml per step . 4 . Load the 3 ml syringe with 33 % Optiprep . Eject any bubbles . Insert the syringe until the needle is gently touching the bottom of the tube . Gently eject 1 . 5 ml of 33 % Optiprep beneath the 27 % step . 5 . Remove the syringe from the tube and eject residual Optiprep ( or use a fresh syringe ) . Repeat step 4 with 39 % Optiprep . 6 . Cover the tubes with Paraﬁlm and incubate 1 to 4 hr at room temperature . Letting the gradients stand at room temperature allows the steps to partially diffuse into one another . The partly linearized gradient results in a slightly better - focused capsid band . Perform the ultracentrifugation 7 . Gently layer the clariﬁed cell lysate ( or DPBS in the balance tube ) onto the top of the gradient . Seat the tubes into opposing rotor buckets . 8 . Add DPBS / 0 . 8 M NaCl to the top of the tube until the meniscus is above the surrounding metal rim of the bucket . Balance buckets to within 5 mg . It is critical that the tubes be ﬁlled to near the rim and that the buckets be balanced . Un - derﬁlled tubes can collapse , resulting in imbalances . Imbalances can result in destruction of the ultracentrifuge rotor and containment drum . Production of Papillomavirus - Based Gene Transfer Vectors 26 . 1 . 10 Supplement 37 Current Protocols in Cell Biology 9 . Hang the buckets on the rotor , being sure that both hooks catch . Spin 3 . 5 hr at 234 , 000 × g ( 50 , 000 rpm for an SW - 55ti rotor ) , 16 ◦ C . Fractionate the gradient 10 . Remove the tube from the bucket and place in the tube clamp . An opalescent band of capsids may be visible roughly a third of the way up the gradient . Visualization of the band is easier if a dark object is held behind the tube . 11 . Set up and uncap twelve siliconized collection tubes . Position the collection tubes beneath the ultracentrifuge tube . 12 . Puncture the bottom of the ultracentrifuge tube slightly off center using a 25 - G ( or similar diameter ) needle . Rock the needle in a circular motion to slightly expand the hole . Use of sharp objects when handling biohazardous agents obviously presents some risk . This step of the protocol should be performed very carefully . Discard the needle directly into an appropriate sharps container ( do not attempt to re - cap the needle ) . 13 . Collect a single large ﬁrst fraction until the rate of drops begins to increase ( ∼ 750 µ l collected ) . For each subsequent fraction , collect 5 to 8 drops ( ∼ 200 µ l ) per fraction . Repeat for twelve fractions . The fractions should encompass the bottom 1 / 2 to 2 / 3 of the gradient . Discard the top portion of the gradient . The ﬁrst few drops will emerge very slowly . 14 . Screen gradient fractions for the presence of capsids ( Support Protocol 3 ) . Pool appropriate fractions , divide into 100 - µ l aliquots , and store at − 80 ◦ C . Optiprep is nontoxic to cell cultures and can be injected into mice without apparent negative effects . It is therefore not necessary to exchange capsids out of Optiprep in most cases . If removal of Optiprep ( or the high salt present in the gradient fractions ) is desired , Support Protocol 2 presents an effective method for exchanging capsids into other buffers . Note that Optiprep is resistant to dialysis ( see Support Protocol 4 ) . SUPPORT PROTOCOL 2 PURIFICATION OF VECTOR STOCKS USING AGAROSE GEL FILTRATION The simple size - exclusion chromatography ( gel ﬁltration ) puriﬁcation method described in this protocol makes use of the fact that papillomavirus capsids are larger than nearly all other macromolecular complexes in the clariﬁed lysate . The agarose beads used in the protocol have a pore size slightly smaller than the papillomavirus capsid . Thus , papillomavirus capsids are excluded from the beads and run rapidly through the void volume of the column , while other solutes in the cell lysate take a slower , circuitous path through the bead matrix . Although the purity of gel ﬁltered capsids is not quite as high as for Optiprep - puriﬁed capsids ( Support Protocol 1 ) , gel ﬁltration does effectively remove most contaminants and is safer and less technically demanding than ultracentrifugal methods . Agarose gel ﬁltration can also be used as a buffer exchange method for removing Optiprep or other solutes from puriﬁed vector stocks . Additional Materials ( see Basic Protocol 1 ) DPBS - BSA ( see recipe ) DPBS / 0 . 5 M NaCl ( prepare by adding 0 . 075 volume of 5 M NaCl to DPBS ) Benzonase nuclease ( Sigma ; optional ) 0 . 05 % ( w / v ) NaN 3 or other preservative Vacuum source ( optional ) Bell jar or side - arm vacuum ﬂask for degassing solutions ( optional ) Ring stand with clamp 5 ml gravity - ﬂow columns with caps and frits ( Pierce or other supplier ) Viruses 26 . 1 . 11 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Supplement 37 1 - or 5 - ml pipet 2 % ( w / v ) agarose beads ( 50 - to 150 - µ m diameter ; Agarose Bead Technologies , no . A - 1020 - S ) or 1 . 4 % agarose beads ( Bioscience Beads ) Paraﬁlm Prepare an agarose gel ﬁltration column 1 . De - gas the DPBS - BSA solution by exposure to vacuum . This step is optional . See the package insert that comes with Pierce gravity - ﬂow column kit for additional information . 2 . Clamp the column to a ring stand . Put the bottom cap on and add 5 ml of DPBS / 0 . 5 M NaCl . 3 . Remove the bottom cap to eject any bubbles . Recap and add more DPBS / 0 . 5 M NaCl . Fill to near the top of the column . 4 . Float a frit on the surface . Gently tap the frit to dislodge any air bubbles . Tap frit down to the bottom of the column using a 1 - or 5 - ml pipet ( or the serum separator provided with the column kit ) . 5 . Remove the bottom cap and drain out most of the ﬂuid . 6 . Suspend the agarose beads by gently swirling and inverting the bottle . Pour bead slurry into the column . Fill the column to the rim . 7 . Remove the bottom cap . Partially exchange the beads into room - temperature DPBS - BSA by repeatedly allowing the column to drip to near dryness then pouring on more DPBS - BSA . 8 . Replace the bottom cap . Cover the top of the column with Paraﬁlm . Suspend beads by repeated gentle inversion of the column . Return the column to the clamp and allow blocking and settling overnight at room temperature . Preblocking the column overnight with 1 % BSA reduces capsid aggregation by blocking nonspeciﬁc protein binding sites on the bead matrix and column walls . Although it is generally not as effective as BSA , Tween 80 at a ﬁnal concentration of 0 . 01 % ( v / v ) can also be used as a blocking agent . Like BSA , the detergent partially prevents nonspeciﬁc interactions that can lead to capsid aggregation ( Shi et al . , 2005 ) . Tween 80 is a relatively mild detergent and can be added to cell cultures at ﬁnal concentrations of up to 0 . 1 % ( v / v ) without noticeable toxicity . The use of high ( 0 . 5 M ) NaCl concentrations also helps block nonspeciﬁc interactions that can lead to capsid denaturation and aggregation . It is important to allow the beads to settle slowly after equilibration with room temperature ( preferably de - gassed ) buffer . Chilled solutions contain more dissolved oxygen , which can form bubbles upon re - warming to room temperature . Trapped bubbles create disruptive vortexes in the liquid ﬂow through the gel bed . 9 . Remove Paraﬁlm . Float a frit on the ﬂuid surface and gently tap down to within a few mm of the bed surface . 10 . Remove the cap from the bottom of the column . Wash the column with at least 10 column volumes of DPBS / 0 . 5 M NaCl . It is helpful to use the conical reservoir included with the Pierce column kit . The washing process may take as long as long as an hour . Washing with only 4 column volumes may result in contamination of the capsids with residual BSA . The gel bed will compact some during the washing . Tap the frit down to within a few millimeters of the bead surface . Do not compress the gel bed . After washing , the column is ready to use . Production of Papillomavirus - Based Gene Transfer Vectors 26 . 1 . 12 Supplement 37 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Perform gel ﬁltration 11 . Optional : If capsids are being puriﬁed out of crude cell lysate ( Basic Protocols 1 and 2 ) add 1 µ l of Benzonase nuclease and incubate 10 to 30 min at 37 ◦ C to digest any residual unencapsidated DNA . It may be beneﬁcial to adjust the salt concentration of the crude lysate to 0 . 5 M NaCl after Benzonase digestion . Although the addition of Benzonase is optional , it helps improve the purity of the stock by digesting large DNA molecules that , like capsids , are too large to enter the pores in the agarose beads . A small fraction of cellular DNA - associated capsids will remain present in the clariﬁed lysate . The addition of Benzonase will therefore liberate some capsids carrying 8 - kb linear fragments of cellular DNA . Most of the Benzonase will be removed by the gel ﬁltration process . If capsids have been puriﬁed using an Optiprep gradient , they have already been separated from unencapsidated DNA and addition of Benzonase is unnecessary . Also note that Benzonase is inhibited by high - salt concentrations ( such as the 0 . 8 M NaCl used for Optiprep gradients ) . 12 . Add 0 . 5 ml or less ( i . e . , less than 1 / 10 of the agarose bed volume ) of clariﬁed lysate ( or capsids in Optiprep ) to the washed agarose gel ﬁltration column . 13 . Apply 0 . 25 ml of DPBS / 0 . 5 M NaCl to the top of the column . Collect column eluate in a siliconized 1 . 5 - ml tube . Repeat this for a total of 12 0 . 25 - ml fractions . See notes for step 13 of Basic Protocol 1 for information about use of siliconized tubes . 14 . Screen fractions for encapsidated DNA , as described in Support Protocol 3 . A peak of puriﬁed capsids usually emerges from the gel ﬁltration column at about 1 / 3 rd of the column volume . In other words , typically fraction 7 , if 0 . 25 ml fractions were collected . A histogram of capsid content may be spread over as many as four fractions . 15 . Regenerate columns for re - use by washing the column with 10 column volumes of DPBS / 0 . 5 M NaCl , then exchanging into DPBS - BSA supplemented with 0 . 05 % ( w / v ) NaN 3 or other preservative . Store the column at room temperature for several days . Columns can be stored for longer periods at 4 ◦ C , but oxygen bubbles may form in the column upon re - warming . If bubbles form , remove the top frit and resuspend the beads by inverting the column . SUPPORT PROTOCOL 3 SCREENING FRACTIONS FOR THE PRESENCE OF CAPSIDS If enough capsids are present in the starting lysate , it is possible to screen Optiprep or agarose gel ﬁltration fractions by simple BCA protein assay ( Pierce ) . Screening fractions for the appearance of L1 ( 55 kDa ) in stained SDS - PAGE gels ( see UNIT 6 . 1 ) is also feasible . If SDS - PAGE is used for screening , fractions containing L1 and peak amounts of ∼ 15 kDa histone bands ( indicating the presence of encapsidated DNA ) should be chosen . Optiprep has a strong light absorbance peak at ∼ 250 nm . This makes it impossible to screen Optiprep fractions using UV absorbance . If the papillomaviral vector carries a convenient reporter gene , fractions can also be screened by titration of infectivity ( Support Protocol 4 ) . If siliconized tubes ( see note for step 13 of Basic Protocol 1 ) have been used for fraction collection , stock titer is generally stable at 4 ◦ C for 48 hr . The fraction screening technique described below is based on the visualization of en - capsidated DNA and has the advantage of rapidly identifying fractions containing even relatively low levels of encapsidated plasmid . For more information on agarose gel electrophoresis see Voytas ( 2000 ) . Viruses 26 . 1 . 13 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Supplement 37 Additional Materials ( see Basic Protocol 1 ) Electrophoresis - grade agarose Tris - acetate - EDTA ( TAE ) electrophoresis buffer ( or other agarose gel electrophoresis buffer , see APPENDIX 2A ) Phosphate - buffered saline ( APPENDIX 2A ) , optional Proteinase K ( e . g . , Qiagen , no . 19131 ) 0 . 5 M EDTA 10 % SDS DNA loading dye ( Voytas , 2000 ) DNA marker ladder ( kilobase - range ; Invitrogen or other supplier ) 1 to 10 ng sample of supercoiled p16L1L2 and / or 1 to 10 ng of the expression plasmid of interest SYBR Green - I ( Invitrogen / Molecular Probes or other supplier ) UV ( or blue light ) gel documentation imaging device 16 - × 16 – cm tray 12 - well combs Agarose gel electrophoresis apparatus ( see APPENDIX 3A ) 1 . Add 0 . 8 g of electrophoresis - grade agarose to 80 ml of TAE buffer . Melt by microwaving . 2 . Cast molten agar into a 16 - × 16 – cm tray with one or two 12 - well combs . Allow gel to cool . Other sizes of casting tray can be used . It is helpful if the gel is relatively shallow ( < 5 mm thick ) . SYBR Green - I stain penetrates the gel relatively slowly . If the sample extends up to the surface of the gel , the shorter diffusion distance allows for faster staining . 3 . Make a master mix with 100 µ l of water ( or PBS ) and 5 µ l each proteinase K , 0 . 5 M EDTA and 10 % SDS . Distribute 5 µ l of master mix to an appropriate number of microcentrifuge tubes . Add a 15 µ l sample of each gradient or column fraction to separate tubes . Vortex the tubes then incubate 10 to 30 min at 56 ◦ C . Proteinase K digestion liberates the encapsidated plasmid DNA from the capsid / histone complex . This allows the encapsidated DNA to migrate properly during electrophoresis . 4 . Add 5 µ l of DNA loading dye to each tube . Load 20 µ l of each sample into the gel . Include a lane with 100 ng of DNA marker ladder ( i . e . , ∼ 10 ng of DNA per ladder band ) . Also include a 1 to 10 ng sample of supercoiled p16L1L2 and / or 1 to 10 ng of the expression plasmid of interest . Run the gel at 120 V for ∼ 60 min ( or an appropriate voltage and time for the electrophoresis device being used ) . The presence of Optiprep and / or salt in the sample may distort the migration of the loading dye , but migration of the DNA is not dramatically affected . It is possible to purify encapsidated DNA away from the proteinase K - digested fraction material using silica spin columns , for example Qiaquick PCR Puriﬁcation columns ( Qiagen , no . 28104 ) . The puriﬁed DNA can then be positively identiﬁed by digestion with restriction enzymes prior to electrophoresis . 5 . Stain the gel for 20 min in SYBR Green - I diluted 1 : 10 , 000 in TAE . 6 . Image the gel using an appropriate imaging device ( see SYBR Green - I package insert ) . The encapsidated plasmid should be predominantly supercoiled , although some nicked and linearized species may appear , particularly if Benzonase was added to the sample ( step 1 in Support Protocol 2 ) . Benzonase liberates capsids containing linear fragments of cellular DNA , which will appear as a wide ∼ 8 - kb band . See Alternate Protocol 2 for details about capsids containing cellular DNA . Production of Papillomavirus - Based Gene Transfer Vectors 26 . 1 . 14 Supplement 37 Current Protocols in Cell Biology 7 . Choose fractions with peak plasmid content . Pool the fractions , divide into 100 - µ l aliquots , and freeze at − 80 ◦ C . SUPPORT PROTOCOL 4 CONCENTRATION OF VECTOR STOCKS It should not generally be necessary to concentrate capsid stocks . However , it is possible to do so using Pierce Slide - A - Lyzer dialysis cassettes and Slide - A - Lyzer Concentrating Solution , following manufacturer’s instructions . Unfortunately , Optiprep does not readily pass through dialysis membranes . Therefore , capsids must be exchanged out of Optiprep ( using gel ﬁltration , Support Protocol 2 ) prior to concentration . Addition of high NaCl concentrations ( 0 . 5 M to 1 . 0 M ﬁnal ) and Tween 80 ( 0 . 001 % – 0 . 01 % ( v / v ) ) to the sample prior to concentration will help prevent capsid aggregation during the concentration process ( see notes for Support Protocol 2 , step 8 ) . If necessary , the NaCl and Tween 80 can then be dialyzed away after concentrating the stock . SUPPORT PROTOCOL 5 TITERING THE INFECTIVITY OF PAPILLOMAVIRAL VECTOR STOCKS Authentic papillomaviruses are released into the environment by the spontaneous disrup - tion of cells at the surface of stratiﬁed squamous epithelia . This process , referred to as desquamation , is a normal feature of healthy skin and mucosal surfaces . Perhaps as a con - sequence of their exploitation of desquamation as a release mechanism , papillomaviruses are not known to employ an active cell - lysis program , as do other nonenveloped viruses . Thus , classical viral plaque assays that rely on viral lysis of infected cells are not useful for titration of papillomaviral vectors . If a ﬂuorescent protein is expressed by one or more of the packaged plasmids , the stock can readily be titered by ﬂow cytometric analysis of cells treated with varying doses of vector stock ( see Current Protocols in Cytometry ) . Intracellular immunostaining [ for example , using a Cytoﬁx / Cytoperm Kit ( BD Biosciences ) ] coupled with ﬂow cytometry may also be a feasible method for titering the expression of proteins of interest . If ﬂow cytometry is not available , assessment of ﬂuorescent protein expression ( or ﬂuorescent staining of a protein of interest ) can be performed using ﬂuorescence microscopy . Some plasmids , for example p16L1 - GFP , express enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) under control of the SV40 promoter , while a protein of interest ( in this case HPV16 L1 ) is expressed from the stronger EF1 α promoter . 293TT cells are useful for titering vector stocks because the incoming plasmid is rapidly replicated to high copy number by SV40 T antigen , thus promoting high - level expression of proteins or reporter genes of interest . Typically , adding 1 µ l of vector stock to 10 6 293TT cells will result in bright ﬂuorescence of nearly 100 % of the cells , if GFP is used as a reporter . The infectability of other cell lines varies and should be tested empirically , preferably using a reporter plasmid with GFP under control of a strong promoter , such as CMV immediate early promoter ( e . g . , pCIneo - GFP ) or human EF1 α promoter ( e . g . , pfwB ) . See Commentary for further information on selecting reporter plasmids . Materials Cells , e . g . , 293TT DMEM - 10 Vector stocks to be tested Dulbecco’s phosphate - buffered saline ( DPBS ) supplemented with 1 % ( v / v ) FBS ι - carrageenan ( e . g . , Sigma , no . C4014 ) 24 - well plate 2 . 5 - µ l pipettor 1000 - µ l pipettor Fluorescent microscope Viruses 26 . 1 . 15 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Supplement 37 1 . Plate 1 × 10 5 293TT cells ( or other cell type of interest ) per well in a 0 . 5 ml volume of DMEM - 10 in a 24 - well plate . Incubate overnight in a humidiﬁed 37 ◦ C , 5 % CO 2 incubator . Cells should be ∼ 25 % conﬂuent . 2 . Perform four 10 - fold serial dilutions ( i . e . , 1 : 10 to 1 : 10 , 000 ) of the papillomaviral vector stock , for example by serially adding 2 µ l of stock to 18 µ l of DMEM - 10 . 3 . Using a 2 . 5 µ l pipettor , add 1 µ l of diluted virus stocks to individual wells . Include a well of mock - treated cells . Perform the titration in replicate wells . Include a negative control by adding the papillomavirus - neutralizing agent ι - carrageenan to the cell culture at a ﬁnal concentration of 1 µ g / ml just prior to virus inoculation ( Buck et al . , 2006 ) . Incubate cells 48 hr in a humidiﬁed 37 ◦ C , 5 % CO 2 incubator . It is not necessary to change the medium on the cells . Papillomavirus infectious entry is a relatively slow process . 48 hr represents an adequate time period for infection of 293TT cells , but peak infection rates may occur at closer to 72 hr . 4 . Remove the supernatant and trypsinize ( as described in step 4 of Basic Protocol 1 , using a few drops of trypsin per well ) infected cells . Using a 1000 µ l pipettor , thoroughly resuspend the cells in 0 . 5 ml DPBS supplemented with 1 % FBS . Subject cells to ﬂow cytometric analysis . Alternatively , count the fraction of cells expressing GFP using a ﬂuorescent microscope . 5 . To analyze GFP expression by ﬂow cytometry , adjust an FL1 marker window to exclude 99 . 8 % of the mock - transduced cells . Choose a vector stock dilution showing between 1 % and 25 % of cells FL1 - positive . Use the formula [ 1000 µ l / ml ] × [ stock dilution ] × [ 200 , 000 cells at time of infection ] × [ fraction of cells FL1 - positive ] to calculate the number of infectious units per ml . Typical seed stocks for most GFP plasmids should contain at least 3 × 10 9 infectious units per ml . REAGENTS AND SOLUTIONS Use deionized , distilled water in all recipes and protocol steps . For common stock solutions , see APPENDIX 2A ; for suppliers , see SUPPLIERS APPENDIX . Brij - 58 , 10 % ( w / v ) Dissolve Brij - 58 ( polyoxyethylene 20 cetyl ether ) at 10 % ( w / v ) in Dulbecco’s phosphate - buffered saline ( DPBS ; e . g . , Invitrogen , no . 14040 - 141 ) . Store up to 1 month at 4 ◦ C . Dissolve the Brij - 58 by gently rocking the tube at room temperature for an hour or by storing overnight at 4 ◦ C . It is not necessary to ﬁlter the solution . The gradual appearance of a cloudy layer near the surface of the stored solution is normal . Mix the solution by gentle inversion of the tube prior to use . DPBS - BSA Combine the following in a 50 - ml tube : 23 ml of Dulbecco’s phosphate - buffered saline ( DPBS ; e . g . , Invitrogen , no . 14040 - 141 ) 1 . 75 ml of 5 M NaCl 0 . 25 g of bovine serum albumin fraction V ( BSA ) Filter using a 0 . 45 - µ m ﬁlter device ( optional ) Dissolve the BSA by rocking at least 30 min . Solution can be kept overnight at room temperature . Production of Papillomavirus - Based Gene Transfer Vectors 26 . 1 . 16 Supplement 37 Current Protocols in Cell Biology DPBS - Mg 100 ml Dulbecco’s phosphate - buffered saline ( DPBS ; e . g . , Invitrogen , no . 14040 - 141 ) , sterile 475 µ l of sterile - ﬁltered 2 M MgCl 2 1 ml of 100 × antibiotic / antimycotic stock ( Invitrogen , no . 15240062 or comparable broad - spectrum antibiotic from other suppliers ) Solution is stable for several months stored at 4 ◦ C . Keep sterile . Optiprep / DPBS 46 % 30 . 7 ml of 60 % iodixanol solution ( Optiprep ; Sigma - Aldrich or other supplier ) 4 ml of 10 × PBS ( Invitrogen or other supplier ) 5 . 2 ml of 5 M NaCl 18 µ l of 2 M CaCl 2 10 µ l of 2 M MgCl 2 84 µ l of 1 M KCl Store up to one month at room temperature It is helpful to brieﬂy mix the solution after addition of the 10 × PBS to avoid formation of CaPO 4 precipitates upon addition of the CaCl 2 stock . Optiprep ( 60 % iodixanol solution ) is available from Sigma - Aldrich and other suppliers . Although the term Optiprep is technically a trade name for a 60 % aqueous solution of iodixanol , this unit uses the term Optiprep colloquially as a synonym for iodixanol in order to be consistent with other published literature . COMMENTARY Background Information Viral vectors are useful for efﬁcient intro - duction of genes into mammalian cell types that are difﬁcult to transfect . There is also sub - stantial interest in the development of viral vectors for use as genetic vaccine vehicles or for various in vivo gene therapy applica - tions . Papillomaviral vectors have a number of appealing features , such as their relatively tractable production and puriﬁcation , which should make them useful as general - purpose gene delivery vehicles . The papillomaviral vectors described in this unit are a recent ad - dition to the viral vector toolbox . To date , the vectors have been used primarily for analy - sis of the biology of papillomaviruses . How - ever , the vector system also has utility for high - efﬁciency gene delivery to cultured cell lines and represents a promising new tool for in vivo gene delivery and genetic vaccination . Other viral vectors , such as retroviral , ade - noviral , or AAV - based systems , require that a gene of interest be ﬂanked by viral packag - ing signals or other elements critical for pro - duction of infectious virions . A unique fea - ture of papillomaviral vectors is that the pack - aging of plasmids within the cell nucleus is highly promiscuous , such that a variety of commercially available mammalian expres - sion plasmids carrying the SV40 promoter [ which contains the SV40 origin of replica - tion ( ori ) ] can be packaged efﬁciently . For ex - ample , pCDNA3 . 1 ( Invitrogen ) and pCIneo ( Promega ) plasmids expressing enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ; BD Clontech ) can be converted into puriﬁed papillomaviral vector stocks with titers of up to 10 11 GFP - transducing units per ml . Critical Parameters This unit describes the production of pa - pillomaviral vector stocks by two different methods : by direct transfection of cells ( Basic Protocol 1 ) and infectious ampliﬁcation of the transfection - derived stock ( Basic Protocol 2 ) . The yield of the initial transfection - derived stock is likely to be sufﬁcient for most in vitro applications . The higher yields of propagated vector stocks may be appealing for in vivo studies , which generally require higher infec - tious doses . At the outset of the protocol , a deci - sion must be made whether to produce an ampliﬁcation - competent or - incompetent vec - tor stock ( see Fig . 26 . 1 . 1 ) . Ampliﬁcation - competent stocks utilize p16L1L2 , which car - ries the SV40 origin of replication and is small enough to be packaged into capsids . The p16L1L2 plasmid can be used to co - propagate expression plasmids of interest as Viruses 26 . 1 . 17 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Supplement 37 part of a viral swarm . Although this allows high - yield ampliﬁcation of the vector stock , it has the drawback that the p16L1L2 plas - mid will be co - delivered to target cell popula - tions together with the expression plasmid of interest . This problem can be avoided by pro - duction of an ampliﬁcation - incompetent vec - tor stock , using p16sheLL in place of p16L1L2 ( Fig . 26 . 1 . 1 ) . p16sheLL does not carry an SV40 ori and is too large to become packaged . Infectious titer yields for p16sheLL - derived stocks are typically at least several - fold lower than for p16L1L2 transfection - derived stocks , but for most applications the reduced titer yield should not be a major impediment . For reasons that are not yet clear , some ex - pression plasmids are more amenable to pack - aging into papillomaviral vectors than oth - ers . In some instances , packaging may be impaired by the cytotoxic effects of high - level over - expression of a gene of interest in the producer 293TT cells . Even for rel - atively nontoxic genes , the plasmid context can affect titer yield . For example , use of pEGFP - N1 ( Clontech ) results in about ten - fold lower GFP - transducing titer yield com - pared to vector stocks made using pCDNA3 . 1 - GFP or pCIneo - GFP . The suitability of a given plasmid for packaging should be tested em - pirically in an initial small - scale transfection - based stock ( Basic Protocol 1 ) . If the infec - tious titer ( Support Protocol 4 ) of stocks made using a particular plasmid of interest is poor , it may be worth considering moving the gene of interest into a different expression plasmid backbone . Plasmids using the human elongation fac - tor 1 - α ( EF1 α ) promoter , for example the GFP expression plasmid pfwB or the L1 - expression plasmid p16L1 - GFP , have gener - ally worked well in our hands . Variants of these EF1 α promoter - based expression plas - mids , such as phGf or pGwf ( see http : / / home . ccr . cancer . gov / Lco / support . htm for maps ) , have been adapted for the Gateway cloning system ( Invitrogen ) . p16L1 - GFP and the Gateway - adapted variants also carry GFP un - der control of the SV40 promoter , which facil - itates titration of the infectivity of the vector stock . 293TT cells rapidly replicate plasmids car - rying the SV40 ori to high copy number in the cell nucleus . In general , it appears that this over - replication only modestly enhances the expression of genes under control of the human cytomegalovirus immediate early pro - moter ( CMV promoter ) . In contrast , most genes under control of the EF1 α promoter ex - hibit a more pronounced dose - response rela - tionship between plasmid copy number and expression level . For some genes , for example HPV16 L1 , expression from the EF1 α pro - moter can yield milligram amounts of protein from a single ﬂask of 293TT cells . If the ul - timate goal is the high - level production of a protein of interest in 293TT cells , the EF1 α promoter is probably a better choice than the CMV promoter . Plasmids lacking the SV40 ori can be pack - aged using direct transfection ( Basic Proto - col 1 ) , but titer yields for SV40 ori - negative plasmids are generally a minimum of 10 - fold lower than comparable plasmids with the SV40 ori . The lack of an SV40 ori also pre - cludes ampliﬁcation of the vector stock ( Basic Protocol 2 ) . Addition of a previously reported minimal SV40 ori ( construct pC139H ; Okuley et al . , 2003 ) to a plasmid of interest effectively enhances conversion of the plasmid into a pa - pillomaviral vector stock . Efﬁcient transfection of 293TT cells during the production of a seed stock is a critical pa - rameter of the production system . In our hands , the transfection reagent Lipofectamine 2000 is reliable , provided the cell density is relatively low at the time of transfection . However , Lipo - fectamine 2000 is very expensive and other , less expensive transfection methods , such as calcium phosphate ( see UNIT 20 . 3 ) or PEI ( see Choi et al . , 2007 ) , can be used to transfect 293TT cells , if cost is of primary concern . A commercial version of the 293TT cell line , known as 293FT , is available from In - vitrogen ( no . R700 - 07 ) . 293FT cells appear to perform reasonably well for production of transfection - derived papillomaviral vector stocks , but for unknown reasons they appear not to perform as well for titration or infectious ampliﬁcation of stocks . The widely available 293T line , on which the 293TT line is based , expresses very low levels of SV40 T antigen ( Fu and Manley , 1987 ) and therefore performs poorly for production of papillomaviral vectors . Papillomaviral vectors can infect cell lines derived from a wide range of tissue types . However , the efﬁciency of infection can vary from line to line within a given tissue type and cell lines should be tested to determine their infectability . Ideally , cell infectability studies should be performed using ﬂow cytometric analysis of cells infected with papillomaviral vectors carrying GFP under control of a strong promoter such as CMV or EF1 α . Production of Papillomavirus - Based Gene Transfer Vectors 26 . 1 . 18 Supplement 37 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Biosafety Like other types of mammalian gene deliv - ery vehicles , there is a risk that papillomaviral vectors could endanger laboratory personnel if handled improperly . Papillomaviral vectors are a relatively new gene delivery technology and have not yet been subjected to controlled in vivo safety testing . One theoretical biosafety risk is that vector - delivered plasmids , or ran - dom fragments of 293TT cell DNA ( see in - troduction to Alternative Protocol 2 ) , might be oncogenic in human cells . Investigators should seek approval from an appropriate in - stitutional biosafety committee ( or compara - ble body within the investigator’s institution ) prior to engaging in the production of viral vectors . It is important to note that papillo - maviruses are thought to be able to withstand a wide range of temperature and pH condi - tions , and remain infectious after desiccation ( Roden et al . , 1997 ) . Thus , environmental ex - posure to papillomaviral vectors may be of greater concern than for other types of viral vectors . An additional potential risk posed by pa - pillomaviral vectors is that the L1 / L2 pack - aging plasmid could , in principle , recombine with 293TT genomic DNA segments encoding SV40 T antigen . Such recombination events could result in the formation of an entirely novel autonomous tumor virus . It is important to note that SV40 T antigen cannot drive efﬁ - cient replication of SV40 ori + DNA in murine cells ( Smith et al . , 2002 ) . It is therefore un - likely that mice would be permissive for in vivo ampliﬁcation of SV40 T antigen - based viruses . Several safety modiﬁcations are currently under development in our laboratory . A 293 cell line carrying a T antigen mutant with di - minished capacity to inactivate the pRb and p53 tumor suppressor genes ( Cooper et al . , 1997 ) may become a useful , theoretically safer , alternative to 293TT cells . The co - propagation of separate L1 and L2 expression plasmids ( together with expression plasmids of interest ) might also be an effective method for reducing the theoretical risk of the de - velopment of recombinant autonomous tumor viruses . Troubleshooting A critical ﬁrst step in the production pro - cess is efﬁcient transfection of the 293TT cells . Production of a GFP - expressing vector stock allows easy ﬂow cytometric or ﬂuorescent mi - croscopic analysis of the transfected vector - producing cells to determine transfection efﬁ - ciency . A minimum of 75 % of the cells should be brightly GFP - positive if the transfection has worked well . The harvested cell pellet should contain enough GFP that it appears green to the naked eye . The initial health of the cells is a critical fac - tor in achieving good transfection efﬁciency . 293TT cultures should not be allowed to be - come conﬂuent or form regions of piled up cells . It is also essential that the cells be pre - plated at a low enough density to be < 50 % conﬂuent at the time of transfection . The optimal dose of vector stock to use for ampliﬁcation can vary substantially . The guidelines given in Basic Protocol 2 should result in a very high multiplicity of infection ( i . e . , many infectious events for each cell in culture ) for a good vector stock . Lower - titer stocks might require a higher dose to ensure that both p16L1L2 and the expression plasmid of interest are co - delivered to a majority of cells in culture . Small - scale tests using 6 - well plates or 25 - cm 2 ﬂasks can be performed to determine optimal stock dose for the ampliﬁ - cation step . The time of harvesting the infected cells can also be varied . Again , such tests are facilitated by the presence of an easily scored reporter gene , such as GFP . Anticipated Results The initial transfection - based production described in Basic Protocol 1 should yield at least 100 µ l of clariﬁed cell lysate with at least 3 × 10 9 GFP - transducing units per ml . The great majority of the infectious titer should be recoverable after puriﬁcation by ultracentrifu - gation or gel ﬁltration , although the puriﬁca - tion may dilute the stock somewhat . The sub - sequent ampliﬁcation of the stock ( Basic Pro - tocol 2 ) should yield at least 300 µ l of clariﬁed lysate with at least 2 × 10 10 GFP - transducing units per ml . Time Considerations 293TT cells can be slow to attach and re - cover after thawing . It may take more than a week to establish the culture at adequate health for efﬁcient transfection . Attempts to incubate 293TT cells with Lipofectamine 2000 / DNA complexes overnight often results in unacceptable levels of cytotoxicity . It takes some planning to accomplish the 6 - hr incubation of the cells with the lipid / DNA complexes , as suggested in Basic Protocol 1 , during an 8 - hr workday . Viruses 26 . 1 . 19 Current Protocols in Cell Biology Supplement 37 Basic Protocols 1 and 2 can be performed in series and still accommodate weekends , pro - vided the procedure is begun on a Monday and the feeding step for the infected ampliﬁcation culture ( Basic Protocol 2 , step 3 ) is omitted . From start to ﬁnish ( including titration of the ampliﬁed stock ) the two protocols take 10 days to accomplish in series . Although crude cell lysates should not be frozen prior to maturation ( see notes for step 21 of Basic Protocol 1 ) , clariﬁed crude vector stocks withstand freeze - thaw well . This rep - resents a reasonable stopping point prior to puriﬁcation of the stock . With some advance planning , it is possible to perform Optiprep puriﬁcation ( Support Protocol 1 ) in a single day . The infectious entry process for papillo - maviruses is quite slow and asynchronous compared to many other virus types . For most cell types , harvesting the titration ( Support Protocol 5 ) 3 days post - infection results in higher apparent titers . Support Protocol 5 sug - gests a shorter 48 hr period of incubation pri - marily in the interest of saving time . Literature Cited Buck , C . B . , Pastrana , D . V . , Lowy , D . R . , and Schiller , J . T . 2004 . Efﬁcient intracellular assem - bly of papillomaviral vectors . J . Virol . 78 : 751 - 757 . Buck , C . B . , Thompson , C . D . , Pang , Y . Y . , Lowy , D . R . , and Schiller , J . T . 2005 . Maturation of pa - pillomavirus capsids . J . Virol . 79 : 2839 - 2846 . Buck , C . B . , Thompson , C . D . , Roberts , J . N . , Muller , M . , Lowy , D . R . , and Schiller , J . T . 2006 . Car - rageenan is a potent inhibitor of papillomavirus infection . PLoS Pathog . 2 : e69 . Buck , C . B . , Cheng , N . , Thompson , C . D . , Lowy , D . R . , Steven , A . C . , Schiller , J . T . , and Trus , B . L . Arrangement of L2 within the papillomavirus capsid . Submitted for publication . Choi , V . W . , Asokan , A . , Haberman , R . D . , and Samulski , R . J . 2007 . Production of recombinant adeno - associated viral vectors for in vitro and in vivo use . Curr . Protoc . Mol . Biol . 78 : 16 . 25 . 1 - 16 . 25 . 24 . Cooper , M . J . , Lippa , M . , Payne , J . M . , Hatzivassil - iou , G . , Reifenberg , E . , Fayazi , B . , Perales , J . C . , Morrison , L . J . , Templeton , D . , Piekarz , R . L . , et al . 1997 . Safety - modiﬁed episomal vectors for human gene therapy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 94 : 6450 - 6455 . Fu , X . Y . and Manley , J . L . 1987 . Factors inﬂuencing alternative splice site utilization in vivo . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 : 738 - 748 . Leder , C . , Kleinschmidt , J . A . , Wiethe , C . , and Muller , M . 2001 . Enhancement of capsid gene expression : preparing the human papillomavirus type 16 major structural gene L1 for DNA vac - cination purposes . J . Virol . 75 : 9201 - 9209 . Okuley , S . , Call , M . , Mitchell , T . , Hu , B . , and Woodworth , M . E . 2003 . Relationship among location of T - antigen - induced DNA distortion , auxiliary sequences , and DNA replication efﬁ - ciency . J . Virol . 77 : 10651 - 10657 . Roberts , J . N . , Buck , C . B . , Thompson , C . D . , Kines , R . , Bernardo , M . , Choyke , P . L . , Lowy , D . R . , and Schiller , J . T . 2007 . Genital transmission of HPV in a mouse model is potentiated by nonoxynol - 9 and inhibited by carrageenan . Nat . Med . ( in press ) . Roden , R . B . , Lowy , D . R . , and Schiller , J . T . 1997 . Papillomavirus is resistant to desiccation . J . In - fect . Dis . 176 : 1076 - 1079 . Shi , L . , Sanyal , G . , Ni , A . , Luo , Z . , Doshna , S . , Wang , B . , Graham , T . L . , Wang , N . , and Volkin , D . B . 2005 . Stabilization of human papil - lomavirus virus - like particles by non - ionic sur - factants . J . Pharm . Sci . 94 : 1538 - 1551 . Smith , R . W . , Steffen , C . , Grosse , F . , and Nasheuer , H . P . 2002 . Species speciﬁcity of simian virus 40 DNA replication in vitro requires multiple functions of human DNA polymerase alpha . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 20541 - 20548 . Voytas , D . 2000 . Agarose gel electrophoresis . Curr . Protoc . Mol . Biol . 51 : 2 . 5A . 1 - 2 . 5A . 9 . Internet Resources http : / / home . ccr . cancer . gov / LCO / The Laboratory of Cellular Oncology maintains this website listing plasmid maps and pseudovirus - related technical protocols . http : / / www . axis - shield . com / densityhome / density / dapp . htm Axis - Shield offers a useful handbook containing information about the use of Optiprep . http : / / www . invitrogen . com / content / sfs / productnotes / F 051025 MammalianExpressionVectors - TS - TL - MKT - HL . pdf Invitrogen offers a brochure comparing various commonly - used mammalian promoters . http : / / www . cdc . gov / od / ohs / pdfﬁles / 4th % 20BMBL . pdf The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s handbook entitled “Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories” discusses proce - dures for the handling of biohazardous substances .