1 Reference as : Mora , M . , Phillips - Wren , G . , Wang , F . and Gelman , O . ( 2014 ) . An Integrative Evaluation Framework for Determining the Value of Group Decision Support Systems . Engineering Management Journal , 26 ( 2 ) : 24 - 38 . · An Integrative Evaluation Framework for Determining the Value of Group Decision Support Systems Manuel Mora , Autonomous University of Aguascalientes , Mexico Gloria Phillips - Wren , Loyola University Maryland , USA Fen Wang , Central Washington University , USA Ovsei Gelman , Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico , Mexico Abstract : Group - based decision - making situations are relevant to Engineering Management practice . To assist group decision making , specialized computer - based tools called Group Decision Support Systems ( GDSS ) have been promoted since the late 1980s . Nevertheless , a review of the extensive research on GDSS design and evaluation reveals that an integrated framework is not available to evaluate the decision - making value of a specific GDSS . This article proposes a GDSS evaluation framework by considering the process of , and outcomes from , decision making together with the technical capabilities needed to provide them . The framework is implemented with an Analytic Hierarchy Process ( AHP ) model , and its utilization is illustrated with the evaluation of three real GDSS applications . This integrative GDSS - value evaluation framework can be used by engineering managers as a tool to determine the overall decision - making value from an existing or projected GDSS with the aim of selecting the most adequate GDSS for a particular Engineering Management group - based decision - making situation . Keywords : GDSS evaluation , McGrath’s model , Analytic Hierarchy Process ( AHP ) , Engineering Management , group decision support system EMJ Focus Areas : Information Technology , Quantitative Methods and Models , Concurrent Engineering and Teams , Systems Engineering Introduction According to Kotnour and Farr ( 2005 , p . 17 ) , Engineering Management is defined by IEEE ( 1990 ) as “… the discipline addressed to making and implementing decisions for strategic and operational leadership in current and emerging technologies and their impacts on interrelated systems ” . Similarly Rouse and Compton ( 2009 ) establish that Systems Engineering and Management , a foundation discipline for Engineering Management , provides a set of methods and tools for efficient design and effective use of human - machine systems . Such systems include management decision - making methods and decision support systems . Engineering Management decisions can be made by a single decision maker ( Huber , 1981 ) or by groups or teams ( Huber , 1984b ) . In particular , a decision group is “ two or more people who are jointly responsible for detecting a problem , elaborating on the nature of the problem , generating possible solutions , evaluating potential solutions , or formulating strategies for implementing solutions ” ( DeSanctis and Gallupe , 1987 , p . 590 ) . A group faces additional challenges compared to a single decision maker such as considering the views of multiple people and developing consensus . For example , group - based decision situations within Engineering Management practice in business and governmental settings include : the selection of cargo handlers for military operations ( Bard and Sousk , 1990 ) ; the planning and selection of organizational actions for natural disasters ( Belardo and Harrald , 1992 ) ; the value management rating in Civil Engineering projects ( Sánchez et al . , 2005 ) ; the evaluation of the conceptual design of aerospace vehicles ( Unal et al . , 2005 ) ; determination of support value for management workshops in the construction industry ( Fan , Shen and Kelly , 2008 ) ; R & D project expert selection ( Sun et al . , 2008 ) ; support for 2 multi - facility location problems ( Bashiri and Hosseininezhad , 2009 ) ; information technology project selection ( Zandi and Tavana , 2010 ) ; and development of new electronic products ( Lu et al . , 2011 ) . In all of these examples , adequate group decision - making processes are needed to achieve expected outcomes and avoid wasting valuable organizational , economic and materials resources resulting from incorrect group decisions . Poor quality organizational group decisions can result in negative organizational outcomes such as financial loses , corporate image deterioration , competitive weakness , cancellation of contracts , reduction of shared market , and possible damages to third parties ( e . g . ecological disasters ) ( Huber , 1984a ) . Consequently , group - based decision - making situations are relevant concerns for Engineering Management practice along with the concurrent design , evaluation and selection of tools which support efficient and effective group decision - making processes . One of the tools promoted in the Information Systems area since the 1980s ( Huber , 1984b ; DeSanctis and Gallupe , 1985 ) to aid decision making for groups is Group Decision Support Systems ( GDSS ) . In the case of a single decision maker , Decision Support Systems ( DSS ) support individual decision makers ( Huber , 1981 ) . GDSS have been defined as : interactive computer - based systems that combine communication , computer , and decision technologies to support unstructured problem formulation and solution in group decision - related meetings ( DeSanctis and Gallupe , 1987 , p . 589 ) . The primary purpose of GDSS is to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of a decision team by providing collaborative support such as interactive retrieval , sharing , and use of information between decision group participants , and between them and the system ( Huber , 1984b ; DeSanctis and Gallupe , 1987 ) . GDSS are developed under the premise that the collective intelligence of a team outperforms an individual in complex decisional tasks when the group is effectively supported ( Huber , 1984b ) . With adequate support , negative group effects such as monolithic rather creative groupthink , dominance of high status participants , null participation of low status stakeholders , group miscommunication , and scarcity of time available for sufficient exploration of alternatives are minimized ( Kraemer and King , 1986 ) . In contrast , with adequate support , positive effects such as team creativity , knowledge co - creation , process efficiency , team learning , team satisfaction , and better decision quality are expected ( Limayem , Banerjee and Ma , 2006 ) . However , decision making by groups is more difficult to support using computerized tools compared to individual decision makers . For example , a GDSS has multiple - users / multiple - models while a DSS has a single - user / single - model ( Sage , 1991 ) . A GDSS faces group performance / satisfaction trade - offs that are not present in a DSS ( DeSanctis and Gallupe , 1987 ) . A GDSS is framed for an implicit political - competitive decision - making process model , while a rational - alike model is commonly used in a DSS ( Huber , 1981 ) . A GDSS must allow the co - existence of different perceptions of data , context and uncertainties that are not present in a DSS ( Barkhi , 2001 - 2002 ; French , 2007 ) . A GDSS requires treating group coordination , sense - making and convergent understanding of the problem that is minimized or lacking for an individual decision maker using a DSS ( Gray et al . , 2011 ) . A GDSS may accommodate different structures based on the physical location of participants ( same room or different room ) , the size of decision group ( small or large ) , and the concurrency of the session ( synchronous or asynchronous ) ( DeSanctis and Gallupe , 1987 ) . An additional difficulty for GDSS is the lack of a standardized and systematic group - based decision - making process ( McGrath , 1984 ; French 2007 ) . In contrast , for individual decision makers using a DSS , there are several well - recognized decision - making process models primarily based on Simon’s seminal process of three phases : Intelligence , Design and Choice ( Simon , 1961 , 1997 ) . Due to these factors , evaluation of GDSS design and GDSS value are more difficult than that for DSS , possibly explaining the few integrative design and value evaluation frameworks proposed for GDSS ( Huber , 1984b ; Jelassi and Beauclair , 1987 ; Gray and Mandviwalla , 1999 ) . In contrast , non - integrative GDSS design and value evaluation frameworks are more abundant in the literature ( Limayem et al . , 2006 ) . These studies have been primarily focused on decision - making value rather than design issues by proposing a variety of group decision performance metrics ( Stevens and Finlay , 1996 ; Fjermestad and Hiltz , 1998 - 99 , 2000 - 01 ) . Performance metrics have been grouped as metrics regarding process efficiency , process consensus , process satisfaction , process effectiveness , and system usability ( Fjermestad and Hiltz , 1998 - 99 , 2000 - 01 ) . Other authors ( Stevens and Finlay , 1996 ) have also grouped the performance metrics as substantive outcomes ( individual and organizational ) and process performance indicators . However , the literature has not provided an integrative GDSS design and value evaluation framework that includes both GDSS user and designer concerns . Furthermore , a standardized group - based decision - making process model derived from the main GDSS evaluation frameworks has not been reported . With this situation , GDSS designers are faced with disperse literature to select suitable design building - blocks to be included in the projected GDSS . Similarly , GDSS users / implementers interested in determining the expected value provided by the system are faced with partial viewpoints that do not link design characteristics with process - outcomes issues . In contrast , several design and value frameworks have been reported for DSS ( Sprague , 1980 ; Sage , 1981 ; Huber , 1981 ; Phillips - Wren , Hahn and Forgionne , 2004 ; Mora et al . , 2005 ; Phillips - Wren et al . , 2009 ) . In particular , 3 the last two frameworks are integrative by combining the criteria from a user viewpoint ( Forgionne , 1999 ; 2000 ; Phillips - Wren et al . , 2004 ) with the criteria from a design engineering viewpoint ( Mora et al . , 2005 ) . The user’s viewpoint concerns the expected or achieved impacts on the decision - making process and outcomes . A design engineering viewpoint concerns the services , the architectural capabilities and the computational mechanisms projected or existent in the system . With an integrative view , DSS designers and users can evaluate the designs and value of two or more projected or existent DSS applications to determine their best architectural design ( an à priori evaluation ) , or their provided value ( an à posteriori evaluation ) , through the evaluation of their impacts on decision - making process and outcomes . In this article , an integrative GDSS value evaluation framework is proposed that considers the concerns of both GDSS users and designers . Outcomes from a group - based decision can be evaluated similarly to individual decisions through a single effectiveness criterion ( e . g . achievement of the goal ) or through multiple criteria ( e . g . group performance , organizational effectiveness and organizational efficiency ) ( Stevens and Finlay , 1996 ) . The group - based decision - making process can be also evaluated by objective metrics ( e . g . average time for reaching consensus , number of generated feasible alternatives , among others ) and socio - political considerations ( e . g . members’ satisfaction and support of the group decision , among others ( Turoff and Hiltz , 1982 ) . In turn , design engineering issues can be associated with GDSS services , architectural capabilities , and computational mechanisms similar to DSS design engineering issues . This article proposes a GDSS evaluation framework by integrating the dispersed foundational research on GDSS design and evaluation . A Conceptual Design Research method is used ( March and Smith , 1995 ; Hevner et al . , 2004 ) . The model is implemented with an Analytic Hierarchy Process ( AHP ) model ( Saaty , 1990 ; 1994 ) , and its utilization is illustrated with evaluation of three real GDSS applications . This integrative framework can be used by engineering managers as a tool to compare the overall value of existing or projected GDSS with the ultimate aim of selecting the most adequate GDSS for the decision problem . Also , engineering managers coordinating a GDSS development project can use this framework to make design decisions . The remainder of this article continues with a brief description of the Conceptual Design Research method . Next , we report the integrative GDSS value evaluation framework and illustrative applications . Finally , this article presents a discussion of implications for GDSS designers and users , recommendations for further research , and limitations of this study . Research Methodology This research uses a Conceptual Design Research method ( March and Smith , 1995 ; Hevner et al . , 2004 ) based on three criteria : ( i ) it provides a framework to elaborate a new conceptual or physical artifact through a systematic research process ; ( ii ) it is adequate to treat the complex conceptual components to be analyzed and synthesized ; and ( iii ) it responds to recommendations and critiques from GDSS research pioneers ( Gray and Mandviwalla , 1999 ) on the need to conduct GDSS research with an engineering perspective . A Conceptual Design Research method provides principles that can be used to organize existing knowledge on group decision - making processes and their associated GDSS design and evaluation frameworks . In few words , Conceptual Design Research is a research method useful for building / designing and evaluating non - trivial , non - naturally available , and non - existent artifacts needed for human beings ( March and Smith , 1995 ) . Design Research artifacts can be : constructs , models , methods , or system instantiations ( Hevner et al . , 2004 ) . Build activity responds to the general inquiry : is it feasible to build an artifact X by using a design approach Y ? , and evaluate activity responds to the inquiry : does the artifact X fulfill the design range of a set M of expected metrics ? . The Conceptual Design Research steps used in this research were : Knowledge Gap Identification , Methodological Knowledge Selection , Conceptual Design , Design Data Collecting , and Analysis and Synthesis . In the Knowledge Gap Identification step are defined the research objectives which guide the research , the knowledge gaps which motivate the research , and the conceptual units of study ( e . g . selected research articles to be analyzed ) . In Methodological Knowledge Selection step an exploratory or full design purpose is confirmed , and the type of design method ( heuristic , analytic or axiomatic ) is defined . In the Conceptual Design step , the core designed artifact is elaborated through an iterative heuristic , analytic or axiomatic design method . In the Design Data Collecting step , initial validity evaluations are conducted ( comparisons with related competitive designs , face validity tests , conceptual what - if analysis ) . Finally , in the Analysis and Synthesis step are derived the contributions from the conceptual designed artifact . It is realized through analysis ( direct insights ) and synthesis ( emergent insights ) of findings derivable from the designed conceptual artifact . In this research , the five aforementioned steps have been used to elaborate the integrative GDSS value evaluation framework . This framework includes as an intermediate result a standardized group - based decision - 4 making process model . An additional product of this integrative framework is its implementation with the Analytic Hierarchy Process ( AHP ) ( Saaty , 1990 ; 1994 ) . AHP is a multiple attribute decision method that provides a quantitative evaluation of a set of alternatives using a value structure defined by the user ( Saaty , 1990 ; 1994 ) . The value structure is a hierarchy with a single goal in the top level , with one or more sub - levels containing criteria ( that might be weighted ) as determined by the user . Hence , the structure reflects the judgment of the user as to the goal , sub - goals , and criteria of importance along with their relative importance . The contributions of each criterion in each level toward the criteria in the next upper level are computed on comparative paired judgments between alternatives entered by the user at the lowest level . Alternatives ( in our case alternative GDSS applications ) are compared using qualitative judgments that are mapped to quantitative data . Each comparative assessment uses a ratio scale from 1 to 9 where the values 1 , 3 , 5 , 7 and 9 correspond to : equal , moderate , strong , very strong and extreme importance for an alternative X versus an alternative Y regarding its contribution to the specific upper level criterion Z on the lowest level . The values 2 , 4 , 6 and 8 are for intermediate values . A consistency ratio ( CR ) is calculated for judgments across all pair - wise comparisons of alternatives ( Alonso and Lamata , 2006 ) . It is expected that this value will be small ( no greater than 0 . 10 ) . If the CR value is less than 0 . 10 , adequate consistency is achieved between comparisons . If the CR value is greater than 0 . 10 , pairwised comparisons need to be adjusted . Several AHP evaluation frameworks have been reported for DSS ( Phillips - Wren et al . , 2004 ; 2009 ) as well as for other type of systems ( Ngai and Chan , 2005 ) . Elaboration of an Integrative GDSS Value Evaluation Framework A Standardized Group - based Decision - Making Process Exhibit 1 shows the 20 GDSS research articles that were selected as units of study . These studies were selected based on Pervan’s study ( 1998 ) by any of the following criteria : ( i ) the paper is widely cited ( e . g . at least 50 scholarly citations using Google scholar ) ; ( ii ) the paper summarizes GDSS research focused on design issues as reported by leaders in the field ; and / or ( iii ) the paper reports innovative GDSS design issues . The papers are grouped additionally by GDSS foundations , GDSS with a political - negotiation view , GDSS survey studies , and GDSS innovations . Exhibit 1 . Seminal GDSS Research Studies Used to Develop an Integrative Group Decision - making Process ID GDSS Study Article Selection Criteria i ii iii Studies on GDSS Foundations 1 Sage ( 1981 ) 200 + citations YES - 2 Huber ( 1984b ) 400 + citations - - 3 DeSanctis and Gallupe ( 1985 ) 200 + citations - - 4 DeSanctis et al . ( 2008 ) - YES - Studies on GDSS Political Viewpoints 5 McGrath and Kravitz ( 1982 ) 100 + citations - - 6 McGrath ( 1984 ) 2 , 000 + citations - - 7 Straus and McGrath ( 1994 ) 500 + citations - - 8 Straus ( 1999 ) 50 + citations YES - 9 DeSanctis and Gallupe ( 1987 ) 1 , 800 + citations - - Studies on GDSS Surveys 10 Fjermestad and Hiltz ( 1998 - 1999 ) 600 + citations YES - 11 Fjermestad and Hiltz ( 2000 - 2001 ) 200 + citations YES 12 Dennis et al . ( 1998 ) 600 + citations YES - 13 Nunamaker et al . ( 1996 - 97 ) 500 + citations YES - 14 Sage ( 1991 ) - YES - Studies on GDSS Design Issues 15 Gray and Mandviwalla ( 1999 ) - YES YES 16 Briggs , de Vreede and Nunamaker ( 2003 ) 300 + citations - YES 17 He , Song and Zhao ( 2003 ) - - YES 18 Aken ( 2006 ) - - YES 5 19 Wu , Zhou and Yu ( 2008 ) - - YES 20 Rosanty , Dahlan and Hussin ( 2012 ) - - YES Space limits preclude reporting a detailed analysis of these 20 articles ( available upon request to the authors ) . However , these 20 selected papers provide comprehensive and primary literature useful to elaborate an integrative GDSS value evaluation framework . The analysis of these core units of study produced four categories of design parameters : DP . 1 GDSS process , DP . 2 GDSS functions , DP . 3 GDSS mechanisms , and DP . 4 GDSS attributes . Three core design effects were also identified as follows : transformation of a GDSS process , transformation of GDSS capabilities , and transformation of both GDSS process and capabilities . Exhibit 2 shows the list of the four identified design parameters ( DP . 1 to DP . 4 ) with their respective parameter values and their identified core design effects . Exhibit 2 : GDSS Design Parameters DESIGN PARAMETER TYPE OF DESIGN EFFECT DP . 1 GDSS Process On GDSS Process Values for DP . 1 v1 = { Formulation ( determination of needs and restrictions , determination of objectives and metrics , determination of courses of action ) ; Analysis ( determination of impacts , adjustment of parameters ) ; Interpretation ( evaluation of courses of action , agreements and commitments on selected decision ( s ) ) } v2 = { Problem Sensing , Problem Exploration , Problem Definition , Criterion and Constraint Identification , Proposal Generation , Proposal Evaluation , Choice , Implementation , and Performance Evaluation } v3 = { idea generation , participation , decision making , conflict management , influence and process management } v4 = { Generate Phase ( task 1 : planning , task 2 : creativity actions ) ; ( ii ) Choose Phase ( task 3 : intellective actions ; task 4 : preference actions ) ; ( iii ) Negotiate Phase ( task 5 : cognitive - conflict actions ; task 6 : mixed - motive actions ) ; and ( iv ) Execute Phase ( task 7 : competitive task ; task 8 : non - competitive tasks ) } v5 = { Generate Phase ( task 1 : planning , task 2 : creativity actions ) ; Choose Phase ( task 3 : intellective actions ; task 4 : preference actions ) ; Negotiate Phase ( task 5 : cognitive - conflict actions ; task 6 : mixed - motive actions ) } v6 = { session planning ; idea generation ; idea organization ; evaluation ; issue exploration ; knowledge preservation } v7 = { generate basic alternatives , evaluate the alternatives regarding decision criteria , assess uncertainty on individual preferences , aggregate individual preferences for a group outcome , ends when the consensus is high ( a minimal value is prefixed ) or start negotiations and return to previous steps } v8 = { Identification ( recognition , diagnosis ) , Development ( design OR search and screen ) , and Selection ( judgment OR analysis OR bargaining ) } v9 = { gathering of group opinions on a specific decision problem , analysis of consistency of opinions , test the agreed assembly rule , assembling group decision when rule is satisfied and ends , or return to previous steps in negative case } v10 = { problem definition and data collection , repeat AHP performance evaluation until a satisfactory consistency index , conduct fuzzy evaluation of alternatives , get overall ranking of alternatives , aggregate preferences using Social Choice methods , report final outcome } DESIGN PARAMETER TYPE OF DESIGN EFFECT DP . 2 GDSS Functions On GDSS Capabilities and Processes Values for DP . 2 v1 = { information retrieval / generation , information sharing , information use } v2 = { information communication , information deliberation , information access , negotiation and coordination } v3 = { information retrieval , sharing and negotiation , and use and judgment tasks } v4 = { thinkLets ( divergence , convergence , organization , evaluation , consensus ) } DESIGN PARAMETER TYPE OF DESIGN EFFECT DP . 3 GDSS Mechanisms On GDSS Capabilities Values for DP . 3 v1 = { agenda , ideas gathering / brainstorming , idea evaluation , decision aids , meeting thoughts , and utilities } v2 = { level 1 , level 2 , level 3 } v3 = { electronic board system , voting , ranking , issue organizer , idea generator , agenda , split / divide screen , 6 brain - writing , group outliner , MCDM , AHP , topic commenter , group writer , questions } v4 = { brainstorming , delphi , nominal group , voting , alternative evaluator } v5 = { collaborative writing , electronic polling ( voting ) , MCDM ( weight - based methods ) } v6 = { session director , brain - writing , nominal group technique , Delphi , police formation , topic commenter , assumption surfacing , voting , alternative evaluator , issue analyzer } DESIGN PARAMETER TYPE OF DESIGN EFFECT DP . 4 GDSS Attributes On GDSS Capabilities v1 = { modular , with a consistent user interface , structured , flexible , and with data portability } v2 = { visual decision making – packaging , new analytic methods based on diagrams and pictorial representations , integration with video and computer conferencing , and expert system ( s ) as the n + 1st meeting participant } By applying an iterative heuristic design process the two first authors developed the artifact [ ART . 1 ] : a high level Group - based Decision - making model . This iterative design applied the design parameters DP . 1 and DP . 2 several times on an previously reported generic decision - making process for individual decision makers identified here as artifact [ ART . 0 ] ( Mora et al . , 2005 ) . Each transformation was analyzed to be logically congruent by the first two authors . The third and fourth authors of this article realized an additional verification for its logical congruence . Under inconsistencies , an overall agreement was realized by the four authors . An additional external validation of an earlier version of the artifact [ ART . 1 ] was presented to several recognized GDSS international researchers . We collected recommendations and critiques from six of the nine contacted GDSS experts . Their expert opinions are included in this article . Exhibit 3 reports the results of the second design iterative transformation . The most critical values considered were : { v3 , v6 , v8 , and v4 } for design parameter DP . 1 , and { v4 and v1 } for design parameter DP . 2 . The first parameter values account for a shared group - based decision - making process model , from a group problem recognition activity to a group decision activity . The second set of parameter values accounts for core functionalities expected in a GDSS . In particular , the concept of a thinkLet ( Briggs , de Vreede and Nunamaker , 2003 ) is used to provide structure and guidelines on how the group decision - making process can be conducted and supported by a GDSS . A thinkLet ( Briggs et al . , 2003 ) is a script based on best practices of well - trained facilitators in the use of a technology ( tool ) that has the following characteristics : a specific goal , a set of steps to be followed for reaching these goals , and a specified configuration of the technology ( e . g . in the case of GDSS , a list of specific capabilities ) . These authors ( idem , 2003 ) identified 5 types of thinkLets from GDSS facilitators : ( i ) for divergence of concepts ( moving from few to more concepts ) ; ( ii ) for convergence of concepts ( moving from more to few or one unique concept ) ; ( iii ) for organization of concepts ( moving from a not well - understood situation to a better understood situation ) ; ( iv ) for evaluation of concepts ( moving from not known and understood consequences of actions to known and better understood consequences ) ; and ( v ) for building of consensus ( moving from low to high or minimal expected level of agreement ) . From this conceptual artifact [ ART . 1 ] ( e . g . the high - level group - based decision - making process ) , a next [ ART . 2 ] conceptual artifact emerged after a further analysis on the structure of phases , activities and their logical interactions . This conceptual artifact [ ART . 2 ] is reported in Exhibit 4 . Its description proceeds as follows :  GROUP AGENDA ELABORATION PHASE : This phase shares with the Intelligence phase of an individual decision - making process the purpose of finding the main elements that a decision team accepts for analysis in the next phase . In groups , the next phase could involve different paths . Two sets of thinkLets are posed : ( i ) thinkLets for guiding the group to the acknowledgement of a problematic situation which must be addressed by the group ; and ( ii ) thinkLets for guiding the group to a highly valued set of relevant issues to be considered in the decision problem ( i . e . goals , solutions , pieces of solutions , restrictions , resources , and so on , which can be still misclassified ) .  GROUP NEGOTIATION PHASE : In this phase a GDSS must provide suitable functionalities so that inherent discussions caused by conflicts of cognition ( i . e . differences on mindsets of decision makers ) or of interest / motive ( i . e . differences on the affectation and benefits of involved parties ) can be mediated effectively and efficiently . Resolving a conflict should be a highly valued outcome as well as a definitive of decision schemes to be evaluated . For conflict resolution , we pose two sets of thinkLets : ( i ) thinkLets for the group to organize relevant issues previously identified ; and ( ii ) thinkLets for conducting required negotiations within the group . This phase is proposed to be realized before the group performs group 7 evaluations , but it may also be realized after such activity , especially when conflicts and disagreements still exist or emerge in the evaluation phase .  GROUP EVALUATION PHASE : In this phase a GDSS assists in finding the right answer to analytic problems ( i . e . McGrath’s intellective tasks ) , or the best team - preferred course of action when there is not a unique right response ( i . e . McGrath’s preference tasks ) . Thus , an effective and efficient GDSS must provide procedures to solve ( i . e . optimize ) or resolve ( i . e . satisfy ) a group decision situation . In this phase , an initial highly valued outcome is either an optimal analytic response or a non - optimal but acceptable solution . We suggest two types of thinkLets : ( i ) thinkLets for achieving the establishment of group preferences : and ( ii ) thinkLets for supporting the group toward an analytic solution . After this phase , group negotiations might be still required . In this case , the previous phase and this one must be repeated until a satisfactory set of solutions can be reached within timely and economically - based restrictions . 8 Exhibit 3 : A High - level Group - decision Making Process [ ART . 0 ] A Generic Decision - Making Process [ ART . 0 ]  { DP . 1 , DP . 2 }  [ ART . 1 ] Iteration 1 [ ART . 1 ]  { DP . 1 , DP . 2 }  [ ART . 2 ] Iteration 2 I n t e lli g e n ce Problem Detection I n f o r m a t i o n re t r i e va l a nd p l a nn i n g Problem Sensing GROUP AGENDA ELABORATION PHASE PROBLEM RECOGNITION THINKLETS Data Gathering Problem Exploration IDEAS GENERATION THINKLETS Problem Formulation Problem Identification D e s i g n Model Classification I n f o r m a t i o n s h a r i n g a nd n e go t i a t i o n Criterion and Constraint Identification GROUP NEGOTIATION PHASE IDEAS ORGANIZATION THINKLETS Model Building Proposal Generation IDEAS NEGOTIATION THINKLETS Model Validation - C h o i ce Evaluation I n f o r m a t i o n u s e a nd j ud g m e n t Proposal Evaluation GROUP EVALUATION PHASE IDEAS PREFERENCES THINKLETS Sensitivity Analysis - Selection Choice IDEAS EVALUATIONS THINKLETS I m p l e m e n t a t i o n Results Presentation - Decision Implementation GROUP DECISION IMPLEMENTATION PHASE IMPLEMENTATION THINKLETS Task Planning - Task Monitoring - L e a r n i n g Outcome - Process Analysis - Performance Evaluation KNOWLEDGE PRESERVATION THINKLETS Outcome - Process Synthesis - - - Group Coordination Group Session Planning GROUP COORDINATION PHASE GROUP SESSION PLANNING Group Session Control GROUP SESSION GUIDANCE Group Session Closing GROUP SESSION CLOSING 9 Exhibit 4 : A Standardized Group - based Decision - making Process 10  IMPLEMENTATION AND KNOWLEDGE PRESERVATION PHASE : In this phase ( taken from extended decision - making processes for individuals ) groups can develop competitive or non - competitive realization actions ( McGrath , 1984 ) . In the first case , implementation acts are the co - responsibility of the team , and the availability of resources is assigned by organizational contest . In the second case , implementation acts are also the co - responsibility of a team , but resources are already assigned . Both actions are mapped in this research with implementation actions . Additionally , we consider that a GDSS must support the notion of decision tracking via learning tasks . Consequently , we pose the following thinkLets : ( i ) thinkLets for supporting the group on monitoring implemented decisions ; and ( ii ) thinkLets to help the group to preserve and re - use the gained group decision knowledge .  GROUP COORDINATION PHASE : This phase is added to the four initial phases reported in Exhibit 6 . In contrast to a linear decision - making process for individuals , in the group decision - making process model , a group control activity is suggested . This central task is permanent from the start to the end of the group decision - making process . While that some group decisions may require only one iteration from phase I to IV , more complex and conflictive group decision situation might demand several iterations . In this phase , three activities were identified : one for planning the group session , one for carrying the control over the four group decision phases , and one more for formally closing the group session . Furthermore , this phase is responsible for : ( i ) the distribution of selected and agreed tasks by the group , and ( ii ) and the provision of GDSS tools for supporting the information access , communication , deliberation and integration . Hence , this integrative high - level group decision - making process poses the consideration of two types of tasks : ( i ) four core activities for making a group decision , and ( ii ) one coordination activity . It is expected that both types of activities can be supported by information technology mechanisms included in the GDSS Analysis of GDSS Mechanisms The analysis of the DP . 3 GDSS mechanisms identified 11 categories of mechanisms . Most GDSS mechanisms are reported for Level 1 ( communication tasks ) rather than Level 2 ( core evaluation and choice tasks ) . This suggests a bias of GDSS studies toward utilization for communication and negotiation rather than structured or semi - structured decisional process as seen for single users . Exhibit 5 maps the 11 categories of GDSS mechanisms to the specific GDSS phases and activities for transforming the artifact [ ART . 2 ] to the final artifact [ ART . 3 ] . It is important to note the following issues : ( i ) all phases and activities need support for retrieval , communication and negotiation purposes ; ( ii ) evaluation and judgment support is required only for some activities ; ( iii ) choice and evaluation activities are reported in two mutually exclusive paths ( either group evaluation task for situations where an analytical model can be elaborated and agreed upon , or a group preferences task for more conflictive situations where simple voting or ranking mechanism is a better method ) ; and ( iv ) new mechanisms for tracking implemented decisions and preserving gained knowledge are also suggested . The Integrative GDSS Value Evaluation Framework and its Implementation on the AHP Model In Exhibit 6 , the Integrative GDSS Value Evaluation Framework is shown . This framework includes the group - based decision - making process reported in Exhibit 4 . This framework ( Exhibit 6 ) is implemented by using an Analytic Hierarchy Process model with five levels that permit a multi - attribute evaluation of GDSS . In the first level there is a single decision goal : the GDSS overall provided value . In the second level ( GDSS contributions ) there are four criteria : process satisfaction , process performance , outcome satisfaction and outcome performance . In the third level ( GDSS phases ) there are four criteria : agenda , negotiation , evaluation and implementation . In the fourth level there are two criteria : information retrieval , communication and negotiation services , and judgment and evaluation services . Finally , in the fifth level ( GDSS mechanisms ) there are four criteria : mechanisms A to mechanisms D . Mechanisms A include agenda writer , idea generator and idea organizer . They can be considered as mechanisms of information retrieval and communication or Mechanisms for Agenda phase . Mechanisms B include electronic board systems , shared editor , NGT tool and topic commenter . They can be considered as mechanisms of negotiation or Mechanisms for Negotiation phase . Mechanisms C include Delphi and voting - ranking tools . They are mechanisms focused on judgment tasks . Thus , they are labeled as Mechanisms for Judgment . Lastly mechanisms D include MADM / AHP and simulation tools . They are focused on quantitative evaluations , and they are labeled as Mechanisms for Evaluation . These five levels constitute the value hierarchy in an AHP model . The additional last level accounts for the specific alternatives to be evaluated : the GDSS tools . 11 Exhibit 5 : Mechanisms for Information Retrieval , Communication and Negotiation , Evaluation and Judgment in GDSS [ ART . 2 ]  { DP . 3 , DP . 4 }  [ ART . 3 ] P H A S E ACTIVITY GDSS Mechanisms for Information Retrieval , Communication and Negotiation GDSS Support Services GDSS Mechanisms for Evaluation and Judgment GDSS Support Services GDSS MECH A GDSS MECH B GDSS MECH C GDSS MECH D A G E NDA W R I TE R … I D E A G E N E RA T O R … I D E A O R G AN I ZE R / CA TE GO R I ZE R ELE C T R O N I C B O ARD S Y S TE M S H AR E D E D I T O R … N O M I NA L G R O U P TE C H N I Q U E T OO L T O P I C C O MM E N TE R D EL P H I T OO L V O T I N G T OO L / RAN K I N G … M AD M / A H P T OO L S S I M U L A T I O N T OO L S G R O U P A G E NDA GROUP PROBLEM RECOGNITION THINKLETS █ █ █ █ - - - - - - - GROUP IDEAS GENERATION THINKLETS - █ █ █ - - - - - - - G R O U P N E GO T . GROUP IDEAS ORGANIZATION THINKLETS - - █ █ █ █ █ - - - - GROUP IDEAS NEGOTIATION THINKLETS - - - █ █ █ █ - - - - G R O U P E VA L . GROUP PREFENCES THINKLETS - - - █ - - - █ █ - - GROUP EVALUATIONS THINKLETS - - - █ - - - - - █ █ G R O U P I M P . & K P . IMPLEMENTATION THINKLETS - - - █ █ - - - - - █ KNOWLEDGE PRESERVATION THINKLETS - - - █ █ - - - - - - Exhibit 6 : The Derived GDSS - AHP Evaluation Model The Analytic Hierarchy Process ( AHP ) is a multiple attribute decision making method widely used in decision making literature ( Saaty , 1994 ; Gass , 2005 ) . AHP provides a systematic method for achieving a quantitative comparison of two or more alternatives qualitatively evaluated on a set or net of criteria levels ( Saaty , 1994 ) . Furthermore , using a computer - based tool , changes in preferences ( weights ) on criteria and evaluated alternatives ( e . g . sensitivity analysis ) can be easily conducted to observe effects when some change is required . AHP can be considered a hybrid method regarding the level of evaluation objectivity . While AHP provides an objective and systematic quantitative calculation process to evaluate alternatives , a subjective or inter - subjective process is used to establish the preferences ( weights on criteria ) . It implies that the final overall evaluation of the same set of alternatives being evaluated can produce different results when different users employ AHP due to differences established in their preferences . Rather than a weakness , it is an inherent characteristic of multi - attribute decision making process methods to express the opinions of the evaluator . All multi - attribute decision making methods ( MADM ) have this characteristic in contrast with objective multi - goal decision making methods ( MODM ) like linear programming or optimization techniques ( Yoon and Hwang , 1995 ) . Illustration of the Usefulness of the Integrative GDSS Value Evaluation Framework This illustrative case consists of evaluation of the value provided by three real GDSS applications using the integrative GDSS value evaluation framework . The first GDSS application ( GDSS . 1 TeamSpirit ) is a Web - based group decision system designed to support creative problem - solving ( Chen et al . , 2007 ) . It was used by undergraduate and graduate students in a higher education institution in Taiwan . The second GDSS application ( GDSS . 2 Promethee ) is a system used for industrial site location decisions ( Ishizaka and Nemery , 2012 ) . The third GDSS application ( GDSS . 3 HR ) was used for recruiting personnel ( Shih , Huang and Shyur , 2005 ) . Exhibit 7 reports the main architectural capabilities of these three GDSS applications . A set of equal assessment of importance for the second ( GDSS contributions ) and third ( GDSS phases ) levels is used in this example . For the fourth ( GDSS services ) and fifth ( GDSS mechanisms ) levels the paired assessment of importance between criteria considers what specific GDSS services are more useful for GDSS phases , and what specific GDSS mechanisms are more useful for GDSS services . In the fourth level , it is assumed that the specific GDSS service of information retrieval , communication and negotiation is strongly more important that the GDSS service of judgment and evaluation for the phases of agenda , negotiation and implementation . In turn , the GDSS service of judgment and evaluation is considered much more important than information retrieval , communication and negotiation GDSS service for the phase of evaluation . In the fifth level , GDSS mechanisms A ( for Agenda ) and B ( for information retrieval and communication ) are considered significantly more important than C ( for judgment ) and D ( for evaluation ) mechanisms for the GDSS service of information retrieval , communication and negotiation . Vice versa , the mechanisms C ( for judgment ) and D ( for evaluation ) are considered much more important than mechanisms A ( for Agenda ) and B ( for information retrieval and communication ) the GDSS service of judgment and evaluation . A verbal scale of importance with nine values ( from 1 for equal importance among criterion X and criterion Y regarding an upper criterion Z , to 9 for the extreme importance ) was used for the paired assessment in the value hierarchy . A similar scale from 1 to 9 was used for assessing the three GDSS applications . AHP generates final weights and final scores in the range from 0 . 000 to 1 . 000 , after the determined calculations of contributions of each evaluated alternative ( the three GDSS applications in this case ) for each particular criterion in the lowest layer of the value hierarchy . These contributions are propagated by each upper layer of criteria to obtain a final score for each evaluated alternative . Given that the assessment for the value hierarchy was fixed to be equal in all criteria layers , the CR ( consistency ratio ) was 0 . 00 for all criteria matrices . Exhibit 8 reports the final accumulated weights for the five criteria layers . Exhibit 9 reports the evaluation matrix for the three GDSS applications . Assigned values are the paired comparisons based in the initial assessment for each GDSS tool reported in Exhibit 9 . The respective CR values for the 4 matrices are : 0 . 03 , 0 . 06 , 0 . 03 and 0 . 03 . Exhibit 7 : Architectures of three GDSS evaluated with the Design - Evaluation GDSS GDSS . 1 TeamSpirit GDSS . 2 Promethee GDSS . 3 HR Agenda Phase  Variable agenda support ( manage agenda , invite participants , view agenda )  Idea generation / brainstorming tool Agenda Phase  Fixed agenda support  Brainstorming ( for goals , criteria and alternatives )  Weight elicitation Agenda Phase  Fixed agenda support  Idea generation ( for criteria ) Negotiation Phase  Idea consolidation / Idea organization  Discussion Forum  Information sharing tool Negotiation Phase  GAIA visualization tool  Hierarchical clustering of ideas Negotiation Phase  Weight elicitation  Consensus index on criteria Evaluation Phase  Idea evaluation / voting / ranking  MADM tools Evaluation Phase  Promethee MADM tool  Sensibility Analysis Evaluation Phase  MADM tool ( TOPSIS technique ) Implementation Phase  Meeting repository  Web - based architecture Implementation Phase  Database repository  Network - based architecture Implementation Phase  Database repository  Web - based architecture GDSS Mechanisms assessment  GDSS Mechanisms A for Agenda ( agenda writer , idea writer / generator , idea organizer / categorizer ) : VERY HIGH  GDSS Mechanisms B for Negotiation ( electronic board system , shared editor , topic commenter , NGP tool ) : HIGH  GDSS Mechanisms D for Judgment ( Delphi tool , ranking and voting tools ) : VERY HIGH  GDSS Mechanisms E for Evaluation ( MADM and simulation tools ) : VERY HIGH GDSS Mechanisms assessment  GDSS Mechanisms A for Agenda ( agenda writer , idea writer / generator , idea organizer / categorizer ) : HIGH  GDSS Mechanisms B for Negotiation ( electronic board system , shared editor , topic commenter , NGP tool ) : VERY HIGH  GDSS Mechanisms D for Judgment ( Delphi tool , ranking and voting tools ) : HIGH  GDSS Mechanisms E for Evaluation ( MADM and simulation tools ) : HIGH GDSS Mechanisms assessment  GDSS Mechanisms A for Agenda ( agenda writer , idea writer / generator , idea organizer / categorizer ) : MODERATE  GDSS Mechanisms B for Negotiation ( electronic board system , shared editor , topic commenter , NGP tool ) : LOW  GDSS Mechanisms D for Judgment ( Delphi tool , ranking and voting tools ) : MODERATE  GDSS Mechanisms E for Evaluation ( MADM and simulation tools ) : MODERATE Exhibit 8 : Matrices of Accumulated Weights for the Five Criteria Layers GDSS - AHP CRITERIA LAYER ACCUMULATED WEIGHTS GDSS VALUE 1 . 000 Process satisfaction Process Performance Outcomes Satisfaction Outcomes Performance GDSS CONTRIBUTIONS 0 . 250 0 . 250 0 . 250 0 . 250 Agenda Negotiation Evaluation Implementation GDSS PHASES 0 . 250 0 . 250 0 . 250 0 . 250 Information Retrieval , Communication and Negotiation Judgment and Evaluation GDSS SERVICES 0 . 667 0 . 333 A . Agenda writer , idea writer / generator , idea organizer / categorizer . B . Electronic board system , shared editor , topic commenter , NGP tool . C . Delphi tool , ranking and voting tools . D . MADM and simulation tools . GDSS MECHANISMS 0 . 287 0 . 287 0 . 135 0 . 292 Exhibit 9 : Evaluation of the three GDSS tools GDSS Mechanisms A ( agenda writer , idea writer / generator , idea organizer / categorizer ) : GDSS . 1 TeamSpirit GDSS . 2 Promethee GDSS . 3 HR GDSS . 1 TeamSpirit - - - 3 5 GDSS . 2 Promethee 1 / 3 - - - 3 GDSS . 3 HR 1 / 5 1 / 3 - - - CR = 0 . 03 GDSS Mechanisms B ( electronic board system , shared editor , topic commenter , NGP tool ) : GDSS . 1 TeamSpirit GDSS . 2 Promethee GDSS . 3 HR GDSS . 1 TeamSpirit - - - 1 / 3 7 GDSS . 2 Promethee 3 - - - 9 GDSS . 3 HR 1 / 7 1 / 9 - - - CR = 0 . 06 GDSS Mechanisms C ( Delphi tool , ranking and voting tools ) GDSS . 1 TeamSpirit GDSS . 2 Promethee GDSS . 3 HR GDSS . 1 TeamSpirit - - - 3 5 GDSS . 2 Promethee 1 / 3 - - - 3 GDSS . 3 HR 1 / 5 1 / 3 - - - CR = 0 . 03 GDSS Mechanisms D ( MADM and simulation tools ) GDSS . 1 TeamSpirit GDSS . 2 Promethee GDSS . 3 HR GDSS . 1 TeamSpirit - - - 3 5 GDSS . 2 Promethee 1 / 3 - - - 3 GDSS . 3 HR 1 / 5 1 / 3 - - - CR = 0 . 03 Exhibits 10 to 13 show four charts which highlight the evaluation results for the three GDSS applications realized by the authors ( using an open access AHP software tool ) . As can be seen , GDSS . 1 ( TeamSpirit ) received the higher decision value of 0 . 535 , GDSS . 2 ( Promethee ) received 0 . 375 and GDSS . 3 ( HR ) 0 . 090 . In Exhibit 10 , the contributions to the overall GDSS value from the lower layer of GDSS mechanisms for each GDSS tool are reported . For GDSS . 1 ( TeamSpirit ) the contributions to the total value of 0 . 535 come mainly from GDSS mechanisms A ( for agenda ) and D ( for evaluation ) , with 0 . 187 and 0 . 174 , respectively . For GDSS . 2 ( Promethee ) the main contribution for the total value of 0 . 375 comes from the mechanism B ( for information retrieval and communication ) with a value of 0 . 192 . For the GDSS . 3 ( HR ) with a total value of 0 . 090 , the main contributions come from mechanisms A and D with the values of 0 . 030 and 0 . 028 respectively . In Exhibit 11 , the contributions to the overall GDSS value from the next lower layer of GDSS services for each GDSS tool are presented . For GDSS . 1 ( TeamSpirit ) , the contributions to the total value of 0 . 535 are of 0 . 328 and 0 . 206 , respectively , for information retrieval and communication , and judgment and evaluation services . For the total value of 0 . 375 reached by GDSS . 2 ( Promethee ) tool the values are 0 . 282 and 0 . 092 and for total value of 0 . 090 of GDSS . 3 ( HR ) tool the values are 0 . 055 and 0 . 034 . In Exhibit 12 , the contributions to the overall GDSS value from the next layer of GDSS phases for each GDSS tool are showed . For GDSS . 1 ( TeamSpirit ) the contributions to the total value of 0 . 535 are of 0 . 149 , 0 . 128 , 0 . 128 and 0 . 128 for the Evaluation , Implementation , Negotiation and Agenda phases , respectively . For the total value of 0 . 375 in GDSS . 2 ( Promethee ) , the values are 0 . 075 , 0 . 099 , 0 . 099 and 0 . 099 and for the total value of 0 . 090 in GDSS . 3 ( HR ) the values are 0 . 024 , 0 . 021 , 0 . 021 and 0 . 021 , respectively . Finally , in Exhibit 13 , the contributions to the overall GDSS value from the next layer of GDSS process - outcome contributions for each GDSS tool are reported . For GDSS . 1 ( TeamSpirit ) , the contributions to the total value of 0 . 535 are of 0 . 133 for the four process - outcome criteria . For the total value of 0 . 375 in GDSS . 2 ( Promethee ) , the values are 0 . 093 for the four criteria and for the total value of 0 . 090 in GDSS . 3 ( HR ) the values are of 0 . 022 also for the four criteria . The GDSS AHP evaluation model reveals that the paired comparison of the architectural design realized in GDSS . 1 outperforms the designs of the other two GDSS applications . GDSS . 1 ( TeamSpirit ) design can be considered moderately better than the design of GDSS . 2 ( Promeethe ) and notably better than GDSS . 3 ( HR ) . The differences in architectural designs of the three GDSS applications are not directly identified in the GDSS process - outcome level . In this level the three GDSS contribute similar values to the four criteria ( but with a different final value as total ) . In the remaining levels , differences emerge . In the GDSS phase level , for GDSS . 1 ( TeamSpirit ) , the Evaluation phase is better supported than others . For GDSS . 2 ( Promethee ) , the Agenda , Negotiation and Implementation phases are slightly better supported than the Evaluation phase . For GDSS . 3 ( HR ) , the Evaluation phase is also slightly better supported than the other three GDSS phases . In the GDSS services level for GDSS . 1 ( TeamSpirit ) information retrieval , communication and negotiation service receives slightly better support than evaluation service . In GDSS . 2 ( Promethee ) , the former service receives a strongly better support than the latter one , and for GDSS . 3 ( HR ) the support is similar for both GDSS services . This GDSS AHP evaluation model permits further analysis such as trade - offs , sensitivity analysis , and uncertainty analysis , and these are suggested for further study . Hence , we must note that the evaluations for these three GDSS applications are illustrations based on the preferences of the authors on the established criteria . Other evaluators might obtain different results when they change the preferences . 17 Exhibit 10 : Contributions to GDSS Value from GDSS Mechanisms for each GDSS Tool Exhibit 11 : Contributions to GDSS Value from GDSS Services for each GDSS Tool Exhibit 12 : Contributions to GDSS Value from GDSS Phases for each GDSS Tool 18 Exhibit 13 : Contributions to GDSS Value from GDSS Contributions for each GDSS Tool Conclusions GDSS , like all decision support technologies , must provide value to their users and to the users’ organizations . However , to achieve this aim , a well - designed GDSS must be developed . In this article , we have provided a comprehensive and integrative framework that can be used to evaluate the value and design of GDSS . The evaluation model is multiple criteria , systematic , user - centered and semi - formalized . The model has been implemented by using the AHP method to compare alternative GDSS applications ( already developed ) or planned GDSS ( designs ) . This integrative GDSS value evaluation framework provides to the practitioner : an integrative group - based decisional process that can be used as a reference model of tasks to be supported for a GDSS application under consideration ; a five - category taxonomy of integrated and coherent metrics for group - based decisional process and outcomes derived from core studies ; a four - level AHP evaluation model useful for users and designers by capturing impact and design elements ; an analytical and objective procedure to compare GDSS designs and evaluate GDSS applications using a multi - criteria model ; and a model useful for evaluating both traditional and intelligence - based GDSS . This paper also contributes to the GDSS literature : with a theoretically - based integration of the accumulated knowledge on group decision - making processes used in GDSS ; with a theoretically - supported structure of what is expected by GDSS users ; with a theoretically - supported value structure ( e . g . criteria and sub - criteria ) to evaluate GDSS designs and tools ; with an objective causal linkage between the GDSS designs what’s ( higher level criteria ) and how’s ( lower level criteria ) ; and with a review of current GDSS applications and technologies needed to build them . Three real GDSS applications have been used to illustrate the usefulness of this evaluation framework . These results should be motivators to advance on further empirical tests for designing GDSS . Given the inherent complexity of designing a GDSS , we hypothesize that the utilization of a standardized group decision - making process model and its derived AHP evaluation model can reduce the complexity of the GDSS design process and improve the overall quality of a GDSS application . However , these hypotheses require further empirical research efforts not pursued in this current study . The Engineering Management area is concerned with a variety of relevant group - based decisional problems occurring in business , industrial and governmental settings , as well as the techniques , approaches and methods of addressing them . GDSS applications can be used to support such a decision making process . Thus , advancing our understanding on how to design better GDSS and on how to objectively evaluate them are worthy research and professional goals for the Engineering Management discipline . 19 This research also has inherent limitations : it used 20 core papers filtered by criteria based on number of citations and quality of content useful for this research , but some important papers might have been omitted ; the analysis rounds were limited to 15 sessions ; the three GDSS applications were evaluated from their respective articles rather than by the utilization of the actual system ; and the authors’ expertise in DSS design and evaluation could potentially bias our viewpoint on the group - based decision - making process and the implemented AHP evaluation model . However , we posit that this integrative GDSS value evaluation framework can be used by engineering managers as a tool to determine the overall decision - making value provided for existent or projected GDSS with the ultimate aim of selecting the most adequate GDSS for a particular Engineering Management group - based decision - making situation . Acknowledgements The authors thank the reviewers whose comments and suggestions significantly contributed to the final version of this manuscript . The authors also thank the renowned GDSS researchers consulted in the early stages of this research . REFERENCES Adelman , L . ( 1984 ) . Real - Time computer support for decision analysis in a group setting : another class of decision support systems . Interfaces , 14 ( 2 ) , 75 - 83 . Aiken , M . W . , Liu , Sheng O . R . , & Vogel , D . R . ( 1991 ) . Integrating expert systems with group decision support systems . ACM Transactions on Information Systems , 9 ( 1 ) , 75 - 95 . Aken , A . ( 2006 ) . Towards a Functional GDSS : A New Framework . AMCIS 2006 Proceedings , Paper 199 , pp . 1556 - 1565 . Alonso , J . & Lamata , T . ( 2006 ) . Consistency in the Analytic Hierarchy Process : A New Approach . International Journal of Uncertainty , Fuzziness and Knowledge - Based Systems , 14 ( 4 ) , 445−459 . Bard , Jonathan F . , and Stephen F . Sousk , " A tradeoff analysis for rough terrain cargo handlers using the AHP : an example of group decision making " , IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 37 : 3 , ( 1990 ) pp . 222 - 228 . Barkhi , R . ( 2001 - 2002 ) . The effects of decision guidance and problem modeling on group decision - making . Journal of Management Information Systems , 18 ( 3 ) , 259 - 282 . Bashiri , Mahdi , and Seyed Javad Hosseininezhad , " A fuzzy group decision support system for multifacility location problems " , The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 42 : 5 - 6 ( 2009 ) pp . 533 - 543 . Belardo , Salvatore , and John Harrald , " A framework for the application of group decision support systems to the problem of planning for catastrophic events " , IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 39 : 4 , ( 1992 ) pp . 400 - 411 . Briggs , R . , de Vreede , G . , & Nunamaker , J . ( 2003 ) . Collaboration Engineering with ThinkLets to Pursue Sustained Success with Group Support Systems . Journal of Management Information Systems , 19 ( 4 ) , 31 – 64 . Chen , M . , Liou , Y . , Wang , C . , Fan , Y . , & Chi , Y . ( 2007 ) . TeamSpirit : design , implementation , and evaluation of a web - based group decision support system . Decision Support Systems , 43 ( 4 ) , 1186 - 1202 . Cil , A . , Alpturk , O . , & Yazgan , H . R . ( 2005 ) . New collaborative system framework based on a multiple perspective approach : InteliTeam . Decision Support Systems , 39 ( 4 ) , 619 - 641 . Cohen , M . D . , March , J . G . , & Olsen , J . P . ( 1972 ) . A Garbage can model of organizational choice . Administrative Science Quarterly , 17 ( 1 ) , 1 - 25 . Denning , P . , et al . ( 1989 ) . Computing as Discipline . Communications of the ACM , 32 ( 1 ) , 9 - 23 . Dennis , A . , George , J . , Jessup , L . & Nunamaker , J . & Vogel , D . ( 1998 ) . Information technology to support electronic meetings . MIS Quarterly , 12 ( 4 ) , 591 - 624 . DeSanctis , G . , & Gallupe , B . A . ( 1985 ) . GDSS : a brief look at a new concept in decision support . Proceedings of the twenty - first annual conference on Computer personnel research , pp . 24 - 28 . DeSanctis , G . , & Gallupe , B . , ( 1987 ) . A Foundation for the study of group decision support systems . Management Science , 33 ( 5 ) , 589 - 609 . Fan , Shichao , Qiping Shen , and John Kelly , " Using group decision support system to support value management workshops " , Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering 22 : 2 ( March - April 2008 ) , pp . 100 - 113 . Fjermestad , J . , & Hiltz , S . R . ( 1998 - 1999 ) . An assessment of group support systems experimental research : methodology and results . Journal of Management Information System , 15 ( 3 ) , 7 - 149 . 20 Fjermestad , J . , & Hilt , z S . R . ( 2000 - 2001 ) . Group support systems : a descriptive evaluation of case and field studies . Journal of Management Information System , 17 ( 3 ) , 115 - 159 . Forgionne , G . ( 1999 ) . An AHP model of DSS effectiveness . European Journal of Information Systems , 8 ( 2 ) , 95 - 106 . Forgionne , G . ( 2000 ) . Decision - making support systems effectiveness : the process to outcome link . Information Knowledge - Systems Management , 2 ( 2 ) , 169 - 188 . French , S . ( 2007 ) . Web - enabled strategic GDSS , e - democracy and Arrow ' s theorem : a bayesian perspective . Decision Support Systems , 43 ( 4 ) , 1476 - 1484 . Gass , S . , ( 2005 ) . Model World : The Great Debate—MAUT Versus AHP . Interfaces , 35 ( 4 ) , 308 – 312 . Gray , P . , Johansen , R . , Nunamaker , J . , Rodman , J . & Wagner , G . ( 2011 ) . GDSS Past , Present , and Future . In D . Schuff , D . Paradice , F . Burstein , D . Power and R . Sharda ( Eds ) , Decision Support : An Examination of the DSS Discipline , Springer , pp . 1 - 24 . Gray , P . , & Mandviwalla , M . ( 1999 ) . New directions for GDSS . Group Decision and Negotiation , 8 ( 1 ) , 77 – 83 . He , S . , Song , R . & Zhao , Q . ( 2003 ) Design of uncertain group decision support system and its application in intelligent transportation management . Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems , pp . 1724 - 1729 . Hevner , A . , March , S . , Park , J . & Ram , S . ( 2004 ) . Design Science in Information Systems Research . MIS Quarterly , 28 ( 1 ) , 75 - 105 . Huber , G . P . ( 1981 ) . The nature of organizational decision making and the design of decision support systems . MIS Quarterly , 5 ( 2 ) , 1 - 10 . Huber , G . P . ( 1984a ) . The nature and design of post - industrial organizations . Management Science , 30 ( 8 ) , 928 - 951 . Huber G . P . ( 1984b ) . Issues in the design of group decision support systems . MIS Quarterly , 8 ( 3 ) , 195 - 204 . IEEE Editorial , “Research and Education Characteristics of the Engineering Management Discipline , ” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management , 37 : 3 ( August 1990 ) , pp . 172 – 176 . Ishizaka , A . , & Nemery , P . ( 2012 ) . A Multi - Criteria Group Decision Framework for Partner Grouping When Sharing Facilities . Group Decision & Negotiation , 22 ( 4 ) , 1 - 27 . Jelassi , M . T . , & Beauclair , R . A . ( 1987 ) . An integrated framework for group decision support systems design . Information & Management , 13 ( 3 ) , 143 - 153 . Jin , T . , & Bouthillier , F . ( 2004 ) . Facilitating access to information through collaboration : examination of the role of collaborative technology in competitive intelligence . Proceedings of the Canadian Association for Information Science ( CAIS ) , pp . 1 - 14 . Karacapilidis , N . ( 2007 ) . Integrating new information and communication technologies in a group decision support system . International Transactions in Operational Research , 7 ( 6 ) , 487 - 507 . Kotnour , Timothy , and John V . Farr , " Engineering Management : Past , Present , and Future " , Engineering Management Journal 17 : 1 , ( March 2005 ) , pp . 15 - 26 . Kraemer , K . , & King , J . ( 1986 ) . Computer - based Systems for Cooperative Work and Group Decision Making : Status of Use and Problems in Development . Proceedings of Conference Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 353 - 375 . Limayem , M . , Banerjee , P . , & Ma , L . ( 2006 ) . Impact of GDSS : opening the black box . Decision Support Systems , 42 ( 2 ) , 945 - 957 . Limayem , M . , & DeSanctis , G . ( 2000 ) . Providing decisional guidance for multicriteria decision making in groups . Information Systems Research , 11 ( 4 ) , 386 - 401 . Lu , Jie , Jun Ma , Guangquan Zhang , Yijun Zhu , Xianyi Zeng , and Ludovic Koehl , " Theme - based comprehensive evaluation in new product development using fuzzy hierarchical criteria group decision - making method " , IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics 58 : 6 ( 2011 ) , pp . 2236 - 2246 . March , S . , & Smith , G . ( 1995 ) . Design and Natural Science Research on Information Technology . Decision Support Systems , 15 ( 4 ) , 251 - 266 . March , J . G . ( 1962 ) . The business firm as a political coalition . Journal of Politics , 24 ( 4 ) , 662 - 678 . McGrath , J . E . ( 1984 ) . Groups : Interaction and performance . New York : Prentice - Hall . McGrath , J . E . & Kravitz , D . ( 1982 ) . Group research . Annual Review of Psychology , 33 ( 1 ) , 95 - 230 . Mora , M . , Forgionne , G . , Cervantes , F . , Garrido , L . , Gupta , J . , and Gelman , O . ( 2005 ) . Toward a comprehensive framework for the design and evaluation of intelligent decision - making support systems ( i - DMSS ) . Journal of Decision Systems , 14 ( 3 ) , 321 - 344 . Mora , M . , Gelman , O . , Paradice , D . , & Cervantes , F . ( 2008 ) . The Case for Conceptual Research in Information Systems . CONF - IRM 2008 Proceedings . Paper 52 . 21 Ngai , E . , & Chan , E . , ( 2005 ) . Evaluation of knowledge management tools using AHP . Expert Systems with Applications , 29 ( 4 ) , 889 - 899 . Norese , M . & Toso , F . ( 2004 ) . Group decision and distributed technical support . Intl . Trans . in Operations Research , 11 ( 4 ) , 395 – 417 . Nunamaker , J . F . , Briggs , R . , Mittleman , D . , Vogel , D . , and Baltahzard , P . ( 1996 - 1997 ) . Lessons from a dozen years of group support systems research : a discussion of lab and field findings . Journal of Management Information Systems , 13 ( 3 ) , 163 - 207 . Pervan , G . ( 1998 ) . A review of research in Group Support Systems : leaders , approaches and directions . Decision Support Systems , 23 ( 2 ) , 149 – 159 . Phillips - Wren , G . , Hahn , E . , & Forgionne , G . ( 2004 ) . A multiple criteria framework for the evaluation of decision support systems . Omega , 32 ( 4 ) , 323 - 332 . Phillips - Wren , G . , Mora , M . , Forgionne , G . , & Gupta , J . ( 2009 ) . An integrative evaluation framework for intelligent decision support systems . European Journal of Operational Research , 195 ( 3 ) , 642 - 652 . Rao , S . , and Jarvenpaa , S . L . ( 1991 ) . Computer support of groups : theory - based models for GDSS . Research . Management Science , 37 ( 10 ) , 1347 - 1362 . Rosanty , E . , Dahlan , H . & Hussin , R . ( 2012 ) Multi - Criteria Decision Making for Group Decision Support System . IEEE e - Library , 105 - 109 . Rouse , William B . and Compton , W . Dale , “Systems Engineering and Management” , Information Knowledge Systems Management 8 , ( 2009 ) pp . 231 – 240 . Rowe , AJ . , and Davis , S . A . ( 1996 ) . Intelligent information systems : meeting the challenge of the knowledge Era . Westport , CT : Greenwood Publishing . Saaty , T . ( 1990 ) . How to make a decision : the analytic hierarchy process . European Journal of Operations Research , 48 ( 1 ) , 9 - 26 . Saaty , T . ( 1994 ) . How to make a decision : the analytic hierarchy process . Interfaces , 24 ( 6 ) 19 - 43 . Sage , A . P . ( 1981 ) . Behavioral and organizational considerations in the design of information systems and processes for planning and decision support . IEEE Trans . in Systems , Man and Cybernetics , 11 ( 9 ) , 640 - 678 . Sage , A . P . ( 1991 ) . An overview of group and organizational decision support systems . IEEE Control Systems , 11 ( 5 ) , 29 - 33 . Sánchez , Mónica , Francesc Prats , Núria Agell , and Gaizka Ormazabal . " Multiple - criteria evaluation for value management in civil engineering " , Journal of Management in Engineering 21 , no . 3 ( 2005 ) : 131 - 137 . Shih , H . , Huang , L . , & Shyur , H . ( 2005 ) . Recruitment and Selection Processes through an Effective GDSS . Computer and Mathematics with Applications , 50 ( 10 ) , 1543 - 1558 . Shim , J . P . , Warkentin , M . , Courtney , J . F . , Power , D . J . , Sharda , R . , & Carlsson , C . ( 2002 ) . Past , present , and future decision support technology . Decision Support Systems , 33 ( 2 ) , 111 - 126 . Simon , H . A . ( 1997 ) . Administrative behavior : a study of Decision - Making process in administrative organizations . New York : Free Press . Sprague , R . H . ( 1980 ) . A framework for the development of decision support systems . MIS Quarterly , 4 ( 4 ) , 1 - 26 . Stevens , C . , & Finlay , P . ( 1996 ) . A Research Framework for Group Support Systems . Group Decision and Negotiation , 5 ( 4 - 6 ) , 521 - 543 . Straus , S . G . , & McGrath , J . E . ( 1994 ) . Does the medium matter : The interaction of task and technology on group performance and member reactions . Journal of Applied Psychology , 79 ( 1 ) , 87 - 97 . Straus , S . G . ( 1997 ) . Technology , group process , and group outcomes : testing the connections in computer - mediated and face - to - face groups . Human - Computer Interaction , 12 ( 3 ) , 227 - 266 . Straus , S . G . ( 1999 ) . Testing a typology of tasks : an empirical validation of McGrath’s ( 1984 ) Group Task Circumplex . Small Group Research , 30 ( 2 ) , 166 - 187 . Sun , Yong - Hong , Jian Ma , Zhi - Ping Fan , and Wang Jun , " A group decision support approach to evaluate experts for R & D project selection " , IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 55 : 1 ( 2008 ) , pp . 158 - 170 . Turoff , M . & Hiltz , S . ( 1982 ) . Computer support for group versus individual decisions . IEEE Transactions Communications , 30 ( 1 ) , 82 - 90 . Turoff , M . , Hiltz , S . , Bahgat , A . , & Rana , A . ( 1993 ) . Distributed group support systems . MIS Quarterly , 17 ( 4 ) , 399 - 417 . Unal , Resit , Charles B . Keating , Trina M . Chytka , and Bruce A . Conway , " Calibration of Expert Judgments Applied to Uncertainty Assessment " , Engineering Management Journal 17 : 2 ( June 2005 ) , pp . 34 - 43 . Wu , T . , Zhou , X . , & Yu , S . ( 2008 ) The Research of Group Decision Methods for Product Design Evaluation . IEEE e - library , 326 - 329 . 22 Zandi , Faramak , and Madjid Tavana , " A multi - attribute group decision support system for information technology project selection " , International Journal of Business Information Systems 6 : 2 , ( 2010 ) pp . 179 - 199 . Zha , X . F . & Du , H . ( 2006 ) . Knowledge - intensive collaborative design modeling and support Part II : System implementation and application . Computers in Industry , 57 ( 1 ) , 56 - 71 . Zigurs , I . , Poole , M . S . , & DeSanctis , G . ( 1998 ) . A study of influence in computer - mediated group decision making . MIS Quarterly , 12 ( 4 ) , pp . 625 - 644 .