The FASEB Journal (cid:127) Research Communication AHNAK , a novel component of the dysferlin protein complex , redistributes to the cytoplasm with dysferlin during skeletal muscle regeneration Yanchao Huang , * Steven H . Laval , † , 1 Alexandra van Remoortere , ‡ , 1 Jacques Baudier , § Chriselle Benaud , § Louise V . B . Anderson , † Volker Straub , † Andre Deelder , ‡ Rune R . Frants , * Johan T . den Dunnen , * Kate Bushby , † and Silve ` re M . van der Maarel * , 2 * Center for Human and Clinical Genetics , Leiden University Medical Center , Leiden , The Netherlands ; † Institute of Human Genetics , International Centre for Life , Newcastle - upon - Tyne , UK ; ‡ Department of Parasitology , Leiden University Medical Center , Leiden , The Netherlands ; and § INSERM EMI - 104 , DRDC CEA - Grenoble , France ABSTRACT Mutations in dysferlin cause limb girdle muscular dystrophy 2B , Miyoshi myopathy and distal anterior compartment myopathy . Dysferlin is proposed to play a role in muscle membrane repair . To gain functional insight into the molecular mechanisms of dysferlin , we have searched for dysferlin - interacting proteins in skeletal muscle . By coimmunoprecipitation coupled with mass spectrometry , we demonstrate that AHNAK interacts with dysferlin . We deﬁned the bind - ing sites in dysferlin and AHNAK as the C2A domain in dysferlin and the carboxyterminal domain of AHNAK by glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) - pull down assays . As expected , the N - terminal domain of myoferlin also interacts with the carboxyterminal domain of AHNAK . In normal skeletal muscle , dysferlin and AHNAK colo - calize at the sarcolemmal membrane and T - tubules . In dysferlinopathies , reduction or absence of dysferlin correlates with a secondary muscle - speciﬁc loss of AHNAK . Moreover , in regenerating rat muscle , dysfer - lin and AHNAK showed a marked increase and cyto - plasmic localization , consistent with the direct interac - tion between them . Our data suggest that dysferlin participates in the recruitment and stabilization of AHNAK to the sarcolemma and that AHNAK plays a role in dysferlin membrane repair process . It may also have signiﬁcant implications for understanding the biology of AHNAK - containing exocytotic vesicles , “en - largosomes , ” in plasma membrane remodeling and repair . —Huang Y . , Laval S . H . , van Remoortere A . , Baudier J . , Benaud C . , Anderson L . V . B . , Straub V . , Deelder A . , Frants R . R . , den Dunnen J . T . , Bushby K . , van der Maarel S . M . AHNAK , a novel component of the dysferlin protein complex , redistributes to the cytoplasm with dysferlin during skeletal muscle regen - eration . FASEB J . 21 , 732 – 742 ( 2007 ) Key Words : protein interaction (cid:1) dysferlinopathies (cid:1) membrane repair (cid:1) LGMD2B (cid:1) MM Mutations in dysferlin are responsible for autoso - mal recessive limb girdle muscular dystrophy 2B ( LGMD2B ) , Miyoshi myopathy ( MM ) and distal ante - rior compartment myopathy ( DMAT ) , a group of my - opathies with a wide range of phenotypic variability referred to as the dysferlinopathies ( 1 – 3 ) . Regardless of phenotype , dysferlinopathy patients typically have ab - sent or severely reduced levels of dysferlin in skeletal muscle . There is a deﬁciency of muscle membrane repair in dysferlin - deﬁcient mouse models , leading to the pro - posal that this deﬁnes a new pathogenic mechanism in muscular dystrophy ( MD ) . However , the precise bio - chemical function of dysferlin remains unknown . Dys - ferlin , and its homologues otoferlin and myoferlin , show homology to the Caenorhabditis elegans spermato - genesis factor fer - 1 that mediates spermatid vesicles / plasma membrane fusion ( 4 ) . Dysferlin is widely ex - pressed , and in skeletal muscle , it is primarily found at the plasma membrane ( 5 ) and in cytoplasmic vesicles ( 6 ) . Myoferlin is also expressed at the plasma mem - brane , and in addition , it is found at the nuclear envelope . Dysferlin and myoferlin contain six C2 do - mains , which are typically involved in the calcium - dependent binding to phospholipids and the most amino - terminal C2 domain , C2A , shows calcium - depen - dent phospholipid binding in vitro ( 7 ) . Various proteins have been suggested to interact with dysferlin , includ - ing annexins A1 and A2 , caveolin 3 , calpain 3 ( CAPN3 ) , afﬁxin ( (cid:1) - parvin ) , and the dihydropyridine receptor ( DHPR ) ( 8 – 13 ) . Although dysferlin is not considered as an integral component of the dystrophin glycoprotein complex ( DGC ) , patients with mutations in the DGC often show 1 These authors contributed equally to this work . 2 Correspondence : Leiden Univesity Medical Center , De - partment of Human Genetics , Hlbinusdreef 2 , 2333 ZA Leiden , The Netherlands . E - mail : maarel @ lumc . nl doi : 10 . 1096 / fj . 06 - 6628com 732 0892 - 6638 / 07 / 0021 - 0732 © FASEB some reduced or altered dysferlin expression ( 6 ) . Dys - ferlin - null mice develop a slowly progressive muscular dystrophy with vesicular accumulations and sarcolem - mal disruptions similar to those observed in human dysferlinopathy , and the vesicular accumulations are particularly prominent during skeletal muscle regener - ation . Isolated myoﬁbers from dysferlin null mice show impaired resealing following high - intensity laser irradi - ation , implicating dysferlin in some aspect of calcium - dependent membrane repair ( 14 ) . By means of phage display , we recently reported the successful selection of Llama - derived heavy - chain anti - body ( Ab ) ( HCAb ) fragments speciﬁc for dysferlin ( 11 ) . We demonstrated these HCAb fragments to be functional in several immunological techniques , in - cluding immunoprecipitation . Using immunoprecipita - tion followed by mass spectrometry , we demonstrate here for the ﬁrst time that AHNAK , a protein implied in cell membrane differentiation , repair , and signal transduction ( 15 – 17 ) , is in complex with dysferlin in skeletal muscle . GST pull - down assays and coimmuno - ﬂuorescence microscopy provide further support for a direct interaction between dysferlin and AHNAK , as does the secondary reduction in skeletal muscle label - ing for AHNAK in muscle from dysferlinopathy pa - tients . We also found that dysferlin and AHNAK relo - calize in a rat model of muscle regeneration , providing further evidence for a functional relationship between both proteins . MATERIALS AND METHODS Patient mutations Patient 1 is heterozygous for a 509 C (cid:2) A ( Ala170Glu ) substi - tution and a splice site mutation in exon 19 ( 1752 (cid:3) 2 T (cid:2) A ) . Patient 2 carries a homozygous 3802 G (cid:2) A ( Gly1268Arg ) substitution . Patient 3 is heterozygous for a 3618 C (cid:2) G ( Tyr1206Stop ) and 4439 A (cid:2) C ( Lys1480Thr ) . C2C12 cell cultures C2C12 mouse cell lines were maintained in Dulbecco’s mod - iﬁed Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ) with phenol red ( Gibco BRL , Carlsbad , CA ) supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum ( FCS ) ( Gibco BRL ) , sodium pyruvate ( ﬁnal concentration 1 mM , Gibco BRL ) , and penicillin - streptomycin ( 100 IU / 100 (cid:4) g / ml , Gibco BRL ) . The cells were cultured in an incubator with 10 % CO 2 at 37°C . Cells were induced to differentiate and fuse at 30 – 50 % conﬂuency by switching to serum - deprived medium ( 4 % horse serum in DMEM ) . After differentiation for 7 days , cells were harvested , resuspended in lysis buffer 1 ( 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 0 . 15 % CHAPS ( 3 - [ 3 - cholamidopropyl ] - dimethylammonio ) - 1 - propanesulfonic acid ) ) 1 (cid:5) protease in - hibitor cocktail ( Roche Molecular Biochemicals , Basel , Swit - zerland ) , and incubated on ice for 10 min . Cellular debris was removed by brief centrifugation at 8 , 000 g for 5 min at 4°C , and the protein concentration of the supernatant was assayed with by SDS - PAGE . Recombinant protein production pcDNAI / Amp eukaryotic expression vectors containing N - AHNAK ( residues 2 – 252 ) , M - AHNAK ( residues 821 – 1330 ) , C - AHNAK ( residues 4646 – 5643 ) were a kind gift from Dr . Takashi Hashimoto ( Keio University School of Medicine , Tokyo , Japan ) . DNA fragments encoding the protein frag - ments N - AHNAK , M - AHNAK , and C - AHNAK , respectively , were obtained by Bam HI / Xho I restriction from pcDNAI / Amp and ligated in the prokaryotic expression vector pET28a - GST ( modiﬁed from pET28a ( Novagen , Madison , WI ) with an additional GST tag ) . Subsequently , pET28a - GST - C - AHNAK was split in two parts by Bam HI / Sac I digestion ( designated C 1 - AHNAK , from residue 4646 – 5145 ) and by Sac I / Xho I diges - tion ( designated C 2 - AHNAK , from residue 5146 – 5643 ) and ligated in Bam HI / Sac I - digested , or Sac I / Xho I - digested pET28c - GST , respectively . To generate the carboxy terminus of AHNAK2 , C 2 - AHNAK2 ( aa 5146 – 5637 ) , a 1487 bp fragment was polymer - ase chain reaction ( PCR ) ampliﬁed from cDNA clone ( clone ID : DKFZp686J02145 , RZPD , Berlin , Germany ) with forward primer ( 5 (cid:6) - GGGTCGACCCTCTCCCTTTTCAGA - 3 (cid:6) ) and re - verse primer ( 5 (cid:6) - GCGGCCGCTCAGCCTTCATT - 3 (cid:6) ) and cloned into TOPO blunt vector ( Invitrogen , Paisley , UK ) . Subsequently , the fragment was digested with Sal I / Not I and ligated in the Sal I / Not I - digested prokaryotic expression vec - tor pGEX 4T - 3 ( Amersham Biosciences , Uppsala , Sweden ) . Unfused GST protein was used as control . To generate DYSF C2A ( aa 1 – 130 ) , a 392 - bp fragment was PCR ampliﬁed from a plasmid that contains entire human dysferlin coding sequence with forward primer ( 5 (cid:6) - ATC GGG ATC CAT GCT GAG GGT CTT CAT C - 3 (cid:6) ) and reverse primer ( 5 (cid:6) - ATC GCT CGA GCA CAG CTC CAG GCA GCG G - 3 (cid:6) ) and cloned into the Bam HI / Xho I - digested pET28a . Site - directed mutagenesis was performed to generate dysferlin C2A ( V67D ) by use of the QuickChange site - directed mutagenesis kit ( Stratagene , La Jolla , CA , USA ) . DYSF2 ( aa 2 – 1080 ) was generated by the plasmid that contains entire human dysfer - lin coding sequence with Eco RI / Xho I and ligated in the Eco RI / Xho I - digested prokaryotic expression vector pET28a . DYSF1 ( aa 2 – 245 ) and DYSF3 ( aa 1666 – 1788 ) were gener - ated , as described previously ( 11 ) . C2D ( aa 1152 – 1285 ) and C2Q ( aa 1314 – 1476 ) were generated in vitro using a TNT Coupled Rabbit Reticulocyte Lysate System as directed by the manufacturer ( Promega , Madison , WI , USA ) . Recombinant myoferlin proteins MYOF1 ( aa 2 – 245 ) , MYOF2 ( aa 1 – 130 ) and MYOF C2A ( aa 1 – 85 ) were produced by PCR ampliﬁcation of 740 - bp , 407 - bp , 272 - bp fragments from cDNA clone ( clone ID : DKFZp686C16167Q2 , RZPD ) , respectively . MYOF1 was generated with forward primer ( 5 (cid:6) - GGG AAT TCC TGC GAG TGA TTG T - 3 (cid:6) ) and reverse primer ( 5 (cid:6) - GGG AAG CTT AAA CAA CTC ATC - 3 (cid:6) ) ; MYOF2 with forward primer ( 5 (cid:6) - GGGAATTCATGCTGCGAGTGA - 3 (cid:6) ) and reverse primer ( 5 (cid:6) - GGGAAGCTTTGGAGCAGAAG - 3 (cid:6) ) ; and MYOFC2A with forward primer ( 5 (cid:6) - GGGAATTCATGCT - GCGAGTGA - 3 (cid:6) ) and reverse primer ( 5 (cid:6) - GGGAAGCT - TAGTCGCCGTG - 3 (cid:6) ) , respectively , and cloned into the TOPO 2 . 1 vector ( Invitrogen ) . Subsequently , the fragments were digested with Eco RI / Sal I , Eco RI / Hind III , and Eco RI / Hind III , respectively , and ligated in the prokaryotic expres - sion vector pET28a ( Novagen , Madison , WI , USA ) . All con - structs were sequence - veriﬁed ( LGTC , Leiden , The Netherlands ) . The prokaryotic expression constructs were used for re - combinant protein production in BL21 ( DE3 ) - RIL E . coli ( Stratagene , La Jolla , CA , USA ) cells according to the manu - facturer’s instructions . Brieﬂy , bacterial cells were grown to log phase and recombinant protein production was initiated by the addition of IPTG ( Fermentas , St . Leon - Rot , Germany ) 733 AHNAK INTERACTS WITH DYSFERLIN to a ﬁnal concentration of 1 mM . After 2 h induction at 30°C , the cells were collected by centrifugation and lysed in lysis buffer 2 ( 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 4 , 1 mM EDTA , 1 . 5 mg / ml lysozyme , 0 . 15 M NaCl , 1 % Triton X - 100 ) , and sonicated for 2 (cid:5) 10 s with 15 - s intervals on ice . For the pull - down assay , after centrifugation at 13 , 000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C , the supernatant containing soluble GST fusion was recovered . Fusion proteins were immobilized to Glutathione - Sepharose 4B ( Amersham Pharmacia , Piscataway , NJ , USA ) , incubated at room temperature for 30 min and then centrifuged at 500 g for 5 min . The supernatant was removed and the glutathi - one - sepharose was washed 3 times with binding buffer ( 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 ) . The GST / GST - fusion protein bound beads were ready for pull - down assay . Antibodies The antibodies used in this study were as follows . The monoclonal anti - dysferlin Ab NCL - Hamlet ( Novocastra , New - castle , UK ) was used in a dilution of 1 : 300 for Western blot analysis and at a dilution of 1 : 50 or 1 : 100 for immunoﬂuores - cent microscopy . Monoclonal antibodies against (cid:1) - dystrogly - can , dystrophin , (cid:1) - and (cid:7) - sarcoglycan , and spectrin were as described previously ( 18 ) . Monoclonal antibody ( mAb ) against caveolin - 3 ( Becton Dickinson , Franklin Lakes , NJ ) was used at a dilution of 1 : 1 , 000 . Mouse monoclonal CD31 Ab ( Abcam , Cambridge , UK ) was diluted 1 : 500 for immunostain - ing . Mouse mAb against DHPR ( Abcam , Cambridge , UK ) was diluted 1 : 200 for immunostaining . Secondary antibodies goat anti - mouse alexa488 ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) , goat anti - rabbit alexa594 ( Molecular Probes ) , sheep anti - mouse ( Am - ersham ) , swine anti - rabbit ( DAKO , Glostrup , Denmark ) and rabbit anti - mouse HRP ( DakoCytomation , Glostrup , Denmark ) were diluted 1 : 250 , 1 : 1 , 000 , 1 : 500 , 1 : 200 and 1 : 1 , 000 , respec - tively . Afﬁnity puriﬁed KIS / AHNAK polyclonal antibodies were used in appropriate dilutions as described previously ( 19 ) . Mouse anti - T7 HRP ( Novagen , Madison , WI ) was diluted 1 : 15 , 000 for Western blot analysis . Coimmunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis Immunoprecipitation of dysferlin was performed basically as described by Matsuda ( 13 ) . Normal mouse or human skeletal muscle was homogenized on dry ice in the ratio of 1 : 10 in a lysis buffer 1 for 1 h at 4°C . 500 (cid:4) l of protein homogenate was incubated ﬁrst with 20 (cid:4) g of either F4 or H7 HCAb fragment overnight ( o / n ) at 4°C and next precipitated with 25 (cid:4) l of protein A Sepharose CL - 4B for 1 h at 4°C . Immune com - plexes were eluted by boiling in 50 (cid:4) l of 2 (cid:5) SDS - PAGE sample buffer for 5 min and 20 (cid:4) l was loaded on a 7 % SDS - PAGE gels ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) . After separation , proteins were transferred to PVDF membrane ( Roche , Basel , Switzerland ) and blocked with 4 % skimmed milk ( ELK , Campina , Woerden , The Netherlands ) in PBS supplemented with 0 . 02 % Tween 20 for 1 h at room temperature . Then , blots were incubated with NCL - hamlet ( 1 : 300 ) for 1 h at RT and rabbit anti - mouse HRP ( 1 : 2 , 000 ) for 1 h at RT . Enhanced chemiluminescence ( ECL ) plus ( Amersham Pharmacia Bio - tech ) was used for visualization . Mass spectrometric analysis and protein identiﬁcation Immunoprecipitated proteins were separated on SDS - PAGE . The protein bands were excised from sypro - stained gel and trypsin digested , as described previously ( 20 ) . Brieﬂy , minced gel pieces were ﬁrst washed with H 2 O and acetonitril , re - duced with dithiothreitol at 56°C for 45 min , and then alkylated by iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min . The gel was incubated in 30 (cid:4) l of a 5 ng / (cid:4) l modiﬁed trypsin solution in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate , pH 8 . 6 and incubated at 37°C o / n . The digests were acidiﬁed with aqueous TFA to a ﬁnal concentration of 0 . 1 % and the peptides were extracted with one change of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate . The sample was desalted and concentrated with a 10 (cid:4) l ZipTip C18 ( Millipore , Bedford , MA ) , following the instructions provided by the manufacturer . Peptides were eluted with 1 . 5 (cid:4) l (cid:8) - cyano 4 - hydroxycinnamic acid matrix ( 0 . 33 mg / ml in Aceton / Ethanol ( 1 : 3 ) onto the MALDI target plate . Mass spectrometry ( MS ) and tandem mass spectrometry ( MS / MS ) data were acquired with the MALDI - TOF - TOF mass spectrom - eter ( Ultraﬂex TOF / TOF mass spectrometer , Bruker Dalton - ics , Bremen , Germany ) . Proteins were identiﬁed by peptide mass ﬁngerprint ( PMF ) and MS / MS peptide sequencing with the searching program MASCOT ( http : www . matrixscience . com ) . NCBInr was the database used with the following search parameters : a mass tolerance of 0 . 1 Da and one miscleavage were allowed and peptide mass changes due to carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methio - nine were taken into account . Pull - down assays For GST - binding assay , normal human skeletal muscle and mouse C2C12 cells were homogenized on dry ice and lysed in the ratio of 1 : 10 of lysis buffer 1 plus 1 (cid:5) protease inhibitor cocktail ( Roche Molecular Biochemicals , Basel , Switzerland ) . Fusion proteins produced in E . coli were lysed in buffer 2 . For calcium - dependent binding assay , fusion proteins were lysed in buffer 2 supplemented with either 1 mM Ca 2 (cid:3) or 2 mM EDTA . Lysates were centrifuged for 15 min at 4°C , and the supernatants were precleared with glutathione - sepharose 4B ( Amersham ) for 1 h at 4°C . Five - hundred - microliter aliquots of precleared supernatant were incubated with 10 (cid:4) g of puriﬁed GST fusion protein afﬁnity beads in binding buffer supplemented 2 % skimmed milk for muscle lysates and 1 % BSA for fusion protein lysates for o / n at 4°C or with unfused GST protein as a control . For calcium - dependent binding assays , binding buffer was supplemented with 1 % BSA and either 1 mM Ca 2 (cid:3) or 2 mM EDTA . After binding , the beads were washed 3 times in binding buffer without milk / BSA and 1 time in 50 mM Tris - HCl pH 7 . 4 , then eluted by boiling in 50 (cid:4) l of 2 (cid:5) SDS - PAGE sample buffer for 5 min . Ten microliters were loaded on 7 % SDS - PAGE gels to detect endogenous dysferlin or on 10 % SDS - PAGE gels to detect recombinant dysferlin protein fragments . After separation , proteins were transferred to PVDF membranes and dried o / n . Then , blots were incubated with NCL - hamlet ( 1 : 300 ) for 2 h at RT and rabbit anti - mouse HRP ( 1 : 2 , 000 ) for 1 h at RT for detection of endogenous dysferlin ; anti - T7 HRP Ab for the detection of recombinant dysferlin protein fragments . ECL plus was used for visualization . Immunohistochemistry For immunohistochemical examinations , transverse , or lon - gitudinal muscle cryosections of 5 (cid:4) m thickness were ﬁxed in 3 . 7 % formaldehyde containing 0 . 1 % triton X for 30 min , following by preincubation with PBS containing 4 % skimmed milk at room temperature for 2 h . The sections were next incubated with primary Ab fragments overnight at 4°C , and subsequently with afﬁnity - puriﬁed secondary antibodies at room temperature for 40 min , following by incubation of ﬂuorescein - labeled tertiary Ab for 40 min at RT . Background staining was performed by omitting the primary Ab from the ﬁrst step . The sections were washed with PBS , dehydrated 734 Vol . 21 March 2007 HUANG ET AL . The FASEB Journal with 70 , 90 , 100 % ethanol and mounted in a DAPI ( 50 ng / (cid:4) l ) / Vectashield mounting medium ( Burlingame , CA ) . Final preparations were analyzed with a Leica DMRA2 ﬂuo - rescence microscope , and images were obtained using Leica CW4000 digital system . Regenerating rat muscle Female Wistar rats ( 90 – 100 g ) were obtained from an accred - ited breeder and maintained in accordance with local proce - dures for animal handling . Notexin ( 200 (cid:4) l of a 10 (cid:4) g / ml solution in 0 . 9 % w / v NaCl ) was injected subcutaneously ( s . c . ) into the dorsolateral aspect of one hind limb , so as to bathe the underlying soleus muscle in toxin . Four days after toxin injection , the soleus muscle was removed and frozen in isopentane ; sections were cut for routine immunohistochem - istry . The contralateral soleus muscle acted as a control . Thawed sections were treated in 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in 1 (cid:5) PBS for 30 min at room temperature and endogenous peroxidase blocked using DAKO peroxidase block . Sections were incu - bated in DAKO protein block for 5 min and overnight in primary Ab diluted in DAKO background reducing Ab di - luent . After washing HRP - labeled secondary Ab previously preabsorbed in normal rat serum was added and incubated for 1 h at room temperature . After washing TSA ampliﬁcation reagent was added as the manufacturer’s instructions ( Perkin - Elmer ) . Images were collected and analyzed on a Zeiss LSM - 510 confocal microscope . RESULTS Identiﬁcation of AHNAK as a novel binding partner of dysferlin by coimmunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry To identify novel protein partners for dysferlin , we performed immunoprecipitation followed by matrix - assisted laser desorption / ionization time - of - ﬂight mass spectrometry ( MALDI - TOF - MS ) . Normal human mus - cle homogenates were immunoprecipitated with anti - dysferlin HCAb fragment F4 , and restained proteins were resolved on SDS - PAGE . The sypro - stained protein bands were excised and digested with trypsin and subjected to MS . A number of proteins coprecipitated identiﬁed by both peptide mass ﬁngerprinting and MS / MS peptide sequencing ( data not shown ) . The searching program MASCOT was used to identify the protein species . Apart from dysferlin and CAPN3 , which we previously showed to coimmunoprecipitate with dysferlin ( 11 ) , a most interesting novel component of the immunoprecipitation ( IP ) - complex was AHNAK , which was chosen for further characterization . To conﬁrm that AHNAK was coimmunoprecipi - tated with dysferlin , independent IPs were analyzed by Western blot analysis with afﬁnity puriﬁed poly - clonal antibodies raised against AHNAK ( 19 ) . As shown in Fig . 1 B , multiple protein bands correspond - ing to different AHNAK protein isoforms were de - tected in the IP fraction with HCAb fragment F4 , but not in the IP fraction of unrelated HCAb fragments or in the IP fraction without primary HCAb fragments . This speciﬁc immunoreactivity indicates an interaction between dysferlin and AHNAK . Interaction of GST AHNAK fusion proteins with endogenous dysferlin Two homologues of AHNAK exist in the human and mouse genome : AHNAK localized at human chromo - some 11 and AHNAK2 at human chromosome 14 ( 21 ) . Both proteins are composed of a large number of highly conserved repeat segments but differ in their C - terminal domain . The polyclonal AHNAK antisera react to both proteins and cannot discriminate them . To investigate whether AHNAK can bind dysferlin and which domains are responsible for speciﬁc binding to dysferlin , a series of recombinant GST - AHNAK fu - sion proteins ( Fig . 2 A ) representing the amino - termi - Figure 1 . Western blot analysis of coimmunoprecipitation by the selected HCAb fragments F4 from human muscle homog - enates . A ) Coimmunoprecipitated proteins were detected with NCL - hamlet anti dysferlin Ab . Dysferlin was immunopre - cipitated by HCAb fragments F4 ( lane 1 ) with Protein A Sepharose and detected with NCL - Hamlet . As controls , an unrelated HCAb fragment ( lane 2 ) and Protein A Sepharose without HCAb fragment ( lane 3 ) were included . Lanes 4 and 5 represent immunodetection of dysferlin in total muscle homogenates of human ( lane 4 ) with NCL - Hamlet and without primary Ab ( lane 5 ) as a negative control . B ) Coim - munoprecipitated proteins were also probed with KIS anti AHNAK Ab . The fractions were loaded in the same order as above . AHNAK was detected in lane 1 , while the other lanes showed negative . A MW marker is indicated on the left . 735 AHNAK INTERACTS WITH DYSFERLIN nal domain of AHNAK ( N - AHNAK : aa 2 – 252 ) , a central repeat unit ( M - AHNAK : aa 821 – 1330 ) , and two car - boxyterminal domains ( C 1 - AHNAK : aa 4646 – 5145 and C 2 - AHNAK : aa 5146 – 5643 ) were applied in a GST pull - down assay with human muscle ( Fig . 2 B ) or mouse C2C12 protein extracts ( Fig . 2 C ) . Western blot analysis of the pull - down fractions using the dysferlin - speciﬁc mAb NCL - Hamlet showed that only the most carboxy - terminal end of AHNAK , C 2 - AHNAK , was able to bind to dysferlin . No binding was observed for equivalent amounts of the GST fusion proteins N - AHNAK , M - AHNAK , C1 - AHNAK , or for the control unfused GST protein . In C2C12 cells , we identiﬁed two protein bands reactive to NCL - Hamlet , a prominent high MW isoform and a less prominent low MW isoform of dysferlin . Although the low MW isoform is most abundant in the precleared protein fraction , in our pull - down assay from C2C12 cells , only the high MW isoform of dysfer - lin was pulled down by GST - C 2 - AHNAK but not the low MW isoform ( Fig . 2 C ) . Interaction of GST - C 2 - AHNAK with T7 - tagged dysferlin fusion proteins To determine whether both AHNAK proteins can bind dysferlin , whether this interaction is direct or indirect , and to further deﬁne the interaction domain of dysfer - lin , we produced HIS - and T7 - tagged fusion proteins , representing different domains of dysferlin , including C2A ( aa 2 – 130 ) , C2D ( aa 1152 – 1285 ) and C2Q ( aa 1314 – 1476 ) , as well as the dysferlin protein fragments DYSF1 ( aa 2 – 245 ) , DYSF2 ( aa 1666 – 1788 ) , and DYSF3 ( aa 2 – 1080 ) . After incubation with the C - terminal GST - AHNAK fusion construct GST - C 2 - AHNAK or control GST protein preimmobilized to glutathione Sepharose 4B beads , the GST pull - down fractions were analyzed on Western blot analysis probed with anti T7 HRP anti - bodies . Three recombinant protein fragments all incor - porating the C2A domain of dysferlin ( C2A , DYSF1 , and DYSF3 ) were speciﬁcally pulled down by GST - C 2 - AHNAK ( Fig . 3 A – C ) . No binding was observed for equivalent amounts of the fusion proteins lacking the C2A domain of dysferlin ( DYSF2 , C2D , C2Q ; data not shown ) and the control GST protein . Furthermore , a C - terminal GST - fusion construct of AHNAK2 ( GST - C 2 - AHNAK2 : aa 5146 – 5637 ) , was also able to pull down dysferlin fragments incorporating the C2A domain of dysferlin . This interaction of dysferlin with AHNAK2 seemed even stronger than with AHNAK ( compare lanes 6 and 5 in Fig . 3 C ) . Therefore , this observation indicates that the carboxyterminal domains of both AHNAK proteins speciﬁcally and directly associate with C2A - dysferlin . A scheme in Fig . 3 G represents the direct interaction of AHNAK proteins with dysferlin . Interaction of GST - C 2 - AHNAK with T7 - tagged myoferlin fusion proteins To elucidate whether both AHNAK proteins can also interact with myoferlin , a similar pull - down strategy was performed by replacing the T7 - tagged amino - terminal constructs of dysferlin with those of myoferlin . By analogy to dysferlin , there is a direct interaction of the N - terminal myoferlin with the C – terminal domains of both AHNAK proteins ( Fig . 3 D – F ) . In general , the interaction between myoferlin and AHNAK2 was weaker than for AHNAK and as shown in Fig . 3 F , only GST C 2 - AHNAK effectively pulled down T7 - tagged C2A - myoferlin . A scheme in Fig . 3 H represents the direct interaction of AHNAK proteins with myoferlin . Interaction of GST - C 2 - AHNAK with dysferlin C2A and its mutant in the presence or absence of Ca 2 (cid:1) To determine whether the direct interaction between both C 2 - AHNAK proteins and dysferlin C2A is Ca 2 (cid:3) - dependent , we performed a similar pull - down assay in Figure 2 . Identiﬁcation of the interaction site of AHNAK with endogenous dysferlin . A ) Schematic representation of GST - AHNAK fusion proteins used in GST pull - down assay . The interaction ability of the fusion proteins with endogenous dysferlin is indicated on the left . Western blot analyses of GST pull - down fractions using NCL - Hamlet to detect dysferlin . Human muscle ( B ) or C2C12 ( C ) cell lysates were incubated with GST ( lane 1 ) , GST - N - AHNAK ( lane 2 ) , GST - M - AHNAK ( lane 3 ) , GST - C 1 - AHNAK ( lane 4 ) , and GST - C 2 - AHNAK ( lane 5 ) . Bound proteins were resolved on SDS - PAGE and blotted on PVDF membrane ; then , they were probed by NCL - Hamlet . Lanes 6 , 7 , and 8 represent immunode - tection of dysferlin in precleared human or C2C12 lysates ( lane 6 ) , total muscle homogenates of human or mouse ( lane 7 ) and without primary Ab as negative control ( lane 8 ) . Only GST fusion C 2 - AHNAK is able to pull down endogenous dysferlin , while other fusion proteins were nega - tive . A MW marker is indicated on the left . 736 Vol . 21 March 2007 HUANG ET AL . The FASEB Journal the presence ( Fig . 4 A ) or absence ( Fig . 4 A (cid:6) ) of Ca 2 (cid:3) . As shown in Fig . 4 A , we observed that both C 2 - AHNAK and C 2 - AHNAK2 maintained binding afﬁnity for the C2A domain of dysferlin under both conditions . No binding was observed for equivalent amounts of unfused GST protein in both conditions . These results indicate a Ca 2 (cid:3) - independent interaction between both AHNAK proteins and dysferlin . To determine whether mutations in the C2A domain of dysferlin affect the binding with both AHNAK pro - teins , we introduced the V67D mutation into dysferlin C2A ( V67D , GenBank accession number AF075575 ) . This point mutation is associated with both mild and severe phenotypes ( 22 ) . Previously , it was shown that the V67D mutation in dysferlin C2A leads to reduced calcium - sensitive phospholipid binding ( 7 ) . We tested the interaction of GST C 2 - AHNAK proteins with dysfer - lin C2A - V67D in a similar pull - down assay in the pres - ence ( Fig . 4 B ) or absence ( Fig . 4 B (cid:6) ) of Ca 2 (cid:3) . Figure 4 B and 4 B (cid:6) shows that dysferlin C2A - V67D was unable to bind to C 2 - AHNAK2 in the presence or absence of Ca 2 (cid:3) and the interaction between C 2 - AHNAK and dysferlin C2A - V67D was reduced in the absence of Ca 2 (cid:3) . Immunolocalization of AHNAK in normal human skeletal muscle sections Previously , it was shown that AHNAK localizes to the plasma membrane of skeletal muscle ( 19 ) . To further investigate the localization of AHNAK in skeletal mus - cle , we performed colocalization studies in transverse and longitudinal human muscle cryosections . In cross sections , double labeling with AHNAK and dysferlin showed that both proteins are primarily localized at the sarcolemma of skeletal muscle ( Fig . 5 A ) . In longitudi - nal sections , AHNAK and dysferlin showed colocaliza - tion ( Fig . 5 C ) . Double labeling of AHNAK and anti CD31 antibodies showed that AHNAK is also present in the intermediate blood vessels and capillaries ( Fig . 5 B ) . Recently , it was shown that dysferlin coprecipitates with the DHPR by immunoprecipitation and partially colo - calizes with DHPR in longitudinal sections of skeletal muscle . We observed that AHNAK and DHPR clearly colocalize in longitudinal sections of normal skeletal muscle by double immunoﬂuorescent labeling ( Fig . 5 D ) . Taken together , AHNAK colocalizes with dysfer - lin at the sarcolemma of muscle ﬁbers in cross sections and both AHNAK and dysferlin colocalize with DHPR at T - tubules in longitudinal sections of skeletal muscle . Immunostaining of dysferlin and AHNAK in patient muscle sections Immunostaining analysis of frozen muscle sections of three unrelated LGMD2B patients ( patients 1 , 2 , and 3 from Huang et al . ( 11 ) ) showed a comparable and similar reduction of AHNAK and dysferlin , with some Figure 3 . Identiﬁcation of the interaction site of dysferlin ( A – C ) and myoferlin ( D – F ) with C 2 - AHNAK . Both GST - C 2 - AHNAK fusion proteins or unfused GST lysates were used in pull - down assays with lysates of T7 - tagged fusion proteins repre - senting different domains of dysferlin , including C2A ( aa 1 – 130 ) ( C ) , and the dysferlin protein fragments DYSF1 ( aa 2 – 245 ) ( A ) , DYSF2 ( aa 2 – 1080 ) ( B ) ; MYOF C2A ( aa 1 – 85 ) ( F ) , and the myoferlin protein fragments MYOF1 ( aa 2 – 245 ) ( D ) , MYOF2 ( aa 1 – 130 ) ( E ) , as described in Materials and Methods . Bound proteins were separated by SDS - PAGE and anaylzed by immu - noblotting with anti - T7 HRP . In A – F , lanes 1 – 5 represent uninduced fusion proteins , induced fusion proteins , soluble fusion proteins , pre - cleared fusion proteins and GST - C 2 - AHNAK pull - down fractions , respectively . Lane 6 in A , B , and F and lane 7 in C – E represents GST alone pull - down fractions . Lane 6 in C – E represent GST - C 2 - AHNAK2 pull - down fractions . As shown , GST - C 2 - AHNAK pulled down T7 - tagged dysferlin fusion proteins , in which the C2A domain was present in the fusion protein . Similarly , GST - C 2 - AHNAK2 precipitated T7 - tagged DYSF C2A , T7 - tagged MYOF1 , and T7 - tagged MYOF2 . These results demonstrated a speciﬁc and direct interaction between both C 2 - AHNAK proteins and C2A do - mains of dysferlin and myoferlin . Unfused GST did not interact with fusion proteins ( in E and F , unfused GST marked with an asterisk ) . A MW marker is indicated on the left . Schemes repre - sent the interactions between AHNAK and dysfer - lin ( G ) and myoferlin ( H ) . 737 AHNAK INTERACTS WITH DYSFERLIN patchy trace staining at the sarcolemma of these three dysferlinopathy patients ( Fig . 6 A ) . Interestingly , al - though AHNAK is secondarily reduced at the sarco - lemma in the absence of dysferlin , its presence in the blood vessels persists ( Fig . 6 B ) , suggesting a muscle - speciﬁc reduction of AHNAK in these patients . To conﬁrm the secondary reduction of AHNAK , as observed by immunostaining , we performed quantita - tive Western blot analysis . Figure 6 A (cid:6) shows a single section Western blot analysis of the three LGMD2B patients and one normal skeletal muscle as a control . Full - length AHNAK was only observed in the control but not in the muscle of the LGMD2B patients . Ponceau S staining of blots after transfer conﬁrmed equivalent loading of proteins . This result is in agreement with the observation of secondary reduction of AHNAK in LGMD2B patients by immunostaining ( Fig . 6 A ) . Along with the analysis of dysferlinopathy patients , we also performed a random labeling of seven addi - tional nondysferlin muscular dystrophies with dysferlin and AHNAK antibodies . These patients had genetically conﬁrmed diagnoses of BMD , FSHD , DMD , (cid:8) - sarcogly - canopathy , (cid:1) - sarcoglycanopathy , (cid:7) - sarcoglycanopathy , and LGMD1C ( Fig . 6 C ) . Both dysferlin and AHNAK showed normal expression at the sarcolemma in all cases except LGMD1C . In this case , both dysferlin and AHNAK showed a secondary overall reduction along with the primary loss of caveolin - 3 , while the residual AHNAK staining was also restricted to the blood vessels ( Fig . 6 C ) . Immunostaining of dysferlin and AHNAK on regenerating mouse skeletal muscle sections We ﬁnally examined the expression of dysferlin and AHNAK during muscle regeneration in a rat model system . Four days after notexin treatment , dysferlin shows extensive cytoplasmic staining , consistent with relocalization of this protein to the cytoplasm during regeneration . As a marker of membrane integrity , we used spectrin , which was also shown to be increased , conﬁrming the regenerative process . Interestingly , al - though the staining for (cid:1) - dystroglycan and dystrophin is predominantly at the membrane in control and Figure 5 . Immunoﬂuorescent analysis of AHNAK and dysfer - lin in normal human skeletal muscle sections . Double immu - noﬂuorescent analyses of AHNAK and dysferlin in normal human skeletal muscle cross sections showed that AHNAK is preferentially localized in the sarcolemma ( A ) . Double im - munostaining for AHNAK and CD31 revealed a colocaliza - tion of AHNAK and CD31 in the blood vessel endothelia ( B ) . Double immunoﬂuorescent analyses of AHNAK and dysferlin in longitudinal normal human skeletal muscle sections showed the colocalization of AHNAK and dysferlin ( C ) . Double immunostaining for AHNAK and DHPR also revealed colocalization at the T - tubules ( D ) . Figure 4 . Interaction of C 2 - AHNAK with dysferlin C2A and its mutant ( V67D ) in the presence or absence of Ca 2 (cid:3) . GST fusion proteins of C 2 - AHNAK and C 2 - AHNAK2 or unfused GST lysates were used in pull - down assays with lysates of T7 - tagged dysferlin C2A ( Fig . 4 A and 4 A (cid:6) ) and dysferlin C2A - V67D ( Fig . 4 B and 4 B (cid:6) ) fusion proteins . Bound proteins were separated by SDS - PAGE and analyzed by immunoblot - ting using anti - T7 HRP . In Fig . 4 , lanes 1 – 5 represent induced fusion proteins , precleared fusion proteins , GST - C 2 - AHNAK , GST - C 2 - AHNAK2 , and unfused GST pull - down fractions , re - spectively . Figure 4 A and 4 B , 4A (cid:6) and 4B (cid:6) represent the pull - down assays in the presence of Ca 2 (cid:3) or absence of Ca 2 (cid:3) , respectively . As shown , GST - C 2 - AHNAK and GST - C 2 - AHNAK2 pulled down T7 - tagged dysferlin C2A fusion proteins in the presence ( Fig . 4 A ) and absence of Ca 2 (cid:3) ( Fig . 4 A (cid:6) ) . However , GST - C 2 - AHNAK2 was unable to pull down T7 - tagged dysferlin C2A - V67D fusion proteins in the presence or absence of Ca 2 (cid:3) . The interaction between C 2 - AHNAK and dysferlin C2A - V67D was reduced by the addition of EDTA ( Fig . 4 B and 4 B (cid:6) ) . Unfused GST did not interact with T7 - tagged dysferlin C2A or dysferlin C2A - V67D fusion proteins . 738 Vol . 21 March 2007 HUANG ET AL . The FASEB Journal notexin - injected muscle , AHNAK is redistributed to the cytoplasm in parallel with dysferlin ( Fig . 7 ) . DISCUSSION Dysferlin is a mammalian homologue of a Caenorhabditis elegans protein that mediates spermatid vesicle / plasma membrane fusion ( 4 ) . Dysferlin is ubiquitously ex - pressed , with highest expression in skeletal muscle and heart ( 5 ) . Dysferlin - null mice progressively develop pathological characteristics of muscular dystrophy . In dysferlin - null mice , there are subsarcolemmal accumu - lations of yet uncharacterized vesicles , and dysferlin - deﬁcient muscle ﬁbers are defective in Ca 2 (cid:3) - dependent sarcolemma resealing ( 14 ) . To gain further insights into the molecular mechanisms of dysferlin function , we have searched for proteins that interact with dysfer - lin in skeletal muscle . In this paper , we describe a novel interaction of dysferlin with AHNAK based on IP coupled to MALDI - MS analysis , further conﬁrmed by coimmunoprecipitation and GST pull - down assays , and by immunoﬂuorescence microscopy analysis . CAPN3 , whose mutations cause LGMD2A , has been conﬁrmed to interact with dysferlin in a similar way ( 11 ) . Caveo - lin - 3 , afﬁxin , and annexins , another three known dys - ferlin - interacting proteins , were undetectable because of their locations in the smears caused by the cross - reactivity of the secondary Ab against coimmunopre - cipitated IgG molecules from the muscle homogenate . In this paper , we describe a novel interaction of dysferlin with AHNAK based on IP coupled to MALDI - MS analysis , further conﬁrmed by coimmuno - precipitation and GST pull - down assays , and by immu - noﬂuorescence microscopy analysis . The interaction sites between dysferlin and AHNAK have been deﬁned as the carboxyterminal 500 aa of both AHNAK variants and the C2A domain of dysferlin and its homologue myoferlin . In C2C12 cells , we detected two isoforms of dysferlin . Recently , Salani et al . ( 23 ) also presented evidence for two dysferlin isoforms , of which the low - MW variant is progressively replaced by the full - length dysferlin as myoblast fusion proceeds and com - pletely disappears in adult skeletal muscle . Regardless of the precise differences between both isoforms we detect , AHNAK speciﬁcally interacts with the full - length dysferlin despite the much higher abundance of the low MW isoform in the precleared protein fraction . Although the low MW isoform is thought to preserve the carboxyterminal region , as it can be recognized by NCL - Hamlet , the binding with AHNAK is completely abolished . This may suggest that the low MW isoform of dysferlin may have either lost the C2A domain that is recognized by AHNAK or has undergone a conforma - tional change that impairs the binding between both proteins . In proteins containing a single C2 domain , this domain is often involved in calcium - dependent phos - pholipid binding . However , C2 domains can also be involved in protein - protein binding , in a Ca 2 (cid:3) - depen - Figure 6 . Immunoﬂuorescent analysis of frozen muscle sections of three unrelated LGMD2B patients showed a comparable and similar reduction of AHNAK and dysferlin , with some patchy trace staining , at the sarcolemma of these three dysferlinpathy patients . Right : integrity of the membrane in the patients using antidystrophin and sarcoglycan antibodies . ( A ) . A (cid:6) ) Immuno - blots of three unrelated LGMD2B patients using polyclonal anti AHNAK KIS Ab . Lane 1 is a control muscle , lanes 2 – 4 represent patient 1 , patient 2 , and patient 3 , respectively . Compared to normal control skeletal muscle , full length 700 kDa AHNAK protein was absent in all three patients . Equal loading and transfer was conﬁrmed by Ponceau S staining . Double staining in serial sections shows that the presence of AHNAK in the blood vessels persists , suggesting a muscle - speciﬁc reduction of AHNAK in patient 2 ( B ) . C ) Immunolabeling analysis of seven additional nondysferlin muscular dystrophies with dysferlin Ab and AHNAK Ab . Both dysferlin and AHNAK showed normal expression at the sarcolemma in all cases ( BMD , FSHD , DMD , (cid:8) - sarcoglycanopathy , (cid:1) - sarcoglycanopathy , (cid:7) - sarcoglycanopathy ) except LG1C . In this case , dysferlin and AHNAK showed a secondary overall reduction to the primary loss of caveolin - 3 . And in this patient , the presence of AHNAK in blood vessels was shown by costaining with CD31 in serial sections ( C ) . The right panels show the integrity of the membrane in this patient using anti - (cid:1) sarcoglycan Ab . 739 AHNAK INTERACTS WITH DYSFERLIN dent or independent fashion . Previously , it was shown that in dysferlin and myoferlin , the C2A domain showed Ca 2 (cid:3) - dependent phospholipid binding , while the other C2 domains showed no afﬁnity for phospho - lipids ( 7 ) . It was speculated that these domains are involved in protein - protein interactions . Moreover , the V67D mutation in the C2A domain demonstrated re - duced phospholipid binding . Our studies show a calcium - independent interaction between AHNAK and the C2A domains of dysferlin . Interestingly , the V67D mutation disrupts the binding between dysferlin and AHNAK2 , while the afﬁnity for AHNAK is reduced in a calcium - dependent manner . AHNAK is a family of two proteins ( AHNAK and AHNAK2 ) of exceptionally large size ( (cid:9) 600 – 700 kDa ) and characterized by common amino acid sequences and structural features ( 21 ) . The AHNAK proteins have a tripartite structuring , including the amino - terminal 251 amino acid large head , a large central region of 4390 amino acids composed of 26 repeated elements , and the carboxyl - terminal tail of 1002 amino acids . Like dysferlin , high expression levels of AHNAK are ob - served in all muscular cells , including cardiomyocytes and skeletal muscle cells ( 19 ) . The uniform distribu - tion of AHNAK at the plasma membrane of skeletal muscle is also observed in normal human skin ( 24 ) and mouse keratinocytes ( 25 ) . However , structure predic - tion algorithms do not provide evidence for the pres - ence of transmembrane domains in AHNAK to explain the plasma membrane localization . It was suggested that its membrane association is probably dependent on speciﬁc interactions with the annexin A2 / S100A10 complex in human epithelial MCF - 7 cells through the AHNAK C - terminus ( 26 ) . Nevertheless , annexin A2 / S100A10 complexes do not contain transmembrane domains either . Dysferlin has also been shown to associate with the annexin 2 / S100A10 complex in a Ca 2 (cid:3) - and membrane injury - dependent manner ( 12 ) . We thus propose a model in which the sarcolemmal localization and stabilization of AHNAK can be con - trolled by its direct interaction with dysferlin and myoferlin , which are anchored to the sarcolemma through their single transmembrane domain ( Fig . 8 ) . The functional signiﬁcance of the interaction be - tween dysferlin and AHNAK comes from the observa - tion that AHNAK is , like dysferlin , primarily localized at the sarcolemma and is secondarily reduced in muscle from patients with genetically conﬁrmed dysferlinopa - thy , generally comparable to the loss of dysferlin . Moreover , in LGMD1C , dysferlin and AHNAK showed Figure 7 . Immunostaining of dysferlin and AHNAK in regenerating rat skeletal muscle sections 4 days postnotexin treatment . Dysferlin shows extensive cytoplasmic staining , while (cid:1) - spectrin , (cid:1) - dystroglycan , and dystrophin staining is indistinguishable from the normal mock - treated control . AHNAK also shows a redistributed greater cytoplasmic staining and a thickening at the sarcolemma on regenerating rat skeletal muscle sections . Figure 8 . A scheme representing the proteins involved in the dysferlin complex at sarcolemma in skeletal muscle . In the multimeric complex , known direct interactions include those between the beta2 subunit of the cardiac L - type Ca 2 (cid:3) channel and AHNAK , and between AHNAK and annexin / S100A10 . The interactions of dysferlin with CAPN3 , caveolin - 3 , and annexin A1 / A2 , respectively , are either direct or indirect . In this study , we demonstrated the direct interaction between dysferlin and AHNAK and between myoferlin and AHNAK , respectively ( indicated with red lines ) . In the dysferlin complex , dysfer - lin , caveolin - 3 , and CAPN3 have been linked to LGMD2B , LGMD2A and LGMD1C , respectively . 740 Vol . 21 March 2007 HUANG ET AL . The FASEB Journal a secondary overall reduction to the primary loss of caveolin - 3 , for which a functional relationship with dysferlin has already been suggested ( 10 ) . In con - trast , in unrelated muscular dystrophies , dysferlin and AHNAK showed normal sarcolemma staining . This secondary reduction is muscle speciﬁc , as we do not observe a loss of AHNAK in the blood capillaries of LGMD2B and LGMD1C patients . In addition , we have provided further evidence for a functional cooperation between dysferlin and AHNAK during muscle regeneration . Dysferlin and AHNAK show a marked increase and cytoplasmic localization during regeneration , consistent with the direct interac - tion between them and mobilization of the AHNAK - dysferlin complex during repair and regeneration . Reg - ulation of cellular AHNAK content in relationship with cell membrane remodeling and specialization has al - ready been observed in epithelial and endothelial cells ( 26 ) . In these cells , AHNAK stabilization is dependent on its recruitment to the plasma membrane through interaction with partner proteins , including the an - nexin2 / S100A10 complex ( 26 ) . Dysferlin has also been shown to associate with the annexin 2 / S100A10 com - plex in a Ca 2 (cid:3) - and membrane injury - dependent man - ner ( 12 ) . Thus , we suggest that at the sarcolemmal membrane dysferlin , AHNAK and the annexin2 / S100A10 may act in a single functional complex , includ - ing caveolin - 3 , afﬁxin , and CAPN3 , with a role in renewal of the complex structures of the sarcolemma . In agreement with the proposed membrane repair function for AHNAK , it was demonstrated that AHNAK is also an integral component of a newly discovered Ca 2 (cid:3) - regulated vesicle capable of rapid exocytosis , called enlargosome . Enlargosome exocytosis is induced by plasma membrane disruption and is thought to be involved in both plasma membrane differentiation and repair ( 16 ) . In this line , an interaction of dysferlin and AHNAK in striated muscle is particularly intriguing , as dysferlin was already implied in patch fusion repair . Like the uncharacterized vesicular accumulation in SJL - dysf mice , AHNAK - positive enlargosomes are con - centrated in the cytoplasmic rim below the plasma - lemma ( 16 ) . It is , therefore , imperative to further investigate the role of enlargosomes in muscle mem - brane maintenance and repair . Another intriguing hypothesis for the function of the dysferlin complex is a putative involvement in signal transduction in addition to plasma membrane repair . Recently , it was demonstrated that dysferlin coprecipi - tates with the dihydropyridine receptor ( DHPR ) by immunoprecipitation . And double immunoﬂuorescent staining revealed that dysferlin was observed to partially colocalize with DHPR in skeletal muscle ﬁbers ( 8 ) . The DHPR forms the L - type Ca 2 (cid:3) channel , acts as the voltage sensor and initiates the cascade of events lead - ing to excitation - contraction ( EC ) coupling by the strict functional and structural relationship of DHPR and ryanodine receptor type 1 ( RyR1 ) ( 27 ) . In agreement with the interaction between dysferlin and DHPR , the association of AHNAK with the regulatory (cid:1) 2 subunit of L - type Ca 2 (cid:3) channel indicated a potential role of AHNAK in the regulation of channel activity ( 17 ) . Moreover , it has been demonstrated that AHNAK binds and activates phospholipase C - (cid:7) 1 in the presence of arachidonic acid ( 28 ) and interacts with the EF hand Ca 2 (cid:3) binding protein S100B ( 29 ) . In this study , we also demonstrated that AHNAK colocalizes with DHPR in longitudinal sections of normal human skeletal muscle . Thus , it is intriguing to suggest that the dysferlin - AHNAK complex may have implications in signal trans - duction in skeletal muscle . In summary , we demonstrate that AHNAK is a novel member of the dysferlin protein complex in skeletal muscle . In this paper , we report that AHNAK directly interacts with dysferlin and that both proteins colocal - ize in skeletal muscle by double immunoﬂuorescence labeling . Moreover , we have provided evidence for a functional cooperation between dysferlin and AHNAK during muscle regeneration . Our studies suggest that the dysferlin complex , including a novel component , AHNAK , may act simultaneously in Ca 2 (cid:3) - mediated muscle membrane homeostasis processes and signal transduction events . We are grateful to Dr . Takashi Hashimoto , Keio University School of Medicine , for providing us with cDNA clones of human AHNAK . This work was supported by grants from SenterNovem ( IOP - Genomics IGE01019 ) and the National Institutes of Health ( NIH - NIAMS R21 - AR48327 – 01 ) . REFERENCES 1 . Illa , I . , Serrano - Munuera , C . , Gallardo , E . , Lasa , A . , Rojas - Garcia , R . , Palmer , J . , Gallano , P . , Baiget , M . , Matsuda , C . , and Brown , R . H . ( 2001 ) Distal anterior compartment myopathy : a dysferlin mutation causing a new muscular dystrophy phenotype . Ann . Neurol . 49 , 130 – 134 2 . Liu , J . , Aoki , M . , Illa , I . , Wu , C . , Fardeau , M . , Angelini , C . , Serrano , C . , Urtizberea , J . A . , Hentati , F . , Hamida , M . B . , et al . ( 1998 ) Dysferlin , a novel skeletal muscle gene , is mutated in Miyoshi myopathy and limb girdle muscular dystrophy . Nat . Genet . 20 , 31 – 36 3 . Bashir , R . , Britton , S . , Strachan , T . , Keers , S . , Vaﬁadaki , E . , Lako , M . , Richard , I . , Marchand , S . , Bourg , N . , Argov , Z . , et al . ( 1998 ) A gene related to Caenorhabditis elegans spermatogenesis factor fer - 1 is mutated in limb - girdle muscular dystrophy type 2B . Nat . Genet . 20 , 37 – 42 4 . Achanzar , W . E . , and Ward , S . ( 1997 ) A nematode gene required for sperm vesicle fusion . J . Cell Sci . 110 ( Pt 9 ) , 1073 – 1081 5 . Anderson , L . V . , Davison , K . , Moss , J . A . , Young , C . , Cullen , M . J . , Walsh , J . , Johnson , M . A . , Bashir , R . , Britton , S . , Keers , S . , et al . ( 1999 ) Dysferlin is a plasma membrane protein and is expressed early in human development . Hum . Mol . Genet . 8 , 855 – 861 6 . Piccolo , F . , Moore , S . A . , Ford , G . C . , and Campbell , K . P . ( 2000 ) Intracellular accumulation and reduced sarcolemmal expres - sion of dysferlin in limb – girdle muscular dystrophies . Ann . Neurol . 48 , 902 – 912 7 . Davis , D . B . , Doherty , K . R . , Delmonte , A . J . , and McNally , E . M . ( 2002 ) Calcium - sensitive phospholipid binding properties of normal and mutant ferlin C2 domains . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 22883 – 22888 8 . Ampong , B . N . , Imamura , M . , Matsumiya , T . , Yoshida , M . , and Takeda , S . ( 2005 ) Intracellular localization of dysferlin and its association with the dihydropyridine receptor . Acta Myol . 24 , 134 – 144 741 AHNAK INTERACTS WITH DYSFERLIN 9 . Matsuda , C . , Kameyama , K . , Tagawa , K . , Ogawa , M . , Suzuki , A . , Yamaji , S . , Okamoto , H . , Nishino , I . , and Hayashi , Y . K . ( 2005 ) Dysferlin interacts with afﬁxin ( beta - parvin ) at the sarcolemma . J . Neuropathol . Exp . Neurol . 64 , 334 – 340 10 . Hernandez - Deviez , D . J . , Martin , S . , Laval , S . H . , Lo , H . P . , Cooper , S . T . , North , K . N . , Bushby , K . , and Parton , R . G . ( 2006 ) Aberrant dysferlin trafﬁcking in cells lacking caveolin or ex - pressing dystrophy mutants of caveolin - 3 . Hum . Mol . Genet . 15 , 129 – 142 11 . Huang , Y . , Verheesen , P . , Roussis , A . , Frankhuizen , W . , Ginjaar , I . , Haldane , F . , Laval , S . , Anderson , L . V . , Verrips , T . , Frants , R . R . , et al . ( 2005 ) Protein studies in dysferlinopathy patients using llama - derived antibody fragments selected by phage dis - play . Eur . J . Hum . Genet . 13 , 721 – 730 12 . Lennon , N . J . , Kho , A . , Bacskai , B . J . , Perlmutter , S . L . , Hyman , B . T . , and Brown , R . H . , Jr . ( 2003 ) Dysferlin interacts with annexins A1 and A2 and mediates sarcolemmal wound - healing . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 50466 – 50473 13 . Matsuda , C . , Hayashi , Y . K . , Ogawa , M . , Aoki , M . , Murayama , K . , Nishino , I . , Nonaka , I . , Arahata , K . , and Brown , R . H . , Jr . ( 2001 ) The sarcolemmal proteins dysferlin and caveolin - 3 interact in skeletal muscle . Hum . Mol . Genet . 10 , 1761 – 1766 14 . Bansal , D . , Miyake , K . , Vogel , S . S . , Groh , S . , Chen , C . C . , Williamson , R . , McNeil , P . L . , and Campbell , K . P . ( 2003 ) Defective membrane repair in dysferlin - deﬁcient muscular dys - trophy . Nature 423 , 168 – 172 15 . Hohaus , A . , Person , V . , Behlke , J . , Schaper , J . , Morano , I . , and Haase , H . ( 2002 ) The carboxyl - terminal region of ahnak pro - vides a link between cardiac L - type Ca 2 (cid:3) channels and the actin - based cytoskeleton . FASEB J . 16 , 1205 – 1216 16 . Borgonovo , B . , Cocucci , E . , Racchetti , G . , Podini , P . , Bachi , A . , and Meldolesi , J . ( 2002 ) Regulated exocytosis : a novel , widely expressed system . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 955 – 962 17 . Haase , H . , Podzuweit , T . , Lutsch , G . , Hohaus , A . , Kostka , S . , Lindschau , C . , Kott , M . , Kraft , R . , and Morano , I . ( 1999 ) Signaling from beta - adrenoceptor to L - type calcium channel : identiﬁcation of a novel cardiac protein kinase A target possess - ing similarities to AHNAK . FASEB J . 13 , 2161 – 2172 18 . Anderson , L . V . , and Davison , K . ( 1999 ) Multiplex Western blotting system for the analysis of muscular dystrophy proteins . Am . J . Pathol . 154 , 1017 – 1022 19 . Gentil , B . J . , Delphin , C . , Benaud , C . , and Baudier , J . ( 2003 ) Expression of the giant protein AHNAK ( desmoyokin ) in mus - cle and lining epithelial cells . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 51 , 339 – 348 20 . Shevchenko , A . , Wilm , M . , Vorm , O . , Jensen , O . N . , Podtelejni - kov , A . V . , Neubauer , G . , Shevchenko , A . , Mortensen , P . , and Mann , M . ( 1996 ) A strategy for identifying gel - separated pro - teins in sequence databases by MS alone . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 24 , 893 – 896 21 . Komuro , A . , Masuda , Y . , Kobayashi , K . , Babbitt , R . , Gunel , M . , Flavell , R . A . , and Marchesi , V . T . ( 2004 ) The AHNAKs are a class of giant propeller - like proteins that associate with calcium channel proteins of cardiomyocytes and other cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 101 , 4053 – 4058 22 . Illarioshkin , S . N . , Ivanova - Smolenskaya , I . A . , Greenberg , C . R . , Nylen , E . , Sukhorukov , V . S . , Poleshchuk , V . V . , Markova , E . D . , and Wrogemann , K . ( 2000 ) Identical dysferlin mutation in limb - girdle muscular dystrophy type 2B and distal myopathy . Neurology . 55 , 1931 – 1933 23 . Salani , S . , Lucchiari , S . , Fortunato , F . , Crimi , M . , Corti , S . , Locatelli , F . , Bossolasco , P . , Bresolin , N . , and Comi , G . P . ( 2004 ) Developmental and tissue - speciﬁc regulation of a novel dysferlin isoform . Muscle Nerve 30 , 366 – 374 24 . Masunaga , T . , Shimizu , H . , Ishiko , A . , Fujiwara , T . , Hashimoto , T . , and Nishikawa , T . ( 1995 ) Desmoyokin / AHNAK protein localizes to the non - desmosomal keratinocyte cell surface of human epidermis . J . Invest . Dermatol . 104 , 941 – 945 25 . Hashimoto , T . , Amagai , M . , Parry , D . A . , Dixon , T . W . , Tsukita , S . , Tsukita , S . , Miki , K . , Sakai , K . , Inokuchi , Y . , and Kudoh , J . ( 1993 ) Desmoyokin , a 680 - kDa keratinocyte plasma membrane - associated protein , is homologous to the protein encoded by human gene AHNAK . J . Cell Sci . 105 ( Pt 2 ) , 275 – 286 26 . Benaud , C . , Gentil , B . J . , Assard , N . , Court , M . , Garin , J . , Delphin , C . , and Baudier , J . ( 2004 ) AHNAK interaction with the annexin 2 / S100A10 complex regulates cell membrane cytoar - chitecture . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 133 – 144 27 . Schneider , M . F . , Rodney , G . G . , and Ward , C . W . ( 2004 ) Local Ca 2 (cid:3) release events in skeletal muscle . J . Muscle . Res . Cell . Motil . 25 , 587 – 589 28 . Sekiya , F . , Bae , Y . S . , Jhon , D . Y . , Hwang , S . C . , and Rhee , S . G . ( 1999 ) AHNAK , a protein that binds and activates phospho - lipase C - gamma1 in the presence of arachidonic acid . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 13900 – 13907 29 . Gentil , B . J . , Delphin , C . , Mbele , G . O . , Deloulme , J . C . , Ferro , M . , Garin , J . , and Baudier , J . ( 2001 ) The giant protein AHNAK is a speciﬁc target for the calcium - and zinc - binding S100B protein : potential implications for Ca 2 (cid:3) homeostasis regulation by S100B . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 23253 – 23261 Received for publication June 23 , 2006 . Accepted for publication October 25 , 2006 . 742 Vol . 21 March 2007 HUANG ET AL . The FASEB Journal