2360 Research Article Introduction Degradation and removal of ECM proteins is a cell - mediated process , which is involved in a number of physiological processes , such as development , postnatal tissue remodeling and tissue repair ( Clark , 1996 ; Holmbeck et al . , 1999 ; Vu et al . , 1998 ) . Impaired or abnormal degradation and removal of ECM components contributes to the onset and progression of many diseases , including fibrosis , arthritis and cancer ( Hotary et al . , 2003 ; Kurban et al . , 2006 ; Liotta and Kohn , 2001 ; Mutsaers et al . , 1997 ; Poole et al . , 2003 ) . Two principal molecular mechanisms are believed to be involved in the turnover of ECM . One is extracellular degradation of ECM proteins by matrix metalloproteases ( MMPs ) , plasmin and other proteases ( Marchina and Barlati , 1996 ; Shapiro , 1998 ) . The other pathway occurs via internalization of ECM proteins and intracellular degradation in lysosomes ( Godyna et al . , 1995 ; Memmo and McKeown - Longo , 1998 ; Murphy - Ullrich and Mosher , 1987 ; Wienke et al . , 2003 ) . These two pathways are not mutually exclusive and probably work collaboratively during ECM turnover . Many ECM proteins form supramolecular complexes ( Kuivaniemi et al . , 1991 ; McKeown - Longo and Mosher , 1989 ; Sasaki et al . , 2004 ; Schwarzbauer and Sechler , 1999 ; van der Rest and Garrone , 1991 ) . Thus , prior to internalization , extracellular degradation may partially breakdown large multimers or crosslinked molecules . Additionally , some fragments derived from ECM proteins possess functions distinct from the intact proteins ( Giannelli et al . , 1997 ; O’Reilly et al . , 1997 ; Sasaki et al . , 2000 ; Xu et al . , 2001 ) . Hence , cellular internalization can provide a way to regulate the availability of ECM fragments that may have potent biological effects . However , at present , mechanisms and pathways for degradation and removal of supramolecular ECM components are not completely understood . Integrin receptors play important roles in mediating cell adhesion , contractility , motility and growth ( Aplin et al . , 1999 ; Burridge and Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , 1996 ; Howe et al . , 1998 ; Hynes , 1992 ; Hynes , 2002 ) . Ligation of integrins with ECM ligands can activate signaling pathways and influence cytoskeleton organization , which account for many of the biological functions of integrins ( Brakebusch and Fassler , 2003 ; Geiger et al . , 2001 ; Ginsberg et al . , 2005 ) . Integrins are known to be constitutively endocytosed and recycled ( Bretscher , 1989 ; Bretscher , 1992 ; Pellinen and Ivaska , 2006 ) . Disruption of integrin endocytosis and recycling can impair cell spreading and migration ( Proux - Gillardeaux et al . , 2005 ; Roberts et al . , 2001 ) . Relatively little attention has been given to the fate of the ECM proteins that are ligated to integrins during integrin endocytosis , or to how ECM proteins may modify integrin internalization . In addition , most studies on integrin trafficking do not distinguish between ECM - bound and - unbound forms of the receptors . ECM remodeling has been shown to be critical to many cellular functions , including cell migration and invasion ( Engelholm et al . , 2003 ; Hocking and Chang , 2003 ; Hornebeck et al . , 2002 ; Hotary et al . , 2000 ; Sabeh et al . , 2004 ) . Therefore , coupling of ECM remodeling with integrin endocytosis / recycling may be an important feature of integrin trafficking . We established a fibronectin ( FN ) - null myofibroblast cell culture model system ( Sottile et al . , 1998 ) . The turnover of fibronectin matrix can be easily induced in FN - null myofibroblasts when soluble fibronectin is removed from the culture medium . Using this model system , we previously demonstrated that fibronectin matrix turnover β 1 integrins are major cell surface receptors for fibronectin . Some integrins , including β 1 integrins , are known to undergo constitutive endocytosis and recycling . Integrin endocytosis / recycling has been implicated in the regulation of cell migration . However , the mechanisms by which integrin endocytosis / recycling regulates cell migration , and other biological consequences of integrin trafficking are not completely understood . We previously showed that turnover of extracellular matrix ( ECM ) fibronectin occurs via receptor - mediated endocytosis . Here , we investigate the biological relevance of β 1 integrin endocytosis to fibronectin matrix turnover . First , we demonstrate that β 1 integrins , including α 5 β 1 play an important role in endocytosis and turnover of matrix fibronectin . Second , we show that caveolin - 1 constitutively regulates endocytosis of α 5 β 1 integrins , and that α 5 β 1 integrin endocytosis can occur in the absence of fibronectin and fibronectin matrix . We also show that downregulation of caveolin - 1 expression by siRNA results in marked reduction of β 1 integrin and fibronectin endocytosis . Hence , caveolin - 1 - dependent β 1 integrin and fibronectin endocytosis plays a critical role in fibronectin matrix turnover , and may contribute to abnormal ECM remodeling that occurs in fibrotic disorders . Supplementary material available online at http : / / jcs . biologists . org / cgi / content / full / 121 / 14 / 2360 / DC1 Key words : Integrin , Extracellular matrix , Endocytosis , Caveolae , Fibrosis Summary Caveolin - 1 - dependent β 1 integrin endocytosis is a critical regulator of fibronectin turnover Feng Shi and Jane Sottile * Aab Cardiovascular Research Institute , University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry , 211 Bailey Road , West Henrietta , NY 14586 , USA * Author for correspondence ( e - mail : jane _ sottile @ urmc . rochester . edu ) Accepted 28 April 2008 Journal of Cell Science 121 , 2360 - 2371 Published by The Company of Biologists 2008 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 014977 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 2361 β 1 - integrin - mediated fibronectin endocytosis plays an important role in governing ECM turnover ( Sottile and Hocking , 2002 ) . We also showed that fibronectin matrix turnover occurs through receptor - mediated endocytosis and is followed by lysosomal degradation ( Sottile and Chandler , 2005 ) . In this manuscript , we used this experimental model system to explore the role of integrin endocytosis in fibronectin matrix turnover . We demonstrate that β 1 integrins , including α 5 β 1 , are fibronectin matrix endocytic receptors . Moreover , we show that caveolin - 1 ( official protein symbol CAV1 ) constitutively regulates α 5 β 1 integrin endocytosis , regardless of the presence or absence of fibronectin and fibronectin matrix . We previously demonstrated that downregulation of caveolin - 1 by siRNA inhibits fibronectin matrix turnover . Here we show that downregulation of caveolin - 1 also impairs β 1 integrin endocytosis . These data demonstrate the importance of caveolin - 1 - dependent integrin endocytosis in regulating fibronectin matrix turnover . Results β 1 integrins colocalize with internalized fibronectin during long - term fibronectin matrix turnover Fibronectin matrix turnover occurs through receptor - mediated endocytosis and intracellular degradation in a process that is regulated by caveolin - 1 ( Sottile and Chandler , 2005 ) . Here we investigate the receptors that are involved in endocytosis of fibronectin and turnover of matrix fibronectin . Both integrins and proteoglycans are known to bind fibronectin , and to participate in endocytosis of various ligands , including ECM proteins ( Chen et al . , 1996 ; McKeown - Longo and Panetti , 1993 ; Memmo and McKeown - Longo , 1998 ; Murphy - Ullrich and Mosher , 1987 ; Pijuan - Thompson and Gladson , 1997 ) , and hence , both are candidates for mediating fibronectin turnover . Some integrins , including β 1 integrins , undergo constitutive endocytosis and recycling ( Bretscher , 1989 ; Bretscher , 1992 ; Caswell and Norman , 2006 ; Pellinen and Ivaska , 2006 ; Sczekan and Juliano , 1990 ) . α 5 β 1 and α v β 3 are major fibronectin receptors expressed in FN - null myofibroblasts ( Sottile et al . , 1998 ) . As a first step in determining whether integrins are involved in regulating fibronectin matrix turnover , we tested whether fibronectin and β 1 or β 3 integrins are trafficked to the same endocytic compartment . FN - null myofibroblasts were incubated overnight with Texas Red ( TR ) - conjugated fibronectin to allow them to establish a robust fibronectin matrix . Cells were washed , and then chased with culture medium lacking fibronectin and containing chloroquine , an inhibitor of lysosomal hydrolases ( de Duve et al . , 1974 ) that also inhibits fibronectin degradation ( Sottile and Chandler , 2005 ) . Using this pulse - chase assay , we previously showed that there is a time - dependent loss of fibronectin matrix fibrils and a corresponding increase in fibronectin degradation during the chase period ( Sottile and Hocking , 2002 ) . As shown in Fig . 1A , internalized fibronectin was readily detected in permeabilized cells following the chase period , and showed extensive colocalization with β 1 integrins ( Fig . 1C ) . To ensure that the β 1 integrins detected in fibronectin - containing vesicles are internalized from the cell surface , cell surface β 1 integrins were labeled with the 9EG7 antibody , which recognizes the ligand - bound conformation of β 1 integrins ( Bazzoni et al . , 1995 ; Lenter et al . , 1993 ) . The 9EG7 antibody ( Fig . 1E , F ) , but not the isotype control antibody ( data not shown ) , was internalized into fibronectin - containing intracellular vesicles during fibronectin matrix turnover . Extensive colocalization of internalized fibronectin and β 1 integrins was also seen in smooth muscle cells ( Fig . 1G - I ) . Fibronectin and β 1 integrins colocalize shortly after the initiation of endocytosis To determine whether fibronectin and β 1 integrins are similarly colocalized at early times after the initiation of endocytosis , we developed a short - term fibronectin endocytosis pulse - chase assay . In this assay , fluorescently labeled fibronectin is added to the culture medium and allowed to bind to cells for 1 hour at 4°C ( pulse phase ) . The culture medium containing unbound fibronectin is then replaced with medium lacking fibronectin , and the cells incubated at 37°C ( chase phase ) to allow endocytosis to occur . Intracellular fibronectin was detected by confocal microscopy as soon as 30 minutes following the start of the chase ( Fig . 2A ) . The FN - null myofibroblasts in Fig . 2 were co - incubated with FITC - conjugated 9EG7 during the pulse phase . Internalized TR - fibronectin ( Fig . 2A ) and FITC - 9EG7 ( Fig . 2B ) were extensively colocalized ( Fig . 2C , arrowheads ) . Quantitative analysis of confocal z - sections showed that 75 % of the internalized fibronectin colocalized with 9EG7 ( β 1 integrins ) . α 5 integrins also colocalize with internalized fibronectin Six different α subunits form dimeric complexes with β 1 integrins and function as fibronectin receptors ( Johansson et al . , 1997 ; Plow Fig . 1 . Colocalization of internalized fibronectin with β 1 integrins . ( A - C ) FN - null myofibroblasts were incubated with 10 μ g / ml TR - fibronectin overnight . Cells were washed and then incubated for 12 hours in cell culture media lacking fibronectin , but containing 50 μ M chloroquine . Cells were stained with an anti - β 1 integrin antibody ( HM β 1 - 1 ) . ( A ) TR - fibronectin ; ( B ) β 1 integrin ; ( C ) overlay image . ( D - F ) FN - null myofibroblasts were incubated with 10 μ g / ml TR - fibronectin overnight . Cells were washed , and then incubated with 10 μ g / ml 9EG7 at 4°C for 30 minutes . Cells were washed , and then chased for 4 hours with cell culture medium lacking fibronectin , but containing 100 μ M chloroquine . Cells were then stained with a FITC - conjugated secondary antibody . ( D ) TR - fibronectin ; ( E ) 9EG7 ( β 1 integrin ) ; ( F ) overlay image . ( G - I ) Smooth muscle cells were incubated with 10 μ g / ml TR - fibronectin and 50 μ M chloroquine for 12 hours . Cells were stained using an anti - β 1 integrin antibody . ( G ) TR - fibronectin ; ( H ) β 1 integrin ( FITC ) ; ( I ) overlay image . All images are optical sections collected from a confocal microscope . Scale bars : 10 μ m . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 2362 et al . , 2000 ) . Because α 5 and α v integrins are expressed in FN - null myofibroblasts in relatively high amounts ( Sottile et al . , 1998 ) , we first focused on determining whether these two α subunits are trafficked to the same endocytic compartment as fibronectin . We used rat smooth muscle cells for these experiments because the available α 5 antibodies did not strongly recognize intracellular α 5 integrin in mouse cells . There was substantial colocalization of α 5 integrin ( Fig . 3B ) and fibronectin ( Fig . 3A ) in intracellular vesicles ( Fig . 3C ) . By contrast , there was no detectable α v or α 3 integrins in fibronectin - containing vesicles ( data not shown ) . Quantification of fibronectin endocytosis To further establish the role of integrins in regulating fibronectin endocytosis , we combined our short - term fibronectin endocytosis pulse - chase assay with flow cytometry . For these experiments , fluorescently labeled fibronectin was added to cells at 4°C during the pulse . The labeled fibronectin was removed , and the cells switched to 37°C to initiate endocytosis . At the end of the chase , the remaining extracellular fibronectin was removed by proteolytic digestion , and quenched using Trypan Blue as described in the Materials and Methods ( Hed , 1977 ; Van Amersfoort and Van Strijp , 1994 ) . The fluorescence signal emitted from internalized fibronectin was measured by flow cytometry . As shown in Fig . 4A , there was a dose - dependent increase in the level of endocytosed fibronectin with increasing concentrations of added fibronectin up to 20 - 30 μ g / ml . To determine whether Journal of Cell Science 121 ( 14 ) fibronectin endocytosis is competable , a given dose of Alexa Fluor 488 ( AF488 ) - fibronectin ( 10 μ g / ml ) was incubated with cells in the presence of increasing concentrations of unlabeled fibronectin during the pulse phase . As shown in Fig . 4B , endocytosis of AF488 - fibronectin was maximally ( 81 % ) inhibited by 800 μ g / ml unlabeled fibronectin . The experiment in Fig . 4A was performed in the absence or presence of excess unlabelled fibronectin ( 800 μ g / ml ) during the pulse phase . Nonspecific endocytosis is defined as that occurring in the presence of excess unlabelled fibronectin . The nonspecific component in this assay probably represents the noncompetable fraction of fibronectin binding . The linear increase in nonspecific fibronectin endocytosis parallels the linear increase in noncompetable fibronectin binding that is seen when 125 I - labelled fibronectin is added to adherent cells in the presence of excess unlabelled fibronectin ( McKeown - Longo and Mosher , 1983 ) . Fibronectin internalization is saturated at fibronectin concentrations above 30 - 50 μ g / ml , as shown by the plateau in the endocytosis curve at high concentrations of added fibronectin ( Fig . 4A ) . β 1 integrins function as fibronectin endocytic receptors Endocytosed fibronectin colocalizes with β 1 and α 5 integrins ( Figs 1 - 3 ) , suggesting that these integrins may be involved in fibronectin endocytosis . To determine whether β 1 integrins are functionally required for fibronectin endocytosis in FN - null myofibroblasts , we used function blocking anti - integrin antibodies and assessed their effect on fibronectin internalization . Prior to the pulse phase , FN - null myofibroblasts were pre - incubated with β 1 antibodies at 4°C , followed by the addition of fluorescently labeled fibronectin . Addition of β 1 integrin inhibitory antibodies substantially reduced fibronectin endocytosis ( Fig . 5A , B ) . Flow cytometry was used to quantify the level of internalized fibronectin . There was a 70 . 2±3 . 5 % reduction in internalized fibronectin in cells treated with β 1 inhibitory antibodies ( Fig . 5C ) . We examined the cell surface levels Fig . 2 . Colocalization of internalized fibronectin and β 1 integrins shortly after initiation of endocytosis . FN - null myofibroblasts were incubated with 10 μ g / ml TR - fibronectin and 50 μ g / ml FITC - conjugated 9EG7 at 4°C for 1 hour during the pulse . After 30 minutes of chase at 37°C , cells were incubated with 0 . 2 % Trypan Blue for 3 minutes to quench extracellular fluorescence . ( A ) TR - fibronectin ; ( B ) FITC - conjugated 9EG7 ; ( C ) overlay images . Arrowheads in C indicate colocalized TR - Fibronectin and FITC - 9EG7 . These images are optical sections collected from a confocal microscope . Scale bar : 10 μ m . Fig . 3 . Colocalization of internalized fibronectin with α 5 integrins . Smooth muscle cells were incubated with 10 μ g / ml TR - fibronectin and 50 μ M chloroquine for 8 hours . Cells were stained using an anti - α 5 integrin antibody ( AB1928 ) . ( A ) TR - fibronectin ; ( B ) α 5 integrin ; ( C ) overlay image . These images are optical sections collected from a confocal microscope . Scale bar : 10 μ m . Fig . 4 . Quantification of fibronectin endocytosis . ( A ) FN - null myofibroblasts were incubated with 2 . 5 - 50 μ g / ml AF488 - conjugated fibronectin at 4°C during the pulse phase ( total endocytosis ) . Some samples were co - incubated with 800 μ g / ml unlabeled fibronectin to determine non - specific endocytosis . Cells were chased in the absence of fibronectin for 2 hours at 37°C , and then processed for flow cytometry to quantify endocytosed fibronectin . Specific endocytosis was determined by subtracting nonspecific endocytosis from total endocytosis . The graph shows the best - fit curve of the mean fluorescence intensity ( MFI ) of internalized AF488 - fibronectin . Data represent the mean of duplicate samples and error bars the range . ( B ) FN - null myofibroblasts were incubated with 10 μ g / ml AF488 - fibronectin in the presence of increasing concentrations of unlabeled fibronectin ( 0 - 800 μ g / ml ) during the pulse phase . Cells were chased in the absence of fibronectin for 2 hours at 37°C , and then processed for flow cytometry to quantify endocytosed AF488 - fibronectin . The amount of internalized AF488 - fibronectin is reported as percent control internalization ( cells incubated in the absence of unlabelled fibronectin , which was set equal to 100 % ) . Data represent the mean of duplicate samples and error bars indicate the range . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 2363 β 1 - integrin - mediated fibronectin endocytosis of fibronectin both at the beginning and the end of the chase period using western blot analysis . There was a relatively small reduction ( 25 % ) in cell surface fibronectin at the beginning of the chase in cells treated with β 1 inhibitory antibodies in comparison with control cells ( data not shown ) . When measured at the end of chase period , there was a 14 . 5 % reduction in cell surface fibronectin in cells treated with β 1 inhibitory antibodies . The smaller reduction in cell surface fibronectin at 2 hours of chase ( 14 . 5 % vs 25 % ) could reflect the higher rate of endocytosis in the control cells , which leads to a greater reduction of cell surface fibronectin over the course of 2 hours . These data show that the reduction in the levels of endocytosed fibronectin in cells treated with β 1 inhibitory antibodies cannot be attributed to the reduced availability of fibronectin to cells . β 3 inhibitory antibodies did not have any effect on fibronectin endocytosis ( Fig . 5C ) . When smooth muscle cells were pretreated with β 1 integrin inhibitory antibodies ( Fig . 5D ) , there was also a striking decrease in intracellular accumulation of fibronectin in comparison with control cells ( Fig . 5E ) . Flow cytometric analysis indicated that fibronectin endocytosis was reduced 56 . 5±4 . 2 % in smooth muscle cells treated with β 1 inhibitory antibodies ( Fig . 5F ) . This decrease could not be attributed to decreased fibronectin binding to the cell surface , because fibronectin binding was only decreased 2 % in cells treated with β 1 inhibitory antibodies . β 1 integrins play an important role in endocytosis and turnover of matrix fibronectin To further establish that the effect of β 1 inhibitory antibodies on fibronectin endocytosis was not due to differences in the levels of fibronectin bound to the cell surface or present in the matrix at the beginning of the chase , we performed fibronectin endocytosis assays with FN - null myofibroblasts seeded onto fluorescently labeled pre - assembled fibronectin matrices . Some cells were incubated with β 1 inhibitory antibodies for 30 minutes prior to seeding . β 1 inhibitory antibodies did not affect cell attachment or spreading ( data not shown ) , probably because of the presence of non - β 1 integrins , including β 3 integrins ( Sottile et al . , 1998 ) , and other matrix protein in the pre - assembled matrix , including collagen I and heparan sulfate proteoglycans , which could promote adhesion in a β 1 - integrin - independent manner . As shown in Fig . 6A , B , fibronectin endocytosis was dramatically reduced in cells treated with β 1 inhibitory antibodies . Flow cytometric analysis indicated that there Fig . 5 . Blocking of β 1 integrin inhibits fibronectin endocytosis . ( A - C ) FN - null myofibroblasts were incubated with 25 μ g / ml β 1 antibodies ( Ha2 / 5 ) or isotype control antibodies at 4°C for 30 minutes . 10 μ g / ml TR - fibronectin ( A , B ) or AF488 - fibronectin ( C ) was then added to the medium and cells were processed for fibronectin endocytosis pulse - chase assays . After 2 hours of chase , cells were either fixed for imaging assay ( A , β 1 inhibition ; B , isotype control ) , or processed for flow cytometry to quantify endocytosed fibronectin ( C ) . The numbers over the peaks in C are the MFI of internalized AF 488 - fibronectin . ( D - F ) Smooth muscle cells were seeded in serum - free medium on vitronectin - coated dishes . Cells were allowed to adhere for 3 hours and then processed for integrin - blocking assay as described above for FN - null myofibroblasts . ( D ) 25 μ g / ml β 1 inhibitory antibodies ( Ha2 / 5 ) ; ( E ) isotype control ; blue : DAPI . ( F ) Quantification of endocytosed fibronectin in smooth muscle cells by flow cytometry . The numbers over the peaks in F are the MFI of internalized AF 488 - fibronectin . Scale bars : 10 μ m . Fig . 6 . Blocking of β 1 integrins inhibits endocytosis of fibronectin from preassembled matrix . FN - null myofibroblasts were incubated with either 30 μ g / ml β 1 inhibitory antibody ( Ha2 / 5 ) or isotype control in suspension at room temperature for 30 minutes prior to seeding on pre - assembled TR - ( A , B ) or AF488 ( C , D ) fibronectin matrix . Cells were cultured for 24 hours at 37°C , and were then either fixed for imaging assay ( A , β 1 inhibition ; B , isotype control ) or processed for flow cytometry to quantify internalized fibronectin ( C , D ) . The numbers over the peaks in C are the MFI of internalized AF488 - fibronectin . Graph in D shows fold change relative to the MFI of endocytosed AF488 - fibronectin in cells treated with isotype control IgM , which was set equal to 1 ( n = 4 , mean ± s . d . ) . Scale bar : 10 μ m . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 2364 was a significant reduction ( 58 . 7±4 % ) in fibronectin endocytosis in cells treated with β 1 inhibitory antibodies ( Fig . 6C , D ) . To further demonstrate the requirement for β 1 integrins in fibronectin endocytosis , we asked whether fibronectin endocytosis occurs in fibroblastic cells lacking β 1 integrins ( GD25 cells ) . GD25 cells and GD25 cells re - expressing β 1 integrins ( GD25 β 1 ) were seeded onto preassembled fibronectin matrix for 24 hours . As shown in Fig . 7A , B , there was a dramatic reduction in fibronectin endocytosis in GD25 cells in comparison to GD25 β 1 cells . Flow cytometric analysis indicated that there was a 47 . 8 % reduction in internalized fibronectin in GD25 cells ( Fig . 7C ) . It is likely that the flow cytometry data underestimate the percent inhibition because the cells have some intrinsic background fluorescence [ mean fluorescence intensity ( MFI ) = 77 ] and because of the noncompetable portion of fibronectin endocytosis ( Fig . 4B ) . Turnover of preassembled fibronectin matrix fibrils is also reduced in GD25 cells compared with that in GD25 β 1 cells ( Fig . 7D - G ) . Interestingly , in short - term pulse - chase experiments , GD25 cells endocytosed soluble fibronectin at levels comparable with that in GD25 cells re - expressing β 1 integrin ( supplementary material Fig . S1A ) . Fibronectin endocytosis was blocked by RGD peptides ( supplementary material Fig . S1B ) , but not by the control RGE peptides ( supplementary material Fig . S1C ) . These data indicate that an alternative integrin receptor can endocytose soluble fibronectin in the absence of β 1 integrins , but that this alternative receptor is inefficient at promoting the internalization of matrix fibronectin . α 5 integrins also function as fibronectin endocytic receptors To determine which α subunit is involved in fibronectin endocytosis , we used the same function - blocking protocol as described in Fig . 5 . Because α 5 and α v integrins are expressed in FN - null myofibroblasts in relatively high amounts ( Sottile et al . , 1998 ) , we first focused on these two α subunits . FN - null myofibroblasts were pre - incubated with α 5 or α v function inhibitory antibodies at 4°C , Journal of Cell Science 121 ( 14 ) prior to the addition of fluorescently labeled fibronectin during the pulse phase . After 2 hours of chase at 37°C , we found that α 5 integrin inhibitory antibodies reduced the intracellular accumulation of fibronectin ( Fig . 8A , B ) . Flow cytometric analysis indicated that there was a 45 % reduction in internalized fibronectin in cells treated with 50 μ g / ml α 5 integrin inhibitory antibody ( Fig . 8E ) . Increasing the concentration of α 5 integrin inhibitory antibodies did not cause any further reduction in fibronectin endocytosis ( data not shown ) . This reduction in endocytosed fibronectin could not be totally attributed to a reduction of fibronectin initially bound to the cell surface ( 19 % reduction ) . By contrast , α v integrin inhibitory antibodies had no effect on fibronectin endocytosis at 100 μ g / ml ( Fig . 8C - E ) . A non - clathrin mechanism mediates fibronectin endocytosis Using long - term fibronectin matrix turnover pulse - chase assays , we previously showed that fibronectin matrix turnover is inhibited by agents that disrupt caveolae / lipid - raft - mediated endocytosis and can be blocked by downregulation of caveolin - 1 ( Sottile and Chandler , 2005 ) . To determine whether caveolin - 1 also regulates fibronectin endocytosis in short - term pulse - chase assays , we examined the levels of internalized fibronectin in FN - null myofibroblasts expressing caveolin - 1 siRNA ( shcav ) or control siRNA ( shluc ) . As shown in Fig . 9 , there is a dramatic reduction in fibronectin ( Fig . 9A ) and β 1 integrin ( 9EG7 , Fig . 9B ) endocytosis in cells expressing caveolin - 1 siRNA in comparison with control cells . Flow cytometric analysis showed that there was a 46±2 % reduction in levels of endocytosed fibronectin in cells expressing caveolin - 1 siRNA ( Fig . 9G ) . To further characterize the intracellular vesicles that contain fibronectin , we asked whether internalized fibronectin is found in lipid - raft - enriched compartments . FN - null myofibroblasts were incubated at 4°C with TR - fibronectin and AF488 - conjugated cholera toxin subunit B ( CTxB ) , a caveolae / lipid raft marker , and a short - term endocytosis pulse - chase assay was preformed . TR - fibronectin ( Fig . 9H ) was found in AF488 - CTxB - positive Fig . 7 . Reduced endocytosis and turnover of pre - assembled fibronectin matrix in β 1 - integrin - null cells . GD25 and GD25 β 1 re - expressing cells were seeded on pre - assembled TR ( A , B , D , E , F , G ) or AF488 ( C ) fibronectin matrix and incubated for 24 hours at 37°C . ( A , B ) Cells were incubated with 0 . 2 % Trypan Blue for 3 minutes and then fixed . Intracellular fibronectin vesicles are shown ( A , GD25 ; B , GD25 β 1 ) . The insets show outlines of cells loaded with CellTracker Green . Scale bar : 10 μ m . ( C ) Cells were processed for flow cytometry to quantify endocytosed fibronectin . The numbers over the peaks in C are the MFI of internalized AF 488 - fibronectin . ( D - G ) Cells were fixed without Trypan Blue treatment to visualize fibronectin fibrils ( D , E , GD25 ; F , G , GD25 β 1 ; E and G are phase images of corresponding fields ) . Scale bar : 40 μ m . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 2365 β 1 - integrin - mediated fibronectin endocytosis compartments ( Fig . 9I ) following 2 hours of chase ( Fig . 9J , arrowheads point to yellow staining ) . Furthermore , internalized fibronectin , β 1 integrins and caveolin - 1 all extensively colocalized , as shown by the white color in the overlay image of Fig . 9N ( arrowheads ) , as well as by the substantial overlap among the fluorescence intensity plots of the three color staining ( Fig . 9O ) . To directly address whether fibronectin endocytosis occurs via a clathrin - or non - clathrin - mediated pathway , a dominant - negative Eps15 mutant ( DN Eps15 ) ( Benmerah et al . , 1999 ) was transiently expressed in FN - null myofibroblasts . Cells expressing DN Eps15 ( Fig . 10A ) endocytosed fibronectin from preassembled matrix at levels similar to control cells . By contrast , DN Eps15 effectively inhibited endocytosis of the transferrin receptor ( Fig . 10I ) , which is known to be endocytosed by a clathrin - mediated pathway ( Harding et al . , 1983 ) . DN Eps15 also failed to inhibit soluble fibronectin endocytosis ( Fig . 10E ) . These data demonstrate that fibronectin endocytosis occurs via a non - clathrin - mediated pathway . Downregulation of caveolin - 1 reduces both fibronectin and β 1 integrin endocytosis β 1 integrins play a major role in mediating fibronectin endocytosis ( Figs 5 - 7 ) . Thus , we asked whether β 1 integrin endocytosis is also caveolin - 1 dependent . We performed a long - term fibronectin matrix turnover pulse - chase assay in cells expressing caveolin - 1 siRNA ( shcav ) and control cells ( shluc ) . The level of intracellular β 1 integrins was dramatically reduced in shcav cells compared with control cells ( Fig . 11A - F ) . To ensure that the intracellular β 1 integrins detected in Fig . 11D are internalized from the cell surface , we labeled cell surface β 1 integrins with 9EG7 antibody . Internalized 9EG7 was extensively colocalized with internalized fibronectin in control cells ( shluc , supplementary material Fig . S2F ) . However , there was a dramatic reduction of 9EG7 intracellular accumulation in cells expressing caveolin - 1 siRNA ( supplementary material Fig . S2A ) in comparison with control cells ( supplementary material Fig . S2D ) . It is unknown whether endocytosis of β 1 integrins is regulated by the same mechanisms in the presence and absence of fibronectin . Cells expressing caveolin - 1 siRNA ( shcav ) were incubated with α 5 integrin antibodies at 4°C in the absence of fibronectin . After washing , cells were chased at 37°C , and the levels of internalized α 5 integrin were measured . There was a dramatic decrease in endocytosed α 5 integrins in cells expressing caveolin - 1 siRNA ( Fig . 11G ) compared with control cells ( Fig . 11H ) . The levels of endocytosed α 5 integrin were reduced 53 . 2±1 . 7 % when caveolin - 1 was downregulated ( Fig . 11I ) . The levels of endocytosed β 1 integrins were also reduced in cells expressing caveolin - 1 siRNA ( Fig . 11J ) compared with control cells ( Fig . 11K ) . Re - expression of caveolin - 1 increases endocytosis of β 1 integrins in cells expressing caveolin - 1 siRNA To confirm that downregulation of caveolin - 1 in the caveolin - 1 siRNA - expressing cells is responsible for decreased endocytosis of β 1 integrins ( Fig . 11 ) , we re - expressed caveolin - 1 in these cells using an adenovirus containing human caveolin - 1 ( Ad - cav ) . We performed long - term fibronectin matrix turnover pulse - chase assays with FN - null myofibroblasts expressing caveolin - 1 siRNA ( shcav ) . Re - expression of caveolin - 1 in shcav cells resulted in increased endocytosis of β 1 integrins and fibronectin ( arrows , Fig . 12D , E ) . Internalized β 1 integrins and fibronectin were colocalized in endocytic vesicles ( overlay image in Fig . 12F ) . To determine whether re - expression of caveolin - 1 rescues constitutive endocytosis of α 5 β 1 integrin in these cells , we performed integrin endocytosis assays with cells expressing caveolin - 1 siRNA that were cultured in the absence of fibronectin . As shown in Fig . 12J , re - expression of caveolin - 1 increased the levels of endocytosed α 5 integrin by 243±15 % compared with cells transduced with control adenovirus ( Ad - tet ) . The endocytosis of β 1 integrins was also increased by re - expression of caveolin - 1 in shcav cells ( Fig . 12L ) . By contrast , the control adenovirus ( Ad - tet ) did not rescue constitutive endocytosis of α 5 β 1 integrin ( Fig . 12J ) or endocytosis of β 1 integrins ( Fig . 12M ) . These data show that caveolin - 1 regulates endocytosis of β 1 integrins , including α 5 β 1 integrin , regardless of the presence or absence of fibronectin and fibronectin matrix . Discussion Fibronectin matrix turnover plays a critical role in governing ECM turnover ( Sottile and Hocking , 2002 ) . We previously showed that fibronectin matrix turnover occurs through receptor - mediated Fig . 8 . Blocking of α 5 integrin partially inhibits fibronectin endocytosis . FN - null myofibroblasts were incubated with 50 μ g / ml α 5 inhibitory antibodies ( 5H10 - 27 ) or 100 μ g / ml α v inhibitory antibodies ( H9 . 2B8 ) or isotype control IgG at 4°C for 30 minutes . 10 μ g / ml TR - fibronectin ( A - D ) or AF488 - fibronectin ( E ) was added to the medium . After 2 hours of chase , cells were either fixed for imaging analysis ( A , α 5 inhibition ; B , isotype control of α 5 ; C , α v inhibition ; D , isotype control for α v ) , or processed for flow cytometry ( E ) to quantify internalized fibronectin . The numbers over the peaks in E are the MFI of internalized AF488 - fibronectin . Scale bar : 10 μ m . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 2366 endocytosis and intracellular degradation ( Sottile and Chandler , 2005 ) . In this manuscript , we demonstrate that β 1 integrins play an important role in regulating the endocytosis of fibronectin and the turnover of FN matrix fibrils . We also show that caveolin - 1 regulates the endocytosis of fibronectin - binding β 1 integrins . Furthermore , caveolin - 1 constitutively regulates α 5 β 1 integrin endocytosis ( Fig . 11 ) , regardless of the presence or absence of fibronectin and fibronectin matrix . Our study also directly shows that α 5 β 1 integrin endocytosis can occur in the absence of its ECM ligand . Function - blocking antibodies to β 1 integrin inhibit fibronectin endocytosis both in short - term pulse - chase assays , and from preassembled fibronectin matrices ( Figs 5 , 6 ) , indicating that β 1 integrins are functionally important for fibronectin endocytosis . In the short - term assay , most or all of the fibronectin that is present at the start of the chase is cell - associated , protomeric fibronectin . In the long - term pulse - chase experiments , ~ 85 % of the fibronectin is incorporated into the matrix at the start of the chase ( Sottile and Journal of Cell Science 121 ( 14 ) Hocking , 2002 ) . ECM fibronectin is also the predominant ( or sole ) form present in pre - established matrices . Importantly , our data show that β 1 inhibitory antibodies block the endocytosis of ‘soluble’ and matrix fibronectin . Further , β 1 - null cells show impaired ability to endocytose matrix fibronectin from pre - established matrices . Interestingly , β 1 - null cells endocytosed soluble fibronectin at levels similar to cells re - expressing β 1 integrin ( supplementary material Fig . S1A ) . These data indicate that other receptors can mediate the endocytosis of soluble fibronectin when β 1 integrins are absent , but that this pathway is inefficient when matrix fibronectin is the ligand . Endocytosis of soluble and matrix fibronectin share many features : both are clathrin independent , both are inhibited by downregulation of caveolin - 1 ( Fig . 9G ) ( Sottile and Chandler , 2005 ) and both colocalize with β 1 integrins in intracellular vesicles . It is not known why β 1 integrins play a more prominent role in endocytosis of ECM fibronectin than soluble fibronectin ( Fig . 7 ) . We speculate that a certain degree of extracellular degradation of fibronectin may occur prior to Fig . 9 . ( A - F ) Caveolin - 1 regulates short - term fibronectin endocytosis . Cells expressing caveolin - 1 siRNA ( shcav , A - C ) or control siRNA ( shluc , D - F ) were incubated with 10 μ g / ml AF488 - fibronectin and 50 μ g / ml TR - conjugated 9EG7 at 4°C for 1 hour during the pulse . After 30 minutes of chase at 37°C , cells were incubated with 0 . 2 % Trypan Blue for 3 minutes to quench extracellular fluorescence . AF488 - fibronectin , A , D ; TR - 9EG7 , B , E ; overlay images , C , F . Scale bar : 10 μ m . ( G ) Flow cytometric analysis of endocytosed fibronectin . Cells expressing caveolin - 1 siRNA ( shcav ) or control siRNA ( shluc ) were incubated with 10 μ g / ml AF488 - fibronectin at 4°C for 1 hour in the presence or absence of 1 mg / ml unlabeled fibronectin . After 30 minutes of chase , cells were processed for flow cytometry . The specific MFI was determined by subtracting the total MFI ( shcav , 315 ; shluc , 489 ) from the MFI of cells incubated with unlabeled fibronectin ( shcav , 147 ; shluc , 177 ) . Data show the fold change relative to the MFI of endocytosed AF488 - fibronectin in control cells , which was set equal to 1 ( mean ± range ) . ( H - J ) Colocalization of internalized fibronectin with lipid raft marker . FN - null myofibroblasts were incubated with 10 μ g / ml TR - fibronectin and 2 μ g / ml AF488 - CTxB at 4°C for 1 hour . After 2 hours of chase , cells were incubated with 0 . 2 % Trypan Blue for 3 minutes and then processed for imaging assay ( H , TR - fibronectin ; I , AF488 - CTxB ; J , overlay image , arrowheads point to colocalized TR - fibronectin and AF488 - CTxB ) . ( K - O ) Colocalization of internalized fibronectin , β 1 integrins and caveolin - 1 . FN - null myofibroblasts were incubated with 10 μ g / ml TR - fibronectin overnight . Cells were washed and then incubated for 12 hours in cell culture media lacking fibronectin , but containing 50 μ M chloroquine . Cells were stained with anti - β 1 - integrin and anti - caveolin - 1 antibodies , followed by FITC - conjugated anti - hamster and Alexa Fluor 660 - conjugated anti - rabbit secondary antibodies . ( K , TR - fibronectin ; L , β 1 integrin ; M , caveolin - 1 ; N , overlay image , arrowheads show the colocalization of triple colors ) . Fluorescence intensity profiles ( O ) were generated using ImageJ software ( National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , ML ) . A line was manually drawn to cross several TR - fibronectin containing vesicles ( as shown in K ) and the fluorescence intensity profiles were obtained from each individual color channel . The plot in O was generated in Excel ( red , TR - Fibronectin ; green , β 1 integrin ; blue , caveolin - 1 ) . All images are optical sections collected from a confocal microscope . Scale bar : 10 μ m . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 2367 β 1 - integrin - mediated fibronectin endocytosis endocytosis of matrix fibronectin . It has been recently shown that clustering of β 1 integrins can induce polarized exocytosis of MT1 - MMP to invasive structures , which results in localized ECM degradation ( Bravo - Cordero et al . , 2007 ) . Thus , it is possible that β 1 integrins are involved in two aspects of fibronectin matrix turnover : one involving localized matrix fibronectin degradation , and one involving fibronectin endocytosis . β 1 inhibitory antibodies block fibronectin endocytosis , but do not significantly affect initial fibronectin binding to the cell surface in short - term pulse - chase assays . It is possible that the initial cell surface binding and internalization of fibronectin do not rely on the same receptor ( s ) , as has been shown for other matrix proteins ( Panetti and McKeown - Longo , 1993 ) . In addition , there are multiple fibronectin - binding integrins in FN - null myofibroblasts , including α v β 3 ( Sottile et al . , 1998 ) . Fibronectin can also bind to non - integrin receptors , including proteoglycans ( Saunders and Bernfield , 1988 ; Tumova et al . , 2000 ) . Internalized soluble fibronectin and β 1 integrins colocalize at early stages of the endocytosis process ( 30 minutes , Fig . 2 ) . However , endocytosis of fibronectin from preassembled matrices is a slower process , and sufficient intracellular fibronectin does not accumulate at these early times to allow similar colocalization studies to be done . Therefore , it remains uncertain whether β 1 integrins can directly internalize fibronectin from the ECM . Fig . 10 . Dominant - negative Eps15 does not inhibit fibronectin endocytosis . Dominant - negative Eps15 ( A , C , E , G , I , K ) or control Eps15 ( B , D , F , H , J , L ) were transiently expressed in FN - null myofibroblasts . ( A - D ) Transfected cells were seeded onto preassembled matrices and incubated for 24 hours . Endocytosed fibronectin is shown in A , B . ( E - H ) Short - term pulse - chase experiments were performed with transfected cells . ( E , F ) show endocytosed fibronectin following 2 hours of chase . ( I - L ) The effect of dominant - negative and control Eps15 on transferrin receptor endocytosis is shown . Transfected cells were detected by GFP expression ( C , D , G , H , K , L ) and manually outlined . 15 - 20 cells were analyzed for each condition ; representative images are shown . Scale bar : 10 μ m . Fig . 11 . Integrin endocytosis in caveolin - 1 - knockdown cells . ( A - F ) Cells expressing caveolin - 1 siRNA ( shcav ) or control cells ( shluc ) were incubated with 10 μ g / ml TR - fibronectin overnight . Cells were washed , and then incubated for 8 hours in cell culture medium lacking fibronectin , but containing 50 μ M chloroquine . Cells were stained with anti - β 1 integrin antibody ( FITC ) . Upper panels , shcav ; lower panels , shluc . A , D , β 1 integrin ; B , E , TR - fibronectin ; C , F , overlay images . ( G - K ) Cells expressing caveolin - 1 siRNA ( shcav , G , J ) or control cells ( shluc , H , K ) were incubated with 50 μ g / ml antibodies to α 5 integrin ( G - I ) or β 1 integrin ( J , K ) at 4°C for 45 minutes . Cells were then processed for integrin endocytosis assay . The fluorescence intensity of endocytosed α 5 integrin ( G , H ) was quantified using a MATLab - based program . ( I ) Fold change relative to the fluorescence intensity of endocytosed α 5 integrin in shluc cells , which was set equal to 1 ( mean ± range from two independent experiments ) . All images are optical sections collected from a confocal microscope . Scale bars : 10 μ m . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 2368 Not all fibronectin - binding integrins can promote fibronectin endocytosis . Of the integrins tested , only α 5 β 1 integrin was shown to participate in fibronectin endocytosis . Integrin function - Journal of Cell Science 121 ( 14 ) blocking assays showed that α 5 antibodies were not as effective as β 1 antibodies in blocking fibronectin endocytosis ( Figs 5 and 8 ) . We speculate that this may be due to the α 5 antibodies being less potent inhibitors than β 1 antibodies , or to the involvement of multiple α - integrin subunits in fibronectin endocytosis . However , to date , we have been unable to identify other α - integrin subunits that may participate in fibronectin endocytosis . Integrin endocytosis has been reported to occur by clathrin and caveolae / lipid - raft - mediated pathways ( Caswell and Norman , 2006 ; Nishimura and Kaibuchi , 2007 ; Pellinen and Ivaska , 2006 ) . The existence of different pathways and regulatory mechanisms for integrin endocytosis is probably due to the diverse nature of integrin receptors and their ligands . The clearest evidence for the involvement of caveolae / lipid rafts in integrin endocytosis comes from studies of the collagen - binding integrin α 2 β 1 and the leukocyte integrin α L β 2 ( Fabbri et al . , 2005 ; Ning et al . , 2007 ; Upla et al . , 2004 ) . Some data also show that β 1 integrins can be endocytosed via caveolae upon induction by glycosphingolipids ( Sharma et al . , 2005 ) . However , direct evidence that fibronectin - binding integrins can be endocytosed by a caveolin - 1 - dependent pathway is lacking . The α 5 β 1 integrin is endocytosed and recycled in several cell types ( Bretscher , 1992 ; Pierini et al . , 2000 ) . However , the endocytic pathway and regulatory mechanism of α 5 β 1 integrin endocytosis have not been clearly established . In this manuscript , we demonstrate that endocytosis of β 1 integrins , including a5 β 1 , is caveolin - 1 dependent . In the presence of fibronectin matrix , a large portion of the endocytosed β 1 integrins are likely to be ligand ( fibronectin ) bound , because internalized β 1 integrins are extensively colocalized with endocytosed fibronectin , and because endocytosed β 1 integrins are in a ligand - bound conformation , as shown by their ability to bind the 9EG7 antibody ( Figs 1 , 2 ) . We further show that disruption of clathrin - mediated endocytosis does not inhibit fibronectin endocytosis ( Fig . 10 ) . In addition , internalized fibronectin is found in lipid raft compartments ( Fig . 9H - J ) , and internalized fibronectin and β 1 integrins extensively colocalize with caveolin - 1 - positive vesicles ( Fig . 9K - O ) . We previously showed that fibronectin matrix turnover is dependent on protein kinases , cholesterol content , and the dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton ( Sottile and Chandler , 2005 ; Sottile and Hocking , 2002 ) . Together , these data strongly suggest that fibronectin endocytosis occurs via a non - clathrin - mediated mechanism , and likely involves both integrins and caveolae / lipid rafts . ECM remodeling is a key regulator of cell migration ( Davis and Senger , 2005 ; Engelholm et al . , 2003 ; Giannelli et al . , 1997 ; Hangai et al . , 2002 ; Hocking and Chang , 2003 ; Hotary et al . , 2000 ) . Our data show that caveolin - 1 plays a critical role in fibronectin matrix turnover . Interestingly , caveolin - 1 has also been shown to be involved in cell migration ( Beardsley et al . , 2005 ; Ge and Pachter , 2004 ; Grande - Garcia et al . , 2007 ; Navarro et al . , 2004 ) . Hence , it is possible that caveolin - 1 may regulate cell migration in part , by regulating turnover of matrix fibronectin . Moreover , recent studies from caveolin - 1 - knockout mice and patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis ( IPF ) highlight the importance of caveolin - 1 in the development of lung fibrosis ( Drab et al . , 2001 ; Park et al . , 2002 ; Razani et al . , 2001 ; Wang et al . , 2006 ) . These data suggest the interesting possibility that mice lacking caveolin - 1 and / or patients with IPF may also have defects in ECM endocytosis and turnover . Fig . 12 . Re - expression of caveolin - 1 rescues endocytosis of β 1 integrin in caveolin - 1 siRNA cells . FN - null myofibroblasts expressing caveolin - 1 siRNA ( shcav ) were transduced with Ad - cav or Ad - tet adenoviruses . ( A - I ) Cells were incubated with 10 μ g / ml TR - fibronectin overnight . Cells were washed , and then incubated for 8 hours in cell culture medium lacking fibronectin , but containing 50 μ M chloroquine . Cells were stained with anti - β 1 integrin antibody ( FITC ) . Upper panels , shcav without virus transduction ; middle panels , Ad - cav ; lower panels , Ad - tet . A , D , G : TR - fibronectin ; B , E , H : β 1 integrin ; C , F , I , overlay images . Arrows in D show the internalized fibronectin ; arrows in E show intracellular β 1 integrins ; arrows in F show colocalized fibronectin and β 1 integrins . D‘ , E‘ and F‘ are enlarged images of area shown by the rectangle in F . ( J - M ) In the absence of fibronectin , cells were incubated with 50 μ g / ml antibodies to α 5 integrin ( J ) or β 1 integrin ( K - M ) at 4°C for 45 minutes . Cells were then processed for integrin endocytosis assay . ( J ) The fluorescence intensity of endocytosed α 5 integrin was quantified using a MATLab - based program . Graph shows the relative fluorescence intensity of endocytosed α 5 integrin in shcav cells with or without virus transduction . Intracellular fluorescence intensity of shcav cells without virus transduction was set equal to 1 ( mean ± range from two independent experiments ) . All images are optical sections collected by confocal microscopy . Scale bars : 20 μ m . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 2369 β 1 - integrin - mediated fibronectin endocytosis Materials and Methods Immunological reagents and chemicals Polyclonal anti - fibronectin antibodies were a generous gift from Deane Mosher ( University of Wisconsin , Madison , WI ) , or were purchased from Sigma ( St Louis , MO ) . Antibodies to β 1 ( Ha2 / 5 , HM β 1 - 1 and 9EG7 ) , β 3 ( 2C9 . G2 ) , α 5 ( 5H10 - 27 ) and α v integrin ( H9 . 2B8 ) , caveolin - 1 and ERK1 / 2 were from BD Biosciences ( San Diego , CA ) ; antibodies to α 5 ( AB1928 ) , α 3 ( AB1920 ) and α v integrin ( AB1930 ) were from Millipore ( Billerica , MA ) . TR and AF488 conjugation kits , AF488 - conjugated CTxB , CellTracker green CMFDA , RGD and RGE peptides , and lipofectamine LTX reagent were from Invitrogen ( Carlsbad , CA ) . Proteins Human fibronectin was purified as previously described ( Miekka et al . , 1982 ) . Texas Red ( TR ) - or Alexa Fluor 488 ( AF488 ) - conjugated fibronectin was made according to the manufacturer’s protocol ( Molecular Probes / Invitrogen ) . Recombinant vitronectin was produced as described ( Sottile et al . , 2007 ) . Laminin was purchased from BD Biosciences ( Bedford , MA ) and type I collagen from BD Biosciences or UBI ( Lake Placid , NY ) . Cell culture FN - null myofibroblasts were cultured as described ( Sottile and Hocking , 2002 ; Sottile et al . , 1998 ) . FN - null myofibroblasts expressing mouse caveolin - 1 siRNA ( shcav ) and control siRNA ( shluc ) were described previously ( Sottile and Chandler , 2005 ) . Flow cytometry demonstrates that cells expressing caveolin - 1 siRNA ( shcav ) and parental FN - null myofibroblasts express very similar cell surface levels of β 1 , β 3 , α v and α 5 integrins in the absence of fibronectin ( data not shown ) . Rat aortic smooth muscle cells were from Cell Applications ( San Diego , CA ) . GD25 cells and GD25 cells re - expressing human β 1 integrin were gifts from Reinhardt Fassler ( Max - Planck - Institute for Biochemistry , Martinsried , Germany ) ( Wennerberg et al . , 1996 ) and Susan LaFlamme ( Albany Medical College , Albany , NY ) ( Reverte et al . , 2006 ) . For most experiments , cells were plated onto dishes pre - coated with 10 μ g / ml vitronectin . To ensure that similar results were obtained with other matrix proteins , some experiments were performed with cells seeded onto dishes coated with 10 μ g / ml laminin , 10 μ g / ml fibronectin or 50 μ g / ml type I collagen . Long - term fibronectin matrix turnover pulse - chase assays FN - null myofibroblasts were incubated ( ‘pulsed’ ) overnight with 10 μ g / ml fibronectin . Cells were washed and then incubated ( ‘chased’ ) with culture medium lacking 10 μ g / ml fibronectin at 37°C for various lengths of time . For tracking the internalization of integrins during fibronectin matrix turnover , fibronectin was removed from the medium , and cells were then incubated with integrin antibodies at 4°C for 30 minutes to label cell - surface integrins . Unbound antibody was removed , and surface - bound antibody was allowed to internalize at 37°C for 3 - 4 hours in the presence of chloroquine . Internalized antibody was visualized using a fluorescently labeled secondary antibody . Short - term fibronectin endocytosis pulse - chase assays FN - null myofibroblasts were incubated with 10 μ g / ml fluorescently labeled fibronectin for 1 hour at 4°C ( pulse phase ) . For some experiments , FITC - conjugated 9EG7 antibody or Alexa Fluor 488 - CTxB was co - incubated with fibronectin during the pulse period . Cells were washed and then incubated with culture medium lacking fibronectin at 37°C ( chase phase ) . For integrin function blocking assays , cells were pre - incubated with integrin inhibitory antibodies at 4°C for 30 minutes as described in the figure legends . Preparation of pre - assembled fibronectin matrix The procedure for preparing pre - assembled fibronectin matrix was modified from published protocols ( Chen et al . , 1978 ; Mao and Schwarzbauer , 2005 ) . FN - null myofibroblasts were incubated overnight with 10 μ g / ml fibronectin to allow assembly of a robust fibronectin matrix . Cells were washed gently with PBS followed by two washes with wash buffer I ( 100 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , pH 9 . 6 , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 2 mM EDTA ) . Cells were incubated with lysis buffer ( 20 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , pH 9 . 6 , 1 % NP - 40 ) at room temperature for 15 minutes . The lysis buffer was replaced with fresh lysis buffer , and the incubation continued for 30 - 40 minutes at 37°C . Dishes were gently washed twice with wash buffer II ( 300 mM KCl , 10 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , pH 7 . 5 ) and three times with PBS . Fibronectin matrix was largely preserved after extraction ( supplementary material Fig . S3 ) . Integrin endocytosis assays To study constitutive integrin endocytosis ( in the absence of fibronectin and fibronectin matrix ) , FN - null myofibroblasts grown in defined media were incubated with integrin antibodies at 4°C for 45 minutes . Unbound antibody was removed , and surface - bound antibody was allowed to internalize at 37°C for 30 minutes . Remaining cell surface antibodies were removed by incubating cells in acidic media ( pH 4 . 0 ) for 6 minutes on ice . Internalized antibody was detected using a fluorescently labeled secondary antibody . To quantify intracellular fluorescence intensity , z - series confocal images and differential interference contrast images of cells were collected at the same time . A MATLab ( Mathworks , Natick , MA ) based program was used to trace cell outlines and to quantify the fluorescence intensity within individual cells . Background fluorescence was determined for each image , and subtracted from the fluorescence intensity of each cell . The fluorescence intensity within individual cells was normalized by cell area . Sample sizes were 46 - 171 cells for each condition . The mean value of two independent experiments ( ± range ) is reported . Imaging assays Immunostaining was performed as described ( Sottile and Hocking , 2002 ) . Cells were examined using an Olympus microscope equipped with epifluorescence , or with an Olympus scanning confocal microscope . Protein colocalization was quantified from confocal images as described previously ( Sottile and Chandler , 2005 ) . Flow cytometry to quantify endocytosed fibronectin After pulse - chase assays , cells were incubated with a mixture of 0 . 02 % EDTA , 0 . 1 % trypsin and 200 μ g / ml proteinase K for 3 minutes at 37°C to remove cell surface fibronectin . Cells were detached from culture dishes and washed with PBS / 0 . 01 % sodium azide . Cell were then suspended in 0 . 2 % Trypan Blue for 2 minutes to quench any residual cell surface fluorescence ( Hed , 1977 ; Van Amersfoort and Van Strijp , 1994 ) . Cells were washed with PBS / 0 . 01 % sodium azide and then suspended in 3 . 5 % paraformaldehyde . The intracellular AF488 - fibronectin signal was measured immediately by flow cytometry using a FACSCalibur ( Becton Dickinson ) . Western blotting Cells were scraped from dishes in lysis buffer at the end of the pulse or chase period . Western blotting was performed as described ( Sottile and Chandler , 2005 ) . Blots were quantified using an Odyssey infrared imaging system ( Li - COR Bioscience , Lincoln , NE ) . Levels of ERK on the blots were used as a loading control . The levels of fibronectin were normalized to the levels of ERK . Control experiments were done to determine whether the full - length fibronectin present at the end of the chase is cell surface fibronectin . For these experiments , intact cells were harvested by EDTA , and then treated with trypsin and proteinase K . Western blot analysis showed that all of the full - length fibronectin was extracellular , because it was completely digested by protease treatment ( data not shown ) . Transient expression of GFP - Eps15 mutant constructs Dominant - negative GFP - Eps15 EH21 and control GFP - Eps15 DIII Δ 2 were generous gifts from Alexandre Benmerah ( INSERM , Paris , France ) . The EH21 mutant disrupts clathrin - mediated endocytosis ; the control construct does not affect endocytosis ( Benmerah et al . , 1999 ; Benmerah et al . , 1998 ) . Transient expression was performed using lipofectamine LTX reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Short - term pulse chase assays were performed on cells 24 hours post transfection . To study fibronectin endocytosis from pre - assembled matrix , cells were harvested 18 hours after transfection , re - seeded on pre - assembled matrix and then cultured for an additional 24 hours . Endocytosis of transferrin receptor was monitored by using antibodies to the transferrin receptor . Adenoviruses The Ad - tet adenovirus was a kind gift from Sandra Schmid ( Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla , CA ) . Preparation and transduction of adenoviruses containing the sequence of either human caveolin - 1 ( Ad - cav ) or tetracycline regulatable transactivator ( Ad - tet ) were described previously ( Sottile and Chandler , 2005 ) . Increased levels of caveolin - 1 persisted for > 60 hours after viral transduction ( data not shown ) . The authors thank Deane Mosher , Reinhardt Fassler , Sandra Schmid , Alexandre Benmerah and Susan LaFlamme for providing reagents used in this study , Ken Foxx for developing the MATLab program for image analysis , Peter Keng and Timothy Bushnell for advice on flow cytometry , Keigi Fujiwara and Liam Casey for their help with image analysis , Jennifer Bradburn for reading the manuscript , and Andrew Serour and Jennifer Chandler for excellent technical support . This research was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health ( HL070261 and GM069729 ) . References Aplin , A . E . , Howe , A . K . and Juliano , R . L . ( 1999 ) . Cell adhesion molecules , signal transduction and cell growth . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 , 737 - 744 . Bazzoni , G . , Shih , D . T . , Buck , C . A . and Hemler , M . E . ( 1995 ) . Monoclonal antibody 9EG7 defines a novel beta 1 integrin epitope induced by soluble ligand and manganese , but inhibited by calcium . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 25570 - 25577 . Beardsley , A . , Fang , K . , Mertz , H . , Castranova , V . , Friend , S . and Liu , J . ( 2005 ) . Loss of caveolin - 1 polarity impedes endothelial cell polarization and directional movement . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 3541 - 3547 . Benmerah , A . , Lamaze , C . , Begue , B . , Schmid , S . L . , Dautry - Varsat , A . and Cerf - Bensussan , N . ( 1998 ) . AP - 2 / Eps15 interaction is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 1055 - 1062 . Benmerah , A . , Bayrou , M . , Cerf - Bensussan , N . and Dautry - Varsat , A . ( 1999 ) . Inhibition of clathrin - coated pit assembly by an Eps15 mutant . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 1303 - 1311 . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 2370 Brakebusch , C . and Fassler , R . ( 2003 ) . The integrin - actin connection , an eternal love affair . EMBO J . 22 , 2324 - 2333 . Bravo - Cordero , J . J . , Marrero - Diaz , R . , Megias , D . , Genis , L . , Garcia - Grande , A . , Garcia , M . A . , Arroyo , A . G . and Montoya , M . C . ( 2007 ) . MT1 - MMP proinvasive activity is regulated by a novel Rab8 - dependent exocytic pathway . EMBO J . 26 , 1499 - 1510 . Bretscher , M . S . ( 1989 ) . Endocytosis and recycling of the fibronectin receptor in CHO cells . EMBO J . 8 , 1341 - 1348 . Bretscher , M . S . ( 1992 ) . Circulating integrins : alpha 5 beta 1 , alpha 6 beta 4 and Mac - 1 , but not alpha 3 beta 1 , alpha 4 beta 1 or LFA - 1 . EMBO J . 11 , 405 - 410 . Burridge , K . and Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , M . ( 1996 ) . Focal adhesion , contractility , and signaling . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 12 , 463 - 519 . Caswell , P . T . and Norman , J . C . ( 2006 ) . Integrin trafficking and the control of cell migration . Traffic 7 , 14 - 21 . Chen , H . , Sottile , J . , Strickland , D . K . and Mosher , D . F . ( 1996 ) . Binding and degradation of thrombospondin - 1 mediated through heparan sulphate proteoglycans and low - density - lipoprotein receptor - related protein : localization of the functional activity to the trimeric N - terminal heparin - binding region of thrombospondin - 1 . Biochem . J . 318 , 959 - 963 . Chen , L . B . , Murray , A . , Segal , R . A . , Bushnell , A . and Walsh , M . L . ( 1978 ) . Studies on intercellular LETS glycoprotein matrices . Cell 14 , 377 - 391 . Clark , R . A . F . ( 1996 ) . Wound repair : overview and general considerations . In The Molecular and Cellular Biology of Wound Repair ( ed . R . A . F . Clark ) , pp . 3 - 50 . New York : Plenum Press . Davis , G . E . and Senger , D . R . ( 2005 ) . Endothelial extracellular matrix : biosynthesis , remodeling , and functions during vascular morphogenesis and neovessel stabilization . Circ . Res . 97 , 1093 - 1107 . de Duve , C . , de Barsy , T . , Poole , B . , Trouet , A . , Tulkens , P . and Van Hoof , F . ( 1974 ) . Commentary . Lysosomotropic agents . Biochem . Pharmacol . 23 , 2495 - 2531 . Drab , M . , Verkade , P . , Elger , M . , Kasper , M . , Lohn , M . , Lauterbach , B . , Menne , J . , Lindschau , C . , Mende , F . , Luft , F . C . et al . ( 2001 ) . Loss of caveolae , vascular dysfunction , and pulmonary defects in caveolin - 1 gene - disrupted mice . Science 293 , 2449 - 2452 . Engelholm , L . H . , List , K . , Netzel - Arnett , S . , Cukierman , E . , Mitola , D . J . , Aaronson , H . , Kjoller , L . , Larsen , J . K . , Yamada , K . M . , Strickland , D . K . et al . ( 2003 ) . uPARAP / Endo180 is essential for cellular uptake of collagen and promotes fibroblast collagen adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 1009 - 1015 . Fabbri , M . , Di Meglio , S . , Gagliani , M . C . , Consonni , E . , Molteni , R . , Bender , J . R . , Tacchetti , C . and Pardi , R . ( 2005 ) . Dynamic partitioning into lipid rafts controls the endo - exocytic cycle of the alphaL / beta2 integrin , LFA - 1 , during leukocyte chemotaxis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 5793 - 5803 . Ge , S . and Pachter , J . S . ( 2004 ) . Caveolin - 1 knockdown by small interfering RNA suppresses responses to the chemokine monocyte chemoattractant protein - 1 by human astrocytes . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 6688 - 6695 . Geiger , B . , Bershadsky , A . , Pankov , R . and Yamada , K . M . ( 2001 ) . Transmembrane crosstalk between the extracellular matrix - cytoskeleton crosstalk . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 793 - 805 . Giannelli , G . , Falk - Marzillier , J . , Schiraldi , O . , Stetler - Stevenson , W . G . and Quaranta , V . ( 1997 ) . Induction of cell migration by matrix metalloprotease - 2 cleavage of laminin - 5 . Science 277 , 225 - 227 . Ginsberg , M . H . , Partridge , A . and Shattil , S . J . ( 2005 ) . Integrin regulation . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 , 509 - 516 . Godyna , S . , Liau , G . , Popa , I . , Stefansson , S . and Argraves , W . S . ( 1995 ) . Identification of the low density lipoprotein receptor - related protein ( LRP ) as an endocytic receptor for thrombospondin - 1 . J . Cell Biol . 129 , 1403 - 1410 . Grande - Garcia , A . , Echarri , A . , de Rooij , J . , Alderson , N . B . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . , Valdivielso , J . M . and Del Pozo , M . A . ( 2007 ) . Caveolin - 1 regulates cell polarization and directional migration through Src kinase and Rho GTPases . J . Cell Biol . 177 , 683 - 694 . Hangai , M . , Kitaya , N . , Xu , J . , Chan , C . K . , Kim , J . J . , Werb , Z . , Ryan , S . J . and Brooks , P . C . ( 2002 ) . Matrix metalloproteinase - 9 - dependent exposure of a cryptic migratory control site in collagen is required before retinal angiogenesis . Am . J . Pathol . 161 , 1429 - 1437 . Harding , C . , Heuser , J . and Stahl , P . ( 1983 ) . Receptor - mediated endocytosis of transferrin and recycling of the transferrin receptor in rat reticulocytes . J . Cell Biol . 97 , 329 - 339 . Hed , J . ( 1977 ) . The extinction of fluorescence by crystal violet and its use to differentiate between attached and ingested microorganisms in phagocytosis . FEMS Microbiol . Lett . 1 , 357 - 361 . Hocking , D . C . and Chang , C . H . ( 2003 ) . Fibronectin matrix polymerization regulates small airway epithelial cell migration . Am . J . Physiol . 285 , L169 - L179 . Holmbeck , K . , Bianco , P . , Caterina , J . , Yamada , S . , Kromer , M . , Kuznetsov , S . A . , Mankani , M . , Robey , P . G . , Poole , A . R . , Pidoux , I . et al . ( 1999 ) . MT1 - MMP - deficient mice develop dwarfism , osteopenia , arthritis , and connective tissue disease due to inadequate collagen turnover . Cell 99 , 81 - 92 . Hornebeck , W . , Emonard , H . , Monboisse , J . C . and Bellon , G . ( 2002 ) . Matrix - directed regulation of pericellular proteolysis and tumor progression . Semin . Cancer Biol . 12 , 231 - 241 . Hotary , K . , Allen , E . , Punturieri , A . , Yana , I . and Weiss , S . J . ( 2000 ) . Regulation of cell invasion and morphogenesis in a three - dimensional type I collagen matrix by membrane - type matrix metalloproteinases 1 , 2 , and 3 . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 1309 - 1323 . Hotary , K . B . , Allen , E . D . , Brooks , P . C . , Datta , N . S . , Long , M . W . and Weiss , S . J . ( 2003 ) . Membrane type I matrix metalloproteinase usurps tumor growth control imposed by the three - dimensional extracellular matrix . Cell 114 , 33 - 45 . Journal of Cell Science 121 ( 14 ) Howe , A . , Aplin , A . E . , Alahari , S . K . and Juliano , R . L . ( 1998 ) . Integrin signaling and cell growth control . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 , 220 - 231 . Hynes , R . O . ( 1992 ) . Integrins : Versatility , modulation , and signaling in cell adhesion . Cell 69 , 11 - 25 . Hynes , R . O . ( 2002 ) . Integrins : bidirectional , allosteric signaling machines . Cell 110 , 673 - 687 . Johansson , S . , Svineng , G . , Wennerberg , K . , Armulik , A . and Lohikangas , L . ( 1997 ) . Fibronectin - integrin interactions . Front . Biosci . 2 , d126 - d146 . Kuivaniemi , H . , Tromp , G . and Prockop , D . J . ( 1991 ) . Mutations in collagen genes : causes of rare and some common diseases in humans . FASEB J . 5 , 2052 - 2060 . Kurban , G . , Hudon , V . , Duplan , E . , Ohh , M . and Pause , A . ( 2006 ) . Characterization of a von Hippel Lindau pathway involved in extracellular matrix remodeling , cell invasion , and angiogenesis . Cancer Res . 66 , 1313 - 1319 . Lenter , M . , Uhlig , H . , Hamann , A . , Jeno , P . , Imhof , B . and Vestweber , D . ( 1993 ) . A monoclonal antibody against an activation epitope on mouse integrin chain beta 1 blocks adhesion of lymphocytes to the endothelial integrin alpha 6 beta 1 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 90 , 9051 - 9055 . Liotta , L . A . and Kohn , E . C . ( 2001 ) . The microenvironment of the tumour - host interface . Nature 411 , 375 - 379 . Mao , Y . and Schwarzbauer , J . E . ( 2005 ) . Stimulatory effects of a three - dimensional microenvironment on cell - mediated fibronectin fibrillogenesis . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 4427 - 4436 . Marchina , E . and Barlati , S . ( 1996 ) . Degradation of human plasma and extracellular matrix fibronectin by tissue type plasminogen activator and urokinase . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 28 , 1141 - 1150 . McKeown - Longo , P . J . and Mosher , D . F . ( 1983 ) . Binding of plasma fibronectin to cell layers of human skin fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 97 , 466 - 472 . McKeown - Longo , P . J . and Mosher , D . F . ( 1989 ) . The assembly of fibronectin matrix in cultured human fibroblast cells . In Fibronectin ( ed . D . F . Mosher ) , pp . 163 - 179 . New York : Academic Press . McKeown - Longo , P . J . and Panetti , T . S . ( 1993 ) . Receptor mediated endocytosis of vitronectin by fibroblast monolayers . In Biology of Vitronectins and their Receptors ( ed . K . T . Preissner , S . Rosenblatt , C . Kost , J . Wegerhoff and D . F . Mosher ) , pp . 111 - 118 . Amsterdam : Elsevier Science Publishers . Memmo , L . M . and McKeown - Longo , P . ( 1998 ) . The alphavbeta5 integrin functions as an endocytic receptor for vitronectin . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 425 - 433 . Miekka , S . I . , Ingham , K . C . and Menache , D . ( 1982 ) . Rapid methods for isolation of human plasma fibronectin . Thromb . Res . 27 , 1 - 14 . Murphy - Ullrich , J . E . and Mosher , D . F . ( 1987 ) . Interactions of thrombospondin with endothelial cells : receptor - mediated binding and degradation . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 1603 - 1611 . Mutsaers , S . E . , Bishop , J . E . , McGrouther , G . and Laurent , G . J . ( 1997 ) . Mechanisms of tissue repair : from wound healing to fibrosis . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 29 , 5 - 17 . Navarro , A . , Anand - Apte , B . and Parat , M . O . ( 2004 ) . A role for caveolae in cell migration . FASEB J . 18 , 1801 - 1811 . Ning , Y . , Buranda , T . and Hudson , L . G . ( 2007 ) . Activated EGF receptor induces integrin alpha 2 internalization via caveolae / raft - dependent endocytic pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 6380 - 6387 . Nishimura , T . and Kaibuchi , K . ( 2007 ) . Numb controls integrin endocytosis for directional cell migration with aPKC and PAR - 3 . Dev . Cell 13 , 15 - 28 . O’Reilly , M . S . , Boehm , T . , Shing , Y . , Fukai , N . , Vasios , G . , Lane , W . S . , Flynn , E . , Birkhead , J . R . , Olsen , B . R . and Folkman , J . ( 1997 ) . Endostatin : an endogenous inhibitor of angiogenesis and tumor growth . Cell 88 , 277 - 285 . Panetti , T . S . and McKeown - Longo , P . J . ( 1993 ) . The alpha v beta 5 integrin receptor regulates receptor - mediated endocytosis of vitronectin . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 11492 - 11495 . Park , D . S . , Woodman , S . E . , Schubert , W . , Cohen , A . W . , Frank , P . G . , Chandra , M . , Shirani , J . , Razani , B . , Tang , B . , Jelicks , L . A . et al . ( 2002 ) . Caveolin - 1 / 3 double - knockout mice are viable , but lack both muscle and non - muscle caveolae , and develop a severe cardiomyopathic phenotype . Am . J . Pathol . 160 , 2207 - 2217 . Pellinen , T . and Ivaska , J . ( 2006 ) . Integrin traffic . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 3723 - 3731 . Pierini , L . M . , Lawson , M . A . , Eddy , R . J . , Hendey , B . and Maxfield , F . R . ( 2000 ) . Oriented endocytic recycling of alpha5beta1 in motile neutrophils . Blood 95 , 2471 - 2480 . Pijuan - Thompson , V . and Gladson , C . L . ( 1997 ) . Ligation of integrin alpha5beta1 is required for internalization of vitronectin by integrin alphavbeta3 . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 2736 - 2743 . Plow , E . F . , Haas , T . A . , Zhang , L . , Loftus , J . and Smith , J . W . ( 2000 ) . Ligand binding to integrins . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 21785 - 21788 . Poole , A . R . , Nelson , F . , Dahlberg , L . , Tchetina , E . , Kobayashi , M . , Yasuda , T . , Laverty , S . , Squires , G . , Kojima , T . , Wu , W . et al . ( 2003 ) . Proteolysis of the collagen fibril in osteoarthritis . Biochem . Soc . Symp . 2003 , 115 - 123 . Proux - Gillardeaux , V . , Gavard , J . , Irinopoulou , T . , Mege , R . M . and Galli , T . ( 2005 ) . Tetanus neurotoxin - mediated cleavage of cellubrevin impairs epithelial cell migration and integrin - dependent cell adhesion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 6362 - 6367 . Razani , B . , Engelman , J . A . , Wang , X . B . , Schubert , W . , Zhang , X . L . , Marks , C . B . , Macaluso , F . , Russell , R . G . , Li , M . , Pestell , R . G . et al . ( 2001 ) . Caveolin - 1 null mice are viable but show evidence of hyperproliferative and vascular abnormalities . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 38121 - 38138 . Reverte , C . G . , Benware , A . , Jones , C . W . and LaFlamme , S . E . ( 2006 ) . Perturbing integrin function inhibits microtubule growth from centrosomes , spindle assembly , and cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 174 , 491 - 497 . Roberts , M . , Barry , S . , Woods , A . , van der Sluijs , P . and Norman , J . ( 2001 ) . PDGF - regulated rab4 - dependent recycling of alphavbeta3 integrin from early endosomes is necessary for cell adhesion and spreading . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1392 - 1402 . Sabeh , F . , Ota , I . , Holmbeck , K . , Birkedal - Hansen , H . , Soloway , P . , Balbin , M . , Lopez - Otin , C . , Shapiro , S . , Inada , M . , Krane , S . et al . ( 2004 ) . Tumor cell traffic through J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 2371 β 1 - integrin - mediated fibronectin endocytosis the extracellular matrix is controlled by the membrane - anchored collagenase MT1 - MMP . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 769 - 781 . Sasaki , T . , Larsson , H . , Tisi , D . , Claesson - Welsh , L . , Hohenester , E . and Timpl , R . ( 2000 ) . Endostatins derived from collagens XV and XVIII differ in structural and binding properties , tissue distribution and anti - angiogenic activity . J . Mol . Biol . 301 , 1179 - 1190 . Sasaki , T . , Fassler , R . and Hohenester , E . ( 2004 ) . Laminin : the crux of basement membrane assembly . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 959 - 963 . Saunders , S . and Bernfield , M . ( 1988 ) . Cell surface proteoglycan binds mouse mammary epithelial cells to fibronectin and behaves as a receptor for interstitial matrix . J . Cell Biol . 106 , 423 - 430 . Schwarzbauer , J . E . and Sechler , J . L . ( 1999 ) . Fibronectin fibrillogenesis : a paradigm for extracellular matrix assembly . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 , 622 - 627 . Sczekan , M . M . and Juliano , R . L . ( 1990 ) . Internalization of the fibronectin receptor is a constitutive process . J . Cell . Physiol . 142 , 574 - 580 . Shapiro , S . D . ( 1998 ) . Matrix metalloproteinase degradation of extracellular matrix : biological consequences . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 , 602 - 608 . Sharma , D . K . , Brown , J . C . , Cheng , Z . , Holicky , E . L . , Marks , D . L . and Pagano , R . E . ( 2005 ) . The glycosphingolipid , lactosylceramide , regulates beta1 - integrin clustering and endocytosis . Cancer Res . 65 , 8233 - 8241 . Sottile , J . and Hocking , D . C . ( 2002 ) . Fibronectin polymerization regulates the composition and stability of extracellular matrix fibrils and cell - matrix adhesions . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 3546 - 3559 . Sottile , J . and Chandler , J . ( 2005 ) . Fibronectin matrix turnover occurs through a caveolin - 1 - dependent process . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 757 - 768 . Sottile , J . , Hocking , D . C . and Swiatek , P . ( 1998 ) . Fibronectin matrix assembly enhances adhesion - dependent cell growth . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 2933 - 2943 . Sottile , J . , Shi , F . , Rublyevska , I . , Chiang , H . Y . , Lust , J . and Chandler , J . ( 2007 ) . Fibronectin - dependent collagen I deposition modulates the cell response to fibronectin . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 293 , C1934 - C1946 . Tumova , S . , Woods , A . and Couchman , J . R . ( 2000 ) . Heparan sulfate chains from glypican and syndecans bind the Hep II domain of fibronectin similarly despite minor structural differences . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 9410 - 9417 . Upla , P . , Marjomaki , V . , Kankaanpaa , P . , Ivaska , J . , Hyypia , T . , Van Der Goot , F . G . and Heino , J . ( 2004 ) . Clustering induces a lateral redistribution of alpha 2 beta 1 integrin from membrane rafts to caveolae and subsequent protein kinase C - dependent internalization . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 625 - 636 . Van Amersfoort , E . S . and Van Strijp , J . A . ( 1994 ) . Evaluation of a flow cytometric fluorescence quenching assay of phagocytosis of sensitized sheep erythrocytes by polymorphonuclear leukocytes . Cytometry 17 , 294 - 301 . van der Rest , M . and Garrone , R . ( 1991 ) . Collagen family of proteins . FASEB J . 5 , 2814 - 2823 . Vu , T . H . , Shipley , J . M . , Bergers , G . , Berger , J . E . , Helms , J . A . , Hanahan , D . , Shapiro , S . D . , Senior , R . M . and Werb , Z . ( 1998 ) . MMP - 9 / gelatinase B is a key regulator of growth plate angiogenesis and apoptosis of hypertrophic chondrocytes . Cell 93 , 411 - 422 . Wang , X . M . , Zhang , Y . , Kim , H . P . , Zhou , Z . , Feghali - Bostwick , C . A . , Liu , F . , Ifedigbo , E . , Xu , X . , Oury , T . D . , Kaminski , N . et al . ( 2006 ) . Caveolin - 1 : a critical regulator of lung fibrosis in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis . J . Exp . Med . 203 , 2895 - 2906 . Wennerberg , K . , Lohikangas , L . , Gullberg , D . , Pfaff , M . , Johansson , S . and Fassler , R . ( 1996 ) . B1 integrin - dependent and - independent polymerization of fibronectin . J . Cell Biol . 132 , 227 - 238 . Wienke , D . , MacFadyen , J . R . and Isacke , C . M . ( 2003 ) . Identification and characterization of the endocytic transmembrane glycoprotein Endo180 as a novel collagen receptor . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 3592 - 3604 . Xu , J . , Rodriguez , D . , Petitclerc , E . , Kim , J . J . , Hangai , M . , Yuen , S . M . , Davis , G . E . and Brooks , P . C . ( 2001 ) . Proteolytic exposure of a cryptic site within collagen type IV is required for angiogenesis and tumor growth in vivo . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 1069 - 1079 . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e