Current Biology 19 , 2102 – 2107 , December 29 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2009 . 10 . 075 Report Shape and Dynamics of Tip - Growing Cells Otger Campa ` s 1 and L . Mahadevan 1 , 2 , 3 , * 1 School of Engineering and Applied Sciences , Harvard University , 29 Oxford Street , Cambridge , MA 02138 , USA 2 Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology , Harvard University , 16 Divinity Avenue , Cambridge , MA 02138 , USA 3 Department of Systems Biology , Harvard Medical School , 200 Longwood Ave , Alpert 536 , Boston , MA 02115 , USA Summary Walled cells have the ability to remodel their shape while sustaining an internal turgor pressure that can reach values up to 10 atmospheres [ 1 – 7 ] . Although it is undisputed that this requires a tight and simultaneous regulation of cell wall assembly and mechanics , previous theoretical studies on tip growth focused either on the mechanical behavior of the cell wall or on its assembly [ 8 – 14 ] . To study the interplay between growth and mechanics in shaping a walled cell , we examine the particularly simple geometry of tip - growing cells [ 1 , 3 , 15 , 16 ] , which elongate via the assembly and expansion of cell wall in the apical region of the cell . We describe the observed irreversible expansion of the cell wall during growth as the extension of an inhomogeneous viscous ﬂuid shell under the action of turgor pressure , fed by a material source in the neighborhood of the growing tip . This allows us to determine theoretically the radius of the cell and its growth velocity in terms of the turgor pres - sure and the secretion rate and rheology of the cell wall material . We derive simple scaling laws for the geometry of the cell and ﬁnd that a single dimensionless parameter , which characterizes the relative roles of cell wall assembly and expansion , is sufﬁcient to explain the observed vari - ability in shapes of tip - growing cells . More generally , our description provides a framework to understand cell growth and remodeling in plants ( pollen tubes [ 17 ] , root hairs , etc . [ 18 ] ) , fungi ( hyphal growth [ 19 , 20 ] and ﬁssion and budding yeast [ 3 ] ) , and some bacteria [ 21 ] , in the context of both tip growth and diffuse growth . Theoretical Description and Results The shape of a walled cell is speciﬁed by its cell wall . From a geometrical viewpoint , cell walls are shell - like structures [ 1 , 6 ] of thickness 0 . 1 – 1 m m [ 6 ] , always much thinner than the observed radii of curvature of the shell , which is of the order of 10 m m ( Figure 1 ) . Therefore , a steadily elongating tip - growing cell can be described as an axisymmetric thin shell of radius r ( s ) and thickness h ( s ) , with s being the contour length from the apex ( Figure 1C ) . The geometry of the shell is charac - terized by its principal curvatures , k s along the tangential direction , s , and k f along the azimuthal direction , f . Deﬁning q as the angle between the local normal and the direction of growth ( Figure 1C ) , the curvatures read k s = d q / ds and k f = sin q / r . The stress resultants ( tensions ) s ss and s ff in a shell subject to a pressure P ( the turgor ) are given by k s s ss + k f s ff = P ; k f s ss = P 2 ; ( 1 ) and follow from a consideration of the balance of forces in the longitudinalandazimuthaldirections , regardlessofthemechan - ical properties of the cell wall ( see Supplemental Data , available online , fordetails ) . Thetensionsinthecellwallmustberelatedto the deformation rates ( i . e . , the expansion ) ofthe tubular shell via the rheologyofthecellwall . In ordertoaccountfortheobserved irreversible expansion of the cell wall in the apical region , we describe it as an inhomogeneous but locally isotropic viscous shell , with a viscosity that varies with location following the distributionof enzymes thatregulatethe local crosslinkingstate ofthewall ( cellwalllooseningenzymes [ 6 , 16 , 22 ] ; Pectinmethyl - esterases ( PMEs ) and PME inhibitors ( PMEIs ) in the case of pollen tubes [ 17 , 23 , 24 ] ) . For the sake of simplicity , we assume the cell wall to be incompressible , with a constant cell wall density r w . A minimal description of the viscous cell wall is then embodied in a linear relation between stress resultants and strain rates , which , in the steady state , reads s ss = 4 m h (cid:2) du ds + 1 2 u cos q r (cid:3) ; s ff = 4 m h (cid:2) 1 2 du ds + u cos q r (cid:3) ; ( 2 ) where u ( s ) is the local tangential velocity of the shell , h ( s ) is the local cell wall thickness , and m ( s ) is its local viscosity ( see Supplemental Data for details ) . In terms of the deﬁned vari - ables , the strain rates read du / ds and u cos q / r . In order to maintain the growth of the cell , new cell wall material must be supplied to the expanding apical region ( Figure 1B ) . We account for the addition of new cell wall mate - rial to the pre - existing wall through an inhomogeneous secre - tion rate that describes the localized , cytoskeletally guided fusion of secretory vesicles with the plasma membrane [ 3 , 15 , 16 , 25 , 26 ] ( Figure 1B ) . If g ( s ) is the local rate of cell wall material addition per unit surface to the pre - existing wall , local mass conservation of the cell wall material dictates that ( see Supplemental Data for details ) d ð urh Þ ds = r g r w : ( 3 ) Equations 1 – 3 form a complete set of differential equations for the variables u ( s ) , r ( s ) , and h ( s ) , once the viscosity m ( s ) , the material secretion rate g ( s ) , and some boundary conditions are speciﬁed . Wall Secretion Rate : g ( s ) Despite the complexity of the intracellular phenomena associ - ated with the organization of cytoskeletal ﬁlaments , cyto - plasmic streaming , and several other processes in the * Correspondence : lm @ seas . harvard . edu neighborhood of the apical region [ 3 , 16 , 17 , 25 , 26 ] , some general properties can be established for the spatial depen - dence of the secretion rate in a steadily tip - growing cell . In the reference frame attached to tip of the growing cell , the net axial ﬂux of cell wall material through a cross - section of the tube , J ( s ) , is related to the local secretion rate via the expression 2 p r g ð s Þ = dJ ð s Þ ds ; ( 4 ) where we have assumed that there is no degradation or synthesis of cell wall material in the cytoplasm , as shown to be valid in the near apical region [ 3 , 18 ] ( see Supplemental Data for details ) . Far away from the apex , in the cylindrical part of the cell , there is no material addition ( g = 0 ) [ 3 , 17 , 18 ] , so that the net ﬂux of cell wall material is a constant J 0 ( Equation 4 ; Figure 2 ) . At the apex , the secretion rate per unit surface is a constant g 0 because it can neither vanish nor diverge in the steady state . Consequently , following Equation 4 , the asymptotic behavior of the ﬂux close to the apex ( s / 0 and q / 0 ) is J ( s ) w s 2 . Between these two limiting cases the spatial proﬁle of the ﬂux ( or the secretion rate ) may depend on many details [ 25 , 26 ] , but continuity alone implies the existence of a length scale , a , characterizing the crossover from one limiting regime to the other ( Figure 2 ) . Over this secretion length scale , a , the secre - tion rate g changes signiﬁcantly compared to its value g 0 at the apex . This is consistent with the observations in pollen tubes , among other tip - growing cells [ 3 , 19 ] , which show a distinct region in the neighborhood of the apex with a sharp gradient in the density of both secretory and endocytic vesicles [ 26 ] ( Figure 1B ) . Although an inﬁnite family of functional forms may be constructed with these minimal constraints , we show below that our qualitative results are unchanged as long as we respect the asymptotic behaviors discussed above . Wall Viscosity : m ( s ) The mechanical properties of the cell wall at a given position depend on the local concentration of crosslinks between the constituent polymers . In vitro experiments with pectin poly - mers ( the primary constituent of the cell wall in the apical region of pollen tubes [ 1 , 17 , 18 ] ) have shown that for crosslink concentrations below a critical value r * the pectin network ﬂows , with a viscosity that depends on the crosslink concen - tration [ 27 ] . At a critical crosslink concentration r * ( gelation transition [ 27 , 28 ] ) , the pectin network ceases to ﬂow ( charac - terized by a diverging viscosity at the critical point [ 27 ] ) , and when r > r * the network behaves as an elastic gel . In pollen tubes , both the concentration of methylesteriﬁed pectin J ( s ) g ( s ) J ( s ) ~ s 2 6 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 s / a - 1 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 J ( s ) J 0 J 0 8 4 2 0 10 g ( s ) g 0 2 q / p m ( q ) m 0 a g 0 a Figure 2 . Secretion of Cell Wall Material and Differential Viscosity Sketch of the apical region of the cell describing the spatial dependence of thetwofunctionsthatcharacterizetransportandsecretionofcellwallmate - rial , J ( s ) and g ( s ) , respectively , and also of the wall viscosity m . The net total ﬂuxofcellwallmaterialgoingthroughacross - sectionofthecell , J ( s ) , isrep - resented by an arrow in the center of the sketched cross - section , and it is constant ( J 0 ) in the cylindrical region . The secretion of material into the wall is represented by internal arrows in the normal direction . Secretion is maximal at the apex ( longer arrows ) , where the secretion rate per unit surface is constant ( g 0 ) and decreases considerably at the characteristic length scale a . Examples of the functions J ( s ) and g ( s ) , with the required asymptotic behaviors and the crossover at the length scale a , are plotted ( down ) . In this example J ( s ) / J 0 = s 2 / ( s 2 + a 2 ) . An example of the variation of the viscosity with q , m ( q ) / m 0 = ( 1 + q 6 ) / cos q , also with the required asymp - totic behavior , is plotted ( right ; inverse viscosity is plotted for clarity ) . n s r s s = 0 q B C A f Figure 1 . System Geometry and Deﬁnitions , Example of Tip - Growing Cell : Pollen Tubes ( A ) Lily pollen tube growing from a hydrated pollen grain in vitro and observed with bright - ﬁeld microscopy ( left ) . The image on the right is a close - up of the apical region and its vicinity ( dashed red box ) . Image courtesy of Enrique Rojas ( Dumais Lab , Harvard University ) . ( B ) Sketch of the apical region of a growing pollen tube showing how secre - tory vesicles ( circles ) move along actin ﬁlaments ( red ) toward the apex , transporting the cell wall material ( gray ) and secreting it by fusing to the plasma membrane ( yellow ) [ 17 , 18 ] . The motion of secretory vesicles along actin ﬁlaments induces a cytoplasmic ﬂow ( cytoplasmic streaming ; blue arrows ) with a characteristic ‘‘reverse fountain pattern’’ that creates an accumulation of secretory vesicles close to the apex . ( C ) Parameterization of the cell shape in the apical region . The left panel showsthetridimensionalgeometryofthegrowingcell . Asectionatconstant azimuthal angle f ( transparent plane ) is shown on the right , together with thecoordinatesystemusedtodescribeapointonthesurface ( inthemoving frame located at the apex of the cell ) , where n represents the normal vector to the surface and s the tangential direction . Shape and Dynamics of Tip - Growing Cells 2103 ( noncrosslinked pectin ) and the concentration of PMEIs decrease monotonically from the apex [ 23 , 24 ] . Assuming the extracellular calcium concentration to be homogeneous , the concentration of crosslinks in the cell wall of pollen tubes increases monotonically from the apex , and so does then the wall viscosity . Therefore , far away from the expanding apical region , the cell wall of pollen tubes does not ﬂow anymore and adopts a cylindrical , tubular shape compatible with a pres - surized elastic cylinder . We interpret the transition from a ﬂuid - like to a solid - like behavior as occurring when the crosslink concentration exceeds the critical crosslink concentration r * at the gelation transition , consistent with experimental obser - vations [ 27 ] . The effect of PMEIs in pollen tubes , and most likely of other cell wall loosening enzymes in different organ - isms , is therefore not to soften the cell wall , but to ﬂuidize it , which involves a sol - gel - like phase transition rather than just a mere change of material stiffness . Closetotheapex , theﬂuidcellwallischaracterizedbyaﬁnite viscosity m 0 . In agreement with the fact that the cell wall behaves as a pressurized elastic shell far away from the growing apical region , the dynamics of cell wall expansion described by Equations 1 , 2 , and 3 require the viscosity to diverge ( gelation of the cell wall ) as the cell shape approaches the characteristic tubular geometry away from the apex . Math - ematically , thistranslates into a viscosity m that diverges as m ( q ) w 1 / ( p / 2 2 q ) whenapproaching the tubular geometry ( q / p / 2 and k s / 0 ) . For the sake of simplicity , we assume that the tubular geometry is attained asymptotically far away from the apex ( s / N ) . We note that the dependence of m on space is implicit through other ﬁelds , such as the concentration of the enzymes that control the local crosslinking state of the cell wall , and therefore its functional form may depend on s , q , and / or r , or a combination of them . Assuming that the kinetics ofcrosslinkinginthecellwallaremuchfasterthanallothertimescalesintheproblemallowsustowrite m = m ( q ) without explic - itly introducing any additional parameters . Scales and Scaling Laws Tip Geometry Close to the apex of the cell , the local geometry is that of a sphere with radius of curvature R 0 and curvature k 0 = 1 / R 0 . The steady apical expansion of a cell wall with density r w and viscosity m 0 driven by the turgor pressure P is maintained by a constant supply of cell wall material per unit surface g 0 . Comparing the velocity at which cell wall material is assem - bled , g 0 / r w , to the expansion rate of the wall , P / m 0 , yields a length scale R 0 w m 0 g 0 / P r w , the tip radius of curvature . Indeed , using Equations 1 , 2 , and 3 , we may verify this because the asymptotic solutions close to the apex are q ( r ) = k 0 r , u ( r ) = u 0 0 r and h ( r ) = h 0 , with k 0 = P r w 6 m 0 g 0 and u 0 0 = g 0 2 h 0 r w ; ( 5 ) where u 0 0 characterizes the spatial velocity gradient of tangential cell wall expansion near the tip and h 0 is the cell wall thickness at the apex . The curvature k 0 and u 0 0 set the velocity scale u 0 in the shell , which reads u 0 = u 0 0 / k 0 = 3 m 0 g 02 / P r w 2 h 0 . We note that the absolute scale of cell wall thickness , h 0 , cannot be ﬁxed in our framework because we do not discuss the microscopic mechanism of cell wall forma - tion and turnover in the through - the - thickness direction . However , the spatial variations in cell wall thickness are accounted for in our theory through mass conservation . Tubular Geometry Far away from the apical region , the cell wall does not ﬂow and becomes a cylindrical , tubular , elastic shell with radius R and thickness H . In the reference frame attached to the apex , the velocity V of the tubular region corresponds to the growth velocity of the cell . Comparing the wall expansion rate , P / m 0 , to the total available cell wall volume per unit time , J 0 / r w , sets a tubal length scale ð J 0 m 0 = r w P Þ 1 = 3 . Indeed , rewriting Equations 1 , 2 , and 3 for a cylindrical shape and taking into account the asymptotic behavior of the viscosity in this region yields R 3 = 2 p m 0 J 0 P r w : ( 6 ) Although the quantities P , m 0 , and r w are intrinsic constants and do not depend on the geometry , size , or velocity of the cell , the total net ﬂux J 0 ( and similarly g 0 ) does , in general , depend on them . Therefore , in order to separately specify the radius R and velocity V of the cell only in terms of intrinsic quantities , it is necessary to establish the dependence of J 0 on R and V , which we discuss below . Scaling Laws Using Equations 5 and 6 , and relating g 0 to J 0 through p a 2 g 0 = J 0 ( Equation 4 ) , we obtain the scaling laws R R 0 w (cid:4) a R 0 (cid:5) 2 = 3 and V u 0 H h 0 w (cid:4) a R 0 (cid:5) 4 = 3 : ( 7 ) These hold for any form of the ﬂux J 0 ( R , V ) and measure the pointedness of the cell and the cell wall material ﬂow rate , respectively , as a function of the ratio a / R 0 , which compares the secretion length scale a to the wall expansion length scale R 0 . Because they follow from simple considerations of mass and force balance in the apical and tubular regions , they are broadly applicable . In Figure 3 we discuss some cases of particular interest . R constant 0 Fixed g 0 a ~ R R ~ R 0 Fixed a R ~ a R 0 2 3 R 2R 4R R R 0 A B C Figure 3 . Scaling Laws for Tip Growth To obtain scaling relations involving only the radiusofcurvatureattheapex , R 0 , andtheradius ofthecell , R , fromthegeneralscalinglaws ( Equa - tion 7 ) , we need to specify the dependence of a on R ( or on R 0 ) . We discuss some cases . ( A ) If the secretion rate at the apex , g 0 , is a ﬁxed quantity ( independent of R or V ) , which could happen , for instance , by the crowding of secretory vesicles at the apex , then R 0 is constant , independent of R ( Equation 5 ) and a w ( R 3 / R 0 ) 1 / 2 , i . e . , the larger the radius of the cell , the more pointy it would be . ( B ) On the other hand , if the length a scales with the cell radius ( a w R ) , as can be envisioned by considering that the intracellular processes that determine a vary with the radius of the cell , then R w R 0 , i . e . , cells would have the same shape independent of their size . ( C ) If a was constant , independent of the cell radius , then R 3 w a 2 R 0 , i . e . , the larger the cell , the ﬂatter its apex would be . Current Biology Vol 19 No 24 2104 Cell Radius and Velocity As an example of the relation between ﬂux and cell growth velocity and size , we consider the case of cortical transport characteristic of pollen tubes [ 1 , 17 , 18 , 29 ] , in which secretory vesicles are transported toward the apex along the actin ﬁla - ments forming a shell underneath the plasma membrane ( Fig - ure 1B ) . In such a case , the net ﬂux of material transported toward the apex reads J 0 = 2 p R r 0 ð V 0 2 V Þ , where r 0 is the surface density of cell wall material being transported ( propor - tional to the surface density of secretory vesicles ) and V 0 is the velocity of the secretory vesicles , which is mainly determined by the velocity of the myosin motors carrying them [ 17 ] . For the case of cortical transport , the radius and velocity of the tip - growing cell are related by R 2 = 4 m 0 V 0 P r 0 r w (cid:4) 1 2 V V 0 (cid:5) ; ( 8 ) which follows from Equation 6 . If the typical growth velocity V of the cell is much smaller than V 0 ( V « V 0 ) , as commonly observed experimentally for pollen tubes , we see that the radius of the cell becomes essentially independent of its growth velocity . Explicit expressions for the radius and velocity can be obtained by combining Equations 1 , 2 , and 3 and the function J 0 ( R , V ) . Cell Shape To go beyond our scaling analysis and determine the shapes of the growing apical region , it is necessary to specify the func - tions m ( s ) and g ( s ) ( or J ( s ) equivalently ) . We use the functional forms J ( s ) = J 0 s 2 / ( s 2 + a 2 ) and m ( q ) = m 0 ( 1 + q 6 ) / cos q for the numerical calculations ( Figure 2 ) . Although the particular cell shape will depend on the choice of these functions , we ﬁnd that the same qualitative results are obtained for any reason - able functional forms consistent with the asymptotic behav - iors described above for the wall secretion rate and viscosity ( see Supplemental Data ) . The ratio of the length scale , a , that characterizes the spatial variation of secretion of new cell wall material and the charac - teristic radius of curvature R 0 , which arises from the mechanics of cell wall expansion , deﬁnes the dimensionless parameter a h a / R 0 . Once we have scaled the curvatures with the tip curvature k 0 , h with the microscopically deter - mined wall thickness h 0 , and u with the cell wall expansion velocity at the tip u 0 , a is the only dimensionless parameter left in the problem . Figure 4A shows the dependence of the numerical solutions of Equations 1 , 2 , and 3 on a . For a ( 1 the shapes show a characteristically ﬂatter region in the vicinity of the apex , which translates into a nonmonotonic curvature k s . This is consistent with observations in pollen tubes and root hairs [ 30 ] ( see Supplemental Data ) and may be interpreted in terms of the competition between local cell wall assembly and expansion . The nonmonotonicity of the curvature leads to nonmonotonous strain rates ( see Supple - mental Data ) and cell wall thickness ( Figure 4 ) , even though the viscosity increases monotonically away from the apex ( Figure 4 ) and the material secretion rate decreases monoton - ically ( Figure 2 ) . As a is increased , the shapes become increas - ingly pointed , with a monotonically decreasing curvature k s from its maximal value k 0 at the apex ( Figure 4A ) . In this case , the velocity proﬁle shows two distinct regimes , with a fast linear increase at the apex and a slow convergence to its maximal velocity V . Both ﬂat and pointed apices are observed in the tip growth of different organisms [ 19 , 20 , 30 ] , suggesting that our minimal theoretical considerations are sufﬁcient to explain these morphologies . Discussion A molecular approach to cellular morphogenesis requires knowledge of the dynamics of cytoskeletal structures and their control via signaling molecules that would allow us to build up toward a description of cell shape and its evolution . Unfortu - nately , many ofthe putativeintracellular processesthat control wall material production , transport , and assembly are not yet well understood . However , it may be argued that even if they were understood , it is extremely improbable that all this detailed information is required to address global questions such as the cell size , shape , and dynamics , which require global constraints ( [ 3 ] ; Figure 5 ) . Mesoscopic approaches , whileignoringsomeofthemoleculardetails , provideapossible route that allows us to identify the biophysical parameters that control the scales and the diversity of shapes in tip growth . Our description of tip growth avoids the molecular approach in favor of a mesoscopic view by assuming that the effect of intracellular processes can be described effectively by two functions , which account for the local secretion rate and the rheology of the cell wall ( Figure 5 ) . The shape of the cell may depend on many details through the functional forms of the viscosity m and the secretion rate g . However , the scaling laws ( Equation 7 ) , the dependence of the cell radius and velocity on the physical parameters ( Equation 8 ) , and the variation of 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 0 3 2 1 s / R u V z / R 0 6 5 4 3 2 1 1 0 rR 0 . 1 1 10 hh 0 a = 0 . 5 a = 1 a = 2 a = 4 0 3 2 1 s / R kk 0 s s / R 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 4 3 0 1 2 s / R 3 0 1 2 mm 0 Figure 4 . Numerical Solutions Apicalcellshapesobtainednumericallyfordifferentvaluesoftheparameter a h a / R 0 ( top right ) : a = 0 . 5 ( black ) , a = 1 ( red ) , a = 2 ( green ) , and a = 4 ( blue ) . The shapes are also shown in 3D for clarity ( left ) . Small values of a corre - spondtoﬂatter apices , whereaslargevaluesof a areassociatedwithpointy cells . The curvature k s ( s ) , the tangential expansion velocity of the cell wall , u ( s ) , and the cell wall thickness , h ( s ) , are shown for the different shapes . The viscosity m ( s ) is plotted as a function of the arclength ( inset in the plot showing k s ; inverse viscosity is plotted for clarity ) , showing a monotonic increasefromtheapexevenwhenthecurvatureisnonmonotonic . Thefunc - tions J ( s ) and m ( q ) usedtoobtainthenumericalsolutionsarethoseinFigure2 and explained in the main text . Shape and Dynamics of Tip - Growing Cells 2105 theshape withtheparameter a / R 0 ( Figure 4 ) areindependent of those details , providing robust predictions that can be tested experimentally . Furthermore , the obtained apical geometry ( Equation 5 ) establishes the dependence of two commonly measured quantities [ 30 ] —namely , the radius of curvature at the apex , R 0 , and the slope of the cell wall expansion velocity u ( s ) , u 0 0 —on measurable physical parameters , such as turgor pressure P or the secretion rate per unit surface g 0 . These behaviors for both the shape and the expansion velocity in the vicinity of the apex have indeed been observed experimen - tally [ 30 ] ( see SupplementalData ) . Finally , weshowthatasingle dimensionless parameter , which characterizes the interplay of cell wall mechanics and assembly , may be sufﬁcient to explain much of the diversity of shapes in tip - growing cells . Our theory sharpens the quest for the molecular underpin - nings of morphogenesis by identifying the physical mecha - nisms in shaping the cell and thus focusing further attention on those molecular pathways involved in the control of the relevant physical magnitudes , such as the local secretion rate and cell wall rheology . Moreover , it provides a framework that can be generalized to other questions of the morphogen - esis of walled cells such as diffuse growth , budding , and branching . Supplemental Data Supplemental Data include supplemental theory and nine ﬁgures and can be found with this article online at http : / / www . cell . com / current - biology / supplemental / S0960 - 9822 ( 09 ) 01983 - 6 . Acknowledgments We thank Jacques Dumais and Enrique Rojas for discussions and for the images of pollen tubes in Figure 1 , as well as the Human Frontiers Science Program and the Harvard NSF - MRSEC for partial ﬁnancial support . Received : March 31 , 2009 Revised : October 14 , 2009 Accepted : October 20 , 2009 Published online : December 17 , 2009 References 1 . Taiz , L . , and Zeiger , E . ( 2006 ) . Plant Physiology , Fourth Edition ( Sunder - land , MA : Sinauer Associates , Inc ) . 2 . Alberts , B . , Bray , D . , Lewis , J . , Raff , M . , Roberts , K . , and Watson , J . D . ( 2004 ) . Molecular Biology of the Cell , Third Edition ( New York : Garland ) . 3 . Harold , F . M . ( 2005 ) . Molecules into cells : Specifying spatial architec - ture . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 69 , 544 – 564 . 4 . Fowler , J . E . , and Quatrano , R . S . ( 1997 ) . Plant cell morphogenesis : Plasma membrane interactions with the cytoskeleton and cell wall . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 13 , 697 – 743 . 5 . Baskin , T . I . ( 2005 ) . Anisotropic expansion of the plant cell wall . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 21 , 203 – 222 . 6 . Cosgrove , D . J . ( 2005 ) . Growth of the plant cell wall . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 , 850 – 861 . 7 . Mathur , J . ( 2004 ) . Cellshape development inplants . TrendsPlantSci . 9 , 583 – 590 . 8 . Thompson , D . W . ( 2002 ) . On Growth and Form ( New York : Dover Publi - cations ) , reprint of 1942 2nd ed . ( 1st ed . , 1917 ) . 9 . Bernal , R . , Rojas , E . R . , and Dumais , J . ( 2007 ) . The mechanics of tip growth morphogenesis : What we have learned from rubber balloons . Journal of Mechanics of Materials and Structures 2 , 1157 – 1168 . 10 . Goriely , A . , and Tabor , M . ( 2003 ) . Self - similar tip growth in ﬁlamentary organisms . Phys . Rev . Lett . 90 , 108101 . 11 . Lockhart , J . A . ( 1965 ) . An analysis of irreversible plant cell elongation . J . Theor . Biol . 8 , 264 – 275 . 12 . Tindemans , S . H . , Kern , N . , andMulder , B . M . ( 2006 ) . Thediffusivevesicle supply center model for tip growth in fungal hyphae . J . Theor . Biol . 238 , 937 – 948 . 13 . Gierz , G . , and Bartnicki - Garcia , S . ( 2001 ) . A three - dimensional model of fungal morphogenesis based on the vesicle supply center concept . J . Theor . Biol . 208 , 151 – 164 . 14 . Pelce , P . , andPocheau , A . ( 1992 ) . Geometricalapproachtothemorpho - genesis of unicellular algae . J . Theor . Biol . 156 , 197 – 214 . Figure 5 . Schematic Representation of the Different Description Levels of Tip Growth This sketch only contains the most straightfor - ward relations between the molecules and processes that control cell morphogenesis . There are some relations ( arrows in the sketch ) between these elements that have been omitted for the sake of simplicity or because they are not yet established . Similarly , it is possible that other processes that are likely to play a role in shaping the cell have not been considered in the sketch , either because they are not known or because their role is thought to be minor compared to those sketched here . As important as the extensively studied molecular and micro - scopic levels , at the mesoscopic scale the assembly and extension of the cell wall are gov - erned by the laws of physics . No matter how complex intracellular processes and signaling pathways may be , the morphogenesis of the cell must obey essential incontrovertible laws at the mesoscopic scale , such as force balance and mass conservation . Whereas these generic laws set the possible shapes for the cell , molec - ular cues establish the actual shape of the cell from the possible , physically meaningful shapes . The molecular control of cellular morphogenesis occurs through the modiﬁcation of the effective mesoscopic parameters , namely , the turgor pressure P , the cell wall rheology ( characterized by the local wall viscosity m ) , andthelocalsecretion rate g . Turgor pressure isessentially regulated byion ﬂuxes ( Ca 2 + , H + , etc . ) , which change the osmotic balancebetween thecellinterioranditsexternalenvironment [ 3 , 17 , 18 ] . Thelocalrheologicalpropertiesofthecellwalldependon ( extracellular ) ionicconcentrations , andthe activity of enzymes that affect the local crosslink concentration in the cell wall ( e . g . , PMEs and their associated inhibitors in pollen tubes [ 23 , 24 ] ) . The cell wall secretion rate is mainly affected by polysaccharide synthesis , the transport of secretory vesicles toward the apex , and the fusion of vesicles with the plasma membrane . Intracellular transport relies on cytoskeletal ﬁlaments ( regulated at the molecular scale by PIP 2 and IP 3 , as well as by small GTPases of the Ras superfamily [ 17 , 31 ] ) and molecular motors ( whose activity is known to depend on Ca 2 + concentration ) , which carry secretory vesicles to the apical region . Vesicle fusion at the plasma membrane is required for cell wall secretion and is thought to be controlled by GTPases ( Rab ) and ( intracellular ) ionic concentrations [ 17 , 31 ] . Current Biology Vol 19 No 24 2106 15 . Mathur , J . , and Hu¨lskamp , M . ( 2002 ) . Microtubules and microﬁlaments in cell morphogenesis in higher plants . Curr . Biol . 12 , R669 – R676 . 16 . Cole , R . A . , and Fowler , J . E . ( 2006 ) . Polarized growth : Maintaining focus on the tip . Curr . Opin . Plant Biol . 9 , 579 – 588 . 17 . Krichevsky , A . , Kozlovsky , S . V . , Tian , G . W . , Chen , M . H . , Zaltsman , A . , andCitovsky , V . ( 2007 ) . Howpollentubesgrow . Dev . Biol . 303 , 405 – 420 . 18 . Hepler , P . K . , Vidali , L . , and Cheung , A . Y . ( 2001 ) . Polarized cell growth in higher plants . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 17 , 159 – 187 . 19 . Trinci , A . , and Saunders , P . ( 1977 ) . Tip growth of fungal hyphae . J . Gen . Microbiol . 103 , 243 – 248 . 20 . Heath , I . B . , and Geitmann , A . ( 2000 ) . Cell biology of plant and fungal tip growth—getting to the point . Plant Cell 12 , 1513 – 1517 . 21 . Cabeen , M . T . , and Jacobs - Wagner , C . ( 2005 ) . Bacterial cell shape . Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 3 , 601 – 610 . 22 . Cosgrove , D . J . ( 2000 ) . Loosening of plant cell walls by expansins . Nature 407 , 321 – 326 . 23 . Bosch , M . , and Hepler , P . K . ( 2005 ) . Pectin methylesterases and pectin dynamics in pollen tubes . Plant Cell 17 , 3219 – 3226 . 24 . Ro¨ckel , N . , Wolf , S . , Kost , B . , Rausch , T . , and Greiner , S . ( 2008 ) . Elabo - rate spatial patterning of cell - wall PME and PMEI at the pollen tube tip involves PMEI endocytosis , and reﬂects the distribution of esteriﬁed and de - esteriﬁed pectins . Plant J . 53 , 133 – 143 . 25 . Campanoni , P . , and Blatt , M . R . ( 2007 ) . Membrane trafﬁcking and polar growth in root hairs and pollen tubes . J . Exp . Bot . 58 , 65 – 74 . 26 . Bove , J . , Vaillancourt , B . , Kroeger , J . , Hepler , P . K . , Wiseman , P . W . , and Geitmann , A . ( 2008 ) . Magnitude and direction of vesicle dynamics in growing pollen tubes using spatiotemporal image correlation spectros - copy and ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching . Plant Physiol . 147 , 1646 – 1658 . 27 . Axelos , M . A . , and Kolb , M . ( 1990 ) . Crosslinked biopolymers : Experi - mental evidence for scalar percolation theory . Phys . Rev . Lett . 64 , 1457 – 1460 . 28 . de Gennes , P . G . ( 1979 ) . Scaling Concepts in Polymer Physics ( Ithaca , NY : Cornell University Press ) . 29 . Vidali , L . , McKenna , S . T . , andHepler , P . K . ( 2001 ) . Actinpolymerizationis essential for pollen tube growth . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2534 – 2545 . 30 . Dumais , J . , Long , S . R . , andShaw , S . L . ( 2004 ) . The mechanics of surface expansion anisotropy in Medicago truncatula root hairs . Plant Physiol . 136 , 3266 – 3275 . 31 . Lee , Y . J . , and Yang , Z . ( 2008 ) . Tip growth : Signaling in the apical dome . Curr . Opin . Plant Biol . 11 , 662 – 671 . Shape and Dynamics of Tip - Growing Cells 2107