1 Design Issues in Gaze Guidance Under review with ACM Transactions on Computer Human Interaction Christoph Rasche * , Karl Gegenfurtner Abteilung Allgemeine Psychologie , Justus - Liebig - Universität Otto - Behaghel - Str . 10F , 35394 Giessen , Germany Email : rasche15 @ gmail . com Abstract The idea of gaze guidance is to lead a viewer’s gaze through a visual display in order to facilitate his / her search for specific information . This study elaborates on the process of guiding gaze from one spatial position to another , whereby the goal is to create a guidance process that is as least - obtrusive as possible . A list of guidance aspects is discussed and then applied to two specific scenarios , car cockpit and PC monitor . To explore some of those aspects , an experimental framework is introduced in which subjects perform a difficult letter search and identification task in dynamic noise . To facilitate this recognition task , the viewer is guided by a luminance ‘marker’ . It is investigated how the marker’s spatio - temporal properties influence the recognition performance . From those results we derive a number of design recommendations for the process of gaze guidance . Content indicators : General Terms : Design , Experimentation Categories & Subject Descriptors : H . 1 . 2 User / Machine Systems , H . 5 . 2 User Interfaces Keywords and Phrases : Eye - Tracking , Gaze Guidance * Corresponding author 2 Introduction The aim of gaze guidance is to support the viewer during visual inspection of his / her environment by giving suggestions of where to look ( Barth et al , 2006a , 2006b ) . Gaze guidance is potentially applicable in situations where the viewer is confronted with a large visual display ( or visual field ) , which needs to be searched for specific information , e . g . while driving a car , when working at a monitor or when analyzing medical images ( McNamara et al 2009 ; Kim and Varshney , 2008 ) . The ( human ) viewer itself is undoubtedly the most efficient searcher of visual information , yet a viewer can browse detailed visual information only serially ; the viewer may tire ; or the viewer may be a novice and lack the experience to find specific information in his / her environment . The aim is therefore to point out potentially interesting spots by means of some visual marker , which in turn would draw the gaze toward that position . Thus , there are two parts to a gaze - guiding system . The first one is the computation of visually interesting spots by means of algorithms mimicking human vision or by means of a previously collected set of salient locations obtained from other human viewers ( Barth et al , 2006b ) . The second one is the process of leading gaze through this set of locations in such a way , that the viewer feels least irritated or disrupted by the process . This study is concerned with the second part and intends to argue the following points : 3 - The complexity of gaze guidance should not be underestimated : trying to comprehend the complexity in its entity will more likely lead to a successful implementation . - In order to successfully implement a complex guiding system , one should start with a well specified , simple guiding task . A simple task may not satisfy the researcher’s hunger for futuristic system , but may be necessary to gain experience and to anticipate potential pitfalls when expanding to more daring systems . - Today’s technology is ready to perform gaze guidance in a PC setting and some examples are given . - Guidance should be comfortable , e . g . , bright flashing dots are unlikely candidates for a smooth guiding process . Rudimentary forms : Gaze guidance already exists in rudimentary forms , for instance on personal computers : word editors use blinking cursors to signal their present position ; operating systems employ blinking icons to signal incoming email , security updates or entry dialogs , which have appeared behind other panels ; and banner advertisement on web pages uses blinking or moving objects , or also pop - up windows , to attract a viewer’s gaze . Each one of these markers has its advantages and disadvantages . The blinking cursor is effective as long as we stay near it , for instance within the editor . But once we leave the editor window and switch to another window , the memory for the cursor position fades away with increasing duration . A return to the previous cursor position 4 therefore results sometimes in a search . The icons of security updates are sometimes not noticed , because their appearance has become too familiar to us . Finally , advertisement markers can be very irritating . Traffic signals are another rudimentary form of gaze guidance . Traffic signals are made of different degree of saliency . They exhibit bright , conspicuous colors to notify the driver of potential dangers ( e . g . , red stop sign ) , but moderate colors when the road sign contains general information ( e . g . signs pointing toward historic sites ) . The saliency of a road sign is modulated by its context : on a secluded road in a remote area , any traffic signal may be a welcome attraction ; in a busy city center , a traffic signal may be drowned in a sea of other signs . These examples already hint that there is a range of aspects associated with optimal gaze guidance . In case of the blinking cursor it would be optimal if the saliency of the cursor were proportional with eccentricity in order to recapture gaze unerringly . In case of the car cockpit , it would be beneficial , if those road signs were pointed out , which pertain to the current driving task , for instance parking signs when searching for a parking spot . A central issue is therefore the adjustment of the saliency of the visual marker . This point is expanded in the next paragraph . The process in a nutshell : When humans search a visual field in real - world conditions , they are doing this often in parallel with many other actions , which decrease or even 5 divert the viewers attention from the actual search task ( e . g . leaving temporarily the word editor ) . Generally expressed , the viewers attention , A , fluctuates as a function of time , A ( t ) . During such distractions the marker’s saliency , S m , needs to be increased in order to efficiently recapture gaze . The saliency is therefore dependent on the subjects attention , and is also dependent on the context , c , as mentioned above : S m ( A , c ) . If a viewer is distracted strongly , it may even require a cueing signal to disengage the viewer from the present gaze position . The saliency of the cueing signal may also depend on attention and context , S c ( A , c ) . Thus the essential cycle of operations is the sensing of the viewer’s attention , then adjusting the saliency of the cuing and marker signal , followed by placing an attention - and context - dependent marker at the corresponding spatial locations : these latter two operations are denoted as P c ( x c , y c , S c ) and P m ( x m , y m , S m ) , with ( x c , y c ) and ( x m , y m ) as the corresponding spatial coordinate pairs . The cycle is completed by recognizing the visual information at the marker location , R ( x m , y m ) : ) ( ) , ( ) , , ( ) , , , ( ) , ( ) , , ( ) ( t A y x R S y x P S y x P c A S c A S t A m m m m m m c c c c m c → → → → The formulation is a generic one . Implementations of simple guidance tasks may require only a subset of those outlined operations and functions . The following section elaborates on all of these operations . 6 A List of Aspects The list of aspects is not confined to a particular system , but intends to address the topic in a broad sense . One may distinguish between 3 types of aspects : temporal , attentional and spatial ( figure 1 ) . 1 . Response Urgency : One may distinguish between different degrees of urgencies to lead the viewer to a conspicuous spot . A high - urgency scenario could be , if a car driver is to be notified about a potentially dangerous situation : then , the marker should act as an alert signal triggering immediate reaction . In this case the marker should be obvious , for instance a large bright marker , combined with an auditory signal to ensure rapid reaction . A low - urgency scenario would be , if an observer browses a large visual display , in which there exist salient spots : in such a case , the marker should act as a suggestion , but does not necessarily require an immediate response . Such a marker should be subtle , ideally subliminal , otherwise it may become irritating and loose its attractiveness and hence its purpose . 2 . Marker Frequency : A marker can appear with different frequencies . On the one side , the frequent appearance of a marker may be potentially irritating or tiring leading to its ignorance . The marker frequency can not exceed 3 Hz , because this is the approximate eye movement frequency ( 3 - 4 times / sec ) . On the other side , the occasional appearance of 7 a marker may suffer from potential negligence , thus requiring a stronger saliency . If the frequency varies over time , the saliency of the marker may need to vary accordingly . 3 . Marker Occurrence : A marker may occur sequentially , meaning only one at a time , or there may be several markers appearing simultaneously . In case of the latter , the choice of when to look at which marker may not matter and it would be left to the observer to plan a serial scanning of the spots . If some markers are of higher priority than others , then a serial guidance would be deployed . If gaze is to be guided at a fast pace , e . g . one or two times a second , the precise marker timing may also be a crucial issue . During some time period before the actual saccade is triggered , ca . 100ms before saccadic onset , visual information does not influence the orienting process anymore ( e . g . Nazir et Jacobs 1991 , Caspi et al 2004 ) . Thus , the occurrence of a marker during that time has little effect and may not contribute to a fast - paced and smooth guiding process . 4 . Marker Range : This aspect addresses the display size and the peripheral decline in visual acuity . Acuity declines with increasing eccentricity from the center of gaze , that is , a signal in the periphery is less detectable than one near the focus . For a grating discrimination task the detectability drops as follows : at 5 degrees eccentricity , which is the perimeter of the parafovea , it has dropped to 32 percent ; at 20 degree eccentricity , which is the perimeter of the eye field , the detectability is at 10 percent ( Findlay , Gilchrist 2003 , p . 15 ) . Hence , in order to render distal markers equally noticeable as close 8 ones , the markers have to be scaled up in size with increasing eccentricity , an issue now called eccentricity - dependent saliency . For instance , for a ‘grating marker’ at 5 degree eccentricity the marker size had to be scaled up by a factor of 3 . The decline in grating acuity can be described by an exponential decay , but there exists no general formulation for arbitrary visual structure . During viewing , the typical saccadic jump distance ( = amplitude ) reaches up to about 20 degrees , rarely up to 30 ( Land et al , 1999 ; Einhäuser et al 2007 ) . If the display size is limited to this magnitude , it will be browsed to a large extent by eye - movements and to a smaller extent by head movements . For larger display sizes , the proportion of head movements will increase . For markers , which are farther away than 20 degrees of eccentricity , it may require a cueing signals to alert the viewer ( aspect ‘cue signal’ ) . 5 . Marker Location : A marker may be stationary , e . g . a marker placed on the side mirror of a car , or it may appear at any ( unpredictable ) position in the display . For the former we would expect a viewer to remember its location and make more precise eye movements towards it than in case of the latter . In case of the latter , landing precision may be an issue , depending on the degree of structural detail at the marker’s location . Another potential necessity may be to place the marker slightly beyond its target ( with reference to the present gaze position ) to account for saccadic undershoot . 6 . Attention : As mentioned in the introduction already , an observer may be engaged in another ( guidance - independent ) action , which is so attention - consuming , that any marker 9 signal may fail to attract the viewer’s gaze . In case of a low - urgency situation , this may not matter ; in case of a high - urgency situation it may be crucial that the marker appears very salient – possibly coupled with an auditory signal to disengage the viewer from the distracting action . Consequently , the saliency of a marker must correspond to an observer’s attentive state , which in turn needs to be tracked . The need to continuously sense the viewers attention has already been suggested by others in studies of human - computer dialogue interfaces ( e . g . Qvarfordt and Zhai , 2005 , Salvucci et al 2000 ) . 7 . Cue Signal : As mentioned repeatedly it may be useful to provide an alert signal for the marker in some situations , that is , a cue signal preceding the actual marker ( see aspect ‘marker range’ . Such cues could be of auditory or visual nature and serve to announce the upcoming appearance or presence of a marker . An example of a visual cue could be for instance a little arrow pointing toward the location of the marker , a cue similar as in Posner’s attention experiments ( Posner et al 1980 ) . If one knew the viewer’s momentary gaze position and if one had control over the visual display , then such a cue could be placed near the viewer’s focus to be most effective . This is elaborated in the next 2 points . 8 . Eye - tracking : An optimal gaze - guidance system is equipped with an eye - tracker which knows the viewer’s gaze position at any given point in time ( as already implied in the above discussed points ) . Such tracking does not need to be overly accurate : recent eye - trackers , geared toward desktop use , may well suffice to operate such a gaze - guiding 10 process . For instance , the eye - tracking solution suggested by Li et al , ( 2006 ) , provides an accuracy of 1 degree ( and costs only 350 dollars ) , which is sufficient to make use of the idea of eccentricity - dependent saliency ( see aspect ‘marker range’ ) and to sense when the area near a marker has been foveated . 9 . Marker Appearance : If the visual field consists of a display of which the guidance system possesses control over each pixel , then there exists the option to place a marker in a context - dependent fashion : For instance , a luminance marker can be set by subtly increasing the luminance values at a given salient position . This pixel modulation enables to display markers , which are sufficiently conspicuous but not necessarily irritating . The latter may occur if a fixed - saliency marker is placed into a context from which it pops - out in an irritating manner . Spatial Attentional Temporal Marker Frequency Marker Occurrence Response Urgency Appearance Location Range ( display size ) Eye tracking Cue Attention eye - , head movements eccentricity dependent sequentialsimultaneous ( overload ? ) timing stationaryunpredictable accuracy of landing display ( pixel ) control context dependent saccadic behavior visual auditory immediatelater second – minutes Search Complexity Reliability 11 Figure 1 . Aspects of gaze guidance , nominally classified into temporal , attentional and spatial aspects . 10 . Learning : A gaze - guiding system requires time to get acquainted to : the user needs time to learn to respond to the markers without feeling disrupted in his / her regular search behavior . Although it is often stated that human - computer interfaces should require little learning ( Jacob 1993 ) , this may not be achievable when learning to interact with a subtle process as pursued here . For the learning process , it may be beneficial to increase the overall level of the marker’s saliency to make the novice aware of the guiding process . 11 . Search complexity : A search task may vary in its degree of recognition complexity ( term R ( x m , y m ) in above equation ) . For instance , counting the number of occurrences of a visual structure involves merely its detection , but identifying it may require additional processing time . This may affect search behavior and the chase for an optimal search performance may require different markers . 12 . Validity : The algorithms computing the salient locations may not always be reliable and therefore generate false marker locations . If a viewer becomes aware of this unreliability , s / he will likely adjust to it . This has already been investigated in a visual search task by Groenewald et al . They measured that the attentional window changed with marker validity : for valid markers , the attentional window was large in order to capture possible markers , for invalid markers , the attentional window was small . 12 With this list of aspects in mind , we can start envisioning specific tasks and elaborate on some of the aspects . Specific Scenarios PC monitor : As pointed out above , the technology for performing gaze guidance on PC monitors exists already . Eye - trackers with an accuracy of 0 . 5 to 1 . 0 degrees provide sufficient potential to perform reasonable gaze guidance ( Hansen et al 2004 , Li et al 2006 ) . Let us start with sketching simple guidance tasks , which do not require that attention is sensed ( aspect ‘attention’ ) , but only eccentricity E serves as a variable to modulate the marker’s saliency S m ( E ) ( aspects ‘marker range’ and ‘eye - tracking’ ) . 1 ) Blinking cursor ( of a word processor ) : Taking the cursor size h as a measure for saliency , h = S m , the size could be made proportional to gaze eccentricity E : When the gaze leaves the word editor , the cursor size would increase with gaze eccentricity . An eccentricity - dependent cursor size could also be beneficial , when the page is scrolled – an action during which one tends to loose the cursor position very rapidly due to the whole - text flow field . 2 ) Event notification : Unless the user awaits an immediate email response by someone , many email notifications – or other notifications - can be rather disrupting . To reduce the likelihood of disruption , email notification could be placed only at points in time when 13 the user’s gaze is outside of the editor or near the icon bar . One could take this a step further and consider a system , which magnifies icons or menu points when gaze is near them . That would be a step toward gaze - contingent displays . Alternatively , one could merely provide cueing signals at the location of the present gaze location . Users may have also developed strategies to ignore areas of event notification . For instance , a study by Stenfors et al ( 2003 ) showed that experienced internet users avoid areas of banner advertisement . Even if a new web site appears , some users do not even fixate the banners once . Stenfors et al even distinguish between different strategies of how to avoid such areas . It is likely that such avoidance or ignorance strategies exist for any kind of notification . Instead , this would be another incentive to implement a clever Gaze Guidance system . 3 ) Site anchors : When users browse web sites , they tend to return to the same locations for faster the purpose of orienting . Stenfors et al call these locations anchors ( 2003 ) . Such anchors can range from the menu bar , representing a static , global anchor , to the mouse pointer representing a dynamic , local anchor . Even the text cursor may be used as an anchor by placing it to specific text locations . The use of such external stimuli is an aid to avoid memory burden ( Zhang and Norman , 1994 ) . Clearly , all these forms of anchoring are some sort of gaze guidance . We therefore imagine the situation in which the user has the opportunity to place markers on the screen , which serve as anchors . For instance , when working in a text , these anchors should serve only temporarily and could thus fade 14 away within a few tens of seconds . Such anchors could be created in an eccentricity - dependent fashion as the blinking cursor . The marker range on a PC monitor ( visual field ) varies from about 25 to 40 degrees depending on the viewer’s distance to the screen ( sitting far and close respectively ) . Given a maximal saccadic amplitude of 20 degrees , it is likely that visual browsing on the monitor screen involves head movements to some extent , and with the upcoming of wider screens their occurrence is even more likely . For large saccadic amplitudes , there exists undershoot , that is saccadic landings are generally too short . Sometimes , a corrective saccade takes place which brings the target into focus . If a viewer is supposed to be guided sequentially through a display , then repeated undershoot may feel disrupting . It is therefore beneficial to investigate large saccadic amplitudes and consider markers which minimize undershoot . The great potential of a gaze - guiding system at a PC monitor is the feature of complete display control – in contrast to for instance the visual field as seen from a car . Car cockpit : The visual field in a car cockpit is much larger as compared to a PC setting : browsing the road scene and checking the mirrors clearly involves head movements . This makes eye - tracking much more challenging than in a PC setting and accurate eye - tracking may only 15 be possible when the driver observes the road scene . Still , knowing the approximate gaze position can be crucial : for instance , if a driver is looking into the rear view mirror , and the guidance system attempts to draw the driver’s gaze into a side mirror , then the marker needs to be stronger , than if the driver is observing the road . This brings us back to the aspects attention and cuing , which are probably even more crucial during driving due to the presence of dangers . Research on eye - movement behavior during driving has already addressed the aspect of attention ( or intention ) in order to develop educational methods to prevent accidents . Originally , it was believed that there exists a difference between the scanning behavior of novice and experienced drivers . But more extensive research questions the presence of any such differences : instead of seeking a single potential cause or mechanism , which could trigger accidents , Chapman and Underwood instead suggest to analyze the moment - to - moment syntax of scanning behavior ( 1998 ) . Such research is relevant to the construction of a gaze - guiding system , because it can sketch what is required to render a marker’s saliency attention - dependent in order to avoid its annoyance . As for the PC setting , algorithms which read a driver’s attention or intention are being developed ( e . g . Liu 1998 ) . Assuming for the moment the absence of such algorithms , one may at least coarsely adjust the marker’s saliency , by sensing where gaze location is approximately . For instance , one could divide the visual field into zones , the road - scene zone and the dash - board zone . During driving , gaze resides mostly in those two zones , but also the 16 mirrors can be regarded as a zone . In whichever zone gaze is at a given point in time , it may require more effort to lead a viewer’s gaze toward another zone , than for instance to lead a viewer’s gaze within the road scene zone . Following this zone division of the visual field division , we distinguish two types of guidance : 1 ) Guidance between the road - scene zone and the mirrors and dashboard zones : The left and right view mirrors appear at ca . 70 and 90 degrees eccentricity respectively , the rear view mirror at ca . 30 degrees . This clearly exceeds typical saccadic amplitudes ( ca . 20 - 30 degs ) and involves also head movements . Because the location of those markers is fixed ( aspect location ) , saccadic orienting toward them should be very accurate , but marker saliency remains certainly an issue . With a guidance toward mirrors , the driver is merely pointed out where potential information lies and s / he as to still interpret it , e . g . the dynamics of a car : whether a car is approaching quickly , is just staying behind , or is in the process of passing . This may bear the pitfall that drivers become too familiar with the markers : the may sense the marker in the periphery , anticipate a situation , but do not really gaze toward the marker anymore – and hence do not actually interpret the scene . 2 ) Guidance within road - scene zone : This is the most futuristic type of gaze guidance one can think of . Ideally , the observer is notified of immediate dangers , e . g . a car approaching the vehicle from the side . A more realistic goal is that potential dangers are merely pointed out , e . g . a merging car is labeled by a marker , or the car ahead is labeled if one 17 follows too closely . If eye - tracking within the road - scene zone is of reasonable accuracy , then one may make the size of the markers eccentricity - dependent as we suggested for the word - processor cursor . The technical challenge of guidance in the road - scene is to display those markers . There is less control over the display as in the PC monitor . Markers should of course not obstruct the driver’s view , and therefore must be subtle yet still salient . Experimental Framework Whatever guidance system is implemented , a central issue is – as mentioned repeatedly - that the gaze - guiding process feels comfortable . This is particularly necessary for continuous guidance during which a marker is presented frequently . If the viewer ' s gaze is to be directed to a salient location in a non - irritating manner , then the marker and cue should be subtle . Ideally , a marker would be hardly visible , yet still draw a viewer’s gaze every time it appears ( McNamara et al 2008 ) . Toward that goal we carried out experiments which address the aspects of marker appearance , occurrence and location in a broad manner . No specific scenario is simulated , but the experimental tasks and stimuli should reflect a cognitive load as experienced in a car cockpit or in a PC setting . If no such ‘heavy’ work load existed in our experiments , then the viewer may only passively browse the visual field and react too easily to the markers - in some sense too superficially . 18 Our choice of display is a dynamic ( flickering ) bar code , or also called noise movie , see figure 2 top for a single frame . The movie is generated from a two - dimensional image , whose power spectrum is correlated in space and time in a 1 / f relation of which each row is used as the source for a single frame ( stretched to a bar code ) . The movie thus appears as a mixture of rapid high frequencies and slower low frequencies . We chose this type of noise , because the frequency power spectrum of visual images falls off in a 1 / f manner ( Field 1987 ; Simoncelli , Olshausen , 2001 ) . To ensure that this type of display approximates real - world conditions we determined how the statistics of fixation locations differed from the statistics of non - fixations ( randomly selected ‘fixations’ ) . Using the method by Kienzle et al . ( 2007 ) , we computed that fixation and non - fixations differed by ROC area values ranging from 0 . 54 to 0 . 62 for different persons . The values are almost as high as ROC area values determined for fixations in natural scenes ( ca 0 . 63 , e . g . Tatler et al 2005 , 2006 ) . Our chosen noise display therefore evokes similar fixation behavior as in natural scenes . In the experiments presented here , the task is to detect and identify letters embedded in a background of dynamic noise . The letters appear only transiently and are therefore difficult to detect and to identify , requiring thus full attention . A comparable real - world scenario would be the detection and recognition of road signs while driving in dense fog . To facilitate detection , markers appear at those spatial location where a letter is going to appear . The appearance of a marker consists of only small manipulations of the 19 background noise . Although the experiment may appear very simple , the marker’s appearance has a number of parameters , which may influence the detection and identification performance . + luminanceprofile 1200 pixels target 100 pixels Figure 2 . Letter search and identification task . The bar code ( 1200x100 pixels ) represents a still image of a flickering noise movie whose frequency spectrum falls off with 1 / f . Two letters are present ( with high contrast for purposes of demonstration ) . Below the bar code the letter menu is displayed , which is used for identification during visual search . A marker was generated by adding a rectangular function to the luminance profile of the bar code ( bottom ) . 10 letters were shown with a frequency of 0 . 06 Hz each ( ca . 6 letters per 10 - second trial ) , for a duration of 500ms at a contrast of 0 . 1 ( not to scale in figure ) . Methods 20 Subjects . Male and female students ( age 23 - 30 ) served as subjects . All subjects had normal or corrected to normal vision . All subjects were naive with respect to the aim of the experiment . Equipment . Subjects were seated in a dimly lit room facing a 21 - inch CRT monitor ( ELO Touchsystems , Fremont , CA , USA ) driven by an ASUS V8170 ( Geforce 4MX 440 ) graphics board with a refresh rate of 100 Hz non - interlaced . At a viewing distance of 47 cm , the active screen area subtended 45 by 36 degrees of visual angle on the subject’s retina , in the horizontal and vertical direction respectively . With a spatial resolution of 1280 x 1024 pixels this results in 28 pixels / deg . The subject’s head was stabilized in place using a chin rest . Eye position signals were recorded with a head - mounted , video - based eye tracker ( EyeLink II ; SR Research Ltd . , Osgoode , Ontario , Canada ) and were sampled at 250 Hz . Subjects viewed the display binocularly through natural pupils . Stimulus display and data collection were controlled by a PC . Noise stimulus . The two - dimensional 1 / f image I [ x , t ] is generated using a 2D image of normally distributed random pixel - intensity values , whose frequency spectrum was then transformed to describe a 1 / f - frequency decline . The image size is 1000 * 1200 pixels ( time and space respectively ) . Each row is the source for a single frame : the row was stretched vertically to a height of 100 pixels and placed into a gray background presented as 8 - bit ( 40 cd / m ^ 2 luminance ) . The total intensity ranged from 0 to 1 . A frame was 21 shown for 10ms , a movie thus lasted 10ms * 1000 ( pixels ) = 10s and constitutes one trial . Each movie I ( x , t ) was different to avoid potential learning effects . Marker stimulus . Markers were shown for a duration of d = 300ms ( 30 frames ) and a spatial width of 1 degree , see figure 2 . They were presented spatially and temporally randomly with an average frequency of 0 . 333Hz . Markers are added as a rectangular function with amplitude a mrk to the luminance profile of the source image . The amplitude depended on eccentricity e by an exponentially saturating function : a mrk ( e ) = a min + a max - exp ( - e ) a max , whereby a min is a minimal amplitude and a max is a maximal amplitude ; the function starts at a min and saturates at a min + a max . The parameter values were a min = 0 . 2 , and a max = 0 . 5 , chosen heuristically after a few initial tests . Markers appeared 550 ms before onset of a letter with always 100 % validity . The markers duration lasted 500ms . The temporal gap between marker offset and letter onset was typically 50 or 100ms to avoid potential masking effects . Markers appeared with varying frequency per condition : 0 , 25 , 50 , 75 and 100 % . Marker variations . A number of marker modifications were tested , whereby the above described properties are also called fixed [ ‘fxd’ ] , meaning that no other modifications were done on the gaze - eccentric marker . Flickering condition [ ‘flk’ ] : The amplitude a mrk alternated between 0 and a mrk with a frequency of 50Hz ( every 2 nd frame ) . 22 Looming condition [ ‘loom’ ] : The amplitude gradually increased from 0 to a mrk within a time span of 300ms . Wiggly condition [ ‘wig’ ] : the spatial location of the marker was alternated along the horizontal axis ( left / right displacement ) around its center point with a frequency of 33Hz . Letter stimuli . Letters are taken from a 64 x 64 bitmap and appear of size ca . 1x1 degree in the movie ( figure 10 ) . A letter was shown with a frequency of 0 . 06 Hz ( ca . 6 letters per 10 - second trial ) , for a duration of 500ms at a contrast of 0 . 1 . The letters in figure 10 are shown with increased contrast for the purpose of illustration . Letter occurred with equal probability . Procedure . Subjects performed blocks of 50 trials , generally 3 blocks per day and 6 blocks per experiment . Each block was preceded a calibration . The letter identification response was performed with the mouse by menu selection ( see figure 10 ) . The letters in the menu had the same size as the ones in the noise movie . Each search condition was carried out by 4 to 5 persons . For the 100 % guidance condition the marker appeared 850 - 900 times ( ca . 3 marker presentations per trial ) . Analysis . Subjects were instructed to move their focus toward the targets and make the identification response . Target detection ( ‘foveation’ ) is defined as the temporal coincidence of a ‘saccadic hit’ and a button press . A saccadic hit required a saccadic flight toward the target and a spatial landing within 5 degrees of target eccentricity . The temporal tolerance for a saccadic latency was 400ms , respectively . Given the slow 23 mouse - menu selection process , no maximal reaction time was defined . No attempt was made to correlate mouse selections with foveated letters as this is very difficult to establish . Results In a first set of experiments , the search behavior for the markers alone was investigated , omitting the letter recognition task . Subjects were asked to browse the bar code and to react to markers appearing in their periphery by moving their gaze toward them and pressing a button . During the first few trials of an experiment , subjects did not notice the markers , but then learned their appearance . Figure 3 shows the manual reaction times and saccadic latencies in dependence of eccentricity . The manual reaction time was about the same ( ca . 400ms ) across eccentricities of up to 30 degrees ( top curve in upper graph ) , proving that the exponential compensation for the decline in visual acuity did not deteriorate performance . For a fixed marker , the decline Saccadic latencies decreased slightly with increasing eccentricity from ca . 230 to 180ms , that is , saccades are triggered faster the more peripheral the marker was . For both , the manual reaction time and the saccadic latency , the values were higher by 10 to 15 percent , when the compensation took not place ( not shown ) . Hence , eccentricity dependent compensation did actually improve performance . 24 25 MRT Latency Saccade + MRT Saccade only Figure 3 : Visual search for markers only ( no letter task involved ) . Top : manual reaction times ( MRT ) and saccadic latencies ( Latency ) in dependence of marker eccentricity . Bottom : detection rate for markers which captured gaze and were signaled by a button press ( Saccade + MRT ) and detection rate for markers to which only a saccade was made ( Saccade only ) . The lower graph ( figure 3 ) , shows the detection rate for markers ( blue ) , which captured gaze and were also responded by a button press , within 400 and 1200 milliseconds as the 26 temporal tolerances respectively . Detection rate seems approximately constant across a range of 5 to 20 degrees with values above 50 percent , but then slightly decreased for larger eccentricities . There was also a substantial amount of saccades toward the markers which were not followed by a button press response ( shown in red ) , in a range between 13 and 18 percent . The luminance level for detected and not detected markers was analyzed as well : markers which were added to a lower luminance profile were less likely detected than markers added to a higher luminance profile ( not shown ) . Some subjects even sensed that they could not properly detect markers of low - luminance level . Figure 4 shows the landing precision of saccades . A typical saccadic landing is slightly too short of its target , which is called undershoot . The amount of undershoot increases linearly with eccentricity . Because the visual system seems to notice when it has undershot , it sometimes generates a corrective ( second ) saccade , which however occurred only for 10 % of the saccades toward a marker . 27 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 unde r s hoo t [ deg ] marker eccentricity [ deg ] Landing Precision Figure 4 : Saccadic landing precision for a visual marker search . Slope = 0 . 19 ; intercept = - 0 . 51 ; error at 15 degrees : 16 % . In a second set of experiments , the letter task was carried out with varying degrees of guidance to probe the frequency aspect . Markers appeared 550 ms before onset of a letter and lasted 500ms , leaving a temporal gap of 50ms between marker and letter to avoid potential masking effects – effects which prohibit proper recognition of the stimulus ( letter ) . Markers appeared with different frequency per condition : 0 , 25 , 50 , 75 and 100 % . The conditions with 0 % and 100 % guidance represent the control conditions for which no supporting markers appeared at all ( 0 % ) , or for each letter appearance one ( 100 % ) . 28 0 25 50 75 100 0 0 . 01 0 . 02 0 . 03 0 . 04 0 . 05 0 . 06 0 . 07 0 . 08 0 . 09 0 . 1 Identification Guidance [ % ] P r op o r t i on a total guided not chance 0 25 50 75 100 0 0 . 05 0 . 1 0 . 15 0 . 2 0 . 25 0 . 3 0 . 35 0 . 4 Guidance [ % ] Foveation & Responses b para center idfresp 0 25 50 75 100 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 Para Foveation c 0 25 50 75 100 0 0 . 05 0 . 1 Guidance [ % ] Center Foveation d Figure 5 : Letter identification and foveation in dependence of guidance ( 0 , 25 , 50 , 75 , 100 % ) . a . Proportion of correctly identified letters . total ( triangle ) : total identification rate ; guided ( filled circles ) : for guidance with markers only ; not ( guided - empty circles ) : for no guidance ; chance ( dotted ) : chance level of total identification rate ( taken as the proportion of identification responses , see b ) . Error bars represent standard error of inter - subject performance . b . Foveated letters : proportion letters toward which the gaze moved to . identification responses ( square ) : actual manual selections using menu . para : parafoveal foveation ( fixed 5 - degree radial tolerance ) . center : exact foveation ( 1 - deg radial tolerance ) . c . Parafovea - foveation rate for guided and not - guided letters . d . Center - foveation rate for guided and not guided letters . The identification rate for correctly selected letters steadily increased from 0 . 02 to 0 . 09 with increasing guidance , see curve with triangles labeled ‘total’ in figure 5a . The 29 absolute identification level is small yet irrelevant to the goal of this study , because we merely intend to prove the principle of gaze guidance for difficult recognition tasks . This increase already proofs that continuous guidance works and we now analyze the responses for guided and not - guided letter stimuli separately , as well as the foveation rates , in order to obtain a more detailed picture of the recognition dynamics during guidance . The guided responses increase steadily as well ( filled circles , figure 5a ) . The not - guided responses increase slightly , remain steady and then drop ( empty circles , labeled ‘not’ , figure 5a ) ; the initial increase may be explained by an increased propensity to respond when guidance is present . The chance level for the total identification rate is indicated by the dashed line and is taken as the proportion of manual selections multiplied by 0 . 1 ( the probability of randomly selecting a letter ) . The proportion of manual selections is the proportion of letter - identification responses using the mouse menu which quadruples from ca . 0 . 09 to 0 . 37 , see figure 5b ( squares ) . Again , this confirms that guidance facilitated letter identification , but the surprise comes when looking at the foveation rate , which is the proportion of letters to which the gaze was moved to . Two tolerances for a ‘foveation hit’ are used : a 1 - degree tolerance representing the central fovea and a 5 - degree tolerance representing the parafovea ( central and para foveation rate respectively ) . For 0 % guidance , the central and para foveation rate was at 0 . 09 and 0 . 32 respectively . Both increase with higher guidance but only by a few percent , which evidences that the 30 subject does not centrally foveate a letter to make an identification response , but that its parafoveal presence suffices . The subject must therefore perform some covert attentional shifts toward the letter stimulus to obtain an identification judgment . Because the foveation rates hardly increase , it is not clear whether the fovea is ever shifted toward a letter by a saccade ( overt attentional shift ) , or whether the visual system simply awaits the appearance of a letter in its parafovea and uses only covert attentional shifts . To elucidate this , we plot the foveation rate for guided and not - guided letters for both the central fovea and the parafovea ( figure 5c and d , respectively ) . In both cases , the foveation rate for guided letters increases with increasing guidance , whereas the foveation rate for not - guided letters decreases , proving that guidance also involves ouvert attentional shifts ( saccades ) . Summarizing , guidance is indeed exploited for better letter identification , whereby the markers primarily trigger covert attentional shifts and only secondarily overt shifts . The large increase in identification rate may have several reasons : 1 ) without guidance , subjects foveated letters too late to identify them properly ; 2 ) with guidance , subjects feel more compelled to make identification responses ; 3 ) with guidance , the markers have facilitating effects on identification by the transient high - lighting of the letter location . Now that the principle of gaze guidance is established , we can start testing variations of the marker properties to improve guidance performance . To investigate the timing issue 31 ( aspect ‘occurrence’ ) , we varied the temporal gap between marker offset and letter onset ( 50 , 100 and 150ms ) . This is carried out with the constant ( fixed ) marker amplitude at a guidance rate of 50 % ( figure 6 ) . For increasing gap sizes , the total foveation rate steadily increased ( triangles ) ; the performance for guided letters and not - guided letters is shown as control . However , for the identification rate , there was a sharp drop for a gap size of 150ms and the performance for a gap size of 100ms seems to be close to the optimum . 50 100 150 0 . 03 0 . 04 0 . 05 0 . 06 0 . 07 0 . 08 0 . 09 0 . 1 0 . 11 Temporal Gap [ ms ] P r opo r t i on Foveated totalguidednot 50 100 150 0 . 03 0 . 035 0 . 04 0 . 045 0 . 05 0 . 055 0 . 06 0 . 065 0 . 07 0 . 075 Identified Temporal Gap [ ms ] 32 Figure 6 : Letter foveation and identification rate for three different temporal gaps between marker offset and letter onset for the fixed - amplitude marker ( 50 % guidance ) . Left : Foveated letters ( total , guided , not - guided ) . Right : Identified letters . As a temporal gap size of 100ms seemed the optimum , we used this parameter value when testing 3 other marker variations , a flickering , a looming and a wiggly marker ( figure 7 ) . For comparison the performance of the fixed marker used so far , is also plotted ( label ‘fxd’ ) . For a flickering marker with alternating amplitude ( ‘flk’ ) the foveation performance dropped slightly ( left graph in figure 7 ) ; for a looming marker ( ‘loom’ ) the performance marginally increased ; and for a wiggly marker ( ‘wig’ ) with an alternating , horizontal displacement along the spatial axis , the performance was highest . Again , the corresponding identification performance looked different ( right graph in figure 7 ) . It was lowest for the flickering condition , but highest for the fixed condition . The letter identification performance for guided letters ( full circles ) was even significantly under the performance for non - guided letters ( empty circles ) . Thus , it seems that guidance even deteriorates recognition performance for this marker type . The implications of these differences for the design of markers are discussed next . 33 fxd flk loom wig 0 . 03 0 . 04 0 . 05 0 . 06 0 . 07 0 . 08 0 . 09 0 . 1 Condition P r opo r t i on Foveated total guided not fxd flk loom wig 0 . 03 0 . 035 0 . 04 0 . 045 0 . 05 0 . 055 0 . 06 0 . 065 0 . 07 0 . 075 Identified Condition Figure 7 : Letter foveation and identification rate for different markers ( 50 % guidance ; 100ms gap ) . Left : Foveated ( total , guided , not - guided ) . fxd : fixed amplitude ( eccentricity - dependent marker without further modification ) ; flk : flickering marker ( alternating amplitude ) ; loom : looming marker ( gradual amplitude increase and decrease ) ; wig : wiggly marker ( alternating spatial displacement ) . Right : Identified letters ( total , guided , not - guided ) . Discussion One outlined the complexity of implementing a gaze - capturing process for a gaze - guiding system by discussing a list of aspects , which essentially reflects the complexity 34 of the human visual recognition process per se . Several simple guidance scenarios were sketched for the PC setting , which may serve as a starting point to gather experiences for larger , more daring approaches . Previous approaches A specific guidance system was already tested by McNamara et al ( 2008 ) . In their study , subjects were asked to count the number of soap bubbles which were placed into a static , virtual - world - like scene , e . g . 6 fist - sized soap bubbles were placed randomly in a virtual office scene . They used a flickering luminance marker , whose amplitude was set to two distinct levels : a high level represented the obvious marker type ; a low level represented the subtle marker . The subtle marker was applied in the periphery only ( gaze - contingent ) , was smaller than the soap - bubble target and was never noted by subjects ; the obvious marker was simply more salient and was clearly noted by subjects . The detection and counting rate was higher for the obvious markers but surprisingly not by much . McNamara’s study clearly demonstrates the potential of unobtrusive gaze guidance . Following our list of aspects , the system can for example be classified as a task with low search complexity as it involves only the counting / detection of objects ; targets and markers appeared simultaneously and subjects were given sufficient time for counting ( aspect ‘occurrence’ and ‘response urgency’ respectively ) . 35 Another gaze - capturing system is the one developed by Kim and Varshney , who designed a method to attract gaze in 3D - graphic displays ( Kim and Varshney , 2008 ) . Their markers , called ‘persuasive filters’ , were designed especially for ‘meshes’ and were created by inverting the center - surround saliency operator . If a higher performance is desired for either system , than our list of aspects provides a systematic approach to address possible sites of improvement . Both studies were carried out in virtual scenes , which typically contain less visual complexity and noisiness than real - world scenes , in which for instance the luminance of surfaces is already much more inhomogeneous . For guidance in real - world scenes , the markers of the above mentioned studies may not be salient enough to attract gaze as they are generated by very subtle manipulations in a noise - free image . The system that is being developed by Barth’s group aims at such real - world scene guidance , e . g . Vig et al , 2009 . The goal is to guide the viewer through a brief movie with the purpose to manipulate the viewer’s understanding of the movie . In comparison , movies produced by the film industry place the position of the camera such , that a viewer’s gaze is placed on the appropriate spot , meaning gaze guidance was already implemented by the director . But for simpler types of movies or scenes , guidance needs to be implemented afterward . To pursue this ambitious goal , Barth et al perform whole - image manipulations which involve the lowering of the saliency of those areas , which are not supposed to be focused 36 at a given point in time ( Barth et al , 2006a , 2006b ) . Their marker is therefore not confined to an isolated area but is in some sense the untouched or non - manipulated area . Experiences of this study The goal of our study was to support Barth et al’s quest by investigating the search behavior in dynamic noise displays bare of any structure . The noise movies had a frequency spectrum akin to natural images and provide a high degree of unspecific detail . The noise movies elicited natural eye - scanning behavior and therefore provide a natural distraction ( see Rasche and Gegenfurtner ) . The letter task emulates a difficult recognition task , with the goal to fully engage the viewer’s attention . We particularly investigated the aspects location , range , occurrence and appearance . In order to render the markers as subtle as possible ( just noticeable or least - obtrusive ) , markers were merely added to the luminance profile of the background noise – and not just placed into it with fixed amplitude . We made the following experiences with that task : a ) The eccentricity - dependent compensation of the marker amplitude with an exponentially saturating function resulted in detection rates and manual reaction times , which remained approximately constant across eccentricities of up to 20 degrees ; saccadic latencies even decreased slightly . For larger eccentricities the detection rate started to slightly decrease , whereas manual reaction times and saccadic latencies remained about the same . We think it is not worth improving the detection rate of those 37 far - eccentric markers , but rather to investigate the issue together with head movements , which are likely to occur when the markers appear in the far periphery . b ) The landing precision of eye movements toward markers linearly decreased with increasing eccentricity , a 16 % error approximately , which is plotted as an increase in undershoot in figure 4 . For up to ca . 8 degrees eccentricity , undershoot measures only 1 degree and may not be worth correcting for those proximal eccentricities , because the fovea covers an area of 2 degree diameter . But for larger marker eccentricities it may be necessary to consider peripheral compensation , in particular when small targets are to be detected such as the ‘Blinking Cursor’ or ‘Site Anchor’ in PC screens . This compensation could be done by placing the marker radially beyond its target and turning it off when gaze moves toward it . In the car cockpit scenario , it may be even essential to have accurate landing , but this should be investigated in combination with head movements . The measured undershoot is actually twice as large as the one measured in simple displays ( Kalesnykas and Hallett , 1994 ; see Rasche and Gegenfurtner for an exact comparison ) . This indicates that the noisier the display is the more imprecise is saccadic landing . We suspect that the landing variability in McNamara’s as well as in Kim and Varshney’s study is smaller than in our study as they use static scenes only , but it probably is larger than in experiments with simple displays , as the subjects in McNamara’s study carry out a visual search , which likely involves an increase in landing variability . 38 c ) The letter recognition task revealed that subjects did not need to place their gaze upon the letters to make identification judgments , but that parafoveation sufficed – that is , the subjects performed some attentional shifts to obtain an identification judgment ( figure 5 ) . Does this mean that the proposed undershoot compensation ( item ‘b’ ) can be neglected ? Possibly . It is only specific implementations which will reveal what is actually required . d ) The exact marker properties influence the performance but only to a small degree ( figure 7 ) . They maybe therefore be negligible in certain applications , but could be beneficial in other applications or if an optimization is intended . The marker manipulations we tested were essentially all some form of ‘motion’ stimulus and given that such stimuli are very salient ( Franconeri & Simons 2003 ) , one could have expected that they increase performance . It is only the wiggly marker , which showed a slight increase in foveation performance , but for identification performance the motion markers were rather detrimental . The reason may have been that such markers do not combine well with a dynamic noise background . In contrast , the ‘fixed’ marker , which pops out as a constant spot in this restless background , may appear as a ‘calm’ guidance . Thus , the recognition process ( term R ( x m , y m ) in the above equation ) should not be underestimated : gaze guidance toward a spot is only part of the process , but the perception of structure at that location is another important part . e ) The manipulations with temporal gap sizes aimed at determining the degree of masking ( figure 6 ) . Masking is the phenomenon that when two stimuli are presented in 39 rapid succession at the same spatial location , then one stimulus can influence or even prohibit the perception of the other . Applied to our experiments , this means that a marker can affect the detectability of its guided letter ( also called forward - masking ) . This likely has occurred in case of the 50ms gap , for which the identification rate was smaller than for the 100ms gap . But for larger gap size of 150ms , identification declined again , possibly because of the intrinsic rhythm of the visual system to move on and to rest only a limited duration on a fixed spot . f ) Subjects did not react well to markers of very low luminance , hinting that subjects seem not to deal well with markers of varying luminance level . This may have also been the case in McNamara’s study , but is difficult to analyze in their study as much fewer fixations are collected . A remedy to this may be to introduce a lower limit for the marker luminance level . Summary of recommendations : We summarize the specific experiences made in this study as a set of recommendations for gaze - guidance markers : 1 ) Aspect range : To compensate for the decline in peripheral acuity , the marker’s amplitude is increased with eccentricity by an exponentially saturating function : a mrk ( e ) = a min + a max - exp ( - e ) a max ( a min = minimal amplitude , a max = maximal amplitude ) . 40 2 ) Aspect location : If a compensation for undershoot is desired , the marker should be placed radially beyond its target by 18 % of target eccentricity . Such compensation is probably required when small , hard - to - detect targets are to be foveated which are embedded in a complex background . 3 ) Aspect appearance : a ) Motion markers are better gaze - capturing events than stationary markers , however they are potentially detrimental to recognition performance at their location . b ) If one uses a luminance marker , which is merely added to the luminance profile to make it just - noticeable , it may be necessary to set a lower bound in order to avoid the ‘neglect’ of very low luminance markers . 4 ) Aspect occurrence : In case of guidance toward briefly appearing stimuli , the optimal gap size between marker offset and target onset is ca . 100ms to avoid strong forward - masking effects . 41 Acknowledgements We would like to thank the following members of Schölkopf department at MPI Tübingen in guidance with some computational methods : Wolf Kienzle with help of the support - vector machines ; Jakob Macke with guidance of the reverse correlation technique ; Matthias Franz for overview of both techniques . We thank Erik Groenewold for the reliability aspect . Lab support by Nadine Hartig . This work was funded by the Gaze - based Communication Project ( contract no . IST - C - 033816 , European Commission within the Information Society Technologies ) . 42 References [ 1 ] Barth , E . , Dorr , M . , Böhme , M . Gegenfurtner , K . & Martinetz , T . ( 2006a ) . Guiding the mind’s eye : improving communication and vision by external control of scanpath . In Human Vision and Electronic Imaging XI : Proceedings of SPIE , B . E . Rogowitz , T . N . Pappas , S . J . Daly , eds . , 6057 , 1 - 8 . [ 2 ] Barth , E . , Dorr , M . , Böhme , M . , Gegenfurtner , K . & Martinetz , T . ( 2006b ) . Guiding eye movements for better communication and augmented vision . Perception and Interactive Technologies , volume 4021 of Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence , 1 - 8 . [ 3 ] Caspi , A . , Beutter , B . R . & Eckstein , M . P . ( 2004 ) . The time course of visual information accrual guiding eye movement decisions . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA , 101 ( 35 ) , 13086 - 13090 . [ 4 ] Chapman , P . R . & Underwood , G . ( 1998 ) . Visual search of dynamic scenes : event types and the role of experience in driving situations . In : Underwood , G . ( ed . ) , Eye guidance in reading and scene perception , pp . 369 - 93 , Amsterdam : Elsevier . [ 5 ] Field , D . J . ( 1987 ) . Relations between the statistics of natural images and the response properties of cortical cells . Journal of the Optical Society of America A , 4 ( 12 ) , 2379 - 2394 [ 6 ] Findlay , J . M . and Gilchrist , I . D . Active Vision . New York : Oxford University Press , 2003 . [ 7 ] Franconeri , S . L . & Simons , D . J . ( 2003 ) . Moving and looming stimuli capture attention . Perception & Psychophysics , 65 , 999 - 1010 . 43 [ 8 ] Groenewold , E . S . , Renken , R . And Cornelissen , W . ( Under Review ) . Attentional Window Size is Primarily Set by Environmental Relevance . [ 9 ] Einhäuser , W . , Schumann , F . , Bardins , S . , Bartl , K . , Böning , G . , Schneider , E . & König , P . ( 2007 ) . Human eye - head co - ordination in natural exploration . Network : Computation in Neural Systems , 18 , 267 - 297 . [ 10 ] Hansen , D . W . , MacKay , D . , Nielsen , M . & Hansen , J . P . ( 2004 ) . Eye tracking off the shelf . In : Proceedings of the 2004 symposium on eye tracking research & applications , 58 - 58 . [ 11 ] Jacob , R . J . K . ( 1993 ) . Eye movement - based human - computer interaction techniques : toward non - command interfaces . In H . R . Hartson & D . Hix , eds , Advances in Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 4 , Ablex Publishing Corporation , Norwood , New Jersey , chapter 6 , pp . 151 - 190 . [ 12 ] Kalesnykas , R . P . & Hallett , P . E . ( 1994 ) . Retinal eccentricity and the latency of eye saccades . Vision Research , 34 , 517 - 531 . [ 13 ] Kienzle , W . , Wichmann , F . A . , Schölkopf , B . & Franz , M . O . ( 2006 ) . A nonparametric approach to bottom - up visual saliency . Neural Information Processing Systems ( 08 / 2006 ) . [ 14 ] Kim Y , Varshney A . ( 2008 ) . Persuading Visual Attention through Geometry . IEEE Trans . Visualization and Computer Graphics . 14 ( 4 ) : 772 - 782 . [ 15 ] Land , M . F . , Mennie , N . & Rusted , J . ( 1999 ) . The roles of vision and eye movements in the control of activities of everyday living . Perception , 28 , 1311 - 1328 . 44 [ 16 ] Li , D . , Babcock , J . & Parkhurst , D . J . ( 2006 ) . openEyes : a low - cost head - mounted eye - tracking solution . In : Proceedings of the 2006 Symposium on eye tracking research & applications , San Diego , 95 - 100 . [ 17 ] Liu , A . ( 1998 ) . What the driver’s eye tells the car’s brain . In : Underwood , G . ( ed . ) , Eye guidance in reading and scene perception , pp . 431 - 52 , Amsterdam : Elsevier . [ 18 ] McNamara A , Bailey R and Grimm C ( 2008 ) . Improving search task performances using subtle gaze direction . Applied Perception in Graphics and Visualization . In press . [ 19 ] Nazir , T . A . & Jacobs , A . M . ( 1991 ) . The effects of target discriminability and retinal eccentricity on saccade latencies : An analysis in terms of variable - criterion theory . Psychological Research , 53 , 281 - 289 . [ 20 ] Posner , M . I . ( 1980 ) . Orienting of attention . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 32A , 3 - 25 . [ 21 ] Qvarfordt , P . & Zhai , S . ( 2005 ) : Conversing with the user based on eye - gaze patterns . In : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI ' 05 , 221 - 230 . [ 22 ] Rasche , C . and Gegenfurtner , K . ( under review ) . Gaze Control in Dynamic Broadband ( 1 / f ) Noise Sequences . Attention , Perception & Psychophysics . [ 23 ] Salvucci , D . D . & Anderson , J . R . ( 2000 ) . Intelligent gaze - added interfaces . CHI Letters , 2 , 273 - 280 . [ 24 ] Simoncelli , E . P . & Olshausen , B . A . ( 2001 ) . Natural image statistics and neural representation . Annual Review of Neuroscience , 24 , 1193 - 1216 . 45 [ 25 ] Stenfors , I . , Morén , J . & Balkenius , C . ( 2003 ) . Behavioural strategies in web interaction : A view from eye - movement research . In : The Mind’s Eye : Cognitive and Applied Aspects of Eye Movement Research , pp . 633 - 644 . Elsevier Science BV . [ 26 ] Tatler , B . W . , Baddeley , R . J . & Gilchrist , I . D . ( 2005 ) . Visual correlates of fixation selection : Effects of scale and time . Vision Research , 45 , 643 - 659 . [ 27 ] Tatler , B . W . , Baddeley , R . J . & Vincent , B . T . ( 2006 ) . The long and the short of it : Spatial statistics at fixation vary with saccade amplitude and task . Vision Research , 46 , 1857 - 1862 . [ 28 ] Vig E . , Dorr , M . and Barth , E . ( 2009 ) . Efficient visual coding and the predictability of eye movements on natural movies . Spatial Vision . In press .