Out of Sight , Out of Sync : Understanding Conﬂict in Distributed Teams Pamela J . Hinds • Diane E . Bailey Center for Work , Technology and Organization , Department of Management Science and Engineering , Stanford University , Stanford , California 94305 - 4026 phinds @ stanford . edu • debailey @ stanford . edu Abstract The bulk of our understanding of teams is based on traditional teams in which all members are collocated and communicate face to face . However , geographically distributed teams , whose members are not collocated and must often communicate via technology , are growing in prevalence . Studies from the ﬁeld are beginning to suggest that geographically distributed teams operate differently and experience different outcomes than tra - ditional teams . For example , empirical studies suggest that distributed teams experience high levels of conﬂict . These empirical studies offer rich and valuable descriptions of this conﬂict , but they do not systematically identify the mecha - nisms by which conﬂict is engendered in distributed teams . In this paper , we develop a theory - based explanation of how geographical distribution provokes team - level conﬂict . We do so by considering the two characteristics that distinguish dis - tributed teams from traditional ones : Namely , we examine how being distant from one’s team members and relying on technology to mediate communication and collaborative work impacts team members . Our analysis identiﬁes antecedents to conﬂict that are unique to distributed teams . We predict that conﬂict of all types ( task , affective , and process ) will be detri - mental to the performance of distributed teams , a result that is contrary to much research on traditional teams . We also inves - tigate conﬂict as a dynamic process to determine how teams might mitigate these negative impacts over time . ( Distributed Work ; Distributed Teams ; Virtual Teams ; Conﬂict ) In response to a variety of factors that characterize the modern economy—including the global expansion of the marketplace and the businesses that serve it , the rise in mergers and acquisitions , and heightened compet - itive pressures to reduce the time to develop products— organizations increasingly are assembling teams whose members are drawn from sites far and near . Geograph - ically distributed teams face a number of unique chal - lenges , including being coached from a distance , coping with the cost and stress of frequent travel , and dealing with repeated delays ( Armstrong and Cole 2002 ) . Many scholars and practitioners have noted and expressed con - cern about one such challenge facing these teams : the prevalence and severity of conﬂict . Justifying their con - cern , reports from the ﬁeld indicate that conﬂict is dis - ruptive to performance in distributed teams . Field studies further indicate that geographically dis - tributed teams may experience conﬂict as a result of two factors : The distance that separates team members and their reliance on technology to communicate and work with one another . Distance and technology media - tion have gone unexplored in existing models of conﬂict and performance in teams because their authors , for the most part , assumed that team members were collocated and communicating face to face . As a result , whether these two factors spur new antecedents of conﬂict is not known , nor is it clear how conﬂict in distributed teams might be reduced . In this paper , we consider the possi - bility that distance and technology mediation give rise to conﬂict in distributed teams . We also examine how conﬂict might manifest itself over time as members of distributed teams learn how to work and communicate across distances and use technology more effectively . Geographically distributed teams , whose members reside in different cities , countries , or continents , share a number of properties commonly associated with tra - ditionally conceived teams . Namely , they are groups of individuals that work together interdependently to accomplish a task , constitute distinct social entities , and jointly manage their team boundaries ( Cohen and Bailey 1997 , Hackman 1987 ) . Recent studies demonstrate the kinds of problems that arise uniquely in the case of distributed teams and that render questionable the comprehensiveness of past mod - els of group conﬂict and performance . For example , Armstrong and Cole ( 2002 ) reported that conﬂicts in geographically distributed teams went unidentiﬁed and unaddressed longer than conﬂicts in collocated teams . Beyond such empirical evidence , however , there is no comprehensive theory - driven prediction and explanation 1047 - 7039 / 03 / 1406 / 0615 1526 - 5455 electronic ISSN Organization Science © 2003 INFORMS Vol . 14 , No . 6 , November – December 2003 , pp . 615 – 632 PAMELA J . HINDS AND DIANE E . BAILEY Understanding Conﬂict in Distributed Teams for conﬂict in distributed teams . It is not known whether conﬂict in distributed teams is triggered in a manner sim - ilar to that for traditional teams , nor is it clear whether the impact of conﬂict on performance is the same as in traditional teams . We investigate these issues by review - ing ﬁndings from research on distance and technology mediation and blending those ﬁndings with research on conﬂict in traditional teams . We also consider evidence from the growing number of empirical studies of dis - tributed teams , which provide support for the proposi - tions that we build inductively . Our theoretical analysis is intended to help establish a roadmap for future empir - ical work on distributed teams . Our analysis reveals that geographical distribution will have a signiﬁcant impact on each type of group conﬂict proposed in recent organizational studies : task , affec - tive , and process . Task conﬂict refers to disagreements focused on work content . Affective conﬂict ( sometimes referred to as relationship or emotional conﬂict ) refers to team disagreements that are characterized by anger or hostility among group members . Process conﬂict refers to disagreements over the team’s approach to the task , its methods , and its group processes . Affective conﬂict has been differentiated from task conﬂict ( Eisenhardt et al . 1997 , Pelled 1996 , Pelled and Adler 1994 ) and from pro - cess conﬂict ( Jehn 1997 ) partly in an effort to explain contradictory ﬁndings regarding the impact of conﬂict on team performance . Our analysis not only identiﬁes a number of new antecedents for each type of conﬂict in distributed teams , it also reveals that the impact of group conﬂict will in some cases be different for dis - tributed teams than for traditional , collocated teams . For example , task conﬂict has been found to be beneﬁcial for performance on many traditional teams , but we contend that it will not be so for their distributed counterparts . Although we predict worse outcomes for distributed teams , we acknowledge that they have certain advan - tages over collocated teams . Distributed teams enable ﬁrms to take advantage of expertise around the globe , to continue work around the clock , and to create closer relationships with far - ﬂung customers . We argue that these beneﬁts will be diminished by the conﬂict engen - dered by distance and technology mediation , but we acknowledge that distributed teams may , at times , be the only viable option for achieving organizational goals . We therefore extend our analysis to consider conﬂict as a dynamic rather than a static process to illustrate how teams might mitigate the negative effects of distribution over time . Although we contend that the negative effects cannot be fully overcome , the preventative measures we identify may facilitate the performance of distributed teams when the realities of business dictate their use . In our analysis , we specify that distributed teams dif - fer from traditional teams in only two respects : members separated by distance and forced to rely on technolo - gies to mediate their communication and collaborative work . At ﬁrst glance , this approach may appear to rule out other traits that might distinguish a distributed team from a collocated one . We contend that all other traits that may be associated with geographical distribution derive from distance or technology mediation , and we consider them in our analysis of these two factors . For example , some , but not all , distributed teams may expe - rience incongruent temporal rhythms because members work in different time zones , but different time zones occur as a result of distance . Likewise , distributed teams may have members from different cultures . Beyond the impact of distance , distributed teams are no more or less likely than collocated teams to have members working at different times or to have a culturally diverse mem - bership . Moreover , the effects of technology mediation are distinct from those of distance . Although distributed team members must rely on technologies because of their distance , technology mediation has impacts even for teams that are collocated , and that at times choose to rely heavily on technology rather than meet face to face ( Mortensen and Hinds 2001 ) . Among the many traits that might distinguish geographically distributed teams from collocated ones , separation by distance and heavy reliance on mediating technologies are the only two fac - tors that hold true for all distributed teams . In the balance of the paper , we use the term “group” to refer to ad hoc collections of individuals brought together solely for the purpose of research , typically for a short period , and with limited shared past or antici - pated future ( e . g . , as in experimental studies ) . Although groups of this nature may not closely resemble orga - nizational teams , studies employing them have closely examined the effects of technology mediation and have strong , consistent ﬁndings that are extremely relevant to the case of distributed teams . We reserve the term “team” for groups in organizations . We often abbrevi - ate “geographically distributed teams” to simply “dis - tributed teams , ” but in doing so do not intend to include other forms of distributed teams ( e . g . , organizationally distributed teams ) whose experiences with conﬂict we do not consider in this paper . Finally , we treat as syn - onymous the terms “traditional teams” and “collocated teams” even though what is new about distributed teams is their increasing prevalence , not their existence . Col - located teams represent how scholars have traditionally conceived of teams . 616 Organization Science / Vol . 14 , No . 6 , November – December 2003 PAMELA J . HINDS AND DIANE E . BAILEY Understanding Conﬂict in Distributed Teams Distance and Conﬂict In this section , we build on research demonstrating that distance has a detrimental impact on team members’ shared context , familiarity , and friendship , all factors that can heighten conﬂict in teams . We further argue that distance is likely to bring with it increased heterogene - ity , particularly cultural differences , that will reduce the similarity of team members . We describe how the neg - ative impact of distance on shared context , familiarity , friendship , and homogeneity will precipitate conﬂict for distributed teams . Shared Context Because they are distant from each other , members of distributed teams may have difﬁculty establishing a shared context . Different contexts may derive from and be revealed in different work and geographic envi - ronments , different technologies , and different cultures . Occupying different physical contexts makes it more difﬁcult to make and interpret references to objects of interest ( Schober 1998 ) and to co - orient in a partic - ular context . For example , in a study of the use of new machines in a factory , Tyre and von Hippel ( 1997 ) observed that engineers and operators had trouble resolv - ing equipment problems over the phone because the engineers needed to “see for themselves” the technology in context . In this way , distance fosters different per - spectives on and information about the work in which distributed team members are engaged . In the absence of a shared context , team members will have difﬁculty developing mutual understanding ( Fussell and Krauss 1992 , Clark and Brennan 1991 ) . When team members have different understandings of the task , task conﬂict is likely to result ( Jehn et al . 1997 ) . Moreover , when team members’ understanding of the issues differs , conﬂict is difﬁcult to resolve ( Brehmer 1976 ) . Team members who lack a sense of a shared context as a result of distance also are likely to adhere to differ - ent norms . Ofﬁces , meetings rooms , cafeterias , and so forth are associated with behavioral norms and mental schemas that affect team members’ behaviors and expec - tations of one another ( Kiesler and Cummings 2002 ) . Team members who do not share the same social set - ting may have different perceptions about what behav - iors are appropriate , consequently holding one another to different standards . Karnoe ( 1995 ) , for example , observed that Danish and American workers used differ - ent paradigms for understanding problems and solutions . He attributed these differences to disparities in local rou - tines and behavioral norms . Armstrong and Cole ( 2002 ) also observed that site - speciﬁc cultures and expecta - tions acted as signiﬁcant sources of misunderstandings and conﬂict between distant sites . In short , dissimilar paradigms , norms , and behavioral expectations are likely to result in more task and affective conﬂict . In addition to disrupting shared understanding and the development of common behavioral norms , occupy - ing different contexts may make it difﬁcult for groups to establish a shared temporal rhythm , or to become “entrained . ” Ancona and Chong ( 1996 ) argued that groups establish a rhythm that serves as a powerful coordination mechanism . Isomorphic processes at the group level may create similarity in temporal cycles as team members signal to each other the pace and timing of activities ( Ancona and Chong 1996 ) . In distributed teams , signals among distant team members may be difﬁcult to observe and interpret . Grinter et al . ( 1999 ) found that members of distributed software develop - ment teams , regardless of the way they structured their work , were “constantly surprised” and confused about the activities of their distant colleagues . In the absence of triggers available to traditional teams , distributed teams have been observed to use face - to - face meetings and other interactions to establish the rhythm of the team ( Maznevski and Chudoba 2000 ) . Such difﬁculties in developing a shared temporal rhythm may make coor - dination in distant teams more fraught with conﬂict as team members continually ﬁnd their expectations of oth - ers unmet and their work processes “out of sync . ” We posit that distant team members will experience more incongruent temporal rhythms , which in turn will engen - der unfavorable attributions ( Cramton 2002 ) and process conﬂict as confusion arises about who is doing ( or has done ) what and when . Familiarity Whereas shared context either exists or does not , famil - iarity can build over time when people are continually copresent . Mere exposure to others powerfully affects peoples’ feelings about one another ( Zajonc 1968 ) . As compared to collocated teams , distributed team mem - bers tend to receive less passive information about their distant colleagues . Armstrong and Cole ( 2002 ) reported that distance blocked casual visual observation , conse - quently inhibiting learning across sites . Similarly , prox - imity increases the amount of informal interaction that can occur among team members . When people are col - located , the number of casual encounters , unplanned conversations , and multipurpose interactions increases ( Kraut et al . 2002 ) . Such opportunities promote famil - iarity as team members learn about the personalities , concerns , and work processes of others . Familiarity , in turn , is associated with reduced conﬂict . Deutsch ( 1969 ) reported that lack of familiarity increased conﬂict Organization Science / Vol . 14 , No . 6 , November – December 2003 617 PAMELA J . HINDS AND DIANE E . BAILEY Understanding Conﬂict in Distributed Teams about roles and responsibilities . Similarly , Goodman and Leyden ( 1991 ) found that not being familiar with the work habits of other team members increased coor - dination problems in the team . These studies suggest that process conﬂict will be greater in distributed teams because their members have fewer opportunities to become familiar with one another . Friendship Proximity also is associated with friendship . Festinger et al . ( 1950 ) found that graduate students and their fam - ilies who were randomly assigned to housing near one another were more likely to become friends . Friendship is easier to establish when people casually encounter one another and interact spontaneously . Grinter et al . ( 1999 ) observed that distant team members had difﬁ - culty building rapport and developing long - term rela - tionships without meeting face to face . Surprisingly , when team members are friends , conﬂict , particularly affective conﬂict , is likely to be more prevalent . In an experiment conducted with business students , Shah and Jehn ( 1993 ) found that friend groups experienced more emotional conﬂict than groups of strangers working on decision - making tasks . Murnighan and Conlon ( 1991 ) also reported higher levels of conﬂict in string quartets in which members were friends , but friend groups were better able to manage conﬂict successfully . Because bonds of friendship are built on trust , expressing affec - tive conﬂict may be perceived as safer and more readily accepted . These studies suggest that friendship increases affective conﬂict in teams , but that these teams also are better able to harness the conﬂict to improve task perfor - mance . In sum , research on friendship suggests that dis - tributed teams will experience less friendship and , thus , less affective conﬂict . Homogeneity Finally , distance is likely to reduce homogeneity among team members by increasing demographic heterogeneity , particularly ethnic or racial heterogeneity . In a compar - ison of collocated and distributed product development teams , Mortensen and Hinds ( 2001 ) reported that dis - tributed teams were somewhat more culturally diverse than collocated teams . Such diversity has been shown to increase task and affective conﬂict ( O’Reilly et al . 1997 , Pelled 1996 ) because diversity prompts different perspectives on , and approaches to , work and fuels dif - ferent attitudes , beliefs , and expectations . In their review , Williams and O’Reilly ( 1998 , p . 115 ) conclude that over 40 years of research has found that “diverse groups are more likely to be less integrated , have less communi - cation , and have more conﬂict . ” We thus expect distant teams to be more heterogeneous and to experience more task and affective conﬂict . Overall Impact of Distance In sum , the social and psychological effects of distance are likely to lead to more task and process conﬂict due to challenges resulting from different perspectives , incon - sistent norms , incongruent temporal rhythms , reduced familiarity , and demographic heterogeneity . The effect of distance on affective conﬂict , however , is less imme - diately apparent . On one hand , distance should lead to more affective conﬂict as team members adhere to inconsistent norms and attempt to work through demo - graphic differences . On the other hand , distance may lessen affective conﬂict because team members do not have a basis of friendship that would enable them to express affective conﬂict openly . Although one might expect these opposing forces to result in little ultimate impact on affective conﬂict , we argue that distance will heighten affective conﬂict . Our reasoning lies in the relationship between task and affective conﬂict . Task conﬂict can lead to increased affective conﬂict , especially in teams with low trust , per - haps because low trust leads to more faulty attributions regarding the source of the disagreement ( Simons and Peterson 2000 ) . When trust is missing , team members are more likely to question others’ intentions and make attributions that do not adequately account for situa - tional factors . In distributed teams , trust can be frag - ile and often fractures rapidly ( Jarvenpaa and Leidner 1999 ) . Thus , although distance may not directly lead to affective conﬂict , increased task conﬂict will result in more affective conﬂict for distributed teams . This argu - ment is consistent with Cramton’s ( 2001 ) observations that reduced information about team members’ actions on distributed teams will lead to more harsh attributions about their intentions . Overall , we propose that distance will engender conﬂict of all types for distributed teams . Proposition 1 . As a result of the different perspec - tives and norms and reduced homogeneity that it occa - sions , distance engenders task conﬂict in teams . Proposition 2 . As a result of the different norms and temporal rhythms and reduced homogeneity that it occa - sions , distance engenders affective conﬂict in teams , despite the ameliorating effect of reduced friendship . Proposition 3 . As a result of the different temporal rhythms and reduced familiarity that it occasions , dis - tance engenders process conﬂict in teams . Proposition 4 . As a result of the reduced trust that it occasions , distance engenders a strong positive rela - tionship between task conﬂict and affective conﬂict . 618 Organization Science / Vol . 14 , No . 6 , November – December 2003 PAMELA J . HINDS AND DIANE E . BAILEY Understanding Conﬂict in Distributed Teams Technology Mediation and Conﬂict When distributed team members wish to communicate with one another or work together , they typically employ technology . With limited opportunities for talking face to face , they may hold discussions by phone or e - mail . Unable to carry a document to a colleague’s cubicle , they may resort to electronic options , such as posting it on a Web page or storing it in an intranet - accessible directory . In this manner , technology mediates both com - munication and collaborative work for distributed teams . Our reading of prior research suggests that the effects of technology mediation can be categorized accord - ing to their impact on relational outcomes , information transfer , and coordination . Although signiﬁcant interest has been paid to the relational outcomes of technology mediation for distributed teams , we conclude that issues of information transfer and coordination may have an equal , if not greater , bearing on group conﬂict . The bulk of prior research on technology mediation examines use of communication technologies such as computer - supported meeting systems , audio - and video - conferencing , and e - mail . Unfortunately , relatively little work considers the use of information technologies such as shared electronic workspaces or version control soft - ware that mediate collaborative work absent direct inter - personal communication . Such technologies are equally important for a distributed team’s functioning because team members spend only a portion of their time meet - ing or otherwise communicating with one another . A few technologies support both communication and infor - mation sharing and have been studied ( see Mark et al . 1999 , Olson and Teasley 1996 , Orlikowski 1992 ) . As we assess the impact of technology mediation on group conﬂict , we consider research on the use of communica - tion technologies and , to the extent possible , information technologies that support collaborative work . Relational Outcomes For several decades , researchers have been concerned about the effect that interacting via technology has on group member relations , including cohesiveness , com - petition , group behaviors and attitudes , and group iden - tity . One of the earliest theories explaining the relational effects of technology mediation is social presence the - ory , which argues that interpersonal and group processes are negatively affected when people interact over media that reduce their feeling of “being there” with their com - munication partners ( Short et al . 1976 ) . Social presence theory predicts that this reduced social presence will impair interpersonal relations . Later work claims that mediation via technology reduces social cues and , because of their absence , alters the nature of group communication and group processes . With the potential for a reduction in critical contextual cues ( e . g . , status and gender ) , the social context may become less visible , causing people to display more dis - inhibited behaviors , to become less aware that they are engaged in social interaction , and to tend toward less consensus ( Sproull and Kiesler 1991 , Siegel et al . 1986 ) . As a result of depersonalized interactions , groups com - municating via technology are less likely to exchange relational information than face - to - face groups ( Siegel et al . 1986 ) . Other studies show that mediated groups are less cohesive than face - to - face groups ( Straus and McGrath 1994 ) , have lower group identity ( Bouas and Arrow 1996 ) , and exhibit more competitive behavior ( Purdy et al . 2000 ) . In short , mediated communication appears to negatively impact the ability of teams to build and maintain strong interpersonal relationships . Differences among technologies in their ability to sup - port communication have been explained by the media richness theory of Daft and Lengel ( 1984 ) , which holds that media vary in the richness of the information trans - mitted and that richer media are more effective at reduc - ing ambiguity and facilitating shared meaning ( Daft et al . 1987 ) . Media richness theory suggests that dis - tributed team members might lessen the negative effects of mediation by choosing richer media . The premises of social presence , reduced cues , and media richness theories are challenged by studies that suggest that time can remedy the relational problems that ensue from technology mediation . Many studies have found that mediated groups work more slowly than face - to - face groups ( Walther and Burgoon 1992 , Weisband 1992 ) . In a meta - analysis of such studies , Walther et al . ( 1994 ) found that when task time limits were imposed on these more slowly paced groups , the groups exhib - ited lower socioemotional communication . When lim - its were expanded , relational outcomes often improved . There are caveats , however , to the beneﬁts of time . Time does not universally improve socioemotional com - munication because not all groups are equally willing or able to develop relational closeness ( Walther 1994 ) . Also , we suspect that as team membership changes over time , a team’s relational closeness must be reestablished as reconﬁgured teams learn anew how to communicate effectively via technology . Social presence , reduced cues , and media richness theories also come under ﬁre from scholars who decry the technological determinism these theories represent . Markus ( 1994a ) noted two alternatives to technological determinism , both of which turn attention to technology users , their intentions , and the social context of technol - ogy use rather than the material characteristics of the Organization Science / Vol . 14 , No . 6 , November – December 2003 619 PAMELA J . HINDS AND DIANE E . BAILEY Understanding Conﬂict in Distributed Teams technologies . The ﬁrst alternative is the “rational - actor” perspective ( Markus and Robey 1988 , Kling 1980 ) , which contends that individuals make choices about when and how to employ technologies . Research taking this perspective suggests that at times individuals desire and pursue the distance afforded by technology . They may choose , for example , to employ technology rather than talk face to face when interpersonal relationships are strained ( Markus 1994a ) . A second alternative to technological determinism is the emergent - process view ( Markus and Robey 1988 , Pfeffer 1982 ) , which holds that the effects of technology use are emergent and thus unpredictable . Given this , individuals may inadvertently worsen the impact of mediation by assuming they can prevent possible ill effects of technology use . Recent extensions of Giddens’ ( 1984 ) structuration theory also challenge the technological deterministic perspective by suggesting that people will engage in social practices that produce a particular structure of technology use , which may or may not be consistent with its intended use ( Orlikowski 2000 , DeSanctis and Poole 1994 , Barley 1986 ) . Structuration theory implies that distributed teams may alter their use of existing technologies in ways that will better serve the team . For example , there is evidence that teams ﬁnd ways to share extensive and detailed information over e - mail systems ( Hinds and Kiesler 1995 , Lee 1994 ) and adapt technolo - gies to improve their ability to coordinate better ( Kraut et al . 1998 ) . No matter which theoretical perspective one takes , the anticipated effect of technology mediation on group conﬂict appears to be negative . The technological deter - ministic perspective suggests that distributed teams will experience greater opportunities for affective conﬂict as a result of technology mediation . Feelings of not “being there” with one’s communication partners stand to pre - vent distributed team members from sharing relational information that help teams to develop trust . Fewer inhibited behaviors and a lower tendency for consen - sus may prompt affective conﬂict as team members neglect to censor their comments and fail to accommo - date their team members’ preferences . The rational - actor perspective highlights the potential for agency among distributed team members , but it fails to signiﬁcantly lessen the negative implications of mediation because distributed team members , primarily lacking opportuni - ties for face - to - face discourse , can choose only among technologies when wishing to communicate with one another . The rational - actor perspective provides hope , however , that for short periods and for speciﬁc pur - poses , choices that individuals make might deﬂect the onset of affective conﬂict . For example , Simons and Peterson ( 2000 ) report that task conﬂict is more likely to lead to affective conﬂict when voices are raised , sug - gesting that distributed team members might opt for technologies like e - mail rather than the telephone for discussions in which task conﬂict is expected . This is consistent with empirical work suggesting that asyn - chronous communication mitigated negative interpreta - tions of competitive behaviors , perhaps because these behaviors were obscured by the technology ( Montoya - Weiss et al . 2001 ) . The emergent - process perspective , which allows for unintended and unanticipated effects of technology use , provides little reason to suspect that technology mediation will not occasion conﬂict in dis - tributed teams . Lee ( 1994 ) , for example , illustrated that e - mail use is socially embedded and that e - mail users add meaning to the messages that they receive . However , the series of messages Lee examined also highlighted the potential for conﬂict , as Lee noted when describ - ing the “politically sensitive and managerially trouble - some meaning” ( p . 153 ) occasioned by the initial e - mail . Finally , with regard to structuration theory , we concur with the conclusion of Kraut et al . ( 1998 ) , that although users may modify technologies to suit their needs , tech - nologies possess certain material limits that cannot be overcome . As evidence , Markus ( 1994b ) showed that after the introduction of a new e - mail system , users felt that their interpersonal relationships were weakened even though they regularly used the telephone to “keep in touch . ” Although structuration theory implies that teams can limit the impact of technology on relational outcomes , the material properties of technologies , com - bined with the challenges of distance , render unlikely the possibility that distributed teams will be able to mod - ify the technology adequately and consistently enough to match face - to - face communication . In short , technology mediation engenders negative relational effects that we contend will precipitate affec - tive conﬂict . These effects , including reduced cohesion and group identity , increased competitiveness , reduced consensus , and less sharing of relational information , contribute to lower trust , familiarity , and a sense of belonging on the team , and ultimately , we argue , induce affective conﬂict . Because the effects we have consid - ered here concern group relations , we expect that their impact is primarily on affective conﬂict , although task and process conﬂict may be indirectly affected . Information Transfer Technology mediation also impacts information transfer among team members . Several problems related to infor - mation sharing and seeking emerge from the literature , including uneven distribution of information , unevenly 620 Organization Science / Vol . 14 , No . 6 , November – December 2003 PAMELA J . HINDS AND DIANE E . BAILEY Understanding Conﬂict in Distributed Teams weighted information , and information that resists trans - mission . Each problem portends negative effects with respect to conﬂict . Uneven distribution can occur in at least two ways : Team members may be purposely or accidentally excluded from communications , or members may not reveal information that they uniquely hold . Work by Cramton ( 2001 ) highlights problems that can arise from exclusion . In her study of distributed student teams , not all members of the teams were copied on e - mails sent by one team member or another . As a result of this limited distribution , some team members worked with incom - plete information while their colleagues assumed infor - mation had been universally shared . Conﬂict arose in the confusion that ensued . To complicate matters , team members attributed disagreements and miscommunica - tions to individual - level factors rather than to the tech - nology or the situation , a practice that further fueled interpersonal friction . The technologies upon which distributed teams rely vary in the degree to which they promote inclusion and prevent exclusion . Audio - and videoconferencing , as well as Web - based meeting systems , support inclu - sion by allowing distant members to “attend” meetings , but they fail to prevent exclusion because they cannot guarantee that all members will be notiﬁed of the meet - ing . Additionally , Web - based systems like NetMeeting make it difﬁcult for participants to keep track of who is remotely included in a meeting ( Mark et al . 1999 ) . Cramton’s ( 2001 ) study reveals that technologies like e - mail , despite having features that support inclusion , may be more apt to facilitate exclusion of various team members , either through sender intent ( acting as a ratio - nal actor ) or mistake ( in line with the emergent - process view of mediation ) . Her work points out the limita - tions of a purely technological determinist perspective by showing that even advanced features cannot ensure the uniform sharing of information . Uneven distribution of information also results when team members fail to share uniquely held information . Information exchange is less complete and more biased in mediated groups as compared with face - to - face ones , and mediated groups are less likely to uncover informa - tion uniquely held by one member ( Hollingshead 1996 ) . Group members who rely on communication technolo - gies ﬁnd it more difﬁcult to cue one another for the information they need and to interpret the cues being conveyed by other group members ( Hollingshead 1996 ) , which may be why unique information is not shared . The problem of incomplete information sharing , especially of uniquely held information , may be particularly detri - mental to distributed teams because organizations often rely on such teams as a means of assembling expertise from a variety of distant locations . Technology mediation also can impact the weight that various team members place on different pieces of infor - mation . Cramton ( 2001 ) noted that despite whatever importance a sender intended to attach to various top - ics within a single e - mail , team members often assigned different salience to the topics . As a result , some top - ics never received the attention the sender desired for them and at times were entirely overlooked , which led to frustration and misunderstanding . Finally , some information is not readily transmit - ted via technology . Certainly some types of informa - tion , particularly those that can be digitized , can now be more easily transmitted via technologies such as ﬁle - transfer protocols and electronic workspaces , thus increasing the amount of this information that can be shared with distant teammates . However , many types of data continue to resist transmission via technology , with negative implications for conﬂict in distributed teams . This is particularly true in the case of contex - tual information that leads to shared awareness , such as who is in the ofﬁce , what they are doing , what prob - lems they are confronting , and the moment - to - moment social dynamics of the workplace . Weisband ( 2002 ) reported that although some mediated groups using a Web - conferencing system and e - mail were successful in conveying contextual information , many were not . Dif - ferences also exist in the degree to which technologies facilitate the exchange of contextual information ( Olson and Olson 2000 , Clark and Brennan 1991 ) . As com - pared with the phone , which transmits little contextual information beyond background noises , newly develop - ing awareness technologies that display information such as time zones , holidays , and current availability by type of medium for team members around the world are far better at aiding shared awareness ( Atkins et al . 2002 ) . Even with these technologies , considerable contextual information , such as unplanned actions that occur away from one’s desk , remains untransmitted . Research on technology mediation’s information transfer effects suggests that distributed teams will be prone to conﬂict . Uneven distribution of information implies that team members will work and communicate on the basis of different information . As a result , they will be unlikely to recognize or resolve differences in perspectives , which have been shown to increase task conﬂict in groups with weak relationships ( Brehmer 1976 ) . Because technology impedes the ability of dis - tributed teams to collect contextual information , these different perspectives may become entrenched , increas - ing the possibility of task conﬂict . Process conﬂict also Organization Science / Vol . 14 , No . 6 , November – December 2003 621 PAMELA J . HINDS AND DIANE E . BAILEY Understanding Conﬂict in Distributed Teams is likely to arise when some members are excluded from messages . The progression of the team’s work , seemingly purposeful and rational for members who receive all messages , may appear disjoint to those mem - bers who do not . Members who lack complete infor - mation may call into question the team’s methods and trajectory . Finally , affective conﬂict , already engen - dered by mediation’s relational effects , also may derive from information transfer effects . Uneven distribution of information , which can lead to frustration and misplaced blame , increases the potential for affective conﬂict . Coordination Coordination constitutes a third aspect of communica - tion and collaborative work that is impaired by tech - nology mediation . Purdy et al . ( 2000 ) reported that stu - dent groups working face to face collaborated more than distributed groups working over video , telephone , or chat . Moreover , collaborative efforts were less likely to be perceived in the mediated conditions . Field studies of distributed teams further suggest that technologies designed to increase shared awareness may exacerbate coordination problems . For example , an awareness tech - nology that allowed team members to see what docu - ments other team members had read resulted in team members opting not to read what others had in an effort to avoid duplication ( Espinosa et al . 2000 ) . Con - sequently , the team was limited in its ability to discuss materials . Technology mediation also may induce time lags and sequencing problems that further hamper coordina - tion . Cramton ( 2001 ) found that distributed teams using online chat to hold discussions with members around the globe experienced time lags that delayed some members’ comments , rendering them “out of sync” with the larger conversation . With the sequence of responses disrupted , members may think their comments have been ignored , prompting frustration and irritation . Cramton’s ( 2001 ) study also highlighted problems with asynchronous com - munication . Disparities in when messages were sent , received , and responded to resulted in individuals work - ing with different information at different times . The coordination problems imposed by technology mediation may precipitate conﬂict of all types . Process conﬂict is likely when the use of technologies renders some team members “out of sync” and makes it difﬁ - cult to coordinate use of shared resources . Incompatibil - ities in work processes may give rise to disagreements about how work should get done . Coordination prob - lems also may occasion task conﬂict , as can be expected when individuals have not examined the same materials as their colleagues or when they work on the basis of different information . Finally , the inability to coordinate work may lead to frustration and misconceptions , which in turn feed the potential for affective conﬂict . Overall Impact of Technology Mediation In short , notwithstanding the different affordances of technologies and the ability of users to make choices about how and when to use them , technology mediation has implications for conﬂict in distributed teams . Teams using the most advanced technologies experience difﬁ - culties , as do teams that have a host of technologies avail - able to them . Just because one technology is found to be superior to another does not mean it is absent negative outcomes ; research to date reveals that problems arise from nearly every available technology . The coordination problems we mention , for example , were uncovered with respect to computer conferencing and support systems , awareness technologies , e - mail , and shared workspaces . Moreover , advanced technologies are accompanied by their own litany of usability problems that compound the difﬁculties of mediation ( see Fish et al . 1993 , Gaver et al . 1992 ) . Success of groupware tools , for instance , can be dependent on achieving a “critical mass” of users and on users’ willingness to enter data into the system ( Atkins et al . 2002 ) . NetMeeting allows distant members to “attend” meetings , but Mark et al . ( 1999 ) found that many members could not participate because they were late in implementing the technology or had no one at their own site to consult with about the technology . Although technological advances may lessen a particular impact of mediation , it seems unlikely that they will ameliorate all such impacts and rather likely that they will occasion new ones . On these grounds , we propose that technology mediation engenders conﬂict of all types in distributed teams . Proposition 5 . As a result of the uneven informa - tion and difﬁculties in coordination that it occasions and its inability to transmit certain information , technology mediation engenders task conﬂict in teams . Proposition 6 . As a result of the negative relational effects , uneven information , unevenly weighted infor - mation , and difﬁculties in coordination that it occa - sions , technology mediation engenders affective conﬂict in teams . Proposition 7 . As a result of the uneven information and difﬁculties in coordination that it occasions , tech - nology mediation engenders process conﬂict in teams . 622 Organization Science / Vol . 14 , No . 6 , November – December 2003 PAMELA J . HINDS AND DIANE E . BAILEY Understanding Conﬂict in Distributed Teams Summary of Conﬂict’s Antecedents We consolidate our propositions on the antecedents and outcomes of group conﬂict in distributed teams into models for task , affective , and process conﬂict , respec - tively ( see Figure 1 ) . Perhaps the most striking result of our analysis is the number and variety of ways in which distance and technology mediation engender each type of conﬂict , as depicted by the multiple paths in each model . Conﬂict and Performance in Distributed Teams Having established that distributed teams are apt to expe - rience a signiﬁcant amount of conﬂict , we turn our attention to the consequences of conﬂict with respect to performance . Consistent with most of the existing lit - erature on conﬂict and performance , we focus on team effectiveness and efﬁciency in performing tasks . We examine research on the impact of task , affective , and process conﬂict on performance in traditional teams and consider the implications for distributed teams . Task Conﬂict In general , conﬂict is detrimental to team performance . Task conﬂict , however , has been shown in many stud - ies to have a positive relationship with performance ( Eisenhardt et al . 1997 , Jehn 1995 ) , in part because groups consider more alternatives and think through options more thoroughly ( Pelled et al . 1999 ) . Consider - ing diverse opinions and alternative strategies enables a group to avoid “groupthink” ( Janis 1982 ) and arrive at better solutions ( Pelled et al . 1999 ) . Although many studies have observed a positive effect , task conﬂict does not consistently lead to bet - ter performance . Recent studies of student project teams ( Jehn et al . 1997 ) , for example , have reported a nega - tive relationship between task conﬂict and performance . Lovelace et al . ( 2001 ) reported that norms of openness and collaborative communication determined whether or not task conﬂict was beneﬁcial . Recent research also has demonstrated that task conﬂict remains beneﬁcial to teams only when it is not complicated by , and does not degenerate into , affective or process conﬂict ( Jehn and Chatman 2000 ) . Thus , although task conﬂict has the potential to be positive , research suggests it must be managed carefully through open , collaborative commu - nication . In contrast to what is found in traditional teams , we propose that the relationship between task conﬂict and performance will be consistently negative in distributed teams . We reason that task conﬂict is only beneﬁcial to the extent that it is expressed and resolved through the process of building shared understanding . Sharing com - plex information and coming to consensus on even fairly mundane tasks is exceedingly difﬁcult for teams sepa - rated by distance ( Kraut et al . 2002 ) . Communicating complex information via technology is more challeng - ing because it takes longer ( Straus and McGrath 1994 ) , is subject to delay ( Kraut et al . 1992 ) , and can require more cognitive effort ( Hinds 1999 ) . Thus , distributed team members may have more difﬁculty engaging in collaborative interactions in which information must be shared and alternative perspectives understood . Over - all , we expect that distributed teams will have difﬁculty resolving task conﬂict effectively and thereby will rarely gain its beneﬁts . This prediction is supported by ﬁnd - ings from Mortensen and Hinds ( 2001 ) , who reported that task conﬂict was negatively related to performance in distributed product development teams . Proposition 8 . Task conﬂict detracts from perfor - mance in distributed teams . Affective Conﬂict Researchers have reported that affective conﬂict detracts from performance in student project teams ( Jehn et al . 1997 ) , R & D teams ( Evan 1965 ) , work teams and management teams ( Jehn 1997 ) , and top - management teams ( Eisenhardt et al . 1997 , Amason 1996 ) . Affec - tive conﬂict often hampers performance as a result of the anxiety , hostility , and time and energy consumption associated with emotional disagreements ( Pelled et al . 1999 ) . Although a signiﬁcant amount of research sug - gests a negative relationship between affective conﬂict and performance , there remains some ambiguity . Jehn ( 1995 ) observed that team members avoided other mem - bers with whom they did not get along . She posited that their evasion nulliﬁed the relationship between affective conﬂict and performance . Pelled et al . ( 1999 ) similarly surmised that subjects in the project teams they stud - ied found ways to cope with individuals with whom they had affective conﬂicts , thereby preventing a nega - tive impact on performance . These studies suggest that it is not affective conﬂict itself , but the open expres - sion of affective conﬂict , that contributes to a negative conﬂict - performance relationship . We propose that affective conﬂict will continue to detract from performance in distributed teams for the same reasons that it often does in traditional teams . We further note that in distributed teams , the opportunity to avoid affective conﬂict may be higher because team members do not encounter each other regularly through - out the day—They can often go days , if not weeks , Organization Science / Vol . 14 , No . 6 , November – December 2003 623 PAMELA J . HINDS AND DIANE E . BAILEY Understanding Conﬂict in Distributed Teams Figure 1 Antecedents of Conﬂict on Distributed Teams 624 Organization Science / Vol . 14 , No . 6 , November – December 2003 PAMELA J . HINDS AND DIANE E . BAILEY Understanding Conﬂict in Distributed Teams without “speaking” to a distant team member . Simi - larly , opportunities for open expression of affective con - ﬂict may be lower because mediating technologies pro - vide less - satisfying ways of discussing emotional topics . These factors point toward less destructive affective con - ﬂict in distributed teams . We argue , however , that mem - bers of distributed teams will be prone to more faulty and harsh attributions ( Cramton 2002 ) and that such attributions will counterbalance the beneﬁts of avoid - ance . We therefore posit that affective conﬂict will have an overall detrimental effect on performance in dis - tributed teams . Proposition 9 . Affective conﬂict detracts from per - formance on distributed teams . Process Conﬂict The few studies that have examined the relationship between process conﬂict and performance on traditional teams suggest that process conﬂict , like affective con - ﬂict , generally has negative effects ( Jehn and Mannix 2001 , Jehn 1997 ) . Process conﬂict appears to detract from performance because effort is absorbed by dis - agreements , and inefﬁciencies result from confusion about resources and responsibilities ( Jehn 1997 ) . As with affective conﬂict , we argue that process conﬂict will detract from performance in distributed teams for the same reasons that it does on traditional teams . In fact , in distributed teams , confusion about resources and respon - sibilities may be even more detrimental and take more time to resolve because of divergent perspectives and communication challenges . This conclusion is consis - tent with the observations made by Grinter et al . ( 1999 ) , who noted severe inefﬁciencies and errors in distributed teams attempting to coordinate their work in the face of incompatible work processes . Proposition 10 . Process conﬂict detracts from per - formance in distributed teams . Conﬂict as a Dynamic Process With time , team members may get to know one another better , learn how to work together more effectively , and develop ways to best employ technology . Models of group conﬂict that fail to take into account how teams evolve over time run the risk of being incomplete , and possibly misleading . Thus , we complete our model of conﬂict and performance on distributed teams by adding dynamic components . In the interest of provid - ing insights into how teams might mitigate the problems of distribution , we discuss the proposed moderators in terms of their potential for positive effects . A reduction or absence of these moderators , however , will be equally likely to exacerbate conﬂict and its negative effects . To build our model , we examine three aspects of dynamic behavior with respect to conﬂict in distributed teams : how teams may mitigate the negative effects of distance and technology mediation , factors that might moderate the effects of distance and technology medi - ation on conﬂict , and the role of conﬂict handling over time . Because the literature related to the dynam - ics of group conﬂict is not as robust as that con - cerning antecedents to conﬂict , our arguments here are more speculative . Our dynamic model is represented in Figure 2 . Preventative Measures Teams may be able to mitigate the negative effects of distance and use of mediating technologies in at least ﬁve ways . Perhaps the most immediate way to dimin - ish the negative effects of distance is to dislodge , if only temporarily , distance itself ; for example , by increas - ing the frequency and length of face - to - face meetings ( see Kraut et al . 1992 ) . Because face - to - face interaction facilitates interpersonal relationships , more face - to - face meetings should promote more familiarity and friend - ship . At the extreme , organizations can collocate team members for a period of time , which should enhance shared context . Purposely conveying contextual information when working remotely is another way that teams may mit - igate the ill effects of distance . Team members might make it a point to share information about vacation schedules , ofﬁce politics , and so forth . They also might employ new awareness technologies to automate the pro - cess of sharing some contextual information ( see Atkins et al . 2002 ) . By making a special effort to convey con - textual information , team members improve the extent to which their teammates understand their context and increase opportunities to build familiarity and friendship . A third way that teams and organizations can mitigate the impact of distance , particularly on shared contexts , is by creating similar contexts at different sites . Although there are many subtle yet important contextual elements that cannot be standardized and others that , once made similar , diverge due to local events and pressures , some standardization of work processes , tools , and systems can help mitigate conﬂict in distributed teams . Dissim - ilar work processes create an occasion for conﬂict as team members struggle to integrate across different tech - nologies , understand nonstandard formats , and negoti - ate differences . For example , if a software development team is using different compilers across two distant sites , conﬂict will likely emerge because shared code cannot Organization Science / Vol . 14 , No . 6 , November – December 2003 625 PAMELA J . HINDS AND DIANE E . BAILEY Understanding Conﬂict in Distributed Teams Figure 2 Dynamic Model of Conﬂict and Performance on Distributed Teams - - - - be tested easily or adequately . In this case , using a sin - gle compiler could ease coordination problems faced by the team . Distributed teams also may dampen some of the neg - ative effects of technology mediation . Over time , team members may adapt to the communication and informa - tion technologies that they employ through training and use or by altering the technology to meet their needs . As discussed earlier , structuration theory suggests that people will engage in social practices that produce a particular structure of technology use ( Orlikowski 2000 , DeSanctis and Poole 1994 , Barley 1986 ) . These patterns of use may change over time , sometimes as a result of user training . As evidence , Orlikowski ( 2000 ) observed that teams with higher levels of interest in Lotus Notes and higher levels of knowledge regarding its properties and functionalities were more effective in using it . With - out training and conﬁdence in the technology , people may avoid tools , thus severely limiting the ﬂow of infor - mation among distant sites ( Olson and Teasley 1996 ) . In short , as teams learn more about the technologies they use , they will be better able to communicate , share infor - mation , and coordinate . We also have reason to suspect that , over time , dis - tributed teams may change the communication technolo - gies they employ in ways that will better serve the team . Longitudinal studies report that groups adapt communi - cation technologies to good effect ( Walther and Burgoon 1992 , Chidambaram 1989 ) , for example , altering the technology to improve coordination ( Kraut et al . 1998 ) . Team members also choose technologies that they feel are more appropriate ( Hinds and Kiesler 1995 , Markus 1994b ) and use technology to enact social processes that better ﬁt their needs ( DeSanctis and Poole 1994 , Orlikowski 2000 ) . When team members elect to use technologies that more effectively convey the affect and information demanded at the time , they may mitigate the effect of mediating technologies . For example , by choos - ing to make periodic telephone calls to keep in touch rather than relying exclusively on e - mail , team members may facilitate better relational outcomes ( see Markus 1994a ) . As this happens , distributed teams should exhibit fewer immediate outcomes of distribution and , therefore , less conﬂict of all types . We have argued that teams can use preventative mea - sures to mitigate many of the negative effects of dis - tance and technology mediation as they meet face to face , learn more about one another’s work environments , create similar contexts , and learn about and adapt the technologies on which they rely . These negative effects , however , will never entirely disappear . Although dis - tance can be suspended during face - to - face meetings , 626 Organization Science / Vol . 14 , No . 6 , November – December 2003 PAMELA J . HINDS AND DIANE E . BAILEY Understanding Conﬂict in Distributed Teams when team members return to their respective sites dis - tance will again exist among them . As a result , the negative effects of distance will again accrue . Simi - larly , although some context can be shared by visiting one another’s sites , sharing contextual information , and adopting similar processes , contexts change over time and gaps will inevitably remain . Limits also exist with respect to learning to use mediating technologies , adapt - ing technologies to better serve the team , and choosing more appropriate technologies for a given task . Tech - nologies change and have material limits that are difﬁ - cult , if not impossible , to overcome . We therefore argue that the preventative measures taken by teams may mod - erate , but cannot eliminate , the negative effects of dis - tance and mediating technologies . We also suggest that teams that do not learn , do not adapt technologies to better serve their purposes , and are not thoughtful with regard to choosing technologies are likely to experience more severe negative outcomes associated with distance and technology mediation . Countervailing Forces To the extent that the immediate outcomes of distribu - tion cannot be prevented , they will have an impact on group conﬂict . However , several countervailing forces— including shared team identity , the timing of face - to - face meetings , and recognition of technology effects—will moderate this impact . Over time , effective teams generate a shared team identity . Teams with a strong team identity see them - selves as a unit working toward a common goal and may have more integrative communications ( see Maznevski 1994 ) . We , along with others ( Mannix et al . 2002 , Mortensen and Hinds 2001 ) , argue that a shared team identity helps distributed teams bridge distance by cre - ating a psychological tie among team members . In the absence of a team identity , team members may not see themselves as a cohesive unit , may have less faith in the behaviors and intentions of other members , and may be less likely to talk through issues that arise . At the extreme , team members may see themselves as occupy - ing different social categories or groups , resulting in dis - torted judgments about other group members ( Pelled and Adler 1994 ) . These perceptions of “otherness” within a group can make conﬂict more difﬁcult to resolve ( Williams and O’Reilly 1998 ) because team members do not give others the “beneﬁt of the doubt . ” The timing of face - to - face interaction also may be an important countervailing force in limiting the effects of distance and mediating technologies . Distributed teams appear to gain more if they meet early in the develop - ment of the group ( Kraut et al . 1992 ) , enabling mem - bers to form relationships that can be supported over technologies ( Armstrong and Cole 2002 ) . For distributed teams with clear deadlines or a disbanding point , other times also appear deserving of face - to - face meetings . Critical hand - off points , for example , are likely candi - dates for face - to - face meetings of team members , includ - ing the ﬁnal integration and conclusion of the work because of the potential for misunderstandings and the need for collaborative problem solving ( see Grinter et al . 1999 ) . If distributed teams are able to meet face to face at the points with the most potential for conﬂict , then conﬂict may be reduced or diminished . The ﬁnal countervailing force is the team’s experi - ence with technology , particularly the extent to which the team is able to recognize the effect of their technol - ogy use on relational outcomes , information transfer , and coordination within the team . When team members rec - ognize the limitations of the technologies—for instance , that e - mail messages can seem unintentionally harsh and that addressing features may cause team members to be inadvertently left out of important communications— they are more likely to give team members the beneﬁt of the doubt and investigate issues before conﬂict ensues . In these cases , communication can halt misattributions and escalating conﬂict ( Jarvenpaa and Leidner 1999 ) . Conﬂict - Handling Strategies In addition to preventative measures and countervail - ing forces , conﬂict - handling strategies play an impor - tant role in the dynamics of conﬂict . The severity and recurrence of conﬂict is determined , in part , by the extent to which each event is resolved to the satisfac - tion of all parties . Even with severe conﬂicts , healthy and open resolution of the conﬂict will breed trust and ease contentiousness as new sources of conﬂict arise ( see Lovelace et al . 2001 ) . A number of researchers have used Thomas’ ( 1992 ) two - dimensional taxonomy of conﬂict - handling intentions to understand how con - ﬂict is resolved in teams . Thomas argued that when both parties are attempting to maximize their own inter - ests ( assertiveness ) as well as the other party’s interests ( cooperativeness ) , they have a “collaborative” intent . In the absence of a collaborative intent , one of four alterna - tive approaches are used : avoidance , competition , com - promise , or accommodation . Each of these approaches , Thomas argued , leads to one or both parties ultimately frustrated with the outcome . We posit that distant team members will have no more or less collaborative intent Organization Science / Vol . 14 , No . 6 , November – December 2003 627 PAMELA J . HINDS AND DIANE E . BAILEY Understanding Conﬂict in Distributed Teams than collocated team members . Establishing collabora - tive norms , however , may be signiﬁcantly more difﬁ - cult in distributed teams . Collaborative norms of conﬂict handling improve performance , whereas avoidance and compromise detract from it ( Montoya - Weiss et al . 2001 , Xie et al . 1998 ) . To be effective , parties must work to resolve the underlying interests of each party . Doing so requires sharing information about each party’s inter - ests and engaging in discussion and brainstorming to discover innovative ways to create a win - win solution ( Lovelace et al . 2001 , Tinsley 1998 ) . In distributed teams , collaborative conﬂict handling may be fraught with difﬁculty . Thomas ( 1992 ) held that trust , positive mutual regard , mutual attraction , cohesive - ness , and adequate opportunities to interact ( among oth - ers ) are crucial for fostering collaboration . Some of these factors , however , are directly affected by distance and technology mediation . Distance diminishes the develop - ment of friendships among team members ( which is akin to attraction and cohesiveness ) , often undermines trust , and reduces opportunities to interact , especially on an informal basis . Technology mediation also threatens a team’s ability to share information , which is a necessary condition for collaborative work ( see Kraut et al . 2002 ) and is crucial for integrative conﬂict resolution ( Tinsley 1998 ) . Consistent with this , Purdy et al . ( 2000 ) reported that participants in a negotiation over mediated tech - nologies as compared with face to face engaged in less collaborative conﬂict resolution . Thus , distributed teams may be unable to manifest their collaborative intent and be reduced to relying on other , less effective conﬂict - handling strategies . With effort , some teams can overcome this challenge and handle conﬂict collaboratively . In these cases , we predict that they will not only be more effective at resolving issues , but also will accrue interpersonal and coordination beneﬁts from collaborative conﬂict han - dling ( see Lovelace et al . 2001 ) . They will increase their familiarity , friendship , relational outcomes , ability to share information , and ability to collaborate and coor - dinate . Future conﬂicts may be reduced ( see Thomas 1992 ) . Conﬂict - handling norms also may contribute to shared team identity . When teams deal with conﬂict col - laboratively , they are likely to establish stronger bonds and have more integrated goals . In sum , healthy conﬂict - handling norms will lessen the impact that conﬂict has on performance and reduce the potential for future conﬂict . Overall Dynamics of Conﬂict Along with others ( e . g . , Jehn and Mannix 2001 ) , we argue that conﬂict in teams is a complex , dynamic pro - cess that changes over time and is impacted by a variety of factors . In the course of this process , teams may be able to mitigate many of the negative effects of distance and reliance on mediating technologies . As a result , conﬂict in teams may diminish over time , but only to the extent that teams are aware of and mindful of the changes they are making . Untended , shared identity will likely diminish rather than increase in distributed teams ( Mannix et al . 2002 ) . Face - to - face meetings also are likely to fall by the wayside as schedules begin to slip and budgets become tight . Further , conﬂict handling is more likely to evolve into avoidance if healthy norms are not established and maintained . We argue that teams must be cognizant of and attentive to these preventative measures and countervailing forces to sustain a healthy amount of conﬂict and to improve over time . Proposition 11 . Distributed teams moderate the neg - ative effects of distance by meeting face to face , pur - posely conveying contextual information , and creating similar contexts at distant sites . Proposition 12 . Distributed teams moderate the neg - ative effects of mediating technology by learning about and adapting the technologies they employ . Proposition 13 . In distributed teams , shared identity and well - timed face - to - face meetings moderate all of the immediate impacts of distance on conﬂict . Proposition 14 . In distributed teams , shared identity and recognition of the effects of technology moderate all of the immediate impacts of technology mediation on conﬂict . Proposition 15 . Distributed teams are less likely than traditional teams to engage in collaborative conﬂict handling . Proposition 16 . In distributed teams , the approach used for handling conﬂict will impact and be impacted by shared team identity and all of the immediate out - comes of distribution . Proposition 17 . Conﬂict handling in distributed teams moderates the conﬂict - performance relationship such that more collaborative conﬂict handling reduces the negative effects of conﬂict on performance . Discussion Our analysis provides the beginnings of a comprehen - sive explanation for the high levels of conﬂict that have been observed in empirical studies of distributed teams . A key aspect of our analysis is the teasing out of antecedents that derive from distance separately from 628 Organization Science / Vol . 14 , No . 6 , November – December 2003 PAMELA J . HINDS AND DIANE E . BAILEY Understanding Conﬂict in Distributed Teams those that derive from technology mediation . The latter may be experienced by traditional teams to the extent that their members rely on technology to communicate and work with one another even when collocated ; the former , however , are likely to be unique to distributed teams . Because only one of the many antecedents we identify is expected to reduce conﬂict , whereas all of the others are expected to increase it , our analysis helps to explain why distributed teams are experiencing high levels of conﬂict . The antecedents we have identiﬁed exist in addition to the established causes of conﬂict that affect teams of all types . We suspect that other established antecedents ( e . g . , cross - functional composition and tenure diversity ; see Pelled et al . 1999 ) will have similar effects on dis - tributed teams as they have on traditional teams . We also suspect that distributed as compared with tradi - tional teams may experience different levels of these antecedents . For example , distributed teams may have higher functional diversity as organizations strive to assemble diverse expertise from multiple sites , and less continuity of membership as organizations dynamically allocate team members across projects based on chang - ing demands ( DeSanctis and Monge 1999 ) . To the extent that our suspicion bears out , distributed teams as com - pared with traditional teams may face even higher levels of conﬂict . Technology mediation , along with its limitations , enables forms of communication that are not otherwise feasible or possible . Team members can send messages one day and wait for a response the next , messages can follow a person around the globe , and communication can be easily archived for later reference . From our anal - ysis , however , we have no reason to believe that the beneﬁts that can result from technology use will enable distributed teams to prevent the conﬂict that we antici - pate . Still , these beneﬁts make distributed work possible and may alter it in ways quite different from collocated work , therefore providing an important opportunity for continued research . New technologies bring with them advanced features and new affordances . Given that distributed teams must rely heavily upon communication and information tech - nologies , it is worth considering the extent to which our conclusions are contingent upon the current state of tech - nology . Certainly , shared awareness technologies ( and more recently , immersive environments ; see Blascovich et al . 2002 ) are making considerable strides in convey - ing contextual information across distances . However , the unanticipated consequences and usability problems that we have noted suggest that the problems of media - tion will be with us for some time . Additionally , some aspects of face - to - face communication that serve to pre - vent conﬂict may never be achieved by technologies , which have limited capacity for capturing and transmit - ting the myriad actions that occur simultaneously in any conversation or meeting . Our analysis , however , does provide implicit recom - mendations for the kinds of features that new technolo - gies might incorporate ( as some already do ) to mitigate the kinds of misunderstandings that lead to conﬂict . Such features include automatic inclusion of all team members on messages , mechanisms for indicating the importance of items within messages , and passive pro - vision of contextual information . Our conclusions also suggest protocols with regard to current technologies— including practices for shared document retrieval and storage and acknowledgment of local conditions within messages—that might cue distributed team members for the kinds of effects to anticipate when using new tech - nologies . Our models are incomplete in a number of respects , which we note here to acknowledge limitations and to suggest future theoretical work . One major absence is an exploration of the role that established moderators of conﬂict’s impact on performance might play in the case of distributed teams . Task interdependence is a prime example : It consistently moderates the relation - ship between all types of conﬂict and performance on traditional teams . We also did not consider a measure of geographic distribution or team size , even though it seems reasonable to expect that a team spanning 20 sites might experience more negative impacts than a team spanning only 2 sites . Similarly , our conclusions are likely to differ for teams with only a single mem - ber at each site versus those with multiple members at each site . We restricted ourselves to geographically dis - tributed teams , ignoring other types of distributed teams ( such as those with members from various organizations ) whose experiences with conﬂict may differ signiﬁcantly . Finally , we did not consider different types of teams ( e . g . , project teams versus management teams ) or factors associated with task ( e . g . , type , complexity , and routine - ness ) . We suspect that future investigations of the factors we list here will make the model more comprehensive and allow more precise predictions . More research also is needed on information technolo - gies and information transfer . Studies have shown that uneven information can result from exclusion of team members on messages or from failure of team mem - bers to share uniquely held information ; studies fur - ther show that uneven information prompts task conﬂict . Task conﬂict may emerge because some team members are operating with incomplete information , suggesting Organization Science / Vol . 14 , No . 6 , November – December 2003 629 PAMELA J . HINDS AND DIANE E . BAILEY Understanding Conﬂict in Distributed Teams that once the information is provided , agreement will quickly result and resolution of the conﬂict will be swift . Alternatively , task conﬂict may arise because the team as a whole is unable to resolve differing perspectives when some members are operating without certain infor - mation . In this case , team members must comprehend , translate , and incorporate the missing information , once provided , in a much more substantive , time consuming , and perhaps collaborative manner . Should the former situation hold sway , technology features that promote inclusion may remedy much of the problem . In the latter situation , mere provision is insufﬁcient . Research that investigates the nature of information that tends to be unevenly distributed across a team and how members use the information that they possess would provide a more complete picture of the impact of information transfer difﬁculties on conﬂict . As we have noted , time plays an important role for the relational outcomes of technology mediation . In addi - tion , it lies at the heart of the emergent - process per - spective of technology’s impact and is implicit in many technology structuration arguments . Existing longitudi - nal studies demonstrate that conﬂict occurs in teams and that how it is handled over time matters ( Jehn and Mannix 2001 ) . Thus , it is important that future empiri - cal studies examine the role of time and the dynamics that it fosters . Interviews and surveys will aid investi - gations of conﬂict in distributed teams , but observations may be necessary to capture the details of how team members provoke , engage in , resolve , and strive to pre - vent conﬂict . Because distributed teams by deﬁnition span sites , observational studies will require teams of likewise - distributed researchers . A complementary strat - egy could include the collection of electronic communi - cation and information exchanged via technology . Such data , particularly if collected over time , could provide a critical window into the ongoing dynamics of distributed teams . The study of conﬂict in distributed teams thus appears to necessitate multiple - method large - scale long - term studies , studies that will be ambitious in their goals but that stand to yield important ﬁndings that will inform theory , managerial practice , and technology design . Acknowledgments This research was partially supported by National Science Foundation Grants IIS - 9872996 and DMI - 9996081 to the ﬁrst and second authors , respectively . References Amason , A . C . 1996 . Distinguishing the effects of functional and dysfunctional conﬂict on strategic decision making : Resolving a paradox for top management teams . Acad . Management J . 39 123 – 148 . Ancona , D . G . , C . - L . Chong . 1996 . Entrainment : Pace , cycle , and rhythm in organizational behavior . Res . Organ . Behavior 18 251 – 284 . Armstrong , D . J . , P . Cole . 2002 . Managing distances and differences in geographically distributed work groups . P . J . Hinds , S . Kiesler , eds . Distributed Work . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 167 – 186 . Atkins , D . , D . Boyer , M . Handel , J . Herbsleb , A . Mockus , G . Wills . 2002 . Achieving speed in globally distributed project work . Paper presented at the Human Comput . Interaction Consortium , Winterpark , CO . Barley , S . R . 1986 . Technology as an occasion for structuring : Evidence from observation of CT scanners and the social order of radiology departments . Admin . Sci . Quart . 31 78 – 108 . Blascovich , J . , J . Loomis , A . C . Beall , K . R . Swinth . 2002 . Immer - sive virtual environment technology as a research tool for social psychology . Psych . Inquiry 13 103 – 125 . Bouas , K . , H . Arrow . 1996 . The development of group identity in computer and face - to - face groups with membership change . Comput . - Supported Cooperative Work 4 153 – 178 . Brehmer , B . 1976 . Social judgment theory and the analysis of inter - personal conﬂict . Psych . Bull . 83 985 – 1003 . Chidambaram , L . 1989 . Relational development in computer - supported groups . MIS Quart . 20 143 – 163 . Clark , H . H . , S . E . Brennan . 1991 . Grounding in communica - tion . L . Resnick , J . Levine , S . Teasley , eds . Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition , American Psychological Association , Washington , D . C . , 127 – 149 . Cohen , S . G . , D . E . Bailey . 1997 . What makes teams work : Group effectiveness research from the shop ﬂoor to the executive suite . J . Management 23 ( 3 ) 239 – 290 . Cramton , C . D . 2001 . The mutual knowledge problem and its conse - quences for dispersed collaboration . Organ . Sci . 12 ( 3 ) 346 – 371 . . 2002 . Attribution in distributed work groups . P . J . Hinds , S . Kiesler , eds . Distributed Work . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 191 – 212 . Daft , R . L . , R . H . Lengel . 1984 . Information richness : A new approach to managerial behavior and organization design . Res . Organ . Behavior 6 191 – 233 . , , L . K . Trevino . 1987 . Message equivocality , media selec - tion , and manager performance : Implications for information sys - tems . MIS Quart . 11 355 – 366 . DeSanctis , G . , P . Monge . 1999 . Introduction to the special issue : Communication processes for virtual organizations . Organ . Sci . 10 693 – 703 . , M . S . Poole . 1994 . Capturing the complexity in advanced tech - nology use : Adaptive structuration theory . Organ . Sci . 5 121 – 147 . Deutsch , M . 1969 . Conﬂicts : Productive and distructive . J . Soc . Issues 25 7 – 41 . Eisenhardt , K . M . , J . L . Kahwajy , L . J . Bourgeois . 1997 . Conﬂict and strategic choice : How top management teams disagree . Califor - nia Management Rev . 39 ( 2 ) 42 – 62 . Espinosa , A . , J . Cadiz , L . Rico - Gutierrez , G . Lautenbacjer , R . Kraut , L . Scherlis . 2000 . Coming to the wrong decision quickly : Why awareness tools must be matches with appropriate tasks . Proc . Human Factors Comput . Systems , CHI’2000 , ACM Press , New York , 392 – 399 . 630 Organization Science / Vol . 14 , No . 6 , November – December 2003 PAMELA J . HINDS AND DIANE E . BAILEY Understanding Conﬂict in Distributed Teams Evan , W . 1965 . Conﬂict and performance in R & D organizations . Indust . Management Rev . 7 37 – 46 . Festinger , L . , S . Schacter , K . Bach . 1950 . Social Pressures in Informal Groups . Stanford University Press , Palo Alto , CA . Fish , R . S . , R . E . Kraut , R . Root , R . E . Rice . 1993 . Video as a tech - nology for informal communication . Comm . ACM 36 8 – 61 . Fussell , S . R . , R . M . Krauss . 1992 . Coordination of knowledge in communication : Effects of speakers’ assumptions about what oth - ers know . J . Personality Soc . Psych . 62 ( 3 ) 378 – 391 . Gaver , W . W . , T . Moran , A . MacLean , L . Lovstrand , P . Dourish , K . A . Carter , W . Buxon . 1992 . Realizing a video environment : EuroPARC’s RAVE system . Proc . ACM Conf . Human Factors Comput . Systems ( CHI’92 ) . Giddens , A . 1984 . The Constitution of Society : Outline of the Theory of Structure . University of California Press , Berkeley , CA . Goodman , P . S . , D . P . Leyden . 1991 . Familiarity and group produc - tivity . J . Appl . Psych . 76 578 – 586 . Grinter , R . E . , J . D . Herbsleb , D . E . Perry . 1999 . The geography of coordination : Dealing with distance in R & D work . Paper pre - sented at the 1999 SIGGROUP Conference , Phoenix , AZ . Hackman , J . R . 1987 . The design of work teams . J . W . Lorsch , ed . Handbook Of Organizational Behavior . Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ , 315 – 342 . Hinds , P . J . 1999 . The cognitive and interpersonal costs of video . Media Psych . 1 283 – 311 . , S . Kiesler . 1995 . Communication across boundaries : Work , structure , and the use of communication technologies in a large organization . Organ . Sci . 6 373 – 393 . Hollingshead , A . B . 1996 . Information suppression and status persis - tence in group decision making : The effects of communication media . Human Comm . Res . 23 ( 2 ) 193 – 219 . Janis , I . L . 1982 . Victims of Groupthink . Houghton Mifﬂin , Boston , MA . Jarvenpaa , S . , D . Leidner . 1999 . Communication and trust in global virtual teams . Organ . Sci . 10 791 – 815 . Jehn , K . A . 1995 . A multimethod examination of the beneﬁts and detriments of intragroup conﬂict . Admin . Sci . Quart . 40 256 – 282 . . 1997 . A quantitative analysis of conﬂict types and dimensions in organizational groups . Admin . Sci . Quart . 42 ( 3 ) 530 – 558 . , J . A . Chatman . 2000 . The inﬂuence of proportional and per - ceptual conﬂict composition on team performance . Internat . J . Conﬂict Management 11 56 – 73 . , E . A . Mannix . 2001 . The dynamic nature of conﬂict : A longitu - dinal study of intragroup conﬂict and group performance . Acad . Management J . 44 ( 2 ) 236 – 251 . , C . Chadwick , S . M . B . Thatcher . 1997 . To agree or not to agree : The effects of value congruence , individual demographic dissimilarity , and conﬂict on workgroup outcomes . Internat . J . Conﬂict Management 8 287 – 305 . Karnoe , P . 1995 . Competence as process and the social embedded - ness of competence building . Acad . Management Best Paper Proc . , Vancouver , Academy of Management , Briarcliff Manor , NY , 427 – 431 . Kiesler , S . , J . N . Cummings . 2002 . What do we know about proximity and distance in work groups ? A legacy of research . P . J . Hinds , S . Kiesler , eds . Distributed Work . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 57 – 80 . Kling , R . 1980 . Social analyses of computing : Theoretical perspec - tives in recent empirical research . ACM Comput . Surveys 12 61 – 110 . , R . E . Rice , C . Cool , R . S . Fish . 1998 . Varieties of social inﬂu - ence : The role of utility and norms in the success of a new communication medium . Organ . Sci . 9 ( 4 ) 437 – 453 . Kraut , R . E . , R . S . Fish , B . Chalfonte . 1992 . Requirements and media choice in collaborative writing . Human Comput . Interaction 7 375 – 407 . , S . R . Fussel , S . E . Brennan , J . Seigel . 2002 . Understanding effects of proximity on collaboration : Implications for technolo - gies to support remote collaborative work . P . J . Hinds , S . Kiesler , eds . Distributed Work . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 137 – 162 . Lee , A . S . 1994 . Electronic mail as a medium for rich communication : An empirical investigation using hermeneutic interpretation . MIS Quart . 18 ( June ) 143 – 157 . Lovelace , K . , D . L . Shapiro , L . R . Weingart . 2001 . Maximizing cross - functional new product teams’ innovativeness and con - straint adherence : A conﬂict communications perspective . Acad . Management J . 44 779 – 783 . Mannix , E . A . , T . Grifﬁth , M . A . Neale . 2002 . The phenomenology of conﬂict in distributed work teams . P . J . Hinds , S . Kiesler , eds . Distributed Work . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 213 – 233 . Mark , G . , J . Grudin , S . E . Poltrock . 1999 . Meeting at the desktop : An empirical study of virtually collocated teams . Proc . ECSCW’99 , The 6 th Eur . Conf . Comput . Supported Cooperative Work , Copen - hagen , Denmark ( September ) . Markus , M . L . 1994a . Finding a happy medium : Explaining the nega - tive effects of electronic communication on social life and work . ACM Trans . Inform . Systems 12 119 – 149 . . 1994b . Electronic mail as the medium of managerial choice . Organ . Sci . 5 502 – 527 . , D . Robey . 1988 . Information technology and organizational change : Causal structure in theory and research . Management Sci . 34 ( 5 ) 583 – 598 . Maznevski , M . L . 1994 . Understanding our differences : Perfor - mance in decision - making groups with diverse members . Human Relations 47 ( 5 ) 531 – 552 . , K . M . Chudoba . 2000 . Bridging space over time : Global virtual team dynamics and effectiveness . Organ . Sci . 11 437 – 492 . Montoya - Weiss , M . M . , A . P . Massey , M . Song . 2001 . Getting it together : Temporal coordination and conﬂict management in global virtual teams . Acad . Management J . 44 1251 – 1262 . Mortensen , M . , P . J . Hinds . 2001 . Conﬂict and shared identity in geo - graphically distributed teams . Internat . J . Conﬂict Management 12 ( 3 ) 212 – 238 . Murnighan , J . K . , D . J . Conlon . 1991 . The dynamics of intense work groups : A study of British string quartets . Admin . Sci . Quart . 36 165 – 186 . Olson , G . M . , J . S . Olson . 2000 . Distance matters . Human Comput . Interaction 15 139 – 179 . Organization Science / Vol . 14 , No . 6 , November – December 2003 631 PAMELA J . HINDS AND DIANE E . BAILEY Understanding Conﬂict in Distributed Teams Olson , J . S . , S . Teasley . 1996 . Groupware in the wild : Lessons learned from a year of virtual colocation . Proc . Conf . Comput . - Supported Cooperative Work , The Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 419 – 427 . O’Reilly , C . , K . Williams , S . Barsade . 1997 . Group demography and innovation . Does diversity help ? E . Mannis , M . Neale , eds . Research in the Management of Groups and Teams , Vol . 1 . JAI Press , Greenwich , CT . Orlikowski , W . 1992 . The duality of technology : Rethinking the con - cept of technology in organizations . Organ . Sci . 3 ( 3 ) 398 – 427 . . 2000 . Using technology and constituting structures : A prac - tice lens for study technology in organizations . Organ . Sci . 11 404 – 428 . Pelled , L . H . 1996 . Demographic diversity , conﬂict , and work group outcomes : An intervening process theory . Organ . Sci . 7 615 – 631 . , P . S . Adler . 1994 . Antecedents of intergroup conﬂict in mul - tifunctional product development teams : A conceptual model . IEEE Trans . Eng . Management 41 ( 1 ) 21 – 28 . , K . M . Eisenhardt , K . R . Xin . 1999 . Exploring the black box : An analysis of work group diversity conﬂict and performance . Admin . Sci . Quart . 44 1 – 28 . Pfeffer , J . 1982 . Organizations and Organization Theory . Pitman , Marshﬁeld , MA . Purdy , J . M . , P . Nye , P . V . Balakrishnan . 2000 . The impact of com - munication media on negotiation outcomes . Internat . J . Conﬂict Management 11 162 – 187 . Schober , M . F . 1998 . Different kinds of perspective - taking . S . Fussell , R . Krauss , eds . Social and Cognitive Approaches to Interpersonal Communication . Lawrence Erlbaum , Mahwah , NJ . Shah , P . P . , K . A . Jehn . 1993 . Do friends perform better than acquain - tances ? The interaction of friendship , conﬂict , and task . Group Decision Negotiation 2 149 – 165 . Short , J . , E . Williams , B . Christie . 1976 . The Social Psychology of Telecommunications . John Wiley & Sons , London , U . K . Siegel , J . , V . Dubrovsky , S . Kiesler , T . W . McGuire . 1986 . Group pro - cesses in computer - mediated communication . Organ . Behavior Human Decision Processes 37 157 – 187 . Simons , T . L . , R . S . Peterson . 2000 . Task conﬂict and relationship conﬂict in top management teams : The pivotal role of intragroup trust . J . Appl . Psych . 85 102 – 111 . Sproull , L . , S . Kiesler . 1991 . Connections : New Ways of Working in the Networked Organization . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Straus , S . , J . E . McGrath . 1994 . Does the medium matter ? The inter - action of task type and technology on group performance and member reactions . J . Appl . Psych . 79 87 – 97 . Thomas , K . W . 1992 . Conﬂict and negotiation processes in organiza - tions . M . D . Dunnette , L . M . Hough , eds . Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology , Vol . 3 . Consulting Psychologists Press , Palo Alto , CA , 651 – 717 . Tinsley , C . 1998 . Models of conﬂict resolution in Japanese , German and American cultures . J . Appl . Sci . 83 316 – 323 . Tyre , M . , E . von Hippel . 1997 . The situated nature of learning in organizations . Organ . Sci . 8 71 – 83 . Walther , J . B . 1994 . Anticipated ongoing interaction versus channel effects on relational communication in computer - mediated inter - action . Human Comm . Res . 20 473 – 501 . , J . Burgoon . 1992 . Relational communication in computer - mediated interaction . Human Comm . Res . 19 50 – 88 . , J . F . Anderson , D . Park . 1994 . Interpersonal effects in computer - mediated interaction : A meta - analysis of social and anti - social communication . Comm . Res . 21 460 – 487 . Weisband , S . 1992 . Group discussion and ﬁrst advocacy effects in computer - mediated and face - to - face decision making groups . Organ . Behavior Human Decision Processes 53 352 – 380 . . 2002 . Maintaining awareness in distributed team collabora - tion : Implications for leadership and performance . P . J . Hinds , S . Kiesler , eds . Distributed Work . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 311 – 333 . Williams , K . Y . , C . A . O’Reilly . 1998 . Demography and diversity in organizations : A review of 40 years of research . B . M . Staw , L . L . Cummings , eds . Research in Organizational Behavior , Vol . 20 . JAI Press , Greenwich , CT , 77 – 140 . Xie , J . , X . M . Song , A . Stringfellow . 1998 . Interfunctional con - ﬂict , conﬂict resolution styles , and new product success : A four - culture perspective . Management Sci . 44 192 – 206 . Zajonc , R . B . 1968 . Attitudinal effect of mere exposure . J . Personality Soc . Psych . 9 2 – 17 . 632 Organization Science / Vol . 14 , No . 6 , November – December 2003