BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 High - Speed AFM and Applications to Biomolecular Systems Toshio Ando , 1 , 2 Takayuki Uchihashi , 1 , 2 and Noriyuki Kodera 2 1 Department of Physics and 2 Bio - AFM Frontier Research Center , Kanazawa University , Kanazawa 920 - 1192 , Japan ; email : tando @ staff . kanazawa - u . ac . jp Annu . Rev . Biophys . 2013 . 42 : 393 – 414 The Annual Review of Biophysics is online at biophys . annualreviews . org This article’s doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - biophys - 083012 - 130324 Copyright c (cid:2) 2013 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved Keywords atomic force microscopy , proteins in action , high - resolution imaging , dynamics of biomolecules , nanostructural dynamics Abstract Directly observing individual protein molecules in action at high spatiotem - poral resolution has long been a holy grail for biological science . This is because we long have had to infer how proteins function from the static snapshots of their structures and dynamic behavior of optical makers at - tached to the molecules . This limitation has recently been removed to a large extent by the materialization of high - speed atomic force microscopy ( HS - AFM ) . HS - AFM allows us to directly visualize the structure dynamics and dynamic processes of biological molecules in physiological solutions , at subsecond to sub - 100 - ms temporal resolution , without disturbing their function . In fact , dynamically acting molecules such as myosin V walking on an actin ﬁlament and bacteriorhodopsin in response to light are successfully visualized . In this review , we ﬁrst describe theoretical considerations for the highest possible imaging rate of this new microscope , and then highlight recent imaging studies . Finally , the current limitation and future challenges to explore are described . 393 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 AFM : atomic force microscopy Contents INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 394 FEEDBACK OPERATION AND MAXIMUM POSSIBLE IMAGING RATE . . . . . 395 Feedback Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 396 Other Factors Limiting Feedback Frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 397 Maximum Possible Imaging Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 398 CANTILEVER , SAMPLE STAGE , AND SUBSTRATE SURFACE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 398 Small Cantilevers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 398 Sample Stage and Hydrodynamic Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 400 Substrate Surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 400 IMAGING OF PROTEINS IN ACTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 401 Myosin V Walking on Actin Filament . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402 Rotary Catalysis of Rotorless F 1 - ATPase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405 FUTURE CHALLENGES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407 Wide - Area Observation and In Situ Imaging of Dynamic Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407 Faster Wide - Area Observation and Dynamic Imaging of Cell Morphology . . . . . . . . 408 High - Speed Noncontact Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408 INTRODUCTION Atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) was originally invented to visualize atoms on solid surfaces ( 10 ) . In biological sciences , this microscopy is now routinely used to directly acquire high - resolution images of biological samples under physiological conditions , without sample staining ( 66 , 81 , 82 ) . AFM is also used for the recognition and localization of speciﬁc molecules ( 37 , 91 ) as well as force measurements to estimate the strength of intra - and intermolecular bonds at the single - molecule level ( 26 , 67 , 108 ) , the elasticity of biological surfaces ( 19 , 98 ) , and the osmotic pressure of live cells ( 90 ) . Therefore , AFM is a nano - toolbox for biology ( reviewed in References 64 and 65 ) . However , the limited scan speed of AFM limits its usefulness . It takes time ( at least 30 s ) to ac - quire an image , and therefore , molecules moving on the substrate surface are imaged as a blur or cannot be imaged at all . To overcome this limitation , the development of high - speed AFM ( HS - AFM ) was started around 1993 . Through the initial prototypes ( 5 , 103 , 104 ) and their ex - tensive improvements ( 8 , 9 , 24 , 25 , 29 , 47 , 50 , 51 , 53 , 101 ) , HS - AFM is now materialized ( 3 , 7 ) . Although the speed performance depends on imaging conditions , current HS - AFM can generally captureanimageofbiologicalmoleculeswithin100msorless . Importantly , thestructureandfunc - tion of fragile molecules are not disturbed by the interaction with a cantilever tip . This high - speed and low - invasive performance opens up a new opportunity to visualize dynamically functioning biological molecules in great detail . As has been demonstrated in recent imaging studies ( 12 , 40 , 52 , 86 , 99 ) , the visualized dynamic images of proteins can provide information inaccessible with other approaches , giving great insight into how the proteins function . Remarkably , the dynamic images can be interpreted straightforwardly without intricate analyses and interpretations , making it possible to attain ﬁrm conclusions . This review summarizes the fundamentals of HS - AFM , high - lights recent imaging studies of proteins , and outlines ongoing and future challenges to expand the scope of its application to biological studies . 394 Ando · Uchihashi · Kodera A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 P - G a i n z z y y x x I - G a i n D - G a i n D A - x F r e q . A m p . D A - y A D - z Differentialamplifier Focusinglens Split photodiode Amplitudedetector Set point PID - feedback controller Piezo driver Sample - stage scanner Computer Monitor Sine wave generator Mirror Piezoactuatorfor excitation Laser diode Cantilever Sample stage Cantilever base Figure 1 Schematic for general conﬁguration of a tapping - mode AFM system ( see text for details ) . Set point : the target value of a controlled variable FEEDBACK OPERATION AND MAXIMUM POSSIBLE IMAGING RATE Visualization by AFM of the topography of a sample placed on a substrate surface requires acquisition of sample height information over many points on the sample surface ( Figure 1 ; Supplemental Movie 1 , follow the Supplemental Material link from the Annual Reviews home page at http : / / www . annualreviews . org ) . A stylus probe attached to the free end of a cantilever is brought into contact with the sample . Mechanical response of the cantilever upon this contact is measured and then the sample stage is ﬁnally moved in the z - direction to recover the mechanical state of the cantilever back to a given condition ( i . e . , set point ) through feedback control . For this recovery , the closed feedback loop spends a certain amount of time mainly because of the slow response of the mechanical devices ( i . e . , cantilever and z - scanner ) . This series of operations is repeated many times for different sample surface points during lateral scanning of the sample stage . Among several imaging modes of AFM ( reviewed in References 31 and 63 ) , the tapping mode ( 120 ) ( also called amplitude modulation mode or intermittent contact mode ) is often used for biological samples . In this mode , the cantilever is oscillated in the z - direction at its ﬁrst resonant frequency ( Supplemental Movie 1 ) so that the tip intermittently taps the sample surface . This tapping results in decreased amplitude as well as a phase shift relative to the excitation signal ( 101 ) . The intermittent contact can eliminate friction force during lateral scanning , which minimizes deformation of fragile biological samples . Described below www . annualreviews . org • High - Speed AFM for Filming Biomolecules 395 Supplemental Material A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 OBD : optical beam deﬂection λ h 0 V S Parachuting Sample surface Scanner trajectory Tracing error Figure 2 Scanner movement tracing sinusoidally shaped sample surface with periodicity λ and amplitude h 0 / 2 , when no parachuting occurs . The inset shows a trajectory of the bottom swing position of the tip ( broken line ) relative to the sample surface when parachuting occurs . is the feedback operation to maintain the cantilever oscillation amplitude ( and thus tip - sample interaction force ) constant . Next , the highest possible imaging rate of tapping - mode HS - AFM is derived as a function of the feedback bandwidth and various parameters . Feedback Operation In the closed feedback loop ( see Figure 1 ) , the input to the loop is the variation of sample height right under the cantilever tip and the output is the displacement of the z - scanner . The output from the feedback controller is used as a signal representing the sample height . There are several devices in the feedback loop : a cantilever , an optical beam deﬂection ( OBD ) detector for the detection of cantilever deﬂection , an amplitude detector ( deﬂection - to - amplitude converter ) , a feedback controller , a piezoelectric driver , and a piezoactuator - based z - scanner . Each of these devices has a certain time delay in the response to the corresponding input signal . Therefore , the feedback control cannot perform without time delay . This delay deteriorates the speed performance of the microscope , which is described below . For simplicity , it is assumed that the sample surface proﬁle in the x - z plane has a sinusoidal shape with a periodicity λ and an amplitude h 0 / 2 ( Figure 2 , black line ) . When the sample - stage scanner is moved in the x - direction at velocity V s , the sample height h right under the cantilever tip changes with time as h ( t ) = ( h 0 / 2 ) × sin ( 2 π f t ) , 1 . where f = V s / λ . Duringfeedbackscan , the z - scannermovesinthedirectionoppositetothesample height so that the sample surface looks ﬂat when viewed from the cantilever . However , because 396 Ando · Uchihashi · Kodera A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 Quality factor : a measure representing small damping ( energy loss per cycle ) in a resonant system of the time delay ( τ 0 ) in the closed feedback loop , the z - scanner moves at feedback frequency f as z ( t ) = − ( h 0 / 2 ) × sin ( 2 π f t − θ ) , 2 . where θ = 2 π f τ 0 ( Figure 2 , red line ) . Therefore , the sample surface when viewed from the cantilever does not look perfectly ﬂat but varies with time as S ( t ) = h ( t ) + z ( t ) = h 0 sin ( θ / 2 ) cos ( 2 π f t − θ / 2 ) . 3 . The deviation from a ﬂat surface ( i . e . , feedback error ) due to the feedback delay is indicated with the blue line in Figure 2 . When cantilever free oscillation amplitude and the amplitude set point are set at A 0 and A s ( = rA 0 ; 0 < r < 1 ) , respectively , the cantilever tip in contact with the sample surface is pushed upward by the sample to an extent of D ( t ) ≡ S ( t ) + A 0 ( 1 − r ) so long as the sample is rigid enough compared with the cantilever . The feedback bandwidth f B , which is a value characterizing the speed performance of feedback operation in the AFM system , is usually deﬁned by a feedback frequency at which 45 ◦ phase delay occurs in the feedback scan . Thus , f B = 1 / ( 8 τ 0 ) . Because the feedback frequency f should not exceed f B , a condition f < f B holds , which limits the scan speed V s as V s < λ f B . Other Factors Limiting Feedback Frequency However , two other factors limit f more severely than f B . One comes from the condition that D ( t ) should always be positive . Otherwise , at downhill regions of the sample , the cantilever tip cannot make contact with the sample surface at the bottom swing of oscillation ; i . e . , parachuting occurs ( Figure 2 , inset ) . Once detached , the error signal is saturated at A 0 ( 1 − r ) . When r is set close to 1 so that the tapping force exerted from the oscillating cantilever tip to the sample is minimized , the saturated error signal is small , and hence the parachuting time is prolonged ( 51 , 92 ) . During parachuting , the sample topography cannot be recorded at all . The condition under which no parachuting occurs is expressed as A 0 ( 1 − r ) − h 0 sin ( θ / 2 ) > 0 . 4 . To minimize the tapping force , small A 0 has to be used in addition to r close to 1 . For example , for A 0 = h 0 / 5 and r = 0 . 9 , Equation 4 limits the phase delay as θ < 2 . 3 ◦ , which severely limits the feedback frequency f as f < 0 . 05 f B . The other condition that limits f comes from the maximum possible tapping force under which the structure and function of the biological sample are retained . The maximum tapping force F max p is exerted at an uphill region of the sample , which can be approximately expressed as F max p = ( k c / Q c ) × [ A 0 ( 1 − r ) + h 0 sin ( θ / 2 ) ] , 5 . where k c and Q c arethespringconstantandthequalityfactorinwaterofthecantilever , respectively . For example , under the condition of F max p = 100 pN , k c = 200 pN / nm , Q c = 2 , A 0 = 1 nm , h 0 = 5 nm , and r = 0 . 9 [ these values are realistic ones as values close to these values are actually used in successful imaging of functioning proteins ( 40 , 52 , 86 , 99 ) ] , Equation 5 limits the phase delay as θ < 20 . 7 ◦ , which moderately limits f as f < 0 . 46 f B . Thus , the parachuting problem is the severest limiting factor for the maximum possible feed - back frequency and hence for the scan speed V s . However , we have successfully eliminated this problem by developing a feedback controller that can automatically change its gain parameters depending on the cantilever oscillation amplitude during imaging ; feedback gain is increased at the downhill region of the sample so that parachuting only rarely occurs ( 51 ) . Even when it occurs , the parachuting time is reduced signiﬁcantly . www . annualreviews . org • High - Speed AFM for Filming Biomolecules 397 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 Here , note that the mechanical quantity affecting the sample ( i . e . , causing momentum change ) isnotthetipforceitselfactingonthesamplebuttheimpulsiveforce ( theproductoftheforceacting on the sample and the time for which the force acts ) . When the cantilever resonant frequency is high ( ∼ 1 MHz in water ) , as is the case for small cantilevers optimized for HS - AFM , the force acting time is approximately 100 ns or less , which guarantees no signiﬁcant effect of F max p = 100 pN on fragile protein molecules . Maximum Possible Imaging Rate The maximum possible imaging rate R max is a function of f B and the imaging condition ( the scan size in the x - direction W , the number of scan lines N , and the spatial frequency of sample height corrugation to be imaged 1 / λ ) as well as of the maximum possible phase delay θ max in the feedback operation that depends largely on the sample fragility . For given W , N , and V s , one frame of image is captured with time T = ( 2 WN ) / V s . The maximum possible scan speed V smax is given by θ max / ( π / 4 ) × λ f B . Thus , R max is given by R max = 2 θ max λ f B / ( π W N ) . 6 . For example , under a realistic condition for imaging protein molecules by our HS - AFM ( f B = 110 kHz , θ max = π / 9 ( i . e . , 20 ◦ ) , λ = 10 nm , W = 150 nm , and N = 100 ) , Equation 6 gives R max = 16 . 3 frames per second ( fps ) . The high f B achieved ( 110 kHz ) is approximately 1 , 000 times higher than that of conventional AFM systems . CANTILEVER , SAMPLE STAGE , AND SUBSTRATE SURFACE HS - AFM is materialized by the achievement of three conditions to meet high - speed and low - invasive performance : ( a ) extensive reduction of time delays in the response of all devices contained in the feedback loop ( reviewed in Reference 7 ) , ( b ) damping of mechanical vibrations caused by fast displacement of the scanner ( 7 , 53 ) , and ( c ) feedback control technique that can eliminate tip parachuting even when A s is set close to A 0 ( 51 ) . Details of various techniques and devices that have achieved these conditions are described elsewhere ( 7 ) . The latest HS - AFM instrument developed by us is commercially available from the Research Institute of Biomolecule Metrology Co . , Ltd . ( Tsukuba , Japan ) . Here , we therefore focus on devices ( small cantilevers , sample stage , and substrate surfaces ) and associated issues that HS - AFM users themselves must deal with . Small Cantilevers When a cantilever tip taps the sample surface , a brief stepwise force is exerted on the cantilever . The cantilever responds to this force with a response time τ c = Q c / π f c , where f c is the ﬁrst resonant frequency of the cantilever in water . Measuring the cantilever oscillation amplitude requires time , at least τ m = 1 / 2 f c . Thus , the resonant frequency f c should be as high as possible , whereas k c should be small for fragile biological samples . Q c can be naturally small in water . The size of the cantilever has to be small to achieve both high f c and small k c ( 50 , 104 ) . Several types of small rectangular cantilevers made of Si 3 N 4 have been developed by Olympus ( Tokyo , Japan ) in collaboration with our group . The high - end small cantilevers ( Olympus BL - AC7DS - KU5 , custom - made ) that we have been routinely using for imaging studies are 6 – 7 μ m long , 2 μ m wide , and 90 nm thick ( Figure 3 a ) . They have f c = 1 . 2 MHz in water ( 3 . 5 MHz in air ) , Q c ≈ 2 in water , and k c = 0 . 2 N / m . The commercially available small cantilevers ( Olympus BL - AC10DS - A2 ) are 9 – 10 μ m long , 2 μ m wide , and 130 nm thick , and have f c = 0 . 6 MHz in water ( 1 . 5 MHz in 398 Ando · Uchihashi · Kodera A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 a b Cantilever c Cantilever base Mica disk 1 μm 1 μm Figure 3 Cantilever , tip , and relative arrangement of cantilever and sample stage . ( a ) Scanning electron microscope ( SEM ) image of a small cantilever . ( b ) SEM image of an electron - beam - deposited ( EBD ) tip grown on an original bird - beak - shaped tip . ( c ) Relative arrangement between sample stage and cantilever for circumventing the disturbance by hydrodynamic pressure produced by quick displacement of the z - scanner . air ) , Q c ≈ 2 in water , and k c = 0 . 1 N / m . Small cantilevers are also available from NanoWorld ( Neuchˆatel , Switzerland ) . Small cantilevers have other advantages . The total thermal noise ( k B T / k c ) 1 / 2 ( where k B is Boltzmann’s constant and T is the temperature in Kelvin ) ( 2 ) is distributed over frequencies up to slightly above f c . Therefore , a cantilever with a higher f c has a lower noise density . In the tapping www . annualreviews . org • High - Speed AFM for Filming Biomolecules 399 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 EBD : electron beam deposition ( deposited ) mode , the frequency region used for imaging is approximately the feedback frequency centered on the resonant frequency . Thus , for a cantilever with a higher f c , thermal noise has less effect on the amplitude measurement . The deﬂection of a cantilever alters the angle of its free end ( Δϕ ) , which is detected by the OBD detector ( see Figure 1 ) . Therefore , for a given displacement Δ z of the cantilever free end in the z - direction , a shorter cantilever results in a larger angle change ( Δϕ = 3 Δ z / 2 L ) and thus gives higher displacement detection sensitivity . Because of a small thermal noise effect and this high sensitivity with small cantilevers 6 – 10 μ m long , the displacement as small as < 0 . 1 nm can be detected even with high bandwidth detection ( a few megahertz ) . The deﬂection - to - amplitude conversion can be performed every half or one cycle of cantilever oscillation using fast amplitude detectors developed ( 5 , 7 ) . The bird - beak - shaped tip of the small cantilevers produced by Olympus is approximately 1 . 5 μ m long and its apex radius is 15 – 24 nm . Small cantilevers that have an additional carbon nanoﬁber tip with an apex radius < 10 nm grown on the bird - beak - shaped tip have become com - mercially available ( Olympus , BL - AC10FS - A2 ) ( 49 , 97 ) . When a scanning electron microscope ( SEM ) is available , electron - beam - deposited ( EBD ) tips can be grown under an atmosphere of gas sublimated from materials . Various materials can be used for the deposition of carbon , platinum , tungsten , and silicon dioxide . A gas injection system , which is adaptable to SEMs and can mix different gases under computer control , is commercially available ( Omniprobe OmniGIS TM ) . The grown tips can be sharpened by nitrogen or oxygen plasma etching . The tip apex radium is usually reduced to ∼ 5 nm and sometimes to ∼ 0 . 5 nm ( 100 ) . Sample Stage and Hydrodynamic Pressure In high - speed imaging , the sample - stage z - scanner is displaced at high frequencies ( 20 – 100 kHz ) . This fast scan exerts a hydrodynamic pressure on the cantilever and its supporting base placed in close vicinity to the sample surface , which tends to move them , particularly when the sample stage is large ( 4 ) . Their movement results in a slow response of the cantilever oscillation amplitude to z - scanner displacement . In the worst case , this delay extends to a few microseconds ( 6 , 100 ) , which is much longer than the minimized time delay in the closed feedback loop . As a sample stage , a small glass rod 1 . 5 – 2 mm in diameter and 2 mm high is routinely used for HS - AFM imaging ( Figure 3 c ) . To further circumvent the disturbance by hydrodynamic pressure , the cantilever is positioned in a way that the whole cantilever chip minimally overlaps with the sample stage when viewed from the top ( Figure 3 c ) . Moreover , the cantilever tip longer than ∼ 2 . 5 μ m is prepared by the growth of a > 1 - μ m - long EBD tip on the original tip ( Figure 3 b ) . When the tip is shorter , the cantilever gets closer to the sample surface at the bottom of swing and thus the solution conﬁned between them becomes more squeezed , resulting in oscillation damping and the deteriorated detection sensitivity of tip - sample interaction ( 6 ) . Substrate Surfaces A substrate surface , on which a sample is placed , holds the key to successful HS - AFM imaging ( reviewed in References 109 and 111 ) . The surface should be ﬂat enough so that the molecules of interest deposited on it can be easily identiﬁed . Observing dynamically acting protein molecules requires the substrate surface to loosely bind the molecules to allow them to retain their physio - logical function . However , the sample - surface interaction is essential to avoid too rapid Brownian motion of the sample , particularly for single - protein molecules isolated completely from other molecules . Observing dynamic interactions between different proteins often requires selective protein attachment to a surface . As substrate surfaces , bare or chemically treated mica surfaces , 400 Ando · Uchihashi · Kodera A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 Ni – NTA : nickel – nitrilotriacetic acid DOPC : dioleoylphos - phatidylcholine P2X 4 receptor : one of the ATP - gated membrane cation channels OmpF : outer membrane protein F planar lipid bilayer ( PLB ) surfaces , and the surfaces of two - dimensional crystals of streptavidin formed on a biotin - containing PLB have been used for dynamic AFM imaging . The properties of these surfaces are summarized below . Mica surfaces . Mica ( natural muscovite or synthetic ﬂuorophlogopite ) has been frequently used as the substrate source because of its surface ﬂatness at the atomic level over a large area . It has a net negative charge and is therefore quite hydrophilic . A bare mica surface adsorbs DNA and various proteins by electrostatic interaction . We can control the adsorption strength by varying the ionic strength or pH or by adding divalent cations such as Mg 2 + and Ni 2 + ( especially for attaching nega - tivelychargedsamples ) ( 17 , 72 ) . Monovalentcationsmarkedlychangetheafﬁnity ; Li + > Na + > K + for every protein ( 18 ) . For fractionated membranes containing membrane proteins , the bare mica surface is useful . A water layer of ∼ 1 nm thickness separates the membranes from the mica surface , enablingthemotionofmembraneproteinswithinthemembranes ( 46 , 76 , 113 ) . Proteins , including proteins in membranes , can be covalently immobilized onto chemically treated mica surfaces ( 43 ) . Planar lipid bilayer surfaces . PLB can easily be formed on a bare mica surface by the deposition of liposomes ( 58 ) . The PLB surfaces can be used for both speciﬁc and electrostatic immobiliza - tions of proteins . For the speciﬁc immobilization of biotinylated proteins and His - tag - conjugated proteins , lipids with biotin and nickel – nitrilotriacetic acid ( Ni – NTA ) at the polar head groups can be used , respectively . Multiple - point pinning is sometimes required for stopping the rapid motion of molecules tethered to the surfaces . PLB surfaces prepared with electrically neutral phospho - lipids are resistant to the nonspeciﬁc binding of proteins . For electrostatic immobilization , lipids with charged head groups can be used . Unlike bare mica surfaces , the surface charge density and polarity can be varied by using different fractions of a charged lipid and by using positively or negatively charged lipids , respectively . Streptavidin two - dimensional crystal surfaces . The two - dimensional crystals of streptavidin can easily be formed on highly ﬂuidic PLBs containing lipids with unsaturated alkyl chains ( such as DOPC , dioleoylphosphatidylcholine ) and a biotin - containing lipid ( 11 , 20 ) . Their surface is par - ticularly useful for the selective and stable immobilization of homo - oligomeric protein complexes because pinning the complexes at multiple biotinylated sites is possible ( 109 ) . Not only biotiny - lated samples but also His - tag - conjugated samples can be immobilized using biotin - Ni - NTA compounds as a linker . Importantly , the surface is resistant to the nonspeciﬁc binding of proteins . IMAGING OF PROTEINS IN ACTION The imaging studies conducted thus far have covered a wide range of dynamic molecular events ( reviewed in References 3 , 14 , and 44 ) . These events are classiﬁed into ( a ) structure dynamics of proteins including myosin V on actin ( 52 ) , rotorless F 1 - ATPase ( 99 ) , P2X 4 receptors ( 87 ) , bacteriorhodopsin ( bR ) ( 85 , 86 ) , Ca 2 + pump ( 118 ) , and intrinsically disordered FACT protein ( 61 ) ; ( b ) self - assembly processes including amyloid - like ﬁbril formation from cleaved lithostathine ( 57 ) and PLB formation ( 3 , 33 ) ; ( c ) dynamic protein - protein interactions including GroEL - GroES ( 8 , 109 , 119 ) , membrane - mediated association between c - rings of ATP synthase ( 15 ) , bR trimer - trimer ( 13 , 113 ) , and DNA - histone ( 60 , 94 ) ; ( d ) diffusion processes including OmpF reconstructed in lipids at high density ( 12 ) , porin trimers on a live bacterial cell surface ( 112 ) , defects in protein two - dimensional crystals ( 110 ) , and DNA - bound Rad54 ( 79 ) ; ( e ) molecular processes associated with enzymatic reactions including cellulase hydrolyzing cellulose ﬁbers ( 39 , 40 ) and DNA restriction - modiﬁcation enzymes ( 32 , 93 ) ; and ( f ) dynamics occurring with DNA www . annualreviews . org • High - Speed AFM for Filming Biomolecules 401 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 HMM : heavy meromyosin ( tail - truncated myosin ) origamis ( 22 , 23 , 80 , 96 , 107 ) . Below we give two examples of imaging studies of proteins in action to demonstrate the power of HS - AFM . Myosin V Walking on Actin Filament Double - headed myosin V ( M5 ) functions as a cargo transporter in cells ( reviewed in 83 ) and moves processively along an actin ﬁlament toward the plus end of the ﬁlament ( 56 , 77 ) in a hand - overhand manner with a 36 - nm advance ( 28 , 106 , 116 ) for every ATP hydrolysis cycle ( 78 ) . Hand - overhand means that the two heads step alternately , exchanging leading and trailing roles at each step , very much like walking . We visualized the walking molecules by HS - AFM ( 52 ) . Below , we describe an experimental setup for this visualization and what we can learn by closely looking at walking molecules . Selection of substrate surface . Partially biotinylated actin ﬁlaments were immobilized on the surface of PLB containing an electrically neutral phospholipid , a biotin lipid , and a positively charged lipid , through streptavidin with a low surface density . When the positively charged lipid was absent , tail - truncated M5 ( M5 - HMM ) was never bound to the surface and only interacted with the immobilized actin ﬁlaments to move unidirectionally . The velocity of the movement was identical to that measured by ﬂuorescence microscopy under the same buffer solution . However , most of the molecules were moving , orienting perpendicularly to the surface , so that their structure was not well resolved ( Figure 4 a ) . When a positively charged lipid was included in the bilayer at an appropriate density , we could observe the characteristic sideways topography of the molecules processively moving with ∼ 36 - nm steps at slightly lower velocity ( Figure 4 b ; Supplemental Movie 2 ) . However , we could not see detailed molecular behavior during a step because it was completed within a frame time ( 1 / 7 s ) . To slow down the step , streptavidin molecules were further placed on the substrate surface as moderate obstacles to the advance . This method allowed the visualization of stepping processes as shown in Figure 4 c , d ( see also Supplemental Movie 3 ) . No effect of tip - sample interaction on motor activity . When streptavidin molecules as mod - erate obstacles were absent , we could continuously track a moving molecule ( up to ∼ 20 steps ) by shifting the scan area manually , while observing the scanned images on a computer display ( Sup - plemental Movie 4 ) . The undegraded velocity of the observed movement for a long distance indicates no effect of the tip - sample interaction on the motor activity . Let us discuss this issue in a way different from that mentioned in Other Factors Limiting Feedback Frequency , above . In this imaging with a scan size of 150 × 75 nm 2 , at 7 fps , we used a cantilever having f c ≈ 1 MHz in water , k c ≈ 0 . 2 N / m , and Q c ≈ 2 in water . The oscillating cantilever tip therefore taps the sample surface 12 . 7 times per 1 × 1 nm 2 . As the two - dimensional size of the motor domain is roughly 5 × 5 nm 2 , the motor domain is tapped with the tip ∼ 320 times during one frame time ( 1 / 7 s ) and much more ( > 50 , 000 times ) during the successive imaging , clearly indicating no accumulation but quick dissipation of the energy given to the molecule by the tapping . In this imaging , the cantilever free oscillation amplitude A 0 and amplitude set point A s were set at ∼ 1nmand0 . 8 – 0 . 9 A s , respectively . Onaverage , theenergyoftheoscillatingcantileverdissipates after every tapping by 1 / 2 k c ( A 02 − A s2 ) / Q c = 2 . 3 – 4 . 4 k B T , where T is 300 K . Even when the oscillation energy is completely lost , its energy loss is only 24 k B T ( similar to the energy of ATP hydrolysis , ∼ 20 k B T ) . Even if the motor domain is mechanically excited by this amount of energy , the energy would quickly dissipate into many degrees of freedom including those of surrounding water molecules . Thus , so long as small free oscillation amplitude is used for a cantilever with 402 Ando · Uchihashi · Kodera Supplemental Material A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 b c d 50 nm 30 nm 30 nm 50 nm + end – end Streptavidin 1 2 3 e a + + + 147 ms 293 ms 440 ms 587 ms 734 ms 1 , 027 ms 1 , 320 ms 147 ms 2 , 201 ms 2 , 347 ms 3 , 814 ms 2 , 494 ms 3 , 374 ms 1 , 760 ms 1 , 614 ms 1 , 467 ms 1 , 320 ms 1 , 174 ms 147 ms 14 . 99 s 15 . 33 s + Figure 4 Walking tail - truncated myosin V ( M5 - HMM ) and unfolding of coiled - coil tail captured by high - speed atomic force microscopy ( HS - AFM ) . ( a ) Successive AFM images showing processive movement of M5 - HMM in 1 μ M ATP when positively charged lipid is absent on the planar lipid bilayer ( PLB ) surface . Frame rate , 7 fps . ( b ) Successive AFM images showing processive movement of M5 - HMM in 1 μ M ATP when positively charged lipid is present on the PLB surface . Arrows indicate the coiled - coil tail pointing to the minus end of actin . ( c ) Successive AFM images showing hand - overhand movement in 1 μ M ATP . The swinging lever is highlighted with a thin white line . ( d ) Schematic explaining the images in panel c . ( e ) Unfolding of the coiled - coil tail of two - headed bound M5 - HMM . Top image , before unfolding ; bottom image , after unfolding . The symbol “ + ” indicates the plus ends of actin ﬁlaments . The arrowheads show some of streptavidin molecules . Vertical dashed lines show the centers of mass of the motor domains . The frame rates used are 7 fps for panels a – c and 3 fps for panel e . The z - scales are 18 nm for panel a and 10 . 5 nm for panels b , c , and e . Adapted with permission from Reference 52 . www . annualreviews . org • High - Speed AFM for Filming Biomolecules 403 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 k c ≈ 0 . 2 N / m , the function of M5 - HMM ( and other proteins ) is not disturbed by the oscillating tip even when tapped many times . Spontaneous swing of leading head in hand - overhand movement . As shown in Figure 4 c and Supplemental Movie 3 , after trailing head detachment , the leading head appeared to spon - taneously rotate from the reverse arrowhead orientation toward the arrowhead orientation ( the term arrowhead originates from the conﬁguration of single - headed myosin bound to an actin ﬁlament in the rigor state ) . Before completing this rotation , the leading head brieﬂy halted by colliding with a streptavidin molecule placed in the way of its natural path , and the detached trailing head was most distant from the actin ﬁlament and slightly rotated around the neck - neck junction . Then , the leading head overcame the streptavidin blockade and completely rotated to the arrowhead orientation . Accompanied by this further rotation , the trailing head was bound to a forward site of the actin ﬁlament to become a new leading head , completing one step . Here , it was clearly revealed that before the completion of a step , the trailing head never interacted with actin but passively moved forward , driven by the rotating leading head . The rotation of the leading head is exactly the swinging lever arm motion proposed by Huxley ( 38 ) for the powerstroke of muscle myosin , a hypothesis that existed for a long time without clinching evidence . Foot stomp and unwinding of the coiled - coil tail . The seemingly spontaneous rotation of the leading head following trailing head detachment suggests that intramolecular tension for the advance has already existed in the two - headed bound molecule . In this bound state , the trailing headisinthearrowheadorientation , whichisnaturalatleastfortheADP - boundornucleotide - free head . Nevertheless , the leading head is not in the natural orientation ( i . e . , in the reverse arrowhead orientation ) and therefore pays an energy cost to generate the intramolecular tension , which is implied in the slightly curved appearance of the leading head . Upon trailing head detachment , the constraint keeping the bound leading head in the unnatural orientation is removed and hence the leading head spontaneously rotates forward , meaning that the bound leading head is in a strained prestroke state and that the lever arm swing is not accompanied by chemical transitions . Interestingly , duringthetwo - headedboundstateinATP , themotordomainoftheleadinghead frequently exhibited brief dissociation and reassociation on the same actin ﬁlament , whereas the molecule remained at approximately the same position on the ﬁlament ( Supplemental Movies 3 and 4 ) . Similarly , the motor domain of the trailing head exhibited a brief translocation by ∼ ± 5 nm along the actin ﬁlament . We termed these behaviors foot stomp . The foot stomp was observed more frequently at the leading head than at the trailing head ( approximately 3 : 1 ) . Although not well documented , a foot - stomp - like behavior was previously suggested in ﬂuorescence microscopy observations of walking myosin V molecules ( 89 , 95 ) . Thus , the foot stomp is an inherent behavior of myosin V . The foot stomp at the leading head seems to raise an important issue of the chemomechanical coupling in this motor . The brieﬂy detached leading head does not carry bound Pi because Pi release occurs immediately after the initial binding of the ADP – Pi - bound head to actin ( 21 ) . Nevertheless , the detached leading head with only ADP bound rebinds to actin still in the reverse arrowhead orientation , and then swings forward following trailing head detachment , indicating that tension generation for forward movement can occur without transitioning through an ADP – Pi - bound state . It can occur in the ADP - bound state . Thus , the tension generation for forward movement does not seem to require that chemical energy be supplied by ATP hydrolysis . During the two - headed bound state in ADP , the short coiled - coil tail was sometimes unwound , immediately after which the monomerized leading head rotated toward the arrowhead orientation , similar to the swinging lever arm ( Figure 4 e ) . Again , this unwinding suggests that the distortion 404 Ando · Uchihashi · Kodera Supplemental Material A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 of the actin - bound leading head , which does not require chemical energy , is the source of the intramolecular tension generation for forward movement . Mechanism of hand - overhand movement . The leading head of two - headed bound M5 - HMM was straight ( slightly curved outward ) in ADP or ATP , whereas it was often sharply bent in the nucleotide - free condition . Therefore , the conformation of the leading head indicates whether the leading head contains nucleotides . From AFM movies of actin - bound M5 - HMM in various concentrations of ADP , the ADP dissociation rate constant at the leading head was estimated to be 0 . 1 s − 1 . Thus , ADP is released from the leading head every 10 s , on average . However , M5 - HMM walks many steps for 10 s , meaning that ADP does not dissociate from the leading head . ADP dissociation , the subsequent ATP binding , and the resulting detachment from actin solely occur at the trailing head . This is the basis underlying the processive hand - overhand movement . This mechanism was inferred previously from various indirect experiments ( 27 , 70 , 73 , 75 , 78 , 102 ) but is now clearly and directly demonstrated by the HS - AFM observation . Rotary Catalysis of Rotorless F 1 - ATPase The α 3 β 3 γ subcomplex of F 1 - ATPase ( a part of ATP synthase ) is the minimum complex for the full ATPase activity . About half the length of the long γ subunit is inserted into the central cavity formed by a ring - shaped α 3 β 3 where three α subunits and three β subunits are arranged alternately ( 1 ) . Three ATP binding sites locate at the α - β interfaces , mainly in the β subunits . The α 3 β 3 γ subcomplex is a rotary motor ( 34 , 48 , 68 , 115 ) ( Figure 5 a ) . The γ subunit rotates in the stator α 3 β 3 ring driven by rotary hydrolysis of ATP at the three β subunits . The rotation occurs in the counterclockwise direction as viewed from the exposed side of the γ subunit ( or from the C - terminal side of α 3 β 3 ) . In the ATPase cycle , three β subunits take different chemical states : ATP - bound , ADP - bound , andnucleotide - free ( empty ) states ( 1 , 34 ) . Eachchemicalstatecyclically propagates over the three β subunits . Thus , there is strong cooperativity between β subunits . How is the cooperativity essential for torque generation to rotate the γ subunit engendered without direct contact between the β subunits ? In every instance , the β - γ interaction is different among the three β subunits because the γ subunit has no symmetry . In consideration of this fact , it was proposed that interactions with the γ subunit control the conformational and catalytic states of individual β subunits ( 105 ) . This idea was reinforced by studies showing that backward mechanical rotation of the γ subunit with external force reverses the chemical reaction toward ATP synthesis ( 42 , 74 ) , whereas forced forward rotation results in accelerated ATP binding ( 41 ) . This view was challenged by the ﬁnding that even when the γ subunit is shortened so that most γ - β interaction sites are abolished , the short γ subunit still rotates unidirectionally ( 30 , 62 ) . However , because single - molecule optical microscopy requires attachment of a probe to the γ subunit for the observation of rotary catalysis , it cannot examine whether the rotary catalysis ( hence , the cooperativity ) occurs with α 3 β 3 alone . This issue was solved by HS - AFM imaging of α 3 β 3 in ATP ( 99 ) , as described below . HS - AFM imaging of α 3 β 3 subcomplex . α 3 β 3 with Lys 7 - tags at the N termini of the β sub - units was covalently immobilized to a mica surface that was ﬁrst coated with 3 - aminopropyl - triethoxysilane and then treated with glutaraldehyde . An image of the C - terminal side of α 3 β 3 without nucleotide shows a pseudo - sixfold symmetric ring ( Figure 5 b ) . Each subunit has an up - wardly protruding portion at the inner top side of the ring , but these portions are higher at three alternately arranged subunits than at the other three . When this image was compared with a sim - ulated AFM image ( Figure 5 d ) constructed from a crystal structure of nucleotide - free α 3 β 3 ( PDB www . annualreviews . org • High - Speed AFM for Filming Biomolecules 405 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 c a h 9 . 3 nm 0 nm 8 . 5 nm 0 nm β E β E β E α E α E α E β E β TP β DP α DP α E α TP f α β β γ b 5 nm e d g 0 s β 1 β 3 β 2 0 . 56 s 1 . 44 s 1 . 68 s 2 . 24 s 2 . 32 s 5 nm z - scale z - scale Figure 5 Atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) images of the α 3 β 3 subcomplex at the C - terminal surface . ( a ) Schematic for F 1 - ATPase . ( b ) Averaged AFM image obtained in nucleotide - free condition . ( c ) The C - terminal surface of crystal structure of a nucleotide - free α 3 β 3 subcomplex . ( d ) Simulated AFM image of panel c . ( e ) Averaged AFM image obtained in 1 - mM AMP - PNP . ( f ) The C - terminal surface of crystal structure of an α 3 β 3 subcomplex obtained in ATP . ( g ) Simulated AFM image of panel f . ( h ) Successive AFM images showing counterclockwise rotary propagation of conformational change of an α 3 β 3 subcomplex at the C - terminal surface captured by high - speed AFM in the presence of 2 μ M ATP , at 12 . 5 fps . The red circle marks the highest pixel position in each image . The color scale placed at the right - hand side of panels b and e indicate the z - scale for the respective images . Adapted with permission from Reference 99 . 406 Ando · Uchihashi · Kodera A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 ID : 1SKY ) ( 88 ) ( Figure 5 c ) , the three subunits showing higher protrusions were identiﬁed as β subunits . In 1 mM AMP - PNP , the shape of α 3 β 3 became triangular and the central hole became obscure ( Figure 5 e ) . Only one subunit had a higher protrusion and an outwardly extended distal portion . This is very likely to be a β subunit . If so , two subunits whose distal parts are retracted toward the center are β subunits , in consideration of the alternate subunit arrangement . This assignment was conﬁrmed by the comparison of the AFM image and a simulated AFM image ( Figure 5 g ) constructed using a crystal structure of a nucleotide - bound α 3 β 3 γ subcomplex ( PDB ID : 1BMF ) ( 1 ) from which the γ subunit was removed ( Figure 5 f ) . In addition , it was clariﬁed that the β subunit with the highest protrusion and an extended distal portion is empty and that the two β subunits with retracted distal portions are nucleotide bound . When imaged in 2 – 4 μ M ATP at 12 . 5 fps , distinct conformational dynamics appeared at the β subunits ( Figure 5 h ; Supplemental Movie 5 ) . Each β subunit exhibited a conformational transition between the outwardly extended high state ( open , O , state ) and the retracted low state ( closed , C , state ) . Thefollowingprominentfeatureswereobserved : ( a ) Onlyone β subunitassumes the O state as in the presence of AMP - PNP , and ( b ) when the O - to - C transition occurs at one β subunit , the opposite C - to - O transition occurs simultaneously at its counterclockwise neighbor β subunit in most cases . Thus , the O conformation propagates counterclockwise ( Figure 5 h , red circles ) . The ATP hydrolysis rates at 2 , 3 , and 4 μ M ATP were in approximate agreement with the rates of conformational revolution at 2 , 3 , and 4 μ M ATP , respectively . These dynamic transitions indicate that the O - to - C transition occurs when ATP is bound to an empty β subunit and that the C - to - O transition occurs when an ADP - bound β subunit releases ADP . So , the empty , ADP - bound , and ATP - bound β subunits are arranged counterclockwise in this order , and therefore , the observed conformational propagation demonstrates rotary catalysis by the α 3 β 3 subcomplex . Thus , we reach the most important conclusion : The intrinsic coopera - tivity responsible for torque generation to rotate the γ subunit is elicited through β - β interplay alone and the γ subunit passively undergoes torque to rotate ( 99 ) . FUTURE CHALLENGES Asexempliﬁedbytheseimagingstudies , HS - AFMcanprovidehigh - resolutionmoviesofbiological molecules in action from which we can learn a great detail about how the molecules operate to function . However , current HS - AFM has the following limitations : ( a ) The scan range of the high - speed scanner is limited to 1 μ m , 4 μ m , and 1 μ m in the x - , y - , and z - directions , respectively , to achieve high resonant frequencies for fast scan , and ( b ) because the cantilever tip makes contact with the sample , very soft surfaces such as the membranes of live eukaryotic cells are largely deformed by the contact , which disables the visualization of molecules on such soft surfaces . Below , we describe ongoing and future endeavors to overcome these limitations . Wide - Area Observation and In Situ Imaging of Dynamic Processes The size of a wider - area scanner becomes larger , resulting in lower resonant frequencies and hence a lower highest - possible scan speed . This adverse effect has been recently removed by a simple inversion - based feedforward control technique ( 7 ) and by an enhanced iterative inverse control technique ( 54 , 114 ) . Therefore , even with a scanner capable of scanning over ∼ 40 × 40 μ m 2 , a line scan of ∼ 100 Hz is now possible without production of vibrations . However , because these inverse control techniques capable of extending the bandwidth cannot be applied to the z - scanner , www . annualreviews . org • High - Speed AFM for Filming Biomolecules 407 Supplemental Material A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 its bandwidth is still limited . Nonetheless , a large sample such as a live eukaryotic cell can now be imaged within ∼ 60 s when a relatively small number of scan lines ( ∼ 200 ) are used . After taking a whole topography image of a large biological sample , we can image molecules in a local area of interest on the sample surface when the surface is relatively rigid . For example , it is possible to observe dynamics of molecules on the surfaces of live bacterial cells , intracellular organelles ( such as mitochondria and nuclei ) , and small structures such as neuronal spines . In fact , in situ visualization of porin trimers moving on the outer surface of a live magnetic bacterium was recently accomplished ( 112 ) . Such in situ dynamic molecular imaging will have a great impact on cell biology because dynamic molecularprocessesoccurringonthese surfacesare largely unknown . Faster Wide - Area Observation and Dynamic Imaging of Cell Morphology For the imaging of a whole cell , many - pixel images with single - nanometer resolution are unneces - sary . Nonetheless , in the tapping mode , the feedback operation has to be continuously performed for a huge number of points on the surface ; thus , it takes a long time to image a whole cell . This situation can be improved by the use of a different operation mode employed by scanning ion con - ductance microscopy ( SICM ) . This mode , called AC mode ( 71 ) , pulse mode ( 36 , 55 ) , or hopping mode ( 69 ) , has been devised to avoid probe - sample collision ; a probe ( glass capillary ) is moved up and down during lateral scanning of the sample stage . Therefore , the feedback operation is discretely carried out only at lateral positions where the sample height information is acquired . Its imaging acquisition time is given by the number of pixels contained in an image divided by the up - and - down frequency f ud . With f ud = 20 kHz , a 50 × 50 μ m 2 image with 250 × 250 pixels can be acquired within approximately 3 s . The resonant frequency of commercially available stack piezoactuators displaceable up to 10 μ m is approximately 30 kHz when their ends on one side are ﬁxed . Therefore , this image acquisition time is realistic as far as the sample stage can be quickly retracted upon tip - sample contact . High - Speed Noncontact Imaging A noncontact condition is mandatory for visualizing molecules on the extremely soft surfaces of eukaryotic cells . SICM has already achieved this condition ( 16 , 35 ) . With the use of very sharp glass capillaries with a small pore at the apex , the spatial resolution of SICM has reached a few nanometers ( 117 ) . Immobile protein molecules with a size of ∼ 14 nm in live cell membranes have been successfully imaged ( 84 ) . Moreover , not only imaging but also smart electrophysiological measurements are possible with SICM ( 59 ) . However , the bandwidth of ion conductivity detection islow , becauseofthehighimpedancetoioniccurrentthroughthesmallporeofacapillaryelectrode and because of slow ionic currents . But , there is a possibility of increasing the bandwidth . Scanning tunnelingmicroscopyalsohasahighimpedance ( hencealowbandwidth ) problembutithasalready been overcome by a circuitry technique ( 45 ) . The slow ionic current problem can be solved by the positioning of the counter - electrode close to the capillary end . Noncontact AFM called solution - vibration AFM is currently being developed by the Ando group . The sample stage is vibrated at a high frequency ( 1 – 3 MHz ) with small amplitude , which in turn vibrates the sample solution placed on the top of the sample stage . Although the vibrations are transmitted to a place far from the sample surface , only solution vibrations at places in close proximity to the sample surface are affected by the presence of the sample . In fact , when the tip end was close to the surface of a polystyrene bead with a diameter of 150 nm ( at a distance of < 50 nm ) , the bead was visualized clearly by the phase detection of the cantilever vibrations ( H . Watanabe , T . Saito & T . Ando , unpublished result ) . 408 Ando · Uchihashi · Kodera A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 SUMMARY POINTS 1 . UsingHS - AFM , wecandirectlyobservethestructuredynamicsanddynamicprocessesof biomolecules , at subsecond to sub - 100 - ms temporal and submolecular spatial resolution , without disturbing their function . 2 . Visualized dynamic images of biomolecules can provide information inaccessible with other approaches , giving great insight into how the molecules function . 3 . Dynamics of molecules that appear in AFM movies can be interpreted straightforwardly without intricate analyses and interpretations , making it possible to attain ﬁrm conclu - sions . 4 . In situ dynamic imaging of biomolecules is now becoming possible . 5 . HS - AFM will transform structural biology and single - molecule biophysics . DISCLOSURE STATEMENT The authors are not aware of any afﬁliations , memberships , funding , or ﬁnancial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by Japan Science and Technology Agency ( Project of Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology ) , Grant - in - Aid for Basic Research ( S ) from Japan Society for the Promotion of Science ( 20221006 and 24227005 ) , and Ministry of Education , Culture , Sports , Science and Technology Japan ( Knowledge Cluster Initiative Project ) . LITERATURE CITED 1 . Abrahams JP , Leslie AG , Lutter R , Walker JE . 1994 . Structure at 2 . 8 ˚A resolution of F 1 - ATPase from bovine heart mitochondria . Nature 370 : 621 – 28 2 . Albrecht TR , Gr¨utter P , Horne D , Rugar D . 1991 . Frequency modulation detection using high - Q cantilevers for enhanced force microscope sensitivity . J . Appl . Phys . 69 : 668 – 73 3 . Reviews various bioimaging studies by high - speed AFM . 3 . Ando T . 2012 . High - speed atomic force microscopy coming of age . Nanotechnology 23 : 062001 4 . Ando T , Kodera N , Maruyama D , Takai E , Saito K , et al . 2002 . A high - speed atomic force microscope for studying biological macromolecules in action . Jpn . J . Appl . Phys . 41 : 4851 – 56 5 . Presents ﬁrst high - speed AFM , capturing moving protein molecules at 12 . 5 fps . 5 . Ando T , Kodera N , Takai E , Maruyama D , Saito K , et al . 2001 . A high - speed atomic force microscope for studying biological macromolecules . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 : 12468 – 72 6 . Ando T , Uchihashi T . 2012 . High - speed AFM and imaging of biomolecular processes . In Nanoscale Liquid Interfaces : Wetting , Patterning and Force Microscopy at Molecular Scale , ed . T Ondarc¸uhu , JP Aim´e , pp . 711 – 40 . Singapore : Pan Stanford Publ . 7 . Extensively reviews various techniques leading to the establishment of high - speed AFM for biological studies . 7 . Ando T , Uchihashi T , Fukuma T . 2008 . High - speed atomic force microscopy for nano - visualization of dynamic biomolecular processes . Prog . Surf . Sci . 83 : 337 – 437 8 . Ando T , Uchihashi T , Kodera N , Miyagi A , Nakakita R , et al . 2005 . High - speed AFM for studying the dynamic behavior of protein molecules at work . e - J . Surf . Sci . Nanotechnol . 3 : 384 – 92 9 . AndoT , UchihashiT , KoderaN , MiyagiA , NakakitaR , etal . 2006 . High - speedatomicforcemicroscopy for studying the dynamic behavior of protein molecules at work . Jpn . J . Appl . Phys . 45 : 1897 – 903 10 . Binnig G , Quate CF , Gerber C . 1986 . Atomic force microscope . Phys . Rev . Lett . 56 : 930 – 33 11 . Blankenburg R , Meller P , Ringsdorf H , Salesse C . 1989 . Interaction between biotin lipids and strepta - vidin in monolayers : formation of oriented two - dimensional protein domains induced by surface recog - nition . Biochemistry 28 : 214 – 21 www . annualreviews . org • High - Speed AFM for Filming Biomolecules 409 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 12 . Casuso I , Khao J , Chami M , Paul - Gilloteaux P , Husain M , et al . 2012 . Characterization of the motion of membrane proteins using high - speed atomic force microscopy . Nat . Nanotechnol . 7 : 525 – 29 13 . Casuso I , Kodera N , Le Grimellec C , Ando T , Scheuring S . 2009 . High - resolution high - speed contact mode atomic force microscopy movies of purple membrane . Biophys . J . 97 : 1354 – 61 14 . Casuso I , Rico F , Scheuring S . 2011 . High - speed atomic force microscopy : structure and dynamics of single proteins . Curr . Opin . Chem . Biol . 15 : 704 – 9 15 . Casuso I , Sens P , Rico F , Scheuring S . 2010 . Experimental evidence for membrane - mediated protein - protein interaction . Biophys . J . 99 : L47 – 49 16 . Chen C - C , Zhou Y , Baker LA . 2012 . Scanning ion conductance microscopy . Annu . Rev . Anal . Chem . 5 : 207 – 28 17 . Costa LT , Pinto JR , Moraes MB , de Souza GGB , Sorenson MM , et al . 2004 . Chemical treatment of mica for atomic force microscopy can affect biological sample conformation . Biophys . Chem . 109 : 63 – 71 18 . Czajkowsky DM , Shao Z . 2003 . Inhibition of protein adsorption to muscovite mica by monovalent cations . J . Microsc . 211 : 1 – 7 19 . Dague E , Alsteens D , Latg´e J - P , Verbelen C , Raze D , et al . 2007 . Chemical force microscopy of single live cells . Nano Lett . 7 : 3026 – 30 20 . Darst SA , Ahlers M , Meller PH , Kubalek EW , Blankenburg R , et al . 1991 . Two - dimensional crystals of streptavidin on biotinylated lipid layers and their interactions with biotinylated macromolecules . Biophys . J . 59 : 387 – 96 21 . De La Cruz EM , Wells AL , Rosenfeld SS , Ostap EM , Sweeney HL . 1999 . The kinetic mechanism of myosin V . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 : 13726 – 31 22 . Endo M , Hidaka K , Sugiyama H . 2011 . Direct AFM observation of an opening event of a DNA cuboid constructed via a prism structure . Org . Biomol . Chem . 9 : 2075 – 77 23 . Endo M , Katsuda Y , Hidaka K , Sugiyama H . 2010 . Regulation of DNA methylation using different tensions of double strands constructed in a deﬁned DNA nanostructure . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 132 : 1592 – 97 24 . Fantner GE , Hegarty P , Kindt JK , Schitter G , Cidade GAG , et al . 2005 . Data acquisition system for high speed atomic force microscopy . Rev . Sci . Instrum . 76 : 026118 25 . Fantner GE , Schitter G , Kindt JH , Ivanov T , Ivanova K , et al . 2006 . Components for high speed atomic force microscopy . Ultramicroscopy 106 : 881 – 87 26 . Fernandez JM , Li H . 2004 . Force - clamp spectroscopy monitors the folding trajectory of a single protein . Science 303 : 1674 – 78 27 . Forgacs E , Cartwright S , Sakamoto T , Sellers JR , Corrie JE , et al . 2008 . Kinetics of ADP dissociation from the trail and lead heads of actomyosin V following the power stroke . J . Biol . Chem . 283 : 766 – 73 28 . Forkey JN , Quinlan ME , Shaw MA , Corrier JET , Goldman YE . 2003 . Three - dimensional structural dynamics of myosin V by single - molecule ﬂuorescence polarization . Nature 422 : 399 – 404 29 . Fukuma T , Okazaki Y , Kodera N , Uchihashi T , Ando T . 2008 . High resonance frequency force micro - scope scanner using inertia balance support . Appl . Phys . Lett . 92 : 243119 30 . Furuike S , Hossain MD , Maki Y , Adachi K , Suzuki T , et al . 2008 . Axle - less F 1 - ATPase rotates in the correct direction . Science 319 : 955 – 58 31 . Gan Y . 2009 . Atomic and subnanometer resolution in ambient conditions by atomic force microscopy . Surf . Sci . Rep . 64 : 99 – 121 32 . Gilmore JL , Suzuki Y , Tamulaitis G , Siksnys V , Takeyasu K , et al . 2009 . Single - molecule dynamics of the DNA − Eco RII protein complexes revealed with high - speed atomic force microscopy . Biochemistry 48 : 10492 – 98 33 . Giocondi M - C , Yamamoto D , Lesniewska E , Milhiet P - E , Ando T , et al . 2010 . Surface topography of membrane domains . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1798 : 703 – 18 34 . Gresser MJ , Myers JA , Boyer PD . 1982 . Catalytic site cooperativity of beef heart mitochondrial F 1 adenosine triphosphatase . Correlations of initial velocity , bound intermediate , and oxygen exchange measurements with an alternating three - site model . J . Biol . Chem . 257 : 12030 – 38 35 . Hansma PK , Drake B , Marti O , Gould SA , Prater CB . 1989 . The scanning ion - conductance microscope . Science 243 : 641 – 43 36 . Happel P , Hoffmann G , Mann SA , Dietzel ID . 2003 . Monitoring cell movements and volume changes with pulse - mode scanning ion conductance microscopy . J . Microsc . 212 : 144 – 51 410 Ando · Uchihashi · Kodera A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 37 . Hinterdorfer P , Dufrˆene YF . 2006 . Detection and localization of single molecular recognition events using atomic force microscopy . Nat . Methods 3 : 347 – 55 38 . Huxley HE . 1969 . The mechanism of muscular contraction . Science 164 : 1356 – 66 39 . Igarashi K , Koivula A , Wada M , Kimura S , Penttil¨a M , Samejima M . 2009 . High speed atomic force mi - croscopyvisualizesprocessivemovementof Trichodermareesei cellobiohydrolaseIoncrystallinecellulose . J . Biol . Chem . 284 : 36186 – 90 40 . Igarashi K , Uchihashi T , Koivula A , Wada M , Kimura S , et al . 2011 . Trafﬁc jams reduce hydrolytic efﬁciency of cellulase on cellulose surface . Science 333 : 1279 – 82 41 . Iko Y , Tabata KV , Sakakihara S , Nakashima T , Noji H . 2009 . Acceleration of the ATP - binding rate of F 1 - ATPase by forcible forward rotation . FEBS Lett . 583 : 3187 – 91 42 . Itoh H , Takahashi A , Adachi K , Noji H , Yasuda R , et al . 2004 . Mechanically driven ATP synthesis by F 1 - ATPase . Nature 427 : 465 – 68 43 . Jonkheijm P , Weinrich D , Schr¨oder H , Niemeyer CM , Waldmann H . 2008 . Chemical strategies for generating protein biochips . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 47 : 9618 – 47 44 . Katan AJ , Dekker C . 2011 . Leading edge , minireview : high - speed AFM reveals the dynamics of single biomolecules at the nanometer scale . Cell 147 : 979 – 82 45 . Kemiktarak U , Ndukum T , Schwab KC , Ekinci KL . 2007 . Radio - frequency scanning tunneling mi - croscopy . Nature 450 : 85 – 88 46 . Kim J , Kim G , Cremer PS . 2001 . Investigations of water structure at the solid / liquid interface in the presence of supported lipid bilayers by vibrational sum frequency spectroscopy . Langmuir 17 : 7255 – 60 47 . Kindt JH , Fantner GE , Cutroni JA , Hansma PK . 2004 . Rigid design of fast scanning probe microscopes using ﬁnite element analysis . Ultramicroscopy 100 : 259 – 65 48 . Kinosita K Jr , Adachi K , Itoh H . 2004 . Rotation of F 1 - ATPase : how an ATP - driven molecular machine may work . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 33 : 245 – 68 49 . Kitazawa M , Ohta R , Okita T , Tanaka J , Tanemura M . 2007 . Mechanical properties of single carbon nanoﬁbers grown on tips of scanning probe microscopy cantilevers by ion irradiation . Jpn . J . Appl . Phys . 46 : 6324 – 28 50 . Kitazawa M , Shiotani K , Toda A . 2003 . Batch fabrication of sharpened silicon nitride tips . Jpn . J . Appl . Phys . 42 : 4844 – 47 51 . Presents a new feedback controller that solves the difﬁcult parachuting problem . 51 . Kodera N , Sakashita M , Ando T . 2006 . Dynamic proportional - integral - differential controller for high - speed atomic force microscopy . Rev . Sci . Instrum . 77 : 083704 52 . Presents astonishing AFM movies of myosin V walking on actin ﬁlament . 52 . Kodera N , Yamamoto D , Ishikawa R , Ando T . 2010 . Video imaging of walking myosin V by high - speed atomic force microscopy . Nature 468 : 72 – 76 53 . Kodera N , Yamashita H , Ando T . 2005 . Active damping of the scanner for high - speed atomic force microscopy . Rev . Sci . Instrum . 76 : 053708 54 . Li Y , Bechhoefer J . 2009 . Model - free iterative control of repetitive dynamics for high - speed scanning in atomic force microscopy . Rev . Sci . Instrum . 80 : 013702 55 . Mann SA , Hoffmann G , Hengstenberg A , Schuhmann W , Dietzel ID . 2002 . Pulse - mode scanning ion conductance microscopy—a method to investigate cultured hippocampal cells . J . Neurosci . Methods 116 : 113 – 17 56 . MehtaAD , RockRS , RiefM , SpudichJA , MoosekerMS , etal . 1999 . Myosin - Visaprocessiveactin - based motor . Nature 400 : 590 – 93 57 . Milhiet PE , Yamamoto D , Berthoumieu O , Dosset P , Le Grimellec C , et al . 2010 . Deciphering the structure , growth and assembly of amyloid - like ﬁbrils using high - speed atomic force microscopy . PLoS ONE 5 : e13240 58 . Mingeot - Leclercq M - P , Deleu M , Brasseur R , Dufrˆene YF . 2008 . Atomic force microscopy of supported lipid bilayers . Nat . Protoc . 3 : 1654 – 59 59 . Miragoli M , Moshkov A , Novak P , Shevchuk A , Nikolaev VO , et al . 2011 . Scanning ion conductance mi - croscopy : a convergent high - resolution technology for multi - parametric analysis of living cardiovascular cells . J . R . Soc . Interface 8 : 913 – 25 60 . MiyagiA , AndoT , LyubchenkoYL . 2011 . Dynamicsofnucleosomesassessedwithtime - lapsehigh - speed atomic force microscopy . Biochemistry 50 : 7901 – 8 www . annualreviews . org • High - Speed AFM for Filming Biomolecules 411 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 61 . Miyagi A , Tsunaka Y , Uchihashi T , Mayanagi K , Hirose S , et al . 2008 . Visualization of intrinsically disordered regions of proteins by high - speed atomic force microscopy . Chem . Phys . Chem . 9 : 1859 – 66 62 . Mnatsakanyan N , Krishnakumar AM , Suzuki T , Weber J . 2009 . The role of the β DELSEED - loop of ATP synthase . J . Biol . Chem . 284 : 11336 – 45 63 . Moreno - Herrero F , Colchero F , G´omez - Herrero J , Bar´o AM . 2004 . Atomic force microscopy contact , tapping , and jumping modes for imaging biological samples in liquids . Phys . Rev . E 69 : 031915 64 . M¨uller DJ , Dufrˆene YF . 2008 . Atomic force microscopy as a multifunctional molecular toolbox in nanobiotechnology . Nat . Nanotechnol . 3 : 261 – 69 65 . M¨uller DJ , Helenius J , Alsteens D , Dufrˆene YF . 2009 . Force probing surfaces of living cells to molecular resolution . Nat . Chem . Biol . 5 : 383 – 90 66 . M¨uller DJ , Janovjak H , Lehto T , Kuerschner L , Anderson K . 2002 . Observing structure , function and assembly of single proteins by AFM . Prog . Biophys . Mol . Biol . 79 : 1 – 43 67 . Nakajima H , Kunioka Y , Nakano K , Shimizu K , Seto M , et al . 1997 . Scanning force microscopy of the interaction events between a single molecule of heavy meromyosin and actin . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 234 : 178 – 82 68 . Noji H , Yasuda R , Yoshida M , Kinosita K Jr . 1997 . Direct observation of the rotation of F 1 - ATPase . Nature 386 : 299 – 302 69 . Novak P , Li C , Shevchuk AI , Stepanyan R , Caldwell M , et al . 2009 . Nanoscale live - cell imaging using hopping probe ion conductance microscopy . Nat . Methods 6 : 279 – 81 70 . Oguchi Y , Mikhailenko SV , Ohki T , Olivares AO , De La Cruz EM , Ishiwata S . 2008 . Load - dependent ADP binding to myosins V and VI : implications for subunit coordination and function . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 : 7714 – 19 71 . Pastr´e D , Iwamoto H , Liu J , Szabo G , Shao Z . 2001 . Characterization of AC mode scanning ion - conductance microscopy . Ultramicroscopy 90 : 13 – 19 72 . Pastr´e D , Pi´etrement O , Fusil S , Landousy F , Jeusset J , et al . 2003 . Adsorption of DNA to mica mediated by divalent counterions : a theoretical and experimental study . Biophys . J . 85 : 2507 – 18 73 . Purcell TJ , Sweeney HL , Spudich JA . 2005 . A force - dependent state controls the coordination of pro - cessive myosin V . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 : 13873 – 78 74 . Rondelez Y , Tresset G , Nakashima T , Kato - Yamada Y , Fujita H , et al . 2005 . Highly coupled ATP synthesis by F 1 - ATPase single molecules . Nature 433 : 773 – 77 75 . Rosenfeld SS , Sweeney HL . 2004 . A model of myosin V processivity . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 40100 – 11 76 . Sackmann E . 1996 . Supported membranes : scientiﬁc and practical applications . Science 271 : 43 – 48 77 . Sakamoto T , Amitani I , Yokota E , Ando T . 2000 . Direct observation of processive movement by indi - vidual myosin V molecules . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 272 : 586 – 90 78 . Sakamoto T , Webb MR , Forgacs E , White HD , Sellers JR . 2008 . Direct observation of the mechanochemical coupling in myosin Va during processive movement . Nature 455 : 128 – 32 79 . Sanchez H , Suzuki Y , Yokokawa M , Takeyasu K , Wyman C . 2011 . Protein - DNA interactions in high speed AFM : single molecule diffusion analysis of human RAD54 . Integr . Biol . 3 : 1127 – 34 80 . Sannohe Y , Endo M , Katsuda Y , Hidaka K , Sugiyama H . 2010 . Visualization of dynamic conformational switching of the G - quadruplex in a DNA nanostructure . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 132 : 16311 – 13 81 . Scheuring S , Fotiadis D , M¨oller C , M¨uller SA , Engel A , et al . 2001 . Single proteins observed by atomic force microscopy . Single Mol . 2 : 59 – 67 82 . Scheuring S , Sturgis JN . 2005 . Chromatic adaptation of photosynthetic membranes . Science 309 : 484 – 87 83 . Sellers JR , Weisman LS . 2008 . Myosin V . In Myosins : A Superfamily of Molecular Motors , Vol . 7 : Proteins and Cell Regulation , ed . LM Coluccio , pp . 289 – 323 . Berlin : Springer . 482 pp . 84 . Shevchuk AI , Frolenkov GI , Sanchez D , James PS , Freedman N , et al . 2006 . Imaging proteins in mem - branes of living cells by high - resolution scanning ion conductance microscopy . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 45 : 2212 – 16 85 . Shibata M , Uchihashi T , Yamashita H , Kandori H , Ando T . 2011 . Structural changes in bacteri - orhodopsininresponsetoalternateilluminationobservedbyhigh - speedatomicforcemicroscopy . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 50 : 4410 – 13 412 Ando · Uchihashi · Kodera A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 86 . Presents AFM movies showing bR in response to light and cooperativity by bR - bR interactions . 86 . Shibata M , Yamashita H , Uchihashi T , Kandori H , Ando T . 2010 . High - speed atomic force microscopy shows dynamic molecular processes in photo - activated bacteriorhodopsin . Nat . Nanotechnol . 5 : 208 – 12 87 . ShinozakiY , SumitomoK , TsudaM , KoizumiS , InoueK , etal . 2009 . DirectobservationofATP - induced conformational changes in single P2X 4 receptors . PLoS Biol . 7 : e1000103 88 . Shirakihara Y , Leslie AG , Abrahams JP , Walker JE , Ueda T , et al . 1997 . The crystal structure of the nucleotide - free α 3 β 3 subcomplex of F 1 - ATPase from the thermophilic Bacillus PS3 is a symmetric trimer . Structure 5 : 825 – 36 89 . Shiroguchi K , Kinosita K Jr . 2007 . Myosin V walks by lever action and Brownian motion . Science 316 : 1208 – 12 90 . Stewart MP , Helenius J , Toyoda Y , Ramanathan SP , M¨uller DJ , et al . 2011 . Hydrostatic pressure and the actomyosin cortex drive mitotic cell rounding . Nature 469 : 226 – 30 91 . Stroh C , Wang H , Bash R , Ashcroft B , Nelson J , et al . 2004 . Single - molecule recognition imaging microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 : 12503 – 7 92 . Sulchek T , Yaralioglu GG , Quate CF , Minne SC . 2002 . Characterization and optimization of scan speed for tapping - mode atomic force microscopy . Rev . Sci . Instrum . 73 : 2928 – 36 93 . Suzuki Y , Gilmore JL , Yoshimura SH , Henderson RM , Lyubchenko YL , et al . 2011 . Visual analysis of concerted cleavage by type IIF restriction enzyme SﬁI in subsecond time region . Biophys . J . 101 : 2992 – 98 94 . Suzuki Y , Higuchi Y , Hizume K , Yokokawa M , Yoshimura SH , et al . 2010 . Molecular dynamics of DNA and nucleosomes in solution studied by fast - scanning atomic force microscopy . Ultramicroscopy 110 : 682 – 88 95 . Syed S , Snyder GE , Franzini - Armstrong C , Selvin PR , Goldman YE . 2006 . Adaptability of myosin V studied by simultaneous detection of position and orientation . EMBO J . 25 : 1795 – 803 96 . Tanaka F , Mochizuki T , Liang X , Asanuma H , Tanaka S , et al . 2010 . Robust and photocontrollable DNA capsules using azobenzenes . Nano Lett . 10 : 3560 – 65 97 . Tanemura M , Okita T , Yamauchi H , Tanemura S , Morishima R . 2004 . Room - temperature growth of a carbon nanoﬁber on the tip of conical carbon protrusions . Appl . Phys . Lett . 84 : 3831 – 33 98 . Touhami A , Nysten B , Dufrˆene YF . 2003 . Nanoscale mapping of the elasticity of microbial cells by atomic force microscopy . Langmuir 19 : 4539 – 43 99 . Presents AFM movies showing rotary propagation of conformational changes of rotorless F 1 - ATPase . 99 . Uchihashi T , Iino R , Ando T , Noji H . 2011 . High - speed atomic force microscopy reveals rotary catalysis of rotorless F 1 - ATPase . Science 333 : 755 – 58 100 . Uchihashi T , Kodera N , Ando T . 2012 . Guide to video recording of structure dynamics and dynamic processes of proteins by high - speed atomic force microscopy . Nat . Protoc . 7 : 1193 – 206 101 . Uchihashi T , Yamashita H , Ando T . 2006 . Fast phase imaging in liquids using a rapid scan atomic force microscope . Appl . Phys . Lett . 89 : 213112 102 . Veigel C , Schmitz S , Wang F , Sellers JR . 2005 . Load - dependent kinetics of myosin - V can explain its high processivity . Nat . Cell . Biol . 7 : 861 – 69 103 . Viani MB , Pietrasanta LI , Thompson JB , Chand A , Gebeshuber IC , et al . 2000 . Probing protein – protein interactions in real time . Nat . Struct . Biol . 7 : 644 – 47 104 . Viani MB , Sch¨affer TE , Paloczi GT , Pietrasanta LI , Smith BL , et al . 1999 . Fast imaging and fast force spectroscopy of single biopolymers with a new atomic force microscope designed for small cantilevers . Rev . Sci . Instrum . 70 : 4300 105 . Wang H , Oster G . 1998 . Energy transduction in the F 1 motor of ATP synthase . Nature 396 : 279 – 82 106 . Warshaw DM , Kennedy GG , Work SS , Krementsova EB , Beck S , et al . 2005 . Differential labeling of myosin V heads with quantum dots allows direct visualization of hand - over - hand processivity . Biophys . J . 88 : L30 – 32 107 . Wickham FJS , Endo M , Katsuda Y , Hidaka K , Bath J , et al . 2011 . Direct observation of stepwise movement of a synthetic molecular transporter . Nat . Nanotechnol . 6 : 166 – 69 108 . Williams M , Fowler SB , Robert B , Best RB , Toca - Herrera JL , et al . 2003 . Hidden complexity in the mechanical properties of titin . Nature 422 : 446 – 49 109 . Yamamoto D , Nagura N , Omote S , Taniguchi M , Ando T . 2009 . Streptavidin 2D crystal substrates for visualizing biomolecular processes by atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . 97 : 2358 – 67 www . annualreviews . org • High - Speed AFM for Filming Biomolecules 413 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH17 - Ando ARI 3 April 2013 15 : 19 110 . Yamamoto D , Uchihashi T , Kodera N , Ando T . 2008 . Anisotropic diffusion of point defects in a two - dimensional crystal of streptavidin observed by high - speed atomic force microscopy . Nanotechnology 19 : 384009 111 . Yamamoto D , Uchihashi T , Kodera N , Yamashita H , Nishikori S , et al . 2010 . High - speed atomic force microscopy techniques for observing dynamic biomolecular processes . Methods Enzymol . 457 : B541 – 44 112 . Yamashita H , Taoka A , Uchihashi T , Asano T , Ando T , et al . 2012 . Single molecule imaging on living bacterial cell surface by high - speed AFM . J . Mol . Biol . 422 : 300 – 9 113 . Yamashita H , Vo¨ıtchovsky K , Uchihashi T , Antoranz Contera S , Ryan JF , et al . 2009 . Dynamics of bacteriorhodopsin 2D crystal observed by high - speed atomic force microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 167 : 153 – 58 114 . Yan Y , Wu Y , Zou Q , Su C . 2008 . An integrated approach to piezoactuator positioning in high - speed atomic force microscope imaging . Rev . Sci . Instrum . 79 : 073704 115 . Yasuda R , Noji H , Kinosita K Jr , Yoshida M . 1998 . F 1 - ATPase is a highly efﬁcient molecular motor that rotates with discrete 120 ◦ steps . Cell 93 : 1117 – 24 116 . Yildiz A , Forkey JN , McKinney SA , Ha T , Goldman YE , et al . 2003 . Myosin V walks hand - over - hand : single ﬂuorophore imaging with 1 . 5 - nm localization . Science 300 : 2061 – 65 117 . Ying L , Bruckbauer A , Zhou D , Gorelik J , Shevchuk A , et al . 2005 . The scanned nanopipette : a new tool for high resolution bioimaging and controlled deposition of biomolecules . Phys . Chem . Chem . Phys . 7 : 2859 – 66 118 . Yokokawa M , Takeyasu K . 2011 . Motion of the Ca 2 + - pump captured . FEBS J . 278 : 3025 – 31 119 . Yokokawa M , Wada C , Ando T , Sakai N , Yagi A , et al . 2006 . Fast - scanning atomic force microscopy reveals the ATP / ADP - dependent conformational changes of GroEL . EMBO J . 25 : 4567 – 76 120 . Zhong Q , Inniss D , Kjoller K , Elings VB . 1993 . Fractured polymer / silica ﬁber surface studied by tapping mode atomic force microscopy . Surf . Sci . 290 : L688 – 92 414 Ando · Uchihashi · Kodera A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42 - Frontmatter ARI 13 April 2013 7 : 12 Annual Review of Biophysics Volume 42 , 2013 Contents Doing Molecular Biophysics : Finding , Naming , and Picturing Signal Within Complexity Jane S . Richardson and David C . Richardson (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 1 Structural Biology of the Proteasome Erik Kish - Trier and Christopher P . Hill (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 29 Common Folds and Transport Mechanisms of Secondary Active Transporters Yigong Shi (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 51 Coarse - Graining Methods for Computational Biology Marissa G . Saunders and Gregory A . Voth (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 73 Electrophysiological Characterization of Membrane Transport Proteins Christof Grewer , Armanda Gameiro , Thomas Mager , and Klaus Fendler (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 95 Entropy - Enthalpy Compensation : Role and Ramiﬁcations in Biomolecular Ligand Recognition and Design John D . Chodera and David L . Mobley (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 121 Molecular Mechanisms of Drug Action : An Emerging View James M . Sonner and Robert S . Cantor (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 143 The Underappreciated Role of Allostery in the Cellular Network Ruth Nussinov , Chung - Jung Tsai , and Buyong Ma (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 169 Structural Insights into the Evolution of the Adaptive Immune System Lu Deng , Ming Luo , Alejandro Velikovsky , and Roy A . Mariuzza (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 191 Molecular Mechanisms of RNA Interference Ross C . Wilson and Jennifer A . Doudna (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 217 Molecular Trafﬁc Jams on DNA Ilya J . Finkelstein and Eric C . Greene (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 241 vii A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42 - Frontmatter ARI 13 April 2013 7 : 12 Advances , Interactions , and Future Developments in the CNS , Phenix , and Rosetta Structural Biology Software Systems Paul D . Adams , David Baker , Axel T . Brunger , Rhiju Das , Frank DiMaio , Randy J . Read , David C . Richardson , Jane S . Richardson , and Thomas C . Terwilliger (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 265 Considering Protonation as a Posttranslational Modiﬁcation Regulating Protein Structure and Function Andr´e Sch¨onichen , Bradley A . Webb , Matthew P . Jacobson , and Diane L . Barber (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 289 Energy Functions in De Novo Protein Design : Current Challenges and Future Prospects Zhixiu Li , Yuedong Yang , Jian Zhan , Liang Dai , and Yaoqi Zhou (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 315 Quantitative Modeling of Bacterial Chemotaxis : Signal Ampliﬁcation and Accurate Adaptation Yuhai Tu (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 337 Inﬂuences of Membrane Mimetic Environments on Membrane Protein Structures Huan - Xiang Zhou and Timothy A . Cross (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 361 High - Speed AFM and Applications to Biomolecular Systems Toshio Ando , Takayuki Uchihashi , and Noriyuki Kodera (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 393 Super - Resolution in Solution X - Ray Scattering and Its Applications to Structural Systems Biology Robert P . Rambo and John A . Tainer (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 415 Molecular Basis of NF - κ B Signaling Johanna Napetschnig and Hao Wu (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 443 Regulation of Noise in Gene Expression Alvaro Sanchez , Sandeep Choubey , and Jane Kondev (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 469 Evolution in Microbes Edo Kussell (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 493 Protein Structure Determination by Magic - Angle Spinning Solid - State NMR , and Insights into the Formation , Structure , and Stability of Amyloid Fibrils Gemma Comellas and Chad M . Rienstra (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 515 Structural Studies of RNase P Alfonso Mondrag´on (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 537 On the Universe of Protein Folds Rachel Kolodny , Leonid Pereyaslavets , Abraham O . Samson , and Michael Levitt (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 559 viii Contents A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42 - Frontmatter ARI 13 April 2013 7 : 12 Torque Measurement at the Single - Molecule Level Scott Forth , Maxim Y . Sheinin , James Inman , and Michelle D . Wang (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 583 Modeling Gene Expression in Time and Space Pau Ru´e and Jordi Garcia - Ojalvo (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 605 Mechanics of Dynamin - Mediated Membrane Fission Sandrine Morlot and Aur´elien Roux (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 629 Nanoconﬁnement and the Strength of Biopolymers Tristan Giesa and Markus J . Buehler (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 651 Solid - State NMR of Nanomachines Involved in Photosynthetic Energy Conversion A . Alia , Francesco Buda , Huub J . M . de Groot , and J¨org Matysik (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 675 Index Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors , Volumes 38 – 42 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 701 Errata An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Biophysics articles may be found at http : / / biophys . annualreviews . org / errata . shtml Contents ix A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANNUAL REVIEWS It’s about time . Your time . It’s time well spent . ANNUAL REVIEWS | Connect With Our Experts Tel : 800 . 523 . 8635 ( US / CAN ) | Tel : 650 . 493 . 4400 | Fax : 650 . 424 . 0910 | Email : service @ annualreviews . org New From Annual Reviews : Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application Volume 1 • Online January 2014 • http : / / statistics . annualreviews . org Editor : Stephen E . Fienberg , Carnegie Mellon University Associate Editors : Nancy Reid , University of Toronto Stephen M . Stigler , University of Chicago The Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application aims to inform statisticians and quantitative methodologists , as well as all scientists and users of statistics about major methodological advances and the computational tools that allow for their implementation . It will include developments in the ﬁ eld of statistics , including theoretical statistical underpinnings of new methodology , as well as developments in speciﬁ c application domains such as biostatistics and bioinformatics , economics , machine learning , psychology , sociology , and aspects of the physical sciences . Complimentary online access to the ﬁ rst volume will be available until January 2015 . TABLE OF CONTENTS : • What Is Statistics ? Stephen E . Fienberg • A Systematic Statistical Approach to Evaluating Evidence from Observational Studies , David Madigan , Paul E . Stang , Jesse A . Berlin , Martijn Schuemie , J . Marc Overhage , Marc A . Suchard , Bill Dumouchel , Abraham G . Hartzema , Patrick B . Ryan • The Role of Statistics in the Discovery of a Higgs Boson , David A . van Dyk • Brain Imaging Analysis , F . DuBois Bowman • Statistics and Climate , Peter Guttorp • Climate Simulators and Climate Projections , Jonathan Rougier , Michael Goldstein • Probabilistic Forecasting , Tilmann Gneiting , Matthias Katzfuss • Bayesian Computational Tools , Christian P . Robert • Bayesian Computation Via Markov Chain Monte Carlo , Radu V . Craiu , Jeﬀ rey S . Rosenthal • Build , Compute , Critique , Repeat : Data Analysis with Latent Variable Models , David M . Blei • Structured Regularizers for High - Dimensional Problems : Statistical and Computational Issues , Martin J . Wainwright • High - Dimensional Statistics with a View Toward Applications in Biology , Peter Bühlmann , Markus Kalisch , Lukas Meier • Next - Generation Statistical Genetics : Modeling , Penalization , and Optimization in High - Dimensional Data , Kenneth Lange , Jeanette C . Papp , Janet S . Sinsheimer , Eric M . Sobel • Breaking Bad : Two Decades of Life - Course Data Analysis in Criminology , Developmental Psychology , and Beyond , Elena A . Erosheva , Ross L . Matsueda , Donatello Telesca • Event History Analysis , Niels Keiding • Statistical Evaluation of Forensic DNA Proﬁ le Evidence , Christopher D . Steele , David J . Balding • Using League Table Rankings in Public Policy Formation : Statistical Issues , Harvey Goldstein • Statistical Ecology , Ruth King • Estimating the Number of Species in Microbial Diversity Studies , John Bunge , Amy Willis , Fiona Walsh • Dynamic Treatment Regimes , Bibhas Chakraborty , Susan A . Murphy • Statistics and Related Topics in Single - Molecule Biophysics , Hong Qian , S . C . Kou • Statistics and Quantitative Risk Management for Banking and Insurance , Paul Embrechts , Marius Hofert Access this and all other Annual Reviews journals via your institution at www . annualreviews . org . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 393 - 414 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by A ca d e m i a S i n i ca - N a nk i ng , T a i p e i on 02 / 11 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y .