T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB : ARTICLE The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Cell Biol . Vol . 184 No . 2 269 – 280 www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200806185 JCB 269 Correspondence to Christopher J . Staiger : staiger @ purdue . edu ; or Laurent Blan - choin : laurent . blanchoin @ cea . fr Abbreviations used in this paper : BDM , 2 , 3 - butanedione monoxime ; fABD2 , sec - ond actin - binding domain of Arabidopsis FIMBRIN1 ; FFP , ﬂ uorescent fusion pro - tein ; G - actin , monomeric actin ; LatB , latrunculin B ; TIRFM , total internal reﬂ ection ﬂ uorescence microscopy ; VAEM , variable - angle epiﬂ uorescence microscopy . Introduction The actin cytoskeleton of plants plays an integral yet poorly understood role during cell morphogenesis and elongation . The most compelling data link actin fi lament cables and networks with organelle motility and / or positioning , vesicle traffi cking to the vacuole , and vacuolar morphogenesis ( for reviews see Wada and Suetsugu , 2004 ; Holweg , 2007 ; Sheahan et al . , 2007 ; Yoneda et al . , 2007 ) . Nevertheless , many popular models postulate that the cortical array of actin fi laments regulates exocytic vesicle delivery or fusion ( for reviews see Smith and Oppenheimer , 2005 ; Hussey et al . , 2006 ) . Unfortunately , there is scant infor - mation correlating actin organization or dynamics with sites of secretion or expansion in plant cells undergoing diffuse growth . The organization and function of actin fi lament arrays de - pend not only on the properties of actin itself , but upon a pleth - ora of accessory proteins . Advances in the characterization of actin - binding proteins from plants reveal important differences between the activities of plant and mammalian / yeast proteins ( Staiger and Blanchoin , 2006 ) . However , connecting these in - sights with an understanding of the dynamic properties of actin arrays in vivo has lagged . In part , this limitation is due to the lack of a functional actin – fl uorescent fusion protein ( FFP ) for decorating fi lament arrays and monitoring dynamics in real time . Similar to the situation in budding yeast , actin - binding domain – FFP reporters have partially alleviated this limitation . Because its interaction with actin fi laments appears least detri - mental to cells , the second actin - binding domain from Arabi - dopsis FIMBRIN1 ( fABD2 ) is currently the reporter of choice for live - cell imaging ( Ketelaar et al . , 2004b ; Sheahan et al . , 2004 ; Voigt et al . , 2005 ; Wang et al . , 2008 ) . Even with this M etazoan cells harness the power of actin dy - namics to create cytoskeletal arrays that stimu - late protrusions and drive intracellular organelle movements . In plant cells , the actin cytoskeleton is under - stood to participate in cell elongation ; however , a detailed description and molecular mechanism ( s ) underpinning ﬁ l - ament nucleation , growth , and turnover are lacking . Here , we use variable - angle epiﬂ uorescence microscopy ( VAEM ) to examine the organization and dynamics of the cortical cytoskeleton in growing and nongrowing epidermal cells . One population of ﬁ laments in the cortical array , which most likely represent single actin ﬁ laments , is randomly oriented and highly dynamic . These ﬁ laments grow at rates of 1 . 7 μ m / s , but are generally short - lived . Instead of depolymerization at their ends , actin ﬁ laments are dis - assembled by severing activity . Remodeling of the cortical actin array also features ﬁ lament buckling and straighten - ing events . These observations indicate a mechanism in - consistent with treadmilling . Instead , cortical actin ﬁ lament dynamics resemble the stochastic dynamics of an in vitro biomimetic system for actin assembly . Actin ﬁ lament dynamics are dominated by rapid growth and severing activity in the Arabidopsis cortical array Christopher J . Staiger , 1 , 2 Michael B . Sheahan , 3 , 4 Parul Khurana , 1 Xia Wang , 1 David W . McCurdy , 3 and Laurent Blanchoin 5 1 Department of Biological Sciences and 2 The Bindley Bioscience Center , Hansen Life Sciences Research Building , Purdue University , West Lafayette , IN 47907 3 Plant Science Group , School of Environmental and Life Sciences , The University of Newcastle , Callahan , NSW 2308 , Australia 4 ARC Centre of Excellence for Integrative Legume Research , The University of Newcastle , Callahan , NSW 2308 , Australia 5 Institut de Recherches en Technologie et Sciences pour le Vivant – iRTSV , Laboratoire de Physiologie Cellulaire V é g é tale , Commissariat à l ’ Energie Atomique / Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁ que / Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique / Universit é Joseph Fourier , CEA Grenoble , F38054 Grenoble , France © 2009 Staiger et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the ﬁ rst six months after the publica - tion date ( see http : / / www . jcb . org / misc / terms . shtml ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . JCB • VOLUME 184 • NUMBER 2 • 2009 270 features and organizational principles more consistent with “ sto - chastic dynamics ” than fi lament treadmilling . We used time - lapse VAEM to examine the dynamics of the cortical actin array in hypocotyl epidermal cells from Arabi - dopsis seedlings to gain new insight into the molecular mecha - nisms that control actin organization . We observed complex and dynamic behavior of individual actin fi laments and thick fi la - ment bundles . Cortical actin fi laments were arrayed into ran - domly oriented networks that reorganized continuously . In part , reorganization was due to actin fi lament buckling and straight - ening events . Most individual actin fi laments were typically short lived ( < 30 s ) , a condition maintained by balancing high growth rates ( 1 . 7 μ m / s ) with severing activity . The apparent growth rate was reduced in a dose - dependent manner by treat - ments with the monomer - sequestering agent , Latrunculin B ( LatB ) . We believe remodeling of cortical arrays results from growth at actin fi lament barbed ends ( enabled by a large pool of assembly - competent monomers ) counteracted by the disappear - ance of fi laments due to severing . Surprisingly , the growth rate and severing frequency of fi laments in nongrowing epidermal cells are not markedly changed compared with elongating cells . To our knowledge , this is the fi rst quantitative analysis of actin fi lament turnover in the cortical cytoplasm of plant cells . The dynamics observed are inconsistent with an actin fi lament tread - milling mechanism . Similar to a biomimetic system for actin turn - over and generation of higher - order structures in vitro ( Michelot et al . , 2007 ) , the term “ stochastic dynamics ” best describes the behavior of actin fi laments in live plant cells . Results Cortical cytoskeleton dynamics can be observed by time - lapse VAEM To examine cortical cytoskeleton dynamics we adjusted our total internal refl ection fl uorescence microscope for variable - angle epifl uorescence illumination . VAEM delivers better signal - to - noise ratios than wide - fi eld microscopy . Here , we used time - lapse VAEM to analyze the behavior of cortical cytoskele - tal arrays in the epidermal cells of dark - grown Arabidopsis seedlings . We used transgenic lines expressing GFP - fABD2 to image actin fi laments ( Sheahan et al . , 2004 ) and EYFP - TUB5 or GFP - EB1 expressing plants to visualize microtubules and microtubule plus ends , respectively ( Mathur et al . , 2003 ; Shaw et al . , 2003 ) . For most experimental observations , we imaged epidermal cells from the top third of the hypocotyl , adjacent to the hook region , in plants harvested 3 – 5 d after germination . These epidermal cells are undergoing rapid expansion along the axis of hypocotyl elongation ( Gendreau et al . , 1997 ; Fig . S1 B , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200806185 / DC1 ) . Notably , the GFP - fABD2 line we selected has modest levels of reporter expression and does not hinder growth of hypocotyls ( Fig . S1 A ) or epidermal cell elongation ( Fig . S1 B ) . We found that the organization and dynamics of cortical microtubules visualized by time - lapse VAEM were similar to those reported by others using spinning disk confocal micro s - copy in the same cell type ( Shaw et al . , 2003 ; Paredez et al . , 2006 ; Chan et al . , 2007 ) . Microtubule arrays oriented transversely reporter , a clear picture of the behavior of actin fi laments within complex arrays , arrived at through high temporal and spatial resolution microscopy , is lacking . The most common imaging technique , laser scanning confocal microscopy , suffers from slow acquisition times and therefore poses problems when moni - toring events that occur on timescales of seconds . Spinning disk confocal microscopy and variable - angle epifl uorescence micros - copy ( VAEM ) offer two alternatives for rapid imaging of live cells . Recent studies of cytoskeleton dynamics and vesicle traf - fi cking demonstrate the utility of VAEM for examining dynamic events in the cortical cytoplasm of plant cells ( Fujimoto et al . , 2007 ; Konopka and Bednarek , 2008a , b ; Konopka et al . , 2008 ) . Epidermal cells in hypocotyls from etiolated Arabidopsis seedlings provide a good model system for exploring the role of the cytoskeleton during cell elongation and cell wall deposition ( Ehrhardt and Shaw , 2006 ; Lucas and Shaw , 2008 ) . For exam - ple , cortical microtubules translocate using a form of dynamic instability called “ hybrid treadmilling , ” can be severed , and dis - play angle - dependent changes in behavior upon contacting other microtubules ( Mathur et al . , 2003 ; Shaw et al . , 2003 ; Dixit and Cyr , 2004 ; Chan et al . , 2007 ; Wightman and Turner , 2007 ) . In addition , simultaneous imaging of multiple FFPs re - veals the importance of cortical microtubule organization to tracking of cellulose synthase complexes in the plasma mem - brane ( Paredez et al . , 2006 ) . A few studies hint at similarly complex dynamics in the cortical actin network of hypocotyl epidermal cells ( Kwok and Hanson , 2004 ; Sheahan et al . , 2004 ; Higaki et al . , 2007 ; Holweg , 2007 ; Wang et al . , 2008 ) ; however , a full view of actin fi lament organization and turnover remains to be captured . Nevertheless , pharmacological and genetic analy - ses indicate a role for the actin cytoskeleton during cell expan - sion of hypocotyls . In nonplant cells , cytoskeletal arrays often comprise net - works of short actin fi laments beyond the diffraction - limited resolution of light microscopy . A classical example is the den - dritic network of fi laments that drives lamellipodium protrusion at the leading edge of motile cells . At the ultrastructural level , these arrays consist of a dense , branched network of fi laments that are (cid:2) 100 nm long ( Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ) . Consequently , fl uorescent - speckle microscopy is often used to analyze the aver - age behavior of fi laments within these dense arrays ( Waterman - Storer et al . , 1998 ; Waterman - Storer and Danuser , 2002 ) . The translocation of actin speckles at velocities of 0 . 5 μ m / min in newt lung epithelial cells ( Ponti et al . , 2004 ) and 2 . 5 μ m / min in Drosophila S2 cells ( Iwasa and Mullins , 2007 ) is inferred to cor - relate with actin - monomer assembly rates onto the barbed ends of fi laments . A recent study of cytokinesis in the fi ssion yeast used time - lapse spinning - disk confocal microscopy to reveal actin dynamics during contractile ring formation ( Vavylonis et al . , 2008 ) . Actin fi laments were observed to interconnect nodes and facilitate myosin - dependent clustering of the nodes into higher - order structures by a “ search - capture and pull ” mecha - nism . Dynamic behavior of the fi laments includes fast growth ( 0 . 2 μ m / s ) and stochastic destruction by severing and shrinkage . This latter study , along with a biomimetic system allowing actin fi lament formation in the presence of formin and ADF / cofi lin ( Michelot et al . , 2007 ) , suggests that actin arrays can display 271 ACTIN FILAMENT DYNAMICS • Staiger et al . EB1 - FFPs ( Mathur et al . , 2003 ; Dixit et al . , 2006 ; Chan et al . , 2007 ) . Collectively , cortical microtubule arrays in the epider - mal cells of etiolated hypocotyls showed a coordinate , predomi - nantly transverse orientation with respect to the cell ’ s long axis , with individual microtubules exhibiting dynamic instability at plus - ends and growth rates of 3 – 5 μ m / min . Importantly , we could document differences in microtubule behavior , like the differ - ence in plus - end elongation rate between EYFP - TUB5 and GFP - EB1 expressing lines , validating the use of VAEM for detailed analysis of cortical cytoskeletal dynamics . The VAEM approach itself does not appear to alter microtubule dynamics relative to previous reports . Moreover , no appreciable photodamage occurs , even when cells are imaged over 5 – 10 min ( see Videos 1 – 3 ) , providing further confi dence that VAEM reports cytoskeletal dynamics faithfully . We therefore used identical settings for VAEM angle , laser power , image acquisition time , and total illumination to image actin fi laments in the cortical array noninvasively . along the long axis of the cell , although discordant microtubules and bundles of microtubules were also observed ( Fig . S2 A , avail - able at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200806185 / DC1 ) . Microtubules exhibited “ hybrid treadmilling ” and plus - end behavior was observed to alternate between periods of growth and catastrophic disassembly ( Fig . S2 D ) . As a simple mea - sure of microtubule dynamics , we recorded rates of growth at plus ends . The mean plus - end elongation rate ( ± SD ) for EYFP - TUB5 – decorated microtubules was 5 . 2 ± 1 . 3 μ m / min ( n = 52 ) , a value slightly higher than that reported by Shaw and coworkers ( 3 . 7 ± 1 . 9 μ m / min ; Shaw et al . , 2003 ) . We also used the bright , comet - like structures generated by GFP - EB1 to moni - tor microtubule plus - end dynamics ( Fig . S2 B ; Video 1 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200806185 / DC1 ) . Transverse microtubules had a mean plus - end elongation rate of 2 . 8 ± 0 . 9 μ m / min ( n = 58 ) , signifi cantly slower than that derived from EYFP - TUB5 , but consistent with previous reports using Figure 1 . The cortical actin array is remodeled continuously . Representative epidermal cell from a 5 - d - old , dark - grown hypocotyl expressing GFP - fABD2 was observed with time - lapse VAEM . Successive images were made at (cid:2) 3 - s intervals and every third image is depicted . Actin ﬁ lament behaviors such as rapid growth ( open arrowheads ) , buckling and straightening ( red dots and asterisk ) , and severing activity ( arrows ) are marked . Collectively , this dynamic actin behavior resulted in rather short ﬁ lament lifetimes ( < 30 s ) and constant remodeling of the cortical array . Time points indicate the elapsed time from start of video sequence . See also Video 2 ( available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200806185 / DC1 ) for the full time - lapse series . Bar , 2 μ m . JCB • VOLUME 184 • NUMBER 2 • 2009 272 In contrast to the orderly and predictable behavior of cor - tical microtubules , actin fi laments visualized with GFP - fABD2 were extremely dynamic , producing a randomly organized and continuously rearranging cortical array ( Videos 2 and 3 , avail - able at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200806185 / DC1 ) . Overlaying two consecutive images separated by 3 s revealed mostly randomly oriented and convoluted actin fi laments that changed positions , in addition to a few rigid and static actin fi la - ments ( Fig . S2 C , bottom ) . A montage and time - lapse video of another representative cell , with individual frames captured at (cid:2) 3 - s intervals for a period of > 5 min , reveals further aspects of actin fi lament behavior ( Fig . 1 ; Video 2 ) . Actin fi laments that we identifi ed as being single ( see below ) were oriented at a wide range of angles with respect to the cell ’ s long axis , whereas stiffer , straighter fi lament bundles or cables were mostly ori - ented longitudinally . Actin fi laments typically had a convoluted appearance that changed from frame to frame , indicating exten - sive buckling and straightening . New actin fi laments appeared randomly and elongated rapidly from one end . Most individual fi laments could rarely be tracked for > 30 s with disappearance a consequence of severing activity . We detail the quantifi cation of these and other aspects of cortical actin fi lament dynamics in the following sections . Actin ﬁ lament elongation rates are fast To correlate the nature of an actin - based structure with its aver - age pixel intensity , we computer - generated multiple lines that scanned the entire surface of the observed fi eld of view throughout a full time - lapse series ( e . g . , Fig . 1 ) . After background subtrac - tion , we were able to generate the full range of pixel intensities corresponding to different populations of cortical actin - based structures for growing ( Fig . S3 A , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200806185 / DC1 ) and nongrowing cells ( Fig . S3 B ) . The majority of pixels in the fi eld of view had in - tensities below 1800 arbitrary units ( a . u . ) . A direct comparison of these values with those generated by individual , hand - selection revealed that the faintest actin fi laments had average pixel in - tensities of (cid:2) 1000 a . u . , but the intensity varied substantially along their length ( Fig . S3 C ) . As shown in a representative ex - ample of fi lament growth after severing , the newly elongated region has an average intensity similar to the mother fi lament , but varies by more than 500 a . u . along its length ( Fig . 2 C ) . Figure 2 . Actin ﬁ laments elongate rapidly . ( A ) An actin ﬁ lament is tracked during successive images collected at (cid:2) 3 - s intervals . It undergoes a break - age event at t = 90 s ( arrow ) and the newly created ﬁ lament end ( open arrowhead ) remains stationary or shrinks slightly during the next 30 s . At t = 116 s , the ﬁ lament end ( open arrowhead ) begins to grow and extends out of the ﬁ eld of view at t = 129 s . The average rate of growth for this ﬁ lament , determined as shown in D , was 0 . 97 μ m / s . A second ﬁ lament , ﬁ rst appearing at t = 116 s , grows upward and toward the right at a rate of 1 . 7 μ m / s . See Video 4 ( available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200806185 / DC1 ) . Bar , 2 μ m . ( B ) Kymograph of the ﬁ la - ment highlighted in A . The ﬁ lament origin or base is at the right and the elongation extends toward the left . ( C ) Plot of pixel intensity as a function of position along the ﬁ lament shown in A . The traces show two different time points : gray line , 100 s ; black line , 132 s . Filament origin is plotted at the right and growth occurs toward the left . A black arrow marks the location where this ﬁ lament crosses over another ﬁ lament ( see also Fig . 2 A ; 132 s ) , resulting in a doubling of ﬂ uorescence intensity . The solid black line at 2000 represents the upper limit of pixel intensity for an individual actin ﬁ lament , as determined with the analyses shown in Fig . S3 . ( D ) Actin ﬁ lament length as a function of time for several representative ﬁ laments is plotted and a line of best ﬁ t used to estimate rate of elongation . Closed squares , ﬁ lament marked with open arrowheads in A ; open circles , second ﬁ lament growing upward and toward right in A ; closed circles , example ﬁ lament from a different time - lapse series . 273 ACTIN FILAMENT DYNAMICS • Staiger et al . ( see Fig . 2 , B and D ) and the mean R - value for the entire data - set was 0 . 96 ± 0 . 03 . From such plots we determined a mean growth rate of 1 . 7 ± 0 . 7 μ m / s ( Table II ) . This elongation rate is 20 - fold faster than plus - end growth of cortical microtubules . Filament turnover is mediated by severing activity Lifetimes of most individual actin fi laments were < 30 s — a phe - nomenon mediated by severing or fragmentation rather than de - polymerization . Nevertheless , a few actin filaments were observed to shrink over time and this usually happened at the end opposite to where growth had occurred or was ongoing . The average shrinkage rate of 0 . 3 ± 0 . 3 μ m / s ( n = 9 ) was almost an order of magnitude slower than growth and we never observed complete disassembly by this mechanism . Instead , most newly formed actin fi laments disappeared because severing activity fragmented them into small pieces that subsequently moved from the fi eld of view ( Fig . 3 ; Video 5 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200806185 / DC1 ) . The apparent severing frequency , defi ned as the number of severing events per length of fi lament as a function of time , was 0 . 011 ± 0 . 009 breaks / μ m / s ( n = 50 fi laments ; Table II ) . Importantly , breakage of actin fi laments is unlikely to result from irradiation damage because imaging of fi laments in vitro with the same laser set - tings and TIRF optics does not cause appreciable breakage ( un - published data ) . If a break in an actin fi lament creates a free barbed end , it should elongate immediately at a rate of 1 . 7 μ m / s . However , this was observed only infrequently , suggesting a modifi cation of barbed ends . Newly created actin fi lament barbed ends occa - sionally resumed growth within 5 – 15 s after severing ( e . g . , Fig . 2 A ) . Of 181 severing events assessed , which created 362 new fi lament ends , only 16 ( 4 . 4 % ) were observed to resume growth . Only one or two of these events appeared to show im - mediate regrowth after severing ( e . g . , Fig . 4 B ; Video 7 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200806185 / DC1 ) . Thus , most severed ends appear to be capped at the same time as , or shortly after , severing . Actin ﬁ laments slide along other ﬁ laments The ends of actin fi laments were quite dynamic , but entire fi laments also changed shape and translocated in the cortical cytoplasm . Importantly , where two actin fi laments crossed , the pixel inten - sity nearly doubled ( Fig . 2 C , arrow ) . Differences in actin - based structures were also revealed by comparing numerous fi lamentous elements from multiple cells and hypocotyls . Two populations of actin - based structures were identifi able based on a combination of average pixel intensity , average length , convolution ( Table I ) , and stochastic dynamics ( see below ) . A plot of average pixel intensities revealed that the population of faintest structures has a Gaussian distribution with an average value of (cid:2) 1100 ( Fig . S3 D ) . Actin fi lament bundles or cables were signifi cantly brighter and longer ( Table I ; Fig . S3 D ) and had longer lifetimes ( not depicted ) than the more dynamic single actin fi laments . These large actin - based structures were also stiffer , straighter , and mostly longitudinally oriented in the cytoplasm ( Fig . 1 ; Table I ) . For the subsequent analyses , we con - sidered any actin - based structure with an average pixel intensity < 2000 as a single actin fi lament . To better understand the dynamic properties of single actin fi laments , we tracked > 80 fi laments from fi rst appearance to complete disappearance in growing epidermal cells . Actin fi laments elongated at fast rates , which could occur from the ends of a preexisting fragment ( Fig . 2 A ; Video 4 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200806185 / DC1 ) , de novo in the cytoplasm , or from the side of an existing actin fi lament ( Fig . 2 A ) . Of 52 actin fi laments tracked for elongation , 13 ( 25 % ) formed de novo or from an indeterminate origin ; 22 ( 42 % ) grew from the end of a preexisting fragment or recently severed fi lament ; and 17 ( 33 % ) originated from the side of a mother fi lament or bundle ( Table II ) . Plots of individual actin fi lament length as a function of time produced a linear trend Table I . Comparison of ﬂ uorescence intensity , length , and convoluted - ness of thick vs . thin actin - based structures Measurement Thick structures Thin structures Mean intensity 8130 ± 282 a 1102 ± 122 Length ( μ m ) 34 . 5 ± 1 . 14 17 . 6 ± 0 . 7 Convolutedness b 1 . 1 ± 0 . 01 2 . 3 ± 0 . 6 n ; actin - based structures 131 141 a Values given are means ± SEM . b Convolutedness is a dimensionless descriptor of ﬁ lament shape , deﬁ ned as the ratio of traced ﬁ lament length to the length of the longest side of a bounding rectangle encompassing the same ﬁ lament . Table II . Comparison of actin - dynamic parameters from control and inhibitor - treated epidermal cells Control : Growing cells Nongrowing cells 100 nM LatB 20 or 50 mM BDM Elongation rate ; μ m / s 1 . 7 ± 0 . 7 ( 52 ) a 1 . 6 ± 0 . 8 ( 57 ) ND 0 . 6 ± 0 . 2 ( 51 ) * * 1 . 4 ± 0 . 5 ( 34 ) * Severing frequency ; breaks / μ m / s 0 . 011 ± 0 . 009 ( 50 ) 0 . 014 ± 0 . 011 ( 47 ) ND 0 . 02 ± 0 . 02 ( 40 ) * 0 . 004 ± 0 . 005 ( 30 ) * * Max . ﬁ lament length ; μ m 14 . 8 ± 6 . 4 ( 78 ) 10 . 3 ± 4 . 4 ( 61 ) * * 4 . 4 ± 1 . 6 ( 57 ) * * 9 . 5 ± 5 . 2 ( 51 ) * * Filament origin ; % de novo / end / side 25 / 42 / 33 ( 52 ) 33 / 40 / 26 ( 57 ) 29 / 55 / 16 ( 51 ) 18 / 53 / 29 ( 34 ) Re - growth of severed end ; % 4 . 4 ( 362 ends ) 2 . 1 ( 290 ends ) 7 . 7 ( 154 ends ) 2 . 5 ( 122 ends ) Convolutedness 1 . 6 ± 0 . 4 ( 87 ) 1 . 6 ± 0 . 4 ( 48 ) ND 1 . 2 ± 0 . 2 ( 54 ) * * 1 . 5 ± 0 . 3 ( 40 ) ND Rate of change of convolutedness ; s (cid:2) 1 0 . 08 ± 0 . 07 ( 87 ) 0 . 05 ± 0 . 03 ( 48 ) * 0 . 03 ± 0 . 01 ( 54 ) * * 0 . 02 ± 0 . 03 ( 40 ) * * ND , Not signiﬁ cantly different from control value by Student ’ s t test ; P value > 0 . 05 . * , Signiﬁ cantly different from control value by Student ’ s t test ; P value ≤ 0 . 02 . * * , Signiﬁ cantly different from control value by Student ’ s t test ; P value < 0 . 0001 . a Values given are means ± SD , with ( n ) = number of ﬁ laments in parentheses . See text for details of experimental treatment and measurement . JCB • VOLUME 184 • NUMBER 2 • 2009 274 fi lament . Thus , linear actin fi laments have a convolutedness value of one . Values increase according to the amount of convo - lution in the fi lament . As an example , values of convolutedness are given in Fig . 4 A and B for fi laments undergoing buckling and straightening behaviors , respectively . Nongrowing epidermal cells also show stochastic dynamics To test whether actin fi lament dynamics correlate with the growth status of epidermal cells , we made similar measure - ments on nongrowing cells . Etiolated hypocotyls exhibit a tem - poral and spatial gradient of growth that begins in cells at the base and moves upward to the hook region ( Gendreau et al . , 1997 ) . Here , we examined fi lament dynamics in epidermal cells The only cytoskeletal structures that were relatively static , albeit not immobile , were the large actin bundles ( Videos 2 and 3 ) . Actin fi laments were typically convoluted , appearing to buckle and contort in time - lapse ( Fig . 4 A ; Video 6 ) . Buckling could be observed when a fi lament slid along another actin fi lament or bundle , but also in the absence of any direct association with other fi laments . Actin fi laments also underwent straightening events , suggesting a high level of tension along the fi lament . As an example , Fig . 4 B ( asterisk ; and Video 7 ) shows a convoluted fi lament that straightens within one frame , an interval of only 3 s . We assessed actin fi lament buckling and straightening by measuring a dimensionless descriptor of shape ( Table II ) . We defi ne “ convolutedness ” as the ratio of traced fi lament length to the longest length of a bounding rectangle defi ned by the actin Figure 3 . Actin ﬁ laments are destroyed by severing activity . A long actin ﬁ lament ( red dots ) , previously shown during its elongation phase in Fig . 2 A , is frag - mented into many short pieces . At t = 135 s , the ﬁ la - ment was 25 . 4 μ m in length . During the next 20 – 30 s multiple severing events , some of which are marked by arrows , generate numerous small fragments from the mother ﬁ lament . Most fragments quickly disappear from the ﬁ eld of view . The apparent severing frequency was seven breaks over 25 . 4 μ m of original ﬁ lament length during a 23 - s period , or 0 . 012 breaks / μ m / s . Three other actin ﬁ laments in this ﬁ eld of view ( white , blue , and yellow dots ) were also eliminated or short - ened by fragmentation ( arrows ) . See also Video 5 ( available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200806185 / DC1 ) . Time points indicate elapsed time from start of video sequence . Bar , 2 μ m . 275 ACTIN FILAMENT DYNAMICS • Staiger et al . the average convolutedness value was the same , the rate of change in this parameter was signifi cantly lower in nongrowing cells ( P = 0 . 002 ; Table II , Fig . 4 C ) . Thus , fi lament growth rates and severing frequency are not different in growing versus non - growing epidermal cells , whereas fi lament density , length , and waving / buckling activity are reduced in nongrowing cells . Latrunculin B reduces the apparent ﬁ lament elongation rate Latrunculin B ( LatB ) binds tightly to plant monomeric actin ( K d = 74 nM ) and reduces polymeric actin levels in live cells ( Gibbon et al . , 1999 ) . Here , we used LatB to test whether fi lament growth rates were dependent on the available monomer concentration . at the base of 11 - d - old dark - grown hypocotyls that have ceased growing along the major axis of hypocotyl elongation ( Fig . S1 C ) . The cortical cytoskeleton of nongrowing cells was comprised of a similar array of actin fi laments and actin cables ( Fig . S3 B ) , but was somewhat less densely populated ( Video 8 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200806185 / DC1 ) . Indi - vidual actin fi laments had apparent elongation rates of 1 . 6 ± 0 . 8 μ m / s ( n = 57 ) , not signifi cantly different from the growing epi - dermal cells ( Table II ) . The severing frequency was also similar between the two cell types ( Table II ) . However , the maximum length of actin fi laments , achieved at the end of growth phase or before severing , was markedly shorter in nongrowing cells ( 10 . 3 μ m ) compared with growing cells ( 14 . 8 μ m ) . Finally , although Figure 4 . Buckling and straightening are prominent actin ﬁ lament behaviors . ( A ) A representative ﬁ la - ment ( asterisk ) that undergoes continuous undulations and buckling is shown . The highlighted ﬁ lament ( red dots ) almost completely changes shape between some consecutive frames . A measure of ﬁ lament buckling , convolutedness , was applied to this example and the value is given on each frame at bottom left . The average convolutedness ( ± SEM ) for this ﬁ lament was 1 . 8 ± 0 . 4 . Time points indicate elapsed time from start of video sequence . See also Video 6 ( available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200806185 / DC1 ) . Bar , 2 μ m . ( B ) A long , convoluted actin ﬁ lament ( as - terisk ) exhibits many aspects of dynamic behavior . Changes to convolutedness in the ﬁ rst three frames , precede a breakage event at 71 s ( arrow ) . The newly created end ( open arrowhead ) immediately begins elongating at the rate of 1 . 2 μ m / s . Between t = 91 s and t = 98 s , the ﬁ lament straightens and the convolut - edness value approaches one . Subsequently , numer - ous fragmentation events destroy the mother ﬁ lament completely so that it is unrecognizable by t = 125 s . Values marked on the frame represent measure of con - volutedness for the ﬁ lament of interest and the aver - age value ( ± SEM ) was 1 . 2 ± 0 . 1 . Time points indicate elapsed time from start of video sequence . See also Video 7 ( available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200806185 / DC1 ) . Bar , 2 μ m . ( C ) The average rate of change in convolutedness for different cell types and inhibitor treatments . Compared with the elongating epidermal cells from 3 – 5 - d - old hypocotyls , both nongrowing cells and cells treated with latruncu - lin B or BDM showed a signiﬁ cant ( P < 0 . 002 ) reduc - tion in the rate of change of convolutedness . Data are presented as mean ± SD . JCB • VOLUME 184 • NUMBER 2 • 2009 276 and constant severing activity resulted in a net reduction of aver - age fi lament length . In control cells , the maximum length of growing fi laments was 14 . 8 ± 6 . 4 μ m ( n = 78 ) , whereas this value was reduced to 4 . 4 ± 1 . 6 μ m ( n = 57 ) and 2 . 4 ± 1 . 5 μ m ( n = 49 ) in cells treated with 100 - nM or 1 - μ M LatB , respectively . Although the main effect of LatB treatment is a dose - dependent reduction in elongation rates and a consequent shorten - ing of the actin fi laments over time , there were additional impacts in that fi lament convolutedness and the rate of change in convolutedness were reduced compared with control cells ( Table II ) . This might be an indirect effect of fi lament shorten - ing , if the forces that cause buckling and tension depend upon fi lament length or alternately , indicate that forces generated by actin polymerization contribute to buckling . Growing epidermal cells were treated with either 100 - nm or 1 - μ M LatB and imaged by VAEM within 2 – 10 min . After several minutes , 1 μ M LatB reduced the dynamics and overall length of actin fi laments ( Fig . 5 A ; Video 9 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200806185 / DC1 ) . Individual actin fi la - ments became short fragments with reduced stochastic dynamics ( Fig . 5 B ) . Filament growth and severing still occurred ; however , the elongation rate was just 0 . 15 ± 0 . 2 μ m / s ( n = 47 ; Fig . 5 C ) . Lower concentrations of LatB ( 100 nM ) still had signifi cant ef - fects on stochastic dynamics ( Table II ) . Elongation rates in the presence of 100 nM LatB were 0 . 6 ± 0 . 2 μ m / s ( n = 51 ) , nearly threefold less than in control cells ( Table II ; Fig . 5 C ) . Surpris - ingly , severing frequency was slightly elevated in the presence of 100 nM LatB ( Table II ) . The combination of lower growth rates Figure 5 . Latrunculin treatment reduces the ﬁ la - ment elongation rate in a dose - dependent manner . ( A ) Representative cell treated with 1 μ M LatB has numerous , short ﬁ laments or fragments as well as several large cables . Actin ﬁ laments or fragments grow rather slowly , if at all . Time points indicate elapsed time from start of video sequence . Bar , 2 μ m . See Video 9 for full time - lapse series ( avail - able at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200806185 / DC1 ) . ( B ) Kymograph of the single ﬁ lament marked in A . This short ﬁ lament undergoes slow elongation and rapid shrinkage events . ( C ) Plot of average rate ( ± SD ) of ﬁ lament elongation in control and LatB - treated cells . Treat - ments with 100 nM and 1 μ M LatB for 1 – 10 min signiﬁ cantly reduce the rate of ﬁ lament elongation ( P < 0 . 0001 ) . 277 ACTIN FILAMENT DYNAMICS • Staiger et al . Given the prominent buckling behavior of many actin fi la - ments , there exists a possibility that what is reported as elonga - tion might actually represent intact fi laments moving into the VAEM plane . This is unlikely , however , for the following rea - sons : First , movement of an actin fi lament into the VAEM plane would not be expected to give a good linear fi t to a plot of fi la - ment length versus time . Second , more than 40 % of fi laments originate unambiguously from a preexisting fragment or elon - gate from a severed fi lament end ( e . g . , Figs . 2 A , 4 B ) and the elongation rates are independent of fi lament origin . Third , the complementary behavior of fi laments shrinking by a smooth and uniform movement is rare . Fourth , inhibition of myosin activity with BDM , and thus fi lament buckling , has a negligible effect on elongation rate ( Table II ) . Finally , the actin monomer - sequestering agent , LatB , inhibits fi lament elongation rates ( Fig . 5 C ) and the maximal length of fi laments ( Table II ) in a dose - dependent manner . Thus , we believe that 1 . 7 μ m / s refl ects the polymeriza - tion rate at actin fi lament ends , presumably the barbed ends . Individual actin fi laments in Arabidopsis epidermal cells grow at rates 10 to 100 (cid:3) faster than the actin fi laments in fi s - sion yeast or in the dendritic actin array at the leading edge of motile metazoan cells ( Ponti et al . , 2004 ; Vavylonis et al . , 2008 ) . The high growth rate is consistent with a sizable pool of assembly - competent actin monomers or profi lin – actin in vivo ( Pollard et al . , 2000 ; Staiger and Blanchoin , 2006 ) . Assuming that elon - gation occurs exclusively at fi lament barbed ends ; that the asso - ciation rate constant from monomer assembly is the same as that for ATP - loaded rabbit skeletal muscle (cid:4) - actin ( k + = 11 . 6 μ M (cid:2) 1 s (cid:2) 1 ; Pollard , 1986 ) ; and that one micrometer of actin fi la - ment comprises 370 subunits ( Pollard et al . , 2000 ) , then at a rate of 1 . 7 μ m / s or 629 subunits / s we estimate the actin monomer concentration at (cid:2) 50 μ M using the equation : [ G - actin ] = rate / k + . This seems reasonable for plant cells , where pollen maintains a 100 – 200 - μ M pool of monomeric actin ( Gibbon et al . , 1999 ; Snowman et al . , 2002 ) . If this pool of actin is buffered with pro - fi lin , known to be present in amounts at least equimolar to the total actin ( Chaudhry et al . , 2007 ) , then actin fi lament nucle - ation and elongation from pointed ends will be suppressed ( for review see Staiger and Blanchoin , 2006 ) . The plant profi lin – actin complex can , however , add onto barbed ends and elongate actin fi laments in vitro ( Michelot et al . , 2005 ) . If nucleation is suppressed by abundant profi lin in plant cells , then mecha - nisms to generate new actin fi laments or fi lament ends in such cells are necessary ( Staiger and Blanchoin , 2006 ; Blanchoin and Staiger , 2008 ) . Like the stochastic dynamics of an in vitro biomimetic system ( Michelot et al . , 2007 ) , shrinkage of actin fi laments in the cortical array of epidermal cells is not due to depolymeriza - tion , but rather fi lament severing . Quantifying severing activity gives an average value of 0 . 01 breaks per micrometer of actin fi lament every second ( Table II ) . In other words , a fi lament that is 10 μ m long will suffer on average six breaks per minute be - fore disappearing from the fi eld of view . Biochemically , this severing activity could be the result of ADF / cofi lin or villin / gelsolin proteins . Both classes of protein are present in Arabidopsis cells ( Klahre et al . , 2000 ; Dong et al . , 2001 ; Huang et al . , 2005 ; Chaudhry et al . , 2007 ) , and both sever actin fi laments in vitro A presumptive myosin inhibitor reduces ﬁ lament dynamics To gain insight into the potential involvement of myosin in the observed dynamic parameters , we used 2 , 3 - butanedione monox - ime ( BDM ) . BDM is an antagonist of mammalian myosin II ATPase ( Ostap , 2002 ) , inhibits at least one class of plant myosin in vitro ( Tominaga et al . , 2000 ; Funaki et al . , 2004 ) , and at milli - molar concentrations perturbs cytoplasmic streaming and or - ganelle movements in planta ( Nebenf ü hr et al . , 1999 ; Holweg et al . , 2003 ; Higaki et al . , 2006 ) . We treated hypocotyls with 20 - or 50 - mM BDM and im - aged cells within 30 min . The example in Video 10 ( available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200806185 / DC1 ) shows that several aspects of fi lament dynamics were markedly re - duced by BDM treatment . Interestingly , BDM did not affect av - erage convolutedness of fi laments , but did reduce the rate of change of convolutedness fourfold ( Table II ) . Collectively , these results provide evidence that myosin - dependent forces drive fi l - ament buckling and straightening , either directly or indirectly . To verify that BDM affects myosin specifi cally and not other aspects of fi lament dynamics , we also measured growth rates and severing frequency . The elongation rate in the presence of BDM , 1 . 4 ± 0 . 5 μ m / s ( n = 34 ) , was slightly but signifi cantly re - duced compared with control cells ( P = 0 . 02 ; Table II ) . Further , the apparent severing effi ciency in the presence of BDM , with a mean value of 0 . 004 ± 0 . 005 breaks / μ m / s ( n = 30 ) , was reduced by more than half compared with the controls ( P < 0 . 001 ; Table II ) . Thus , BDM has a substantially greater effect on the buckling and straightening of actin fi laments than it does on the stochas - tic dynamics of actin fi laments . Discussion Here , we report the fi rst examination of actin fi lament dynamics in living plant cells at high spatial and temporal resolution using time - lapse VAEM . Based on actin fi lament properties in motile animal cells and yeasts , we expected to fi nd modest elongation rates , polarized organization of arrays and / or fi lament treadmill - ing . Instead , our results reveal a dynamic , complex , and stochastic behavior of actin fi laments , resembling in many ways a bio - mimetic system of actin assembly ( Michelot et al . , 2007 ) . New actin fi laments originate from the side of existing fi laments or bundles , de novo in the cortical cytoplasm or from fragmented fi l - ament ends . Elongation rates are high , 1 . 7 μ m / s , and capable of generating fi laments that span the cell diameter within 10 – 20 s . Despite high assembly rates , most fi laments are rather short lived . Disappearance of actin fi laments is not mediated by depolymer - ization at their ends , but rather by severing activity . Finally , actin fi laments exhibit buckling and straightening events , indicative of fi lament – fi lament sliding and / or tension along a fi lament . Qualita - tively similar actin dynamics in dividing fi ssion yeast cells were reported recently ( Vavylonis et al . , 2008 ) . For example , actin fi la - ment lifetimes were < 20 s , and fi lament buckling and severing were observed . Detailed consideration of these stochastic actin dynamics and knowledge of the biochemical activities of actin - binding proteins can be combined to generate testable models that describe the molecular control of actin turnover in plant cells . JCB • VOLUME 184 • NUMBER 2 • 2009 278 An important unanswered question is how the dynamic behavior of the cortical actin array relates to its function during cell expansion . Simple models linking stochastic dynamics of the cortical actin network to secretory vesicle traffi cking or sites of exocytosis are diffi cult to imagine . Moreoever , both growing and nongrowing epidermal cells have quantitatively similar fi la - ment elongation rates and apparent severing frequencies ( Table II ) . The only notable differences are a reduction in overall fi lament density and length , and a decreased rate of change in convolut - edness , for nongrowing cells . Thus , a direct role for cortical ac - tin arrays during cell expansion and wall deposition may be over - estimated . Alternatively , cortical actin remodeling might represent a surveillance mechanism that expends energy to be ready to respond to biotic and abiotic stress . Fungal and oomy - cete pathogens elicit a rapid response that involves the actin cy - toskeleton to recruit defense machinery at the site of attack ( Hardham et al . , 2007 ; H ü ckelhoven , 2007 ) . The stochastic dynamics of actin fi laments would permit a cell to change the architecture of its cytoskeletal array within seconds , by locally down - regulating severing activity , stabilizing fi laments , or en - hancing fi lament uncapping . In summary , our fi ndings support a model whereby actin turnover is ruled by stochastic dynamics rather than fi lament treadmilling . This stochastic behavior has two major compo - nents : ( 1 ) rapid polymerization from a large pool of polymeriz - able actin ; and ( 2 ) destruction by severing activity of the aged portions of fi laments . We predict several conserved actin - binding proteins , including profi lin , ADF / cofi lin , and villin will play major roles in this model . Reverse - genetic strategies in Arabi - dopsis will allow these models to be tested in the future . The combination of genetic approaches and imaging of actin fi la - ment dynamics by VAEM make epidermal cells from the hypo - cotyl an excellent system for further exploration of cortical cytoskeleton function . Materials and methods Chemicals All chemicals were purchased from Sigma - Aldrich unless stated otherwise . BDM was prepared freshly in water . LatB ( Calbiochem ) was dissolved in ethanol and stored as a 5 - mM stock solution at (cid:2) 20 ° C . Plant material Arabidopsis thaliana Col - O expressing GFP - fABD2 was as described pre - viously ( Sheahan et al . , 2004 ) , whereas seed for plants expressing EYFP - TUB5 ( Shaw et al . , 2003 ) and GFP - EB1 ( Mathur et al . , 2003 ) were donated by J . Sedbrook ( Illinois State University , Normal , IL ) and J . Mathur ( University of Guelph , Ontario , Canada ) , respectively . Seed was surface sterilized and stratiﬁ ed at 4 ° C on agar plates containing 0 . 5X Murashige and Skoog medium fortiﬁ ed with 1 % sucrose ( Sheahan et al . , 2004 ) . After exposing stratiﬁ ed seed for 4 h with white light , seedlings were grown in the dark for 3 – 5 d at 21 ° C before use in experiments with elongating epi - dermal cells . Nongrowing epidermal cells were visualized on etiolated hypocotyls at 11 d post - germination . When BDM or LatB were applied , the appropriate concentration of drug was added during mounting and the hypocotyls imaged within 2 min but no longer than 30 min post - treatment . Controls for LatB treatments included 0 . 02 % ( vol / vol ) ethanol . Variable - angle epiﬂ uorescence microscopy ( VAEM ) Imaging the cortical cytoplasm of epidermal cells was essentially as de - scribed by Konopka and Bednarek ( 2008a , b ) , albeit using a different manufacturer ’ s instrument . Variable - angle epiﬂ uorescence illumination was achieved using a total internal reﬂ ection ﬂ uorescence ( TIRF ) illuminator ( Xiang et al . , 2007 ; unpublished data ) . ADF / cofi lin is responsible for switching from a simple barbed - end growth mechanism to stochastic dynamics in vitro ( Michelot et al . , 2007 ) . Therefore , either villin / gelsolin and ADF / cofi lin could be responsible for the severing activity observed in epidermal cells . How the fragments generated by severing are recycled into the polymerizable actin pool is diffi cult to analyze , as these small fi laments typically move quickly from the fi eld of view . However , several mechanisms can be envisioned to regenerate the monomer pool ; the fragments might be disassembled by further severing or they could depoly - merize monomer - by - monomer from either end of the fi lament . The behavior of actin fi lament ends that remain in the fi eld of view may give additional clues about the proteins responsible for severing . If a breakage event creates a free barbed end , that end should assemble from the pool of polymerizable subunits at an average rate of 1 . 7 μ m / s . Newly created fi lament barbed ends occasionally resume growing within 5 – 15 s after severing ( e . g . , Fig . 2 A ) , but of 181 severing events observed ( 362 new ends ) only 16 ( 4 . 4 % ) resumed growth . Only one or two of these fi la - ment ends underwent immediate regrowth after severing ( e . g . , Fig . 4 B ) . The failure of the majority of newly created ends to grow suggests villin / gelsolin activity . Villin / gelsolin caps barbed ends after severing , whereas ADF / cofi lin does not . It has been proposed that actin - interacting protein1 ( AIP1 ) caps the ends of fi laments and thereby promotes the activity of ADF / cofi lin ( Okada et al . , 2002 ) ; however , such biochemical activity for plant AIP1 has not yet been demonstrated directly ( Allwood et al . , 2002 ; Ketelaar et al . , 2004a ) . Another possibility is that heterodimeric capping protein ( CP ) rapidly binds and caps the ends of fi laments severed by ADF / cofi lin . Arabidopsis CP binds fi lament barbed ends with high af - fi nity ( K d (cid:2) 10 – 20 nM ) and prevents subunit addition ( Huang et al . , 2003 ) . Assuming a cellular concentration for AtCP of (cid:2) 1 μ M , similar to that in yeast and mammalian cells ( Pollard et al . , 2000 ) , then the association rate constant ( k + ) of 0 . 07 μ M (cid:2) 1 s (cid:2) 1 ( Huang et al . , 2006 ) and half - life of 10 s predict that fi lament barbed ends will grow by (cid:2) 17 μ m before they are capped . As noted above , this was not the case for most severing events we observed . In addition to the stochastic dynamics of rapid polymer - ization and severing , actin fi laments are constantly being rear - ranged in the cortical cytoplasm . A prevalent observation was of fi lament buckling or “ waving ” ( Fig . 4 A ) . Actin fi laments also rapidly straightened , appearing to be under tension ( Fig . 4 B ) . Both of these changes in shape were reduced by the putative myosin inhibitor , BDM ( Fig . 4 C ) . Other aspects of fi lament dynamics , like the site of fi lament origin , elongation rate and severing fre - quency were affected only modestly by BDM ( Table II ) and could be an indirect result of myosin inhibition . For example , the ability to visualize a breakpoint likely requires myosin - driven movement or lateral translocation of the fragment away from the mother fi lament . Thus , severing events might be under - scored in the presence of BDM . Alternatively , fi lament frag - mentation could require the cooperative action of a severing protein and myosin - dependent tensile forces on the fi lament backbone . Finally , the mode of action of BDM remains contro - versial and the possibility for off - target interactions is not ex - cluded ( McCurdy , 1999 ; Tominaga et al . , 2000 ) . 279 ACTIN FILAMENT DYNAMICS • Staiger et al . cyto skeleton dynamics . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200806185 / DC1 . We thank D . Szymanski and S . Shaw for helpful comments ; J . Bristol for techni - cal assistance with TIRFM and IPLabs software ; and J . Sedbrook and J . Mathur for seed stocks . This work was supported by grants from the National Science Founda - tion ( MCB 0130576 ) to C . J . Staiger and D . W . McCurdy ; from the Basic En - ergy Sciences Program of the Department of Energy ( DE - FG02 - 04ER15526 ) to C . J . Staiger ; from the Australian Research Council ( DP0770679 ) to M . B . Sheahan ; and from PICS to L . Blanchoin . The TIRFM facility was supported in part by the Bindley Bioscience Center at Purdue . Submitted : 30 June 2008 Accepted : 31 December 2008 References Allwood , E . G . , R . G . Anthony , A . P . Smertenko , S . Reichelt , B . K . Dr ø bak , J . H . Doonan , A . G . Weeds , and P . J . Hussey . 2002 . Regulation of the pollen - specifi c actin - depolymerizing factor LlADF1 . Plant Cell . 14 : 2915 – 2927 . Blanchoin , L . , and C . J . Staiger . 2008 . Plant formins : Diverse isoforms and unique molecular mechanism . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbamcr . 2008 . 09 . 015 . Chan , J . , G . Calder , S . Fox , and C . Lloyd . 2007 . Cortical microtubule arrays undergo rotary movements in Arabidopsis hypocotyl epidermal cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 : 171 – 175 . Chaudhry , F . , C . Gu é rin , M . von Witsch , L . Blanchoin , and C . J . Staiger . 2007 . Identifi cation of Arabidopsis cyclase - associate protein 1 as the fi rst nucleo - tide exchange factor for plant actin . Mol . Biol . Cell . 18 : 3002 – 3014 . Dixit , R . , and R . Cyr . 2004 . Encounters between dynamic cortical microtubules promote ordering of the cortical array through angle - dependent modifi ca - tions of microtubule behavior . Plant Cell . 16 : 3274 – 3284 . Dixit , R . , E . Chang , and R . Cyr . 2006 . Establishment of polarity during organiza - tion of the acentrosomal plant cortical microtubule array . Mol . Biol . Cell . 17 : 1298 – 1305 . Dong , C . - H . , G . - X . Xia , Y . Hong , S . Ramachandran , B . Kost , and N . - H . Chua . 2001 . ADF proteins are involved in the control of fl owering and regulate F - actin organization , cell expansion , and organ growth in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell . 13 : 1333 – 1346 . Ehrhardt , D . W . , and S . L . Shaw . 2006 . Microtubule dynamics and organization in the plant cortical array . Annu . Rev . Plant Biol . 57 : 859 – 875 . Fujimoto , M . , S . - i . Arimura , M . Nakazono , and N . Tustusmi . 2007 . Imaging of plant dynamin - related proteins and clathrin around the plasma membrane by variable incidence angle fl uorescence microscopy . Plant Biotechnol . 24 : 449 – 455 . Funaki , K . , A . Nagata , Y . Akimoto , K . Shimada , K . Ito , and K . Yamamoto . 2004 . The motility of Chara corallina myosin was inhibited reversibly by 2 , 3 - butanedione monoxime ( BDM ) . Plant Cell Physiol . 45 : 1342 – 1345 . Gendreau , E . , J . Traas , T . Desnos , O . Grandjean , M . Caboche , and H . Hofte . 1997 . Cellular basis of hypocotyl growth in Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant Physiol . 114 : 295 – 305 . Gibbon , B . C . , D . R . Kovar , and C . J . Staiger . 1999 . Latrunculin B has different ef - fects on pollen germination and tube growth . Plant Cell . 11 : 2349 – 2363 . Hardham , A . R . , D . A . Jones , and D . Takemoto . 2007 . Cytoskeleton and cell wall function in penetration resistance . Curr . Opin . Plant Biol . 10 : 342 – 348 . Higaki , T . , N . Kutsuna , E . Okubo , T . Sano , and S . Hasezawa . 2006 . Actin microfi laments regulate vacuolar structures and dynamics : Dual observa - tion of actin microfi laments and vacuolar membrane in living tobacco BY - 2 cells . Plant Cell Physiol . 47 : 839 – 852 . Higaki , T . , T . Sano , and S . Hasezawa . 2007 . Actin microfi lament dynamics and actin side - binding proteins in plants . Curr . Opin . Plant Biol . 10 : 549 – 556 . Holweg , C . L . 2007 . Living markers for actin block myosin - dependent motility of plant organelles and auxin . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 64 : 69 – 81 . Holweg , C . , A . Honsel , and P . Nick . 2003 . A myosin inhibitor impairs auxin - induced cell division . Protoplasma . 222 : 193 – 204 . Huang , S . , L . Blanchoin , D . R . Kovar , and C . J . Staiger . 2003 . Arabidopsis cap - ping protein ( AtCP ) is a heterodimer that regulates assembly at the barbed ends of actin fi laments . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 44832 – 44842 . Huang , S . , R . C . Robinson , L . Y . Gao , T . Matsumoto , A . Brunet , L . Blanchoin , and C . J . Staiger . 2005 . Arabidopsis VILLIN1 generates actin fi lament ca - bles that are resistant to depolymerization . Plant Cell . 17 : 486 – 501 . Huang , S . , L . Gao , L . Blanchoin , and C . J . Staiger . 2006 . Heterodimeric capping protein from Arabidopsis is regulated by phosphatidic acid . Mol . Biol . Cell . 17 : 1946 – 1958 . mounted on an IX - 71 microscope equipped with a 60X 1 . 45 NA TIRFM PlanApo objective ( Olympus ) . After focusing on the ﬁ rst visible actin ﬁ la - ments ( or microtubules ) at the periphery of a cell , the angle of laser illumi - nation was adjusted for maximal contrast and signal - to - noise ratio . We estimate the depth of focal plane at 0 . 5 – 1 μ m in VAEM mode . Illumination was from a 100 - mW argon ion laser ( Melles Griot Photonics ) attenuated to 20 % power with neutral density ﬁ lters and shuttered between consecutive exposures . The 488 - nm laser line was ﬁ ltered through a triple - wavelength ﬁ lter and dichroic mirror set ( 488 – 543 - 633TB ; Omega Optical ) and GFP emission from the specimen captured with a 512 × 512 electron - multiplying CCD camera ( ORCA - EM C9100 - 12 ; Hamamatsu Photonics ) . Typical expo - sure times were (cid:2) 200 ms with an electronic gain of 200 . The VAEM sys - tem was operated with IPLabs software ( version 3 . 9 . 4 ; Scanalytics Inc . ) running on a Macintosh G5 computer . Quantitative analyses Time - lapse series of 100 images were collected at 1 – 3 . 5 - s intervals in IPLabs and a table of elapsed time between each frame recorded . Minimal contrast enhancement or changes to the black level were applied to the en - tire stack to improve image quality for analysis and display . For some pur - poses , cropped regions and subsets of the time - lapse images were converted to 3 or 10 frames per second ( fps ) QuickTime movies , without compression , using IPLabs . Regions of interest were also transferred to MetaMorph ( version 6 . 2r6 ; MDS Analytical Technologies ) for preparing montages of still images . Figures were composed with Adobe Illustrator CS3 . The range of individual pixel intensities for different epidermal cells was computer generated with multiple line - scans over the ﬁ eld of view using MetaMorph . The intensity of the different actin - based structures was determined over time after subtraction of the background intensity . To mea - sure actin assembly rates , ﬁ lament origin , and severing frequency , actin ﬁ l - aments were tracked manually through the time - lapse stack of images . For growing epidermal cells , nongrowing cells and hypocotyls treated with BDM or LatB , 40 – 100 ﬁ laments from at least 5 different cells in 3 or more hypocotyls were selected . For example , 87 ﬁ laments from 12 elongating cells in 5 different hypocotyls were tracked , and an overlapping set of ﬁ la - ments was used for elongation rate and severing frequency measurements . Actin ﬁ lament length was measured using the “ length ” tool in IPLabs and a conversion factor of one pixel = 0 . 267 μ m . Only ﬁ laments that could be tracked over at least four successive frames were quantiﬁ ed . Assembly rates were determined by plotting ﬁ lament length versus time and the data ﬁ t with a linear function in Kaleidagraph ( version 4 . 0 , Synergy Software ) , with rate taken as the slope from the line of best ﬁ t . Plus - end elongation rates for microtubules in epidermal cells expressing EYFP - TUB5 or GFP - EB1 were determined in a similar manner . Filament severing frequency was es - timated by measuring the maximal length of an actin ﬁ lament and then monitoring breaks along the ﬁ lament over time . If a ﬁ lament had a break before it ﬁ nished growing or disappeared , the length was taken as its max - imum theoretical length between point of origin and endpoint of growth . Filament fragments of greater than one micrometer were tracked for as long as practical to monitor additional breakage events . Apparent sever - ing frequency was calculated as the number of breaks per length of origi - nal mother ﬁ lament per unit time ( breaks / μ m / s ) . To quantify ﬁ lament buckling , image sequences were imported into ImageJ ( version 1 . 37 ; http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij ) . A freehand line was traced over the ﬁ lament of interest before using the “ measure ” function to evaluate ﬁ lament length , bounding rectangle , and mean ﬂ uorescence intensity along the ﬁ lament ( see Table I ) . “ Convolutedness ” was calculated as the ratio of ﬁ lament free - hand length to the longest side of the bounding rectangle ( averaged over the image series ; ≥ 10 frames ) and change in convolutedness from the aver - age of differences in convolutedness between consecutive frames . Values were tested for signiﬁ cance with a two - tailed Student ’ s t - test . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 : Hypocotyls and epidermal cells expressing GFP - fABD2 grow simi - larly to those from wild - type seedlings . Fig . S2 : VAEM is useful for docu - menting the organization and dynamics of the cortical cytoskeleton . Fig . S3 : Analysis of pixel intensities for actin ﬁ laments and actin - based structures in the cortical array . Video 1 : Time - lapse series of microtubule plus - end dy - namics as visualized by GFP - EB1 expression . Video 2 : Full time - lapse se - quence of actin dynamics as reported by GFP - fABD2 expression . Video 3 : Another example of full time - lapse series for actin dynamics . Video 4 : Fila - ment elongation from a severed end . Video 5 : Severing activity destroys actin ﬁ laments . Video 6 : Buckling or waving of an actin ﬁ lament . Video 7 : Actin ﬁ lament tension / straightening . Video 8 : Nongrowing cells also show stochastic dynamics . Video 9 : Latrunculin reduces the elongation rate and length of actin ﬁ laments . Video 10 : BDM treatment dampens actin JCB • VOLUME 184 • NUMBER 2 • 2009 280 Svitkina , T . M . , and G . G . Borisy . 1999 . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymer - izing factor cofi lin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin fi la - ment array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 : 1009 – 1026 . Tominaga , M . , E . Yokota , S . Sonobe , and T . Shimmen . 2000 . Mechanism of in - hibition of cytoplasmic streaming by a myosin inhibitor , 2 , 3 - butanedione monoxime . Protoplasma . 213 : 46 – 54 . Vavylonis , D . , J . - Q . Wu , S . Hao , B . O ’ Shaughnessy , and T . D . Pollard . 2008 . Assembly mechanism of the contractile ring for cytokinesis by fi ssion yeast . Science . 319 : 97 – 100 . Voigt , B . , A . C . J . Timmers , J . Samaj , J . M ü ller , F . Baluska , and D . Menzel . 2005 . GFP - FABD2 fusion construct allows in vivo visualization of the dynamic actin cytoskeleton in all cells of Arabidopsis seedlings . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 84 : 595 – 608 . Wada , M . , and N . Suetsugu . 2004 . Plant organelle positioning . Curr . Opin . Plant Biol . 7 : 626 – 631 . Wang , Y . - S . , C . - M . Yoo , and E . B . Blancafl or . 2008 . Improved imaging of actin fi laments in transgenic Arabidopsis plants expressing a green fl uorescent protein fusion to the C - and N - termini of the fi mbrin actin - binding do - main 2 . New Phytol . 177 : 525 – 536 . Waterman - Storer , C . M . , and G . Danuser . 2002 . New directions for fl uorescent speckle microscopy . Curr . Biol . 12 : R633 – R640 . Waterman - Storer , C . M . , A . Desai , J . C . Bulinski , and E . D . Salmon . 1998 . Fluorescent speckle microscopy , a method to visualize the dynamics of protein assemblies in living cells . Curr . Biol . 8 : 1227 – 1230 . Wightman , R . , and S . R . Turner . 2007 . Severing at sites of microtubule cross - over contributes to microtubule alignment in cortical arrays . Plant J . 52 : 742 – 751 . Xiang , Y . , X . Huang , T . Wang , Y . Zhang , Q . Liu , P . J . Hussey , and H . Ren . 2007 . ACTIN BINDING PROTEIN 29 from Lilium pollen plays an important role in dynamic actin remodeling . Plant Cell . 19 : 1930 – 1946 . Yoneda , A . , N . Kutsuna , T . Higaki , Y . Oda , T . Sano , and S . Hasezawa . 2007 . Recent progress in living cell imaging of plant cytoskeleton and vacuole using fl uorescent - protein transgenic lines and three - dimensional imaging . Protoplasma . 230 : 129 – 139 . H ü ckelhoven , R . 2007 . Transport and secretion in plant – microbe interactions . Curr . Opin . Plant Biol . 10 : 573 – 579 . Hussey , P . J . , T . Ketelaar , and M . J . Deeks . 2006 . Control of the actin cytoskeleton in plant cell growth . Annu . Rev . Plant Biol . 57 : 109 – 125 . Iwasa , J . H . , and R . D . Mullins . 2007 . Spatial and temporal relationships be - tween actin - fi lament nucleation , capping , and disassembly . Curr . Biol . 17 : 395 – 406 . Ketelaar , T . , E . G . Allwood , R . Anthony , B . Voigt , D . Menzel , and P . J . Hussey . 2004a . The actin - interacting protein AIP1 is essential for actin organiza - tion and plant development . Curr . Biol . 14 : 145 – 149 . Ketelaar , T . , R . G . Anthony , and P . J . Hussey . 2004b . Green fl uorescent pro - tein - mTalin causes defects in actin organization and cell expansion in Arabidopsis and inhibits actin depolymerization factor ’ s actin depoly - merizing activity in vitro . Plant Physiol . 136 : 3990 – 3998 . Klahre , U . , E . Friederich , B . Kost , D . Louvard , and N . - H . Chua . 2000 . Villin - like actin - binding proteins are expressed ubiquitously in Arabidopsis . Plant Physiol . 122 : 35 – 47 . Konopka , C . A . , and S . Y . Bednarek . 2008a . Comparison of the dynamics and func - tional redundancy of the Arabidopsis dynamin - related isoforms , DRP1A and DRP1C , during plant development . Plant Physiol . 147 : 1590 – 1602 . Konopka , C . A . , and S . Y . Bednarek . 2008b . Variable - angle epifl uorescence mi - croscopy : a new way to look at protein dynamics in the plant cell cortex . Plant J . 53 : 186 – 196 . Konopka , C . A . , S . K . Backues , and S . Y . Bednarek . 2008 . Dynamics of Ara - bidopsis dynamin - related protein 1C and a clathrin light chain at the plasma membrane . Plant Cell . 20 : 1363 – 1380 . Kwok , E . Y . , and M . R . Hanson . 2004 . In vivo analysis of interactions between GFP - labeled microfi laments and plastid stromules . BMC Plant Biol . 4 : 2 . Lucas , J . , and S . L . Shaw . 2008 . Cortical microtubule arrays in the Arabidopsis seedling . Curr . Opin . Plant Biol . 11 : 94 – 98 . Mathur , J . , N . Mathur , B . Kernebeck , B . P . Srinivas , and M . H ü lskamp . 2003 . A novel localization pattern for an EB1 - like protein links microtubule dy - namics to endomembrane organization . Curr . Biol . 13 : 1991 – 1997 . McCurdy , D . W . 1999 . Is 2 , 3 - butanedione monoxime an effective inhibitor of myosin - based activities in plant cells ? Protoplasma . 209 : 120 – 125 . Michelot , A . , C . Gu é rin , S . Huang , M . Ingouff , S . Richard , N . Rodiuc , C . J . Staiger , and L . Blanchoin . 2005 . The formin homology 1 domain modu - lates the actin nucleation and bundling activity of Arabidopsis FORMIN1 . Plant Cell . 17 : 2296 – 2313 . Michelot , A . , J . Berro , C . Gu é rin , R . Boujemaa - Paterski , C . J . Staiger , J . - L . Martiel , and L . Blanchoin . 2007 . Actin - fi lament stochastic dynamics me - diated by ADF / cofi lin . Curr . Biol . 17 : 825 – 833 . Nebenf ü hr , A . , L . A . Gallagher , T . G . Dunahay , J . A . Frohlick , A . M . Mazurkiewicz , J . B . Meehl , and L . A . Staehelin . 1999 . Stop - and - go movements of plant Golgi stacks are mediated by the act - myosin system . Plant Physiol . 121 : 1127 – 1141 . Okada , K . , L . Blanchoin , H . Abe , H . Chen , T . D . Pollard , and J . R . Bamburg . 2002 . Xenopus actin - interacting protein 1 ( XAip1 ) enhances cofi lin fragmentation of fi laments by capping fi lament ends . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 43011 – 43016 . Ostap , E . M . 2002 . 2 , 3 - Butanedione monoxime ( BDM ) as a myosin inhibitor . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 23 : 305 – 308 . Paredez , A . R . , C . R . Somerville , and D . W . Ehrhardt . 2006 . Visualization of cel - lulose synthase demonstrates functional association with microtubules . Science . 312 : 1491 – 1495 . Pollard , T . D . 1986 . Rate constants for the reactions of ATP - and ADP - actin with the ends of actin fi laments . J . Cell Biol . 103 : 2747 – 2754 . Pollard , T . D . , L . Blanchoin , and R . D . Mullins . 2000 . Molecular mechanisms con - trolling actin fi lament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 : 545 – 576 . Ponti , A . , M . Machacek , S . L . Gupton , C . M . Waterman - Storer , and G . Danuser . 2004 . Two distinct actin networks drive the protrusion of migrating cells . Science . 305 : 1782 – 1786 . Shaw , S . L . , R . Kamyar , and D . W . Ehrhardt . 2003 . Sustained microtubule tread - milling in Arabidopsis cortical arrays . Science . 300 : 1715 – 1718 . Sheahan , M . B . , C . J . Staiger , R . J . Rose , and D . W . McCurdy . 2004 . A green fl uo - rescent protein fusion to actin - binding domain 2 of Arabidopsis fi mbrin highlights new features of a dynamic actin cytoskeleton in live plant cells . Plant Physiol . 136 : 3968 – 3978 . Sheahan , M . B . , R . J . Rose , and D . W . McCurdy . 2007 . Actin - fi lament - dependent remodeling of the vacuole in cultured mesophyll cells . Protoplasma . 230 : 141 – 152 . Smith , L . G . , and D . G . Oppenheimer . 2005 . Spatial control of cell expansion by the plant cytoskeleton . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 21 : 271 – 295 . Staiger , C . J . , and L . Blanchoin . 2006 . Actin dynamics : old friends with new stories . Curr . Opin . Plant Biol . 9 : 554 – 562 .