Data sources composition to support learning activities at Cultural Heritage sites Carmelo Ardito , Maria Francesca Costabile , Rosa Lanzilotti , Cosimo Resina Dipartimento di Informatica , Università degli Studi di Bari Aldo Moro , Via Orabona , 4 – 70125 – Bari , Italy { firstname . surname } @ uniba . it Abstract — The huge amount of heterogeneous content available nowadays on the Web pushes towards approaches and tools to allow people , even non - technical ones , to retrieve , combine and manipulate such content , in order to satisfy their knowledge needs . In this paper we illustrate how composition technologies enable teacher and students to create , use and share interactive workspaces that can enhance their learning experience about history and cultural heritage . Keywords— Service composition , Interactive Workspace , Learning experience I . I NTRODUCTION The huge amount of resources available on the Web provides a valuable source of content that can be exploited in different domains to satisfy the information needs of single users or groups of people . In order to create new content and applications , such users , through different devices , browse heterogeneous content , capture , synthesize and annotate it to highlight insights and compose it in various ways . We have been working on the development of a platform implementing a new composition paradigm to allow end users , who are not experts of technologies and programming , to extract content from heterogeneous sources ( personal or third - party ) , and compose interactive workspaces that can be ubiquitously executed on different devices [ 1 ] . By providing the means to integrate data , services and tools , this platform enables people to play an active role in solving their everyday problems , in accordance with the recent culture of participation and with End - User Development ( EUD ) approaches [ 2 - 5 ] . The composition platform is flexible enough to be adopted in different contexts ; in particular , it has been used to provide support to the work of professional guides when accompanying visitors to archaeological parks . The guides can manage services and resources relevant for this domain , i . e . they access content of different types ( text , pictures , video , etc . ) coming from various sources , and integrate them in personal workspaces that they may use during the visit to support their presentation with all the content available in such workspaces . Fig . 1 shows a real example of interactive workspace composed and used by a guide to support her presentation . Media content , such as photos , videos , and wiki pages associated with park locations to be visited during the guided tour are represented by an icon and a title placed on a Google map centered on the park . By tapping on an icon , a pop - up window visualizes the corresponding media ; for example , in Fig . 1 the guide has tapped on an icon on the map to show the picture of a statue that was at that place at Roman times and currently visible in the museum of the park . Guides can share their workspaces with visitors , who have thus access to the same content through their personal devices ( tablets , smartphones ) ; visitors can possibly use and update the shared workspace in other situations outside the park or the museum , so that they may recall the visit experience multiple times . A field study , carried out at the archaeological park of Egnathia , in Italy , involving 2 professional guides and 28 visitors , allowed us to analyze guides’ experience in composing and using interactive workspaces , and the impact on the overall visitors’ experience during the visit of an archeological park [ 1 ] . The study has shown that the guides appreciated the usefulness of interactive workspaces , in particular the good mapping with their working activities . On their side , visitors enjoyed the possibility of looking at pictures and videos that enhanced the guides’ spoken presentation . Fig . 1 . A guide interacting with the IW visualized on a tablet . School pupils constitute a large portion of the visitors to sites of cultural interest , who perform such visits as part of their school curricula . It is difficult to estimate how lasting an interest in archaeological sites and museums traditional visits can generate in students . In order to make the visit more engaging , specific learning techniques such as serious games , implemented in applications for mobile devices , have been designed and experimented ( see e . g . [ 6 ] ) . Thanks to the possibility of processing and integrating different content , the proposed composition platform can be used to support pupils’ learning activities , which can be performed both on site ( using large interactive displays and mobile devices ) and at school ( using interactive whiteboards and laptops ) . After describing the main features of the composition platform in Section II , Section III describes how this platform can provide an engaging experience for active learning , by allowing a school teacher to create an interactive workspace to support the visit to an archaeological park ; pupils can also integrate the workspace with their own content . 2014 International Conference on Interactive Mobile Communication Technologies and Learning ( IMCL ) 978 - 1 - 4799 - 4742 - 3 / 14 / $ 31 . 00 ©2014 IEEE November 13 - 14 , 2014 , Thessaloniki , Greece Page 262 II . T HE C OMPOSITION PLATFORM We have developed a composition paradigm and a light - weight platform to allow non - technical users to construct interactive and pervasive information spaces , which can be accessed from multiple devices . Our approach enables the user to access resources offering heterogeneous content , to compose such resources creating interactive workspaces that support their specific needs , and to share these content with other people . The composition of such interactive spaces exploits a “light - weight” paradigm for resource integration , whose main characteristics are summarized in the following : (cid:120) Customization to a specific usage domain . The platform is designed to be general , in order to use it in various application domains and contexts . However , software environments for data source exploration and composition are more effective for non - technical people if customized to their specific domain [ 7 ] . Thus , our approach requires a customization phase , performed only once , during which professional developers and domain experts collaborate to customize the general - purpose tools to the requirements of a specific domain [ 1 ] : 1 ) they register services relevant for the domain ; 2 ) they define visual templates adequate to visualize domain specific information , which end users then exploit to organize the presentation of the desired content . (cid:120) Intuitive visual mechanisms . They allow end users to easily integrate content and compose IWs without any need to program or adopt complicated design notations . The current interaction paradigm is based on drag & drop of content items extracted from third - parties or personal data sources and moved onto pre - defined templates of the user interface . (cid:120) Lightweight execution environments . They allow the execution of the created interactive workspace on different devices . The composition schema created on the basis of the user composition actions indeed constitutes a Platform Independent Model ( PIM ) , which can be interpreted locally on a given device by means of a dedicated , lightweight execution environment addressing the device’s native technology . (cid:120) The execution environment natively supports context - awareness . The execution environments on mobile devices include a context monitor able to interoperate with the device sensing modules ( e . g . the GPS receiver ) , and exploits the context data captured at run - time to adapt the fruition of the application ( e . g . filtering data related to the current position ) . An overview of the platform main elements and communication flows is shown in Fig . 2 . A Workspace Composition Environment shows the content retrieved by querying Web data sources registered into the platform ( as defined in the Service descriptors ) , and allows users to manipulate such content to fill - in Visual templates representing the user interface of the interactive workspace under construction . Thus , the final user application , i . e . the interactive workspace , dynamically “emerges” at run - time depending on the user’s actions . The result of the visual composition is described in an XML Workspace schema that is stored on the platform Repository Server and downloaded anytime and anywhere for its execution on different devices thanks to Multi - device Execution Environments . The schema specifies the way the services have to be queried based on the composition created by the user , and the way the retrieved content have to be displayed through the visual templates . Fig . 2 . Overview of the composition platform . III . A POSSIBLE USAGE SCENARIO The scenario describes how teachers and students can create interactive workspaces by retrieving , composing and sharing information , gathered from various sources that might be accessed through different devices . Alice is a history teacher in an elementary school . In her fifth grade class , she just finished a cycle of lessons about Messapian , an ancient Italic population . She knows that close to their town there is the archaeological park of Egnathia , an ancient Roman city built on the ruins of a Messapian city . Since only few remains of this population are visible in the park , she needs augmenting the visit by means of multimedia content showing the Messapian traces , which can be displayed using the large interactive display installed in the museum , as well as her own tablet device . Before the visit Alice , using a desktop computer placed in her office , opens the composition platform available on the Web to gather and organize content to be shown to students during a pre - visit session . She uses the Workspace Composition Environment to select relevant content , e . g . 3D reconstructions from Google Sketchup , photos from FlickR , videos from Youtube , wiki pages from Wikipedia . As visual template on which such content is integrated , she chooses the map of the archaeological park , since she considers important to associate content to specific locations in the park . During a pre - visit session , carried out at school , Alice briefly shows on an interactive whiteboard the workspace about Messapian she has prepared . After the presentation of her workspace , which represents a seed for the task she is going to 2014 International Conference on Interactive Mobile Communication Technologies and Learning ( IMCL ) 978 - 1 - 4799 - 4742 - 3 / 14 / $ 31 . 00 ©2014 IEEE November 13 - 14 , 2014 , Thessaloniki , Greece Page 263 assign , Alice divides the class in groups of 3 - 4 pupils : each group prepares a presentation for a different aspect of the site to be visited by collecting material and integrating it in the shared workspace . For example , the groups have to find content about Messapian activities , economy , commerce , religion . The final result is a unique workspace , in which the contributions of the different groups are integrated , still being clearly identifiable . The day of the visit , teacher and pupils go to the park . First , they visit the museum associated to the park . The whole class enjoys the work of the individual groups by interacting with the retrieved content on a large interactive display . After a brief introduction provided by Alice , each group has to present its workspace contribution . Later , during the tour through the ruins in the park , the students are connected to the workspace through their 3G smartphones ; we could also envisage that they use augmented reality wearable devices , such as the Google Glasses ( GG ) . By any of these devices , they can post comments or express their appreciation of specific elements , e . g . in form of “I like” or saying “Vote this content five star ! ” . Alice also uses her device ( tablet or GG ) as a master device for selecting the single content to be shared on the visitors’ devices depending on the specific place of the park they are visiting . Trough GG , the system provides an augmented reality view of the available content . Pupils integrate the workspace with further material collected during the trip , for example by commenting shared content or by taking pictures of an interesting place . Back to school , pupils can collaboratively create a visit summary using also the material collected during the trip ( see e . g [ 8 ] ) . IV . C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK This paper has illustrated our proposal for exploiting composition technologies to enhance the learning experience of pupils visiting an archaeological park . Teacher and students can create , use and share Interactive Workspaces where heterogeneous content can be combined and manipulated to satisfy different information needs . The paper has in particular outlined how the use of composition technologies , adequately customized to the needs of cultural heritage stakeholders , leads to a personalized learning experience . Students and teachers will have the possibility of reviewing all content in their interactive workspaces anytime and everywhere after the visit to the park . According with the emerging concept of Lifelong Cultural Heritage [ 9 ] , the continuum of searching , composing and sharing fosters users’ motivation to get actively involved and improve their knowledge . Our research is aimed at empowering people to flexibly create their interactive workspace with tools that can let them to actively and flexibly compose content and functionality . This is also in line with the so - called culture of participation [ 4 ] , that promotes a shift from consumer cultures , where produced artifacts are passively consumed , to participatory approaches that greatly exploit computational media to support collaboration and communication , providing users with the means to become co - creators of new ideas , knowledge , and products . Thus , we are assisting in the redefinition ( and also in the seamless fusion ) of roles that go beyond the conventional user - designer dichotomy , in a context where system design and system execution are interwoven to let users create , immediately execute and iteratively evolve their own applications . The research presented in this paper contributes to this new line of action by proposing an approach and a composition platform for the creation by end users of flexible , service - based interactive workspaces . The platform has a lot of potential for learning as also shown in a recent study that analyzed the use of the platform in a more traditional context of Technology Enhanced Learning at school [ 10 ] . Nowadays , schools are provided with different computing devices , not only desktop but also different types of tablets and interactive whiteboards that teachers and students are increasingly using in their daily activities . If used with proper techniques and tools , technology may be a valid support to learning , encouraging people to become more active in their learning activities [ 11 ] . The proposed platform can be one of such supporting tools . A CKNOWLEDGMENT This work is partially supported by the Italian Ministry of University and Research ( MIUR ) under grant PON 02 _ 00563 _ 3470993 " VINCENTE " and by the Italian Ministry of Economic Development ( MISE ) under grant PON Industria 2015 MI01 _ 00294 " LOGIN " . We are very grateful to Giuseppe Desolda for his valuable contribution to the research described in this paper . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] C . Ardito , M . F . Costabile , G . Desolda , R . Lanzilotti , M . Matera , A . Piccinno and M . Picozzi , " User - Driven Visual Composition of Service - Based Interactive Spaces " , Journal of Visual Languages & Computing , vol . 25 , no . 4 , 2014 , pp . 278 - 296 . [ 2 ] G . Fischer , E . Giaccardi , Y . Ye , A . Sutcliffe and N . Mehandjiev , " Meta - design : a manifesto for end - user development " , Communications of the ACM , vol . 47 , no . 9 , 2004 , pp . 33 - 37 . [ 3 ] M . F . Costabile , D . Fogli , P . Mussio and A . Piccinno , " Visual Interactive Systems for End - User Development : A Model - Based Design Methodology " , IEEE Transactions on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics - Part A : Systems and Humans , vol . 37 , no . 6 , 2007 , pp . 1029 - 1046 . [ 4 ] G . Fischer , " End User Development and Meta - Design : Foundations for Cultures of Participation " , Journal of Organizational and End User Computing , vol . 22 , no . 1 , 2010 , pp . 52 - 82 . [ 5 ] M . F . Costabile , Y . Dittrich , G . Fischer and A . Piccinno , eds . , Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium on End - User Development ( Is - EUD 2011 ) , LNCS 6654 , Springer , 2011 . [ 6 ] N . Avouris and N . Yiannoutsou , " A Review of Mobile Location - based Games for Learning across Physical and Virtual Spaces " , Journal of Universal Computer Science , vol . 18 , no . 15 , 2012 , pp . 2120 - 2142 . [ 7 ] T . Nestler , A . Namoun and A . Schill , " End - user development of service - based interactive web applications at the presentation layer " , Proc . EICS ' 11 , 2011 , ACM , pp . 197 - 206 . [ 8 ] O . Stock , M . Zancanaro , P . Busetta , C . Callaway , A . Krüger , M . Kruppa , T . Kuflik , E . Not and C . Rocchi , " Adaptive , intelligent presentation of information for the museum visitor in PEACH " , User Model User - Adap Inter , vol . 17 , no . 3 , 2007 , pp . 257 - 304 . [ 9 ] L . Ardissono , T . Kuflik and D . Petrelli , " Personalization in cultural heritage : the road travelled and the one ahead " , User Model User - Adap Inter , vol . 22 , no . 1 - 2 , 2012 , pp . 73 - 99 . [ 10 ] C . Ardito , P . Bottoni , M . F . Costabile , G . Desolda , M . Matera and M . Picozzi , " Creation and Use of Service - based Distributed Interactive Workspaces " , Journal of Visual Languages & Computing , 2014 , in print . [ 11 ] C . Ardito , M . F . Costabile , A . De Angeli and R . Lanzilotti , " Enriching exploration of archaeological parks with mobile technology " , ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . , vol . 19 , no . 4 , 2012 , pp . 1 - 30 . 2014 International Conference on Interactive Mobile Communication Technologies and Learning ( IMCL ) 978 - 1 - 4799 - 4742 - 3 / 14 / $ 31 . 00 ©2014 IEEE November 13 - 14 , 2014 , Thessaloniki , Greece Page 264