DOI : 10 . 1126 / science . 1124832 , 665 ( 2006 ) ; 313 Science et al . Waverly W . Ding , Life Sciences Gender Differences in Patenting in the Academic www . sciencemag . org ( this information is current as of August 2 , 2007 ) : The following resources related to this article are available online at http : / / www . sciencemag . org / cgi / content / full / 313 / 5787 / 665 version of this article at : including high - resolution figures , can be found in the online Updated information and services , http : / / www . sciencemag . org / cgi / content / full / 313 / 5787 / 665 / DC1 can be found at : Supporting Online Material http : / / www . sciencemag . org / cgi / content / full / 313 / 5787 / 665 # otherarticles , 3 of which can be accessed for free : cites 7 articles This article 1 article ( s ) on the ISI Web of Science . cited by This article has been http : / / www . sciencemag . org / cgi / content / full / 313 / 5787 / 665 # otherarticles 2 articles hosted by HighWire Press ; see : cited by This article has been http : / / www . sciencemag . org / cgi / collection / sociology Sociology : subject collections This article appears in the following http : / / www . sciencemag . org / about / permissions . dtl in whole or in part can be found at : this article permission to reproduce of this article or about obtaining reprints Information about obtaining registered trademark of AAAS . c 2006 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science ; all rights reserved . The title SCIENCE is a Copyright American Association for the Advancement of Science , 1200 New York Avenue NW , Washington , DC 20005 . Science ( print ISSN 0036 - 8075 ; online ISSN 1095 - 9203 ) is published weekly , except the last week in December , by the on A ugu s t 2 , 2 007 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Gender Differences in Patenting in the Academic Life Sciences Waverly W . Ding , 1 Fiona Murray , 2 Toby E . Stuart 3 * † We analyzed longitudinal data on academic careers and conducted interviews with faculty members to determine the scope and causes of the gender gap in patenting among life scientists . Our regressions on a random sample of 4227 life scientists over a 30 - year period show that women faculty members patent at about 40 % of the rate of men . We found that the gender gap has improved over time but remains large . T he gender gap in academic science is a topic of ongoing policy and scholarly de - bate . Studies in fields as diverse as en - gineering and biology have found that women scientists suffer from an attainment gap along at least three important dimensions : productivity , recognition , and reward ( 1 – 4 ) . Fortunately , some recent evidence provides cause for opti - mism . Especially in fields within the academic life sciences , the gender gap has narrowed ( 3 , 5 ) . Until recently , however , little research has ex - plored an increasingly important source of non - salary remuneration for faculty : participation in commercial science ( 6 ) . This omission is prob - lematic given the growing opportunities for rec - ognition and reward in the commercialization of scientific research . Although profiting from uni - versity research continues to generate controver - sy ( 7 ) , the reality is that commercial activities including patenting , consulting , and scientific advisory board ( SAB ) membership have be - come commonplace ( 8 ) . What limited evidence exists about B academic entrepreneurship [ sug - gests a gender gap of considerable magnitude . Here , we examine gender differences in one specific commercial activity—patenting . We conducted a longitudinal empirical analysis using a random sample of faculty in the life sciences employed in U . S . academic institutions . The analysis is complemented by interviews with life scientists at one prominent university . Although academic patents do not yield imme - diate financial returns to their inventors , fre - quently they serve as an avenue to a variety of rewards , such as royalty - bearing license agree - ments with established companies or startup formation with substantial equity participation . Although not the only route to commercial en - gagement , our interviews and previous research suggest that patents are an important precursor to opportunities in industry . We began the quantitative analysis by draw - ing a random sample of 12 , 000 life scientists from the UMI Proquest Dissertations database ( 9 ) . We restricted the sample to those earning Ph . D . _ s between 1967 and 1995 in the scientific fields that have most fostered the commercial life sciences . We then used the Science Citation Index ( 10 ) to collect the publications , coauthors , and employers of the individuals in the sample . Because our interest is in academic careers , we retained only the 4227 individuals with at least 5 years of post - Ph . D . publishing experience in academic institutions . We then obtained the patents on which the scientists in the sample are listed as inventors . With this information , we created a data set of scientist - year observations with covariates for the individual _ s gender , an - nual publication activity , and annual patent count E supporting online material ( SOM ) text ^ . Of the scientists in our sample , 11 . 5 % are listed as inventors on one or more patents . However , the full sample proportion masks a large gender difference : Of the 903 women in the sample , 5 . 65 % held patents as of the last year of the data . By contrast , 13 % of the 3324 male scientists in the data are listed on patents . Moreover , the 431 male patenters have amassed a total of 1286 patents in our data set . The 51 women patenters produced only 92 patents . We structured the data archive to enable survival analyses . Figure 1 displays gender - specific nonparametric survivor plots that show the likelihood that a scientist in the data has not patented up to a given year of professional tenure . The plots show that , at all career stages , the curve for male scientists is beneath that for women , and the gender gap in survival prob - abilities increases over time . Similar to other areas of scientific attain - ment , patenting is affected by a range of in - dividual , field , and institutional factors , many of which may differ systematically between the sexes ( 11 – 13 ) . After constructing four mutually exclusive subsamples—male patent holders , female patent holders , men without patents , and women without patents—we observed considerable subsample differences in means ( across levels of professional experience ) in ( i ) number of papers , ( ii ) amount of NIH grants , and ( iii ) number of papers coauthored with research - ers in industry ( Fig . 2 ) . Male patenters typically have the highest paper counts , the most NIH grant money , and along with the women pat - enters , the most coauthorships with industry scientists ( table S1 provides significance tests ) . Given evidence of these disparities between male and female scientists , it is important to determine the conditional effect of gender on patenting—its net effect after holding constant other measured attributes of scientists . There - fore , we estimated scientist - level regressions of the rate of patenting . Formally , let l i ( t ) designate the instantaneous transition rate , where t 0 1 , I , 35 years ( we assume that 35 years is the maximum time any scientist is at risk ) . We estimated Cox proportional hazards regressions . Letting l 0 ( t ) indicate the baseline hazard , X i ( t – 1 ) indicate a vector of lagged , time - varying covariates , and V i indicate a vector of time - independent covariates , we estimated l i ( t , X , V , b , g ) 0 l 0 ( t ) (cid:1) exp E b ¶ X i ( t – 1 ) þ g ¶ V i ^ . We included a number of variables in the X i ( t – 1 ) vector . One attribute that influences patenting is a scientist _ s research productivity . At the extreme , an unpublished scientist prob - ably lacks novel findings to patent . Therefore , we included the number of articles each scien - tist has published in the previous 5 - year period and the square of this variable . Those we in - terviewed suggested that scientists _ employers also influence patenting by providing support 1 Haas School of Business , University of California , Berkeley , CA 94720 , USA . 2 MIT Sloan School of Manage - ment , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , 50 Memorial Drive , Cambridge , MA 02142 , USA . 3 Harvard Business School , Soldiers Field Road , Boston , MA 02163 , USA . * All authors contributed equally to this work . †To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : tstuart @ hbs . edu Fig . 1 . Gender - specific Kaplan - Meier estimates of the survivorship function of first patenting with confidence intervals . The likelihood that scientists ( blue line for male and red dashed line for female ) have not patented up to a given year of professional experience is shown . Both the stratified log - rank test and Wilcoxon test ( P G 0 . 01 ) reject the hypothesis that the survival functions are equal . www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 313 4 AUGUST 2006 665 REPORTS on A ugu s t 2 , 2 007 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m for interactions with industry . To proxy for this workplace characteristic , we included the num - ber of patents assigned to the scientist _ s em - ploying university during the previous 5 years ( excluding patents held by the focal scientist ) . We reasoned that universities with high patent counts will likely have an effective technology transfer office ( TTO ) and a culture that supports involvement in commercial endeavors . Interviewees suggested that networks of colleagues influenced their patenting behavior , which is consistent with recent research on entrepreneurship ( 8 , 14 ) . Scientists ( particularly male faculty ) routinely mentioned consulting with coauthors , colleagues , and industry con - tacts for advice about the patent process . We captured faculty members _ contacts with two variables . First , as a gauge of network reach , we included the average number of coauthors the scientist has had on previously published papers . Second , as a proxy for the richness of scientists _ networks with industry , we included a dummy variable equal to one if a scientist has recently coauthored papers with one or more researchers in industry . Figure 3 shows our regression findings ( table S2 ) . The parameter estimates suggest that an increase in the 5 - year publication count of one standard deviation of the observed distribu - tion ( 12 . 1 papers ) multiplies the hazard rate of patenting by a factor of 1 . 81 . Similarly , scientists that average a greater number of coauthors per paper , those that work at universities that pro - mote patenting and those that have collaborative projects with scientists in industry , patent at a greater rate . There also are statistically signifi - cant scientific field effects . Relative to the omitted category ( genetics ) in the regression , molecular biologists , immunologists , and organ - ic chemists patent at a substantially higher rate ( Fig . 3 and table S2 ) . After accounting for the effects of produc - tivity , networks , field , and employer attributes , what is the net effect of gender ? There remains a large , statistically significant ( P G 0 . 001 ) effect of being female . The parameter estimate implies that , holding constant productivity , social network , scientific field , and employer characteristics , comparable women life scien - tists patent at only 0 . 40 times the rate of equivalent male scientists . This finding leads to the question : What might cause such a large gender difference in patenting ? One possibility is that men and women do qualitatively different kinds of research . In par - ticular , if women are risk averse in their research choices ( 15 ) , there may be a gender difference in research B patentability . [ We believe such a difference would manifest in the extent of scholarly impact . To explore this possibility , we created a data set of the 23 , 436 articles published by the women in our sample and matched each paper ( by publication year ) with a randomly drawn article from the pool of male scientists _ papers . This yields a sample of ar - ticles with a 1 : 1 gender ratio . We then ex - amined , by gender and year , the average number of citations and the journal impact factor ( JIF ) of these papers . We found that the per - article mean citation count for male scientists is very similar to that of women ( table S3 ) . Moreover , the gender gap in average JIF actually favors women ( average JIF for male : 4 . 06 ; average JIF for female : 4 . 12 ) . Overall , there is no evidence that women do less important work based on standard measures of scientific impact . If there is no measurable gender difference in the scholarly influence of research , what else might cause such a large gender difference in patenting ? For clues , we turned to our faculty interviews , in which two factors loomed large . The first is lack of exposure to the commercial sector . Most ( but not all ) women had few contacts in industry . Lacking these connections , women found it time - consuming to gauge whether an idea was commercially relevant . In contrast , men often described an industry contact as a precursor to patenting . Hampered by their narrow networks and concerned about the time it would take to B shop [ a patent around , several female faculty were deterred from completing a patent filing . Thus , differences in the composition of professional networks meant that the time cost of patenting was higher for many women faculty . Several women suggested a second hurdle : concern that pursuing commercial opportunities might hinder their university careers . The women we interviewed were more likely to describe the challenges associated with balancing multiple career elements : teaching , research , and commer - cialization . Unlike their male counterparts , who described their patenting decisions as unproble - matic and driven by translational interests , female faculty expressed concern about the potentially negative impact that patenting might have on education , collegiality , and research quality . Our interviews also uncovered two factors that reduced the perceived costs of patenting for female faculty : collegial support and institu - tional assistance . Compared with men , female faculty were much more likely to be encour - aged in patenting by their ( typically male ) co - authors , who often drove the patenting process . Fig . 2 . Mean publication count ( A ) , NIH grant totals ( B ) , and number of jointly authored papers with industry researchers ( C ) during the first 20 years of scientists’ careers . Groups are male patenters ( dark blue squares ) , males without patents ( light blue triangles ) , female patenters ( light pink circles ) , and females without patents ( dark pink squares ) . Although women patenters appear to have a higher mean grant total than male patenters beyond the 18th year of profes - sional experience , this difference is not statistically significant . ( Table S1 provides equality of means tests across categories . ) MM $ , millions of dollars . Fig . 3 . Hazard ratios and 95 % confidence intervals from Cox re - gression of time until patenting . Hazard ratio g implies that the prob - ability of patenting changes by a factor of g for a unit ( dichotomous variables ) or standard deviation ( continuous variables ) change in the covariate value . Predic - tors are sorted by effect magnitude and are statistically significant if 1 . 0 falls outside of the confidence interval . ( Full regression results are presented in table S2 . ) 4 AUGUST 2006 VOL 313 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 666 REPORTS on A ugu s t 2 , 2 007 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Whereas men sought advice from their often broad - reaching networks , women frequently depended on close relationships with male collaborators to initiate the patenting process . Formal institutional sponsorship was also par - ticularly important for women . Many women commented that their TTO provided industry contacts , advice , and encouragement to develop the commercial aspects of their research . Our interviews also exposed differences between older and younger women scientists . Most senior female faculty we met perceived themselves as being excluded from industry relationships and therefore failed to develop an understanding of how commercial science works . Few made the transition to patenting . Some of the younger ( but tenured ) female life scientists had begun to incorporate patenting into their research strategy . Nonetheless , many still felt at a disadvantage to their male col - leagues because of their limited experience at the academic - industry boundary . It is only among junior faculty that we found parity in attitudes , which were shaped by doctoral and postdoctoral experiences . Regardless of gender , those that experienced patenting during training were undaunted by the challenges of combining academic and commercial science . Because our data spans 35 years , we can determine whether such generational dis - tinctions are evident in the larger sample . For three Ph . D . cohorts ( those earning degrees from 1967 to 1975 , 1976 to 1985 , and 1986 to 1995 ) , we examined gender - specific nonparametric cumulative hazard plots . For each cohort , we also calculated the male - to - female ratio of the cumulative hazards . For example , at the 10th year after scientists earned their Ph . D . , the cumulative hazard of patenting for male scientists was 4 . 4 times as high as women in the 1967 – 1975 cohort , 2 . 1 times as high in the 1976 – 1985 cohort , and 1 . 8 times as high in the 1986 – 1995 cohort ( fig . S1 ) . Thus , consistent with our interview findings , the archival data indicate that the gender gap in patenting rates has been declining . Our analyses suggest that patenting has become common in the academic life sciences , particularly for highly productive and net - worked faculty . Among the most senior faculty , a large gender gap persists , reinforced by women _ s limited commercial networks and traditional views of academic careers . Younger cohorts widely embrace patenting , although a gender gap remains . Increasingly , however , young female faculty are similar to their male colleagues : They view patents as accomplish - ments and as a legitimate means to disseminate research . If this trend continues , we may observe further declines in the magnitude of the gender gap in commercializing academic science . References and Notes 1 . J . R . Cole , S . Cole , Social Stratification in Science ( Univ . Chicago Press , Chicago , IL , 1973 ) . 2 . J . S . Long , M . F . Fox , Annu . Rev . Soc . 21 , 45 ( 1995 ) . 3 . National Science Foundation , Gender Differences in the Careers of Academic Scientists and Engineers ( NSF 04 - 323 , Arlington , VA , 2004 ) ; available online ( www . nsf . gov / sbe / srs / ns04323 / pdf / front . pdf ) . 4 . G . Sonnert , G . Holton , Who Succeeds in Science ? The Gender Dimension ( Rutgers Univ . Press , New Brunswick , NJ , 1995 ) . 5 . C . Holden , Science 294 , 396 ( 2001 ) . 6 . J . Thursby , M . Thursby , J . Technol . Transfer 30 , 343 ( 2005 ) . 7 . J . P . Walsh , W . M . Cohen , A . Arora , Science 299 , 1021 ( 2003 ) . 8 . T . E . Stuart , W . Ding , Am . J . Soc . 112 , 97 ( 2006 ) . 9 . UMI Proquest Dissertations database ( http : / / wwwlib . umi . com / dissertations ) . 10 . Science Citation Index ( http : / / scientific . thomson . com / products / sci ) . 11 . H . Etzkowitz , C . Kemelgor , M . Neuschatz , B . Uzzi , J . Alonzo , Science 266 , 51 ( 1994 ) . 12 . Y . Xie , K . A . Shauman , Women in Science : Career Processes and Outcomes ( Harvard Univ . Press , Cambridge , MA , 2003 ) . 13 . P . D . Allison , J . S . Long , Am . Soc . Rev 55 , 469 ( 1990 ) . 14 . S . Shane , T . Stuart , Management Sci . 48 , 154 ( 2002 ) . 15 . R . L . Fisher , The Research Productivity of Scientists : How Gender , Organizational Culture and Problem Choice Processes Influence the Productivity of Scientists ( Univ . Press of America , Dallas , TX , 2005 ) . 16 . F . M . acknowledges financial support from the Cambridge - MIT Institute . T . E . S . acknowledges financial support from the Center for Entrepreneurial Leadership at the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation , Kansas City , MO . This material is partly based on work supported by the NSF under grant No . EEC - 0345195 ( T . E . S . ) . Supporting Online Material www . sciencemag . org / cgi / content / full / 313 / 5787 / 665 / DC1 Fig . S1 Tables S1 to S4 11 January 2006 ; accepted 13 June 2006 10 . 1126 / science . 1124832 Regulation of Sexual Development of Plasmodium by Translational Repression Gunnar R . Mair , 1 Joanna A . M . Braks , 1 Lindsey S . Garver , 2 Joop C . A . G . Wiegant , 3 Neil Hall , 4 Roeland W . Dirks , 3 Shahid M . Khan , 1 George Dimopoulos , 2 Chris J . Janse , 1 Andrew P . Waters 1 * Translational repression of messenger RNAs ( mRNAs ) plays an important role in sexual differentiation and gametogenesis in multicellular eukaryotes . Translational repression and mRNA turnover were shown to influence stage - specific gene expression in the protozoan Plasmodium . The DDX6 - class RNA helicase , DOZI ( development of zygote inhibited ) , is found in a complex with mRNA species in cytoplasmic bodies of female , blood - stage gametocytes . These translationally repressed complexes are normally stored for translation after fertilization . Genetic disruption of pbdozi inhibits the formation of the ribonucleoprotein complexes , and instead , at least 370 transcripts are diverted to a degradation pathway . T ranslational repression ( TR ) of mRNAs in higher eukaryotes controls temporal expression of specific protein cascades or directs the location of translation within a cell , and is important after gamete fertilization ( zy - gote formation ) in the early embryo when de novo transcription of mRNA is restricted ( 1 – 5 ) . The hallmark of repression is the assembly of certain mRNAs together with proteins into qui - escent messenger ribonucleoprotein particles ( mRNPs ) , where these transcripts are stored for translation at a later time . The DDX6 family of DEAD - box RNA helicases is tightly linked both to storage of mRNAs encoding proteins asso - ciated with progression through meiosis into trans - lationally silent mRNPs and with the transport of mRNA to degradation centers in the cell ( P - bodies ) . These helicases are found in orga - nisms as diverse as yeast ( e . g . , Dhh1p ) and hu - mans ( e . g . , RCK / p54 ) . Earlier studies in Saccharomyces cerevisiae suggested that Dhh1p was localized to cyto - plasmic P - bodies that contain both mRNA and enzymes central to the RNA degradation path - way ( e . g . , the decapping enzyme ) , implying that P - bodies harbor transcripts destined for deg - radation ( 6 – 8 ) . More recently , it was proposed that mRNAs also exit P - bodies and re - engage polysomes for translation in a Dhh1p - dependent mechanism ( 9 ) . With the exception of human RCK / p54 , homologs of DDX6 helicases in meta - zoans have been found exclusively localized to mRNPs involved in TR ( 2 – 4 ) . TR has been described in Plasmodium ( 10 – 16 ) in the female gametocyte , the stable , blood - stream precursor cell of the female gamete , where two abundant transcripts are present but not translated . These mRNAs , p25 and p28 , en - 1 Department of Parasitology , Leiden University Medical Centre , 2333 ZA Leiden , Netherlands . 2 Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology , Johns Hopkins School of Public Health , 615 North Wolfe Street , Baltimore , MD 21205 , USA . 3 Department of Molecular Cell Biology , Leiden University Medical Centre , 2333 ZA Leiden , Netherlands . 4 The Institute for Genomic Research , 9712 Medical Center Drive , Rockville , MD 20850 , USA . * To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : waters @ lumc . nl www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 313 4 AUGUST 2006 667 REPORTS on A ugu s t 2 , 2 007 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m