ACADEMIA AND CLINIC How Internists Learned About Cimetidine PHIL R . MANNING , M . D . ; and TERI A . DENSON , Ph . D . ; Los Angeles , California We surveyed 449 general internists to determine how they first heard about , learned the clinical principles of usage of , and gained update information on cimetidine . Fifty - six percent of those responding named two or more sources for learning how to use cimetidine , and 59 % named two or more sources for updating their knowledge . Medical journals were the single most popular source of information in all stages of learning ; the next commonest sources were continuing medical education programs and discussion with colleagues , followed by Medical Letter , pharmaceutical company representatives , and hospital rounds . The importance of individual learning should not be overlooked by medical educators in attempts to improve continuing medical education . H ow PHYSICIANS learn about new medical knowledge after completion of their formal training and how this learning may be encouraged , facilitated , and integrated into practice are major concerns in continuing medical education today . We explored one aspect of this prob lem—how information about new drugs is acquired—by investigating how internists learned about cimetidine . We wanted to determine the number , relative importance , and variety of sources of knowledge about a newly mar keted drug and to highlight possible differences in use of these sources at various stages of learning . Most previous studies did not examine how physicians learned about a specific new drug . Also , most reports describing physi cian preferences for , and relative usefulness of , drug in formation sources did not consider the various stages in the process . The reports also contain some contradictions that merit examination . Method Cimetidine , released in November 1976 in the United King dom and in August 1977 in the United States , was chosen for study because it was new , frequently prescribed , and marketed after the physicians in our study had entered practice . The first article on cimetidine in American journals appeared in 1975 . Our survey was made between March and April 1979 . To fulfill our objectives , we designed a brief survey form , initially in two versions : one with a free response format and the other , a checklist . These versions were tested in a systematically unbiased distribution to a large group ( TV = 215 ) . On the strength of the correlations of the two formats for the survey ' s three items ( rho = 0 . 89 , 0 . 90 , 0 . 95 ) , we selected the checklist for use with subsequent groups . Respondents were first asked whether they used cimetidine in their practice and , if so , for how long . They were then asked several other questions : " How did you first hear about cimetidine ? " " How did you learn the principles of using cimetidine well enough to begin prescribing it ? " " How do you gain update information about cimetidine— usage , toxic effects ? " Following each question was a checklist of 20 information sources in addition to categories for " I don ' t remember " and " other . " • From the Postgraduate Division , University of Southern California School of Medicine ; Los Angeles , California . During March and April 1979 , 449 physician responses were gathered from three groups : 215 of 349 enrollees in the Univer sity of Southern California ' s ( USCs ) 27th Annual Intensive Re view of Internal Medicine ( used also for testing the comparabil ity of the free response and checklist formats ) ; 115 of the 137 enrollees in USCs Diagnostic and Therapeutic Skills in Internal Medicine Program ; and 119 Fellows of the American College of Physicians in the metropolitan Los Angeles area representing a systematic selection of every third name from membership lists , surveyed by phone . The similarity of responses across the three groups was exam ined to determine if the data could be combined . The fact that the responses of the three groups were significantly related for all three survey items ( chi square = 49 . 14 , 56 . 7 , and 52 . 29 , re spectively ; P < 0 . 001 with 21 df ) justified the use of aggregate data for all 449 respondents . Data from the combined groups were transformed into source rankings , since direct comparisons of frequencies or per centages were precluded by multiple responses to each item . Using these ordinal data ( and chi - square techniques based on the Friedman model [ 1 ] ) , we examined agreement in rankings of the sources across the three stages of learning . Results Of the 449 physicians , 85 % had used cimetidine in their practice for an average of 13 months . Response data in Table 1 show the percentages recorded for each source and the corresponding ranks assigned on the basis of these percentages . The number of options checked for each item exceeds the number of respondents because physicians checked more than one response per question . Fifty - six percent of those surveyed named more than one information source for learning the principles of cimeti dine use , and 59 % cited more than one source for updat ing this knowledge . Despite instructions to choose a sin gle option for " first hearing about cimetidine , " 28 % of the respondents named more than one source for that item . Moreover , some respondents indicated how they heard of cimetidine even though they had not used it in practice . Similarity in response patterns across the three stages of learning based on rankings was significant ( chi square = 8 . 90 ; 0 . 01 > P < . 05 with 2 df ) . Medical jour nals were the primary source at all stages of learning , followed by continuing medical education programs and discussions with colleagues . Medical Letter , drug compa ny representatives , and hospital rounds were the next most frequently cited sources , with drug inserts and the Physicians 9 Desk Reference ( PDR ) closely following . Re sponse patterns differed notably in percentages and ranks for several sources , even though the overall pattern re mained essentially the same across stages . Of particular note was the increasing importance of Medical Letter , drug inserts , and PDR as physicians sought specific in - 6 90 Annals of Internal Medicine . 1980 ; 92 : 690 - 692 . ©1980 American College of Physicians Downloaded from https : / / annals . org by Karolinska Institute user on 01 / 21 / 2019 Table 1 . Sources of Cimetidine Knowledge Source First Knowledge Principles of Using Drug Update Information Percent * Rank Percent * Rank Percent * Rank Medical journals 42 1 28 1 31 1 Continuing education program 18 2 18 2 16 2 Physician colleagues 12 3 12 3 11 3 Hospital rounds 7 4 5 8 4 8 Other ( source not listed ) 4 5 < 1 13 1 14 Drug company representative 4 6 7 6 5 7 Medical Letter 4 7 7 5 9 4 Advertisements in medical journal 3 8 2 10 1 13 Unknown 2 9 < 1 16t < 1 15 Audiotape service 10 3 9 3 9 Medical books 11 1 11 2 10 Patient 13f < 1 14 1 11 . 5f Popular media 13t < 1 16f < 1 16 . 5f Physicians * Desk Reference 13f 6 7 7 6 Drug inserts < 1 15 10 4 8 5 Pharmacist < 1 16 . 5f 1 12 1 11 . 5t Videotape < 1 16 . 5f < 1 16f < 1 16 . 5f * All percentages are rounded . t Average of tied ranks . formation about drug use or updated information about its effect . Advertisements in medical journals and hospi tal rounds , on the other hand , became less important as information sources beyond the initial stage of learning of a new drug . Discussion Results of our study indicate that although physicians use numerous sources to acquire drug information , medi cal journals , continuing education programs , and physi cian colleagues are the most frequent sources . Some con sistency is evident between general internists in this study and cardiologists queried earlier about how they learned about echocardiography ( 2 ) . For both groups , medical journals , meetings , conferences and courses , and consul tation with colleagues were the primary information sources . Consultation with colleagues was mentioned as a source of cimetidine knowledge ( 12 % ) , however , more often than as a source of echocardiography knowledge ( 4 % ) . This difference , understandable in view of the na ture of the two topics , indicates that physicians may use different sources according to the complexity or applica bility of the information . Our data corroborate the reported results of a survey conducted for the American Medical Association in 1975 ( 3 ) as well as those published by Smith and associates ( 4 ) and Harelik and associates ( 5 ) ; in all of these studies , medical journals were the most frequent source of infor mation . Worthen ' s 1973 review of 14 quantitative studies ( 6 ) , on the other hand , concluded that although the phy sicians ' peer group and professional journals did not have an important function in informing the physician about the availability of drugs , they did function as a " legiti mizing channel " to influence prescribing habits . Our find ing that journals were the primary data source at all stages of cimetidine knowledge conflicts with Worthen ' s conclusions . In 1966 Coleman and colleagues ( 7 ) reported that 57 % of physicians surveyed ( mainly general practitioners , in ternists , and pediatricians ) received the first news of a drug from a manufacturer ' s representative , 18 % from di rect mail from pharmaceutical companies , 7 % from pro fessional journals , and 7 % from other physicians . Almost 90 % of their surveyed physicians awaited word from at least two sources before prescribing the drug . In contrast to Coleman ' s study , we found that pharmaceutical repre sentatives ranked considerably lower than certain other sources of drug information , although they maintained a stable position across the three stages of drug informa tion . It is not clear if the difference between Coleman ' s observations and ours is due to the composition of the samples or to the passage of 13 years . In a survey conducted for the United States Food and Drug Administration in 1974 , 36 % of the responding physicians considered national specialty journals the most useful source of drug information ( 8 ) . The FDA Drug Bulletin was reportedly the most widely read source in the periodical newsletter category . Among compendia , the Physicians * Desk Reference was used most often , particularly by physicians in general practice . Consistent with that survey was our own finding of as cending rankings of Medical Letter and PDR as our phy sicians learned details and updated information about cimetidine . ( The FDA Drug Bulletin had not published a report on cimetidine at the time of our survey . ) Another finding consistent with previous research about drug in formation was the relatively infrequent citation of phar macists as sources ( 5 ) . Almost two dozen sources were used by our physi cians . Moreover , as in Coleman ' s study , most of our re spondents did not restrict themselves to a single source . Group learning in traditional continuing medical edu cation programs remains an important educational re source , and the value of informal discussions among phy - Manning and Denson • Cimetidine Information Sources 691 Downloaded from https : / / annals . org by Karolinska Institute user on 01 / 21 / 2019 sicians should encourage informal educational exchanges about drugs within community hospitals . The fact that medical journals are the primary source of drug informa tion , however , highlights the importance of self - directed learning . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS : Grant support : in part by Grant No . LMO 2857 - 03 , awarded by the National Library of Medicine , National Institutes of Health . • Requests for reprints should be addressed to Phil R . Manning , M . D . ; Postgraduate Medical Education , University of Southern California School of Medicine , 2025 Zonal Avenue ; Los Angeles , CA 90033 . Received 17 September 1979 ; revision accepted 5 February 1980 . References 1 . WINER BJ . Statistical Principles in Experimental Design . 2nd ed . New York : McGraw - Hill ; 1971 . 2 . MANNING PR , DENSON TA . HOW cardiologists learn about echocardiog raphy : a reminder for medical educators and legislators . Ann Intern Med . 1979 ; 91 : 469 - 71 . 3 . SEITNER P . Survey of Analgesic Drug Prescribing Patterns . Washington , D . C . : Drug Abuse Council , Inc . , American Medical Association Center for Health Services Research and Development ; 1975 . 4 . SMITH GH , SORBY DL , SHARP LJ . Physician attitudes toward drug in formation resources . Am J Hosp Pharm . 1975 ; 32 : 19 - 25 . 5 . HARELIK JH , JOHNSON PM , RIVERS NP , RYAN MR . Pharmacist and physician evaluation of drug information sources . Am J Pharm . 1975 ; 32 : 594 - 7 . 6 . WORTHEN DB . Prescribing influences : an overview . Br J Med Educ . 1973 ; 7 : 107 - 17 . 7 . COLEMAN JS , KATZ E , MENZEL H . Medical Innovation : A diffusion Study . New York : Bobbs - Merrill Company , Inc . ; 1966 . 8 . RUSKIN A . Survey of Drug Information Needs and Problems Associated with Communications Directed to Practicing Physicians : I . Physician Information Survey . Prepared for Food and Drug Administration Bu reau of Drugs , Report FDA ADMC - 3 . Washington , D . C . : Applied Man agement Sciences , Incorporated , National Technical Information Service , U . S . Department of Commerce ; 1974 . 6 92 May 1980 • Annals of Internal Medicine • Volume 92 • Number 5 Downloaded from https : / / annals . org by Karolinska Institute user on 01 / 21 / 2019