Paul Belleflamme , CORE & Louvain School of Management Thomas Lambert , Louvain School of Management Armin Schwienbacher , Université Lille Nord de France – SKEMA Business School WORKING PAPER 2012 / 02 Individual crowdfunding practices LOUVAIN SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT RESEARCH INSTITUTE Individual crowdfunding practices Paul Belleflamme , CORE & Louvain School of Management Thomas Lambert , Louvain School of Management Armin Schwienbacher , Université Lille Nord de France – SKEMA Business School Summary This study investigates characteristics of individual crowdfunding practices and drivers of fundraising success , where entrepreneurs can tailor their crowdfunding initiatives better than on standardized platforms . Our data indicate that most of the funds provided are entitled to receive either financial compensations ( equity , profit - share arrangement ) or non - financial benefits ( final product , token of appreciation ) , while donations are less common . Moreover , crowdfunding initiatives that are structured as non - profit organizations tend to be significantly more successful than other organizational forms in achieving their fundraising targets , even after controlling for various project characteristics . This finding is in line with theoretical arguments developed by the contract failure literature that postulates that non - profit organizations may find it easier to attract money for initiatives that are of interest for the general community due to their reduced focus on profits . Keywords : crowdfunding , pre - ordering , non - profit JEL Classification : G32 , L11 , L13 , L15 , L21 , L31 Louvain School of Management Working Paper Series Editor : Prof . Jean Vanderdonckt Corresponding author : Thomas Lambert Center for Excellence CESAM Louvain School of Management / Campus Louvain - la - Neuve UC Louvain 1 Place des doyens B - 1348 Louvain - la - Neuve , BELGIUM Email : thomas . lambert @ uclouvain . be The papers in the WP series have undergone only limited review and may be updated , corrected or withdrawn without changing numbering . Please contact the corresponding author directly for any comments or questions regarding the paper . ILSM , UC Louvain , 1 place des doyens , B - 1348 Louvain - la - Neuve , BELGIUM www . uclouvain . be / ilsm and www . uclouvain . be / lsm _ WP Individual Crowdfunding Practices ∗ Paul Belleﬂamme † Thomas Lambert ‡ Armin Schwienbacher § This version : September 24 , 2012 Abstract This study investigates characteristics of individual crowdfunding practices and drivers of fundraising success , where entrepreneurs can tailor their crowdfunding initiatives better than on standardized plat - forms . Our data indicate that most of the funds provided are en - titled to receive either ﬁnancial compensations ( equity , proﬁt - share arrangement ) or non - ﬁnancial beneﬁts ( ﬁnal product , token of appre - ciation ) , while donations are less common . Moreover , crowdfunding initiatives that are structured as non - proﬁt organizations tend to be signiﬁcantly more successful than other organizational forms in achiev - ing their fundraising targets , even after controlling for various project characteristics . This ﬁnding is in line with theoretical arguments devel - oped by the contract failure literature that postulates that non - proﬁt organizations may ﬁnd it easier to attract money for initiatives that are of interest for the general community due to their reduced focus on proﬁts . JEL classiﬁcation codes : G32 , L11 , L13 , L15 , L21 , L31 Keywords : crowdfunding , pre - ordering , non - proﬁt ∗ We are grateful to all participants in this survey . We wish to thank Gr´egoire Krieg for his excellent research assistance . Any remaining errors are the authors’ alone . A previous version of the paper circulated with the title “An Empirical Analysis of Crowdfunding” . † Universit´e catholique de Louvain , CORE and Louvain School of Management , B - 1348 Louvain - la - Neuve , Belgium , Paul . Belleﬂamme @ uclouvain . be . Other aﬃliation : CESifo . ‡ Universit´e catholique de Louvain , Louvain School of Management , B - 1348 Louvain - la - Neuve , Belgium , Thomas . Lambert @ uclouvain . be . Other aﬃliation : Universit´e Lille 2 . § Universit´e Lille Nord de France – SKEMA Business School ( Universit´e Lille 2 , Facult´e de Finance , Banque et Comptabilit´e , Rue de Mulhouse 2 - BP 381 , 59020 Lille C´edex , France ) , Armin . Schwienbacher @ skema . edu . 1 Introduction What determines the success chances of entrepreneurs to reach their capital targets through crowdfunding ? Crowdfunding changes sharply how capital is allocated and represents a viable alternative in channeling outside cap - ital to entrepreneurial ventures . Furthermore , the amount raised through crowdfunding increased dramatically in recent years . 1 Crowdfunding helped to raise about $ 1 . 5 billion of capital in 2011 , according to a global survey conducted by Crowdsourcing . org . 2 However , little is known about the char - acteristics of crowdfunding practices and which ones are associated with fundraising success . 3 In this study , we derive characteristics of individual crowdfunding prac - tices by means of hand - collected data of 44 initiatives and we then examine drivers of fundraising success . We deliberately excluded initiatives launched using crowdfunding platforms since they have received greater attention in the literature ( see , e . g . , Agrawal , Catalini , and Goldfarb , 2010 ; Hildebrand , Puri , and Rocholl , 2011 ) . In our context , individual crowdfunding practices relate to practices in which entrepreneurs do not make use of a “structured” crowdfunding platform – such as Kickstarter , RocketHub , IndieGoGo , My - MajorCompany , Prosper – to fund their venture . In such platforms , the process of raising funds is standardized , in contrast to individual initiatives where entrepreneurs can shape the process according to their speciﬁc needs . As will become clear below , this enables entrepreneurs to oﬀer a greater 1 The potential of crowdfunding in boosting economic activity led , in April 2012 , the US Congress to pass the Jumpstart Our Business Startups ( JOBS ) Act , designed to make easier for startups and small businesses to raise funds by , among other measures , protecting crowdfunders ( i . e . , the individuals who participate to the crowdfunding mechanism ) . 2 The report “Crowdfunding Industry Report : Market Trends , Composition and Crowd - funding Platforms” ( May 2012 ) is released by Crowdsourcing LLC and Massolution . An abridged version is available at www . crowdsourcing . org . 3 At the exception of Mollick ( 2012 ) ; see the literature review below . 2 variety of compensation to the crowd , including active involvement into the process itself . Our hand - collected data are helpful in providing a better understanding of how such individual practices are structured and what motivates them . Perhaps surprisingly , only a limited fraction of initiatives is based on do - nations . In 91 % of cases , crowdfunders receive in return for ﬁnancial con - tributions either non - ﬁnancial beneﬁts ( e . g . , token of appreciation , right to receive the venture’s product ) or ﬁnancial compensation ( e . g . , equity , rev - enue , proﬁt - share arrangements ) . Individual crowdfunding initiatives take the form of pre - ordering of the product in more than one third of our sample . Interestingly , non - proﬁt entrepreneurs represents 10 % of individual initia - tives covered by our study , while 36 % of initiatives take place as a company . In more than one third of cases , crowdfunders’ investments may be quali - ﬁed as “active” , in the sense of ﬁnancial contribution with a promise of com - pensation in addition to direct involvement in the venture they fund . This is a speciﬁc feature of individual practices where the crowdfunding process can be tailor - made . Direct involvement – for instance , participation in the decision - making , provision of time and expertise – allows entrepreneurs to extract more easily additional value from crowdfunders . This may in turn increase the level of community beneﬁts provided to crowdfunders . We il - lustrate this with the following examples . The South African singer , Verity Price , produced her album through her own crowdfunding campaign . She set up a website where over 2 , 000 crowdfunders participated in the creative content of her album by having a say regarding , e . g . , songs recorded and artworks used . The crowdfunders of MyFootballClub are actively associated in the management of their football club by voting , among others , on bud - get , club oﬃcials , kit supplier contracts , transfer deals . Furthermore , the 3 crowdfunders’ community is able to raise new idea for activities at the club that are discussed and subject to approval via a vote by the community . Another point worth stressing is that crowdfunding seems to involve relatively small amounts of capital . Although entrepreneurs raised on av - erage around e 150 , 000 from their crowdfunding campaign , the distribution is skewed ; the median amount is merely around e 6 , 400 . For the sake of comparison , seed capital invested by business angels is typically between $ 25 , 000 and $ 500 , 000 , and deals involved by venture capitalists can be even larger ( Linde and Prasad , 2000 ) . 4 In the theoretical part of this paper ( see Section 4 ) , we rationalize this stylized fact as follows . Compared to tra - ditional funding , crowdfunding has the advantage of oﬀering an enhanced experience to crowdfunders and , thereby , of allowing the entrepreneur to practice a behaviour - based price discrimination and extract a larger share of the crowdfunder surplus ; the disadvantage is that the entrepreneur is constrained in her choice of prices by the amount of capital that she needs to raise : the larger this amount , the more prices have to be twisted so as to attract a large number of crowdfunders in the ﬁrst period , and the less proﬁtable the price discrimination scheme . In addition , motivations of entrepreneur in using crowdfunding are fur - ther examined through a questionnaire sent to entrepreneurs of individually crowdfunded venture . This survey highlights , in particular , the signiﬁcant role played by crowdfunding campaigns in getting public attention on the venture and / or on its products . Finally , we examine what drives the success chances of crowdfunding . This is done through multivariate analyses . A striking result is that non - 4 Sohl ( 2003 ) reports that the typical angel early - stage round ( seed or startup ) ranges between $ 100 , 000 and $ 2 million , while venture capitalists are in the $ 10 million to $ 15 million range . This is in line with Ibrahim ( 2008 ) ; see also Freear , Sohl , and Wetzel ( 2002 ) , Wong ( 2010 ) , and Goldfarb , Hoberg , Kirsch , and Triantis ( 2012 ) . 4 proﬁt organizations are signiﬁcantly more likely to achieve their target level of capital in comparison with other organizational forms such as a corpo - ration and freelance . This result appears robust to diﬀerent econometric speciﬁcations . This ﬁnding is consistent with the notion that non - proﬁt entrepreneurs ﬁnd it easier to attract capital by donors and other sources , since their focus is not purely proﬁt - driven ( Glaeser and Shleifer , 2001 ) . As theoretically shown in the latter paper , proﬁt - driven organizations may be prone to focus too much on proﬁts at the expense of other dimensions such as quality of the product or service provided . This in turn may not be desired by donors and other sources aimed at fostering speciﬁc initiatives . We structure the paper as follows . The next section reviews the related literature . Section 3 . 1 discusses data collection and deﬁnes the variables used . Section 3 . 2 describes key characteristics of individual crowdfund - ing practices , based on our hand - collected dataset . Section 4 presents a model of individual crowdfunding pratices based on a simple extension of Belleﬂamme , Lambert , and Schwienbacher ( 2012 ; henceforth referred to as BLS ) . Section 5 provides results of multivariate analyses on determinants of crowdfunding success . Finally , Section 6 concludes . 2 Related literature The literature on crowdfunding , and especially on individual crowdfunding practices , is still embryonic . BLS ( 2012 ) compare two dominant forms of in - dividual crowdfunding practices ( as shown in Section 3 . 1 ) , where crowdfun - ders are either oﬀered to pre - order the product , or to advance an amount of money in exchange for a share of future proﬁts . In either form , crowdfunders enjoy a community - based experience that confer them extra utility ( com - munity beneﬁts ) with respect to other consumers or investors . The authors 5 show that entrepreneurs prefer pre - ordering if the initial capital requirement is relatively small , and the proﬁt - sharing for larger capital amount . Their conclusions come from the crucial role played by the kind of community beneﬁts that both forms of crowdfunding confer . In their case analysis of an equity - based individually crowdfunded startup , Schwienbacher and Larralde ( 2012 ) also stressed the need for building a community of crowdfunders that enjoys additional utility from their participation . Both papers have impli - cations for entrepreneurial ventures in attracting outside ﬁnance at their initial stage , beside other ﬁnancing sources such as banks , friends & family , business angels , or even venture capital . The literature on crowdfunding also extends to the study of platforms . Agrawal , Catalini , and Goldfarb ( 2010 ) study the geographic dispersion of investors in an online crowdfunding platform that enables musicians to raise money to produce their album . Although the geographic distance between the entrepreneur and the investors increases , they ﬁnd that geography still plays a role at early ﬁnancing stages . Along the same lines , Ward and Ra - machandran ( 2010 ) estimate the extent to which demand for crowdfunding projects is driven by peer eﬀects . They show that crowdfunders are inﬂu - enced by the success or failure of related projects and use the actions of other crowdfunders as a source of information in their funding decisions . 5 As mentioned in the Introduction , Crowdsourcing . org provided an early survey analysis of crowdfunding platforms . They estimated the size of the crowdfunding market at $ 1 . 5 billion in 2011 . Although somewhat impres - sive , the size of the crowdfunding market remains relatively small compared to other sources . The Global Entrepreneurship Monitor ( GEM ) 2009 re - 5 Relatedly , there are several papers on the peer - to - peer lending platform Prosper ( see , e . g . , Hildebrand , Puri , and Rocholl , 2011 ; Lin , Prabhala , and Viswanathan , 2012 ; Zhang and Liu , 2012 ) . 6 port assessed the size of informal investment ( i . e . , entrepreneurs themselves , friends & family , business angels ) at 11 . 3 % of GDP in China , 1 . 5 % in the US , and 0 . 8 % in France , among others . 6 According to the GEM report , informal investment is far more important than venture capital ( see also Wong , 2010 ) . Most strikingly , this survey conducted by Crowdsourcing . org shows that equity - based crowdfunding models tend to raise larger amount of capital as compared to reward - based crowdfunding models , 7 which is in line with BLS’s ( 2012 ) predictions . However , reward - based models represent the majority of platforms . Mollick ( 2012 ) provides another empirical study aiming at understand - ing the underlying dynamics of the recent rise of crowdfunding . Using data from Kickstarter ( the largest crowdfunding platform at this date ) , the au - thor examines , like us , the determinants of success in crowdfunding ventures , as well as their geographic distribution . Among the chances of success that the study highlights are the networks of founders and also the signals of the underlying quality of the project . Intermediary crowdfunding platform , such as Kickstarter , are particularly helpful in these two matters . In contrast , individual entrepreneurs who launch their own crowdfunding initiatives , like the ones we consider in this paper , have a harder time in activating a net - work or in signaling the quality of their projects . This explains why these two variables are absent from our analysis . On the other hand , as individ - ual crowdfunding initiatives are not as standardized as intermediated ones , entrepreneurs have a wider array of available strategies ; this allows us to include into our analysis other variables related to the interaction between the entrepreneur and the crowd . 6 Global Entrepreneurship Monitor : www . gemconsortium . org . 7 See Table 1 for a deﬁnition of equity - and reward - based crowdfunding models . 7 Finally , when crowdfunding practices emerge in non - proﬁt organizations , they can be related to the strand of the literature devoted to choice of an or - ganizational form ( for - proﬁt versus non - proﬁt ) . Ghatak and Mueller ( 2011 ) develop a theoretical framework of labor donation theory to investigate un - der which conditions non - proﬁt organizations can provide a better alterna - tive to motivated workers than other forms of organization . Their results built on Glaeser and Shleifer ( 2001 ) , whose work models the incentives of an entrepreneur who chooses between a for - and non - proﬁt organizational form . Rooted in the contract failure literature , Glaeser and Shleifer ( 2001 ) argue that proﬁt incentives might lead to undesirable outcomes from the point of view of donors who value the non - contractible outcome of the en - trepreneurial venture . Motivating an agent on a contractible task ( eﬀort in reducing costs or boosting output ) might lead to undesirable outcomes since another non - contractible task ( eﬀort in enhancing quality ) might be neglected . They show that non - proﬁt is attractive for entrepreneurs because lower ﬁnancial incentives in the non - proﬁt is compensated for by the increase in donations ; see Bilodeau and Slivinski ( 2004 ) for a similar argument . 3 Empirical analysis of individual crowdfunding practices In this section , we ﬁrst describe our data set and the variables that we use ; then , we report a number of summary statistics . 3 . 1 Data collection and variables To shed light on the structure and characteristics of individual crowdfunding practices , we hand - collected data from various sources on all crowdfunding 8 initiatives that we could possibly identify on the Internet . Data collection took place end of 2009 and early 2010 . Since there is no database available or even listing of individual initiatives , we relied on the Internet to construct our sample . One advantage is that entrepreneurs using crowdfunding as a way to collect funds typically use the Internet to do so , as well as social networks and blogs . This helped us identify cases to construct our sample . Our focus is on individually crowdfunded ventures , which excludes all ini - tiatives made by crowdfunding platforms . The identiﬁcation of entrepreneurs relying on crowdfunding has been done in two steps . Initially , we made Internet research on individually crowdfunded ventures that are explicitly associated with the word of “crowdfunding” . This search did not allow us to ﬁnd a suﬃcient number of such entrepreneurs . In a second step , we de - cided to revisit the deﬁnition of crowdfunding . 8 That is , we selected all entrepreneurs who use the Web 2 . 0 to generate funds for their investments via a large number of internet users . This step was essential because some entrepreneurs have recourse to crowdfunding without knowing that their own fundraising is a kind of a “crowdfunding” . In total , we identiﬁed 69 cases and we managed to collect suﬃcient ( but still partially incomplete ) information on 44 of them . We also complemented our dataset through a questionnaire sent to the 69 cases identiﬁed , during the months of December 2009 and January 2010 . In total , we received 19 completed questionnaires ( some only partially ) . The response rate in this survey is therefore around 32 % . Despite the high response rate , the total sample remains relatively small , which inevitably raises some statistical concerns . In particular , this may induce some small - sample bias for which it is diﬃcult to control ; however , crowdfunding is a 8 A detailed deﬁnition is provided in BLS ( 2012 ) . 9 nascent phenomenon so that our dataset of 44 initiatives converges toward the entire population at the beginning of 2010 . All the variables employed in the analysis are deﬁned in Table 1 . We use two measures that reﬂect the funding outcome : Funds raised is the total funds raised by the entrepreneur since the starting date of her crowdfund - ing campaign ; and Success , which scales Funds raised by the amount of funds targeted . These variables capture the extent to which the personal crowdfunding campaign of an entrepreneur is successful . We then identify the type of organizational form adopted by the entrepreneur . Dummy vari - ables Company and Non - profit capture the type of organizational form – namely for - proﬁt company and non - proﬁt association , respectively ; other organizational forms ( observed but not measured ) are typically freelance and project - based initiatives . More precisely , Company and Non - profit diﬀer on the use of proﬁts . The former may distributes them to persons who exercise control over the ﬁrm ( e . g . , limited liabilities companies ) , while the latter barred from distributing them to their controlling members or boards ( e . g . , charitable foundations , NGOs ) . Non - proﬁt organizations may instead use proﬁts as perquisites and , so , do not allow enrichment from persons exercising control over the organization . 9 We include in our analysis a set of variables reﬂecting key characteris - tics of individual crowdfunding practices : Pre - ordering is equal to one if the entrepreneur pre - sales the product / service before production takes place ; Active implication is equal to one if crowdfunders are involved in the venture they fund in one way or another ( e . g . , in the management , in the creative process ) ; Social networks is equal to one if at least one online social network or blog is used by the entrepreneur besides her own 9 See , for instance , Hansmann ( 1996 ) for extensive developments . 10 website ; Product is equal to one if the entrepreneur provides a product as opposed to a service ; and , Number of crowdfunders is the number of crowdfunders having participated in the funding of the venture . To explore the inﬂuence of the type of crowdfunding model , we include three dummy variables capturing whether the individual crowdfunding prac - tice is equity - , reward - , or donation - based . This is the same classiﬁcation adopted in the report of Crowdsourcing . org . Equity - based crowdfunding is deﬁned as a model in which crowdfunders receive a ﬁnancial compensation ( e . g . , equity , revenue , proﬁt - share arrangements ) . In constrat , reward - based crowdfunding allows crowdfunders to receive a non - ﬁnancial beneﬁt in return for their ﬁnancial contributions ( e . g . , credit on an album , pre - ordering of products or services ) . In donation - based crowdfunding , crowdfunders make only donation without any kind of return . 10 We therefore diﬀerentiate the type of organizational form from the crowdfunding model , which is deﬁned below . That is , non - proﬁt organizations do not imply necessarily donation - based crowdfunding model , and vice versa . Non - proﬁt organizations may indeed reward their crowdfunders through non - ﬁnancial compensation . Another category captures the age of the crowdfunding practice . We identify the year at which the crowdfunding campaign started by the inclu - sion of the variable Starting date . The variable Starting after 2007 is equal to one if the crowdfunding campaign does not start prior 2007 , and zero otherwise . Age measures the time span between the starting date of the crowdfunding campaign and the establishment date of the organizational form . Finally , we look at the region of the world where the registered oﬃce of the entrepreneurial venture is located with the inclusion of the following 10 The report of Crowdsourcing . org also identiﬁes lending - based models . Our sample does not contain such models . This is expected since lending - based crowdfunding is better suited for platforms , which are beyond the scope of our analysis . 11 dummies : US and Europe ; other regions are captured in the constant . 3 . 2 Characteristics of individual crowdfunding practices Table 2 reports summary statistics ( in Panel A ) and survey outputs ( in Panel B ) . Not surprisingly , summary statistics conﬁrm that crowdfunding is a recent phenomenon . Over 84 % of the entrepreneurs have used crowdfunding for their venture most recently only ( variable Starting after 2007 ) , i . e . since 2007 . Entrepreneurs start on average their crowdfunding campaign one year and a half after having started their business / activity ( mean value of Age equals 1 . 54 ) . 30 % of entrepreneurs are from the United States and 55 % from Europe . In terms of funding outcome , entrepreneurs have raised on average around e 150 , 000 through their individual crowdfunding campaign ; the median value is however substantially lower , namely close to e 6 , 400 . Hence , amounts pledged by crowdfunders remain rather limited as compared to business angels or venture capitalists ( e . g . , Linde and Prasad , 2000 ) . Although the large discrepancy observed between the minimum and the maximum amount raised via crowdfunding , entrepreneurs have reached on average 62 % of the amount they initially targeted . Of interest are also the organizational forms adopted by entrepreneurs resorting to crowdfunding : 10 % of crowdfunding initiatives are non - proﬁt organizations , while 36 % are structured as a company ; the remaining initia - tives ( representing 54 % of our sample ) stem from entrepreneurs who have recourse to crowdfunding , for instance , as freelance or in connection with a speciﬁc project only . Interestingly , in 36 % of cases , crowdfunders are oﬀered to pre - order the product or the service . In more than one third of our sample , crowdfunders 12 act as active players in the venture they fund through involvement in the creative process , in the decision - making , or in various operating tasks . This variable Active implication captures crucial characteristics of individual practices . On the one hand , active involvement by the crowd may increase the level of community beneﬁts . On the other hand , the entrepreneurs’ preference for individual crowdfunding practice as compared to standardized crowdfunding platform may be motivated by its ability to extract value from crowdfunders more easily . Indeed , it allows the entrepreneurs to involve their crowdfunders in tasks with value added – such as time and expertise – , whose implementation via a standardized platform is not adapted whereas the ﬂexibility of the individual practice make it possible . Regarding media usage , 78 % of entrepreneurs used speciﬁc communica - tion methods that facilitate social networking . The goal of the venture is the making of a product in the half of initiatives . It is worth noting that in - dividual crowdfunding initiatives attracted the participation of about 1700 crowdfunders on average . Our study distinguishes diﬀerent crowdfunding models . Pure donation constitutes 9 % of our sample . Other models provide ( ﬁnancial or non - ﬁnancial ) return to their crowdfunders . The equity - based crowdfunding model is used in 30 % of the cases , whereas reward - based crowdfunding model is adopted in 61 % of the cases . This pattern is in line with the survey con - ducted by Crowdsourcing . org . Our survey provides further characteristics . Panel B of Table 2 depicts that 63 . 2 % of individual crowdfunding practices are managed by a single founder , 15 . 8 % by two founders , and 21 . 1 % by three founders ( the highest number of founders observed in our sample ) . 70 % of these founders hold a university degree , 10 % are still attending university . 13 Raising money was a strong motivation for all respondents , getting pub - lic attention was relevant ( or highly relevant ) for over 85 % , and obtaining feedback for the product / service oﬀered was relevant ( or highly relevant ) for about 60 % of the respondents . Many of them combine crowdfunding with other sources of ﬁnance , notably with own money , friends & family money , business angel and government subsidy . Consistently with Panel A , 76 . 5 % oﬀer their crowdfunders a reward , mostly in form of right to receive the product ( 66 . 7 % of the cases of these 76 . 5 % of the sample ) or shares that may yield dividends in the future ( 33 . 3 % ) . Direct cash payment is expected in 22 . 2 % of the cases where a reward / return is promised . We note that , in 66 . 7 % of the cases , other forms of reward are oﬀered : e . g . , being credited on an album or a ﬁlm , receiving the possibility to transfer money to a charity of one’s choice . Several of these variables are correlated with each other , as evidenced in Table 3 . While some correlations are intuitive , others are worth being dis - cussed . Individual crowdfunding initiatives taking place as a company tend to involve more often active implication from crowdfunders ; company are more likely to enable crowdfunders to provide input or vote on the project . One possible reason is that projects done outside a company may be smaller and simpler ; also , interacting with the crowd for a particular task requires an organizational structure that companies possess . This correlation is also in line with the notion that investors may require more control than for other organizational forms ; our simple correlation , however , does not oﬀer any conclusive evidence on whether this is actually a main driver . Conversely , non - proﬁt organizations oﬀer active involvements of crowdfunders less often ; this lends to think that their projects require little input from crowdfunders ; also , conversely to companies , crowdfunders may put more trust into non - 14 proﬁt organizations ; but again , this claim is highly speculative here . An interesting positive correlation exists between Active implication and Reward - based model , whereas the correlation is negative with Equity - based model . This suggests that reward - based models are more conducive to integrate crowdfunders within the organization than equity - based models . Lastly , Table 3 shows that the correlation between Company and Funds raised is positive and statistically signiﬁcant , suggesting that companies tend to generate higher amounts of money from their crowdfunding cam - paign . Compellingly , the variable Success is positive and signiﬁcantly cor - related with the dummy variable Non - profit . Though suggestive , this evidence does not allow us to ascertain that non - proﬁt organizations are drivers of success of crowdfunding initiatives and even less to say something on the channel through which non - proﬁt organizations operate as drivers of success . The next two sections explore these issues further , respectively from a theoretical and from an empirical viewpoint . 4 Theoretical framework In this section , we propose a simple theoretical model that allows us to ex - plain why non - proﬁt organizations may be more successful in using crowd - funding while incorporating important ﬁndings of the survey analysis as ingredients for the modeling setup . We also compare the choice of opting for crowdfunding with the outcome of traditional funding , in order to investi - gate scenarios in which crowdfunding is an optimal choice for entrepreneurs . The model is adapted from BLS ( 2012 ) where it is assumed that the crowd - funders enjoy some additional utility with respect to the other consumers of the venture’s product . This assumption reﬂects the fact ( which we have amply documented above ) that entrepreneurs resorting to crowdfunding use 15 the Internet to maintain an interaction with their funders so as to provide them with so - called “community beneﬁts” . Moreover , we incorporate the following additional key ﬁndings of the previous section into our analysis . We focus on crowdfunding experiences where consumers are invited to pre - order the product . The advantage of this form of crowdfunding is that advanced sales allow the entrepreneur to identify ( and reward ) the most eager consumers , and thereby to practice price discrimination . The draw - back is that the revenues collected through advanced sales must be large enough to cover the initial capital requirement , which may actually restrict the scope for proﬁtable price discrimination . This is the trade - oﬀ that we address in this model . The main result of the analysis is that crowdfund - ing is preferred to traditional funding as long as the capital requirement stays below some upper bound , which increases with the level of community beneﬁts . Insofar as non - proﬁt entrepreneurs are more likely to oﬀer larger community beneﬁts than for - proﬁt entrepreneurs ( in the spirit of Glaeser and Shleifer , 2001 ) , it can be concluded that non - proﬁt entrepreneurs are also more likely to prefer crowdfunding over traditional funding . 11 We now develop this argument in details . 4 . 1 Setup An entrepreneur needs an amount of capital equal to K to launch a new product . There is a unit mass of consumers who are identiﬁed by θ , with θ uniformly distributed on [ 0 , 1 ] . The parameter θ is a taste parameter that measures the consumer’s willingness to pay for one unit of the product ( by 11 In BLS ( 2012 ) , we also consider crowdfunding initiatives that compensate crowdfun - ders by oﬀering them a share of the venture’s proﬁts . Qualitatively similar results to those presented here can be obtained for this alternative form of crowdfunding ( namely that crowdfunding is preferred to traditional funding when the required capital is relatively small , and that non - proﬁt organizations are more likely to be successful in raising funds through crowdfunding ) . 16 assumption , consumers buy one or zero unit ) . If the unit price of the product is p , then a consumer of type θ derives surplus U = θ − p . 12 The entrepreneur can choose between two ways of ﬁnancing the initial capital requirement : traditional funding or crowdfunding . Our modeling of the former encompasses a wide array of ﬁnancing sources such as equity ﬁnancing ( venture capital , business angel , friends & family ) and bank loans as long as they do not involve extra non - monetary beneﬁts similar to what the crowd would obtain . If the ﬁrm chooses traditional funding , then the sequence of decisions is as follows . In period 1 , the entrepreneur incurs the ﬁxed cost K , which is ﬁnanced through , e . g . , a bank loan . Then , in period 2 , the entrepreneur sets a uniform price for its product , and consumers decide to buy or not . Denoting by p t this uniform price , the indiﬀerent consumer would be such that θ − p t = 0 . The entrepreneur would then choose p t to maximize p t ( 1 − p t ) , where we assume that the marginal cost of production is equal to zero . 13 Consequently , the entrepreneur would set p t = 1 / 2 , all consumers with θ ≥ 1 / 2 would purchase the product , and gross proﬁts would be equal to 1 / 4 . We record for further reference that under traditional funding , the entrepreneur achieves a net proﬁt equal to Π t = 1 4 − K . ( 1 ) This constitutes a worthwhile benchmark for comparison with crowdfunding . The alternative to traditional funding is crowdfunding based on pre - ordering . The timing of the game is now as follows . In the ﬁrst period , the entrepreneur sets the pre - ordering price p c ( with subscript c for “crowd - funders” ) and consumers decide whether or not to pre - order at that price . If 12 This problem was initially examined by Mussa and Rosen ( 1978 ) . 13 In this linear model , this assumption is made without loss of generality . Prices can simply be reinterpreted as markups above a constant marginal cost . 17 they do , they are oﬀered some rewards by the entrepreneur , which increase their willingness to pay for the product . In particular , a consumer of type θ who pre - orders the product is willing to pay up to θ ( 1 + σ ) , where σ mea - sures the magnitude of the community beneﬁts stemming from the crowd - funding experience . Let n c denote the mass of crowdfunders . If n c p c < K , insuﬃcient capital has been collected and the game stops . The crowd then receives its money back . Otherwise , if n c p c ≥ K , the game moves to the sec - ond period where the entrepreneur sets p r , the price for consumers who did not pre - order in period 1 ( with subscript r for “regular consumers” ) . Those consumers then decide to buy or not ( observing all the previous steps ) . 4 . 2 Optimal choice of ﬁnancing source As we solve the game backward for its subgame - perfect Nash equilibrium , we start by analyzing the second period . Suppose that n c p c ≥ K . Then the indiﬀerent consumer between pre - ordering and not is identiﬁed by a taste parameter θ c = 1 − n c . Consumers who can potentially buy the product at period 2 are such that θ ∈ [ 0 , θ c ] . Facing p r , they buy iﬀ θ ≥ p r . Hence , the entrepreneur chooses p r to maximize p r ( θ c − p r ) . The optimal price and second - period proﬁt are easily found as p r ( θ c ) = θ c / 2 and π 2 ( θ c ) = θ 2 c / 4 . We can now move to the ﬁrst period and identify the indiﬀerent consumer between pre - ordering and not as the consumer for whom θ c ( 1 + σ ) − p c = θ c − p r . Using the value of p r that we have just derived , we ﬁnd : θ c = 2 p c / ( 1 + 2 σ ) . We can then write the entrepreneur’s maximization program in period 1 as max p c p c (cid:18) 1 − 2 p c 1 + 2 σ (cid:19) + 1 4 (cid:18) 2 p c 1 + 2 σ (cid:19) 2 , 18 under the following constraints π 1 ≡ p c (cid:18) 1 − 2 p c 1 + 2 σ (cid:19) ≥ K , and 0 ≤ 2 p c 1 + 2 σ ≤ 1 . The unconstrained optimum is given by the ﬁrst - order condition : p ∗ c = ( 1 + 2 σ ) 2 / 2 ( 1 + 4 σ ) . 14 The ﬁrst constraint is satisﬁed if π 1 ≥ K , which can be rewritten as K ≤ σ ( 1 + 2 σ ) 2 ( 1 + 4 σ ) 2 ≡ ¯ K . We have thus two cases to distinguish . First , if K ≤ ¯ K , than the en - trepreneur can set the price p ∗ c . The total proﬁt at the unconstrained opti - mum is then computed as Π c = π 1 + π 2 − K = 1 4 + σ 2 1 + 4 σ − K . ( 2 ) Second , if K > ¯ K , then the unconstrained optimal price and num - ber of crowdfunders are insuﬃcient to cover the capital requirement . Then p c is computed as the solution to π 1 = K . This equality deﬁnes a poly - nomial of the second degree in p c that has real roots as long as K < ( 1 + 2 σ ) / 8 ≡ ˆ K . Put diﬀerently , there is a threshold for the initial capital requirement above which the entrepreneur is unable to ﬁnance her venture through crowdfunding and pre - ordering . In BLS ( 2012 ) , we show that the entrepreneur is then constrained to charge a lower price to crowdfunders : ¯ p c = 14 ( 1 + 2 σ + (cid:112) ( 1 + 2 σ ) ( 1 + 2 σ − 8 K ) ) < p ∗ c . It follows that ¯ π 1 = K , while ¯ π 2 ( which is equal to the total proﬁt ) is computed as ¯Π c = ¯ π 2 = (cid:18) ¯ p c 1 + 2 σ (cid:19) 2 = 1 16 (cid:32) 1 + (cid:114) 1 − 8 K 1 + 2 σ (cid:33) 2 . ( 3 ) 14 We check that the second set of constraints is satisﬁed . We compute indeed θ ∗ c = ( 1 + 2 σ ) / ( 1 + 4 σ ) , which is clearly positive and smaller than unity . 19 We are now in a position to compare the two funding mechanisms . First , it is obvious from expressions ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) that crowdfunding is preferred to traditional funding for K ≤ ¯ K . Second , for K > ¯ K , we compute from expressions ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) that ¯Π c ≥ Π t ⇔ K ≤ 2 σ ( 2 σ + 1 ) ( 4 σ + 1 ) 2 ≡ ˜ K . Collecting the previous results , we can state the following : Proposition 1 ( Optimal Financing Source ) The entrepreneur prefers to ﬁnance the initial capital requirement K through crowdfunding as long as K is not larger than K up = max (cid:110) ˜ K , ¯ K (cid:111) . Otherwise ( and if K < 1 / 4 ) , she opts for traditional funding . We check that K up < ˆ K , K up = ˜ K for σ ≤ 1 / 2 , and K up = ¯ K for σ > 1 / 2 . The intuition behind Proposition 1 is quite simple . On the one hand , crowdfunding has the advantage of oﬀering an enhanced experience to some consumers and , thereby , of allowing the entrepreneur to practice a form of behavior - based price discrimination , which has the potential to increase proﬁts by extracting a larger share of the consumer surplus . On the other hand , the disadvantage is that the entrepreneur is constrained in the ﬁrst period by the amount of capital that she needs to raise . This distorts the price discrimination strategy of the entrepreneur . The larger this amount , the larger the number of consumers that have to be attracted to cover it , which eventually reduces the proﬁtability of the pre - ordering scheme . Empirical observations presented in Sections 2 and 3 . 2 conﬁrm this prediction . 20 4 . 3 For - proﬁt versus non - proﬁt organizations We now enrich our model by considering that before choosing her source of ﬁnancing ( crowdfunding versus traditional funding ) , the entrepreneur also decides upon the organizational form of her venture : for - proﬁt status or non - proﬁt status . The status of the ﬁrm has the following implication : un - der the non - proﬁt status , the entrepreneur is restricted in her ability to distribute proﬁts to herself . In particular , we make the following set of as - sumptions . As in the so - called ‘contract failure literature’ and , especially , in Glaeser and Shleifer ( 2001 ) , we assume that regardless of the status of the ﬁrm , the entrepreneur’s utility is an increasing function of the quality of the community beneﬁts that she provides to her crowdfunders . That is , the entrepreneur gets a higher ( lower ) utility if the quality σ of the com - munity beneﬁts that she provides exceeds ( falls short ) of some exogenously determined level ¯ σ . This can be justiﬁed either by referring to some altruis - tic preference of the entrepreneur ( her desire to provide better quality than what is available on average ) , or as a reduced form of some reputation mech - anism that would be at work in a richer model with asymmetric information and repeat purchases . More precisely , we adopt the following framework . We focus on cases where crowdfunding allows the venture to achieve the optimal price dis - crimination scheme . That is , we take K ≤ ¯ K ( σ ) = σ ( 1 + 2 σ ) 2 / ( 1 + 4 σ ) 2 . Net proﬁts are then given by Π c ( σ ) = 14 + σ 2 1 + 4 σ − K , which are higher than under traditional funding . It is easily checked that Π (cid:48) c ( σ ) > 0 and Π (cid:48)(cid:48) c ( σ ) > 0 . We assume that the cost of community beneﬁts for the entrepreneur is given by C ( σ ) with C (cid:48) > 0 and C (cid:48)(cid:48) > 0 . We also let b > 0 denote the marginal utility for the entrepreneur of increasing the quality of the 21 community beneﬁts . We posit then the following utility functions . If the venture is for - proﬁt , the entrepreneur earns the venture’s proﬁts as income ; she then chooses σ to maximize the quasi - linear utility function : U F = Π c ( σ ) − C ( σ ) + b ( σ − ¯ σ ) . In contrast , if the venture is non - proﬁt , the entrepreneur is forced , because of the non - distribution constraint , to consume proﬁts as perquisites . We assume that the entrepreneur strictly prefers cash to perquisites ; her utility from perquisites is thus modelled as a fraction 0 < δ < 1 of the proﬁts , which leads to the following utility function U N = δ ( Π c ( σ ) − C ( σ ) ) + b ( σ − ¯ σ ) . Maximizing utility with respect to σ allows us to deﬁne the optimal level of community beneﬁts for a for - proﬁt ( σ F ) and for a non - proﬁt ( σ N ) entrepreneur respectively as   Π (cid:48) c ( σ F ) − C (cid:48) ( σ F ) + b = 0 , δ ( Π (cid:48) c ( σ N ) − C (cid:48) ( σ N ) ) + b = 0 . As δ < 1 , we have that C (cid:48) ( σ N ) − Π (cid:48) c ( σ N ) = b / δ > b = C (cid:48) ( σ F ) − Π (cid:48) c ( σ F ) . Then , a suﬃcient condition to have σ N > σ F is that C (cid:48) ( σ ) − Π (cid:48) c ( σ ) increases with σ , or that C (cid:48)(cid:48) ( σ ) > Π (cid:48)(cid:48) c ( σ ) . Take , for instance , C ( σ ) = ( γ / 2 ) σ 2 ; then , the condition C (cid:48)(cid:48) ( σ ) > Π (cid:48)(cid:48) c ( σ ) is equivalent to γ > 2 / ( 4 σ + 1 ) 3 , which is certainly satisﬁed if γ ≥ 2 . This result ( which mirrors Proposition 1 in Glaeser and Shleifer , 2001 ) shows that if the cost of providing community beneﬁts increases faster than the venture’s proﬁt , then a non - proﬁt entrepreneur using crowdfunding will 22 choose a larger level of community beneﬁts than a for - proﬁt entrepreneur . The intuition is clear : because the non - proﬁt entrepreneur has to consume proﬁts as perquisites , which she values less than cash , she puts a relatively larger weight than the for - proﬁt entrepreneur on the non - cash beneﬁt of raising the quality of community beneﬁts , which leads her to provide larger community beneﬁts . Now , remark that ¯ K (cid:48) ( σ ) > 0 , i . e . , the threshold under which crowd - funding is always preferred to traditional funding increases with the level of community beneﬁts . Then , σ N > σ F implies that ¯ K ( σ N ) > ¯ K ( σ F ) . There exists therefore a range of capital requirements , K ∈ (cid:2) ¯ K ( σ F ) , ¯ K ( σ N ) (cid:3) , that non - proﬁt entrepreneurs are able to ﬁnance through crowdfunding while for - proﬁt entrepreneurs are not . 15 The former result may explain why non - proﬁt organizations tend be more successful than for - proﬁt organizations in using crowdfunding : by credibly commiting to provide larger community beneﬁts to crowdfunders , they ex - tend the range of initial capital requirements that can be ﬁnanced through crowdfunding . 5 Empirical analysis of determinants of crowdfund - ing success The previous sections derived empirical predictions on drivers of crowdfund - ing success , in particular with respect to the organizational form adopted by the entrepreneurial ﬁrm . The theoretical model concludes that , ceteris paribus , non - proﬁt organizations should be able to raise larger amounts and 15 The same result holds for initial capital requirements between ¯ K and ˜ K ( where the entrepreneur is constrained in her price discrimination scheme ) . We check indeed that ¯Π (cid:48)(cid:48) c ( σ ) < 0 ( meaning that the condition C (cid:48)(cid:48) ( σ ) > Π (cid:48)(cid:48) ( σ ) is always satisﬁed ) and that ˜ K (cid:48) ( σ ) > 0 . 23 thereby be more successful in attaining their targeted funds . In this section , we empirically investigate these predictions based on our collected sample of individual crowdfunding initiatives . We examine two dimensions of crowdfunding outcome : the total amount raised by the entrepreneur ( the variable Funds raised ) , and the total amount raised as compared to the entrepreneur’s initial target ( the vari - able Success ) . Our ﬁndings are summarized in Tables 4 and 5 . We focus particularly on the relation between the non - proﬁt organizational form and fundraising outcome , controlling for other potential determinants of funds raised . Table 4 shows OLS regressions on the natural logarithm of Funds raised . This table exhibits that non - proﬁt organizations tend to attract larger amounts of money than other forms ( columns 1 - 5 ) , although the coeﬃcient is not al - ways statistically signiﬁcant . When controlling for Company , our other important form of organization , Non - profit clearly becomes strongly sig - niﬁcant . However , this compares Non - profit with forms other than com - panies . The latter form also raises signiﬁcantly more money than these other forms and the diﬀerence between Non - profit and Company is never sta - tistically signiﬁcant ( see the row Test Diﬀ . ( p - value ) at the bottom of the table ) . These results change little across speciﬁcations . 16 In contrast , Ta - ble 5 provides evidence in support of our main theoretical prediction that non - proﬁt entrepreneurs are more successful than for - proﬁt entrepreneurs , including those organized as a company . We estimate Tobit models because the dependent variable , Success , is left - censored by construction ( i . e . , the lower limit is equal to zero ) . The coeﬃcient of Non - profit is large ( columns 16 Untabulated regressions also show that these results do not change if we use bootstrap method for estimating standard errors . The statistics were obtained from 200 replications resampled from the actual dataset . 24 1 - 8 ) and also statistically diﬀerent from the coeﬃcient of Company in all speciﬁcations ( columns 5 - 8 ) . The eﬀect is also economically meaningful : compared to other organizational forms , non - proﬁts tend to raise 129 % more funds than targeted through crowdfunding ( using the coeﬃcient in column 1 ) . Compared to for - proﬁt entrepreneurs structured as company ( the vari - able Company ) , the economic impact is given by the diﬀerence between the two coeﬃcients , which represents 114 % more compared to targeted funds ( using coeﬃcients in column 5 ) . This is remarkable and , as shown in Sec - tion 4 , can be interpreted in line with the contract failure theory that these organizations are better at attracting outside funds because of their possi - ble stronger focus on the social outcome than on monetary gains . While we cannot exclude a possible bias due to the self - reporting of targeted amounts , any bias is likely to occur for all the initiatives ; therefore , there is no speciﬁc reason to expect that entrepreneurs of non - proﬁt organizations are prone to understate more than entrepreneurs of other organizational forms . In other words , such a bias would inﬂate values of the variable Success but it is likely to be similar across all initiatives . According to Tables 4 and 5 , other potential determinants appear to aﬀect the amount raised in crowdfunding initiatives and success . For in - stance , the variable Active implication enters positively and signiﬁcantly in all the regressions in Table 4 , implying that direct involvement by the crowd exerts an important role on the amount of funds raised . Hence , by involving crowdfunders into venture’s activities , which confers them higher community beneﬁts , entrepreneurs extend the levels of capital that are ﬁ - nanced through crowdfunding . However , this result is not supported in the alternative measure , as shown in Table 5 . Next , the use of social networks does not seem to enhance the amount of funds raised , while entrepreneurial 25 initiatives that make a product tend to attract larger amounts of capital than those that oﬀer a service ( in Table 5 only signiﬁcant in some speciﬁ - cations ) . This result may be mechanical , as activities that make a product will on average require larger investments than for providing a service . In - deed , the former may require signiﬁcant production facilities that lead to major capital expenditures upfront . A second possible explanation for this positive eﬀect may stem from the fact that the crowdfunders may be more tempted to provide money if they expect a tangible outcome ; one reason could be that the provision of a product is contractible and thus less subject to uncertainty about quality ( Hart and Moore , 1988 ) . In this case , they may favor initiatives that make a product as opposed to a service . These results are generally robust to the inclusion of additional control variables . For instance , including Funds targeted into the regression of Table 4 does not aﬀect our diagnostics on diﬀerences ( or the lack thereof ) between non - proﬁts and for - proﬁts . However , the variable is positive and signiﬁcant , in line with intuition . Indeed , this variable is likely to cap - ture ﬁnancial needs of the entrepreneur . Age of the ﬁrm ( captured by the variable Age ) does not aﬀect amounts raised nor success of the crowdfund - ing initiative . 17 This suggests that delaying the crowdfunding campaign from the establishment date of the entrepreneurial activity has no eﬀect on the amount collected . Finally , the choice of crowdfunding model ( Equity - based model and Reward - based model ) seems to aﬀect success rate of the initiative ( Table 5 ) , but not the amount raised ( Table 4 ) . Compared to donation - based models ( captured by the constant term ) , we therefore con - clude that the eﬀect of model choice on outcome is unclear in our analysis , or at best weakly against donation - based models . 17 The number of observations drops , however , due to data availability . 26 These tests should be viewed as weak tests for one of the predictions of our theoretical model . Given the small sample size and limitations in the control variables available , these results should be taken with care . Still , they provide useful insights on what drives the success of crowdfunding initiatives and on the speciﬁcities of non - proﬁt organizations . 6 Conclusion This paper examines characteristics of individual crowdunding practices and drivers of fundraising success . To our knowledge , this is the ﬁrst study directly dealing with individual crowdfunding practices based on a hand - collected dataset . We document evidence that the individual crowdfund - ing practice is a way to develop venture’s activities through the process of fundraising , where entrepreneurs may tailor their crowdfunding campaign better than on standardized platforms . This enables entrepreneurs to oﬀer a large variety of compensation to the crowd , including active involvement in terms of time and expertise . We also ﬁnd that such individual initiatives generate on average small amounts of capital comparatively to other ﬁnanc - ing sources . Furthermore , the questionnaire sent to entrepreneurs highlights that crowdfunding allows them to attract attention on their own venture . This can become a vital asset , especially for artists or entrepreneurs in need to present their talent and product to the “crowd” ( as potential customers ) . In other cases , it is a unique way to validate original ideas in front of a speciﬁcally targeted audience . This may in turn provide insights into mar - ket potential of the product oﬀered . We also document that non - proﬁt organizations aﬀect positively the suc - cess chances of entrepreneurs to reach their capital targets . The empirical evidence from multivariate analyses supports our theoretical predictions that 27 non - proﬁt entrepreneurs tend to be more successful in using crowdfunding . In our setting , the reduced focus on proﬁts by such entrepreneurs is viewed by crowdfunders as a credible commitment to provide larger community beneﬁts and , thereby , extends the range of initial capital requirements that can be pledged through crowdfunding . References [ 1 ] Agrawal , A . , C . Catalini , and A . Goldfarb ( 2011 ) . The Geography of Crowdfunding . NBER Working Paper , No . 16820 . [ 2 ] Belleﬂamme , P . , T . Lambert , and A . Schwienbacher ( 2012 ) . Crowd - funding : Tapping the Right Crowd . Working Paper . [ 3 ] Bilodeau , M . and A . Slivinski ( 2004 ) ; Rational Nonproﬁt Entrepreneur - ship . Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 7 : 551 – 571 . [ 4 ] Freear , J . , J . E . Sohl , and W . Wetzel ( 2002 ) . Angles on Angels : Fi - nancing Technology - Based Ventures – a Historical Perspective . Venture Capital – An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 4 : 275 – 287 . [ 5 ] Ghatak , M . and H . Mueller ( 2011 ) . Thanks for Nothing ? Not - for - Proﬁts and Motivated Agents . Journal of Public Economics 95 : 94 – 105 . [ 6 ] Glaeser , E . L . and A . Shleifer ( 2001 ) . Not - for - Proﬁt Entrepreneurs . Journal of Public Economics 81 : 99 – 115 . [ 7 ] Goldfarb , B . , G . Hoberg , D . Kirsch , and A . Triantis ( 2012 ) . Does An - gel Participation Matter ? An Analysis of Early Venture Financing . Working Paper . [ 8 ] Hansmann , H . ( 1996 ) . The Ownership of Enterprise . Cambridge : Har - vard University Press . [ 9 ] Hart , O . and J . Moore ( 1988 ) . Incomplete Contracts and Renegotiation . Econometrica 56 : 755 – 785 . [ 10 ] Hildebrand , T . , M . Puri , and J . Rocholl ( 2011 ) . Skin in the Game : Incentives in Crowdfunding . Working Paper . [ 11 ] Ibrahim , D . M . ( 2008 ) . The ( Not So ) Puzzling Behavior of Angel In - vestors . Vanderbilt Law Review 61 : 1405 – 1452 . 28 [ 12 ] Lin , M . , N . Prabhala , and S . Viswanathan ( 2012 ) . Judging Borrowers by the Company they Keep : Social Networks and Adverse Selection in Online Peer - to - Peer Lending . forthcoming at Management Science . [ 13 ] Linde , L . and A . Prasad ( 2000 ) . Venture Support Systems Project : An - gel Investors . Cambridge : MIT Entrepreneurship Center . [ 14 ] Mollick , E . ( 2012 ) . The Dynamics of Crowdfunding : Determinants of Success and Failures . Mimeo . [ 15 ] Mussa , M . and S . Rosen ( 1978 ) . Monopoly and Product Quality . Jour - nal of Economic Theory 18 : 301 – 317 . [ 16 ] Schwienbacher , A . and B . Larralde ( 2012 ) . Crowdfunding of Small En - trepreneurial Ventures , in D . J . Cumming , ed . The Oxford Handbook of Entrepreneurial Finance . Oxford : Oxford University Press . [ 17 ] Sohl , J . E . ( 2003 ) . The US Angel and Venture Capital Market : Recent Trends and Developments . Journal of Private Equity 6 : 7 – 17 . [ 18 ] Ward , C . and V . Ramachandran ( 2010 ) . Crowdfunding the Next Hit : Microfunding Online Experience Goods . Working Paper . [ 19 ] Wong , A . ( 2010 ) . Angel Finance : The Other Venture Capital , in D . J . Cumming , ed . Venture Capital : Investment Strategies , Structures , and Policies ( John Wiley & Sons : New Jersey ) . [ 20 ] Zhang , J . and P . Liu ( 2012 ) . Rational Herding in Microloan Markets . Management Science 58 : 892 – 912 . 29 T a b l e 1 : D e ﬁn i t i o n o f v a r i a b l e s V a r i a b l e D e ﬁn i t i o n F und i n g o u t c o m e F un d s r a i s e d T o t a l f und s r a i s e d ( i n e a t 2009 m a r k e t p r i ce s ) b y t h e e n t r e p r e n e u r b e t w ee n t h e s t a r t i n g d a t e o f h e r c r o w d f und i n g c a m p a i g n un t il t h e b e g i nn i n g o f 2 0 10 . F un d s t a r g e t e d T o t a l f und s e x p ec t e d i n i t i a ll y ( i n e a t 2009 m a r k e t p r i ce s ) f r o m t h e c r o w d f und i n g c a m p a i g n b y t h e e n t r e p r e n e u r . S u cc e ss R a t i o o f F u n d s r a i s e d t o F u n d s t a r ge t e d . O r g a n i z a t i o n a l f o r m N o n - p r o f i t D u mm y = 1 i f e n t r e p r e n e u r i s w o r k i n g o n b e h a l f o f a n o n - p r o ﬁ t - m a k i n g a ss o c i a t i o n . C o m p any D u mm y = 1 i f t h e c r o w d f und i n g i n i t i a t i v e i s s t r u c t u r e d a s a c o m p a n y . C r o w d f und i n g c h a r a c t e r i s t i c s P r e - o r d e r i n g D u mm y = 1 i f e n t r e p r e n e u r s p r e - s a l e t h e p r o du c t / s e r v i ce b e f o r e p r o du c t i o n t a k e s p l a ce . A ct i v e i m p l i c a t i o n D u mm y = 1 i f c r o w d f und e r s a r e i n v o l v e d i n a n y w a y w h a t s o e v e r i n t h e v e n t u r e t h e y f und . S o c i a l N e t w o r k s D u mm y = 1 i f a t l e a s t o n e o f t h e f o ll o w i n g c o mm un i c a t i o n m e t h o d s i s u s e d : F a ce b oo k , Tw i tt e r , b l og s , L i n k e d I n , M y Sp a ce ; t h e s e m e t h o d s a r e c h a r a c t e r i ze d b y f a c ili t a t i n g s o c i a l n e t w o r k i n g . P r o d u ct D u mm y = 1 i f t h e goa l o f t h e v e n t u r e i s t h e m a k i n g o f a p r o du c t ( c o n v e r s e l y a s e r v i ce ) . N u m b e r o f c r o w d f un d e r s T o t a l nu m b e r o f c r o w d f und e r s p e r 100 c r o w d f und e r s . C r o w d f und i n g m o d e l s E q u i t y - b a s e d m o d e l D u mm y = 1 i f c r o w d f und e r s r ece i v e c o m p e n s a t i o n i n t h e f o r m o f e q u i t y i n t h e v e n t u r e t h e y f und , r e v e nu e , o r p r o ﬁ t - s h a r e a rr a n g e m e n t s . R e w a r d - b a s e d m o d e l D u mm y = 1 i f c r o w d f und e r s r ece i v e a n o n - ﬁn a n c i a l b e n e ﬁ t i n r e t u r n f o r ﬁn a n c i a l c o n t r i bu t i o n s . N o n - ﬁn a n c i a l b e n e ﬁ t s o f t e n t a k e t h e f o r m o f a t o k e n o f a pp r ec i a t i o n o r t h e p r e - o r d e r i n g o f p r o du c t s o r s e r v i ce s . D o na t i o n - b a s e d m o d e l D u mm y = 1 i f c r o w d f und e r s m a k e o n l y d o n a t i o n w i t h o u t a n y k i nd o f r e t u r n ( i . e . , ph il a n t h r o p i c o r s p o n s o r s h i p b a s e d i n ce n t i v e ) . D a t e o f e s t a b li s h m e n t a nd s t a r t o f c r o w d f und i n g c a m p a i g n S t a r t i n g y e a r Y e a r a t w h i c h t h e c r o w d f und i n g c a m p a i g n s t a r t e d . S t a r t i n g a f t e r 20 0 7 D u mm y = 1 i f t h e c r o w d f und i n g c a m p a i g n s t a r t e d i n 2 0 07 o r l a t e r . A g e T h e t i m e s p a n b e t w ee n t h e s t a r t i n g d a t e o f t h e c r o w d f u n d i n g c a m p a i g n a nd t h e e s t a b li s h m e n t d a t e o f t h e o r ga n i z a t i o n a l f o r m . C o un t r y o f r e g i s t r a t i o n U S D u mm y = 1 i f t h e r e g i s t e r e d o ﬃ ce o f e n t r e p r e n e u r i s l o c a t e d i n U S A . E u r o p e D u mm y = 1 i f t h e r e g i s t e r e d o ﬃ ce o f e n t r e p r e n e u r i s l o c a t e d i n a n E u r o p e a n c o un t r y . 30 T a b l e 2 : C h a r a c t e r i s t i c s o f c r o w d f und e d p r o j ec t s : s u mm a r y s t a t i s t i c s a nd s u r v e y o u t pu t A ll t h e v a r i a b l e s i n P a n e l A a r e d e ﬁn e d i n T a b l e 1 . I n f o r m a t i o n s h o w n i n P a n e l B w a s c o ll e c t e d t h r o u g h t h e s u r v e y . P a n e l A : Su mm a r y s t a t i s t i c s V a r i a b l e s M e a n S t d . D e v . M e d i a n M i n . M a x . N b . O b s . F un d i n g o u t c o m e F un d s r a i s e d 149 , 406 . 10 307 , 682 . 30 6 , 431 . 13 35 . 73 1 , 123 , 563 . 00 30 F un d s t a r g e t e d 596 , 286 . 90 1 , 045 , 869 . 00 90 , 000 . 00 59 . 55 5 , 359 , 272 . 00 35 S u cc e ss 0 . 62 0 . 85 0 . 43 0 . 00 4 . 50 30 O r g a n i z a t i o n a l f o r m N o n - p r o f i t 0 . 10 0 . 29 0 . 00 0 . 00 1 . 00 44 C o m p any 0 . 36 0 . 49 0 . 00 0 . 00 1 . 00 44 C r o w d f und i n g c h a r a c t e r i s t i c s P r e - o r d e r i n g 0 . 36 0 . 49 0 . 00 0 . 00 1 . 00 44 A ct i v e i m p l i c a t i o n 0 . 36 0 . 49 0 . 00 0 . 00 1 . 00 44 S o c i a l n e t w o r k s 0 . 78 0 . 42 1 . 00 0 . 00 1 . 00 44 P r o d u ct 0 . 50 0 . 51 0 . 50 0 . 00 1 . 00 44 N u m b e r o f c r o w d f un d e r s 17 . 27 43 . 51 0 . 80 0 . 03 210 31 C r o w d f und i n g m o d e l s E q u i t y - b a s e d m o d e l 0 . 30 0 . 46 0 . 00 0 . 00 1 . 00 44 R e w a r d - b a s e d m o d e l 0 . 61 0 . 49 1 . 00 0 . 00 1 . 00 44 D o na t i o n - b a s e d m o d e l 0 . 09 0 . 29 0 . 00 0 . 00 1 . 00 44 D a t e o f e s t a b li s h m e n t a nd s t a r t o f c r o w d f und i n g c a m p a i g n S t a r i n g y e a r 2 , 007 . 84 1 . 67 2008 2002 2009 32 S t a r t i n g a f t e r 2007 0 . 84 0 . 37 1 . 00 0 . 00 1 . 00 32 A g e 1 . 54 2 . 23 1 . 00 0 . 00 9 . 00 26 C o un t r y o f r e g i s t r a t i o n U S 0 . 30 0 . 46 0 . 00 0 . 00 1 . 00 44 E u r o pe 0 . 55 0 . 50 1 . 00 0 . 00 1 . 00 44 31 T a b l e 2 – C o n t i n u e d P a n e l B : A dd i t i o n a l s t a t i s t i c s b a s e d o n s u r v e y o u t pu t Q u e s t i o n s A n s w e r s ( % ) N b . O b s . 1 . N u m b e r o f f o und e r s : O n e f o und e r o n l y 63 . 2 % 19 Tw o f o und e r s e x a c t l y 15 . 8 % 19 T h r ee f o und e r s e x a c t l y 21 . 1 % 19 2 . Q u e s t i o n : “ D o f o u n d e r s ho l d a u n i ve r s i t y d eg r ee ? ” a Y e s 70 . 0 % 19 N o 20 . 0 % 19 S t ill a tt e nd i n g un i v e r s i t y 10 . 0 % 19 3 . Q u e s t i o n : “ D o c r o w d f u n d e r s e x p ec t t o r ece i ve r e t u r n o r r e w a r d f r o m t h e i r i n ve s t m e n t ? ” Y e s 76 . 5 % 17 N o , t h e y o n l y m a k e a d o n a t i o n 23 . 5 % 17 3 . b i s . Sub - q u e s t i o n : “ I f y e s , w ha t k i n d ? ” D i r e c t c a s h p a y m e n t ( o t h e r t h a n d i v i d e nd s f r o m s h a r e s ) 22 . 2 % 9 Sh a r e s / s t o c k , i n c l ud i n g d i v i d e nd s i n t h e f u t u r e 33 . 3 % 9 R i g h t t o r e c e i v e o w n p r o du c t 66 . 7 % 9 O t h e r 66 . 7 % 9 4 . Q u e s t i o n : “ I f y o u g i ve i n ve s t o r s s ha r e s , do y o u a ll o c a t e v o t i n g r i g h t s t o t h e m ? ” Y e s 18 . 2 % 11 N o 81 . 8 % 11 5 . Q u e s t i o n : “ I f o t h e r s o u r ce s o f ﬁn a n ce t ha n c r o w d f u n d i n g a r e u s e d , p l e a s e s p ec if y w h i c h o n e ( s ) . ” B a n k l oa n 0 . 0 % 9 C o n t r i bu t i o n s f r o m f a m il y a nd / o r f r i e nd s 18 . 8 % 9 B u s i n e ss a n g e l 18 . 8 % 9 F o und e r ’ s o w n m o n e y 25 . 0 % 9 G o v e r n m e n t s ub s i d y 18 . 8 % 9 O t h e r 43 . 8 % 9 6 . Q u e s t i o n : “ W ha t c o n s t i t u t e s y o u r m a i n m o t i v a t i o n s f o r u s i n g c r o w d f u n d i n g ? ” b H i g h r e l e v a n t R e l e v a n t N e u t r a l S o m e w h a t r e l e v a n t N o t r e l e v a n t a t a ll R a i s e m o n e y 92 . 9 % 7 . 1 % 0 . 0 % 0 . 0 % 0 . 0 % G e tt i n g pub li c a tt e n t i o n f o r m y c o m p a n y / p r o j e c t 64 . 3 % 21 . 4 % 7 . 1 % 0 . 0 % 7 . 1 % V a li d a t e m y p r o du c t / s e r v i c e b e f o r e s e lli n g i t ( m a r k e t s u r v e y ) 35 . 7 % 21 . 4 % 7 . 1 % 0 . 0 % 35 . 7 % a I f m o r e t h a n o n e f o und e r i n v o l v e d , w e c o n s i d e r e a c h f o und e r s e p a r a t e l y . b N b . O b s . = 14 f o r a ll t h e t h r ee m o t i v a t i o n s li s t e d . R e s p o nd e n t s c o u l d a l s o c i t e o t h e r m o t i v a t i o n s ; t h e y a r e n o t li s t e d h e r e e x p li c i t l y . 32 T a b l e 3 : C o rr e l a t i o n m a t r i x A ll t h e v a r i a b l e s a r e d e ﬁn e d i n T a b l e 1 . S i g n i ﬁ c a n c e l e v e l s : * * * f o r 1 % , * * f o r 5 % , a nd * f o r 10 % . ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) ( 10 ) ( 11 ) ( 12 ) ( 1 ) F un d s r a i s e d 1 . 00 ( 2 ) S u cc e ss 0 . 32 * 1 . 00 ( 3 ) N o n - p r o f i t 0 . 02 0 . 49 * * * 1 . 00 ( 4 ) C o m p any 0 . 68 * * * - 0 . 01 - 0 . 24 1 . 00 ( 5 ) A ct i v e i m p l i c a t i o n 0 . 16 - 0 . 08 - 0 . 24 0 . 41 * * * 1 . 00 ( 6 ) S o c i a l n e t w o r k s 0 . 03 0 . 07 - 0 . 02 0 . 13 0 . 01 1 . 00 ( 7 ) P r o d u ct 0 . 31 * 0 . 29 0 . 00 0 . 09 0 . 00 0 . 07 1 . 00 ( 8 ) N u m b e r o f c r o w d f un d e r s 0 . 36 * 0 . 27 0 . 17 0 . 35 * 0 . 38 * * - 0 . 25 - 0 . 07 1 . 00 ( 9 ) E q u i t y - b a s e d m o d e l 0 . 20 0 . 01 - 0 . 20 0 . 03 - 0 . 28 * 0 . 23 - 0 . 15 - 0 . 31 * 1 . 00 ( 10 ) R e w a r d - b a s e d m o d e l - 0 . 11 0 . 01 - 0 . 24 0 . 11 0 . 41 * * * - 0 . 09 0 . 14 0 . 34 * - 0 . 82 * * * 1 . 00 ( 11 ) D o na t i o n - b a s e d m o d e l - 0 . 15 - 0 . 03 0 . 73 * * * - 0 . 24 - 0 . 24 - 0 . 22 0 . 00 - 0 . 06 - 0 . 20 - 0 . 40 * * * 1 . 00 ( 12 ) A g e 0 . 42 * - 0 . 08 0 . 14 - 0 . 03 - 0 . 39 * * - 0 . 25 0 . 11 - 0 . 30 0 . 05 - 0 . 19 0 . 19 1 . 00 33 T a b l e 4 : N o n - p r o ﬁ t o r ga n i z a t i o n s a nd t h e a m o un t o f f und s r a i s e d : O L S r e g r e ss i o n s T h e d e p e nd e n t v a r i a b l e i n a ll t h e r e g r e ss i o n s i s t h e n a t u r a l l oga r i t h m o f F un d s r a i s e d . A ll t h e v a r i a b l e s a r e d e ﬁn e d i n T a b l e 1 . T h e m e t h o d o f e s t i m a t i o n i s O L S . A c o n s t a n t t e r m i s i n c l ud e d i n a ll t h e r e g r e ss i o n s , w h o s e c o e ﬃ c i e n t i s n o t r e p o r t e d . N u m b e r s i n p a r e n t h e s e s a r e s t a nd a r d e rr o r s . T h e r o w f o r t h e t e s t o f d i ﬀ e r e n c e r e p o r t s t h e p - v a l u e s f o r t h e nu ll h y p o t h e s i s o f e q u a li t y o f c o e ﬃ c i e n t s o n N o n - p r o f i t a nd C o m p any . S i g n i ﬁ c a n c e l e v e l s : * * * f o r 1 % , * * f o r 5 % , a nd * f o r 10 % . V a r i a b l e s ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) ( 10 ) N o n - p r o f i t a 2 . 62 * 1 . 19 1 . 80 3 . 69 * 3 . 58 * * 3 . 29 * * * 2 . 08 * * 3 . 04 * * 3 . 67 * * 4 . 09 * * * ( 1 . 45 ) ( 1 . 18 ) ( 1 . 45 ) ( 2 . 01 ) ( 1 . 38 ) ( 1 . 11 ) ( 0 . 96 ) ( 1 . 14 ) ( 1 . 50 ) ( 1 . 05 ) C o m p any a 3 . 78 * * * 2 . 87 * * * 3 . 60 * * * 4 . 16 * * * 3 . 30 * * * ( 0 . 86 ) ( 0 . 74 ) ( 0 . 85 ) ( 0 . 94 ) ( 0 . 91 ) A ct i v e i m p l i c a t i o n 4 . 26 * * * 2 . 15 * * * 3 . 33 * * * 4 . 32 * * * 5 . 68 * * * 2 . 61 * * * 1 . 45 * 2 . 36 * * * 2 . 17 * * 3 . 86 * * * ( 1 . 01 ) ( 0 . 93 ) ( 1 . 08 ) ( 1 . 08 ) ( 1 . 07 ) ( 0 . 86 ) ( 0 . 76 ) ( 0 . 85 ) ( 0 . 94 ) ( 0 . 95 ) S o c i a l n e t w o r k s - 0 . 01 - 0 . 56 0 . 47 - 0 . 45 - 1 . 20 - 0 . 63 - 0 . 88 - 0 . 45 - 0 . 58 - 1 . 58 * ( 1 . 08 ) ( 0 . 85 ) ( 1 . 05 ) ( 1 . 22 ) ( 1 . 13 ) ( 0 . 83 ) ( 0 . 68 ) ( 0 . 82 ) ( 0 . 91 ) ( 0 . 86 ) P r o d u ct 3 . 10 * * * 2 . 58 * * * 3 . 10 * * * 3 . 23 * * * 2 . 94 * * * 3 . 19 * * * 2 . 78 * * * 3 . 03 * * * 3 . 13 * * * 3 . 23 * * * ( 0 . 86 ) ( 0 . 68 ) ( 0 . 82 ) ( 0 . 89 ) ( 091 ) ( 0 . 65 ) ( 0 . 54 ) ( 0 . 62 ) ( 0 . 67 ) ( 0 . 69 ) l n ( F un d s t a r g e t e d ) 0 . 46 * * * 0 . 34 * * * ( 0 . 11 ) ( 0 . 09 ) N b o f c r o w d f un d e r s 0 . 02 * 0 . 01 ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 01 ) E q u i t y - b a s e d m o d e l 1 . 72 0 . 44 ( 2 . 14 ) ( 1 . 62 ) R e w a r d - b a s e d m o d e l 1 . 12 1 . 27 ( 1 . 96 ) ( 1 . 46 ) A g e 1 . 18 0 . 61 * ( 0 . 36 ) ( 0 . 32 ) a T e s t D i ﬀ . ( p - v a l u e ) 0 . 71 0 . 46 0 . 66 0 . 79 0 . 55 F - s t a t i s t i c s ( p - v a l u e ) 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 A d j u s t e d R 2 0 . 50 0 . 70 0 . 64 0 . 47 0 . 65 0 . 71 0 . 81 0 . 75 0 . 71 0 . 80 N b . O b s . 30 30 29 30 22 30 30 29 30 22 34 T a b l e 5 : N o n - p r o ﬁ t o r ga n i z a t i o n s a nd f und r a i s i n g s u cce ss : T o b i t r e g r e ss i o n s T h e d e p e nd e n t v a r i a b l e i n a ll t h e r e g r e ss i o n s i s S u cc e ss . A ll t h e v a r i a b l e s a r e d e ﬁn e d i n T a b l e 1 . T h e m e t h o d o f e s t i m a t i o n i s T o b i t . A c o n s t a n t t e r m i s i n c l ud e d i n a ll t h e r e g r e ss i o n s , w h o s e c o e ﬃ c i e n t i s n o t r e p o r t e d . N u m b e r s i n p a r e n t h e s e s a r e s t a nd a r d e rr o r s . T h e r o w f o r t h e t e s t o f d i ﬀ e r e n c e r e p o r t s t h e p - v a l u e s f o r t h e nu ll h y p o t h e s i s o f e q u a li t y o f c o e ﬃ c i e n t s o n N o n - p r o f i t a nd C o m p any . S i g n i ﬁ c a n c e l e v e l s : * * * f o r 1 % , * * f o r 5 % , a nd * f o r 10 % . V a r i a b l e s ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) N o n - p r o f i t a 1 . 29 * * * 0 . 99 * * 2 . 67 * * * 1 . 00 * 1 . 34 * * * 0 . 99 * * 2 . 67 * * * 1 . 06 * * ( 0 . 45 ) ( 0 . 46 ) ( 0 . 47 ) ( 0 . 52 ) ( 0 . 45 ) ( 0 . 47 ) ( 0 . 47 ) ( 0 . 51 ) C o m p any a 0 . 20 - 0 . 01 0 . 04 0 . 35 ( 0 . 34 ) ( 0 . 35 ) ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 44 ) A ct i v e i m p l i c a t i o n 0 . 01 - 0 . 29 - 0 . 02 - 0 . 28 - 0 . 06 - 0 . 27 - 0 . 02 - 0 . 46 ( 0 . 31 ) ( 0 . 34 ) ( 0 . 25 ) ( 0 . 40 ) ( 0 . 34 ) ( 0 . 35 ) ( 0 . 29 ) ( 0 . 46 ) S o c i a l n e t w o r k s - 0 . 08 0 . 08 - 0 . 56 * 0 . 08 - 0 . 11 0 . 09 - 0 . 55 * 0 . 05 ( 0 . 33 ) ( 0 . 33 ) ( 0 . 29 ) ( 0 . 42 ) ( 0 . 33 ) ( 0 . 34 ) ( 0 . 29 ) ( 0 . 42 ) P r o d u ct 0 . 40 0 . 49 * 0 . 53 * * 0 . 57 0 . 39 0 . 48 * 0 . 52 * * 0 . 59 * ( 0 . 26 ) ( 0 . 26 ) ( 0 . 21 ) ( 0 . 34 ) ( 0 . 26 ) ( 0 . 26 ) ( 0 . 21 ) ( 0 . 34 ) N b o f c r o w d f un d e r s 0 . 01 0 . 01 ( 0 . 00 ) ( 0 . 00 ) E q u i t y - b a s e d m o d e l 2 . 18 * * * 2 . 15 * * * ( 0 . 50 ) ( 0 . 51 ) R e w a r d - b a s e d m o d e l 1 . 81 * * * 1 . 80 * * * ( 0 . 46 ) ( 0 . 46 ) A g e - 0 . 12 0 . 52 ( 0 . 14 ) ( 0 . 39 ) a T e s t D i ﬀ . ( p - v a l u e ) 0 . 04 0 . 06 0 . 00 0 . 28 L R χ 2 ( d f ) ( p - v a l u e ) 0 . 04 0 . 03 0 . 00 0 . 12 0 . 06 0 . 04 0 . 00 0 . 15 P s e ud o R 2 0 . 14 0 . 17 0 . 33 0 . 15 0 . 14 0 . 18 0 . 33 0 . 16 N b . O b s . 30 29 30 22 30 29 30 22 35