Arp2 / 3 Controls the Motile Behavior of N - WASP - Functionalized GUVs and Modulates N - WASP Surface Distribution by Mediating Transient Links with Actin Filaments Vincent Delatour , * Emmanue ` le Helfer , * Dominique Didry , * Kim Hoˆ Dieˆp Leˆ , * Jean - Franc x ois Gaucher , y Marie - France Carlier , * and Guillaume Romet - Lemonne * * Cytoskeleton Dynamics and Motility , Laboratoire d’Enzymologie et Biochimie Structurales , Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque , Gif - sur - Yvette , France ; and y Laboratoire de Cristallographie et RMN Biologiques , Universite´ Paris Descartes / Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque ( UMR 8015 ) Faculte´ de Pharmacie , Paris , France ABSTRACT Spatially controlled assembly of actin in branched ﬁlaments generates cell protrusions or the propulsion of intra - cellular vesicles and pathogens . The propulsive movement of giant unilamellar vesicles ( GUVs ) functionalized by N - WASP ( full - length or truncated ) is reconstituted in a biochemically controlled medium , and analyzed using phase contrast and ﬂuorescence microscopy to elucidate the links between membrane components and the actin cytoskeleton that determine motile behavior . Actin - based propulsion displays a continuous regime or a periodic saltatory regime . The transition between the two regimes is controlled by the concentration of Arp2 / 3 complex , which branches ﬁlaments by interacting with N - WASP at the liposome surface . Saltatory motion is linked to cycles in the distribution of N - WASP at the membrane between a homogeneous and a segregated state . Comparison of the changes in distribution of N - WASP , Arp2 / 3 , and actin during propulsion demonstrates that actin ﬁlaments bind to N - WASP , and that these bonds are transitory . This interaction , mediated by Arp2 / 3 , drives N - WASP segregation . VC - fragments of N - WASP , that interact more weakly than N - WASP with the Arp2 / 3 complex , segregate less than N - WASP at the rear oftheGUVs . GUVpropulsionisinhibitedbythe presenceofVCA - actin covalentcomplex , showingthatthe releaseofactinfrom the nucleator is required for movement . The balance between segregation and free diffusion determines whether continuous movement can be sustained . Computed surface distributions of N - WASP , derived from a theoretical description of this segregation - diffusion mechanism , account satisfactorily for the measured density proﬁles of N - WASP , Arp2 / 3 complex , and actin . INTRODUCTION The movements and changes in shape of living cells are elicited by the polarized growth of actin ﬁlaments that causes deformation of the membrane and the formation of protru - sions ( 1 – 4 ) . It is well accepted that the interplay of membrane and cytoskeleton dynamics is at the origin of actin - based motile processes , because signal - controlled protein machin - eries located at the plasma membrane are responsible for the nucleation and regulated growth of ﬁlaments . One of the most studied machineries is the family of WASP / WAVE proteins , activated at the plasma membrane by small GTPases of the Rho family , which use the Arp2 / 3 complex to generate a dendritic array of branched ﬁlaments responsible for the extension of lamellipodia ( 5 , 6 ) . The same actin - based pro - cess , carried out by the same cell components , promotes in - tracellular propulsion of endocytic vesicles and pathogens or vesicle scission in macropinocytosis . The reconstitution of actin - based movement in vitro with ﬁve proteins that were conﬁrmed to be essential for lamelli - podium extension has proven useful to test the concepts at the origin of motility , to measure the force produced by actin polymerization and , by challenging the role of speciﬁc com - ponents , to gain insight into the link between molecular processes and movement at the mesoscopic scale ( 7 – 11 ) . Insertional barbed end growth of ﬁlaments continuously created by branching is fed by treadmilling and arrested by capping ( 11 ) . However , because the molecular details of the elementary steps involved in ﬁlament branching are not fully elucidated and some remain controversial , several molecular models have been proposed and debated ( see ( 12 ) , for re - view ) . One model proposed that the Arp2 / 3 complex , activated at the membrane , dissociates from the membrane and binds to the side of existing ﬁlaments , initiating a lateral branch ( 6 , 13 ) . The insertional growth of the barbed ends develops protrusion . In this model , the ﬁlaments are never attached to the membrane . On the other hand , evidence showed that the actin ﬁlament meshwork is attached to propelling Listeria ( 14 ) and that Arp2 / 3 is incorporated in the actin tail upon branching at the surface of propelling N - WASP - coated beads , at the same rate as ﬁlaments grow ( 11 ) . Interestingly , ﬂuorescence speckle microscopy analysis of the dynamics of actin and Arp2 / 3 complex in the lamellipodial branched ﬁlament array of mi - grating Drosophila S2 cells also show that like in the bio - mimetic system , Arp2 / 3 is incorporated into the network at the cell edge and undergoes treadmilling - driven retrograde ﬂow at the same rate of 2 . 44 m m / min as actin speckles ( 15 ) . Although both in vitro and in vivo observations support the doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 107 . 118653 Submitted August 9 , 2007 , and accepted for publication February 12 , 2008 . Vincent Delatour and Emmanue ` le Helfer contributed equally to this work . Address reprint requests to Guillaume Romet - Lemonne , E - mail : romet @ lebs . cnrs - gif . fr . Editor : Gerard Marriott . (cid:2) 2008 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 08 / 06 / 4890 / 16 $ 2 . 00 4890 Volume 94 June 2008 4890 – 4905 Biophysical Journal view that ﬁlament barbed end branching and growth occur at the same rate at the membrane - ﬁlament barbed end interface , the biochemical and structural details of the underlying mo - lecular mechanism are not fully understood . The catalytically active VCA domain of N - WASP comprises a WH2 domain ( V , for verprolin - homology ) that binds a G - actin molecule , while the connector ( C ) region and the acidic ( A ) region to - gether bind Arp2 / 3 complex . Polymerization assays in bulk solution show that neither VC nor CA fragments support branched ﬁlament formation . Filament branching requires the binding of the ternary complex of VCA with G - actin and Arp2 / 3 to a ﬁlament ( 13 ) . A recent report by Co et al . ( 16 ) showed that when the isolated WH2 domain was presented at the surface of lipid - coated beads , the WH2 - actin moiety associated with ﬁlament barbed ends independently of Arp2 / 3 complex . How the association and dissociation of WH2 - actin and CA - Arp2 / 3 may occur during ﬁlament branching and growth is not known , but has bearings in motile behavior at the mesoscopic scale . The idea of a transient attachment of membrane - bound N - WASP to a ﬁlament led to the tethered ratchet model ( 17 ) , in which attached ﬁlaments pull and free ﬁlaments grow and push . In contrast with the transient attachment model , a third model of permanent attachment , or end - tracking model , also called ‘‘actoclampin’’ ( 18 , 19 ) , assumes that N - WASP ( or ActA 1 VASP in the Listeria case ) makes an ATP - dependent clamp that is permanently attached to the growing ﬁlament like a stepping motor . In the cellular context , actin polymerizes against the de - formable plasma membrane . Here , N - WASP is in a ﬂuid environment and its diffusion within the lipid bilayer may be hampered by transient or permanent attachment to a ﬁlament ( 20 ) . The ability of N - WASP to diffuse freely or to be maintained in clusters in the membrane may also affect the morphogenesis of the actin meshwork . Finally , the mechan - ical and rheological properties of the membrane may impose a reaction to the force developed by actin polymerization , and thus regulate motility . The simple actin - based motility assay that consists of solid microspheres functionalized with N - WASP at ﬁxed positions and propelling in a reconstituted medium of pure proteins ( 11 ) is not appropriate to provide insight into these issues , and soft , ﬂuid objects such as func - tionalized vesicles ( 21 – 24 ) or droplets ( 25 , 26 ) can be used instead . These issues are addressed here by analyzing reconstituted actin - based propulsion of giant unilamellar vesicles ( GUVs ) in controlled biochemical conditions . We show that the con - centration of Arp2 / 3 complex controls a transition in the regime of propulsion from continuous to saltatory type . Changes in the distribution of N - WASP at the surface of GUVs during saltatory propulsion correlate with changes in velocity of the vesicles . The segregation of N - WASP appears mainly driven by Arp2 / 3 - mediated transient interaction of N - WASP with actin ﬁlaments . Consistently , vesicles func - tionalized with the VC fragment of N - WASP which binds Arp2 / 3 and branches ﬁlaments at a low frequency show a reduced segregation of the nucleator . The presence of the covalent VCA - actin complex at the vesicle surface poisons actin - based movementbypreventingdetachmentofVCA from ﬁlaments . These conclusions are supported by a model in which segregation - diffusion of N - WASP is linked to the cat - alytic cycle of ﬁlament transient attachment upon branching . The model quantitatively accounts for the experimentally observed density proﬁles of N - WASP at the vesicle surface . MATERIALS AND METHODS Giant unilamellar vesicles ( GUVs ) electroformation and functionalization 1 , 2 - Dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine ( DOPC ) and 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - [ ( N - ( 5 - amino - 1 - carboxypentyl ) iminodiacetic acid ) succinyl ] Nickel salt ( DOGS - NTA - Ni ) were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids , Alabaster , AL and stored at – 20 (cid:3) C as chloroformous solutions ( 10 mg / ml for DOPC , 5 mg / ml for DOGS - NTA - Ni ) . Mixtures of DOPC and DOGS - NTA - Ni in a 9 : 1 mol / mol ratio were prepared and stored for one month at (cid:2) 20 (cid:3) C . An original electroformation method was developed , based on the tech - nique described in ( 27 ) , to obtain 5 – 10 m m GUVs in the buffer suitable for the experiments , and in a shorter period of time ( 20 min instead of 3 – 4 h ) . To obtain a homogeneous distribution of lipids in liposomes , the miscibility was increased by using phospholipids of identical acyl chains . The phospholipid mixture ( 2 3 10 m l , at 8 . 5 mg / ml ) was deposited on two indium tin oxide glass plates ( 10 cm 2 ) and dried for 2 h under vacuum . The plates were assembled face - to - face and separated by an 800 - m m polymer spacer ( Gel - Film , from Gel - Pak , Hayward , CA ) . The chamber was ﬁlled with the swelling solution ( 5 mM Tris - HCl pH 7 . 8 , 1 mM CaCl 2 , 100 m M DTT , 0 . 01 % NaN 3 , and 265 mM sucrose ) . An alternating electric ﬁeld of 5 V / mm at10Hzwasappliedbetweenthetwoplates . Theformationofliposomeswas directly monitored by phase contrast light microscopy . Once vesicles had reached the desired size ( typically 25 m m ) , the electric ﬁeld was shut down and the vesicle suspension was carefully extracted to prevent vesicle shearing . The vesicles were stored on ice for 2 – 3 weeks . The vesicle concentration was roughly estimated by diluting the original preparation in an isotonic medium ( 300 mOsm ) supplemented with glucose instead of sucrose , allowing sedimentation of the vesicles and facilitating their numbering . According to the estimated concentration , the vesicle sus - pensionwas diluted ( routinely 5 - to 10 - fold ) in swellingbuffer and incubated with 400 nM N - WASP , during at least 3 h . Proteins Actin was puriﬁed from rabbit muscle ( 28 ) , isolated in the monomeric ( G - actin ) form by gel ﬁltration on Superdex - 200 and labeled in ﬁlamentous form with rhodamine - NHS ( cat . No . C1171 ; Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) or Alexa568 Succinimidyl ester ( cat . No . A20003 ; Invitrogen ) ( 29 ) . Recom - binant human ADF and gelsolin were expressed and puriﬁed as described ( 30 ) . Proﬁlin was puriﬁed from bovine spleen ( 31 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex was puriﬁed from bovine brain ( 32 ) and labeled with Alexa 488 maleimide ( cat . No . A10254 , Invitrogen ) ( 11 ) . His - tagged human N - WASP was expressed in Sf9 cells using the baculovirus system ( 32 ) . His - tagged VCA , VC and V constructs derived from N - WASP were bacterially expressed . VCA was obtained by inserting the DNA region of VCA of N - WASP into the pET100 / D - TOPO vector . VC and V were obtained by inserting the DNA region in the expression vector pBAD33 - GFP ( H . Benabdelhak , unpublished data ) . N - WASP and VC were labeled with Alexa 488 maleimide ( 11 ) . The covalent VCA - actin complex was obtained by EDC conjugation ( 33 ) as follows . G - actin ( 15 m M , 40 ml in 5 mM HEPES , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM Transient N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 - Filament Bonds 4891 Biophysical Journal 94 ( 12 ) 4890 – 4905 ATP ) was activated with 2 mM EDC and 2 mM sulfo - NHS for 20 min at pH 6 . 5 at room temperature . One molar equivalent VCA was added ( ﬁnal actin and VCA concentrations were 10 m M ) , the pH was adjusted to 7 . 5 and the reaction was allowed to proceed for 20 min before quenching by 10 mM glycine . The mixture was loaded on 2 ml Ni - Sepharose ( GE Healthcare , Waukesha , WI ) . His - tagged VCA , VCA - actin covalent adduct and a small amount of free actin were eluted with 75 mM imidazole . The eluate was applied to a Superdex G200 16 / 60 column ( Pharmacia , Peapack , NJ ) equil - ibrated in G buffer containing 0 . 2 mM ADP that weakens the interaction of VCA with G - actin ( 34 ) , to dissociate most of the noncovalent VCA - actin complex , and 10 m M Ap5A to inhibit myokinase - mediated ATP production . The gel ﬁltration step was repeated twice in ATP - G - buffer . The covalent VCA - actin complex was recovered 95 % pure with 1 % ﬁnal yield ( Fig . S4 ) . Actin polymerization assay Actin ( 2 . 5 m M , 10 % pyrenyl - labeled ) was polymerized in F - actin buffer ( 5 mM Tris - HCl pH 7 . 8 , 1 mM DTT , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 1 M KCl , 0 . 2 mM EGTA and 1 mM MgCl 2 ) in presence of Arp2 / 3 complex and nucleator ( VC , VCA , or VCA - actin ) . Polymerization was monitored by the increase in pyrene ﬂuorescence using a spectroﬂuorimeter ( Safas Xenius , Monte Carlo , Monaco ) . Motility assay Thevesiclemotility medium was adapted from the standardmotility medium designed for N - WASP - functionalized polystyrene beads ( 11 ) and consisted of 13 . 5 m M F - actin , 2 . 4 m M proﬁlin , 100 nM gelsolin , 50 nM Arp2 / 3 , 4 m M ADF in glucose buffer ( 5 mM Tris pH 7 . 8 , 60 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 2 mM ATP , 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 , 1 % ( wt / vol ) BSA , 0 . 1 % ( wt / vol ) methylcellulose , 0 . 01 % NaN 3 , 1 mM DTT , 0 . 2 mM DABCO , 50 mM sucrose and 100 mM glucose ) . Changes in the composition of the medium are indicated in the text . One microliter of functionalized vesicles was added to 9 m l of motility medium preincubated for 10 min at room temperature to reach the steady state of actin assembly . The solution was placed between a slide and a coverslip , separated by thick hydrophobic walls ( ; 80 – 100 m m ) drawn using a hydrophobic marker pen ( DakoCytomation , Copenhagen , Denmark ) to prevent vesicle shearing , and sealed with Vaseline / lanolin / parafﬁn ( Valap , 1 : 1 : 1 ) . The samples were observed either in phase contrast or in ﬂuorescence microscopy . Phase contrast imaging was performed using a Diaphot mi - croscope ( Nikon , Tokyo , Japan ) equipped with a 20 3 air objective ( NA 0 . 5 ) , a motorized stage ( Ma¨rzha¨user Wetzlar , Pleasanton , CA ) , and a charge - coupled device camera ( Orca II ERG ; Hamamatsu , Hamamatsu City , Japan ) . Fluorescence imaging was performed using an AX70 microscope ( Olympus , Melville , NY ) equipped with a 60 3 immersion objective ( NA 1 . 42 ) , a motorized stage ( Ma¨rzha¨user ) , and an electron - multiplying charge - coupled device camera ( Cascade II 512 ; Photometrics , Tucson , AZ ) . MetaMorph 6 . 3 software ( Universal Imaging , Burbank , CA ) was used for image acquisition , stage control , and the Olympus microscope control . Images were analyzed with MetaMorph and ImageJ ( National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD ) softwares . Statistical analysis of the types of movement Static phase contrast pictures were acquired after 1 – 3 h incubation of the vesicles in the motility medium containing various concentrations of Arp2 / 3 or gelsolin . Assays were repeated 3 – 8 times with three different vesicle suspensions , at each given composition of the medium . In each assay , 500 – 1000 vesicles were randomly selected . Motile behaviors were classiﬁed in three categories , identiﬁed by the morphology of the actin tails : continuous movement was characterized by a homogeneous actin tail , saltatory move - ment by periodically dense and light actin tails , and intermediate movement by actin tails showing irregular nonperiodic density changes . Measurement of the amount of N - WASP bound to the vesicle membrane The surface density of vesicle - bound N - WASP was evaluatedusing standard N - WASP - coated beads . Carboxylated polystyrene beads ( 6 m m diameter , 2 . 5 % solid , Polysciences , Warrington , PA ) were incubated in X buffer ( 10 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 8 , 0 . 1 M KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM ATP , 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 , and 0 . 01 % NaN 3 ) containing Alexa488 - labeled N - WASP at a series of concentrations ( 0 – 1 . 6 m M ) for 1 h at 4 (cid:3) C , under agitation . Further in - cubation with BSA ( 10 mg / ml ) for 15 min blocked free adsorption sites . Beads were washed twice in 250 m l X buffer , and suspended at 0 . 25 % solid in X buffer containing 1 mg / ml BSA . The amount of adsorbed protein was determined by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting using an anti - N - WASP polyclonal antibody and ImageJ analysis ( 11 ) . Analysis of the supernatants showed that the amount of nonbound activators was negligible . The surface density of immobilized Alexa488 - N - WASP ( d s , in molecules per nm 2 ) was derived . Functionalized beads were then observed in ﬂuorescence micros - copy . The ﬂuorescence of at least 50 beads was measured in each sample . The ﬂuorescence of Alexa488 - N - WASP - coated vesicles was similarly measured and compared to that of Alexa488 - N - WASP - coated beads to de - termine the surface density of N - WASP on the membrane . Measurement of protein distribution at the vesicle surface TheﬂuorescenceoflabeledN - WASP , Arp2 / 3 , andactinwas measuredalong the vesicle contour using Metamorph 6 . 3 software . The protein distribution on the surface of moving vesicles was quantiﬁed by computing the ‘‘seg - regation ratio’’ , deﬁned as the ratio of the ﬂuorescence signal integrated over the rear half of the vesicle contour , and the integral over the whole contour . To check that illumination of the vesicles did not interfere with movement andsegregationdynamics , staticpicturesofdifferentvesicleswerealsotaken atdifferentstagesofsaltatorymovement , andthesegregationratiowasveriﬁed to be compatible with the values of the green curve shown on Fig . 3 B . In the case of Arp2 / 3 , the ﬂuorescent signal coming from the Arp2 / 3 in - corporated in the actin gel near the surface was subtracted to compute the distributionofArp2 / 3boundtothemembrane . ThiscontributionofArp2 / 3in the nearby gel was estimated by measuring the ﬂuorescent signal from actin at the GUV surface , and multiplying it by the local branching density ( Fig . S3 ) . The branching density at the rear and at the sides of the GUV was considered to be the same as the branching density measured along a cross - section of the actin comet tail . Since the branching density is higher at the centerofthecometthanatitssides ( 22 ) , itishigherattherearoftheGUVthan at the sides of the GUV . The branching density at the front of the GUV was assumedto be constantandequal to thelowest valueof thebranchingdensity measured in the actin comet tail . The resulting Arp2 / 3 proﬁle depends mildly on this assumption : Arp2 / 3 appears less segregated if we consider a lower branchingdensityatthefrontoftheGUV , butitstillremainsmoresegregated thanN - WASP , evenifthebranchingdensityatthefrontoftheGUVisassumed to be 50 % lower than the lowest value measured in the comet tail ( Fig . S3 ) . The dependence of segregation ratios on a varying parameter , like the concentrationofoneproteininthemotilitymediumorthedensityofnucleatoratthemembrane , wasmeasuredonthesamebatchofvesiclesonthesameday ( from one vesicle batch to another , membrane composition can vary slightly , affecting the activator recruitment , and therefore the motile behavior ) . For each measurement , segregationratios were statistically averagedover at least ﬁve GUVs in each sample . RESULTS Vesicle propulsion occurs in a restricted range of surface density of N - WASP When placed in the standard motility medium , N - WASP func - tionalized vesicles ﬁrst initiated the growth of an isotropic actin 4892 Delatour et al . Biophysical Journal 94 ( 12 ) 4890 – 4905 gel at the surface , like N - WASP - coated beads . Propulsion cannot occur unless symmetry of this actin shell is broken by a local rupture in the actin gel that allows the vesicle to escape . The mechanism of symmetry - breaking that precedes the es - tablishment of polarizedmovement differs forﬂuid vesicles and solid beads , as analyzed in detail elsewhere ( 22 ) . Brieﬂy , the location of the break is deﬁned by a local lower actin density at the vesicle surface , while for beads it starts with the fracture of the outer region of the gel . The pressure developed by the growth of the actin gel around the actin - bound lipid surface enhances the local weakness of the gel , induces the formation of an expanding zone of low ﬁlament density , and eventually pushes the vesicle out of this zone . This process develops in 30 min , while the break of symmetry of the actin gel leading to polarizedmovementofsolidbeadsoccurswithinafewminutes . The formation of a zone of low actin density at the vesicle surface implies that local inhomogeneities in N - WASP density can occur , which is possible only in a restricted range of global N - WASP densities . The surface density of N - WASP was controlled either by the density of Ni - NTA - derivatized lipids that bind His - tagged N - WASP , or by the concentration of N - WASP during the functionalization step . An optimum surface density of 0 . 19 6 0 . 06 molecules / 100 nm 2 , corresponding to a mean distance of 23 nm between nearest neighbors , was required for vesicles to break symmetry and be propelled . These conditions were met by incubating vesicles containing 10 % Ni - lipids in the presence of 400 nM N - WASP for 3 h . At lower densities of N - WASP , the actin meshwork lacked the cohesive structure required for a break to occur , and the vesicle remained nonmotile , entrapped in a homogeneous actin shell . At high densities of N - WASP , the pressure de - veloped by the growth of a dense actin gel was high enough to cause the collapse of the vesicles before symmetry was broken ( Fig . S1 A ) . In some cases , ﬁssion events were re - corded , in which a fraction of the vesicle budded out and was expelled while the force developed by actin assembly was sufﬁcient to cause the contraction of the lipid ‘‘neck’’ , thus entrapping the remaining fraction of the vesicle in the actin gel . The former , expelled vesicle generally propelled itself with an actin tail , while the latter vesicle remained surrounded by a dense actin gel and was nonmotile ( Fig . S1 B and Movie S1 ) . The process is reminiscent of the macropinocytosis events reported and analyzed in vivo ( 35 , 36 ) . Similar ﬁssion events are generated when N - WASP present in cell extracts is re - cruited at the surface of ARF1 - coated GUVs ( 23 ) . The motile behavior of N - WASP - functionalized GUVs is controlled by Arp2 / 3 complex Once expelled from the actin gel , N - WASP functionalized vesicles displayed a variety of motile behaviors , from a continuous regime of propulsion with a homogeneous actin tail ( Fig . 1 A ) , to a periodic ‘‘saltatory’’ regime that was characterized , in phase contrast microscopy , by alternating light and dark ( i . e . , dense ) regions , in steps of a few microns ( Fig . 1 B and Movie S2 in Data S1 ) . Based on ﬂuorescence measurements , the actin concentration was 1 . 5 – 2 . 5 times higher in the dark than in the light regions . Small ( , 5 m m in FIGURE 1 The biochemical composition of the medium affects the motile behavior of GUVs . Phase contrast images of N - WASP - functionalized vesicles placed in a motility medium ( 50 nM Arp2 / 3 and 100 nM gelsolin ) , and under - going saltatory ( A ) , continuous ( B ) , and intermediate ( C ) movement . Scale bars ¼ 10 m m . Graphs show the percent - age of vesicles undergoing saltatory ( solid circles ) , contin - uous ( open circles ) , and intermediate ( triangles ) movement as a function of Arp2 / 3 concentration , at 100 nM gelsolin ( D ) ; and as a function of gelsolin concentration , at 50 nM Arp2 / 3 ( E ) . Thecurvesarea guide to the eye . Each data point corresponds to an average over a collection of 3 – 8 vesicle preparations . Error bars indicate the standard deviation . Transient N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 - Filament Bonds 4893 Biophysical Journal 94 ( 12 ) 4890 – 4905 diameter ) as well as large ( . 10 m m in diameter ) vesicles ex - hibited both types of movement . Only vesicles undergoing a regular periodic movement , with a deﬁned step size , were classiﬁed as ‘‘saltatory’’ . Chaotic behaviors in which the sal - tatory movement was not regularly periodic were also recorded and deﬁned as ‘‘intermediate’’ movement ( Fig . 1 C ) . In the continuous regime , vesicles move at constant ve - locity , while in the saltatory regime vesicles repeat the initial expulsion process in a cycling fashion ( see Movie S2 , in Data S1 , and ( 22 ) ) . The directionality of propulsion is determined by the primary expulsion step , which deﬁnes the front and rear regions , and is maintained all along the trajectory . The velocity of the saltatory vesicles varied periodically , with maximal speed ( peak velocity can reach over 10 m m / min ) correlating with regions of lower actin density . Similar sal - tatory behaviors have been observed with solid particles ( 8 , 22 , 37 ) , oil droplets ( 26 ) , or mutated Listeria ( 38 , 39 ) . The saltatory propulsion of liposomes offers a unique opportunity to understand the mechanistic links between the force pro - duced by actin polymerization , the deformation of the membrane , the diffusion of N - WASP in the lipid bilayer , and the velocity of the GUV . To determine whether changes in the frequency of ﬁlament branching were responsible for the saltatory movement , we measured the Arp2 / 3 : actin ratio , which represents the branching density of the actin meshwork , using double ﬂuo - rescence measurements of Alexa488 - Arp2 / 3 and rhodamine - actin ( 11 ) ( Fig . S2 ) . The branching density was constant along the axis of the actin tail of continuously propelled vesicles , as reported in the case of beads ( 11 ) . The branching density was also mostly constant , or increased slightly up to 30 % in dense actin regions , along the tails of saltatory vesicles . The poor correlation of these modest changes in ﬁlament branching density with the periodicity observed in phase contrast sug - gests that saltatory motion is not due to periodic changes in the rate of ﬁlament branching . The dependence of the motility regime on the concentra - tions of Arp2 / 3 ( which controls the rate of ﬁlament branch - ing ) and gelsolin ( which controls the rate of ﬁlament capping ) was examined ( Fig . 1 , D and E ) . A statistical analysis showed that the saltatory motion was predominant at low Arp2 / 3 concentration : nearly all vesicles exhibited a hopping be - havior at 25 – 50 nM Arp2 / 3 , but only 40 % did so at 250 nM Arp2 / 3 . Almost no movement was detected at Arp2 / 3 con - centrations , 25 nM . A bell - shaped gelsolin concentration dependence of saltatory movement was observed , with a maximum at 100 nM gelsolin , similarly to the gelsolin - de - pendence of the velocity of beads in a continuous regime of motion ( 11 ) . These results suggest that a threshold rate of ﬁlament branching by the membrane - bound N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 com - plex is required for GUVs to perpetuate the formation of the actin tail and move at constant velocity . The following ex - periments were performed to understand how the transition from continuous to saltatory movement is controlled . Saltatory and continuous movement : the role of N - WASP distribution To understand which molecular reactions occur at the lipo - some - ﬁlament interface and determine saltatory propulsion , we measured the time course of deformation and velocity of the vesicle by tracking the front and the rear boundaries during one step . Time t ¼ 0 is deﬁned as the beginning of a cycle , when the vesicle is at rest . The sequence of events corre - sponding to a saltatory cycle decomposed in three phases , referred to as phases I , II , and III as follows ( Fig . 2 ) : Phase I ( t ¼ 0 to t ¼ 350 s , for the GUV shown in Fig . 2 ) . The vesicle initiates a ( quasi ) symmetrical actin shell , which breaks open typically at t ¼ 40 s ( Fig . 2 ) . The vesicle gradually elongates as it is pushed out of the actin shell , over a time period from t ¼ 40 s to t ¼ 350 s . In this process , the center of mass moves at ; 0 . 5 m m / min ( average between front and rear velocities ) . Phase II ( t ¼ 350 s to t ¼ 470 s ) covers the rapid expulsion and relaxation of the deformation of the GUV . The rear of the vesicle rapidly detaches from the actin gel , the vesicle moves out of the actin shell , a velocity peak of at least 10 m m / min is reached , while the vesicle recovers a quasi - spherical shape . Phase III ( t ¼ 470 s to t ¼ 680 s ) . After expulsion , the vesicle gradually slows down until it stops . During phase I , movement is slow and mainly results from the deformation of the vesicle due to the compression by the growing actin shell . During phase II , rapid movement results from the mechanical conversion of the energy stored in vesicle deformation . During phase III , the shape of the GUV remains unchanged , and movement is driven by the poly - merization of actin that slows down gradually until the vesicle stops . The new actin shell formed at the end of phase III , at the onset of a new cycle , is not perfectly symmetrical . The preferential formation of the actin gel at the rear of the vesicle biases the direction of the next step . Phases I and II represent the break of symmetry and the escape of the GUV out of the dense actin shell , which initiate both saltatory and continuous propulsive movements . How - ever , in continuous movement the vesicle does not slow down during phase III . To get insight into the molecular mechanism that controls the switch from continuous to sal - tatory movement in phase III , we sought distinctive physical and chemical parameters of the vesicles in the two regimes , as follows . The extent of deformation of the vesicles did not correlate with a particular motile behavior . In continuous movement as well as in phase III of saltatory movement , large differences in the extent of deformation among vesicles were recorded . Some vesicles remained spherical in either regime . This is probably due to variations of the elastic properties between 4894 Delatour et al . Biophysical Journal 94 ( 12 ) 4890 – 4905 different vesicles , allowing more or less deformation during the expulsion step . In previous studies of actin - based propulsion of ﬂuid ob - jects , a higher density of nucleators at the rear of the object during movement was observed ( 21 , 24 – 26 ) . We therefore analyzed the distribution of ﬂuorescently - labeled N - WASP on vesicles during continuous or saltatory movement com - paratively , by computing the segregation ratio , which rep - resents the fraction of the observed N - WASP population that is located in the rear half of the contour of the vesicle ( Fig . 3 A . Note that all measurements were carried out with the same average surface density of N - WASP ) . During saltatory propulsion , the value of this ratio cycles between 0 . 5 , cor - responding to a homogeneous distribution of the N - WASP population , effectively measured at time zero , and 0 . 6 , cor - responding to a 1 . 5 - fold higher surface density of N - WASP in the rear than in the front half of the vesicle ( Fig . 3 B ) . The segregation ratio increases up to 0 . 6 during phases I and II , as the vesicle is expelled from the actin shell , and decreases steeply to 0 . 5 during phase III , as the vesicle slows down and stops . Hence phase III corresponds to the evolution of N - WASP distribution from a segregated to a uniform distribution . During continuous movement , the high value of the seg - regation ratio ( 0 . 60 6 0 . 03 in standard GUV motility con - ditions ) reached upon expulsion from the initial actin shell was subsequently maintained ( green dashed line in Fig . 3 B ) . These results are in agreement with independent data from Giardini et al . ( 21 ) , showing an asymmetric distribution of ActA ( another activator of Arp2 / 3 ) at the surface of contin - uously moving vesicles . We derived a rough estimate of 0 . 64 for the ActA segregation ratio in Giardini et al . ’s data . In another study , a very strong segregation of VCA ( the con - stitutively active part of N - WASP ) , corresponding to the gathering of 90 % of the VCA molecules at the rear of con - tinuously moving oil droplets , was reported ( 25 ) . In a recent study by Trichet et al . ( 26 ) , it was proposed that the saltatory movement of VCA - coated oil droplets placed in cell extracts supplemented with VASP could result from variations in the distribution of VCA at the droplet surface , but no measurements were presented . Here we show evi - dence for a direct correlation between the maintenance of nucleator segregation and continuous movement . We further show that in saltatory movement , the changes in velocity correlate with changes in nucleator distribution . Constant velocity correlates with a highly segregated distribution of N - WASP . The decrease in velocity ( phase III ) correlates with the loss of N - WASP segregation ( Fig . 3 B ) . A segregation ratio of 0 . 60 6 0 . 03 was averaged over vesicles undergoing continuous propulsion , with a minimum value of 0 . 55 . For vesicles in saltatory movement , we observed that the segre - gation ratio typically dropped below 0 . 55 during phase III . Thus , a threshold value of ; 0 . 55 marks the transition from the saltatory to the continuous regime of propulsion . To elucidate whether the segregation of N - WASP is at the origin or arises as a consequence of a particular type of motile behavior , the chemical reactions that establish the link be - tween N - WASP and the actin meshwork must be analyzed in detail . An important issue concerns the permanent or tran - sitory nature of these links during movement . This point is FIGURE 2 Kinetic analysis of the deformation and ve - locity of a GUV during saltatory propulsion . A 8 . 1 - m m diameter vesicle propels in steps of 13 m m , every 680 s ( average velocity is 1 . 14 m m / min ) , in standard motility medium ( top left ) . A time - lapse phase contrast image of one of the steps is shown in bottom panel . Scale bar ¼ 10 m m . The graphs ( top right ) show the velocities of the front ( solid circles , solid line ) and the rear ( open circles , dashed line ) of thevesicle , andvesicledeformation , i . e . , itslength L divided by its average diameter D ( triangles ) , as a function of time . The horizontal dashed line indicates the average velocity of vesicles moving continuously , under the same conditions : 1 . 1 6 0 . 3 m m / min . The vertical dotted lines mark the boundaries of the three different phases that make one step : deformation ( I ) , expulsion ( II ) , and slowing down ( III ) . Datapointsare20sapart . Time t ¼ 0correspondstothe beginning of a period , when the vesicle is stopped . The data points represent measurements averaged over four subse - quent steps . Transient N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 - Filament Bonds 4895 Biophysical Journal 94 ( 12 ) 4890 – 4905 addressed by image analysis of the correlated distributions of N - WASP and actin at the surface of the vesicles during movement . Another type of independent information can be obtained either by replacing the original N - WASP nucleator by N - WASP derivatives chemically modiﬁed to display an altered ﬁlament branching activity , or by interfering with N - WASP function by addition of dead - end adducts . The following experiments were designed . N - WASP molecules bind transiently to actin ﬁlaments In continuous movement , the distributions of actin and N - WASP at the surface of vesicles are qualitatively similar , actin being more segregated than N - WASP ( 0 . 72 6 0 . 07 and 0 . 60 6 0 . 03 , respectively ) . The distributions of actin and N - WASP were analyzed comparatively during a saltatory cycle , during which N - WASP cycles between a segregated and a homogeneous distribution ( Fig . 3 B ) . We observed that the actin segregation ratio cycles similarly , except for a delayed loss of actin segregation compared to that of N - WASP during phase III . This behavior is evidenced by monitoring the evolution of the N - WASP segregation ratio divided by the actin segregation ratio ( Fig . 3 C ) : In phases I and II , N - WASP and actin co - segregate , and the actin meshwork and N - WASP make a cohesive vesicle - bound structure that causes deformation and expulsion of the vesicle . The fast release of the rear of the vesicle from the gel is followed by a slower process ( ; 100 s , phase II ) allowing the vesicle to escape from the shell and resume a ( nearly ) spherical shape . In other words , during phases I and II , the actin gel holds the vesicle back , and the links between N - WASP and the actin ﬁlaments prevent its free diffusion in the lipid bilayer and cause its segregation . As ﬁlaments sweep N - WASP molecules toward the rear of the vesicle , N - WASP segregation reaches a maximum after the vesicle’s escape from the actin shell . During phase III , N - WASP returns to a homogeneous distribution before actin ( drop in the curve in Fig . 3 C ) , indicating that some N - WASP molecules , formerly bound to ﬁlaments , become free to diffuse in the lipid bilayer . If the whole population of N - WASP was in a freely - diffusing state , N - WASP would spread homo - geneously over the whole vesicle within a few seconds . The fact that it takes several tens of seconds for N - WASP to return to a nonsegregated state implies that exchanges take place between populations of bound and free N - WASP molecules . In conclusion , the bonds between N - WASP and the ﬁla - ments are transient , and drive the segregation of N - WASP at the rear of the GUV , while free diffusion tends to distribute FIGURE 3 Segregation of N - WASP and actin during a saltatory step . ( A ) Double - ﬂuorescence of Alexa 488 - labeled N - WASP ( in green ) and rhoda - mine - labeled actin ( in red ) of a vesicle ( 3 . 3 m m diameter ) during a saltatory step . Normalized time ( i . e . , time t di - videdbysaltatoryperiod , T ) is indicated . ( B ) Change in the N - WASP segregation ratio ( green circles ) , and in the average velocity of the vesicle ( black squares ) during one step . Each data point corre - sponds to the mean of six measurements carriedout onthesame picture , and error bars indicate the standard error of these measurements . Thesolidlinesareguides to the eye . The green dashed line repre - sents the N - WASP segregation ratio for continuous movement , obtained by a singlemeasurement ona GUVofsimilar size ( 3 . 5 m m diameter ) in the same sam - ple . Itisconsistentwiththeaveragevalue measuredforcontinuousmovementoverdifferentsamples , in the same condi - tions . The black dashed line represents the average velocity of seven vesicles moving continuously in the same condi - tions . ( C ) Relative variations of N - WASP and actin segregation ratios during the same saltatory cycle . The solid line is a guide to the eye . The timescale is normalizedasinpanel B . Theverticaldashedlinesindicatethethreephasesofsaltatorymovement ( seetextandFig . 2 ) . ( D ) SchematicrepresentationofN - WASP distribution ( greentriangles ) onthevesicle , duringitsescapefromtheactinshell ( in red ) andsubsequentmovement : iftheinteractionofN - WASPwithﬁlamentis sufﬁcient to maintain segregation , continuous movement is sustained ; if diffusion of N - WASP dominates , segregation is lost and movement stops , resulting in saltatory behavior . 4896 Delatour et al . Biophysical Journal 94 ( 12 ) 4890 – 4905 N - WASP homogeneously around the GUV . Fig . 3 D sum - marizes the consequence of these molecular interactions on the GUV motile behavior : it schematically shows the escape of a vesicle from its initial actin shell and the resulting seg - regation of N - WASP , along with the two possible subsequent motions , depending on whether N - WASP segregation is lost or maintained . The Arp2 / 3 complex drives N - WASP segregation at the rear of the vesicles The fact that continuous movement is favored by high Arp2 / 3 concentrations ( Fig . 1 ) suggests that Arp2 / 3 plays an im - portant role in strengthening the link between N - WASP and the ﬁlaments to maintain segregation ( Fig . 3 D ) . This hypoth - esis was challenged by analyzing the dependence of N - WASP segregation on Arp2 / 3 concentration , and by monitoring the segregation of Arp2 / 3 during movement . The N - WASP segregation ratio was measured at different Arp2 / 3 complex concentrations on continuously moving GUVs of 4 6 0 . 5 m m - radius , from the same GUV preparation ( from one vesicle batch to another , N - WASP recruitment , and therefore the motile behavior , can vary ) . Segregation ratios of 0 . 60 6 0 . 03 and 0 . 69 6 0 . 02 were measured at 100 nM and 250 nM of Arp2 / 3 complex , respectively . These data indicate that the binding of Arp2 / 3 to N - WASP signiﬁcantly enhances the attachment of ﬁlaments to N - WASP during movement . If Arp2 / 3 complex is responsible for N - WASP segregation by mediating the link with the ﬁlaments , it should segregate as well at the rear of the GUVs in continuous propulsion . We thus measured the Arp2 / 3 segregation ratio ( see Materials and Methods , and Fig . S3 ) and compared it to that of N - WASP . The segregation ratio of Arp2 / 3 was 0 . 75 6 0 . 07 , while the segregation ratio of N - WASP was only 0 . 60 6 0 . 03 in the same conditions . Considering that the Arp2 / 3 complex present at the surface is necessarily bound to N - WASP , it hereby corresponds to a subpopulation of N - WASP : Arp2 / 3 - bound N - WASP . Therefore , this subpopulation of N - WASP is more segregated than the total N - WASP population . This implies that the Arp2 / 3 complex drives the segregation of N - WASP . In other words , N - WASP exists in a minimum of three states : a free state , an Arp2 / 3 - bound state , and a state in which it is bound to both Arp2 / 3 and an actin ﬁlament . In the ﬁrst two states , N - WASP and N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 can diffuse freely , while in the last state , N - WASP and Arp2 / 3 are bound to actin , and are segregated at the rear of the GUV . To further investigate the role of the Arp2 / 3 complex in the binding of N - WASP to ﬁlaments and its segregation at the rear of GUVs , we functionalized GUVs with fragments of N - WASP that interact more or less strongly with the Arp2 / 3 complex . In cells , N - WASP is folded in an almost inactive confor - mation . When activated by signaling molecules , it exposes its catalytic C - terminal domain , called VCA . The VCA domain of N - WASP constitutively branches ﬁlaments with Arp2 / 3 complex in solution . In motility assays , it has been shown that N - WASP is fully activated when adsorbed at the surface of polystyrene beads ( 11 ) or bound to Ni - derivatized lipids on vesicles ( 22 ) and behaves as VCA . We ﬁrst recorded the polymerization properties of different constructs : VCA , VC , and V ( Fig . 4 A ) , which have different afﬁnities for Arp2 / 3 complex but bind G - actin with identical afﬁnity and in a functionally identical fashion ( J . - F . Gaucher , unpublished data ) . In pyrenyl - actin ﬂuorescence polymeri - zation assays , V failed to induce autocatalytic branching of actin ﬁlaments , even in the presence of Arp2 / 3 complex ( data not shown ) , while VC required ; 50 - fold higher amounts of Arp2 / 3 than VCA to branch ﬁlaments ( Fig . 4 B ) . The motile behavior of GUVs functionalized with full - length VCA or its truncated fragments VC and V was then recorded in the standard medium containing 100 nM Arp2 / 3 complex . The VCA - coated vesicles behaved identically to N - WASP - coated vesicles . V - coated vesicles did not initiate actin assembly and did not move , as expected from poly - merization assays , since V does not bind Arp2 / 3 . VC - coated FIGURE 4 The VC fragment of VCA fails to stimulate actin polymeriza - tion in branched ﬁlaments . ( A ) Domain structure of N - WASP and derived fragments . All constructs are histidine - taggedto allowrecruitment onGUVs . Abbreviations for the different fragments are used in the text as follows : VCA ( residues 392 – 505 ) contains the two WH2 - domains that bind G - actin and the CA - domain that binds the Arp2 / 3 complex ; VC ( residues 392 – 484 ) is VCA deletedfromtheacidicdomainthatstabilizestheinteractionwithArp2 / 3 ; and V ( residues 392 – 458 ) is WH2 - domains . ( B ) Pyrenyl - actin polymerization assay : 2 . 5 m Mactinwerepolymerizedaloneorinthepresenceof34nMArp2 / 3 ( thin black curve —the two curves superimposed , and only one is shown ) ; in presenceof17nMArp2 / 3with312nMVC ( thickredcurve ) or312nMVCA ( thin red curve ) ; in presence of 34 nM Arp2 / 3 with 312 nM VC ( thick blue curve ) or 312 nM VCA ( thin blue curve ) ; and in presence of 84 nM Arp2 / 3 with 312 nM VC ( thick green curve ) . Transient N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 - Filament Bonds 4897 Biophysical Journal 94 ( 12 ) 4890 – 4905 GUVs , in contrast with the weak activation of Arp2 / 3 by VC in polymerization assays , generated actin gels that broke symmetry and led to the propulsion of the vesicles , at a rate at least equal to the rate of N - WASP - or VCA - coated vesicles . Note that , in a motility assay , there is a strong heterogeneity between the vicinity of the GUV’s surface , where proteins are concentrated and branching reactions are frequent , and the bulk of the medium , where nucleators are nearly absent . This heterogeneity allows the nucleator to be locally concentrated , without lowering the amount of G - actin available in bulk , as it would ( by sequestering ) if it were concentrated everywhere ( 32 ) . This effect enhances the activity of VC in motility assays compared to polymerization assays in solution . At lower concentrations ( 50 nM ) of Arp2 / 3 complex , VC - coated GUVs were unable to move . The following measurements were all carried out at 100 nM Arp2 / 3 , on GUVs undergoing continuous movement . The VC segregation ratio measured using Alexa488 - labeled VC , was 0 . 52 6 0 . 02 , while actin around the same GUVs had a segregation ratio of 0 . 65 6 0 . 02 . This result clearly demon - strates that VC segregates much less than N - WASP during continuous motion of GUVs . The weak segregation of VC indicates that VC interacts more weakly with actin ﬁlaments than N - WASP . VC - and VCA - functionalized vesicles were monitored together in the same motility assay containing rhodamine - actin and Alexa488 - Arp2 / 3 . The branching density derived from the double ﬂuorescence measurements was roughly twofold lower in comet tails of VC - GUVs than VCA - GUVs . Since the segregation of the nucleator and of actin are in - terdependent , we compared the segregation of N - WASP and VC when they are both interacting with the same actin ﬁla - ment network . To do so , we functionalized GUVs with both N - WASP and VC , one of which being ﬂuorescently labeled . The ﬂuorescence of the labeled nucleator at the GUV surface decreased upon increasing the fraction of the unlabeled nucleator , indicating that both were recruited with equal ef - ﬁciency via their His - tag . The segregation of N - WASP , VC , and actin was evaluated as a function of the percentage of N - WASP and VC ( Fig . 5 B ) . N - WASP was more segregated than VC , on all GUVs , showing that the nucleator’s afﬁnity for Arp2 / 3 affects its interaction with actin ﬁlaments , and modulates its segregation . The segregation ratio of VC was unaffected by the pres - ence of N - WASP , and remained at the value of 0 . 52 6 0 . 01 , from 0 to 75 % N - WASP ( Fig . 5 B ) . Below 50 % VC , the presence of VC did not affect the segregation ratios of actin and N - WASP , which remained identical to the values mea - sured on 100 % N - WASP - coated GUVs ( 0 . 72 6 0 . 07 for actin , and 0 . 60 6 0 . 03 for N - WASP ) . At 75 % VC , the seg - regation ratio of N - WASP was slightly lower ( 0 . 56 6 0 . 03 ) . Above 50 % VC , the segregation ratio of actin decreased to 0 . 65 6 0 . 02 ( for 100 % VC - coated vesicles ) as the percentage of VC increased ( as a reference , the segregation ratio of actin is 0 . 59 6 0 . 02 for solid beads presenting a homogeneous distribution of nucleators ( 22 ) ) . These data indicate that , in presence of both N - WASP and VC , the segregation of actin is mainly dictated by its interaction with N - WASP , which binds more strongly to Arp2 / 3 . The release of actin from VCA is required for movement The catalytic VCA domain of N - WASP binds not only Arp2 / 3 but also a G - actin molecule with the V ( WH2 ) domain . The binding of G - actin to the V moiety of VCA is known to be essential for ﬁlament branching ( 13 ) . The isolated V domain by itself , presented on the surface of a lipid - coated bead , binds G - actin and mediates the transient attachment of the WH2 - actin complex to a ﬁlament barbed end , a reaction con - FIGURE 5 The VC fragment of N - WASP is sufﬁcient to induce vesicle propulsion , with a lower extent of segregation . ( A ) Fluorescent images of GUVs coated with a mixture of N - WASP and VC : 100 % , 50 % , and 0 % of N - WASP , from left to right . ( Top ) Alexa568 - labeled actin comets ; ( bottom ) Alexa488 - labeled N - WASP or VC on the GUV surface . Scale bar ¼ 10 m m . ( B ) Segregation ratios of labeled actin ( squares ) , N - WASP ( solid circles ) , and VC ( open circles ) at the surface of GUVs undergoing continuous propulsion , as a function of the N - WASP content used during GUV functionalization . Error bars indicate standard deviations . Lines are guides to the eyes . 4898 Delatour et al . Biophysical Journal 94 ( 12 ) 4890 – 4905 sistent with known properties of WH2 domains ( 32 , 40 – 42 ) . Although the structural details of the formation of the branched junction by association of the ternary VCA - actin - Arp2 / 3 complex with a ﬁlament are not known , the available data from differentgroupsaltogethersupporttheviewthatVCAbranchesaﬁlamentbymakingtwocontactswithaﬁlament , via V - actin and the CA - Arp2 / 3 subcomplexes . While our data show the importanceoftheCA - Arp2 / 3attachmenttoaﬁlament , whether the V - actin - ﬁlament attachment plays a role in the process is not clear . To address this issue , we covalently coupled VCA to a G - actin molecule by the zero - length cross - linker EDC and isolated the covalent VCA - actin adduct ( Fig . S4 ) . In solution , VCA - actin covalent complex branched the ﬁlaments as efﬁ - ciently as VCA ( Fig . 6 A ) . However , in contrast with VCA ( dashed curve ) , polymerization in presence of VCA - actin ( thick solid curve ) starts immediately without a nucleation lag as the covalent complex acts as a nucleus that initiates ﬁlament polymerization . GUVs functionalized with VCA - actin covalent complex appeared unable to initiate an actin gel and move , even after hours of incubation in the motility medium , at any concen - tration of Arp2 / 3 . When ﬂuorescently - labeled actin was pre - sent in the motility medium , no ﬂuorescence was detected around the VCA - actin functionalized vesicles . This result contrasts with the ability of VCA - actin covalent complex to polymerize actin in branched ﬁlaments in solution . Therefore the VCA - actin complex is able to form a branch junction but seems unable to detach from it . This behavior has no impact on polymerization assays , where the number of branch junctions that are formed is much lower than the number of nucleators available in solution ( 30 ) , but it does not allow motility , where nucleators must be able to detach from the ﬁlament and form new branches , over and over . The surface of a GUV func - tionalized with the VCA - actin complex would hence be cov - ered with independent , anchored actin ﬁlaments , which cannot grow into a detectable network and lead to propulsion . Vesicles were then functionalized with mixtures of VCA and VCA - actin covalent complex . The percentage of comet - propelled vesicles , as well as the average length of the formed comet tails , were measured after 1 h , as a function of the proportion of VCA - actin in the functionalization mixture ( Fig . 6 B ) . As little as 10 % VCA - actin complex decreased the length of the actin tails formed after 1 h . With 25 % VCA - actin , 50 % of the GUVs grew actin gels but failed to generate movement , and the average length of the propelled GUVs was decreased fourfold . At 50 % VCA - actin , the GUVs were surrounded by actin gels and no comets tails were formed . Identical results were obtained either keeping the total amount of VCA and VCA - actin constant ( 500 nM ) in the FIGURE 6 VCA - actin covalent complex stimulates polymerization in branched ﬁlaments with Arp2 / 3 complex in solution , but inhibits vesicle movement when anchored at the surface of GUVs . ( A ) Pyrenyl - actin polymerization assay : 2 . 5 m M actin were polymerized alone ( thin solid curve ) , in presence of 30 nM Arp2 / 3 supplemented with 125 nM of either VCA ( dashed curve ) or VCA - actin ( thick solid curve ) . ( B ) Percentage of propelled VCA - functionalized GUVs ( open circles ) and average comet length ( solid circles ) , after 1 h incubation in the motility medium , as function of the fraction of VCA - actin used during functionalization . The lines are guides to the eyes . ( C ) Images of vesicles after 1 h incubation in the motility medium , functionalized with a mixture of VCA and 0 % , 10 % , and 25 % VCA - actin , from left to right , respectively . Scale bar ¼ 20 m m . Transient N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 - Filament Bonds 4899 Biophysical Journal 94 ( 12 ) 4890 – 4905 functionalization step , or keeping the amount of VCA con - stant ( 500 nM ) and adding increasing amounts of VCA - actin . These data indicate that the VCA - actin complex may ‘‘poison’’ the nucleating function of VCA at the vesicle surface : not only does its presence lower the actual surface density of VCA , but it also strongly anchors actin ﬁlaments . If these anchored ﬁlaments are connected to the rest of the actin network , they could prevent its growth by holding it against the surface . In conclusion , dissociation of VCA from both actin and Arp2 / 3 complex is required for detachment of ﬁlaments from VCA and for actin - based motility . DISCUSSION AND MODEL The analysis of reconstituted actin - based propulsion of N - WASP functionalized GUVs has provided insight into physiologically relevant aspects of motile processes that take place at the interface between actin ﬁlaments and membranes like at the tip of lamellipodia or in endosome propulsion , macropinocytosis , or phagocytosis . Recent in vivo studies have pointed out to mutual interactions between the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments and membrane components at the leading edge ( 20 ) . This simple system in which N - WASP is bound to a lipid bilayer with no intermediates demonstrates that the force produced by the actin machinery against the membrane is by itself sufﬁcient to reconstitute membrane deformation and ﬁssion ( 23 ) like in vivo ( 35 , 36 ) . Membrane ﬂuidity and deformability play active roles in actin - based propulsion of GUVs . The physical characteristics of the saltatory regime of propulsion of GUVs differ from those of actin - propelled solid microbeads ( 22 , 37 ) , as well as from the nanosaltation of Listeria ( 43 , 44 ) . Trichet et al . ( 26 ) have recently observed a very similar hopping behavior , with VCA - coated oil droplets placed in cell extracts supplemented with VASP . Although variations in VCA distribution on the droplets during hopping movement have not been detected , the authors propose that the saltatory movement operates by a segregation - diffusion mechanism , in which VASP enhances ﬁlament detachment from VCA . Perhaps detachment is en - hanced to such an extent that VCA molecules are abruptly released from ﬁlaments and very rapidly diffuse to a homo - geneous distribution around the droplet . The maintenance of a strong actin segregation ( which was not measured , but can be inferred from microscopy images—Fig . 6 of ( 26 ) —and from the observation that the droplets do not come to a complete stop ) could allow VCA to rapidly return to a segregated distribution , and would explain why variations in VCA dis - tribution could not be observed . Considering the actin dis - tribution as a parameter that drives nucleator segregation is one of the points on which our description of the mechanism differs from that of Trichet et al . ( 26 ) , as we explain in the next section ( model ) . Remarkably , observations made at the mesoscopic scale provide a mechanistic and kinetic insight into molecular processes that orchestrate cell motility , which cannot be derived from solution studies of polymerization of actin in branched ﬁlaments . Each membrane - immobilized nucleator uses Arp2 / 3 complex and G - actin in multiple catalytic cycles of ﬁlament branching coupled to its attachment - detachment from the ﬁlament barbed ends . The data demonstrate that the segregation of N - WASP is due to the transient attachment of ﬁlaments to membrane - bound N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 . This result does not support the actoclampin model ( 18 , 19 ) . On the contrary , our results support the tethered ratchet model , where ﬁlaments alternate between elongation and binding ( 17 ) . The fact that the covalent attachment of the WH2 do - main of VCA to actin blocks movement , is consistent with the conclusions of Co et al . ( 16 ) that the WH2 domain by itself captures barbed ends independently of the Arp2 / 3 complex . However , the fact that VC , which interacts weakly with Arp2 / 3 , segregates very weakly on GUVs , demonstrates that the interaction of WH2 domains with ﬁlament barbed ends is in itself insufﬁcient to drive segregation of VC . Hence , the association of the Arp2 / 3 complex to the CA domain of N - WASP plays a dominant role in mediating the attachment of barbed ends to N - WASP . Our kinetic analysis of saltatory propulsion , shows that , except for the local detachment at the rear ( onset of phase II ) , the vesicle remains in contact with the actin gel throughout its movement . If contact was lost by some slippage event , the vesicle would stop immediately after its escape from the actin shell , and N - WASP molecules would quickly diffuse and recover a homogeneous distribution over the whole mem - brane . On the contrary , the decline in velocity associated with the gradual return of N - WASP to a homogeneous distribution corresponds to the dissociation of N - WASP from Arp2 / 3 after incorporation of Arp2 / 3 in a branched junction . These data provide the ﬁrst demonstration that once N - WASP dissociates from ﬁlament - bound Arp2 / 3 , it is no longer tethered to the ﬁlament . After detachment from the branched junction , N - WASP is in a state in which it freely diffuses in the lipid bilayer . At high enough Arp2 / 3 concentration , the rapid binding of a new Arp2 / 3 complex molecule to N - WASP occurs , thus allowing rapid reassociation with a ﬁlament and maintenance of sustained movement . It is likely that in the reconstituted motility assay , the concentration of G - actin is maintained at a high enough value to saturate the WH2 domain . We propose that N - WASP therefore exists mainly in three states : a free state and an Arp2 / 3 - bound state , in both of which it diffuses freely at the surface of the GUV , and a ﬁlament - attached state in which its diffusion is hampered ( Fig . 7 ) . Model of the segregation - diffusion mechanism of N - WASP The ability of the proposed mechanism of segregation and diffusion orchestrated by the cycle of ﬁlament branching ( Fig . 7 ) to generate the main features of the density proﬁles 4900 Delatour et al . Biophysical Journal 94 ( 12 ) 4890 – 4905 recorded in continuous movement was tested by a simple theoretical model , described as follows . The point is to compute , at steady state , the surface density proﬁle s b of N - WASP molecules that are bound to actin ﬁlaments ( labeled b , for ‘‘bound’’ ) , and the proﬁle s u of N - WASP molecules that are not bound ( labeled u , for ‘‘un - bound’’ ) . Unbound N - WASPs diffuse with a diffusion con - stant D , while bound N - WASPs are pulled toward the rear of the GUV with velocity v . N - WASP molecules switch be - tween unbound and bound states with binding rate k b and unbinding rate k u , both expressed in s (cid:2) 1 . In principle , pa - rameters D , v , k b , and k u can vary on the surface of the GUV . We will consider the GUV as spherical , with radius R , and the system as having a symmetry of revolution around the axis of movement . As a result , all parameters and densities depend on one spatial variable only , the arc length s , which varies from 0 at the rear of the GUV , to p R at the front . At steady state , the following coupled differential equa - tions must be satisﬁed , (cid:2) @ @ s ½ l ð s Þ v ð s Þ s b ð s Þ(cid:3) ¼ ½(cid:2) s b ð s Þ k u ð s Þ 1 s u ð s Þ k b ð s Þ(cid:3) 3 l ð s Þ (cid:2) @ @ s l ð s Þ D ð s Þ @ @ s s u ð s Þ h i ¼ ½ s b ð s Þ k u ð s Þ(cid:2) s u ð s Þ k b ð s Þ(cid:3) 3 l ð s Þ ; 8 < : ( 1 ) where l ( s ) is the length of the perimeter around the sphere at position s ( i . e . , the circle containing all points with the same value of s ) , (cid:2) v ( s ) s b ( s ) corresponds to the ﬂux of bound N - WASPs , and (cid:2) D ð s Þð @ = @ s Þ s u ð s Þ to the ﬂux of unbound N - WASPs . Similar drift - reaction differential equations have been written for similar situations , where objects alternate between a freely - diffusing state and an interacting state where they undergo directed movement ( 26 , 45 ) . If l ( s ) does not depend on s ( e . g . , the case where the object is a cylinder ( 45 ) ) , then it can be taken out of the expressions in Eq . 1 . Here the object is a sphere , and l ( s ) ¼ 2 p R sin ( s / R ) . However , we have checked that even in this case , l ( s ) can be left out of the ex - pressions in Eq . 1 without notably affecting the solution . The expressions in Eq . 1 are hence simpliﬁed , and become (cid:2) @ @ s ½ v ð s Þ s b ð s Þ(cid:3) ¼ (cid:2) s b ð s Þ k u ð s Þ 1 s u ð s Þ k b ð s Þ (cid:2) @ @ s D ð s Þ @ @ s s u ð s Þ h i ¼ s b ð s Þ k u ð s Þ (cid:2) s u ð s Þ k b ð s Þ ; 8 < : ( 2 ) which is very similar to the equations used by Trichet et al . ( 26 ) , with the notable difference that we here consider pa - rameters D , v , k u , and k b as depending on the position s on the GUV . This is of primary importance , as we shall see . Boundary conditions impose that the ﬂuxes of bound and unbound N - WASP each be zero at s ¼ 0 and at s ¼ p R . At steady state , the sum of these two ﬂuxes must be zero ev - erywhere ( for all s ) . So an equivalent set of equations can be written : @ @ s D ð s Þ @ @ s s u ð s Þ h i ¼ D ð s Þ k u ð s Þ v ð s Þ @ @ s s u ð s Þ 1 k b ð s Þ s u ð s Þ s b ð s Þ ¼ (cid:2) D ð s Þ v ð s Þ @ @ s s u ð s Þ : 8 > < > : ( 3 ) Solving the ﬁrst differential expression in Eq . 3 allows one to determine s u ( s ) , and s b ( s ) can then be determined using the second equation . This system cannot be solved analytically unless D , v , k b , and k u are all constants , in which case s u ( s ) and s b ( s ) are exponential functions ( 26 ) , and the boundary conditions are not satisﬁed . We have used Euler’s method of function lin - earization to solve this system numerically . We are thus able , for any given values and variations of D ( s ) , v ( s ) , k b ( s ) , and k u ( s ) , analytical or not , to compute and plot the resulting surface densities for the bound and unbound populations of N - WASP molecules . We can then compare the resulting N - WASP density proﬁle s N (cid:2) WASP ð s Þ ¼ s u ð s Þ 1 s b ð s Þ to the ones we have measured with ﬂuorescent N - WASP . N - WASP molecules that are bound to an actin ﬁlament are pulled toward the rear of the GUV , as the GUV moves with FIGURE 7 Relationship between the mobile states of N - WASP at the GUV surface and the elementary steps of ﬁlaments branching . N - WASP is anchored to the lipid membrane and binds G - actin in rapid equilibrium . N - WASP also binds the Arp2 / 3 complex . The ternary complex N - WASP - actin - Arp2 / 3 associates with the barbed end of an actin ﬁlament , tethering it to the membrane . Once G - actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex have detached from N - WASP , the branched junction allows the growth of a new branch in the actin network . Elongating actin ﬁlaments push against the membrane , and eventually get capped by gelsolin . The ﬁlament - bound and free states of N - WASP are featured . Note that the formation of the dendritic network tends to cluster N - WASP molecules by promoting the association of two indi - vidual N - WASP molecules to barbed ends branching off the same initial ﬁlament . Transient N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 - Filament Bonds 4901 Biophysical Journal 94 ( 12 ) 4890 – 4905 velocity V GUV with respect to the actin network . The bound N - WASP is pulled along a direction parallel to the axis of movement , but since it remains on the GUV surface , its displacement over a time dt is the projection of V GUV dt on the GUV surface ( this corresponds to a minimal deformation of the actin network , to comply with the constraint that N - WASP remains on the GUV surface ) . Hence v ( s ) ¼ V GUV sin ( s / R ) . This variation of v ( s ) ensures that the boundary conditions are satisﬁed . For our computations , we have taken a typical V GUV of 1 m m / min . Let us ﬁrst consider the simplest model , where all the other parameters ( D , k b , and k u ) are constant . Based on published values ( 45 , 46 ) D is expected to be in the 1 – 10 m m 2 / s range . The binding rate k b is not known , and is assumed to increase with Arp2 / 3 concentration . The unbinding rate k u is not known either , but a lower limit can be estimated , based on the following . Considering that ﬁlaments grow freely for an av - erage time T g and remain bound to the surface ( via N - WASP ) for a time k (cid:2) 1 u ; the average distance L between two branching points is such that L cos ( 35 (cid:3) ) ¼ V GUV ( k (cid:2) 1 u 1 T g ) because of the average 35 (cid:3) angle between a ﬁlament and the normal to the surface . Since T g . 0 , this puts a lower limit on k u . For a typical V GUV of 1 m m / min and L ¼ 50 nm , this results in k u . 0 . 4 s (cid:2) 1 . The resulting N - WASP density proﬁles are qualitatively similar to the ones we have measured experimentally . Com - paring proﬁles computed for different values of k b ( Fig . 8 A ) , we see that lower values of k b , corresponding to lower con - centrations of Arp2 / 3 , result in less segregated N - WASP proﬁles . For a given diffusion constant D ( and keeping k u . 0 . 4 s (cid:2) 1 ) , the computed proﬁles depend only on the ratio k b / k u . For D ¼ 1 m m 2 / s and k b / k u ¼ 3 , the segregation ratio is of the order of 0 . 6 , in agreement with the measured value at 100 nM Arp2 / 3 . Compared to N - WASP , the VC domain interacts more weakly with the Arp2 / 3 complex , meaning that it should have a lower binding rate k b and a higher unbinding rate k u , FIGURE 8 Computed N - WASP density proﬁles . ( A ) N - WASP density proﬁles computed with V GUV ¼ 1 m m / min , D ¼ 1 m m 2 / s , k u ¼ 10 s (cid:2) 1 , and k b ¼ 30 s (cid:2) 1 ( red curve ) , k b ¼ 20 s (cid:2) 1 ( green curve ) , k b ¼ 10 s (cid:2) 1 ( blue curve ) , and k b ¼ 5 s (cid:2) 1 ( purple curve ) . The corresponding segregation ratios are 0 . 595 , 0 . 565 , 0 . 530 , and 0 . 515 , respectively . ( B ) Fluorescent actin and N - WASP from a 5 . 35 m m - radius GUV undergoing continuous movement . ( C ) Measured actin density proﬁle along the vesicle shown in panel B ( data points ) , ﬁtted by the Gaussian function f act ( s ) ¼ 0 . 442 exp ( (cid:2) s 2 / 7 . 69 2 ) 1 0 . 558 ( solid line ) . ( D ) Measured N - WASP density proﬁle along the same vesicle ( data points ) , compared to theoretical N - WASP proﬁles , computed with constant D , k b and k u ( red curve , with D ¼ 1 m m 2 / s , k u ¼ 1s (cid:2) 1 , and k b ¼ 3 s (cid:2) 1 ) ; or taking the actin proﬁle into account for k b ( s ) ( green curve , with D ¼ 1 m m 2 / s , k u ¼ 6 s (cid:2) 1 , k 1 ¼ 30 s (cid:2) 1 , and k 2 ¼ 20 s (cid:2) 1 ) , or taking the actin proﬁle into account for k b ( s ) and D ( s ) ( blue curve , with D 0 ¼ 1 . 1 m m 2 / s , a ¼ 0 . 6 , k u ¼ 2 . 25 s (cid:2) 1 , k 1 ¼ 20 s (cid:2) 1 , and k 2 ¼ 4 s (cid:2) 1 ) . 4902 Delatour et al . Biophysical Journal 94 ( 12 ) 4890 – 4905 according to our model . This would lead to a higher pro - portion of unbound VC , with a low segregation ratio , and hereby a lower segregation ratio for the total VC population , in agreement with our observations ( Fig . 5 ) . VC - coated GUVs are nonetheless able to sustain continuous movement , probably due to differences in the mechanical properties of their actin ﬁlament network ( e . g . , a lower branching density ) , which are not included in this model . However , these properties are partly connected to the actin density proﬁle ( which is less segregated for VC - than for N - WASP - coated GUVs ) , which certainly has an impact on the nucleator density proﬁle , and can be taken into account in our model , as explained in the following . Including the actin ﬁlament density proﬁle in the model Using constant values of parameters D , k u and k b , and k u . 0 . 4 s (cid:2) 1 , the computed N - WASP density proﬁles are always symmetrical , with an inﬂection point located around s ¼ p R / 2 ( Fig . 8 A ) . On the contrary , experimental N - WASP density proﬁles often have an inﬂection point positioned at smaller s - values , indicating that an important parameter controlling segregation has not been taken considered . In addition , the computed proﬁles of the two subpopulations of N - WASP have the same segregation ratio , whereas our experimental re - sults , showing that Arp2 / 3 is more segregated than N - WASP , indicate that bound N - WASPs should be more segregated than free N - WASPs . This also indicates that the segregation of N - WASP is not driven solely by the pulling of bound N - WASPs . The polarized distribution of actin ﬁlaments around the GUV should be considered , because it makes it more likely for N - WASP binding to take place at the rear of the GUV , and should enhance N - WASP segregation . In our model , this feature is expressed by the dependence of k b on ﬁlament concentration . The binding of N - WASP to a ﬁlament is better described by a two - step process : the binding of Arp2 / 3 , with rate k 1 proportional to Arp2 / 3 concentration , followed by the binding of an actin ﬁlament , with rate k 2 proportional to local actin ﬁlament concentration . The average lifetimes add up : k (cid:2) 1 b ð s Þ ¼ k (cid:2) 1 1 1 k (cid:2) 1 2 ð s Þ ; the s - dependence reﬂecting the local variations of actin ﬁlament density ( we assume here that Arp2 / 3 concentration is homogeneous , though its diffusion could be locally limited by the density of the actin gel ( 47 ) ) . When the local actin density is high , it may also hinder the diffusion of free N - WASP molecules on the surface of the GUV , resulting in a varying diffusion coefﬁcient D ( s ) . Variations of local actin ﬁlament density are included in our model as follows . The actin density proﬁle is measured ( note that , in this model , the actin density proﬁle is an exper - imentally determined parameter , and is not computed ) , and ﬁtted with an arbitrary function ( e . g . , polynomial , Gaussian ) We call f act ( s ) this function , after normalization of its maxi - mum to 1 . The rate constant for the binding of N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 to an actin ﬁlament is then written k 2 ( s ) ¼ k 2 f act ( s ) . As an example , the actin density proﬁle around a 5 . 35 m m - radius GUV is well described by a Gaussian : f act ( s ) ¼ 0 . 442 exp ( (cid:2) s 2 / 7 . 69 2 ) 1 0 . 558 ( Fig . 8 , B – D ) . The computed proﬁle , taking into account the effect of local actin density variations on k b ( through k 2 , as described earlier ) is in better agreement with experimental data than the proﬁle computed with a con - stant k b ( the inﬂection point is shifted toward lower values of s ) . In addition , a nonuniform k b generates different segregation ratios for the two subpopulations of N - WASP molecules : bound N - WASPs are more segregated than free N - WASPs , in agreement with our observation that the Arp2 / 3 complex is more segregated than the ( total ) N - WASP population . The description of our experimental data can be further improved by taking into account the effect of local actin ﬁl - ament concentration on the diffusion coefﬁcient of N - WASP . Indeed , free N - WASP is expected to diffuse at a slower rate in regions where the density of ﬁlament - bound N - WASP is high ( i . e . , where the actin ﬁlament density is high ) . The fol - lowing equation is proposed to account for the restrained diffusion of N - WASP : D ( s ) ¼ D 0 [ 1 – a f act ( s ) ] , where D 0 corresponds to free , unhindered diffusion , and a is a constant that sets the amplitude of its limitation due to the presence of actin ﬁlaments . This is a very simple description , aiming at a qualitative evaluation of the impact of such an effect on the computed proﬁles ( Fig . 7 D ) . In conclusion , the computed proﬁles of N - WASP along the vesicle contour , based on a mechanism of interaction - driven segregation and diffusion , account for the main features of the corresponding experimental proﬁles . The model therefore validates our understanding of the molecular mechanism of actin - based motility and shows that the distribution of actin ﬁlaments around the GUV plays an important part in the segregation of N - WASP , and must be taken into account . This was not the case in a previously proposed description of the segregation - diffusion mechanism by Trichet et al . ( 26 ) where all parameters were considered constant . In the com - putations presented here , the actin density is considered as a ﬁxed parameter that we determine from our experiments . However , the local density of actin ﬁlaments depends on the local frequency of branching , i . e . , on local N - WASP density . As a development of the model presented here , numerical simulations seem better adapted to express the interdepen - dence of actin and N - WASP densities . Simulations would also allow a better description of the two ( or more ) steps that lead to the binding of N - WASP to actin ﬁlaments . SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL To view all of the supplemental ﬁles associated with this article , visit www . biophysj . org . We thank M . - A . Guedeau - Boudeville for osmometry measurements , D . Pantaloni and C . Le Clainche for guidance and discussions , and M . Bathe for his critical reading of the model section . G . R . L . also thanks S . Abbes for fruitful discussions on mathematics and numerical computation . Transient N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 - Filament Bonds 4903 Biophysical Journal 94 ( 12 ) 4890 – 4905 V . D . was supported by the Association pour la Recherche sur le Cancer . M . F . C . is supported in part by the Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer ( e´quipe labellise´e ) , by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche ( contract No . 06 - PCVI - 0011 - 01 ) , and by a Human Frontier Science Program research grant No . RGP0072 / 2003 - C . G . R . L . was supported by the European Speciﬁc Targeted Research Project ‘‘Active Biomics’’ . REFERENCES 1 . Small , J . V . , T . Stradal , E . Vignal , and K . Rottner . 2002 . The lamelli - podium : where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol . 12 : 112 – 120 . 2 . Horwitz , A . R . , and J . T . Parsons . 1999 . Cell migration—movin’ on . Science . 286 : 1102 – 1103 . 3 . Lauffenburger , D . A . , and A . F . Horwitz . 1996 . Cell migration : a physically integrated molecular process . Cell . 84 : 359 – 369 . 4 . Small , J . V . , M . Herzog , and K . Anderson . 1995 . Actin ﬁlament organization in the ﬁsh keratocyte lamellipodium . J . Cell Biol . 129 : 1275 – 1286 . 5 . Machesky , L . M . , and R . H . Insall . 1999 . Signaling to actin dynamics . J . Cell Biol . 146 : 267 – 272 . 6 . Pollard , T . D . , and G . G . Borisy . 2003 . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell . 112 : 453 – 465 . 7 . Loisel , T . P . , R . Boujemaa , D . Pantaloni , and M . - F . Carlier . 1999 . Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature . 401 : 613 – 616 . 8 . Bernheim - Groswasser , A . , S . Wiesner , R . M . Golsteyn , M . - F . Carlier , and C . Sykes . 2002 . The dynamics of actin - based motility depend on surface parameters . Nature . 417 : 308 – 311 . 9 . Marcy , Y . , J . Prost , M . - F . Carlier , and C . Sykes . 2004 . Forces generated during actin - based propulsion : a direct measurement by micromanipulation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 101 : 5992 – 5997 . 10 . Pantaloni , D . , C . Le Clainche , and M . - F . Carlier . 2001 . Mechanism of actin - based motility . Science . 292 : 1502 – 1506 . 11 . Wiesner , S . , E . Helfer , D . Didry , G . Ducouret , F . Lafuma , M . - F . Carlier , and D . Pantaloni . 2003 . A biomimetic motility assay provides insight into the mechanism of actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 160 : 387 – 398 . 12 . Mogilner , A . 2006 . On the edge : modeling protrusion . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 : 32 – 39 . 13 . Marchand , J . - B . , D . A . Kaiser , T . D . Pollard , and H . N . Higgs . 2001 . Interaction of WASP / Scar proteins with actin and vertebrate Arp2 / 3 complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 76 – 82 . 14 . Gerbal , F . , V . Laurent , A . Ott , M . F . Carlier , P . Chaikin , and J . Prost . 2000 . Measurement of the elasticity of the actin tail of Listeria monocytogenes . Eur . Biophys . J . 29 : 134 – 140 . 15 . Iwasa , J . H . , and R . D . Mullins . 2007 . Spatial and temporal relation - ships between actin - ﬁlament nucleation , capping , and disassembly . Curr . Biol . 17 : 395 – 406 . 16 . Co , C . , D . T . Wong , S . Gierke , V . Chang , and J . Taunton . 2007 . Mechanism of actin network attachment to moving membranes : barbed end capture by N - WASP WH2 domains . Cell . 128 : 901 – 913 . 17 . Mogilner , A . , and G . Oster . 2003 . Force generation by actin poly - merization II : the elastic ratchet and tethered ﬁlaments . Biophys . J . 84 : 1591 – 1605 . 18 . Dickinson , R . B . , and D . L . Purich . 2002 . Clamped - ﬁlament elongation model for actin - based motors . Biophys . J . 82 : 605 – 617 . 19 . Dickinson , R . B . , and D . L . Purich . 2006 . Diffusion rate limitations in actin - based propulsion of hard and deformable particles . Biophys . J . 91 : 1548 – 1563 . 20 . Weisswange , I . , T . Bretschneider , and K . I . Anderson . 2005 . The leading edge is a lipid diffusion barrier . J . Cell Sci . 118 : 4375 – 4380 . 21 . Giardini , P . A . , D . A . Fletcher , and J . A . Theriot . 2003 . Compression forces generated by actin comet tails on lipid vesicles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 100 : 6493 – 6498 . 22 . Delatour , V . , S . Shekhar , A . - C . Reymann , D . Didry , K . H . D . Leˆ , G . Romet - Lemonne , E . Helfer , and M . - F . Carlier . 2008 . Actin - based propulsion of functionalized hard versus ﬂuid spherical objects . N . J . Phys . 10 : 025001 . 23 . Heuvingh , J . , M . Franco , P . Chavrier , and C . Sykes . 2007 . ARF1 - mediated actin polymerization produces movement of artiﬁcial vesi - cles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 104 : 16928 – 16933 . 24 . Upadhyaya , A . , J . R . Chabot , A . Andreeva , A . Samadani , and A . van Oudenaarden . 2003 . Probing polymerization forces by using actin - propelled lipid vesicles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 100 : 4521 – 4526 . 25 . Boukellal , H . , O . Campas , J . F . Joanny , J . Prost , and C . Sykes . 2004 . Soft Listeria : actin - based propulsion of liquid drops . Phys . Rev . E Stat . Nonlin . Soft Matter Phys . 69 : 061906 . 26 . Trichet , L . , O . Campas , C . Sykes , and J . Plastino . 2007 . VASP governs actin dynamics by modulating ﬁlament anchoring . Biophys . J . 92 : 1081 – 1089 . 27 . Mathivet , L . , S . Cribier , and P . F . Devaux . 1996 . Shape change and physical properties of giant phospholipid vesicles prepared in the presence of an AC electric ﬁeld . Biophys . J . 70 : 1112 – 1121 . 28 . Spudich , J . A . , and S . Watt . 1971 . The regulation of rabbit skeletal muscle contraction . I . Biochemical studies of the interaction of the tropomyosin - troponin complex with actin and the proteolytic fragments of myosin . J . Biol . Chem . 246 : 4866 – 4871 . 29 . Isambert , H . , P . Venier , A . C . Maggs , A . Fattoum , R . Kassab , D . Pantaloni , and M . F . Carlier . 1995 . Flexibility of actin ﬁlaments derived from thermal ﬂuctuations . Effect of bound nucleotide , phalloidin , and muscle regulatory proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 11437 – 11444 . 30 . Pantaloni , D . , R . Boujemaa , D . Didry , P . Gounon , and M . F . Carlier . 2000 . The Arp2 / 3 complex branches ﬁlament barbed ends : functional antagonism with capping proteins . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 : 385 – 391 . 31 . Gutsche - Perelroizen , I . , J . Lepault , A . Ott , and M . F . Carlier . 1999 . Filament assembly from proﬁlin - actin . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 6234 – 6243 . 32 . Egile , C . , T . P . Loisel , V . Laurent , R . Li , D . Pantaloni , P . J . Sansonetti , and M . F . Carlier . 1999 . Activation of the CDC42 effector N - WASP by the Shigella ﬂexneri IcsA protein promotes actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex and bacterial actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 146 : 1319 – 1332 . 33 . Grabarek , Z . , and J . Gergely . 1990 . Zero - length crosslinking procedure with the use of active esters . Anal . Biochem . 185 : 131 – 135 . 34 . Le Clainche , C . , D . Didry , M . F . Carlier , and D . Pantaloni . 2001 . Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex by Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome protein is linked to enhanced binding of ATP to Arp2 . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 46689 – 46692 . 35 . Lee , E . , and D . A . Knecht . 2002 . Visualization of actin dynamics during macropinocytosis and exocytosis . Trafﬁc . 3 : 186 – 192 . 36 . Merriﬁeld , C . J . , U . Rescher , W . Almers , J . Proust , V . Gerke , A . S . Sechi , and S . E . Moss . 2001 . Annexin 2 has an essential role in actin - based macropinocytic rocketing . Curr . Biol . 11 : 1136 – 1141 . 37 . Bernheim - Groswasser , A . , J . Prost , and C . Sykes . 2005 . Mechanism of actin - based motility : a dynamic state diagram . Biophys . J . 89 : 1411 – 1419 . 38 . Lasa , I . , E . Gouin , M . Goethals , K . Vancompernolle , V . David , J . Vandekerckhove , and P . Cossart . 1997 . Identiﬁcation of two regions in the N - terminal domain of ActA involved in the actin comet tail formation by Listeria monocytogenes . EMBO J . 16 : 1531 – 1540 . 39 . Rafelski , S . M . , and J . A . Theriot . 2005 . Bacterial shape and ActA distribution affect initiation of Listeria monocytogenes actin - based motility . Biophys . J . 89 : 2146 – 2158 . 40 . Bosch , M . , K . H . Le , B . Bugyi , J . J . Correia , L . Renault , and M . F . Carlier . 2007 . Analysis of the function of Spire in actin assembly and its synergy with formin and proﬁlin . Mol . Cell . 28 : 555 – 568 . 41 . Chereau , D . , F . Kerff , P . Graceffa , Z . Grabarek , K . Langsetmo , and R . Dominguez . 2005 . Actin - bound structures of Wiskott - Aldrich syn - 4904 Delatour et al . Biophysical Journal 94 ( 12 ) 4890 – 4905 drome protein ( WASP ) - homology domain 2 and the implications for ﬁlament assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 102 : 16644 – 16649 . 42 . Hertzog , M . , C . van Heijenoort , D . Didry , M . Gaudier , J . Coutant , B . Gigant , G . Didelot , T . Preat , M . Knossow , E . Guittet , and M . F . Carlier . 2004 . The b - thymosin / WH2 domain ; structural basis for the switch from inhibition to promotion of actin assembly . Cell . 117 : 611 – 623 . 43 . McGrath , J . L . , N . J . Eungdamrong , C . I . Fisher , F . Peng , L . Mahadevan , T . J . Mitchison , and S . C . Kuo . 2003 . The force - velocity relationship for the actin - based motility of Listeria monocytogenes . Curr . Biol . 13 : 329 – 332 . 44 . Alberts , J . B . , and G . M . Odell . 2004 . In silico reconstitution of Listeria propulsion exhibits nano - saltation . PLoS Biol . 2 : e412 . 45 . Leduc , C . , O . Campas , K . B . Zeldovich , A . Roux , P . Jolimaitre , L . Bourel - Bonnet , B . Goud , J . - F . Joanny , P . Bassereau , and J . Prost . 2004 . Cooperative extraction of membrane nanotubes by molecular motors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 101 : 17096 – 17101 . 46 . Sprague , B . L . , and J . G . McNally . 2005 . FRAP analysis of binding : proper and ﬁtting . Trends Cell Biol . 15 : 84 – 91 . 47 . Plastino , J . , I . Lelidis , J . Prost , and C . Sykes . 2004 . The effect of diffusion , depolymerization and nucleation promoting factors on actin gel growth . Eur . Biophys . J . 33 : 310 – 320 . Transient N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 - Filament Bonds 4905 Biophysical Journal 94 ( 12 ) 4890 – 4905