Hydrodynamic Force - Transduced Cytoskeletal Remodeling Stabilizes Leukocyte Integrin - Mediated Adhesions Hisham Ibrahim Master of Science Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology University of Toronto 2016 Abstract The emigration ( recruitment ) of monocytes from the blood into tissues is a fundamental component of inflammation , and contributes to the pathogenesis of inflammatory diseases such as atherosclerosis . In inflammation , monocytes roll and arrest on inflamed endothelium and stably adherent cells are subjected to a hydrodynamic force imparted by flowing blood . How monocytes respond to this force and resist detachment is poorly understood . We used parallel plate flow chamber assays to investigate actin cytoskeleton dynamics and the role of this process in stabilizing integrin - mediated adhesion of U937 cells . Actin polymerization was required for arrest and accumulation of U937 cells on TNFα - stimulated HUVEC , as well as surfaces coated with VCAM - 1 and ICAM - 1 . The ability of U937 cells to resist detachment and flow - induced cell deformation when adhered to surfaces coated with low density of VCAM - 1 and all densities of ICAM - 1 was also dependent on actin polymerization . Hydrodynamic force triggered cytoskeletal remodeling and cell spreading both parallel and perpendicular to the direction of fluid flow , which increased contact area with the adhesion surface . Interestingly , cytoskeletal remodeling and cell spreading was triggered by hydrodynamic force when U937 cells were adherent to poly - L - lysine , which suggests that force - induced signaling can occur independent of integrins . Flow - induced actin redistribution was more pronounced in cells adherent via integrins compared to electrostatic adhesion to poly - L - lysine . On integrin ligands , F - actin had redistributed from the cell centre to the periphery while on poly - L - lysine , significant F - actin remained at the cell centre . These data suggest that hydrodynamic force induces integrin - dependent and integrin - independent signaling that together contribute to cytoskeletal remodeling , which strengthens cell adhesion and resistance to deformation . Thus , rapid signaling and structural adaptations enable U937 cells to arrest and stabilize their adhesion in the presence of hydrodynamic force .