Cell , Vol . 84 , 371 – 379 , February 9 , 1996 , Copyright ª 1996 by Cell Press Actin - Based Cell Motility Review and Cell Locomotion T . J . Mitchison and L . P . Cramer deadhesion occurs since the axon is more weakly sub - strate bound than the front of the growth cones ( Bray , Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology 1979 ) . Strongly adhesive cells such as cultured fibro - University of California , San Francisco blasts tend to have a strongly adherent , extended tail San Francisco , California 94143 - 0450 and leave behind a trail of cytoplasmic fragments as they move . Deadhesion / tail retraction may limit move - Introduction ment rate in such cells . In weakly adhesive , fast moving Most animal cell types possess the capacity to move cells such as amoebae and white blood cells , the tail is over or through a substrate , and cell locomotion plays more rounded and this step is more efficient . Adhesion akeyrolein bothnormal physiologyand disease . Certain and its reversal are a major focus of the accompanying cell types are specialized for locomotion , e . g . , neutro - review by Lauffenburger and Horwitz ( 1996 [ this issue of phils and free living amoebae . In many tissue cells , the Cell ] ) , and tail retraction has been discussed elsewhere capacity for locomotion is normally repressed , but can ( Grebecki , 1994 ) . In this review , we will focus on the be activated by wounding or oncogenic transformation . different structures and potential mechanisms of force The mechanism of amoeboid ( or crawling , or gliding ) generation for protrusion , other leading edge motility , cell motility has been the subject of scientific scrutiny and traction . We will then discuss the relative contribu - since the advent of optical microscopy , and many mod - tion of each type of motile force to locomotion of the els have been discussed ( for the most recent compre - whole cell . hensive review , see Grebecki , 1994 ) . It is now widely accepted that the basic engine for gliding or crawling Actin in Protrusive Structures locomotion is the actin cytoskeleton . An alternative Protrusive structures at the leading edge of motile cells view , that directed lipid flow generates force , has been are highly dynamic and contain dense arrays of actin extensively considered , and rejected , in several recent filaments . In general , where it has been possible to reviews and we will not discuss it here ( e . g . , Grebecki , study , these filaments are organized with their barbed 1994 ) . We will also avoid microtubules , despite their ends ( fast growing , or plus ends ) oriented preferentially in the direction of protrusion ( Small , 1988 ) . The simplest importance forpolarityand motility ( Vasiliev , 1991 ) . Rap - protrusive structures are filopodia , thin cylinders that idly moving cells can often move over the substrate can extend tens of microns from the main cortex ( Figure without microtubules ( keratocytes , neutrophils ) , but 2 ) . Filopodia contain a tight bundle of long actin fila - crawling motility always requires actin . The only known ments oriented in the direction of protrusion . The fila - exception is nematode sperm cells in which polymers ments are held together in the bundle by cross - linking of major sperm protein appear to play the roles of actin proteins such as fimbrin ( Matsudaira , 1994 ) . Filopodia filaments ( Italiano et al . , 1996 ; Roberts and Stewart , have been most studied in neuronal growth cones , but 1995 ) . For the mostpart , the actin andtubulin cytoskele - are present on many other motile cell types . Lamelli - tal systems function independently ; although intercom - podia are thin protrusive sheets that dominate the lead - munication does occur , this would be the subject of an ing edges of cultured fibroblasts and many other motile article in itself . cells . Thecharacteristicrufflingappearance offibroblast Cell locomotionis undoubtedlycomplex , requiringco - leading edges is due to lamellipodia that lift up off the ordinated activity of cytoskeletal , membrane , and adhe - substrate and move backward . The web of actin fila - sion systems . Actin filaments themselves are likely to ments that shapes lamellipodia is organized as an or - be involved in multiple force - generating mechanisms . thogonal cross - weave between two sets of filaments To begin a molecular analysis , we need to dissect loco - ( Small , 1988 ) oriented at approximately 45 (cid:56) to the direc - motion into subtypes of motility . A conventional break - tion of protrusion ( Small et al . , 1995 ) ( Figure 2 ) . In many down along spatial / mechanical lines is shown in Figure cell types , lamellipodia are punctuated at intervals by 1 , for a single cell moving over a two - dimensional sub - rib - like microspikes that resemble short filopodia . The strate . Forward motility of the membrane at the front of orthogonal filaments gather into a tight bundle in mi - the cell is called protrusion . It has been intensively stud - cropikes . Amoeboid cells tend to protrude using thicker ied over the past few years and is probably the aspect processes termed pseudopods . The organization of ac - of locomotion for which we are closest to uncovering tin in pseudopods has been difficult to study owing the molecular basis of force generation . Adhesion is to problems with maintaining their organization during required for protrusion to be converted into movement fixation . Their cortex is thought to be dominated by a along the substrate . The process leading to forward cross - linked mesh of actin filaments with a less polar - movement of the nucleus and cell body we have termed ized organization ( Cox et al . , 1995 ) that may be similar traction . This is arguably the most important type of to the organization seen inthicker lamellipodia of certain motility for generating overall locomotion , and also the types of growth cones ( Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ) . least well understood in either mechanical or molecular However , filaments with their barbed ends forward are terms . The last step in locomotion is comprised of two present in protrusive regions of both these cell types , mechanistically distinct processes : deadhesion and tail predominantly on the ventral surface of growth cones retraction . Whether this step is actively motile depends ( Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ) , and as far as we can deter - on the cell type . Neuronal growth cones lack tail retrac - mine from the data presented , in thin tips protruding along the ventral surface of amoeba ( Cox et al . , 1995 ) . tion , instead spinning out an axon as they move , but Cell372 Figure 3 . Two Models for Formation of Actin Polymer New polymercould begeneratedonly by polymerizingonto existing barbed ends ( elongation , A ) or by a combination of nucleating new filaments and elongating existing ends ( B ) . force is generated remain controversial . New actin poly - mermustbe generatedin oneoftwo ways : byelongation of existing filaments , or by nucleation of new filaments Figure 1 . Subtypes of Motility in Locomotion followed by elongation ( Figure 3 ) . When pure actin poly - A single cellmovingacrossa two - dimensional substrate isshown in merizes , elongation is kinetically favored over nucle - cartoon form ( time increases down the page ) . Detailed morphology ation , resulting in long filaments . In motile cells , the varies between cell types , but the same basic types of motility can bedistinguished . In cellswheretheprocessesoccursimultaneously , situation is complicated by the presence of some actin - the morphology is constant during locomotion . binding proteins that affect filament elongation and oth - ers that catalyze nucleation of new filaments ( Hartwig and Kwiatkowski , 1991 ; Pollard and Cooper , 1985 ) . Un - In all the structures described above , protrusion of fortunately , although recent discoveries have been the membrane is tightly coupled to polymerization of made in motile cells on the signaling molecule control actin filaments at the leading edge . However , the exact of actin polymerization ( Ridley , 1995 ) , it is not yet known mechanism of actin polymerization and how protrusive whether elongation or nucleation factors are targets for regulation . In the prototypic case of thyone sperm acro - somal process protrusion , Tilney and Inoue ( 1982 ) ar - guedthat filamentsare generatedexclusively byelonga - tion of existing barbed ends , originally templated by a stable filament bundle embedded in the sperm nucleus . This results in a bundle of very long actin filaments . In more typical protrusive structures , it has been difficult to measure filament length , but some generalizations can be made . In filopodia , actin filaments are thought to be long , perhaps as long as the filopodium , implying a predominantly elongation mechanism . In lamellipodia of fish keratocytes , Small et al . ( 1995 ) have argued that actinfilamentsmay extendthe wholelength ofthe lamel - lipodia , again arguing fora predominance of elongation . However , their methods might have preferentially ex - tracted shorter filaments . Kinetic analysis using fluores - cence photoactivation in the same cells suggested that actinfilaments turnoververy rapidly ( Theriot andMitchi - son , 1991 ) . This data was interpreted as indicating the presence of a population of short filaments , requiring frequent nucleation . However , this interpretation made assumptions about filament turnover mechanism , and other explanations for the rapid decay in fluorescence signal have been suggested ( Small , 1994 ) . The issue is Figure 2 . Organization of Actin Filaments in Protrusive Structures unresolved , but in some cells may be explained by the Actin is shown as chevrons and the plasma membrane as a thin coexistence of long and short filaments with differential line . Filopodia are typically 0 . 1 – 0 . 5 (cid:109) m thick and extend 5 – 50 (cid:109) m . spatial distribution ( Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ) . These Where measured they contain greater than 15 actin filaments orga - controversies highlightthe deficiencies in current meth - nized as a tight bundle ( Lewis and Bridgman 1992 ) . Lamellipodia odsfordeterminingbothstructureanddynamicsofactin havea similarthicknessandextend1 – 15 (cid:109) m . The extentoforganiza - filament arrays . tion of filaments in a lamellipodium into a clear cross - weave as shown depends on the cell type ( e . g . , Cox et al . , 1995 ; Small , 1988 ) . An exciting new direction in research on protrusion Review : Cell Motility and Locomotion 373 has come from studying the intracellular propulsion of certain bacterial and viral pathogens by an actin “comet tail” mechanism that resembles aspects of protrusion at the front of motile cells ( Cossart , 1995 ; Cudmore et al . , 1995 ; Theriot , 1995 ) . The pathogen surface is likely to bebiochemically simplerthan theinside ofthe plasma membrane , and thus easier to dissect . It may allow us to distinguish between elongation and nucleation for formation of new actin polymer . One of the bacterial pathogens ( Listeria ) appears to generate relatively short filamentsas it moves ( Tilney and Portnoy , 1989 ; see also Zhukarev et al . , 1995 ) , while another bacterium ( Rick - ettsia ) generates long filaments ( Heinzen et al . , 1993 ) . Thus , the balance between elongation and nucleation may vary betweenthese bacteria , and both are compati - ble with motility . Thebacterial motilitysystems are prov - Figure 4 . Two Models for Generation of Protrusive Force ing powerful for identifying molecules that regulate the In the ATPasemotormodel ( A ) , forwardmovement of themembrane actin cytoskeleton , ashas begun to be shown for nucle - tip is driven by a motor protein ( e . g . , myosin I ) moving toward fila - ation ( e . g . , Cossart 1995 ) . ment barbed ends . Polymerization then fills in the resulting gap . In the thermal ratchet model ( B ) , gaps between the protruding mem - Regardlessof whether newactin filaments are formed brane and the barbed ends of actin filaments are created by ther - bynucleationorelongation , ahigh concentrationof actin mally driven movements ( Peskin et al . , 1993 ) . These could be either monomeris requiredto driveactinpolymerization during fluctuations in the position of the membrane , or in the length of the protrusion . In the thyone acrosome reaction , a high con - actin filaments ( Peskin et al . , 1993 ) . Polymerization then fills in the centration of stored , unpolymerized actin drives irre - gap , preventing backward movement of the membrane . versible polymerization . In motile cells , however , new polymerization at the leadingedge occurs continually at proteins to drive protrusion and those in which actin steady state and must be balanced bydepolymerization polymerization itself produces force . Force production elsewhere . Actin depolymerization within the protrusive requires an energy source , and in the cytoplasm , this structure is the most likely source of actin monomer , must ultimately derive from the chemical energy of nu - although contribution of actin from other regions in the cleotide hydrolysis . In motor - based models , a barbed cell may also play a role . Newly synthesized actin is end – directed motor , most likely a myosin , transduces probably not very important since protein synthesis hydrolysis energy directly into force , pushing the mem - blocking drugs donot affect protrusionin the shortterm . brane tip forward ( Figure 4A ) . Certain myosin I isoforms Depolymerization of actin filaments may be catalyzed are enriched in protrusive structures , where they might in vivo because filament turnover is faster in vivo than play the role of the motor ( e . g . , Baines et al . , 1992 ; Fukui in vitro with pure actin ( Theriot and Mitchison , 1991 , et al . , 1989 ; McGoldrick et al . , 1995 ; Wagner et al . , 1992 ; 1992 ; Zigmond , 1993 ) . Candidates for this catalysis are Wessels et al . , 1991 ) , and kinetic analysis of filopodial proteins in the actophorin / ADF / cofilin family ( reviewed protrusion has been argued to favor a motor - driven by Moon and Drubin , 1995 ; Sun et al . , 1995 ) . How these model ( Sheetz et al . , 1992 ) . Dictyostelium genetics is or similar proteins precisely maintain the monomer pool beginning to reveal specific roles for individual myosin is not clear . One intriguing possibility is that hydrolysis I isoforms . So far , neither single nor multiple myosin of actin - bound ATP that accompanies polymerization mutants has blocked protrusion in these cells , though promotes depolymerization . This would effectively cou - it is too early to rule out any role for myosins ( e . g . , Jung ple depolymerization and maintenance of the monomer and Hammer , 1990 ; Titus et al . , 1993 ; Wessels et al . , pool to the free energy of ATP hydrolysis . 1991 ) . Protrusion of hyphae is blocked in Aspergillus nidulans null for myoA , a myosin I – like protein , but it is not clear if this is due to a direct effect on the actin Force for Cell Protrusion cytoskeleton or due to reduced vesicle transport to the In principle , the force for protrusion could be generated growing tip ( McGoldrick et al . , 1995 ) . locally at the leading edge , or in the cell body and trans - The ideathat polymerization alone couldpush a mem - mitted to the leading edge by mechanical linkage or brane forward is consistent with the polarity of actin hydrostatic pressure . Experiments in amoeba clearlyfa - filaments in protrusive structures , but perhaps lesscon - vor local force generation ( Grebecki , 1994 ) . Mechanical ceptually obvious than using a motor protein . However , linkage would require the cytoskeleton to be pushed there is considerable evidence in favor of such a model . into the leadingedge , but in general , forward movement Polymerization of pure actin inside a lipid vesicle can of actin polymer has not been observed in protrusive deform the membrane ( Cortese et al . , 1989 ) and poly - structures . In animal cells , there is no evidence for bulk merization of other proteins including tubulin ( Hotani hydrostatic pressure in the cytoplasm , unlike plants and Miyamoto , 1990 ) can also produce membrane - de - where turgor pressure contributes to protrusion . Thus , forming force . Any proposed mechanism for coupling the evidence strongly favors generation of protrusive polymerization to protrusion can take advantage of ac - force directly at the leading edge . tin - binding proteins thatcross - link and bundlethe newly Proposedmechanisms forgeneratingprotrusive force formed polymer ( Matsudaira , 1994 ) increasing the stiff - ness of the gel ( Condeelis , 1992 ) . Polymerization may can be divided into those invoking the action of motor Cell374 be coupled to ATP hydrolysis by maintenance of the monomer pool , asdescribedabove , but how is polymer - ization in turn coupled to physical protrusion of the membrane ? Two mechanisms have been proposed for physical coupling , the simpler of which is the thermal ratchet model ( Peskin et al . , 1993 ; Figure 4B ) . In this model , the energy to drive protrusion comes from poly - Figure 5 . Particle Motility in Protrusive Structures merization , but the rate is limited by the probability that Surfaceattached particlesandreceptors ( andintracellularparticles ; thermal fluctuation will allow a subunit to be added . A data not shown ) move inward with respect to the substrate by pas - serious objection to the model concerns the mechanical sive attachment to inwardly moving actin ( A ) , or are actively trans - properties of the plasma membrane , which may be too ported by a putative minus end – directed actin - based motor ( B ) . A myosin I may transport particles and receptors that have been stiff to deform at the required rate by thermal fluctua - observed to move outward ( Kucik et al . , 1989 , Sheetz et al . , 1990 ) tions alone . However , another potential sourceof fluctu - ( C ) . In somecells , actin does not move with respectto the substrate ation is thermally driven changes in the effective length inlamellipodia ( Theriotand Mitchison , 1991 ) . In thesecells , particles of the actin filaments due to temporary bending ( Peskin may move on stationary actin by ( B ) or ( C ) . For simplicity , we have et al . , 1993 ) . Thealternative potential mechanism of me - not indicated how theactin may be movingor whyit does not move chanical coupling of polymerization to protrusion is forward in ( B ) . through local osmotic effects due to gel swelling . Poly - merizing actin may release water and bound ions , pro - Backward and Sideways Motility in moting water influx into the polymer gel ( Condeelis , Protrusive Structures 1992 ) . Understanding forward motility of lamellipodia and filo - Currently , we lack decisive evidence to decide be - podia is complicated by the continuous backward tween motor protein - driven and polymerization - driven movement of internal structures and surface - attached models for protrusive force generation , and it may turn particles . This type of motility as viewed by high resolu - out that both are important . The same distinction has tion , time lapse microscopy is one of the most dramatic been difficult tomake inthe microtubule - dependentpro - properties of lamellipodia and filopodia and is seen in cess of anaphase chromosome movement ( Inoue and all thinleadingedge structures ofmotile cells . Backward Salmon , 1995 ) . One problem with analyzing the role of movement in lamellipodia of motile cells has been stud - myosins in protrusionhas been the coexistence of many ied for decades and often proposed to play some role members of this protein family in cells , complicating in locomotion , although backward movement is not im - genetic analysis , and the lack of pharmacological inhibi - mediately reconcilable with forward movement of the tors . An interesting pharmacological tool is the drug cell . Are we closer to understanding what is moving butane - dione - monoxime ( BDM ) , a low affinity inhibitor backward and how the movement is powered ? Now of myosin ATPasethat readily enters cells . BDM inhibits classic photobleachingstudies ofWang ( 1985 ) and cyto - myosin II and myosin V in vitro and may inhibit all myo - chalasin addition experiments of Forscher and Smith sins ( Cramer and Mitchison , 1995 ) . Listeria , as a model ( 1988 ) lead most authors to conclude that all the actin for lamellipodia protrusion , does not stain for known filaments in lamellipodia and filopodia are moving con - myosins , and its motility is neither inhibited by BDM tinually backward toward the cell body , and that back - nor appears to utilize osmotic forces . Although other ward movement of particles and surface receptors is ATPase actin motors could exist , the data makes us driven by coupling to this flow of moving actin ( Figure prefer the thermal ratchet mechanism for Listeria . Two 5A ) ( Mitchison and Kirschner , 1988 ; Sheetz et al . , 1989 ; evolutionary arguments also support thermal ratchets . Smith , 1988 ) . Much of the evidence still favors such First , in nematode sperm motility , actin is replaced by a model , though direct tests have yielded ambiguous another polymerizing protein , MSP . This is surprising results . Filaments marked by photobleaching of phalloi - enough , and it is difficult to imagine that novel motors din in growth cones move at the same rate as surface - have also evolved in this system . Second , using ATP attached beads ( Lin and Forscher , 1995 ) , but actin hydrolysis by actin to power thermal ratchet based pro - filaments in tissue culture lamellipodia marked by fluo - trusion provides the simplest possible mechanism , and rescence photoactivation move backward at only one the easiest one to imagine evolving in primitive eukary - third the rate of particles and surface - attached beads otes ( Mitchison , 1995 ) . Proponents of polymerization - ( Theriot and Mitchison , 1992 ) . Different rates of back - driven protrusion need to provide alternative roles for ward movement might simply reflect the presence of the myosin I isoforms thatare enriched in leadingedges . different populations of actin filaments that are not Video tracking has shown that certain membrane pro - equally detected by current methods of observation , teins can move rapidly forward in lamellipodia ( Kucik et but are moving backward at different rates in the same al . , 1989 ; Sheetz et al . , 1990 ; Schmidt et al . , 1994 ) . This lamellipodia . Consistent with this possibility is the ob - is faster than that allowed by diffusion and could be servation thatparticlesmove backwardatdifferentrates drivenbymyosinI , allowingreceptors torapidly promote over dorsal and ventral surfaces respectively in primary substrate sensing and adhesion ( Figure 5C ) . Alterna - fibroblasts ( Harris and Dunn , 1972 ) . Alternatively , these tively myosin I may have some role in stabilization of data also fit a model in which some particles or surface - protrusive structures as implicated for brushborder my - attached beads are passively attached to moving actin osin I ( Temm - Grove et al . , 1992 ) or in vesicle transport / and others are actively driven backward at a faster rate in the same lamellipodium , perhaps by the action of a secretion ( McGoldrick et al . , 1995 ) . Review : Cell Motility and Locomotion 375 pointed end – directed actin - based motor ( Figures 5A Stress fibers have a strict definition in that they are organized like muscle sarcomeres , with short actin fila - and 5B ) , a possibility we take seriously . Similar , but generally slower , backward movement of particles oc - ments arranged in bundles of alternating polarity inter - spersed with bipolar myosin II filaments . Most fluores - curs over the cell body ( capping ) , and this is known to be driven by myosin II ( Pasternak et al . , 1989 ) . However , cent studies of motile cells do not determine whether observed bundles of actin filaments are strictly stress myosin II is absent from lamellipodia and in Dictyostel - ium does not by some mechanism ( e . g . , raking back - fibers by S1 decoration and the possibility exists that some of these actin fibers have a different organization . ward ) drive backward movement of particles on protru - sive structures ( Jay and Elson , 1992 ) . Roles for myosin Certain locomoting cells that lack stress fibers have thinner actin bundles often oriented in the direction of I’shave notbeen reported in theliterature . Theprevalent model in which all backward movement in leading edge locomotion ( Couchman and Rees , 1979 ) . The polarity of these filaments are notknown , but the (cid:97) - actinin fluores - structures reflects coupling to moving actin filaments needs to be testedmore rigorously , and this may require cent staining on similar filaments in related cells does not appear characteristic of sarcomeres ( Tomasek et development ofnew probes ofactin dynamicsand parti - cle movement . al . , 1982 ) . These thin actin bundles in animal cells have received little attention , despite their possible impor - Sideways movements of microspikes and filopodia in lamellipodia have received lessattention than backward tance for locomotion . movements , though they can be dramatic and must pro - vide clues to dynamic organization of actin filaments . Generation of Traction Force Sideways movement may be important in growth cone Many models have been postulated for generation of guidance , allowing the same filopodium to move around traction force , but we will concentrate on two possibilit - a growth cone as it samples the environment ( Bray and ies that propose roles for myosin II in force generation . Chapman , 1985 ) . Small ( 1994 ) has pointedout ageomet - One reason for focusing on this molecule is its abun - ric relationship between orientation of actin filaments dance in the cell body of motile cells ( Huxley , 1973 ) ; in protruding lamellipodia and sideways movements of another is its proven importance in locomotion . Much their elongating barbed ends . This idea fits with the attention was paid to the observation that genetic abla - gradedradialextension modelsof keratocytemovement tion of myosin II in Dictyostelium did not completely ( Lee et al . , 1993 ) , but it cannot explain rapid sideways block cell locomotion or chemotaxis ( De Lozanne and movements of microspikes in lamellipodia that are pro - Spudich , 1987 ; Knecht and Loomis , 1987 ) . Since myosin truding slowly with respect to sideways movements II is not involved in protrusion , a block to this type of ( Fisher et al . , 1988 ) . The mechanism of this movement is motility would not be expected . Less celebrated is the enigmatic : we might speculate a role for motors moving observation that the net rate of locomotion ( reflecting along actin filaments that are arranged at an angle to traction ) was greatly reduced in myosin II nulls , and in the direction of protrusion and thus generate a force the physiological setting of the slug stage , the nulls are component normal to the protrusive direction . completely blocked in locomotion ( Doolittle et al . , 1995 ) . That this is direct evidence for myosin II generating Actin in the Cell Body traction force is supported by the reduced locomotion Once we move back from the leading edge to the cell of the nulls on more adhesive substrates ( Jay et al . , body , actin organization is less well understood . We 1995 ) . define the cell body as the thickest region of cytoplasm How does myosin II generate traction force ? Two fun - containing the nucleus togetherwith a regionofinterme - damentally distinct mechanisms are conceivable , based diate thickness ( often called the lamella ) found between either on contraction or transport . The difference con - the nucleusand protrusive structures . Aswith protrusive cerns the source of polarity that makes the cell move structures , organization and polarity of actin filaments forward . Incontractile models ( Figure 6A ) , forceisgener - in the cell body has important implications for mecha - ated as tension , which has equal components pulling nisms of force generation . We know from electron mi - the cell forward and backward . Net locomotion occurs croscopy of lamellae of motile animal cells that cortical by superimposing either polarizedadhesion , stronger at actin ( subplasmalemma ) appears as a loose meshwork the front relative to theback , and / or polarizedassembly / of apparentlyshort , randomly organized filaments . Fluo - disassembly of the cortex . A related contractile model is rescent studies show that cell bodies of motile animal based on polarized cortical contraction / relaxation ( Bray cells also have bundles of actin filaments , but unlike the and White , 1988 ) . Transport models postulate that myo - bundles in lamellipodia , their organization and polarity sin generates force in an inherently polarized manner , are generally not known . It is known that bundles of acting directly to pull the cell forward ( Figure 6B ) . Trans - actin filaments are commonly homopolar in plant cells port models , in contrast with contraction models , re - where they provide the substrate for myosin - driven cy - quire a net polarity in actin filaments that are attached toplasmic streaming ( Kuroda , 1990 ) . Also neuronal to the substrate , which act as tracks over which the rest growth cones have long homopolar actin filament bun - of the cell is pulled . Polarized adhesion and assembly dleswith barbed endsprimarilyin thedirection ofprotru - may also be needed for locomotion , but they are no sion , but it is not clear whether thisorganization extends longer the primary source of polarity . into the cell body of the growth cone ( Lewis and Bridg - Contraction - driven motility was one of the earliest man , 1992 ) . Actin filament bundles in cell bodies of mo - types of force proposed for amoeba locomotion and tileanimalcells arealmost alwayslooselytermed “stress fibers” in the literature . has been debated since early last century ( see Bray and Cell376 Figure 6 . Two Models for Generation of Traction Force Using Myo - sin II Activity In the contractionmodel ( A ) , myosinpulling onfilaments of opposite polarity creates a cortical tension that pulls the cell equally in all directions . This contraction can be converted into movement by combining it with preferential assembly of the cortex at the front of the cell and disassembly at the back , and / or by regulating the rela - tive strength of adhesive contacts to the substratum at the front and back . In the transport model ( B ) , myosin activity pulls the body of the cell over an oriented track of actin filaments attached to the Figure 7 . Transport - Driven Traction in Two Types of Cell Motility substratum . ( A ) shows a side view of a PtK2 cell respreading after mitosis . The oriented track of filamentous actin is provided by retraction fibers . Experimental evidence support a model in which myosin II drives spreading by pulling the cell over these retraction fiber filaments White , 1988 ; Grebecki , 1994 ; Sheetz , 1994 ) . Credence ( Cramer and Mitchison , 1993 , 1995 ) . for the idea came much later when it was determined ( B ) shows an extension of this model to growth cone locomotion . that actin and myosin were present in nonmuscle motile Protrusion of filopodia is driven by the polymerization mechanisms discussed above , andis followed by adhesive contact of the filopo - cells , and a model for movement based on known stri - dium to the substratum . The growth cone is then shown as being ated muscle contraction was suggested ( Huxley , 1973 ) . pulled outward over this oriented filamentous actin track provided Myosin II driven contraction is thought to be responsible by myosin II activity . There is no direct experimental support for for generating cortical tension , an important factor in such a model in growth cones , though myosin II is present at the shaping cells . Myosin II is also responsible for local base of filopodia ( Bridgman and Dailey 1989 ) and homopolar bun - dles of actin filaments have been observed in growth cones ( Lewis contractions , e . g . , cytokinesis . Although less is known and Bridgman , 1992 ) . about a role for contraction in driving locomotion there are reasons to favor it . Preferential assembly of the cor - tex probably does occur at the front of the cell , where after mitosis ( Figure 7A ) . The spreading cell moves out - the leading edge meets the cell body and where poly - ward preferentially along retraction fibers that provide a merization of myosin II filaments is thought to occur homopolartransport track ( Cramerand Mitchison , 1993 , ( Kolega and Taylor , 1993 ; McKenna et al . , 1989 ) . Polar - 1995 ) . Inhibition of spreading by the myosin inhibitor ized adhesion , stronger at the front of the cell than the BDM suggests that spreading may be driven by myosin back , is supported by direct measurements in some activity , and this is supported by immunolocalization of cells , asdiscussed byLauffenburger and Horwitz ( 1996 ) . myosin II at the spreading edge ( Cramer and Mitchison , One situationwherethereis strongevidenceforcontrac - 1995 ) . Another situation where transport tracks may ex - tion - based forward movement is “purse string” motility ist is where filopodial actin bundles extend into growth ( discussed in Cramer et al . , 1994 ) . cones . Indeed , long actin filament bundles with barbed Transport mechanisms have been discussed less in ends mostly in the direction of forward movement are the literature , presumably because of the apparent ab - located on the ventral surface of growth cones ( Lewis sence of information on the polarity of actin filaments and Bridgman , 1992 ) . Pulling force produced by filo - in the cell body of locomoting cells . When homopolar podia ( the “contractile force” of Heidemann et al . , 1991 ) actin bundles are present in motile cells and oriented may be generated by myosin pulling the growth cone in the direction of cell movement , it is natural to propose body forward on these bundles . Myosin II is present in that they could act as transport tracks . One such situa - the correct location to generate such force ( Bridgman and Dailey 1989 ) . In this view , growth cones ( and other tion occurs when certain tissue culture cells respread Review : Cell Motility and Locomotion 377 filopodia - rich cells such as sea urchin secondary mes - Lin and Forscher ( 1995 ) . As the rate of growth cone locomotion increases , the rate of backward movement enchyme cells ) could first use protrusive force to send ( measured relative to the substrate ) decreases . This is out filopodia that then act as transport tracks for myosin consistent with a model in which backward movement to pull the growth cone forward ( Figure 7B ) . This model of actin filaments is attenuated by coupling to the sub - may be more generally applicable . For example , the strate , generating instead force to pull the growth cone uniform actin deposited by fibroblast lamellipodia may forward . In contrast , backward movement of actin fila - act as a transport mat for myosin to pull the cell body mentsin protruding lamellipodiaofstationary fibroblasts forward . While the generality of transport based mecha - is not directly related to protrusion ( Theriot and Mitchi - nisms for generating traction force is not clear , it does son , 1992 ) . This difference might arise because fibro - seemlikely thattheyare atleastasimportant ascontrac - blastlamellipodia are oftendetachedfromthe substrate , tion based mechanisms for some types of cell motility . preventing efficient coupling of actin filaments to the What experiments might distinguish contraction from substrate . transport - based traction force in locomoting cells ? The For groups of cells traveling relatively short distances contraction model predicts that actin filamentscan slide or undergoing morphogenetic movements during devel - or shear over relatively short distances , but are essen - opment , contraction - based motility can occur in the ab - tially fixed with respect to the substrate over the longer sence of lamellipodia protrusion and is probably suffi - distances a locomoting cell is expected to move . This is cient for active movement , e . g . , pursestring contraction consistent with morphological observations suggesting ( discussed in Cramer et al . , 1994 ) . For individual cells that the cortex is fixed with respect to the substrate in traveling greater distances , suchas fibroblasts and neu - moving embryonic cells ( Bilozur and Hay , 1989 ) . Actin rons , lamellipodia and / or filopodia are always observed filamentmarking experimentscould test the fixedcortex to protrudeasthe cells locomoteandthe question arises and related contraction - based models in locomoting as to the relative importance of protrusion and traction . cells . Plausibility of the transport - based model hinges We picture that traction is an inherently stronger force on detection of actin filaments preferentially oriented and is therefore likely important for cells that are more with barbed ends in the direction of forward movement strongly adherent to the substrate , whichthus locomote under cell bodies of locomoting cells . more slowly . For these cells , we do not know whether protrusive force contributes to the overall force for loco - Integration of Motile Forces for motion , or whether protrusion is mainly required to lay Cell Locomotion down a polarized actin track for myosin as proposed in We have discussed three types of force - generating sys - Figure 7B . tems , andthe question naturallyarises astotheir relative importance for locomotion as a whole . For example , is Future Directions protrusive force in lamellipodia ever enough to power For each of the forces , we have discussed multiple mo - cell locomotion alone ? Is force derived from backward lecular mechanisms , and one obvious priority for future movements in protrusive structures important for for - work is to distinguish between them . To do this , we ward locomotion , and if so in which cells ? Can cells will need better ways of analyzing the structure and locomote purely by traction force ? We suspect the rela - dynamics of the actin filament arrays in cells . In particu - tive importance of these forces dependson such factors lar , better filament marking experiments in live cells and as the rate of locomotion , distance the cell has to travel filament polaritymeasurements in fixed cells are needed and strength of cell adhesion . to test traction models . Analyzing the role of specific Fast moving cells such as keratocytes and leucocytes motors is another important challenge for the future . To can locomote 10 – 60 times faster than a typical primary do this , we will need , in addition to genetic approaches , fibroblast and are 3 – 20 times less adhesive ( Oliver et better pharmacologicaltools if we hope to study motors al . , 1994 ) . Thus , the cell bodiesof keratocytesand leuco - in a variety of cell types . It may turn out that some of cytes impose little drag force during cell protrusion . In the mechanisms set up as alternatives in this review in these cells , force from cell protrusion may be sufficient fact turn out to be both true , to an extent that varies tomove the entirecellforward , providedthe lamellipodia with cell type . Applying what we have learned from cells makes adhesive contact with the substrate . Protrusion locomoting on a two - dimensional substrate to those at the leading edge would generate membrane tension moving through a three - dimensional matrix is another that could pull the back of the cell forward . Estimated important direction . The whole issue of regulation that protrusive force from rates of actin polymerization can we have barely touched on will have to be integrated account for measured locomotory force in these cells with force - generating mechanisms to understand how ( Oliver et al . , 1994 ) . However , a contractile force normal locomotion is directed . Overall , we foresee the basic to the direction of locomotion has also been observed mechanisms of cell locomotion being solved , perhaps in keratocytes ( Lee et al . , 1994 ) , and this could also in this century . Using this information to manipulate lo - contribute to forward locomotion . Nematode sperm , an - comotion for therapeutic benefit appears to be a more other fast moving , weakly adhesive cell type , may also daunting task . It is , however , one well worth pursuing move by protrusion alone , in this case driven by MSP given the importance of locomotion in many aspects of polymerization . No other potential sources of motile physiology . force are known in these cells ( Roberts and Stewart , 1995 ) . Acknowledgments The clearest example where backward motility in la - mellipodia appears to couple directly to forward loco - We explicitly acknowledge key intellectual contributions from Jody Rosenblatt ( depolymerization ) and Julie Theriot ( protrusion , Listeria motion comes from work on Aplysia growth cones by Cell378 motility ) . Owing to space restrictions , we were unable to cite all Harris , A . , and Dunn , G . ( 1972 ) . Centripetal transport of attached particles on both surfaces of moving fibroblasts . Exp . Cell Res . 73 , relevant publications . We attempted to fairly representdifferent lab - oratories , systems , and opinions and apologize to authors whose 519 – 523 . papers we did not include . We thank Matt Welch and Jody Rosen - Hartwig , J . H . , and Kwiatkowski , D . J . ( 1991 ) . Actin - binding proteins . blatt for helpfulcomments onthe manuscript . This workwas funded Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 3 , 87 – 97 . bygrantGM48027 fromtheNationalInstitutesofHealthanda fellow - Heidemann , S . R . , Lamoureux , P . , and Buxbaum , R . E . ( 1991 ) . On the ship from the Packard Foundation to T . J . Mitchison , and a senior cytomechanics and fluid dynamics of growth cone motility . J . Cell postdoctoral fellowship from the American Cancer Society to L . P . Sci . ( Suppl . ) 15 , 35 – 44 . Cramer . Heinzen , R . A . , Hayes , S . F . , Peacock , M . G . , andHackstadt , T . ( 1993 ) . References Directionalactinpolymerizationassociatedwithspottedfevergroup rickettsia infection of vero cells . Infect . Immun . 61 , 1926 – 1935 . Baines , I . C . , Brzeska , H . , and Korn , E . D . ( 1992 ) . Differential localiza - Hotani , H . , and Miyamoto , H . ( 1990 ) . Dynamic features of microtu - tion of Acanthamoeba myosin I isoforms . J . Cell Biol . 119 , 1193 – bules as visualized by dark - field microscopy . Adv . Biophys . 26 , 1203 . 135 – 156 . Bilozur , M . E . , and Hay , E . D . ( 1989 ) . Cell migration into neural tube Huxley , H . E . ( 1973 ) . Muscular contraction and cell motility . Nature lumen provides evidence for the fixed cortex theory of cell motility . 243 , 445 – 449 . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 14 , 469 – 484 . Inoue , S . , and Salmon , E . D . ( 1995 ) . Force generation by microtubule Bray , D . ( 1979 ) . Mechanical tensionproducedby nervecellsintissue assembly / disassemblyin mitosisandrelated movements . Mol . Biol . culture . J . Cell Sci . 37 , 391 – 410 . Cell 6 , 1619 – 1640 . Bray , D . , and Chapman , K . ( 1985 ) . Analysis of microspike move - Italiano , J . E . , Jr . , Roberts , T . M . , Stewart , M . , and Fontana , C . A . ments on the neuronal growth cone . J . Neurosci . 5 , 3204 – 3213 . ( 1996 ) . Reconstitutioninvitroofthemotileapparatusfromtheamoe - Bray , D . , andWhite , J . G . ( 1988 ) . Corticalflow inanimalcells . Science boid sperm of ascaris shows that filament assembly and bundling 239 , 883 – 888 . move membranes . Cell 84 , 105 – 114 . Bridgman , P . C . , andDailey , M . E . ( 1989 ) . The organization of myosin Jay , P . Y . , and Elson , E . L . ( 1992 ) . Surface particle transport mecha - and actin in rapid frozen nerve growth cones . J . Cell Biol . 108 , nismindependentofmyosinIIin Dictyostelium . Nature 356 , 438 – 440 . 95 – 109 . Jay , P . Y . , Pharm , P . A . , Wong , S . A . , andElson , E . L . ( 1995 ) . Amechan - Condeelis , J . ( 1992 ) . Are all pseudopods created equal ? Cell Motil . ical function of myosin - II in cell motility . J . Cell Sci . 108 , 387 – 393 . Cytoskeleton 22 , 1 – 6 . Cortese , J . D . , Schwab , B . , Frieden , C . , and Elson , E . L . ( 1989 ) . Actin Jung , G . , and Hammer , J . A . , III ( 1990 ) . Generation and characteriza - polymerization induces shape change in actin - containing vesicles . tionof Dictyostelium cells deficientin amyosin heavy chainisoform . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 86 , 5773 – 5777 . J . Cell Biol . 110 , 1955 – 1964 . Cossart , P . ( 1995 ) . Actin - based bacterial motility . Curr . Opin . Cell Knecht , D . , and Loomis , W . F . ( 1987 ) . Antisense RNA inactivation of Biol . 7 , 94 – 101 . myosin heavy chain gene expression in Dictyostelium discoideum . Science 236 , 1081 – 1086 . Couchman , J . R . , and Rees , D . A . ( 1979 ) . The behavior of fibroblasts migrating from chick heart explants : changes in adhesion , locomo - Kolega , J . , and Taylor , D . L . ( 1993 ) . Gradients in the concentration tion , and growth , in the distribution of actomyosin and fibronectin . and assembly of myosin II in living fibroblasts during locomotion J . Cell Sci . 39 , 149 – 165 . and fiber transport . Mol . Biol . Cell 4 , 819 – 836 . Cox , D . , Ridsdale , J . A . , Condeelis , J . , andHartwig , J . ( 1995 ) . Genetic Kucik , D . F . , Elson , E . L . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1989 ) . Forward transport deletion of ABP - 120 alters the three - dimensional organization of of glycoproteins on leading lamellipodia in locomoting cells . Nature actin filaments in Dictyostelium pseudopods . J . Cell Biol . 128 , 340 , 315 – 317 . 819 – 835 . Kuroda , K . ( 1990 ) . Cytoplasmic streaming in plant cells . Int . Rev . Cramer , L . P . , andMitchison , T . J . ( 1993 ) . Movingandstationary actin Cytol . 121 – 307 . filaments are involved in spreadingof postmitotic PtK2 cells . J . Cell Lauffenburger , D . A . , andHorwitz , A . F . ( 1996 ) . Cellmigration : aphysi - Biol . 122 , 833 – 843 . cally integrated molecular process . Cell 84 , this issue . Cramer , L . P . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1995 ) . Myosin is involved in post - mitotic cell spreading . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 1 – 11 . Lee , J . A . , Ishihara , A . , Theriot , J . A . , and Jacobson , K . ( 1993 ) . Princi - ples of locomotion for simple - shaped cells . Nature 362 , 167 – 171 . Cramer , L . P . , Mitchison , T . J . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 1994 ) . Actin - depen - dent motile forces and cell motility . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 6 , 82 – 86 . Lee , J . , Leonard , M . , Oliver , T . , Ishihara , A . , andJacobson , K . ( 1994 ) . Traction forces generated by locomoting keratocytes . J . Cell Biol . Cudmore , S . , Cossart , P . , Griffiths , G . , and Way , M . ( 1995 ) . Actin - 127 , 1957 – 1964 . based motility of vaccinia virus . Nature 378 , 636 – 638 . De Lozanne , A . , and Spudich , J . A . ( 1987 ) . Disruption of the Dictyo - Lewis , A . K . , and Bridgman , P . C . ( 1992 ) . Nerve growth cone lamelli - stelium myosinheavy chain by homologous recombination . Science podiacontaintwo populations ofactinfilaments thatdiffer inorgani - 236 , 1086 – 1091 . zation and polarity . J . Cell Biol . 119 , 1219 – 1243 . Doolittle , K . W . , Reddy , I . , and McNally , J . G . ( 1995 ) . 3D analysis of Lin , C . - H . , andForscher , P . ( 1995 ) . Growthconeadvanceis inversely cellmovement duringnormal andmyosin - II - nullcell morphogenesis proportional to retrograde F - actin flow . Neuron 14 , 763 – 771 . in Dictyostelium . Dev . Biol . 167 , 118 – 129 . Matsudaira , P . ( 1994 ) . Actin crosslinking proteins at the leading Fisher , G . W . , Conrad , P . A . , DeBiasio , R . L . , and Taylor , D . L . ( 1988 ) . edge . Semin . Cell Biol . 5 , 165 – 174 . Centripetal transport of cytoplasm , actin and the cell surface in McGoldrick , C . A . , Gruver , C . , and May , G . S . ( 1995 ) . myoA of Asper - lamellipodia of fibroblasts . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 11 , 235 – 247 . gillus nidulans encodes an essential myosin I required for secretion Forscher , P . , and Smith , S . J . ( 1988 ) . Actions of cytochalasins on and polarized growth . J . Cell Biol . 128 , 577 – 587 . the organization of actin filaments and microtubules in a neuronal McKenna , N . M . , Wang , Y . - L . , and Konkel , M . E . ( 1989 ) . Formation growth cone . J . Cell Biol . 107 , 1505 – 1516 . andmovement of myosin - containing structures in living fibroblasts . Fukui , Y . , Lynch , T . J . , Brzeska , H . , and Korn , E . D . ( 1989 ) . Myosin I J . Cell Biol . 109 , 1163 – 1172 . islocated attheleading edgesoflocomoting Dictyostelium amoeba . Mitchison , T . J . ( 1995 ) . Evolution of a dynamic cytoskeleton . Phil . Nature 341 , 328 – 331 . Trans . Roy . Soc . ( Lond . ) B . 349 , 299 – 304 . Grebecki , A . ( 1994 ) . Membraneand cytoskeletal flow in motile cells with emphasis on the contribution of free - living amoeba . Int . Rev . Mitchison , T . J . , and Kirschner , M . ( 1988 ) . Cytoskeletal dynamics and nerve growth . Neuron 1 , 761 – 772 . Cytol . 148 , 37 – 79 . Review : Cell Motility and Locomotion 379 Moon , A . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 1995 ) . The ADF / cofilin proteins . Stimu - Vasiliev , J . M . ( 1991 ) . Polarization of pseudopodial activities : cy - toskeletal mechanisms . J . Cell Sci . 98 , 1 – 4 . lus - responsivemodulatorsofactindynamics . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 , 1423 – 1431 . Wagner , M . C . , Barylko , B . , andAlbanesi , J . P . ( 1992 ) . Tissuedistribu - tion and subcellular localization of mammalian myosinI . J . Cell Biol . Oliver , T . , Lee , J . , and Jacobson , K . ( 1994 ) . Forces exerted by loco - 119 , 163 – 170 . moting cells . Semin . Cell Biol . 5 , 139 – 147 . Wang , Y . - L . ( 1985 ) . Exchange of actin subunits at the leading edge Pasternak , C . , Spudich , J . A . , and Elson , E . L . ( 1989 ) . Capping of of living fibroblasts : possible role of treadmilling . J . Cell . Biol . 101 , surface receptors and concomitant cortical tension are generated 597 – 602 . by conventional myosin . Nature 341 , 549 – 551 . Wessels , D . , Murray , J . , Jung , G . , Hammer , J . A . , III , and Soll , D . R . Peskin , C . S . , Odell , G . M . , and Oster , G . F . ( 1993 ) . Cellular motions ( 1991 ) . MyosinIBnull mutantsof Dictyostelium exhibitabnormalities and thermal fluctuations : the Brownian ratchet . Biophys . J . 65 , in motility . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 20 , 301 – 315 . 316 – 324 . Zigmond , S . H . ( 1993 ) . Recent quantitative studies of actin filament Pollard , T . D . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1985 ) . Actin and actin - binding pro - turnover during cell locomotion . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 25 , teins : a critical evaluationof mechanisms and functions . Annu . Rev . 309 – 316 . Biochem . 55 , 987 – 1035 . Zhukarev , V . , Ashton , F . T . , Sanger , J . M . , Sanger , J . W . , andShuman , Ridley , A . J . ( 1995 ) . Rho - relatedproteins : actincytoskeleton andcell H . ( 1995 ) . Steady state fluorescence polarization study of actin fila - cycle . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 5 , 24 – 30 . ment bundles in Listeria - infected cells . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 30 , Roberts , T . M . , andStewart , M . ( 1995 ) . Nematodesperm locomotion . 229 – 246 . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 7 , 13 – 17 . Schmidt , C . E . , Chen , T . , and Lauffenburger , D . A . ( 1994 ) . Simulation of integrin - cytoskeletal interactions in migrating fibroblasts . Bio - phys . J . 67 , 461 – 474 . Sheetz , M . P . ( 1994 ) . Cell migration by graded attachment to sub - strates and contraction . Semin . Cell Biol . 5 , 149 – 155 . Sheetz , M . P . , Turney , S . , Qian , H . , andElson , E . L . ( 1989 ) . Nanometre - levelanalysis demonstratesthatlipid - flowdoes notdrive membrane glycoprotein movements . Nature 340 , 284 – 288 . Sheetz , M . P . , Baumrind , N . L . , Wayne , D . B . , and Pearlman , A . L . ( 1990 ) . Concentration of membrane antigens by forward transport and trapping in neuronal growth cones . Cell 61 , 231 – 241 . Sheetz , M . P . , Wayne , D . B . , and Pearlman , A . L . ( 1992 ) . Extension of filopodiaby motor - dependent actinassembly . CellMotil . Cytoskele - ton 22 , 160 – 169 . Small , J . V . ( 1988 ) . The actin cytoskeleton . Electron Microsc . Rev . 1 , 155 – 174 . Small , J . V . ( 1994 ) . Lamellipodia architecture : actin filament turnover and the lateral flow of actin filaments during motility . Seminars Cell Biol . 5 , 157 – 163 . Small , J . V . , Herzog , M . , and Anderson , K . ( 1995 ) . Actin filament organization in the fish keratocyte lamellipodium . J . Cell Biol . 129 , 1275 – 1286 . Smith , S . J . ( 1988 ) . Neuronalcytomechanics : theactin - based motility of growth cones . Science 242 , 708 – 715 . Sun , H . - Q . , Kwiatkowska , K . , and Yin , H . L . ( 1995 ) . Actin monomer binding proteins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 7 , 102 – 110 . Temm - Grove , C . , Helbing , D . , Wiegand , C . , Honer , B . , andJockusch , B . M . ( 1992 ) . The upright position of brush border - type microvilli depends on myosin filaments . J . Cell Sci . 101 , 599 – 610 . Theriot , J . A . ( 1995 ) . The cell biology of infection by intracellular bacterial pathogens . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 11 , 213 – 239 . Theriot , J . A . , andMitchison , T . J . ( 1991 ) . Actinmicrofilament dynam - ics in locomoting cells . Nature 352 , 126 – 131 . Theriot , J . A . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1992 ) . Comparison of actin and cellsurfacedynamics inmotilefibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 118 , 367 – 377 . Tilney , L . G . , and Inoue , S . ( 1982 ) . Acrosomal reaction of thyone sperm . II . The kinetics and possible mechanism of acrosomal pro - cess elongation . J . Cell Biol . 93 , 820 – 827 . Tilney , L . G . , andPortnoy , D . A . ( 1989 ) . Actinfilamentsandthegrowth , movement , and spread of the intracellular bacterial parasite , listeria monocytogenes . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 1597 – 1608 . Titus , M . A . , Wessels , D . , Spudich , J . A . , and Soll , D . ( 1993 ) . The unconventional myosin encoded by the myoA gene plays a role in Dictyostelium motility . Mol . Biol . Cell 4 , 233 – 246 . Tomasek , J . J . , Hay , E . D . , and Fujiwara , K . ( 1982 ) . Collagen modu - lates cellshape andcytoskeleton of embryonic corneal and fibroma fibroblasts : distribution of actin , (cid:97) - actininand myosin . Dev . Biol . 92 , 107 – 122 .