The Kinetics of Cooperative Coﬁlin Binding Reveals Two States of the Coﬁlin - Actin Filament Enrique M . De La Cruz † * and David Sept ‡ * † Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry , Yale University , New Haven , Connecticut ; and ‡ Department of Biomedical Engineering and Center for Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , Michigan ABSTRACT The interaction of coﬁlin with actin ﬁlaments displays positive cooperativity . The equilibrium binding and associ - ated thermodynamic properties of this interaction are well described by a simple , one - dimensional Ising model with nearest neighbor interactions . Here we evaluate the kinetic contributions to cooperative binding and the ability of this model to account for binding across a wide range of coﬁlin concentrations . A Monte Carlo - based simulation protocol that allows for nearest - neighbor interactions between adjacent binding sites was used to globally ﬁt time courses of human coﬁlin binding to human non - muscle ( b - , g - ) actin ﬁlaments . Several extensions of the one - dimensional Ising model were tested , and a mechanism that includes isomerization of the actin ﬁlament was found to best account for time courses of association as well as irreversible disso - ciation from a saturated ﬁlament . This model predicts two equilibrium states of the coﬁlin - actin , or coﬁlactin , ﬁlament , and the resulting set of binding parameters are in agreement with equilibrium thermodynamic parameters . We conclude that despite its simplicity , this one - dimensional Ising model is a reliable model for analyzing and interpreting the energetics and kinetics of cooperative coﬁlin - actin ﬁlament interactions . The model predicts that severing activity associated with boundaries between bare and decorated segments will not be linear , but display a transient burst at short times on coﬁlin activation then dissipate due to a kinetic competition between severing activity and coﬁlin binding . A second peak of severing activity is predicted to arise from irreversible coﬁlin dissociation on inactivation . These behaviors predict what we believe to be novel mechanisms of coﬁlin severing and spatial regulation of actin ﬁlament turnover in cells . The methods developed for this system are generally applicable to the kinetic analysis of cooperative ligand binding to linear polymers . INTRODUCTION The actin regulatory protein , coﬁlin , binds actin ﬁlaments cooperatively and promotes actin assembly dynamics by severing ﬁlaments and increasing the number of ends from which subunits add and dissociate ( 1 – 3 ) . This process is a critical step in cell migration because free barbed ends are important for rapid actin assembly at the leading edge , whereas ﬁlament severing and disassembly are vital for turn - over and remodeling of the actin network ( 4 ) . Coﬁlin activity is highly regulated by a number of factors within the cell , e . g . , phosphorylation or binding to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , and coopera - tive binding to actin ﬁlaments is an additional regulatory component because the binding density of coﬁlin strongly inﬂuences its severing ability ( 1 ) . Coﬁlin also binds actin monomers and accelerates ﬁlament nucleation , an activity that has been implicated in the regulation of ﬁlament assembly in cells ( 5 ) . We have used a one - dimensional Ising model with near - est - neighbor interactions to analyze cooperative coﬁlin binding to actin ﬁlaments under equilibrium conditions ( 6 ) . This relatively simple model has advantages over previous models because it has a well deﬁned thermodynamic founda - tion and the predictive power from which to develop binding - based severing models ( 1 ) . The model explicitly accounts for the three types of binding modes that exist on a linear actin ﬁlament lattice : 1 ) , isolated ( no nearest neigh - bors ) with an intrinsic binding constant of K a ; 2 ) , singly contiguous ( one nearest - neighbor ) with a binding constant of K a u , where u is the unitless cooperativity parameter that speciﬁes the relative afﬁnity for binding to a contiguous versus an isolated site and is related to the cooperative free energy ( D G (cid:2) coop ) according to D G (cid:2) coop ¼ (cid:3) RT ln ( u ) ; and 3 ) , doubly contiguous ( two nearest neighbors ) with afﬁnity K a u 2 . A value of u > 1 means positive cooperativity exists ( D G (cid:2) coop < 0 ) ; negative cooperativity generates u < 1 ( D G (cid:2) coop > 0 ) , and u ¼ 1 ( D G (cid:2) coop ¼ 0 ) when no coopera - tivity exists . Equilibrium experiments showed that human coﬁlin I binds human nonmuscle ( 85 % b , 15 % g ) actin ﬁla - ments with an afﬁnity ( 1 / K a ) of 14 m M and u of ~ 17 ( 6 ) . The one - dimensional Ising model permits the prediction of the equilibrium biochemical state ( i . e . , isolated , single - contiguous and doubly - contiguous ) distribution and shows that a single coﬁlin molecule can sever a ﬁlament ( 6 ) . Consistent with this , fully - decorated ﬁlaments are more stable and severed less readily than partially decorated ﬁla - ments ( 1 , 5 , 7 , 8 ) , thereby favoring a model in which asymme - tries in ﬁlament mechanics ( 9 , 10 ) and conformational dynamics ( 10 ) at junctions of bare and decorated regions ( 1 , 6 ) increases the severing probability . Coﬁlin binding ( 11 ) is more rapid than severing ( 5 , 7 ) . Coﬁlin severing of actin ﬁlaments is , therefore , under kinetic control—rapid ﬁlament decoration , large coﬁlin cluster sizes , and ﬁlament Submitted November 24 , 2009 , and accepted for publication January 15 , 2010 . * Correspondence : enrique . delacruz @ yale . edu or dsept @ umich . edu Editor : Roberto Dominguez . (cid:2) 2010 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 10 / 05 / 1893 / 9 $ 2 . 00 doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2010 . 01 . 023 Biophysical Journal Volume 98 May 2010 1893 – 1901 1893 stabilization is favored at high ( coﬁlin ) , whereas slow ﬁla - ment binding , small cluster sizes and severing are favored at low ( coﬁlin ) . The cooperativity parameter ( u ) and the binding afﬁnity ( K a ) that arise in the equilibrium model can be expanded in terms of their kinetic components ( u ¼ u þ / u (cid:3) and K a ¼ k þ / k (cid:3) ) . The observed rate constant for coﬁlin dissociation from small clusters is slightly more rapid than from large clusters , indicating that cooperativity arises , in part , from slowing dissociation ( 11 ) . Time courses of human coﬁlin dissociation from rabbit muscle actin ﬁlaments are well described by a simpliﬁed mechanism in which cooperativity arises from a large acceleration of binding ( 1 , 11 – 13 ) , consis - tent with bound coﬁlin changing the ﬁlament structure and / or dynamics in such a manner that it increases the accessibility of neighboring sites on a ﬁlament . Our objective here is to evaluate the kinetic basis of human coﬁlin binding to human nonmuscle actin ﬁlaments and to evaluate how consistent these results are with the values determined from equilibrium measurements . METHODS Proteins Recombinant human coﬁlin I was puriﬁed as described ( 6 , 10 , 11 ) . Human platelet b , g - actin ( 85 % b , 15 % g ) was purchased from Cytoskeleton ( Den - ver , CO ) , labeled with pyrene ( 6 ) , and gel - ﬁltered over Sephacryl S300 at 4 (cid:2) C in G buffer ( 5 mM Tris ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 5 mM DTT , 1 mMNaN 3 ) . The labeling efﬁciency was R 0 . 95 pyrene per actin molecule . All proteins were dialyzed exhaustively before use against KMI 6 . 6 buffer ( 50 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 2 mM DTT , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 1 mM NaN 3 , 20 mM imidazole ( pH 6 . 6 ) ) . Ca 2 þ - actin monomers were converted Mg 2 þ - actin monomers with 0 . 2 mM EGTA and 50 m M MgCl 2 immediately before dialysis . Cooperative binding kinetics Time courses of cooperative coﬁlin binding to actin ﬁlaments were acquired in KMI 6 . 6 buffer using an Applied Photophysics ( Leatherhead , Surrey , UK ) SX . 18MV - R stopped - ﬂow apparatus thermostated at 25 ( 5 0 . 1 ) (cid:2) C . The exci - tation wavelength was set to 366 nm and the emission was monitored at 90 (cid:2) through 385 - nm or 400 - nm long - pass colored glass ﬁlters . The reaction was initiated by rapidly mixing 1 . 2 m M pyrene actin ﬁlaments with a range of coﬁlin concentrations . Time courses of coﬁlin dissociation were measured by mixing an equilibrated mixture of coﬁlin and pyrene actin ﬁlaments ( binding density ( n ) > 0 . 9 ) with R 60 m M unlabeled actin ﬁlaments ( 11 ) . The indicated concentrations are ﬁnal concentrations after mixing . Time - courses were corrected for photobleaching as previously described ( 14 ) . The observed ﬂuorescence intensities ( FI ) were converted to the coﬁlin binding density ( n , coﬁlin molecules bound per actin subunit ) using the expression ( 6 ) : n ¼ 1 (cid:3) (cid:2) FI (cid:3) FI N FI 0 (cid:3) FI N (cid:3) ; ( 1 ) in which FI 0 is the ﬂuorescence of pyrene actin alone and FI N is the ﬂuores - cence of coﬁlin - saturated actin ﬁlaments . This expression is valid when binding is stoichiometric ( one coﬁlin per actin subunit ) and the ﬂuorescence quenching is linearly proportional to the fractional actin saturation ( 6 , 15 ) . Note that because the stoichiometry under our conditions is one coﬁlin molecule per actin subunit , the fractional ﬁlament saturation ( ligated actin subunits per total actin subunits ) and the coﬁlin binding density are equivalent . Monte Carlo simulations To simulate the cooperative binding of coﬁlin to sites along actin ﬁlaments , we used the Monte Carlo treatment developed by Epstein ( 16 ) . The system was set up to mimic a solution volume of 100 fL and the actin and coﬁlin were treated as discrete entities . Actin ﬁlaments were modeled as a single array , which for a concentration of 1 . 2 m M had ~ 72 , 000 sites . The number of coﬁlin molecules varied from ~ 300 , 000 for a concentration of 5 m M to > 1 . 8 million at 30 m M . Each step in the MC algorithm involved two biochemical transitions ( coﬁlin binding and dissociation ) ; the expanded model included two additional transitions ( forward and reverse isomeriza - tion of coﬁlactin ) . We took timesteps of 1 ms and simulated for a total time of 20 s . Because the solution is stochastic , the averaged solution of ﬁve separate runs was used to compare with the experimental data . Rate constant determination To ﬁnd the set of kinetic parameters that best ﬁt the experimental data , we used a particle swarm optimization method ( 17 ) . In this method , an initial population of solutions ( particles ) is ﬁrst set up with random values for the kinetic rate constants within speciﬁed bounds ( k þ , u þ , k (cid:3) , u (cid:3) , and k þ i , k (cid:3) i with isomerization ) . The ﬁtness or score for each solution is based on the sum of square residuals ( SSR ) from ﬁtting the MC solution to the experimental data . The rate constant values for each particle are updated stochastically based on three criteria : 1 ) , the current score or SSR ; 2 ) , the best score found by the particle during the current search ; and 3 ) , the best score found by any particle within the local neighborhood , again during the current search . For populations of 15 – 40 particles , the solutions would converge within 200 – 300 iterations , resulting in a single set of rate constants . Because the particle swarm solutions involve a stochastic search of parameter space , we cannot rely on a single run to estimate the rate constants . Instead , we completed 20 independent runs for each model and took the ﬁve solutions with the lowest SSR values . We averaged the param - eter values for these ﬁve runs , resulting in a mean and standard deviation for each rate constant . Calculation of biochemical states Throughout the course of the simulation , each coﬁlin binding site on the actin ﬁlament was monitored and designated as occupied or vacant . Occu - pied sites were deﬁned either as isolated ( no bound nearest - neighbors ) , singly - contiguous ( on the edge of a cluster ) , or doubly - contiguous ( within a cluster ) according to the occupancy of neighboring sites on the ﬁlament . Using this data , the number ( N ) of boundaries between decorated and bare segments on the ﬁlament was calculated from : N boundaries ¼ 2 * ( N isolated ) þ ( N singly - contiguous ) . Coﬁlin binding to actin monomers assayed from inhibition of nucleotide exchange The dissociation rate constant of etheno - ATP ( 3 ATP , Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) or etheno - ADP ( 3 ADP ) from actin monomers ( 18 ) was measured from the time course of ﬂuorescence reduction after mixing ( ﬁnal concentrations ) 0 . 5 m M Mg - 3 ATP - actin or Mg - 3 ADP - actin monomers with 40 - fold excess unlabeled nucleotide ( 1 mM MgATP or MgADP ; 25 m M free etheno - nucleotide ) and a range of coﬁlin concentration . Measurements were made at 25 (cid:2) C in 5 mM Tris ( pH 7 . 0 ) , 2 mM DTT , 100 m M MgCl 2 buffer to avoid polymerization during the long acquisition times needed to measure dissociation with excess coﬁlin . Given the high afﬁnity of actin monomers for Mg 2 þ ( 19 ) , we consider bound nucleotide as a metal - nucle - otide complex . Biophysical Journal 98 ( 9 ) 1893 – 1901 1894 De La Cruz and Sept Observed nucleotide dissociation rate constants ( k (cid:3) Nucleotide ) were obtained from ﬁtting the time courses to single exponential functions . The apparent binding afﬁnity of coﬁlin for actin monomers was determined from the coﬁlin concentration dependence of the observed nucleotide exchange rate constant by least - squares ﬁtting to the quadratic form of the binding equation that takes into account the total protein concentrations : k (cid:3) Nucleotide ¼ k (cid:3) AN þ ð k (cid:3) CAN (cid:3) k (cid:3) AN Þ (cid:4) ð K d þ½ A (cid:5) tot þ½ C (cid:5) tot Þ(cid:3) ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ(cid:5) K d þ½ A (cid:5) tot þ½ C (cid:5) tot (cid:6) 2 (cid:3) 4 ½ A (cid:5) tot ½ C (cid:5) tot q 2 ! ; ( 2 ) where [ A ] tot and [ C ] tot are the total actin monomer and coﬁlin concentra - tions , K d is the apparent dissociation equilibrium constant of coﬁlin for actin monomers , k (cid:3) AN is the nucleotide dissociation rate from actin monomers in the absence of coﬁlin , and k (cid:3) CAN is the dissociation rate of bound nucleotide from the ternary ( coﬁlin - actin - nucleotide ) complex populated in the pres - ence of saturating coﬁlin . RESULTS We evaluate the kinetic mechanism of human coﬁlin binding to human nonmuscle actin ﬁlaments and determine the kinetic contributions to the observed cooperativity . We do so by globally ﬁtting time courses of ﬁlament decoration using a Monte Carlo - based simulation protocol that models an actin ﬁlament as a one - dimensional lattice of identical sites and allows for nearest - neighbor interactions between adjacent binding sites . We consider three distinct models ( Fig . 1 ) that differ in the number of kinetic transitions asso - ciated with binding and the basis of nearest - neighbor coop - erative interactions : ( Model A ) a single - step binding model in which bound coﬁlin allosterically interacts with vacant neighboring sites , ( Model B ) a two - step binding model in which coﬁlin binding is followed by an isomerization of the coﬁlactin complex , and the isomerized conformation gives rise to cooperativity at neighboring sites , and ( Model C ) a two - step binding - isomerization model as in ( Model B ) , except that cooperative interactions arise from both bound conformations of coﬁlactin—isomerized and unisomerized . The inclusion of an isomerization step was inspired by the observation of a slow relaxation in the association time courses ( discussed below ) . Each of these models was evalu - ated for their ability to account for the kinetic and equilibrium binding proﬁles of cooperative coﬁlin binding . Time courses of cooperative coﬁlin binding display two distinct relaxation phases over the concentration range exam - ined ( Fig . 2 ) : a lag phase that is completed on the millisecond timescale , followed by a slower phases on the hundreds of milliseconds to seconds timescale . The single - step binding model ( Model A ) describes association time courses reason - ably well ( Fig . 2 , a and b ) but fails to account for the slow relaxation , particularly at low coﬁlin concentrations ( Fig . 2 , a and b ) . We therefore evaluated a mechanism in which co - ﬁlin binding occurs in two steps—initial binding followed by a slow isomerization—with only the isomerized conforma - tion yielding nearest - neighbor cooperative interactions ( Model B ; Fig . 2 , c and d ) . This mechanism also fails to reli - ably account for the time courses over the coﬁlin concentra - tion range examined , and the ﬁt between the experimental and model curves was worse than that for Model A . A two - step binding model in which both bound conforma - tions—isomerized or not—promote nearest - neighbor coop - erative interactions ( Model C ; Fig . 2 , e and f ) describes the complete set of binding time courses best as indicated by the sum of square residuals from comparing the model FIGURE 1 One - dimensional Ising models with nearest neighbor interactions evaluated in this study . Note that the models differ in the number of coﬁlactin conforma - tions—isomerized and not—and origin of nearest - neighbor cooperative interactions . Biophysical Journal 98 ( 9 ) 1893 – 1901 Cooperative Coﬁlin Binding Kinetics 1895 predictions and the experimental data points . The resulting kinetic rate constants for Model C are shown in Table 1 . We note that the slower than diffusion - limited association rate constant for binding to an isolated site is consistent with the suggestion that initial binding of coﬁlin is limited by thermal ﬂuctuations in actin ﬁlament shape ( 11 ) . The observation that isolated site binding is more rapid to non - muscle actin ﬁlaments than skeletal muscle ﬁlaments , of which the former are more ﬂexible ( 20 ) , further supports the hypothesis that ﬁlament mechanics modulate coﬁlin binding kinetics and cooperativity ( 1 , 6 ) . Although these kinetic parameters are deﬁned solely from ﬁtting association data , the resulting set of constants include contributions to binding as well as dissociation and should therefore also describe coﬁlin dissociation from ﬁlaments . Indeed , the predicted time courses of coﬁlin dissociation agree extremely well with those observed experimentally ( Fig . 3 ) ; both the experimental and simulated data are well described by single exponentials with relaxation times of FIGURE 2 Time courses of cooperative coﬁlin binding to actin ﬁlaments . The colored lines represent the best ﬁts of the experimental data ( black lines ) to : ( a and b ) Model A ; ( c and d ) Model B ; and ( e and f ) Model C . The paired left - right panels show the same data but are presented on different timescales for visualization . The model results are averaged over 20 individual runs to smooth out the intrinsic noise . TABLE 1 Best ﬁt kinetic and equilibrium binding parameters determined from Model C Parameter Value k þ ( m M (cid:3) 1 s (cid:3) 1 ) 0 . 063 5 0 . 003 k (cid:3) ( s (cid:3) 1 ) 0 . 44 5 0 . 07 1 / K a ( m M ) 7 . 0 5 1 . 2 k þ i ( s (cid:3) 1 ) 0 . 13 5 0 . 05 k (cid:3) i ( s (cid:3) 1 ) 0 . 11 5 0 . 04 K i ¼ k þ i / k (cid:3) i 1 . 2 5 0 . 6 u þ 2 . 71 5 0 . 03 u (cid:3) 0 . 306 5 0 . 005 u ¼ u þ / u (cid:3) 8 . 9 5 0 . 2 FIGURE 3 Time course of coﬁlin dissociation from actin ﬁlaments . The time course of irreversible coﬁlin dissociation ( right , trace with noise ) is shown with a simulated time course ( left , smooth trace ) of dissociation as predicted from the best - ﬁt parameters obtained from analysis of association time courses . The dashed line through each curve represents the best ﬁt to a single exponential with observed rate constants 0 . 09 s (cid:3) 1 of and 0 . 07 s (cid:3) 1 for the experimental and simulated data , respectively . Biophysical Journal 98 ( 9 ) 1893 – 1901 1896 De La Cruz and Sept the decays that differ by a factor of < 2 ( 0 . 09 s (cid:3) 1 and 0 . 07 s (cid:3) 1 for the experimental and simulated data , respectively ; Fig . 3 ) . Further , the best - ﬁt kinetic parameters obtained using Model C predict that coﬁlin dissociates more rapidly from small clusters than from large clusters , as has been observed experimentally ( 11 ) . The best ﬁt kinetic parameters to Model C yield equilib - rium binding afﬁnity ( 1 / K a ) and cooperativity parameter ( u ) values of 7 . 0 5 1 . 2 m M and 8 . 9 5 0 . 2 , respectively . These compare favorably , again within a factor of two , with the values of 1 / K a ( 14 5 6 m M ) and u ( 16 . 7 5 1 . 4 ) obtained from equilibrium binding measurements ( 6 ) . Although the isolated site afﬁnity and overall cooperativity determined from equilibrium and kinetic analysis do differ slightly , the product of these two values , which reﬂects the apparent binding afﬁnity for coﬁlin binding to a singly contiguous site ( i . e . , with one nearest neighbor ( 6 ) ) , are essentially identical : 1 / ( K a u ) ¼ 0 . 79 and 0 . 8 for the simula - tions and experiments , respectively . We also determined the equilibrium binding afﬁnity of co - ﬁlin for b , g - actin monomers with either bound 3 ATP or 3 ADP ( Fig . 4 ) from the inhibition of nucleotide exchange ( 21 ) . Human b , g - actin monomers exchange bound Mg 3 ATP at 0 . 052 ( 5 0 . 001 ) s (cid:3) 1 ; bound Mg 3 ADP dissoci - ates more rapidly at 0 . 153 ( 5 0 . 005 ) s (cid:3) 1 . These values are within a factor of two of the values obtained by others with human b , g - actin under higher ionic strength buffer conditions ( 21 ) . Coﬁlin binding slows exchange of both nucleotides to < 0 . 01 s (cid:3) 1 . The [ coﬁlin ] - dependence of the observed rate constant of nucleotide exchange yield binding afﬁnities 9 . 0 ( 5 1 . 0 ) m M and 0 . 20 ( 5 0 . 06 ) m M for MgATP - and MgADP - actin monomers , respectively . We note that these values are an order of magnitude weaker than those re - ported previously for coﬁlin - I ( 22 ) . The differences may be due to the assays used , change in ﬂuorescence of NBD - labeled actin monomers ( 22 ) or inhibition nucleotide exchange from unlabeled monomers ( Fig . 4 ) , or the actin iso - forms—rabbit skeletal muscle actin ( 22 ) or human non - muscle actin ( this study ) . The method of coﬁlin preparation could also contribute because they have different composi - tion at the coﬁlin N - terminus , a region known to be impor - tant for actin binding activity ( 23 ) . The GST constructs used by Vartiainen ( 22 ) , yield two additional amino acid residues ( Ser - Gly ) at the coﬁlin N - terminus , which are absent from the untagged recombinant protein with the N - terminal methionine , presumably removed , used in this study . DISCUSSION Coﬁlin binding to actin ﬁlaments is a multi - step process Previous kinetic models of coﬁlin binding to actin ﬁlaments ( 12 , 13 ) proposed that cooperative association proceeds by a two - step , nucleation - zipper mechanism . The ﬁrst step is weak binding of two coﬁlin molecules on a ﬁlament to form a nucleus for growth ; binding of the ﬁrst coﬁlin on a ﬁlament is slow and likely limited by ﬁlament ﬂuctuations or ﬁlament breathing ( 11 ) . The second step is thought to be the rapid and irreversible binding of consecutive coﬁlin molecules in a zipper - like manner along the ﬁlament ( 12 , 13 ) . This nucleation - zipper model accounts for experi - mental data extremely well and predicts that cooperative zip - pering is strong and ﬁlaments in solution are either fully decorated or bare ( 13 ) . However , the cooperativity observed experimentally for human coﬁlin is too weak to yield such behavior ( 6 ) , and the slow relaxation observed at low coﬁlin concentrations cannot be explained by such models . The two - state one - dimensional Ising model with nearest neighbor cooperative interactions does an excellent job of describing the equilibrium thermodynamics ( 6 ) and a fair job of describing the association kinetics ( Model A in Fig . 2 , a and b ) , but a second biochemical transition corre - sponding to isomerization of the coﬁlactin ﬁlament is required to properly ﬁt the observed kinetic transients ( Fig . 2 ) . In principle , an isomerization on bare actin ﬁlaments that precedes and limits coﬁlin binding can account for the slow phase , but we do not favor this mechanism because the observed relaxation time would be independent of coﬁlin concentration , which is clearly not the case ( Fig . 2 ) . There - fore , we prefer a mechanism in which the slow relaxation arises from a conformational change of the coﬁlactin complex on initial binding ( Fig . 1 ) . Model C describes well the equilibrium and kinetic behavior of coﬁlin binding to actin ﬁlaments , but it is unlikely to reﬂect a unique solution . It is natural to question what additional models can account for the experimental data . It is instructive to apply the Bayesian information FIGURE 4 Coﬁlin binding to actin monomers assayed from inhibition of nucleotide exchange . The observed rate constants of 3 ATP ( triangles ) and 3 ADP ( circles ) dissociation from actin monomers were determined from the best ﬁt of the time courses of exchange to single exponentials . Uncer - tainties are within the data points . The solid lines represent the best ﬁt of the data to Eq . 2 . Biophysical Journal 98 ( 9 ) 1893 – 1901 Cooperative Coﬁlin Binding Kinetics 1897 criterion ( BIC ) developed by Schwarz ( 24 ) to evaluate if the additional parameters in Model C are warranted . The BIC measure is deﬁned as : BIC ¼ SSR = s 2e þ k ln ð n Þ where SSR is the sum of square residuals between the model and the data , s 2 e is the error variance , k is the number of free param - eters , and n is the number of data points . When we apply this metric to our case , we see that the BIC for Model C is nearly half of that for Model A , indicating that the addition of two free parameters is completely justiﬁed by the improvement in the overall ﬁt . A model involving additional transitions / states and free parameters will often ﬁt experimental data better , however any decrease in the SSR must outweigh the increase in k to yield an overall decrease in BIC . With this in mind , we do not consider models in which non - nearest neighbor interactions inﬂuence coﬁlin binding because it is difﬁcult to distinguish experimentally between nearest - neighbor and non - nearest - neighbor cooperativity unless the value of u is very large and the experimental data are well described by simpler models in which only nearest - neighbor interactions are assumed to modulate binding ( discussed below ) . In addition , because bound coﬁ - lin molecules do not directly interact , cooperative interac - tions and associated energies ( D G (cid:2) 0 coop ) must be mediated through changes in actin ﬁlament conformation and / or dynamics and these will dissipate exponentially as distance from the occupied site increases , so cooperative interactions that promote coﬁlin binding will be less signiﬁcant beyond neighboring subunits . This does not mean that non - nearest neighbor interactions are not present ( 1 , 10 , 25 , 26 ) , just that they do not contribute signiﬁcantly to cooperative coﬁlin binding to actin ﬁlaments ( 27 ) . Coﬁlactin ﬁlaments adopt two equilibrium conformations Evidence for isomerization states and structural plasticity in actin ﬁlaments has had a growing amount of support from structural ( 28 ) and spectroscopic ( 29 ) studies , as well as detailed analysis of polymerization kinetics ( 30 ) and phos - phate release after polymerization ( 31 ) . These studies show evidence for an age - dependent conformational change in the actin ﬁlament such that newly polymerized ﬁlaments exhibit signiﬁcant heterogeneity , but as bound ATP is hydro - lyzed and phosphate is released , the ﬁlament assumes more uniform conformation typical of mature ADP F - actin ( 30 , 31 ) . Coﬁlin preferentially binds to the ADP state of the ﬁlament ( 12 , 15 ) , but the binding of coﬁlin induces confor - mational changes in the ﬁlament and reintroduces some degree of disorder within the ﬁlament ( 10 , 32 ) . This behavior suggests the existence of two conformational states or at least two phases of the ﬁlament , and further indicates that the binding of coﬁlin can inﬂuence the transitions and equilib - rium between these states . The distinct conformational states of coﬁlactin ( i . e . , iso - merized or not ) identiﬁed from kinetic analysis in this study are consistent with previous spectroscopic ( 10 , 29 ) and assembly ( 30 ) studies of coﬁlactin ﬁlaments . Time - resolved phosphorescence anisotropy of actin and coﬁlactin ﬁlaments indicate that coﬁlin binding shifts the equilibrium distribu - tion of actin thermal conformers and that a ﬁlament fully saturated with coﬁlin is predominantly in one of two equilib - rium conformations with distinct spectroscopic and struc - tural properties ( 10 ) . The equilibrium distribution of these states is ~ 40 % , interpreted as unisomerized because it comprises a small ( < 5 % ) fraction in the absence of coﬁlin , and ~ 60 % with bound coﬁlin , which yields an association equilibrium constant of 1 . 5 ( a third state maximally popu - lated at ~ 3 % of the total actin was also observed ) . Similar results are found from the analysis of depolymerization rates in the presence of coﬁlin ( 30 ) . This study ﬁnds two distinct populations of ﬁlaments , comprising 61 % and 39 % of the population , which results in an equilibrium constant of 1 . 56 . Both of these values are comparable ( i . e . , within exper - imental uncertainty ) to our equilibrium constant of 1 . 2 for the isomerized an unisomerized equilibrium ( K i ; Table 1 ) , suggesting the two conformational states observed in these other studies correspond to the two coﬁlactin conformational states identiﬁed from the kinetic analysis in this study . It is tempting to assign the isomerized conformation of co - ﬁlactin as a state that is linked to ﬁlament severing activity . This behavior would be consistent with the observation that severing ( 5 , 7 ) is considerably slower than binding ( Fig . 2 ( 11 ) ) . However , the hypothesis that severing occurs at boundaries of bare and decorated segments ( 1 , 6 , 9 ) is strengthened by the correlation of ﬁlament severing activity and stability with boundaries , independent of the isomeriza - tion identiﬁed here ( 1 ) , indicating that occupancy rather than conformation is the major determinant . However , the iso - merized conformation may affect the rate constant for ﬁla - ment subunit dissociation ( 30 ) . Model predictions and implications for coﬁlin in vivo function Developing models of in vivo coﬁlin function and targeted severing activity requires knowledge of the time evolution of cooperative coﬁlin binding and distribution of biochem - ical states that promote severing . All evidence indicates that coﬁlin preferentially severs at the boundary between decorated and undecorated portions of the ﬁlament ( 1 , 6 , 9 ) , the extreme example of this being ﬁlament severing by a single bound coﬁlin molecule ( 6 ) . As such , the existence of boundaries between coﬁlin - bound and vacant sites is proportional to the overall severing activity of the protein ( 1 ) . The activity of coﬁlin is spatially regulated by slingshot and LIM kinase ( 33 , 34 ) , but the temporal activity is also regulated by the rates of hydrolysis and phosphate release from the actin ﬁlaments as well as changes in the boundaries that deﬁne bound coﬁlin clusters . The density of boundaries on ﬁlaments increases sharply at early time points on coﬁlin Biophysical Journal 98 ( 9 ) 1893 – 1901 1898 De La Cruz and Sept activation ( i . e . , on activation at the leading edge ) , but then slowly decays as the clusters of bound coﬁlin continue to grow to decorate the ﬁlament ( Fig . 5 ) . Because the peak number of boundaries has been linked to maximum severing activity ( 1 ) , a burst of severing activity and subsequent ﬁla - ment assembly dynamics is predicted to occur at early times after coﬁlin activation , followed by spontaneous inactivation due to further ﬁlament decoration and loss of boundaries ( Fig . 5 ) . The total amount of severing should scale with the integrated area of each of the time evolution of bound - aries ( Fig . 5 ) , as this represents the product of the number of boundaries and their duration . The maximum severing rate is thought to be slow and on the seconds timescale ( 12 ) . Therefore , high coﬁlin concentrations will yield less severing than low coﬁlin , because boundaries will exist for shorter times ( Figs . 5 and 6 ) . A second peak of severing activity is predicted to occur due to coﬁlin dissociation and inactivation by LIM kinase ( 33 , 34 ) . As coﬁlin dissociates from decorated ﬁlaments , additional boundaries will form , and then dissipate ( Fig . 6 ) . However this second phase of severing can only occur if the initial level of coﬁlin activity is high enough to decorate the ﬁlament or at least create large clusters of bound coﬁlin . Coﬁlin dissociation and inactivation will occur on a slightly slower timescale than association , which extends the lifetime of boundaries , thereby generating more severing . All of the aspects discussed above have been incorporated into what we believe is a novel model for in vivo coﬁlin function that accounts for the kinetic competition between ﬁlament binding and severing ( Fig . 7 ) . When the coﬁlin activity is high , such as in the leading edge of a migrating cell , ﬁlaments will quickly be decorated , resulting in minimal severing during the association phase . However , further away from the leading edge as coﬁlin dissociates and is inac - tivated by phosphorylation , a higher amount of severing will FIGURE 6 Time evolution of boundaries between bare and decorated regions that are associated with coﬁlactin severing activity on coﬁlin disso - ciation and inactivation . ( a ) The number density of boundaries was calcu - lated assuming a fully decorated ﬁlament at t ¼ 0 . ( b ) Overlay of the time courses of boundary formation comparing activation of 20 m M coﬁlin and dissociation from a decorated ﬁlament . FIGURE 5 Time evolution of boundaries between bare and decorated regions that are associated with coﬁlactin severing activity on coﬁlin activa - tion . The number density of boundaries was calculated as the number of singly - contiguous bound coﬁlins plus two times the number of isolated bound coﬁlins . Considering an isolated bound coﬁlin as a single boundary has minor effects on the curves . The curves represent activation of ( line a ) 30 , ( line b ) 20 , ( line c ) 15 , ( line d ) 10 , ( line e ) 7 . 5 , or ( line f ) 5 m M coﬁlin . Both panels contain the same data but are presented on different timescales for visualization . Biophysical Journal 98 ( 9 ) 1893 – 1901 Cooperative Coﬁlin Binding Kinetics 1899 occur due to the prolonged presence and number of bound - aries . Intermediate levels of coﬁlin activation will generate severing during both association and dissociation phases . This model explains how coﬁlin severing activity can contribute to ﬁlament assembly and disassembly both at the leading edge ( 33 ) and the lamella ( 35 ) . We thank Dr . W . Cao ( Yale University ) for initial suggestions regarding isomerization of the coﬁlactin complex , Dr . J . A . Cooper ( Washington University in St . Louis ) for discussions , and Dr . H . Sim ( University of Mich - igan ) for supplying the particle swarm optimization code . E . M . D . L . C . is an American Heart Association Established Investigator , an NSF - CAREER Award recipient ( MCB - 0546353 ) , and Hellman Family Fellow . This work was supported by grants from the American Heart Association ( 0940075N to E . M . D . L . C . ) and National Institutes of Health ( GM071688 to E . M . D . L . C . and GM067246 to D . S . ) . REFERENCES 1 . De La Cruz , E . M . 2009 . How coﬁlin severs an actin ﬁlament . Biophys . Rev . 1 : 51 – 59 . 2 . Michelot , A . , J . Berro , . , L . Blanchoin . 2007 . Actin - ﬁlament stochastic dynamics mediated by ADF / coﬁlin . Curr . Biol . 17 : 825 – 833 . 3 . Roland , J . , J . Berro , . , J . L . Martiel . 2008 . Stochastic severing of actin ﬁlaments by actin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin controls the emergence of a steady dynamical regime . Biophys . J . 94 : 2082 – 2094 . 4 . Pollard , T . D . , and J . A . Cooper . 2009 . Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science . 326 : 1208 – 1212 . 5 . Andrianantoandro , E . , and T . D . Pollard . 2006 . Mechanism of actin ﬁla - ment turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / coﬁlin . Mol . Cell . 24 : 13 – 23 . 6 . De La Cruz , E . M . 2005 . Coﬁlin binding to muscle and non - muscle actin ﬁlaments : isoform - dependent cooperative interactions . J . Mol . Biol . 346 : 557 – 564 . 7 . Pavlov , D . , A . Muhlrad , . , E . Reisler . 2007 . Actin ﬁlament severing by coﬁlin . J . Mol . Biol . 365 : 1350 – 1358 . 8 . Yeoh , S . , B . Pope , . , A . Weeds . 2002 . Determining the differences in actin binding by human ADF and coﬁlin . J . Mol . Biol . 315 : 911 – 925 . 9 . McCullough , B . R . , L . Blanchoin , . , E . M . De la Cruz . 2008 . Coﬁlin increases the bending ﬂexibility of actin ﬁlaments : implications for severing and cell mechanics . J . Mol . Biol . 381 : 550 – 558 . 10 . Prochniewicz , E . , N . Janson , . , E . M . De la Cruz . 2005 . Coﬁlin increases the torsional ﬂexibility and dynamics of actin ﬁlaments . J . Mol . Biol . 353 : 990 – 1000 . 11 . Cao , W . , J . P . Goodarzi , and E . M . De La Cruz . 2006 . Energetics and kinetics of cooperative coﬁlin - actin ﬁlament interactions . J . Mol . Biol . 361 : 257 – 267 . 12 . Blanchoin , L . , and T . D . Pollard . 1999 . Mechanism of interaction of Acanthamoeba actophorin ( ADF / Coﬁlin ) with actin ﬁlaments . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 15538 – 15546 . 13 . Ressad , F . , D . Didry , . , M . F . Carlier . 1998 . Kinetic analysis of the interaction of actin - depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / coﬁlin with G - and F - actins . Comparison of plant and human ADFs and effect of phosphor - ylation . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 20894 – 20902 . 14 . Robblee , J . P . , A . O . Olivares , and E . M . de la Cruz . 2004 . Mechanism of nucleotide binding to actomyosin VI : evidence for allosteric head - head communication . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 38608 – 38617 . 15 . Carlier , M . F . , V . Laurent , . , D . Pantaloni . 1997 . Actin depolymeriz - ing factor ( ADF / coﬁlin ) enhances the rate of ﬁlament turnover : implica - tion in actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 136 : 1307 – 1322 . 16 . Epstein , I . R . 1979 . Kinetics of nucleic acid - large ligand interactions : exact Monte Carlo treatment and limiting cases of reversible binding . Biopolymers . 18 : 2037 – 2050 . 17 . Poli , R . , J . Kennedy , and T . Blackwell . 2007 . Particle swarm optimiza - tion : An overview . Swarm Intell . 1 : 33 – 57 . 18 . De La Cruz , E . M . , and T . D . Pollard . 1995 . Nucleotide - free actin : stabi - lization by sucrose and nucleotide binding kinetics . Biochemistry . 34 : 5452 – 5461 . 19 . Estes , J . E . , L . A . Selden , . , L . C . Gershman . 1992 . Tightly - bound divalent cation of actin . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 13 : 272 – 284 . FIGURE 7 Model of coﬁlin binding and severing in cells . After coﬁlin activation and ATP hydrolysis / phosphate release from actin , coﬁlin rapidly binds to ﬁlaments resulting in a transient peak in the formation of boundaries and associated severing probability . As coﬁlin continues to bind , the number of boundaries decreases resulting in stable ﬁlaments , but as bound coﬁlin dissociates and activity decreases , the number of boundaries rises again resulting in an increased severing probability . We do not implicate coﬁlin binding to actin monomers and associated ﬁlament nucleation activity ( 5 ) because the afﬁnity of human non - muscle coﬁlin I for human nonmuscle MgATP actin monomers is weak ( Fig . 4 ) . For simplicity , we assume coﬁlin does not affect the nucleotide state of actin ﬁlaments , although it has been suggested to accelerate P i release allosterically from nonoccupied sites ( 10 ) . Biophysical Journal 98 ( 9 ) 1893 – 1901 1900 De La Cruz and Sept 20 . Allen , P . G . , C . B . Shuster , . , I . M . Herman . 1996 . Phalloidin binding and rheological differences among actin isoforms . Biochemistry . 35 : 14062 – 14069 . 21 . Kinosian , H . J . , L . A . Selden , . , J . E . Estes . 2000 . Interdependence of proﬁlin , cation , and nucleotide binding to vertebrate non - muscle actin . Biochemistry . 39 : 13176 – 13188 . 22 . Vartiainen , M . K . , T . Mustonen , . , P . Lappalainen . 2002 . The three mouse actin - depolymerizing factor / coﬁlins evolved to fulﬁll cell - type - speciﬁc requirements for actin dynamics . Mol . Biol . Cell . 13 : 183 – 194 . 23 . Lappalainen , P . , E . V . Fedorov , . , D . G . Drubin . 1997 . Essential func - tions and actin - binding surfaces of yeast coﬁlin revealed by systematic mutagenesis . EMBO J . 16 : 5520 – 5530 . 24 . Schwarz , G . 1978 . Estimating Dimension of a Model . Ann . Stat . 6 : 461 – 464 . 25 . Bobkov , A . A . , A . Muhlrad , . , E . Reisler . 2006 . Cooperative effects of coﬁlin ( ADF ) on actin structure suggest allosteric mechanism of coﬁlin function . J . Mol . Biol . 356 : 325 – 334 . 26 . Dedova , I . V . , O . P . Nikolaeva , . , D . I . Levitsky . 2004 . Two opposite effects of coﬁlin on the thermal unfolding of F - actin : a differential scan - ning calorimetric study . Biophys . Chem . 110 : 119 – 128 . 27 . Prochniewicz , E . , H . F . Chin , . , E . M . De La Cruz . 2009 . Myosin iso - form determines the conformational dynamics and cooperativity of actin ﬁlaments in the strongly bound actomyosin complex . J . Mol . Biol . In press . 28 . Orlova , A . , A . Shvetsov , . , E . Reisler . 2004 . Actin - destabilizing factors disrupt ﬁlaments by means of a time reversal of polymerization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 101 : 17664 – 17668 . 29 . Kozuka , J . , H . Yokota , . , T . Yanagida . 2006 . Dynamic polymorphism ofsingle actin molecules in the actin ﬁlament . Nat . Chem . Biol . 2 : 83 – 86 . 30 . Kueh , H . Y . , W . M . Brieher , and T . J . Mitchison . 2008 . Dynamic stabi - lization of actin ﬁlaments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 105 : 16531 – 16536 . 31 . Bryan , K . E . , and P . A . Rubenstein . 2005 . An intermediate form of ADP - F - actin . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 1696 – 1703 . 32 . Galkin , V . E . , A . Orlova , . , E . H . Egelman . 2001 . Actin depolymeriz - ing factor stabilizes an existing state of F - actin and can change the tilt of F - actin subunits . J . Cell Biol . 153 : 75 – 86 . 33 . Oser , M . , and J . Condeelis . 2009 . The coﬁlin activity cycle in lamelli - podia and invadopodia . J . Cell . Biochem . 108 : 1252 – 1262 . 34 . Nishita , M . , C . Tomizawa , . , K . Mizuno . 2005 . Spatial and temporal regulation of coﬁlin activity by LIM kinase and Slingshot is critical for directional cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 171 : 349 – 359 . 35 . Pollard , T . D . , and G . G . Borisy . 2003 . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell . 112 : 453 – 465 . Biophysical Journal 98 ( 9 ) 1893 – 1901 Cooperative Coﬁlin Binding Kinetics 1901