Sketching User Experiences 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA1 1 27 / 02 / 2007 10 : 12 : 44 PM 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA2 2 27 / 02 / 2007 10 : 12 : 44 PM Bill Buxton Sketching User Experiences getting the design right and the right design AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON NEW YORK • OXFORD • PARIS • SAN DIEGO SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO Morgan Kaufmann is an imprint of Elsevier 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA3 3 27 / 02 / 2007 10 : 12 : 44 PM Publisher : Diane Cerra Publishing Services Manager : George Morrison Senior Project Manager : Brandy Lilly Editorial Assistant : Asma Palmeiro Copyeditor : Adrienne Rebello Indexer : Distributech Scientific Indexing Interior printer : Transcontinental Interglobe Cover printer : Transcontinental Interglobe Book Design : Henry Hong - Yiu Cheung Illustrations : Adam Wood Morgan Kaufmann Publishers is an imprint of Elsevier . 500 Sansome Street , Suite 400 , San Francisco , CA 94111 This book is printed on acid - free paper . © 2007 by Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks or registered trademarks . In all in - stances in which Morgan Kaufmann Publishers is aware of a claim , the product names appear in initial capital or all capital letters . Readers , however , should contact the appropriate companies for more complete information regarding trademarks and registration . No part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in a retrieval system , or transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic , mechanical , photocopying , scanning , or otherwise—without prior written permission of the publisher . Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Science & Technology Rights Department in Oxford , UK : phone : ( + 44 ) 1865 843830 , fax : ( + 44 ) 1865 853333 , E - mail : permissions @ elsevier . com . You may also complete your request on - line via the Elsevier homepage ( http : / / elsevier . com ) , by selecting “Support & Contact” then “Copyright and Permission” and then “Obtaining Permissions . ” Library of Congress Cataloging - in - Publication Data Buxton , William . Sketching user experience : getting the design right and the right design / Bill Buxton . p . cm . Includes bibliographical references and index . ISBN - 13 : 978 - 0 - 12 - 374037 - 3 ( pbk . : alk . paper ) ISBN - 10 : 0 - 12 - 374037 - 1 ( pbk . : alk . paper ) 1 . Design , Industrial . I . Title . TS171 . B89 2007 658 . 5’752 - - dc22 2006036416 ISBN 13 : 978 - 0 - 12 - 374037 - 3 ISBN10 : 0 - 12 - 374037 - 1 For information on all Morgan Kaufmann publications , visit our Web site at www . mkp . com or www . books . elsevier . com Printed in Canada 07 08 09 10 11 5 4 3 2 1 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA4 4 27 / 02 / 2007 10 : 12 : 45 PM To the love of my life , Lizzie Russ . 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA5 5 27 / 02 / 2007 10 : 12 : 45 PM  Contents Preface Acknowledgements Author’s Note PART I : Design as Dreamcatcher Design for the Wild Case Study : Apple , Design , and Business The Bossy Rule A Snapshot of Today The Role of Design A Sketch of the Process The Cycle of Innovation The Question of “Design” The Anatomy of Sketching Clarity is Not Always the Path to Enlightenment The Larger Family of Renderings Experience Design vs Interface Design Sketching Interaction Sketches Are Not Prototypes Where Is the User in All of This ? You Make That Sound Like a Negative Thing If Someone Made a Sketch in the Forest and Nobody Saw it… The Object of Sharing Annotation : Sketching on Sketches Design Thinking and Ecology The Second Worst Thing That Can Happen A River Runs through It 9 11 13 25 27 41 3 9 73 77 85 95 105 115 121 127 135 139 143 145 153 17 175 201 207 221 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA6 6 27 / 02 / 2007 11 : 40 : 37 PM 77 PART II : Stories of Methods and Madness From Thinking on to Acting On The Wonderful Wizard of Oz Chameleon : From Wizardry to Smoke - and - Mirrors Le Bricolage : Cobbling Things Together It Was a Dark and Stormy Night… Visual Story Telling Simple Animation Shoot the Mime Sketch - a - Move Extending Interaction : Real and Illusion The Bifocal Display Video Envisionment Interacting with Paper Are You Talking to Me ? Recapitulation and Coda Some Final Thoughts References and Biblography Index 227 229 239 245 253 21 277 299 309 315 331 337 349 371 393 401 407 421 43 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA7 7 27 / 02 / 2007 11 : 40 : 37 PM 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA8 8 27 / 02 / 2007 10 : 12 : 45 PM 99 This is a book about design . Mainly , it is about the design of appliances , structures , buildings , signs , and yes , computers , that exist in both the physical and behavioral sense . That is , there may be something concrete that you can touch , see , and hear . But there is also something that you can actively experience : something that involves dy - namics or time ; something with behavior that is usually the result of software running on an embedded microprocessor ; and something whose design needs to be grounded in the nature of that experience . The underlying premise of the book is that there are techniques and processes whereby we can put experience front and centre in design . My belief is that the basis for doing so lies in extending the traditional practice of sketching . So why should we care about any of this ? Hardly a day goes by that we don’t see an announcement for some new product or technology that is going to make our lives easier , solve some or all of our problems , or simply make the world a better place . However , the reality is that few of these products survive , much less deliver on their typically over - hyped promise . But are we learning from these expensive mistakes ? Very little , in my opinion . Rather than rethink the underlying process that brings these prod - ucts to market , the more common strategy seems to be the old shotgun method ; that is , keep blasting away in the hope that one of the pellets will eventually hit the bull’s eye . Now if this is a problem , and I believe that it is , it shows every indication of getting worse before it gets better . The pundits , such as Weiser ( 1991 ) and Dourish ( 2001 ) , as well as those contributing to Denning & Metcalfe ( 1997 ) and Denning ( 2001 ) , tell us that we are in the midst of a significant transition in the very nature of the products that are going to emerge in the future . Others , such as Forty ( 1986 ) and Borgmann ( 1987 ) would say that this transition began a long time ago . Both are accurate . The important point to recognize is that whenever it started , the change has reached a tip - ping point ( Gladwell 2000 ) , where we ignore it at our peril if we are in the business of creating new products . By virtue of their embedded microprocessors , wireless capabilities , identity tag - ging , and networking , these products are going to be even more difficult to get right Preface If Ernest Hemingway , James Mitchener , Neil Simon , Frank Lloyd Wright , and Pablo Picasso could not get it right the first time , what makes you think that you will ? — Paul Heckel 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA9 9 27 / 02 / 2007 10 : 12 : 45 PM 10 than those that we have produced ( too often unsuccessfully ) in the past . For those of us coming from computer science , these new products are going to be less and less like a repackaging of the basic PC graphical user interface . For industrial designers , they are no longer going to be the mainly passive entities that we have dealt with in the past . ( The old chestnut problem of the flashing “12 : 00” on the VCR is going to look like child’s play compared to what is coming . ) For architects , buildings are going to become increasingly active , and reactive , having behaviours that contribute as much to their personalities as do the shapes , materials , and structures that have defined their identity in the past . And then there is the business side . These new products are going to present a raft of new challenges to the product manager . Finally , company executives are going to have to acquire a better understanding of the pivotal role of design in achieving their business objectives , as well as their own responsibilities in providing the appropriate leadership and environment where innovation can thrive , as opposed to just survive . On the one hand , the change that confronts us is rooted in the increasingly rich range of behaviours that are associated with the products we are being asked to cre - ate . These products will be interactive to an unprecedented degree . Furthermore , the breadth of their form and usage will be orders of magnitude wider than what we have seen with PCs , VCRs , and microwave ovens . Some will be worn or carried . Others will be embedded in the buildings that constitute our homes , schools , businesses , and cars . In ways that we are only starting to even imagine , much less understand , they will reshape who does what , where , when , why , how , with whom , for how much , and for how long . On the other hand , as suggested by this last sentence , the extended behaviours of these products will be matched , and exceeded , by the expanded range of human be - haviour and experience that they enable , encourage , and provoke—both positive and negative . Some academics , such as Hummels , Djajadiningrat , and Overbeeke ( 2001 ) , go so far as to say that what we are creating is less a product than a “context for experience . ” Another way of saying this is that it is not the physical entity or what is in the box ( the material product ) that is the true outcome of the design . Rather , it is the behavioural , experiential , and emotional responses that come about as a result of its existence and its use in the real world . Though this may always have been the case , this way of de - scribing things reflects a transition to a different way of thinking , a transition of view - point that I characterize as a shift from object - centred to experience - centred . And it is not just academics touting the experience - centric line for both products and services . It is also reflected in the titles that we find in the business sections of airport bookstores , such as Priceless : Turning Ordinary Products into Extraordinary Experiences ( LaSalle & Britton 2003 ) , Building Great Customer Experiences ( Shaw & Ivens 2002 ) and The Experience Economy ( Pine & Gilmore 1999 ) . However , my favorite way of hitting this particular nail on the head comes from a designer friend , Michael Kasprow , the creative director of Trapeze , a design firm in Toronto : Sketching User Experiences 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA10 10 27 / 02 / 2007 10 : 12 : 45 PM Preface 11 Content is content … Context is KING . New labels tend to carry with them the risk of being reduced to a trendy change in lan - guage , rather than any significant change in substance . It is one thing to talk about ex - perience design ; embracing it in one’s practice is quite another . Expanding the sphere and responsibilities of design to include such experiential concerns carries with it a very real burden—a whole new level of complexity , especially if we factor in the broad range of emerging technologies that are involved . It really requires a rather different mind - set and range of concerns than those that traditionally have driven the practice of design and engineering . For example , think about the introduction of texting ( more properly called Short Messaging Service , or SMS ) into mobile phones . The traditional object - centred ap - proach would view SMS as the design of a protocol to enable text messages to be sent between phones , and then its implementation in hardware and software ( along with the associated model for billing for the service ) . Yet that description does not even begin to accurately characterize the real nature of SMS . This is far more accurately reflected by activities such as voting for your favourite performer in American Idol , or flirting with someone across the floor in a dance club . That is SMS , and I don’t believe that you will find anyone involved in its design who would claim that they anticipated , understood , much less considered any of that when they were designing the feature . This SMS example leads us to yet another dimension in which these emerging prod - ucts are becoming more complex : increasingly , the technologies that we design are not islands—that is , they are not free - standing or complete in their own right ( to the extent that they ever were , but more on that later ) . Rather , they are social entities . As with people , they have different properties and capacities when viewed as a collective , within a social , and physical context , than they have when they are viewed in isolation , independent of location or context . For example , just as I behave differently when I am alone than I do when with others ( among other things , I talk with them , but hopefully not to myself ) , so it will be with our devices . When they approach other devices , or possibly people , they will become social animals . Just like you and me , their behaviour will vary , depending on whom they are with , in the same way you and I behave differ - ently with family than we do with strangers , business colleagues , or alone . Success in this emerging world is going to depend on significant change in how we work . Nevertheless , I believe that this change can respect the best of the traditions of the past—that is , it involves change that builds on , rather than replaces , existing skills and practice . It is change that must recognize , acknowledge , and respect the im - portance and interdependence of the different design , engineering , management , and business disciplines involved . Each is essential , but no single one is sufficient . As it is with people , so it is with technology . Industry also must learn to reconcile these interdependencies with the idiosyncratic properties—and demands—of the new technologies and types of products that it is trying to bring to market . And to really succeed , these products must be reconciled to the needs and values of the individuals , 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA11 11 27 / 02 / 2007 10 : 12 : 45 PM 12 societies , and cultures to which they are being targeted . However , today’s reality is that in this equation , the value of design is too often be - ing questioned , and the contributions of the designer are being seen as an expensive luxury . Similarly , in software products , we are seeing the notion of user interface de - sign disappearing as a professional description , too often being replaced by usability engineering , something that is ever more remote from something an industrial de - signer , for example , would recognize as design . Against this backdrop is the compelling observation that there may never have been a time when design was more important , and the specific skills of the designer more essential . And yet , with far too few exceptions ( such as Sharp , Rogers & Preece 2007 and Moggridge 2006 ) design as it is currently taught and practiced is better suited for how things have been in the past , rather than meeting the demands for what is coming in the future . The psychologist Jean Piaget has defined intelligence as the ability of an organism to adapt to a change . The substantial—and largely technology - induced—changes affect - ing us now are a clear challenge for the design professions to adapt their skills to the redesign of their own practice . This is not only the intelligent response , it is essential if design is to fulfill its potential role in shaping our collective future . Technology isn’t destiny , no matter how inexorable its evolution may seem ; the way its capa - bilities are used is as much a matter of cultural choice and historical accident as politics is , or fashion . ( Waldrop 2001 ; p . 469 ) This book is based on the premise that design is a distinct discipline . It involves unique skills that are critical to the molding of these emerging technologies into a form that serves our society , and reflects its values . Far from being a luxury , informed design is essential from the technical , economic , and cultural perspective . A second key premise is that although design is essential , it is not sufficient . Design is just one—albeit an important one—of the components requisite to the development of successful , appropriate , and responsible products . But what is the role of the designer ? How does design fit in among all the other components of the process ? For example , how does design fit in with engineering , marketing , or the corporate plan and executive objectives ? If I am an architect , indus - trial designer , environmental graphic designer , or software developer , what is my role ? What skills do I need to cultivate ? How can they best be deployed ? If I am an educator , what should I be teaching so as to prepare my students for what is coming , rather than how things have been done in the past ? If I am an investor , businessperson , or manager who aspires to bring new products to market , how do I staff my teams ? What kind of process should I put in place ? These are the types of questions that motivated me to write this book . For over thirteen years , but especially in the past four or five , I have had the pleasure and privi - lege to work with some of the world’s most outstanding designers , from almost all Sketching User Experiences 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA12 12 27 / 02 / 2007 10 : 12 : 46 PM Preface 13 disciplines . I was a willing student , and they were generous teachers . Having come from a background in the arts ( music ) and technology ( computer science ) , as well as some experience as an executive of a mid - sized company , I have been lucky . I was in an unusual position to see things from a unique and privileged perspective . My hope is that what I have written here is respectful of those who were my teachers , and worthy of the confidence that they placed in me . Ultimately , this book is about product design , with an emphasis on products that have dynamic behaviour due to the incorporation of embedded digital technology . It tries to address the topic while looking in a few different directions : outward , to other parts of the overall organization that is trying develop the product ; further out , to the users and even culture within which the product is destined ; and inward , to the staff , techniques , and methods of the design team itself . My approach is built largely around case studies and examples , supplemented by a discussion of the underlying issues . Hopefully , along the way , I will shed light on some of the key questions that might help us innovate effectively in this ever more techno - logically complex environment . What are some of the core skills that one should expect in a modern design team ? What should be taught in design programs , and how ? What are some of the issues of managing a modern design team compared to engineering ? This is a start . It is a rough sketch . The best that I can hope is that its timeliness will in some way compensate for its broad strokes . After all , isn’t that what sketching is all about ? Audience To have the intended impact , this book must address multiple audiences . No matter how well one group performs , it is unlikely that the overall job will be done successfully unless the rest of the organization is working in concert . For this to happen , everyone has to be singing from the same song sheet . In order to help bring this about , I have tried to speak to the following key groups : User interface designers : people who have primarily a software and / or psychol - ogy background , and who have traditionally dealt with things like icons , naviga - tion , menus , search , etc . Industrial designers : people who largely studied at a design school , and whose specialty is product design . Related design professionals : people who have studied architecture , environ - mental graphic design , illustration , film making , etc . ; that is , those who make up part of the ever - richer mosaic of the new experience design team . 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA13 13 27 / 02 / 2007 10 : 12 : 46 PM Software engineers : people who are hard - core computer scientists , who have the responsi - bility to build shipping code that is robust , maintainable and meets specification . Usability engineers : people who test and evaluate products during their development in order to ensure that they are fit for human consumption and that there are no unexpected negative surprises for the user . Product managers : people who typically come from marketing or an MBA type of back - ground , who have to perform like the conductor of an orchestra of disparate instruments . Executives : the people at the top of organizations who ultimately own responsibility for providing both leadership as well as a physical , intellectual , and organizational ecology in which design and innovation can thrive . That is a start , at least . I know that I have left off some , but the list is already daunting , if not fool - hardy . And , just to make things more complicated , my hope is to write something that speaks to each of these groups , regardless of how you slice the pie among the following categories : Student Teacher Practitioner Researcher So although this is not a textbook , it should be of use to teachers and students . It is not a recipe book that you can throw at a product development team and say , “Go and implement this . ” But it should help companies understand how to improve their performance . I have tried to provide examples and ideas that will help all readers in the practice of their day - to - day profession . But what is foremost in my mind is to paint a larger , holistic picture . My overarching goal is to help this diverse cast of characters better understand their role in the larger intertwined performance that constitutes our companies , schools , and practices . In this I have attempted to find a balance between going into sufficient depth in any topic so as to have relevance to the specialist , while still sustaining comprehensibility and interest for others . Sketching User Experiences 14 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA14 14 27 / 02 / 2007 10 : 12 : 46 PM Preface 15 Overview The rest of this book is structured in two parts . Part I lays the foundation . It talks about the current state of design , as well as much of the underlying belief system that drives my thoughts on experience design . Much of the focus is on software product design . Initially , this may seem remote , or not too relevant to an industrial designer , for example . However , I think it is important for someone from the traditional design professions to understand the state of software design . There are two reasons for this . First , it will probably remove any lingering delusions that the software industry will come in with some magic bullet and solve all our current problems . The second reason is that there is nothing even vaguely resembling a “design process” in software , at least not in the way that an industrial designer would understand that term . I realize that this is both a contentious and provocative statement , and in making it I am not trying to denigrate software developers . Rather , the exercise that I am trying to bring about is for them to look more deeply into the skills and practice of design professionals , and compare , contrast , and understand these with their own . Neither design nor engineering is sufficient for the task at hand , and both are essential . What is required is a new relationship involving an ad - aptation of both skill sets that reflects the demands of the new design challenges . Part II is about methods . It moves to a more pragmatic realm . It is primarily made up of a number of case studies and examples . If we bump up a level , it is about techniques for bringing design thinking to the design of interactive products and the experiences that they engender . It is also a bit of a history lesson . It is intended to provide some exercises and examples that one can work through in order to help build a base literacy around the problems of designing in this new space . These include problems of process . I have chosen many examples from the prior art . Despite repeatedly talking about “new” problems and “new” design challenges , there is simply not a broad awareness of what has already been done . This is good news . It means that we don’t have to start from scratch , and by building our awareness of the literature , we can proceed from a much better position . To emphasize that what I am advocating is within our reach , I have bal - anced the examples of past masters with several from young students of today . We end with a coda . It tries to synthesize some of what we have seen . It is both a summary as well as an essay around the implications of what we have discussed . This section will be of aid not only to the student and practitioner , but to the educator , the manager , companies developing new products , and even governmental policymakers . Finally , in addition to the book itself , there is a web page containing supplementary material ( www . mkp . com / sketching ) . Perhaps the most important of this is the collection of video clips that are referenced throughout the text . Given that we are dealing with experiences that have a strong temporal component , these really help bring much of the material to life . Overall , my goals are probably overly ambitious . But after all , aren’t designers supposed to be dreamers ? 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA15 15 27 / 02 / 2007 10 : 12 : 46 PM Leadership = Stewardship = Resource Management = Technology = Design = CEO COO CFO CTO ? 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA16 16 27 / 02 / 2007 10 : 12 : 46 PM The issue of executive responsibility is especially important to me . This stems partially from my experience as an executive , and partially by analyzing the structure of com - panies that I would describe as successful repeat offenders—that is , companies that have grown their business through consistent innovation and design . So let’s get to the point by asking a few questions : Who makes design decisions in your company ? Do they know that they are making design decisions ? If you are the CEO of the company : Is design leadership an executive level position ? Do you have a Chief Design Officer reporting to the president ? If the answer to the last two questions is no , remember that your actions speak louder than your words . In this case , the likely message that you are telegraphing to all of your employees is that you are not serious about design or innovation , and you are also sending an implicit message that they need not be either . Why employ designers , researchers and other creative people , if you are not going to set them up to succeed ? As an executive , of course you have to have creative and innovative ideas . But perhaps at the top of the list should be ones around ( a ) how important innovation is to the future of your company , ( b ) the role of design in this , ( c ) a recognition that innovation cannot be ghettoized in the research or design departments , since it is an overall cul - tural issue , and ( d ) an awareness of the inevitable and dire consequences of ignoring the previous three points . ( Buxton 2005 ; p . 53 ) Leadership = Stewardship = Resource Management = Technology = Design = CEO COO CFO CTO ? 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA17 17 27 / 02 / 2007 10 : 12 : 46 PM 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA18 18 27 / 02 / 2007 10 : 12 : 46 PM 19 I am seriously indebted to a number of people who helped me develop my understanding of design , and provided suggestions and materials for this book . These people are far more than colleagues—they are friends , and partners in crime . To begin , there are a few people with whom I have worked intimately over the years , who have had a huge influence on my thinking and experience in general , as well as in terms of this specific project . In particular , I want to acknowledge my colleagues and friends Ron Baecker , George Fitzmaurice , Gord Kurtenbach , Abigail Sellen , and K . C . Smith . As I was getting started , some of my friends from the design community were instrumental in giving me encouragement , confidence , and materials . To this end , I especially have to acknowl - edge the contributions of Alistair Hamilton of Symbol Technologies and Michael Sagan of Trek Bicycles . Along the way , a number of people have contributed insights , materials , suggestions , and in general , much of which brought this book to life . These include , listed in alphabetical order , Mattias Arvola , Linköpings Universitet ; Tim Bajarin , Creative Strategies ; Richard Banks , Micro - soft Research Cambridge ; Larry Barbera , Kaleidoscope ; David Biers , University of Dayton ; Ron Bird , 2 Birds Design , UK ; Andreas Butz , University of Munich ; Dawn Chmielewski , San Jose Mercury News ; Hugh Dubberly , Dubberly Design Office ; Herbert Enns , University of Manitoba ; Lars Erik Holmquist , Viktoria Institute ; Adi Ignatius , Time Magazine ; Hiroshi Ishii , MIT Media Lab ; Scott Jenson , Google ; Steve Kaneko , Microsoft ; Dave Kasik , Boeing ; Ianus Keller , TU Delft ; Butler Lampson , Microsoft Research ; Joseph LaViola , Brown University ; Don Lindsay , Micro - soft ; Gene Lynch , Design Technologies ; Alex Manu , Ontario College of Art and Design ; Roger Martin , Rotman School of Business , University of Toronto ; Bruce Mau , Bruce Mau Design ; Tyler Millard , Toronto ; Dan Olsen , Bringham Young University ; Mike Roberts , Brook Stevens Design ; John Sören Pettersson , Karlstad University ; Frank Steinicke , Westfälische Wilhelm Universität of Münster ; Dan Rosenfeld , Microsoft ; Bob Spence , Imperial College ; Louise St . Pierre , School of Design , University of Washington ; Pieter Jan Stappers , TU Delft ; Erik Stolterman , Indiana University ; Alex Tam , Toronto ; John Tang , IBM Research ; Lucia Terrenghi , University of Mu - nich ; Richard Turnnidge , IDEO ; Frank Tyneski , Research in Motion , Smart Design , New York City ; Karon Weber , Yahoo ! ; and Shumin Zhai , IBM Research . I also want to acknowledge the huge contribution of my friends , Richard Harper , Caroline Acknowledgements 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA19 19 27 / 02 / 2007 10 : 12 : 46 PM 20 Hummels , Jonas Löwgren , Steve Pozgaj , and Ken Wood . After a thorough reading of an early draft , Steve and Richard made a huge contribution to improving the content , the tightness of my prose , and flow of my story . Jonas , Caroline , and Ken made a similar , really significant contri - bution through their detailed comments on later drafts . Then Richard went through the whole thing again , helping me restructure things and bring the project to a close . I could not have done it without them . Likewise , I want to thank my friend , partner in the mountains , and colleague , Saul Greenberg of the University of Calgary , who fed me examples and provided professional guidance , moral support , and welcome diversions throughout this project . In transforming my manuscript into this book , I want to thank my cycling partner and de - signer , Henry Hong - Yiu Cheung and my son and illustrator , Adam Wood . They did a wonderful job of making the book itself reflect the message that it contained . From Morgan Kaufmann , I want to thank my editor , Diane Cerra for her unflagging support , Asma Palmeiro , the associate editor working with us , Brandy Lilly for her great project management , and Marisa Crawford who helped with the not inconsiderable task of securing permissions . Furthermore , I would be remiss if I did not acknowledge the help and support that I have gotten from my colleagues at Microsoft , and the support of Microsoft Research , which gave me the opportunity to finish this project . Perhaps most of all , I have to single out Azam Khan . He was both my biggest cheerleader and toughest taskmaster . His help , prodding , editorial suggestions and detailed proofreading—not to mention his friendship—have been as much appreciated as they were valuable . Collectively , all these people lend proof to my conjecture that we are far less smart individu - ally than we are collectively . This sharing of knowledge and insight is fundamental to intellectual and cultural growth . Finally , those mentioned being good teachers , friends , and colleagues does not make me a good student . Consequently , any mistakes , distortions , misinterpretations , stupidities , or other generally goofy things in this manuscript are the result of my own shortcomings , not theirs . God knows they tried . And so did I . It is just that we are all human . That we are all human , by the way , is the point of the whole exercise . We need to keep that in the forefront , all the time—but especially in design . 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA20 20 27 / 02 / 2007 10 : 12 : 46 PM 2121 In some ways , compromise can be defined as annoying everyone equally . So , if you are annoyed by some of the decisions that I have taken in writing this book , take solace in the fact that I have done my best to make sure that you aren’t alone . On the one hand , I have tried to write in an informal and approachable style . Simply put , a large part of the audience that I am trying to address , and think critical to address , are not inter - ested in reading a deep academic tome . That is just how it is , and I am a pragmatist . On the other hand , I have worked very hard to ensure that there is solid scholarship behind what I write . The challenge is to figure out how to balance these two things . For one group of readers , my casual style may be off - putting . For the other , my embedding of citations in the text will be unfamiliar , and disrupt the flow of their reading . But despite some strong suggestions to the contrary , I have chosen to keep the references in . Besides just wanting to remind the reader that this is not all coming off the top of my head , I believe that after very few pages , the references will fade into the background for those readers who want to ignore them , while being invaluable for those who don’t . As I said , it is a compromise . Note : Photos without credit are the work of the author . Finally , throughout the book the reader will encounter relatively brief sections that are bro - ken out from the main text . These fall into three categories : extended quotes or thoughts of oth - ers , points of my own that I want to emphasize , and sidebars ( that is , side stories that relate to or amplify the adjacent text ) . I have used the following conventions to distinguish these : Quotes and thoughts of others are indented and in small type Points of my own are indented and in bold Sidebars are hi - lighted with yellow background I hope this helps . Thanks for your patience . • • • Author’s Note 070226 _ SketchingUserExp _ Final _ PA21 21 27 / 02 / 2007 10 : 12 : 46 PM