Loss Aversion , Intellectual Inertia , and a Call for a More Contrarian Science : A Reply to Simonson & Kivetz and Higgins & Liberman David Gal University of Illinois at Chicago Derek D . Rucker Northwestern University Accepted by Sharon Shavitt , Associate Editor Higgins and Liberman ( 2018 ) and Simonson and Kivetz ( 2018 ) offer scholarly and stimulating perspectives on loss aversion and the implications for the sociology of science of its acceptance as a virtual law of nature . In our view , Higgins and Liberman ( 2018 ) largely complement our conclusion that the empirical evidence does not sup - port loss aversion . Moreover , in alignment with our call for a contextualized perspective , they provide an excel - lent discourse on how a more nuanced view of reference points and consumers ’ regulatory focus enriches our understanding of the psychological impact of losses and gains . Simonson and Kivetz ( 2018 ) approached our per - spective with skepticism , and , while they retain some skepticism , they express agreement on the larger point that loss aversion has been accepted too uncritically . Both commentaries point to a need for a critical reevaluation of prevailing paradigms . Here , we build on these perspectives , as well as our experience working on the topic of loss aversion , to call for structural changes to facilitate scholarly debate on science ’ s status quo . Keywords Loss aversion ; Sociology of science ; Contrarian science Four exceptional scholars — all who have made outstanding contributions to the study of decision making and psychology — provided two thought - provoking commentaries to our article ( Gal & Rucker , 2018 ) . We appreciated the commentary by Higgins and Liberman ( 2018 ) ( hereafter H & L ) on sev - eral fronts . First , they provided a rich discussion of reference points within the framework of regulatory focus theory ; H & L elucidate how different regulatory strategies lead to the adoption of different reference points which , in turn , lead to distinct outcomes . Sec - ond , while we entertained the idea of elaborating on the implications of regulatory focus theory for loss aversion in our target article , we could not have done it nearly as well as H & L . As such , we particularly appreciated their perspective and insights . Third , H & L supplement our review of the literature by identifying a number of additional contexts where evidence for loss aversion is notable by its absence . We also valued the commentary by Simonson and Kivetz ( 2018 ) ( hereafter S & K ) . First , we appreciated the skepticism that they brought to our argument ; we anticipate skepticism will be the most common reaction among decision - making researchers . Indeed , we do not believe challenges to existing ideas should be accepted blindly ; rather , we believe they should be approached in the critical but open - minded man - ner demonstrated by S & K . Second , we understand some of the skepticism offered by S & K , and we view this as perfectly suited toward further scholarly dia - log . Finally , we found S & K ’ s discussion of the impli - cations for our science of the uncritical acceptance of paradigms highly insightful . In this rejoinder , we offer a brief discussion of our points of agreement followed by points of dis - agreement with the commentaries . We conclude with an extension of the theme of our target article and of the commentaries . We do this by calling for scientists to be wary of intellectual inertia and to maintain a critical but open mind to contrarian ideas as a means to advance the search for scienti ﬁ c truth . We also illuminate potential directions to extend this discussion to structural changes that might stimulate debate of competing ideas and thereby advance science . Points of Agreement As stated in our target article ( Gal & Rucker , 2018 ) , we believe a strong need exists to take a contextual - ized approach to the study of the psychological Received 20 March 2018 ; accepted 20 March 2018 Available online 30 March 2018 Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to David Gal , University of Illinois at Chicago , 601 S . Morgan St . , Chicago , IL 60607 , USA . Electronic mail may be sent to davidgal @ uic . edu . © 2018 Society for Consumer Psychology All rights reserved . 1057 - 7408 / 2018 / 1532 - 7663 DOI : 10 . 1002 / jcpy . 1044 impact of losses versus gains . Loss aversion repre - sents an alternative perspective because it suggests an innate and general tendency — ceteris paribus — of losses to outweigh gains . Intentional or not , we view acceptance of loss aversion as an obstacle to a more systematic , contextualized , and informative study of losses and gains . H & L ’ s discussion of reference points and regula - tory focus offers an excellent instantiation of the type of contextualized theories we believe are required . We concur with H & L that an important contribution of prospect theory was to highlight that people eval - uate outcomes , in part , in terms of the change from a reference point . We further agree with H & L that much of the decision - making literature has assumed that the status quo is the only relevant reference point . As a consequence , past research has done little to develop systematic theories of how people adopt reference points , how they integrate multiple refer - ence points , and how the motives and strategies they bring to bear on a decision in ﬂ uence the reference points used . H & L ’ s description of reference points as “ locations on the value axis that receive attention ” resonated with us and we hope their discussion of reference points is widely read and extended . H & L also highlighted several domains , beyond those we identi ﬁ ed , where evidence for loss aver - sion is notable by its absence . They report that upward counterfactuals do not appear to exert more in ﬂ uence than downward counterfactuals , upward social comparisons do not appear to exert more in ﬂ uence than downward social comparisons , and using the end - state of goal pursuit as a refer - ence point appears no more motivating than using the starting - point of goal pursuit as a reference point . They also note that “ loss aversion character - izes better ( but , even then , not fully ) people in a prevention focus who are trying to restore the sta - tus quo when they are below it , but it does not characterize people in a promotion focus . ” These observations further buttress the case against both the strong and weak versions of loss aversion . S & K also express agreement with our argument that loss aversion has been accepted too uncriti - cally , and that it is less robust and more contextual than typically assumed . Although we disagree with S & K on whether the evidence supports losses to be more impactful than gains on average — a point we will return to — upon re ﬂ ection , we view this as sec - ondary to what we see as the larger issue at hand . Speci ﬁ cally , regardless of whether one could mean - ingfully demonstrate that losses loom larger than gains on average or vice versa , a contextual per - spective suggests that the more interesting and important endeavor concerns the development of psychological theories of when and why losses ver - sus gains are more impactful . In this vein , and in strong agreement with our views , S & K call for “ greater attention to moderators , boundary condi - tions , and psychological mechanisms . ” Points of Disagreement Because the commentary by H & L largely comple - mented our arguments or extended them in a meaningful way , we have no critical points of dis - agreement that merit discussion . In contrast , S & K made several points from which we diverge . First , S & K view our delineation of a strong ver - sion of loss aversion as a rhetorical strawman . They write , “ we are unaware of any empirical phe - nomenon in the social sciences that always holds , and presenting it as a viable option may create the wrong impression that the ‘ weaker version ’ they advocate represents a compromise view . ” This criti - cism merits two points of clari ﬁ cation . First , our designation of “ stronger ” and “ weaker ” are simply descriptive devices ; the weaker version is not meant to imply that such a perspective is unimportant or invaluable ; rather , it is simply “ weaker ” in form . Indeed , were we to view the weaker version as triv - ial , we would not have gone to great lengths to challenge such a perspective . Second , and more importantly , our strong version of loss aversion is not the idea that losses will always be observed to be more impactful than gains , but that the psycho - logical mechanism that leads losses to fundamentally loom larger than gains always operates . To clarify , in the target article we write , “ This strong version does not require that losses must outweigh gains in all circumstances , as factors such as measurement error and boundary conditions might obscure or reduce the fundamental propensity for losses to be weighted more than equivalent gains . ” Far from a rhetorical straw man , we maintain our assertion that the strong version is an accurate repre - sentation of what many researchers believe about loss aversion and that it is substantively distinct from the weak version we delineate . To elaborate , the weak version states that sometimes losses loom lar - ger than gains , sometimes gains loom larger than losses , and sometimes there is no difference , but , on average , the ﬁ rst ( losses loom larger than gains ) ulti - mately predominates . However , as S & K note , many researchers seem to hold beliefs much more aligned with the stronger version . Speci ﬁ cally , in S & K ’ s own words , “ loss aversion has been elevated to something 2 Gal and Rucker akin to a law of nature that might be hard - wired from birth and may hold also for some other species . It represents a fundamental and all - encompassing driver of judgments and decisions . ” We believe this quote accords well with what we term the strong ver - sion of loss aversion . To illustrate by way of an anal - ogy , the statement “ Earth ’ s gravity always exerts a pull on objects in the direction of the Earth ” is similar to our representation of the strong version of loss aversion . It does not mean that objects will always be observed to fall toward the earth . For example , when a person exerts muscular force to jump upwards or when a rocket reaches escape velocity , the constant force of gravity is overcome by other forces . In contrast to our assessment of the evidence , S & K view the evidence as supporting the weaker form of loss aversion whereby losses , on average , loom lar - ger than gains . In their discussion , they state that “ some of the evidence proffered by G & R appears to actually support loss aversion ; for example , G & R cite their ﬁ nding that people enjoy gaining things that are lost ( e . g . , ﬁ nding a lost ﬂ ashlight ) more than they enjoy gaining new things . . . which suggests that losses do loom larger than gains . ” However , our interpretation is that such an inference con ﬂ ates a speci ﬁ c context where a loss might be more impactful than a gain with a general tendency of losses to loom larger than gains . Our contextualized perspective does not deny that contexts exist where losses loom larger than gains — indeed it embraces such outcomes by its very nature . Individual instantiations where losses exceed gains are not evidence for a general tendency of loss aversion any more than individual instantiations where gains exceed losses are evidence for a general tendency of gain seeking ( e . g . , our ﬁ nd - ing that for mundane objects , individuals report greater positive feelings from acquiring them than they report negative feelings from losing them ) . H & L ’ s commentary presents an excellent example of this perspective with regard to different outcomes associated with promotion versus prevention . S & K also view evidence from risky choice con - texts as supportive of loss aversion . They write , “ G & R unconvincingly and super ﬁ cially try to explain away the strongest illustration of loss aver - sion , namely , the typical extreme risk aversion exhibited in choices between a certain gain and a mixed , high expected value gamble . ” We will not review the evidence again here , but we stand by the conclusion of our initial review ( Gal & Rucker , 2018 ) . When acceptance of a risky gamble is not framed as a change to the status quo , in the context of low to moderate stakes , little evidence is found that people are loss averse , as previously reviewed by Ert and Erev ( 2013 ) and Yechiam and Hochman ( 2013 ) . At high stakes , the evidence suggests people prefer a safer over a riskier option , but , as dis - cussed in our initial review , this is perfectly rational and can be explained by expected utility theory . Moreover , even in the case of fairly high stakes , the observed level of risk aversion tends to be far from “ extreme . ” Finally , S & K view some of the new experimental paradigms we have introduced to detect the pres - ence of loss aversion in riskless choice as relying on “ what appears to be unrealistic experimental manipulations that are susceptible to confounds and give rise to simple alternative explanations . ” Because no speci ﬁ c confounds and alternatives are identi ﬁ ed , we cannot address such criticism directly . However , it is possible that our paradigms might have had some hidden confound that inhib - ited our ability to demonstrate loss aversion . Nonetheless , beyond the thought given to eliminate potential confounds , we used a large number of operationalizations and stimuli . The advantage of a varied approach is that it reduces the likelihood that a persistent confound is likely to account for our effects . In addition , our conclusion that little evidence for loss aversion exists rests on the totality of the evidence , of which our new procedures rep - resent only a part . As noted , H & L add to this evi - dence with examples from other domains . Nonetheless , we believe challenges to any theory should be scrutinized carefully and not merely accepted . And we welcome further dialog with S & K , perhaps even a mutual collaboration , to design even more rigorous paradigms . Intellectual Inertia and A Call for a More Contrarian Science S & K offer a powerful and cogent articulation of the disincentives for scholars to challenge reigning paradigms . Most prominent is gatekeepers ’ ten - dency to favor work that builds on established paradigms . S & K also articulate the costs associated with favoring the incumbent paradigm : “ the bias in favor of incumbent assumptions can impede scien - ti ﬁ c progress , bar new ideas from the literature , and reinforce well - established but contingent notions that may apply under some conditions but not others . ” H & L likewise point to uncritical accep - tance of established ideas as problematic , and call for a critical reevaluation of such notions , for exam - ple , the “ bad is stronger than good ” assertion . Indeed , a way to understand the totality of these Loss Aversion and Intellectual Inertia 3 concerns is that science falls prey to a form of intel - lectual inertia that favors the status quo even when equivalent — or stronger — evidence challenges it . Here , we extend this discussion to call for a greater acceptance , tolerance , and open - mindedness toward contrarian science . Our point is not that sci - entists should be contrarian for the sake of being contrarian , nor is it to say that contrarian science should be held to lower standards . Rather , we focus on how intellectual inertia may lead to protection of the status quo in a manner that hinders science . Speci ﬁ cally , we ﬁ rst contest the notion that it is log - ical to hold competing ideas to higher standards of evidence and logic than accepted ideas . Second , we make the case that challenging accepted ideas is often a critical route to advancing the search for sci - enti ﬁ c truth . Finally , we offer recommendations to encourage a more open - minded discussion of chal - lenges to established ideas . Higher Standards of Evidence to Challenge Established Ideas The case of loss aversion serves , we believe , as a sharp illustration of a more general phenomenon . Namely , established ideas become so entrenched that they take root and persist in spite of irreconcil - able and even contrary evidence . As noted in our target article and by S & K , this outcome might re ﬂ ect the fact that the threshold for publication and acceptance among scientists tends to be much higher for ideas that contrast with existing theory compared to those that buttress or extend estab - lished theories . As Galileo might have attested , this is not unique to our ﬁ eld or time . Nassir Ghaemi ( 2017 ) , a psychiatrist , recently wrote an open letter of advice to medical students : “ You can make it your passion to try to raise psychiatry up and move it forward when all the in ﬂ uence of the status quo holds it back . Are you willing to spend your entire career ﬁ ghting the powers that be ? You may become a hero for future generations , if you suc - ceed in the process of change in the long run , but that posthumous adulation will do nothing for your personal happiness in this life . . . the awards go to those who maintain the status quo , not to those who change it ” . On the one hand , a case can be made on episte - mological grounds that work designed to challenge established paradigms should face more stringent criteria than work that builds on existing para - digms . Existing paradigms are likely to have been established through the defeat of inferior rival accounts over time . Moreover , the scholars that develop and work within existing paradigms have the most relevant expertise , and therefore their sup - port of these paradigms is a testament to their validity . In other words , a reasonable case can be made that established paradigms are more likely to be true than upstart rivals . As such , a conservative bias against new accounts can be viewed as com - pletely appropriate . However , this seems far from certain in our ﬁ eld . Ioannidis ( 2012 ) , for example , argues , “ In several ﬁ elds of investigation , including many areas of psychological science , perpetuated and unchallenged fallacies may comprise the major - ity of the circulating evidence . ” In particular , a tendency toward intellectual iner - tia and conformity might arise because it is a chal - lenge to update one ’ s worldview . It can be dif ﬁ cult to adapt to new skills and paradigms that differ from those one has been trained in and on which one ’ s reputation has been built . An unintended byproduct of intellectual inertia is that people might seek strong proof of challenges to extant the - ory , but ultimately favor established paradigms even when the established evidence is no greater than the contrarian evidence . To provide a telling anecdote , in the discussion of the new procedures we developed to test for loss aversion , we have heard concerns expressed with respect to the arti ﬁ - cial nature of the scenarios we employ ( e . g . , paying to retain a possession ) . Yet , a large portion of the evidence cited to support loss aversion , both histor - ically and contemporarily , relies upon just as arti ﬁ - cial scenarios ( e . g . , a consumer selling a possession that an experimenter has just given them ) . We view this as an excellent example of when the evidence demanded to challenge an idea is qualitatively dif - ferent from the evidence demanded to support it . Whereas one set of standards is viewed as accept - able for the status quo , a different set is applied to challenges . Of greater concern , in the absence of a culture of critiquing accepted ideas , it is unclear how we can know if our theories and paradigms are leading us astray . The U . S . Navy admiral and strategist Wil - liam Sims wrote , “ it may be stated in general terms that most arguments in favor of fundamentally new weapons have failed except those that resulted in shedding the blood of the unbelievers ; that defeat alone has been accepted as a ﬁ nal demonstration ” ( Sims , 1921 ) . Yet , unlike in the military domain , ﬂ awed , incorrect , or overgeneralized psychological theories cannot be laid bare through defeat on the battle ﬁ eld . A building erected on a ﬂ awed founda - tion will collapse , but again , this seems less true for psychological theories , which can be expanded 4 Gal and Rucker upon inde ﬁ nitely , however , ﬂ awed they might be . Dissertations based on the theory can continue to be published , accolades can continue to be awarded , and no decisive climax or ultimate reck - oning awaits . Contrarian Ideas and the Advancement of Science The Hierarchy of the Sciences hypothesis states that as ﬁ elds of inquiry move from the study of the low - level and general ( e . g . , physical chemistry ) to the high - level and speci ﬁ c ( e . g . , human decision making ) , the ability of scholars to reach theoretical consensus diminishes ( Comte , 1835 ; Fanelli & Gl € anzel , 2013 ) . Indeed , when inscrutable evidence is dif ﬁ cult to obtain , social proof , such as the opin - ions of other scholars , particularly prominent ones , serves as a substitute basis for beliefs ( Simonton , 2004 ) . It is common for scientists debating competing theories to use the phrase , “ it ’ s an empirical ques - tion . ” But , in looking retrospectively , we believe that it is rarely as simple as an empirical question . As we believe the case of loss aversion suggests , few strongly held beliefs in our ﬁ eld are changed solely by data . A large number of ﬁ ndings suggest , at a minimum , that losses are not always more impactful than gains ; in fact , this evidence has been accessible for decades . Yet , rather than leading to the generation of more complex and nuanced mod - els , it seems that most evidence continues to be interpreted in line with a loss aversion account or , alternatively , is dismissed and ignored . It seems , in line with Kuhn ( 1962 ) , that scienti ﬁ c truth is slip - pery and data alone , no matter how accurate , is fundamentally ﬁ ltered through the lens of estab - lished paradigms that have been forti ﬁ ed by the social proof of acceptance . That the data cannot speak for themselves underscores the need for open discourse around contrarian theories as a means to facilitate critical consideration of con ﬂ ict - ing interpretations . Of note , even the publication of “ wrong ” ideas , to the extent they challenge established ideas , can ultimately be bene ﬁ cial from the standpoint of advancing science . For example , even though we believe Zajonc ( 1980 ) was correct in his assertion that affect need not be dependent on cognitive inference , a tremendous amount was learned from his debate with Lazarus ( 1982 ) , who advocated the contrary viewpoint . It forced Zajonc to better syn - thesize the evidence , articulate his logic , and re ﬁ ne his perspective ( Zajonc , 1984 ) . Although the estab - lished theory in this example could be viewed as ultimately more correct than the contrarian view - point , we learned a great deal from the publication of the contrarian article . As two additional , more recent examples of con - trarian articles , consider the debate stimulated by Frederick , Lee , and Baskin ( 2014 ) that challenged the attraction effect and the debate stimulated by Scheibehenne , Greifeneder , and Todd ( 2010 ) on the choice overload effect . Right or wrong , an open dia - log on the contrarian view offers insight into these topics . Yet , to our knowledge , both of these papers had a fairly painful road to publication , much more so than a typical paradigm - con ﬁ rming paper might have had . Indeed , an author of one of these papers told one of us that the publication process was “ not worth it . ” Moreover , all three reviewers , experts on the topic , recommended rejecting the other of these papers before it was ultimately published . A productive disagreement can force those who are closer to the truth to strengthen their logic and arguments and to illuminate unclear assumptions . Conversely , being overly cautious to publish “ cor - rect ” articles often provides little new insight and can lead to the perpetuation of ﬂ awed paradigms . Thus , perhaps surprisingly , even when it is ﬂ awed , contrarian science can ultimately serve to advance science more than con ﬁ rmatory science . Recommendations To be clear , we are not advocating publishing contrarian ideas merely because they are contrarian , nor are we eschewing concerns about evidence and logic . Rather , we believe scientists are biased in favor of accepted ideas ( Greenwald , Pratkanis , Leippe , & Baumgardner , 1986 ; Kuhn , 1962 ) . As such , we advocate greater balance and greater attention to the ability of contrarian ideas to advance science . Part of this recommendation to be more open - minded toward contrarian research is directed to researchers and gatekeepers . However , we believe most scientists are already open - minded in principle , and this is likely insuf ﬁ cient to encour - age contrarian science . For example , although we privately ( and now publicly ) lament the lack of value accorded to ideas that challenge the status quo in our ﬁ eld , we ﬁ nd ourselves as reviewers , letter writers , hiring com - mittee members , and even as authors in danger of perpetuating the status quo . Put simply , ideas that ﬁ t the purview of existing knowledge seem to be easier to match up with existing standards and norms than ideas that do not . We believe such behavior re ﬂ ects the fact that a tendency to Loss Aversion and Intellectual Inertia 5 perpetuate the status quo is dif ﬁ cult to escape as we are socialized by our ﬁ eld to act according to its norms ( Ellison , 2002 ; Lehmann , McAlister , & Stae - lin , 2011 ) . Thus , our view is that if contrarian para - digms are to receive a fairer hearing , structural reforms are needed . First , we suggest that conferences and journals in our ﬁ eld develop tracks for particularly contrar - ian , controversial , or otherwise paradigm - upending research . 1 Ideally , papers accepted through this track would receive a special designation , so that schools and letter writers who value such work can more easily give it the appropriate weight . Indeed , the current Research Dialogues section of the Jour - nal of Consumer Psychology , in which this discussion appears , provides an excellent context for such an opportunity . In addition , the NIH , cognizant of the inherent bias against paradigm - upending research , has recently taken several steps to help promote such research . For example , the NIH seeks to pro - mote transformative research through a grant port - folio speci ﬁ c to “ research projects that have the potential to create or overturn fundamental para - digms ” ( Transformative R01 , 2017 ) . Second , because the publication lag in our ﬁ eld is long and uncertain , and likely particularly so for contrarian research , we suggest that contrarian papers can bene ﬁ t from an evaluation process that is both more rapid and more heavily weighted toward conceptual importance than is typical . By conceptual importance we refer to an emphasis on conceptual arguments , novelty , challenge to accepted ideas , and ability to stimulate scienti ﬁ c debate . One option is a two - tiered review process , in which the ﬁ rst tier is almost entirely concept driven and the turnaround time is fast , before the work is sent out to reviewers . Indeed , such a pro - cess would mimic and build upon the approach by some journals to make initial decisions based on a ﬁ rst reading by the editor and associate editor prior to review . Third , a component of the NIH transformative research grant initiative is that reviewers are recog - nized authorities in their ﬁ eld , but are not experts on the speci ﬁ c topic that they are tasked to evalu - ate . The purpose is to facilitate the advancement of paradigm - upending research and to protect propos - als from being rejected for lack of conformity with existing methods or theories . Similarly , we suggest that contrarian research papers be assigned at least some reviewers who are not experts in the particu - lar research subject . Again , this does not mean that poor research should be accepted for contrarian purposes ; rather , it should be given a fairer and more impartial trial . Will such reforms work , leading to greater publi - cation of contrarian research and to the advance - ment of science ? Ultimately , it might ( or might not ) be an empirical question . Endnote 1 Though more targeted toward innovation in methods or modeling than toward challenging exist - ing theories , Marketing Science has recently adopted a similar initiative ( Sudhir , 2018 ; https : / / pubsonline . informs . org / doi / 10 . 1287 / mksc . 2018 . 1091 ) . References Comte , A . ( 1835 ) . Cours de philosophie positive : Borrani et Droz . Ellison , G . ( 2002 ) . Evolving standards for academic pub - lishing : A q - r theory . Journal of Political Economy , 110 , 994 – 1034 . Ert , E . , & Erev , I . ( 2013 ) . On the descriptive value of loss aversion in decisions under risk : Six clari ﬁ cations . Judg - ment and Decision Making , 8 , 214 – 235 . Fanelli , D . , & Gl € anzel , W . ( 2013 ) . Bibliometric evidence for a hierarchy of the sciences . PLoS One , 8 , e66938 . Frederick , S . , Lee , L . , & Baskin , E . ( 2014 ) . The limits of attraction . Journal of Marketing Research , 51 , 487 – 507 . Gal , D . , & Rucker , D . D . ( 2018 ) . The loss of loss aversion : Will it loom larger than it ’ s gain ? Journal of Consumer Psychology . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jcpy . 1047 Ghaemi , N . ( 2017 ) . Choosing a Specialty : A Letter to a Medi - cal Student . Retrieved April 12 , 2017 , from https : / / www . medscape . com / viewarticle / 873762 Greenwald , A . G . , Pratkanis , A . R . , Leippe , M . R . , & Baumgardner , M . H . ( 1986 ) . Under what conditions does theory obstruct research progress ? Psychological Review , 93 , 216 – 229 . Higgins , T . E . , & Liberman , N . ( 2018 ) . The loss of loss aversion : Paying attention to reference points . Journal of Consumer Psychology . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jcpy . 1045 Ioannidis , J . P . ( 2012 ) . Why science is not necessarily self - correcting . Perspectives on Psychological Science , 7 , 645 – 654 . Kuhn , T . S . ( 1962 ) . The structure of scienti ﬁ c revolutions . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Lazarus , R . S . ( 1982 ) . Thoughts on the relations between emotion and cognition . American Psychologist , 37 , 1019 . Lehmann , D . R . , McAlister , L . , & Staelin , R . ( 2011 ) . Sophistication in research in marketing . Journal of Mar - keting , 75 , 155 – 165 . Scheibehenne , B . , Greifeneder , R . , & Todd , P . M . ( 2010 ) . Can there ever be too many options ? A meta - analytic review of choice overload . Journal of Consumer Research , 37 , 409 – 425 . 6 Gal and Rucker Simonson , I . , & Kivetz , R . ( 2018 ) . Bringing ( contingent ) loss aversion down to earth – A comment on Gal & Rucker ’ s rejection of “ Losses Loom Larger Than Gains ” . Journal of Consumer Psychology . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jcpy . 1046 Simonton , D . K . ( 2004 ) . Psychology ’ s status as a scienti ﬁ c discipline : Its empirical placement within an implicit hierarchy of the sciences . Review of General Psychology , 8 , 59 . Sims , W . ( 1921 ) . Military conservatism . United States Naval Institute Proceedings , November . Transformative R01 ( 2017 ) . NIH Director ’ s Transformative Research Award Frequently Asked Questions . Retrieved April 12 , 2017 , from https : / / commonfund . nih . gov / TRA / faq Yechiam , E . , & Hochman , G . ( 2013 ) . Losses as modulators of attention : Review and analysis of the unique effects of losses over gains . Psychological Bulletin , 139 , 497 . Zajonc , R . B . ( 1980 ) . Feeling and thinking : Preferences need no inferences . American Psychologist , 35 , 151 . Zajonc , R . B . ( 1984 ) . On the primacy of affect . American Psychologist , 39 , 117 – 123 . Loss Aversion and Intellectual Inertia 7