Creative Computing : An Approach to Knowledge Combination for Creativity ? Hongji Yang , Delin Jing and Lu Zhang Centre for Creative Computing Bath Spa University Corsham , UK { h . yang , delin . jing13 , lu . zhang13 } @ bathspa . ac . uk Abstract —It can be agreeable that human knowledge has been accumulated to a peak level , of which one of the evidences is the coming of Big Data era . It is observed that knowledge combination presently can be a way of innovating new products and new services for people . A challenging issue is how to combine human knowledge intelligently and creatively . It is proposed and visioned that Creative Computing can be one approach to tackling the above challenge . This paper starts with questions such as what Creative Computing is ; what research scope Creative Computing has ; what assumptions and principles Creative Computing is based on ; what new methods Creative Computing will use ; what applications Creative Computing will have ; and how , in particular , Creative Computing will combine knowledge . By summarising related research studies and projects , it observes the advancement of Creative Computing has enabled broad use of computers in many domains , while combined knowledge are playing key roles in most of them . As an example , the paper will present an attempt for knowledge from different disciplines to be linked and combined via software semantic techniques . Furthermore , the combined knowledge provides the basis of creativity on generating new ideas and solutions , which not only helps on solving problems but also inspires and encourages on innovative activities . Overall , this paper aims to speculate and establish a prospect and imagination of Creative Computing as an effective way for connecting and combining various and vast amount of human knowledge . Keywords—Creative Computing ; knowledge combination ; software semantics ; super intelligence I . I NTRODUCTION It is obvious that it comes to an information explosion era , in which human knowledge has been accumulated to a peak level . Accordingly , the emerging big - data paradigm , owing to its broader impact , has attracted diverse attentions from both technological experts and the public in general [ 1 ] . Meanwhile , there is more emphasis on innovation as it is the key role of being successful in this extremely competitive market , because there are always multiple products or services striving to serve the users in the same domain [ 2 , 3 ] . Knowledge is always the foundation of innovative ideas for both products and services . It is observed that knowledge combination presently can be a way of innovating new products and new services on various domains . A well - known example is Apple’s iPhone , considered as a game - changing product , which merged many technical knowledge items , for instance , virtual keyboard , with the knowledge of traditional mobile phone . Over the last few years , the introduction of the iPhone has subverted the smartphone market . Traditional mobile phone companies , even the giants like Nokia and Motorola , have been forced to make huge changes and many new smartphone companies have arisen following iPhone’s trend . Further , it is not only leading the trend of the mobile phone industry but also affected the computer market seriously . Sales on various brands have suffered different degrees of declining in recent years , while millions applications are available for iPhone that allow users to do all kinds of tasks in this pocket size device . It is obvious that an effective combination of two or more types of knowledge can revolutionise products and services . However , a challenging issue here is how to combine human knowledge intelligently and creatively , because 1 ) nowadays human knowledge is vast and high variety , and 2 ) not all the combinations of knowledge can be useful , workable , and innovative . Therefore , in this paper , it is proposed that Creative Computing can be one approach to tackling the above challenge . It focuses on presenting Creative Computing as an approach to knowledge combination for creativity . In particular , in the following content , it discusses and explores Creative Computing from many perspectives , including its history , research scope , assumptions , principles and methods . Selected research studies and projects are reviewed as example of Creative Computing or work related to it . According to observing the related work , it shows the way the applications work in practical and the advantages of Creative Computing . Towards combining knowledge , software semantic techniques are employed to establish a method of Creative Computing . In addition , it presents a developed prototype as case study , in which the basis of creativity on its generated results comes from linking and combining knowledge from different disciplines . Results generated by the prototype are research topics that are novelty , usefulness and surprising . Overall , this paper presents Creative Computing as an effective approach to tackling innovation requirements via combining human knowledge . II . C REATIVE C OMPUTING A . History and Scope The advancement of computing has enabled broad use of computers in all domains [ 4 ] . Since the early 1990s , 2016 IEEE Symposium on Service - Oriented System Engineering 978 - 1 - 5090 - 2253 - 3 / 16 $ 31 . 00 © 2016 IEEE DOI 10 . 1109 / SOSE . 2016 . 51 407 researchers of computing and information science have studied creativity in the context of technology . An interdisciplinary research area , named Creative Computing , is taking shape , in which there are some research directions [ 5 – 8 ] , such as creative design , creative requirement engineering , creativity analysis and evaluation , creative collaboration , and e - learning among others . According to the contents , methods and purposes of the existing research , Creative Computing can be recognised as the study of computer science and related technologies and how they are applied to support creativity , take part in creative processes , and solve creativity related problems . Although there is not a universal definition of Creative Computing , it is certainly around a clear and kernel feature , creativity . Further , based on the specific properties of creativity [ 9 ] , three interrelated types of Creative Computing have been identified as follows [ 10 ] : • creative development of a computing product , • development of a creative computing based product , and • development of a computing environment to support creativity . Creative Computing is being discussed more widely in last few years , hoping to produce new , innovative and valuable products , which are mainly happening in software [ 10 , 11 ] . It seeks to reconcile the objective precision of computer systems ( mathesis ) with the subjective ambiguity of human creativity ( aethesis ) [ 10 ] . As a newly aroused emerging research field , in Creative Computing , there are many promising research directions to be studied [ 7 , 8 ] , such as creative design , creative requirement engineering , creative collaboration , and electronic learning . One research objective in Creative Computing is to find the approach to get creativity and to realise it [ 10 – 12 ] . In other words , Creative Computing is launched to support the creativity issues in various domains . Creative application software , or called as creative application can be referred to those software , tools , or environment which can support , improve or enhance creativity using text , graphics , audio , video , and integrated technologies [ 7 , 13 , 14 ] . Currently , many studies are on approaches and processes to develop creative software for some specific applications . B . Assumptions and Principles Basically , a computing process belongs to Creative Computing only if it contains creativity as a core feature . Creativity is an extremely important facet of life and is a feature of many of the tasks that people do every day . It can occur in a multitude of situations ranging from work to pleasure , from artistic portrayals to technological innovation [ 15 ] . It is very difficult , perhaps even very challenging to define in objective terms and it takes many forms in human activities [ 4 ] . Most texts regard creativity as a beneficial process in an organisation and it has been said to offer a competitive advantage in the design processes [ 16 ] . Naturally , it is a crucial feature for new and innovative products and services [ 17 ] . Dean , et al . [ 18 ] , carried out an exhaustive analysis of studies that employed criteria to assess creativity in solution and product ideas [ 18 , 19 ] . They broke the collected criteria into more specific and measurable terms including constructs and sub - dimensions as shown in Table Ⅰ . Also , many other studies proposed similar criteria or dimensions for creative activities and results . For instance , Eppler and Pfisher [ 20 ] collected 16 creativity mechanisms based on existing studies and defined how they can be applied in their proposed Path to Success ( P2S ) method . However , on the previous studies , there are inconsistencies limitations and definition conflicts , which lead to confusions and (cid:2)(cid:2) Dimension / Sub - Dimension Definition 1 Novelty The degree to which an idea is original and modifies a paradigm . 1 . 1 Originality The degree to which the idea is not only rare but is also ingenious , imaginative or surprising . 1 . 2 Paradigm relatedness The degree to which an idea is paradigm preserving or paradigm modifying . 2 Workability ( Feasibility ) An idea is workable ( feasibility ) if it can be easily implemented and does not violate known constraints . 2 . 1 Acceptability The degree to which the idea is socially , legally , or politically acceptable . 2 . 2 Implementability The degree to which the idea can be easily implemented . 3 Relevance The idea applies to the stated problem and will be effective at solving problem . 3 . 1 Applicability The degree to which the idea clearly applies to the stated problem . 3 . 2 Effectiveness The degree to which the idea will solve the problem . 4 Specificity An idea is specific if it is clear ( worked out in detail ) . 4 . 1 Implicational explicitness The degree to which there is a clear relationship between the recommended action and the expected outcome . 4 . 2 Completeness The number of independent subcomponents into which the idea can be decomposed , and the breadth of coverage with regard to who , what , where , when , why , and how . 4 . 3 Clarity The degree to which the idea is clearly communicated with regard to grammar and word usage . T ABLE I . D EFINITIONS OF C REATIVITY D IMENSIONS & S UB - DIMENSIONS [ 18 ] 408 inconvenience of understanding and application . To concur the limitations and conflicts , it is proposed a set of creativity elements for Creative Computing , in which three main elements defined are novelty , usefulness and surprising [ 2 , 17 ] . The hierarchical structure of the creativity elements is presented as Figure 1 . It was discussed that there should be proper classifications to avoid confusion between novelty - only activities and products and creativity activities and results where creativity is based on novelty and other attributes [ 18 , 19 ] . It is obvious that a creative outcome is unlikely to be effective if it is novelty only . Therefore , the above creativity elements and sub - dimensions are proposed by adopting part of dimensions and sub - dimensions from Table Ⅰ , redefined them accordingly , and re - catalogued into the proposed three elements , as Dean and his colleagues [ 18 ] have summarised from most of the existing attributes of creative solution and product ideas . In particular , novelty indicates a creative result is original and is some kind of modified paradigm . Usefulness is to make sure an idea of product or service can be applicable and is worthy of further processing , which covers valuable , but not only that . Surprising is for the degree of unexpectedness and unusualness , that is how much a creative result against out expectations and how much unique a result is , which distinguished the surprising with novelty . These three elements are the fundamental assumptions of creativity that Creative Computing is based on . Many efforts have been made in the last two decades to tackle the task on how to clarify different kinds of creativity or called creativity techniques from the application point of view . For example , VanGundy [ 21 ] summarised 101 activities for teaching creativity and problem solving and classified these activities according to the type of users , individuals or groups . Later , Knoll and Horton [ 22 ] re - catalogued the activities for ideation . Among the many studies , a theory was established by Boden [ 23 – 25 ] , who proposed that creativity can be divided into three types , exploratory creativity , combinational creativity , and transformative creativity . This theory has been adopted and applied in many research studies in various domains , e . g . , product design and idea generation . They can be considered as high abstraction level creativity techniques in general creativity perspective [ 17 ] as eventually all the creativity techniques others proposed can be catalogued into these three types . Details of the three types of creativity are explained as following descriptions . Exploratory creativity : further research is conducted in one already existing conceptual space in order to find new route to reach a destination [ 11 ] . In another word , it is exploration of conceptual spaces to notice new things in old places [ 26 ] . Combinational creativity : it is to combine familiar ideas to make unfamiliar or creative ideas . Typical combinational creativities includes bisociation , juxtapositioning of unrelated ideas , puns , conceptual blending , etc . [ 26 ] . Bisociation connects to incomparable contexts together while conceptual blending is to generate ideas by integrating very different thoughts [ 11 ] . Transformative creativity : it means to create its own new exclusive conceptual space by transforming an existing conceptual space , so that the original problem can be transformed to new conceptual space and be solved there [ 11 ] . It makes new thoughts possible by transforming the conceptual space , by altering its own rules [ 26 ] . According to their nature attributes on contributing to innovation , the above three types of creativity are considered as the basic principles for Creative Computing [ 2 , 27 , 28 ] . C . Methods Creative Computing emphasises being creative in the whole computing lifecycle , in particular , software lifecycle . Since Creative Computing is a relatively new filed of study , many research studies are needed to make it applicable and comprehensive in various aspects . New methods are required to be used to support its development . It has been reviewed and discussed that there is no existing method suitable to be applied into Creative Computing directly , because the existing methods are designed for specific discipline and Creative Computing is inherently trans - disciplinary [ 10 , 29 , 30 ] . As essentially it is still computing , it follows the traditional software lifecycle and other principles of software engineering . Therefore , new methods required in Creative Computing should be the mixtures of computing techniques and creativity principles and techniques to achieve novelty , usefulness and surprising results . For the purpose of this paper , an example method for Creative Computing is presented in Section IV , which is designed to knowledge combination for creativity and supported by software semantic techniques and the assumptions and principles of Creative Computing . III . R ELATED WORK A number of research studies and developed projects can be considered as examples of Creative Computing or studies that related to Creative Computing . By observing three selected examples , it is expected to find the capacity , effect , and Fig . 1 . Creativity Elements and Sub - Dimensions 409 application range for Creativity Computing in real - life scenarios . A . The Syzygy Surfer Hendler , Hugill , Yang and Racizinski [ 31 ] proposed and developed a new web search engine , the Syzygy Surfer , which aims to induce search experience that is more creative than traditional search engines , e . g . , Google , Bing , and Yahoo ! . It is can be seen that in the Syzygy Surfer , the combination with Pataphysics , which is a science of imaginary solutions for governance of exceptions , creates a new data manipulation of software for creators [ 31 , 32 ] . That is , it is a new kind of semantic search engine based on pataphysical principles to deliver unexpected and creative results . Hence , it can be a useful tool for creators to stimulate new and surprising ideas . B . Ideas Creation System for Software Requirements Engineering This system is designed to assist activities on developing creative software requirements . It aims to coping with the software domain’s rapid development and intense competition [ 2 ] . Particularly , after a user selected specific domain and entered keywords , it provides text results as clues to help and inspire requirements elicitation . In this system , knowledge of software requirements engineering for certain kind of application , such as E - Learning , are manipulated and linked with related domains’ knowledge in terms of the three creativity principles . Specific rules are designed to support the combinations . Besides , mind - mapping technique is adopted to assist management and presentation of the generated requirements . C . Carer The Carer is a digital creativity app to the care for people with dementia [ 33 , 34 ] . It is developed for use by staff in residential homes and it is designed to support care stuff to create more novel , individualised , person - centred care for people with dementia [ 34 ] . In particular , a model of creative problem solving is proposed working with creativity techniques to support on providing customised creativity prompts automatically . For instance , other worlds technique [ 35 ] is applied in this app , which helps on generating different domains to enhance care plan for residents [ 34 ] . The above examples show that applications are used in various domains via Creative Computing for helping on getting solutions and innovative thoughts . Moreover , it is observed that combining knowledge of different domains is a relatively common way to achieve the aim of being creative . For example , in the second work , the ideas creation system is designed to combine requirements engineering knowledge with knowledge of other domains in order to generating innovative requirements . IV . K NOWLEDGE C OMBINATION A statement in Creative Computing is that uniting is a way to be creative [ 4 ] . “Unit and conquer” is proposed as a mission of Creative Computing [ 32 ] and combination of different knowledge became a popular example and research direction . However , in this Big Data era , human knowledge gained new features , such as vast volume and high variety . As knowledge is not only contained in information but also in the relationships among information , it should not just focus on how to collect , construct and store them anymore . A new challenge is aroused along with the emerging requirements on innovation , which is how to link and combine knowledge from different disciplines intelligently and creatively . Try to imagine that , if a lawyer could draw pictures by utilising defending skills ; if a musician could construct buildings by utilising grateful melodies ; and if a farmer could design t - shirts by utilising potato planting techniques . Although presently they are imaginary and look like fantasies , it does not assert that they cannot be realised in the future . Theoretically , the basic and vital obstruction is lacking of relationships between knowledge of those unrelated disciplines . For example , a farmer may know all the potato planting techniques , but he has no idea on t - shirt design . The potato planting and t - shirt design appear to be totally unrelated . From knowledge perspective , there is no relation among them at all . However , when there is a connection established between the two disciplines , maybe by involving bionics knowledge as a bridge , it can provide directions to research and practice to make the imaginary becomes reality . These kinds of possibilities pronounce a need for creative knowledge combination . In software community , semantic techniques are heavily developed and accepted to support knowledge management to various purposes . Ontology and inference , as two important techniques in semantic web , are broadly used in many applications to provide services on information management and solutions to problems . Therefore , they are the semantic techniques selected and employed in this research to support on combining knowledge of different disciplines . A commonly used definition of ontology can be found in article [ 36 ] , where an ontology was defined to be a specification of a shared conceptualisation of a domain . Specifically , ontology is a formal , explicit specification of a shared conceptualisation . Basically , ontology is a modelled knowledge about a specific domain , which defines a common vocabulary , the meaning of terms , and how terms are interrelated . It consists of conceptualisation and implementation . Meanwhile , ontological primitives are contained . Therefore , ontology can be considered as a shared and reusable model written in a formal language . The common underlying representation languages for ontology are Resource Description Framework ( RDF ) and Web Ontology Language ( OWL ) . The World Wide Web Consortium ( W3C ) recommends both of them as Semantic Web standards . As ontology is well structured and formal formatted , it has inference ability , which basically is to discover implicit information and new relationships . The fundamental elements of inference are reasoning rules , which are designed to accomplish specific tasks and commonly are defined in description language [ 37 ] . There are four traditional inference tasks to do the basic management of domain ontology and to make sure ontology is well structured , i . e . , sub - sumption test , satisfiability test , consistency test , and retrieval test . Following lists details of the four fundamental inference tasks . 410 • Sub - sumption Test : to determine whether one concept is more general than another . Sub - sumption tests are used to build and maintain a taxonomy of named concepts , called the concept hierarchy , and the process of building the concept hierarchy is called classification . • Satisfiability Test : to determine whether the constraints implied by the knowledge base are such that a concept is contradictory and thus its extension is empty in every model of the knowledge base . • Consistency Test : to determine whether a given knowledge base can have a model . • Retrieval : to retrieve all instances of a given concept or all pairs of individuals related via a given role . Based on the four standard inference tasks , there are many ontology based research studies contributed different knowledge management in various domains . For instance , Brandt and his colleagues [ 38 ] proposed an ontology based approach to knowledge management in design processes , in which extensive information exchange and communication among distributed teams are achieved supported by the designed flexible ontology - based schema with formally defined semantics . However , the knowledge combination that this paper aims to achieve requires more creative and complex inferences . For example , a query based on domain knowledge asks for a new product or service based on input keywords . The required new results cannot simply be searched from existing knowledge due to its requirements in creative nature . Therefore , this paper proposes an ontology - based method for knowledge combination , in which creativity principles and other techniques are adopted on supporting the creative reasoning activities to generate novelty , usefulness and surprising results . An approach of this method is presented in Figure 2 . The above approach shows how the techniques and principles fit in the Creative Computing method to combine different types of knowledge . Ontology and standard inference tasks supports the basic management of knowledge base , in which knowledge of different disciplines are stored . Computing is the main activity in charge of generating creative results . Creativity inference tasks are designed for specific applications to reason implicitly and new concepts and relationships among different and uncorrelated knowledge . Creativity principles are followed by the computing activity . Other techniques are adopted to enrich the process ; for instance , Natural Language Processing ( NLP ) is a technique that can be used to support the representation of generated results . Lastly , creativity elements assist the creative results to make sure they are not only novel but also useful and surprising . V . C ASE S TUDY The knowledge combination method designed based on software semantic techniques is implemented in a prototype , the Research Topics Generation System ( RTGS ) , is presented here to demonstrate and prove that , as proposed in previous sections , Creative Computing can be an approach to combine knowledge intelligently and creatively . In particular , the RTGS presents an attempt for knowledge to be linked and combined from different disciplines , while the combination is supported by software semantic techniques , i . e . , ontology and inference . As the name indicated , this system is developed to generate new research topics by combining knowledge from different disciplines . The generated research topics suppose to help researchers on finding potential study directions and to inspire and encourage on innovative activities for their further research , while the combined knowledge provide the basis of creativity on the generated results . Specifically , in the RTGS , a user needs to select a specific discipline and enter some keywords ( maximum three ) as the system’s initial inputs . In this case , it is assumed that new research ideas required are on software reliability , and hence , computing and information technology is selected as the discipline , and software reliability is entered as a keyword . Theses are shown in the system’s input interface as in Figure 3 . After clicking the Next button in the first input interface , the system goes to another input interface as Figure 4 shows , in Fig . 2 . Semantic Techniques based Creativity Computing Approach to Knowledge Combination Fig . 3 . RTGS Input Interface ( I ) Fig . 4 . RTGS Input Interface ( II ) 411 which a set of subjects belongs to the selected discipline is listed for user to choose as the further input of the system . After user’s inputs , the RTGS does the computing in the background based on the proposed creative knowledge combination approach to create a number of research topics for software reliability . The Knowledge Base is the information resource of the computing process . A part of the Knowledge Base is presented in Protégé with concepts and relationships as Figure 5 shows . There are many disciplines’ knowledge stored in this Knowledge Base , e . g . , humanity , art , and software engineering . Because the Knowledge Base contains so many information that it is unable to be presented graphically in a single diagram , there is only a part of it shows here to illustrate what kind of information stored in the Knowledge Base . Through the system’s computing , some research topics are generated as new ideas based on the domains’ ontology and user’s inputs . The specific rules designed to support this step have been explained in other publications [ 17 , 39 ] . Although this paper cannot present all the details of the generation process , the results generated by the system are showing that the combination of knowledge is the kernel of creativity in the results . Besides , language patterns are applied as a technique to support the results’ expression and this part is not explained here , as it is not the point of this paper . Figure 6 is the output / results interface representing user’s inputs and the generated candidate topics . This section illustrates an example for knowledge from different disciplines to be combined via software semantic techniques based Creative Computing . Ontology for many Fig . 6 . RTGS Output / Results Interface Fig . 5 . Part of the Knowledge Base Presented in Protégé 412 domains are stored in the Knowledge Base and represented in Protégé . By combining knowledge from different disciplines according to the proposed Creative Computing method , new research topics are generated to satisfied user’s requirements and interests . In particular , the Creative Computing method is supported by ontology and inference techniques as explained in the last section . This study indicates Creative Computing can be applied into the real - world scenario to achieve the aim of providing innovative solutions and services by combining different types of knowledge . VI . C ONCLUSIONS The era of big data has arrived as human knowledge has accumulated to a peak level . Meanwhile , innovation is emphasised and required in various communities in order to sustain and be successful in an extremely competitive environment . Creativity features become essential to distinguish a product , service or idea from others . It is observed that knowledge combination is a way of innovating ideas on various domains . This paper aims to address the issue on how to combine human knowledge intelligently and creatively . Creative Computing with specific techniques is proposed tackling this challenge . In particular , there is a relatively comprehensive introduction to Creative Computing , including the history , scope , assumptions , principles and new methods . By reviewing and observing examples of Creative Computing or works that related to Creative Computing , it concludes that Creative Computing has enabled broad use of computers in various domains to help , inspire and encourage on solutions and other innovative activities . Besides , it is proved that knowledge combination is a relatively common way towards being innovative . Therefore , a Creative Computing method is proposed to knowledge combination , in which software semantic techniques are employed , i . e . , ontology and inference . Furthermore , an approach is designed showing how the various techniques fit in the Creative Computing paradigm , which can be considered as a high abstraction level guidance for specific development . In addition , a Research Topics Generation System is developed and presented as a case study to illustrate the application of the proposed Creative Computing approach in a practical scenario . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] H . Hu , Y . Wen , T . S . Chua , and X . Li , “Toward Scalable Systems for Big Data Analytics : A Technology Tutorial” , IEEE Access , vol . 2 , 2014 , pp . 652 – 687 . [ 2 ] D . Jing , C . Zhang , and H . Yang , “Using an Ideas Creation System to Assist and Inspire Creativity in Requirements Engineering” , Requirements Engineering in the Big Data Era , vol . 558 , L . Liu and M . Aoyama , Eds . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 2015 , pp . 155 – 169 . [ 3 ] T . Bhowmik , N . Niu , A . Mahmoud , and J . Savolainen , “Automated Support for Combinational Creativity in Requirements Engineering” , International Requirements Engineering Conference , 2014 , pp . 243 – 252 . [ 4 ] H . Yang , Editorial , International Journal of Creative Computing , vol . 1 , no . 1 , 2013 , pp . 1 – 3 . [ 5 ] E . A . Carroll , C . Latulipe , R . Fung , and M . Terry , “Creativity Factor Evaluation : Towards A Standardised Survey Metric for Creativity Support” , 7th ACM Conference on Creativity and Cognition , 2009 , pp . 127 – 136 . [ 6 ] C . Chao , J . Yang , and W . Jen , “Determining Technology Trends and Forecasts of RFID by A Historical Review and Bibliometric Analysis from 1991 to 2005” , Technovation , vol . 27 , no . 5 , 2007 , pp . 268 – 279 . [ 7 ] D . Janssen , T . Schlegel , M . Wissen , and J . Ziegler , “MetaCharts - Using Creativity Methods in A CSCW Environment” , Human - Computer Interaction Theory and Practice ( Part II ) , 2003 , pp . 939 – 943 . [ 8 ] L . Nguyen and G . Shanks , “A Framework for Understanding Creativity in Requirements Engineering” , Information and Software Technology , vol . 51 , no . 3 , Mar . 2009 , pp . 655 – 662 . [ 9 ] R . E . Mayer , “Fifty Years of Creativity Research” , Handbook of Creativity , R . J . Sternberg , Ed . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1999 , pp . 449 – 460 . [ 10 ] A . Hugill and H . Yang , “The Creative Turn : New Challenges for Computing” , International Journal of Creative Computing , 2013 , vol . 1 , no . 1 , pp . 4 – 19 . [ 11 ] R . Liu and H . Yang , “Chaos and Fractal for Creative Computing” , IEEE 8th International Symposium on Service Oriented System Engineering , 2014 , pp . 470 – 473 . [ 12 ] D . N . Perkins , The Mind’s Best Work . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press , 1981 . [ 13 ] V . Weiley and Y . Pisan , “The Distributed Studio : Towards A Theory of Virtual Place for Creative Collaboration” , 20th Australasian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction : Designing for Habitus and Habitat , 2008 , pp . 343 – 346 . [ 14 ] N . Maiden , C . Ncube , and S . Robertson , “Can Requirements be Creative ? Experiences with an Enhanced Air Space Management System” , International Conference on Software Engineering , 2007 , pp . 632 – 641 . [ 15 ] N . Bonnardel , “Creativity in Design Activities : the Role of Analogies in a Constrained Cognitive Environment” , 3rd Conference on Creativity and Cognition , 1999 , pp . 158 – 165 . [ 16 ] P . Cook , “The Creativity Advantage - Is Your Organisation The Leader of The Pack ? ” , Industrial and Commercial Training , vol . 30 , no . 5 , 1998 , pp . 179 – 184 . [ 17 ] D . Jing , H . Yang , L . Xu , and F . Ma , “Developing A Creative Idea Generation System for Innovative Software Reliability Research” , 2nd International Conference on Trustworthy Systems and Their Applications ( TSA’15 ) , 2015 , pp . 71 – 80 . [ 18 ] D . L . Dean , J . M . Hender , T . L . Rodgers , and E . L . Santanen , “Identifying Quality , Novel , and Creative Ideas : Constructs and Scales for Idea Evaluation” , Journal of the Association for Information Systems , vol . 7 , no . 10 , 2006 , pp . 646 – 698 . [ 19 ] G . J . Puccio and J . F . Cabra , “Idea Generation and Idea Evaluation : Cognitive Skills and Deliberate Practices” , Handbook of Organisational Creativity , M . D . Mumford , Ed . London , UK : Elsevier Inc , 2012 , pp . 189 – 215 . [ 20 ] M . J . Eppler and R . A . Pfister , “Paths to Success : A Sketch - Based Creativity Technique for Individuals and Teams” , 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation , 2012 , pp . 337 – 342 . [ 21 ] A . B . VanGundy , 101 Activities for Teaching Creativity and Problem Solving . San Francisco , CA : John Wiley & Sons , Inc . , 2005 . [ 22 ] S . W . Knoll and G . Horton , “Changing the Perspective : Improving Generate thinkLets for Ideation” , 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ) , 2010 , pp . 1 – 10 . [ 23 ] M . A . Boden , The Creative Mind : Myths and Mechanisms , 2nd ed . London : Routledge , 2004 . [ 24 ] M . A . Boden , “Artificial Intelligence Creativity and Artificial Intelligence” , Artificial Intelligence , vol . 103 , no . 1 – 2 , 1998 , pp . 347 – 356 . [ 25 ] M . A . Boden , “Computer Models of Creativity” , AI Magazine , vol . 30 , no . 3 , 2009 , pp . 23 – 34 . 413 [ 26 ] A . Hugill , “Creative Computing Processes : Musical Composition” , IEEE 8th International Symposium on Service Oriented System Engineering , 2014 , pp . 459 – 464 . [ 27 ] D . Jing and H . Yang , “Creativity Techniques Based Inference Activities and Rules for Idea Generation” , 3rd International Symposium on Software Technology ( ISST ) , 2015 , pp . 1 – 8 . [ 28 ] D . Jing and H . Yang , “Creative Computing for Bespoke Ideation” , IEEE 39th Annual Computers , Software and Applications Conference ( COMPSAC ) , 2015 , pp . 34 – 43 . [ 29 ] C . B . Seaman , “Qualitative Methods in Empirical Studies of Software Engineering” , IEEE Transaction on Software Engineering , vol . 25 , no . 4 , 1999 , pp . 557 – 572 . [ 30 ] B . Somekh and C . Lewin , Research Methods in the Social Science . London : Sage Publications , Inc . , 2006 . [ 31 ] J . Hendler and A . Hugill , “The Syzygy Surfer : Creative Technology for the World Wide Web” , ACM Web Science Conference , 2011 , pp . 1 – 3 . [ 32 ] H . Yang and L . Zhang , “Controlling and Being Creative : Software Cybernetics and Creative Computing” , IEEE 38th International Computer Software and Applications Conference Workshop ( COMPSACW ) , 2014 , pp . 19 – 24 . [ 33 ] K . Zachos , N . Maiden , K . Pitts , S . Jones , I . Turner , M . Rose , K . Pudney , and J . MacManus , “A Software App to Support Creativity in Dementia Care” , 9th ACM Conference on Creativity & Cognition , 2013 , pp . 124 – 133 . [ 34 ] K . Zachos , N . Maiden , K . Pitts , S . Jones , I . Turner , M . Rose , K . Pudney , and J . MacManus , “Digital Creativity in Dementia Care Support” , International Journal of Creative Computing , vol . 1 , no . 1 , 2013 , pp . 35 – 56 . [ 35 ] D . Allan , M . Kingdon , K . Murrin , and D . Rudkin , Sticky Wisdom , 2nd ed . Chichester : Capstone Publishing Company Limited , 2002 . [ 36 ] T . R . Gruber , “A Translation Approach to Portable Ontology Speciﬁcations” , Knowledge Acqusition , vol . 5 , 1993 , pp . 199 – 220 . [ 37 ] B . Smith , “Ontology” , The Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of Computing and Information , Malden , MA : Blackwell Publishing Ltd . , 2003 , pp . 153 – 166 . [ 38 ] S . C . Brandt , J . Morbach , M . Miatidis , M . Theißen , M . Jarke , and W . Marquardt , “An Ontology - based Approach to Knowledge Management in Design Processes” , Computers & Chemical Engineering , vol . 32 , no . 1 – 2 , 2008 , pp . 320 – 342 . [ 39 ] D . Jing and H . Yang , “Domain - Specific ‘Idea - tion’ : Real Possibility or Just Another Utopia ? ” , accepted by Applied Science Journal , 2015 . 414