Current Biology 21 , R560 – R569 , July 26 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2011 . 06 . 019 Review Building Distinct Actin Filament Networks in a Common Cytoplasm Alphe´e Michelot and David G . Drubin Eukaryotic cells generate a diversity of actin ﬁlament networks in a common cytoplasm to optimally perform functions such as cell motility , cell adhesion , endocytosis and cytokinesis . Each of these networks maintains precise mechanical and dynamic properties by autonomously controlling the composition of its interacting proteins and spatial organization of its actin ﬁlaments . In this review , we discuss the chemical and physical mechanisms that target distinct sets of actin - binding proteins to distinct actin ﬁlament populations after nucleation , result - ing in the assembly of actin ﬁlament networks that are optimized for speciﬁc functions . Introduction Actin is one of the most abundant , highly conserved and versatile proteins found in eukaryotic cells . In vivo , this 42 kDa globular protein undergoes cycles of polymerization and disassembly between its globular ( G - actin ) and ﬁlamen - tous ( F - actin ) forms [ 1 , 2 ] . This dynamic behavior allows cells to constantly remodel their actin cytoskeleton and to use it as a force - generating system in many different processes , such as cell motility , cell adhesion , endocytosis , cytokinesis , or more generally , for the control of cell morphology [ 1 , 3 – 6 ] . Actin ﬁlaments are not found in cells as disorganized mesh - works , butratherasorganizedassemblieslocalizedinprecise areasofthecytoplasmwheretheycanperformtheirfunctionsinresponsetodifferentstimuli . Numerous lines of evidence indicate that the geometrical , mechanical and dynamic prop - erties of the actin networks are speciﬁcally adapted for each cellular function , and that these properties are tightly controlled by speciﬁc sets of interacting proteins [ 4 , 7 , 8 ] . In this review , we will not describe in detail what is known about the architectures and functions of these numerous actin - based structures . Nor will we address how all of the regulatory proteins work together to assemble and regulate these structures . Rather , we will view the problem from a different angle , by attempting to answer the following ques - tion : by which mechanism ( s ) do cells assemble different actin - ﬁlament - based structures of distinct composition in a common cytoplasm that contains a complex mixture of all the proteins ? After a short description of some of the struc - tures encountered in metazoan and yeast cells , we will review , from chemical and physical standpoints , the different concepts emerging from the literature that explain the segre - gation mechanisms . This discussion will lead us to propose a general working model that explains the formation of branched and linear networks of actin ﬁlaments in all eukary - otic cells . We will conclude with a discussion of the remain - ing unanswered questions and of the approaches that will help us overcome these challenges . Evidence for Generation of Actin Structures of Distinct Compositions In Vivo The formation of F - actin from a pool of G - actin is kinetically unfavorable due to the extreme instability of the dimeric and trimeric forms . Moreover , spontaneous nucleation of actin ﬁlaments is potently inhibited in vivo by additional factors such as proﬁlin and thymosin b 4 . To overcome this inhibition and to be able to control the generation of new actin ﬁla - ments spatially and temporally , cells need additional factors called actin ﬁlament nucleators [ 9 , 10 ] . Subsequent to the initiation step , actin ﬁlaments elongate and become orga - nized into networks of distinct geometrical arrangements and protein compositions . As examples , we will describe a few structures in metazoan and yeast cells . In metazoan cells , actin ﬁlaments assemble into at least 15 distinct structures [ 11 ] , some examples of which are given in Figure 1 . At the leading edge of migrating cells ( called the lamellipodium ) , at sites of clathrin – actin - mediated endocy - tosis , and associated with several intracellular organelles , dense networks of actin ﬁlaments are nucleated and cross - linked in branched arrays by the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Figure 1 ) [ 12 – 15 ] . The Arp2 / 3 complex is recruited and activated at membranes by proteins called nucleation - promoting factors ( NPFs ) , which include WASP at sites of clathrin – actin - medi - ated endocytosis and WAVE at the lamellipodium [ 10 ] . In the presence of the Arp2 / 3 complex , pre - existing actin ﬁlaments and G - actin , NPFs catalyze actin ﬁlament nucleation and formation of branched ﬁlament networks . Subsequently , additional regulatory proteins are recruited ( Figure 1 ) . While some of these regulatory proteins bind directly or indirectly to the NPFs ( e . g . , verprolin binds to yeast WASP [ 16 , 17 ] ) or to the Arp2 / 3 complex ( e . g . , coronin [ 18 ] ) and regulate their activity , most of these proteins appear to be recruited by the actin ﬁlaments . In an area more distal from the leading edge of migrating cells , the lamellum is another actin - based structure com - posed of linear arrays of actin ﬁlaments principally organized into longitudinal stress ﬁbers and transversal arcs in associ - ation with adhesion sites ( Figure 1 ) [ 11 , 19 ] . Recent studies indicate that ﬁlaments within the lamellum can directly emerge from the lamellipodium [ 19 , 20 ] or can be generated independently from focal adhesion sites by formins [ 20 , 21 ] , a family of actin nucleators that generates unbranched actin ﬁlaments and elongates them by remaining processively attached at their barbed ends [ 22 – 24 ] . The lamellum is impli - cated in productive advance of migrating cells [ 20 , 25 ] and in the maintenance of cell plasticity , and it is composed of actin - binding proteins ( ABPs ) that are distinct from the ones interacting with Arp2 / 3 - derived branched networks ( Figure 1 ) . The ﬁnal actin - based metazoan structures covered in this review are ﬁlopodia — ﬁnger - like protrusions at the leading edge of cells involved in cell – cell signaling and guidance toward chemoattractants . Filopodia contain linear bundled arrays of actin ﬁlaments ( Figure 1 ) [ 11 , 26 , 27 ] . Whether the actin ﬁlaments that comprise ﬁlopodia are nucleated inde - pendently by formins at the plasma membrane , or whether they directly emerge and elongate from the lamellipodium , Department of Molecular and Cell Biology , University of California , Berkeley , CA 94720 - 3202 , USA . E - mail : amichelot @ berkeley . edu ( A . M . ) , drubin @ berkeley . edu ( D . G . D . ) Arp2 / 3 complex Capping protein ADF / cofilin WASP / WAVE Tropomyosin Fimbrin Arp2 / 3 complex Cappingprotein ADF / cofilin Fimbrin Tropomyosin WASP Type I myosin IQGAP Formin Formin Ena / VASP Fascin Type II myosin Type V myosin Filopodium Lamellipodium Clathrin – actin endocytic sites Lamellum Contractilering Cables Type I myosin Type II myosin A B α - actinin Type X myosin Metazoan cells Yeast cells Current Biology Figure1 . Actin - basedstructuresandtheirkey conserved regulators in metazoan and yeast cells . ( A ) Schematic representation of actin - based structures in metazoan ( left ) and yeast ( right ) cells . Only a subset of actin - based structures inmetazoancellsispresented . Thecolorcode distinguishes between branched ( Arp2 / 3 - derived ) networks ( in red ) from linear ( formin - derived ) arrays of actin ﬁlaments ( in blue and in green ) . ( B ) Comparison of the composition of actin - associated proteins in distinct cyto - skeletal systems . For metazoan cells ( left ) , red , blue and green circles contain proteins associated with the lamellipodium and / or clathrin – actin endocytic sites , the ﬁlopodium and the lamellum , respectively . For yeast cells ( right ) , red , blue and green circles contain proteins associated with clathrin – actin endo - cytic sites , the cables and the contractile ring , respectively . is not clear [ 26 ] . In any case , elongation factors such as VASP and formins play an important role in ﬁlopodia formation [ 26 , 28 ] . The protein composition of actin structures in ﬁlopodia is distinct from the composition of the other actin - based structures ( Figure 1 ) . Yeast cells share many similarities with more complex organisms , but they are simpler to study in several ways . First , these cells have a smaller number of actin regulatory proteins than metazoan cells . For example , budding yeast has only three known nucleators of actin ﬁlaments ( the Arp2 / 3 complex and the two formin isoforms , Bni1 and Bnr1 ) and four NPFs [ 8 ] . Yeast also have only one actin isoform : elimination of possible roles for actin isoforms facilitates our understanding of the differences between different actin - based structures . Second , only three actin networks are known to assemble in growing yeast : cortical actin patches , which are Arp2 / 3 - branched actin ﬁlament networks involved in clathrin - mediated endocytosis ; actin cables , which are linear bundles of short actin ﬁlaments nucleated by the formins , and are involved in vesicle traf - ﬁcking and maintenance of cell polarity ; and an actin contractile ring composed of short linear actin ﬁlaments nucleated by the formins ( Figure 1 ) [ 8 , 29 ] . Similar to meta - zoan cells , these structures are all regulated by speciﬁc sets of actin regulators ( Figure 1 ) [ 8 ] . Third , although there appear to be connections between actin patches and actin cables in the trafﬁcking of vesicles after endocytosis [ 30 , 31 ] , the actin networks in yeast are spatially distinct , which makes it easier to study these structures independently of one another . For these reasons , and as a result of the powerful genetic tools available , budding and ﬁssion yeast are among the most intensively studied cell types for actin biology . It is interesting to note that homologous proteins often segregate to analogous actin structures across species ( Figure 1 ) . For example , in yeast and metazoan cells type I myosins only localize to sites where Arp2 / 3 - derived branched actin networks are formed , while type II and type V myosins only localize to sites where formin - derived actin ﬁlament linear arrays are formed . Therefore , we now focus our discussion on Arp2 / 3 - derived branched actin ﬁlament networks and formin - derived linear actin ﬁlament networks . Possible Mechanisms for Segregation of Proteins to Different Networks We start our discussion with a simple question : by what mechanisms could actin - associated proteins bind selec - tively to different types of networks ? One potential mechanism relies on the fact that complex signaling networks in cells can target proteins to speciﬁc areas within cells . This mechanism allows cells to spatially regulate where different networks assemble by controlling the location and activity of NPFs or actin nucleators . Several elegant studies have shown that cell signaling can be re - wired , or that key signaling components can be mistargeted , to artiﬁcially form speciﬁc actin ﬁlament networks in precise locations within cells [ 32 , 33 ] . A second possibility is that the local chemical environment ( such as pH or ionic concen - trations ) within areas of cells could provide a mechanism to control protein activities , such as the binding afﬁnity of proteins for actin ﬁlaments . In fact , the activities of numerous ABPs are regulated by such factors . For example , the activity of actin depolymerization factor ( ADF ) / coﬁlin is pH depen - dent and the activities of most proteins of the villin / gelsolin superfamily are regulated by Ca 2 + concentration [ 34 , 35 ] . The last possibility , which we will further develop later in this article , is that different actin ﬁlament structures are preferred as substrates for selective binding by ABPs . Actin Nucleators Are Sufﬁcient to Reconstitute Actin Filament Networks of Biologically Relevant Composition In Vitro Tremendous progress has been made in the last two decades in understanding how complex networks of actin ﬁlaments assemble . A key innovation driving this research was the use of bacterial pathogens , such as Listeria and Shigella , as basic tools to understand Arp2 / 3 - based motility . Review R561 These pathogens hijack the actin cytoskeleton of host cells to drive their movement [ 36 – 38 ] . As a ﬁrst step , motility of these bacteria was reconstituted in cell extracts , demon - strating that factors present at their cell surfaces are sufﬁ - cient to stimulate the assembly of productive actin ﬁlament networks for propulsion of the pathogens during host cell infection [ 39 ] . The surface proteins responsible for the gener - ation of the branched actin networks were later identiﬁed , puriﬁed and characterized as NPFs of the Arp2 / 3 complex [ 40 , 41 ] . These puriﬁed NPFs , when symmetrically conju - gated to polystyrene microbeads , trigger motility of these artiﬁcial objects in cell extracts , proving that NPFs are sufﬁ - cient to induce the recruitment and organized assembly of all the factors required for actin - based motility [ 42 ] . Another crucial discovery was that , when formins are used in similar bead experiments , they induce the assembly of a different kind of network that is instead composed of parallel assem - blies of actin ﬁlaments , similar to those observed in ﬁlopodia or actin cables [ 43 , 44 ] ( Figure 1 ) . Bead / pathogen - based motility and cytoplasmic extracts remain important tools for studying actin - based motile processes . In a recent study , we demonstrated that the NPF WASP ( Las17 in yeast ) is sufﬁcient to assemble cortical endocytic patch - like structures of biologically relevant protein composition in a yeast protein extract [ 45 ] . While some of the proteins were recruited by WASP independent of actin assembly , many others depended on actin ﬁlament assembly . Unexpectedly , among all of the proteins that are known to bind to actin ﬁlaments with a high afﬁnity in vitro , only the subset of proteins that colocalize with endocytic patches in vivo were associated with the reconstituted structures . Since there is only one actin gene in yeast , these results demonstrate the existence of an actin - isoform - independent mechanism for the segregation of ABPs to speciﬁc subpopulations of actin ﬁlaments so that the ﬁnal structure has the composition appropriate for WASP – Arp2 / 3 - nucleated ﬁlaments in vivo . This result also rules out the possibilities raised in the previous section that ABPs ( other than the NPF ) are recruited to speciﬁc actin structures by independent signaling networks , or that their recruitment is due to a speciﬁc and local cellular context , such as pH or salt concentration . In another study , Brawley and Rock followed the recruit - ment of three classes of myosins to triton - extracted actin cytoskeletons [ 46 ] . This treatment preserves the architecture of the cell’s actin networks and retains their ability to interact with other components . The authors found that each class of myosin was recruited to the appropriate actin - based struc - ture , demonstrating in a different system that actin networks have speciﬁc binding properties depending on the structure to which they belong . In the following sections of this review , we will focus on the mechanisms that can explain the recruitment of ABPs to speciﬁc populations of actin ﬁlaments . Cooperativity and Competition for Actin Filament Binding Many studies have concluded that binding of ABPs to actin ﬁlaments can be strongly inﬂuenced by the presence of the other molecules already bound along the ﬁlament , via coop - erative or competitive binding effects . The ﬁrst studies to report such observations date almost to the time of the discoveries and puriﬁcations of the ﬁrst ABPs . Since then , many examples of cooperativity and competition have been reported in vitro and in vivo . Here we will focus on several examples relevant to our discussion — in particular , tropomyosins and their crosstalk with other ABPs — as described below and summarized in Table 1 . Tropomyosins Tropomyosins exist as rod - shaped , coiled - coil dimers that form head - to - tail polymers wrapped around actin ﬁlaments and stabilize actin ﬁlaments in vitro ( for a complete review oftheseproteins , wereferthereaderstoacollection ofexcel - lent reviews and book chapters [ 47 – 49 ] ) . Most eukaryotic cellsexpresstropomyosinsfrommultiplegenesandproducemultipleisoformsfromeachgenebyalternativesplicingorbyacetylationoftheamino - terminal methionine ; moreover , tropomyosins can form homodimers or heterodimers . All of these processes result in the expression of a large number of tropomyosins . While certain tropomyosin isoforms show cooperative binding to actin ﬁlaments , other isoforms compete for binding to actin ﬁlaments , likely explaining the segregation of different isoforms to different actin ﬁlament populations in vivo . The existence of multiple isoforms and the fact that tropomyosins regulate the binding of many other accessory proteins ( see below and [ 50 ] ) suggest that this family of proteins plays a central role in regulating the protein composition of actin structures . Interestingly , tropomyosins usually compete for binding to actin ﬁlaments with protein components of Arp2 / 3 - derived branched networks , but cooperate forbinding with proteins present informin - derived linear networks ( see below and Table 1 ) . Tropomyosins and Myosins It has long been known that tropomyosins are master regu - lators of myosin motor activities in muscle and non - muscle cells [ 51 ] . Tropomyosins affect myosin activities on actin ﬁlaments in different ways , including binding to the motor domain and regulation of ATPase kinetics . These interac - tions are dependent on the particular isoform of tropomyosin and myosin . For example , single - headed type I myosins are unable to bind to tropomyosin - decorated actin ﬁlaments in various organisms [ 52 , 53 ] . On the other hand , type II and type V myosins bind to tropomyosin - decorated actin ﬁla - ments and even have their motor activity enhanced by this binding [ 51 , 53 , 54 ] . Tropomyosin and the Arp2 / 3 Complex Because in many eukaryotic cells the Arp2 / 3 complex and tropomyosins localize to very different areas , whether this segregation might be due to a competitive effect was inves - tigated soon after the discovery of the Arp2 / 3 complex . It was in fact demonstrated that tropomyosin inhibits actin ﬁla - ment branching and nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex in vitro [ 55 ] and competitively inhibits Arp2 / 3 - dependent nucleation in a reconstituted motility assay [ 56 ] . Overexpres - sion of tropomyosin in vivo depletes the Arp2 / 3 complex from the leading edge of epithelial cells , therefore inhibiting the formation of the lamellipodium [ 57 ] . In contrast , tropomy - osin depletion expands the lamellipodium at the expense of the lamellum in Drosophila S2 cells [ 58 ] . ADF / Coﬁlin Proteins of the ADF / coﬁlin family are found in all eukaryotic cells . ADF / coﬁlin mediates disassembly of aged actin networks by binding with a high afﬁnity to ADP – actin ﬁla - ments and inducing their fragmentation [ 44 , 59 – 62 ] . In most cases , ADF / coﬁlin molecules bind cooperatively to actin Current Biology Vol 21 No 14 R562 ﬁlaments , leading to the formation of stretches of actin ﬁla - ments decorated by ADF / coﬁlin [ 59 , 62 ] . Tropomyosin and ADF / Coﬁlin Many isoforms of tropomyosin compete with ADF / coﬁlin for binding to actin ﬁlaments in vitro [ 63 – 65 ] . As a consequence , tropomyosins and ADF / coﬁlin have antagonistic effects in actin - based motile processes [ 56 – 58 ] . Tropomyosin and Fimbrin A recent study showed similar competitive interactions between tropomyosins and ﬁmbrin in ﬁssion yeast . Using Table 1 . F - actin binding proteins in eukaryotes : examples of cooperative / competitive effects and their impact on F - actin’s structure and properties . Protein family Activities / functions Cooperativity / competition Impact on F - actin structure and properties ( + method of detection ) Key references Formin - derived networks ( linear networks ) Formin (cid:1) Nucleates ﬁlaments (cid:1) Processively caps barbed ends (cid:1) Cooperative effect with tropomyosin : barbed - end bound formin recruits tropomyosin to ﬁlaments and formins elongate tropomyosin - decorated ﬁlaments faster (cid:1) Tropomyosin competes with formins for binding to sides of actin ﬁlaments (cid:1) Competes with capping protein to bind actin ﬁlament barbed ends (cid:1) Changes the conformation of actin ﬁlaments when bound at the barbed ends through long - range allosteric interactions ( ﬂuorescence lifetime , anisotropy decay and FRET experiments ) [ 92 – 94 , 99 , 100 , 110 – 112 ] Tropomyosin (cid:1) Binds ﬁlament sides (cid:1) Stabilizes ﬁlaments in vitro (cid:1) Tropomyosin molecules bind cooperatively along actin ﬁlaments ; different isoforms can show cooperative or competitive binding (cid:1) Many cooperative and competitive effects with other proteins ( see corresponding proteins ) (cid:1) Tropomyosin increases ﬁlament stiffness ( light scattering ) [ 47 – 50 ] Type II myosin (cid:1) F - actin motor ; low duty ratio (cid:1) Double - headed (cid:1) Involved in contractile processes (cid:1) ATPase and binding activities increased by speciﬁc tropomyosin isoforms (cid:1) Binding to actin ﬁlaments induces structural and mechanical modiﬁcations ( phosphorescenceanisotropy , electron microscopy ) [ 47 , 48 , 50 , 51 , 54 , 84 – 86 ] Type V myosin (cid:1) F - actin motor ; high duty ratio (cid:1) Double - headed (cid:1) Involved in vesicle and cargo trafﬁcking (cid:1) Afﬁnity and ATPase activity increased by tropomyosin (cid:1) Binding to actin ﬁlaments induces structural and mechanical modiﬁcations ( time - resolved phosphorescenceanisotropy ) [ 51 , 53 , 86 ] Arp2 / 3 complex - derived networks ( branched networks ) Arp2 / 3 complex (cid:1) Nucleates ﬁlaments (cid:1) Induces actin ﬁlament branching (cid:1) Skeletal and non - skeletal tropomyosins compete with Arp2 / 3 complex to prevent nucleation of daughter ﬁlaments (cid:1) Modiﬁes the structure of the mother ﬁlament ( 3D reconstruction for electron tomography ) [ 55 , 56 , 98 ] Fimbrin (cid:1) Binds ﬁlament sides (cid:1) CH domains present in ﬁmbrin bind cooperatively to actin ﬁlaments (cid:1) Competes with tropomyosin in ﬁssion yeast (cid:1) Binding to actin ﬁlaments induces structural modiﬁcations that propagate along actin ﬁlaments ( electron microscopy ) [ 66 , 113 ] ADF / coﬁlin (cid:1) Binds ﬁlament sides (cid:1) Disassembles aged networks by fragmentationofADP – F - actin (cid:1) ADF / coﬁlin molecules bind cooperatively to actin ﬁlaments (cid:1) Competes with most tropomyosin isoforms ; Cooperative binding with several isoforms of tropomyosin (cid:1) Binding to actin ﬁlaments induces structural , mechanical and energetic modiﬁcations ( electron microscopy , FRET , time - resolved phosphorescenceanisotropy , calorimetry , ﬂuorescence microscopy ) [ 59 , 61 , 63 – 65 , 79 – 83 , 90 , 91 ] Type I myosin (cid:1) F - actin motor ; low duty ratio (cid:1) Single - headed (cid:1) Does not bind tropomyosin - decorated actin ﬁlaments (cid:1) None determined [ 51 – 53 ] Review R563 pelleting assays , the authors demonstrated that these two proteins compete for binding to F - actin in vitro [ 66 ] . As a consequence , maintenance of the proper phy - siological ratio of these proteins in vivo is important for their localization to the correct actin - based structures . When these proteins are mistargeted in cells , other ABPs such as ADF / coﬁlin and myosins also fail to localize properly and cannot perform their functions optimally [ 53 , 66 ] . The Different Conformations of an Actin Filament We now discuss physical explanations for these coopera - tive and competitive effects . Competitive binding of different ABPs to actin ﬁlaments due to steric effects along the actin ﬁlament certainly occurs . However , such effects are not sufﬁcient to account for the formation of actin networks of different protein compositions . If we suppose that all of the cytoskeletal proteins obey the law of mass action and if their binding to the same substrate ( the actin ﬁlaments ) results from a chemical equilibrium , then all of the actin ﬁlaments inside a cell should be decorated with a similar ratio of all of the ABPs available . Since this is not what is observed , an alternative ex - planation is suggested in which the properties of the substrate ( the actin ﬁlaments ) are modiﬁed at the time they are being decorated by a reactant ( an ABP ) , with long - range effects that subsequently affect the binding of other ABPs . Evidence for such effects can be found by looking at the structure and mechanical properties of actin ﬁlaments at the molecular scale . Actin ﬁlaments assemble as double - stranded , right - handed helices , with a pitch for a single strand of about 75 nm , which corresponds to approximately 13 subunits along one strand . Actin ﬁlaments are structur - ally polarized , with one dynamic end called the barbed end and the other end called the pointed end [ 1 ] . Impor - tantly , actin ﬁlaments are ﬂexible . First , they can bend along their long axis with a persistence length ( a mechanical parameter that quantiﬁes stiffness ) of about 17 m m [ 67 ] . Second , actin subunits in a ﬁlament can also twist and tilt [ 68 – 70 ] , leading to long - range rearrangements of actin subunits within ﬁlaments along the ﬁlament long axis . Lastly , several actin subdomains , such as the DNAse - I - binding loop , are highly motile . Thus , actin ﬁlaments can adopt multiple conformations ( Figure 2 ) . This is the case for actin ﬁlaments in different nucleotide states ( ATP , ADP - Pi or ADP ) [ 71 , 72 ] , but also for actin ﬁlaments with identical bound nucleotides [ 73 – 76 ] . How energetically favorable each conformation is relative to the others is not known , but it seems probable that Brownian motion helps actin ﬁlaments switch from one state to another , an effect referred to as actin ﬁlament ‘breathing’ [ 77 ] . Actin ﬁlament conformations vary in terms of stability , and this may explain the variations observed in ﬁlament disassembly rates in vitro [ 78 ] . All of these results take on another dimension when considered in the context of the observation that many ABPs exhibit a binding preference for speciﬁc actin ﬁlament conformations in vitro ( Table 1 ) [ 75 ] . These effects imply on the one hand that ABPs might stabilize speciﬁc actin ﬁlament conformations with long - range effects , and on the other hand that ABPs might selectively bind to speciﬁc actin ﬁlament populations that are in their preferred confor - mation . This is the case for ADF / coﬁlin , which has been shown to interact with and stabilize a speciﬁc conforma - tional state of ADP – F - actin [ 59 , 61 , 79 , 80 ] , modifying the mechanical properties of the ﬁlaments [ 81 – 83 ] . Structural modiﬁcation of F - actin induced by an ABP has also been re - ported for other side - binding proteins , such as myosins [ 84 – 86 ] , and for barbed - end binding proteins , such as gel - solin [ 87 – 89 ] . Another important point is that allosteric interactions can have long - range effects on individual actin ﬁlaments , main - taining the ﬁlaments in a speciﬁc conformation over biologi - cally relevant distances [ 75 , 87 ] , although not necessarily over the entire length of the actin ﬁlaments [ 74 ] . Thus , binding a single ABP may be sufﬁcient to modify the struc - ture of the ﬁlament over a long distance [ 83 , 90 ] , explaining why additional ABPs would subsequently bind cooperatively to the ﬁlament to form regions of actin ﬁlaments saturated Current Biology T - mode Mode 1 Mode 2 Mode 3 Mode 4 Mode 5 Figure 2 . Examples of multiple conformations that can be adopted by actin ﬁlaments . This image represents three - dimensional reconstructions of six structural modes observed by electron cryomicroscopy of frozen - hydrated actin ﬁlaments . T - mode represents a tilted state of the subunits within the ﬁlament ( modiﬁed from [ 74 ] ) . Current Biology Vol 21 No 14 R564 with this ABP . This is true for binding of ADF / coﬁlin , and it was originally proposed that the severing of the ﬁlaments happens because the conformation adopted by ADF / coﬁ - lin - decorated ﬁlaments is unstable [ 91 ] . However , this model is contradicted by the observations that actin ﬁlaments fully decorated by ADF / coﬁlin are stable and that fragmentation events occur mainly at low ADF / coﬁlin concentration [ 60 , 90 ] . Therefore , a competing model proposes that the fragmentation events necessary for the disassembly of actin networks happen at the interface between ADF / coﬁ - lin - decorated and non - decorated regions of ﬁlaments , where actin ﬁlaments are forced into an unstable conforma - tion [ 62 , 81 – 83 , 90 ] . A variety of studies suggest that upon nucleation , actin ﬁlaments adopt a certain conformation , which favors binding by a speciﬁc subset of ABPs . In other words , actin ﬁlaments acquire an identity at birth . Long - range structural effects can be imparted on actin ﬁlaments mediated by nucleation by formins and the Arp2 / 3 complex . In a succes - sion of papers , the Nyitrai group used temperature - depen - dent ﬂuorescence resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) and ﬂuorescence anisotropy to demonstrate that the binding of formin at the barbed end of actin ﬁlaments induces modiﬁ - cations to the mechanical and structural properties of the actin ﬁlament [ 75 , 92 – 94 ] . These modiﬁcations could be due in part to the nucleotide state of these formin - derived ﬁlaments , since formins have been shown to accelerate the hydrolysis of the ATP - bound nucleotide during elonga - tion [ 43 , 95 ] , although the latter conclusion remains contro - versial [ 96 , 97 ] . Also , cryo - electron microscopy images of Arp2 / 3 – F - actin branches along with tomographic recon - struction showed that the Arp2 / 3 complex induces confor - mational modiﬁcations in the mother ﬁlament to which they are bound [ 98 ] . Interestingly , these Arp2 / 3 - induced modiﬁcations in the mother ﬁlament seem conserved across species . These related studies demonstrate that conforma - tional modiﬁcations of an actin ﬁlament are induced by nucleators , with potential long - range effects , suggesting that actin ﬁlaments acquire a speciﬁc conformation at the time that they are nucleated . These observations are important for understanding how multiple ABPs collaborate to optimally regulate actin ﬁla - ments . For example , interesting in vitro studies reveal that formins interact with and recruit tropomyosins to actin ﬁla - ments , while tropomyosins have major effects on actin dynamics at the barbed end of the ﬁlament [ 99 , 100 ] . In fact , while Schizosaccharomyces pombe tropomyosin ( SpTm ) on its own inhibits elongation from the barbed end of the actin ﬁlament , it induces a twofold increase in the rate of elongation at the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments nucleated by the formin Cdc12p [ 100 ] . Also , SpTm facilitates the annealing of actin ﬁlaments capped by Cdc12p , suggest - ing that tropomyosin may help to maintain actin ﬁlaments in a similar conformation all along their lengths and therefore favor end - to - end annealing of formin - capped actin ﬁla - ments . These observations were corroborated in vivo by the observation that tropomyosin prefers to re - localize to the formin - nucleated contractile ring during cytokinesis in a ﬁmbrin - null yeast strain in which tropomyosin inappropri - ately associates with endocytic actin patches during inter - phase [ 66 ] . It would be interesting in the future to determine whether collaborative effects between proteins bound to actin ﬁlaments are isoform dependent in more complex eukaryotes . Inﬂuence of the Geometry of the Actin Filament Network Another physical aspect of actin networks that could also inﬂuence the binding properties or the activities of ABPs is the geometry of the networks , which is governed by the nature and the geometrical organization of the proteins that initiate the network [ 101 ] . For example , Nagy et al . [ 102 , 103 ] showed that myosin X , as an obligate dimer , selec - tively walks in a processive manner along actin bundles while avoiding single ﬁlaments . In contrast , other studies show that severing factors , such as villin and ADF / coﬁlin , are prin - cipally active in severing single actin ﬁlaments while having less activity on actin ﬁlament bundles in vitro [ 44 , 104 ] . Actin Filament Identities Dictated by ABPs The results described above indicate that actin ﬁlaments have speciﬁc properties depending on the cellular structures to which they belong . Recent research suggests that many proteins characterized previously as actin - ﬁlament bundling proteins may have an important function in maintaining ﬁla - ment identity . In fact , since many proteins were shown to have crosslinking , decorating or stabilizing effects on actin ﬁlaments in vitro , it has generally been accepted that their principal in vivo functions are to modify the organization and / or mechanical properties of the actin networks . How - ever , as Kovar et al . [ 5 ] discuss in their recent review , it is important to consider whether the observed in vivo pheno - types that result from mutations in genes encoding these proteins are the result of direct or indirect effects . For example , Skau and Kovar [ 66 ] demonstrated elegantly that some phenotypes observed in a ﬁmbrin - null yeast strain are not due to the absence of ﬁmbrin , but rather are due to resulting ectopic mislocalization of tropomyosin to actin patches , where ﬁmbrin normally resides . In fact , in this study , the authors showed that the ﬁmbrin loss - of - function pheno - type can be partially rescued by a loss - of - function mutation of tropomyosin . Thus , this study demonstrated that ﬁmbrin’s most important function in actin patches is not to provide crosslinking between ﬁlaments as previously thought , but rather to maintain the speciﬁc biochemical identity of the actin patches . It will be important in the future to experimen - tally challenge at a cellular level currently held views of the functions of other ABPs . Model for Assembly of Linear and Branched Networks of Appropriate Protein Composition Here we attempt to synthesize the results presented in the previous sections and to formulate a general working model for assembly of branched and linear networks of actin ﬁla - ments of appropriate protein composition ( Figure 3 ) . This model is based on the observations detailed above that : a speciﬁc nucleator can by itself create an actin ﬁlament network of a deﬁned organization and composition ; actin ﬁlaments acquire speciﬁc identities depending on the struc - tures into which they are assembled ; and the afﬁnity of ABPs for actin ﬁlaments is dependent upon the identity of the actin ﬁlament . The ﬁrst point for this model , that the composition of a speciﬁc actin ﬁlament network is mainly determined by the type of actin nucleator that generates it , was demonstrated in vitro for Arp2 / 3 - derived networks in yeast [ 45 ] . In other words , activation of one kind of nucleator in a spatially limited area of its cytoplasm is sufﬁcient to specify which proteins will associate with the resulting network and will dictate the network’s properties ( Figure 3 ) . Review R565 In areas of cells in which formins are activated , linear arrays of actin ﬁlaments are nucleated [ 23 , 24 ] . Because formins establish the local conformation of actin ﬁlaments [ 75 , 92 – 94 ] , the ﬁlaments acquire their speciﬁc identity at the moment they are nucleated ( Figure 3 , blue ﬁlaments ) . As a consequence , proteins that bind to actin ﬁlaments with this identity will interact with these structures , while those that do not bind , such as the proteins that localize with branched networks , will not interact with these struc - tures . Since formins actively cooperate with tropomyosins in vitro [ 99 , 100 ] , we propose that formins are key factors that target tropomyosins to linear arrays of actin ﬁlaments in order to maintain ﬁlaments with this identity . In areas of eukaryotic cells in which NPFs activate the Arp2 / 3 complex , actin ﬁlaments are nucleated and organized into branched arrays [ 12 , 13 ] . Since the Arp2 / 3 complex has also been shown to modify the structure of the actin ﬁlaments [ 98 ] , we propose that these ﬁlaments also acquire a speciﬁc iden - tity at the time they are nucleated , distinct from the identity of actin ﬁlaments in linear networks ( Figure 3 , red ﬁlaments ) . This identity allows a different set of ABPs to associate with actin ﬁlaments in branched networks , and to antagonize binding of other ABPs , such as the tropomyosins [ 55 , 56 ] . This model is well adapted for yeast , wherein actin ﬁla - ments acquire a speciﬁc identity upon nucleation and main - tain this identity until they age or disassemble . While the model also seems to ﬁt well with more complex cell types , it has been proposed that in some cases one kind of actin ﬁlament network might evolve from a pre - existing different kind of network , as seen , for example , with lamella and lamellipodia [ 11 , 19 , 20 ] . Recent work demonstrates that , after a period of lamellipodium protrusion , a period of retrac - tion follows , wherein ﬁlaments localizing at the leading edge of cells suddenly become substrates for type II myosins and condense rearward as transverse arcs in the lamella [ 19 , 20 , 54 ] . It seems that these arcs could arise from an exist - ing sub - population of unbranched actin ﬁlaments nucleated by formins within the lamellipodium [ 54 , 105 ] , or be derived from branched networks [ 19 ] . In the latter case , our model predicts that branched ﬁlaments of the lamellipodium need to be progressively debranched in order to become progres - sively accessible to tropomyosins and to change their identities , therefore becoming accessible to a different set of ABPs , such as type II myosins for contraction of the network , and to crosslinkers , such as a - actinin . What might trigger the de - branching of the network is still unclear , but one hypothesis is that ATP hydrolysis by Arp2 and possibly Arp3 could be involved [ 56 ] . Another hypothesis is that addi - tional factors , such as the coﬁlin homolog GMF , might bind to the Arp2 / 3 complex and destabilize the branches [ 106 ] . Conclusions and Future Perspectives In this review , we attempted to highlight the fact that the properties of actin ﬁlaments within distinct networks are not identical and that this may be due to different actin ﬁla - ment conformations adopted at the time of nucleation and then stabilized by certain binding partners . So far , most available information about biochemical properties of actin Arp2 / 3 - derived networks Formin - derived networks Plasma membrane Actin monomer Actin filament ( different colors represent different identities ) Formin Arp2 / 3 complex Tropomyosin Arp2 / 3 ADF / cofilin Fimbrin Type I myosins Type V myosins Type II myosin Capping protein Nucleation promoting factor NPF NPF ADF / cofilin Fimbrin Type I myosins Capping protein Type V myosins Type II myosin Nucleation and identity acquisition Nucleation and identity acquisition Tropomyosin maintains filament identity Current Biology Figure 3 . Model for the formation of Arp2 / 3 - nucleated ( branched ) and formin - nucleated ( linear ) networks of actin ﬁlaments of distinct protein composition in eukaryotic cells . In this model , actin ﬁlaments nucleated by formins ( right ) and the Apr2 / 3 complex ( left ) are generated with distinct conformations , therefore acquiring speciﬁc identities at birth ( represented by the different colors of the ﬁlaments ) . Tropomyosin speciﬁcally decorates formin - nucleated actin ﬁlaments and maintains their identity all along their lengths . Arp2 / 3 - and formin / tropomyosin - derived networks subsequently become accessible to speciﬁc subsets of ABPs . Current Biology Vol 21 No 14 R566 ﬁlaments and their associated proteins has been obtained using simple systems containing a limited number of factors . Modiﬁcations to ﬁlament conformation and emergent prop - erties resulting from combined effects of multiple different ABPs have not been considered . Also , how actin ﬁlament assembly and disassembly rates are affected by their struc - tural conformation is not known . Therefore , complex models involving multiple proteins but based on biochemical param - eters measured in simple systems should be interpreted with care . To build more relevant models in the future it will be important to develop approaches to assay key system parameters , such as ﬁlament conformation and assembly and disassembly rates resulting from interactions with the full panoply of ABPs present in cells . Three approaches seem to be particularly important in order to reach this goal . First , more structural and mechan - ical information about actin ﬁlaments when they are associ - ated with binding proteins is needed . Presently , obtaining structural information about actin ﬁlaments in cells is probably not possible . However , obtaining more information in vitro , for example with the use of cryo - electron micros - copy techniques , seems attainable . Such an effort should help us to better understand cooperative and competitive interactions among ABPs . Second , powerful reconstituted systems mimicking actin - based cellular processes are needed . Many important ﬁndings during the past 20 years have come from such systems , using a bottom - up approach with puriﬁed proteins or a top - down approach with cyto - plasmic extracts , wherein many if not all the binding partners are present in solution [ 107 – 109 ] . Third , more genetic and RNAi studies , like the one described above involving tropo - myosin and ﬁmbrin [ 66 ] , to test functional relationships between different ABPs in vivo , are required . These three approaches will provide powerful tests of current models and will yield new insights into the mechanisms that estab - lish actin ﬁlament identities . Acknowledgments We thank Shawna Reed for her critical reading of the manuscript , and Edward Egelman and Vitold Galkin for their comments and help with Figure 2 . This work was supported by NIH grant R37 GM42759 to D . G . D . and by Fondation pour la Recherche Me´dicale ( SPE20070709969 ) and Human Frontier Science Program ( LT00565 / 2008 - L ) fellowships to A . M . References 1 . Pollard , T . D . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 . 2 . Bugyi , B . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2010 ) . Control of actin ﬁlament treadmilling in cell motility . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 39 , 449 – 470 . 3 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2003 ) . Actin assembly and endocytosis : from yeast to mammals . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 287 – 332 . 4 . Kaksonen , M . , Toret , C . P . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2006 ) . Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 404 – 414 . 5 . Kovar , D . R . , Sirotkin , V . , and Lord , M . ( 2010 ) . Three’s company : the ﬁssion yeast actin cytoskeleton . Trends Cell Biol . 21 , 177 – 187 . 6 . Parsons , J . T . , Horwitz , A . R . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2010 ) . Cell adhesion : integrating cytoskeletal dynamics and cellular tension . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 633 – 643 . 7 . Pollard , T . D . , Blanchoin , L . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) . Molecular mecha - nisms controlling actin ﬁlament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 , 545 – 576 . 8 . Moseley , J . B . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2006 ) . The yeast actin cytoskeleton : from cellular function to biochemical mechanism . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 70 , 605 – 645 . 9 . Pollard , T . D . ( 2007 ) . Regulation of actin ﬁlament assembly by Arp2 / 3 complex and formins . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 36 , 451 – 477 . 10 . Campellone , K . G . , and Welch , M . D . ( 2010 ) . A nucleator arms race : cellular control of actin assembly . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 237 – 251 . 11 . Chhabra , E . S . , and Higgs , H . N . ( 2007 ) . The many faces of actin : matching assembly factors with cellular structures . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 1110 – 1121 . 12 . Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1999 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depoly - merizing factor / coﬁlin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin ﬁlament array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1009 – 1026 . 13 . Young , M . E . , Cooper , J . A . , and Bridgman , P . C . ( 2004 ) . Yeast actin patches are networks of branched actin ﬁlaments . J . Cell Biol . 166 , 629 – 635 . 14 . Derivery , E . , Sousa , C . , Gautier , J . J . , Lombard , B . , Loew , D . , and Gautreau , A . ( 2009 ) . The Arp2 / 3 activator WASH controls the ﬁssion of endosomes through a large multiprotein complex . Dev . Cell 17 , 712 – 723 . 15 . Campellone , K . G . , Webb , N . J . , Znameroski , E . A . , and Welch , M . D . ( 2008 ) . WHAMM is an Arp2 / 3 complex activator that binds microtubules and functions in ER to Golgi transport . Cell 134 , 148 – 161 . 16 . Lechler , T . , Jonsdottir , G . A . , Klee , S . K . , Pellman , D . , and Li , R . ( 2001 ) . Atwo - tieredmechanismbywhichCdc42controlsthelocalizationandacti - vation of an Arp2 / 3 - activating motor complex in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 261 – 270 . 17 . Sirotkin , V . , Beltzner , C . C . , Marchand , J . B . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2005 ) . Inter - actionsofWASp , myosin - I , andverprolinwithArp2 / 3complexduringactin patch assembly in ﬁssion yeast . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 637 – 648 . 18 . Humphries , C . L . , Balcer , H . I . , D’Agostino , J . L . , Winsor , B . , Drubin , D . G . , Barnes , G . , Andrews , B . J . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2002 ) . Direct regulation of Arp2 / 3 complex activity and function by the actin binding protein coronin . J . Cell Biol . 159 , 993 – 1004 . 19 . Hotulainen , P . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2006 ) . Stress ﬁbers are generated by two distinct actin assembly mechanisms in motile cells . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 383 – 394 . 20 . Burnette , D . T . , Manley , S . , Sengupta , P . , Sougrat , R . , Davidson , M . W . , Ka - char , B . , and Lippincott - Schwartz , J . ( 2011 ) . A role for actin arcs in the leading - edge advance of migrating cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 371 – 381 . 21 . Gupton , S . L . , Eisenmann , K . , Alberts , A . S . , and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2007 ) . mDia2 regulates actin and focal adhesion dynamics and organiza - tion in the lamella for efﬁcient epithelial cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 3475 – 3487 . 22 . Sagot , I . , Rodal , A . A . , Moseley , J . , Goode , B . L . , and Pellman , D . ( 2002 ) . An actinnucleationmechanismmediatedbyBni1andproﬁlin . Nat . CellBiol . 4 , 626 – 631 . 23 . Pruyne , D . , Evangelista , M . , Yang , C . , Bi , E . , Zigmond , S . , Bretscher , A . , and Boone , C . ( 2002 ) . Roleofforminsinactinassembly : nucleationandbarbed - end association . Science 297 , 612 – 615 . 24 . Higashida , C . , Miyoshi , T . , Fujita , A . , Oceguera - Yanez , F . , Monypenny , J . , Andou , Y . , Narumiya , S . , and Watanabe , N . ( 2004 ) . Actin polymerization - drivenmolecularmovementofmDia1inlivingcells . Science 303 , 2007 – 2010 . 25 . Ponti , A . , Machacek , M . , Gupton , S . L . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . , and Danuser , G . ( 2004 ) . Two distinct actin networks drive the protrusion of migrating cells . Science 305 , 1782 – 1786 . 26 . Mattila , P . K . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2008 ) . Filopodia : molecular architecture and cellular functions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 446 – 454 . 27 . Svitkina , T . M . , Bulanova , E . A . , Chaga , O . Y . , Vignjevic , D . M . , Kojima , S . , Vasiliev , J . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Mechanism of ﬁlopodia initiation by reorganization of a dendritic network . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 409 – 421 . 28 . Schirenbeck , A . , Arasada , R . , Bretschneider , T . , Schleicher , M . , andFaix , J . ( 2005 ) . Formins and VASPs may co - operate in the formation of ﬁlopodia . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 33 , 1256 – 1259 . 29 . Amberg , D . C . ( 1998 ) . Three - dimensional imaging of the yeast actin cyto - skeleton through the budding cell cycle . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 3259 – 3262 . 30 . Huckaba , T . M . , Gay , A . C . , Pantalena , L . F . , Yang , H . C . , andPon , L . A . ( 2004 ) . Livecellimagingoftheassembly , disassembly , andactincable - dependent movement of endosomesand actin patchesin the budding yeast , Saccha - romyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 519 – 530 . 31 . Toshima , J . Y . , Toshima , J . , Kaksonen , M . , Martin , A . C . , King , D . S . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2006 ) . Spatial dynamics of receptor - mediated endocytic trafﬁcking in budding yeast revealed by using ﬂuorescent alpha - factor derivatives . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 5793 – 5798 . 32 . Yeh , B . J . , Rutigliano , R . J . , Deb , A . , Bar - Sagi , D . , and Lim , W . A . ( 2007 ) . Rewiring cellular morphology pathways with synthetic guanine nucleotide exchange factors . Nature 447 , 596 – 600 . 33 . Levskaya , A . , Weiner , O . D . , Lim , W . A . , and Voigt , C . A . ( 2009 ) . Spatiotem - poral control of cell signalling using a light - switchable protein interaction . Nature 461 , 997 – 1001 . 34 . Hawkins , M . , Pope , B . , Maciver , S . K . , andWeeds , A . G . ( 1993 ) . Humanactin depolymerizing factor mediates a pH - sensitive destruction of actin ﬁla - ments . Biochemistry 32 , 9985 – 9993 . 35 . Khurana , S . , and George , S . P . ( 2008 ) . Regulation of cell structure and function by actin - binding proteins : villin’s perspective . FEBS Lett . 582 , 2128 – 2139 . 36 . Dabiri , G . A . , Sanger , J . M . , Portnoy , D . A . , and Southwick , F . S . ( 1990 ) . Listeria monocytogenes moves rapidly through the host - cell cytoplasm by inducing directional actin assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 87 , 6068 – 6072 . Review R567 37 . Tilney , L . G . , Connelly , P . S . , and Portnoy , D . A . ( 1990 ) . Actin ﬁlament nucleation by the bacterial pathogen , Listeria monocytogenes . J . Cell Biol . 111 , 2979 – 2988 . 38 . Theriot , J . A . , Mitchison , T . J . , Tilney , L . G . , andPortnoy , D . A . ( 1992 ) . Therate of actin - based motility of intracellular Listeria monocytogenes equals the rate of actin polymerization . Nature 357 , 257 – 260 . 39 . Theriot , J . A . , Rosenblatt , J . , Portnoy , D . A . , Goldschmidt - Clermont , P . J . , andMitchison , T . J . ( 1994 ) . Involvementofproﬁlinintheactin - basedmotility of L . monocytogenes in cells and in cell - free extracts . Cell 76 , 505 – 517 . 40 . Welch , M . D . , Iwamatsu , A . , andMitchison , T . J . ( 1997 ) . Actinpolymerization is induced by Arp2 / 3 protein complex at the surface of Listeria monocyto - genes . Nature 385 , 265 – 269 . 41 . Welch , M . D . , Rosenblatt , J . , Skoble , J . , Portnoy , D . A . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1998 ) . Interaction of human Arp2 / 3 complex and the Listeria monocyto - genes ActA protein in actin ﬁlament nucleation . Science 281 , 105 – 108 . 42 . Cameron , L . A . , Footer , M . J . , vanOudenaarden , A . , andTheriot , J . A . ( 1999 ) . Motility of ActA protein - coated microspheres driven by actin polymeriza - tion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 4908 – 4913 . 43 . Romero , S . , Le Clainche , C . , Didry , D . , Egile , C . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2004 ) . Forminisaprocessivemotorthatrequiresproﬁlintoaccelerate actin assembly and associated ATP hydrolysis . Cell 119 , 419 – 429 . 44 . Michelot , A . , Berro , J . , Guerin , C . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Staiger , C . J . , Martiel , J . L . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2007 ) . Actin - ﬁlament stochastic dynamics mediated by ADF / coﬁlin . Curr . Biol . 17 , 825 – 833 . 45 . Michelot , A . , Costanzo , M . , Sarkeshik , A . , Boone , C . , Yates , J . R . , 3rd , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2010 ) . Reconstitution and protein composition analysis of endocytic actin patches . Curr . Biol . 20 , 1890 – 1899 . 46 . Brawley , C . M . , andRock , R . S . ( 2009 ) . Unconventionalmyosintrafﬁcincells reveals a selective actin cytoskeleton . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 9685 – 9690 . 47 . Gunning , P . W . , Schevzov , G . , Kee , A . J . , and Hardeman , E . C . ( 2005 ) . Tropomyosin isoforms : divining rods for actin cytoskeleton function . Trends Cell Biol . 15 , 333 – 341 . 48 . Wang , C . L . , and Coluccio , L . M . ( 2010 ) . New insights into the regulation of theactincytoskeletonbytropomyosin . Int . Rev . CellMol . Biol . 281 , 91 – 128 . 49 . Pruyne , D . ( 2008 ) . Tropomyosinfunctioninyeast . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 644 , 168 – 186 . 50 . Lindberg , U . , Schutt , C . E . , Goldman , R . D . , Nyakern - Meazza , M . , Hillberg , L . , Rathje , L . S . , and Grenklo , S . ( 2008 ) . Tropomyosins regulate the impact of actin binding proteins on actin ﬁlaments . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 644 , 223 – 231 . 51 . Ostap , E . M . ( 2008 ) . Tropomyosins as discriminators of myosin function . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 644 , 273 – 282 . 52 . Tang , N . , and Ostap , E . M . ( 2001 ) . Motor domain - dependent localization of myo1b ( myr - 1 ) . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1131 – 1135 . 53 . Clayton , J . E . , Sammons , M . R . , Stark , B . C . , Hodges , A . R . , and Lord , M . ( 2010 ) . Differential regulation of unconventional ﬁssion yeast myosins via the actin track . Curr . Biol . 20 , 1423 – 1431 . 54 . Tojkander , S . , Gateva , G . , Schevzov , G . , Hotulainen , P . , Naumanen , P . , Martin , C . , Gunning , P . W . , andLappalainen , P . ( 2011 ) . Amolecularpathway for myosin II recruitment to stress ﬁbers . Curr . Biol . 21 , 539 – 550 . 55 . Blanchoin , L . , Pollard , T . D . , and Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . ( 2001 ) . Inhibi - tion of the Arp2 / 3 complex - nucleated actin polymerization and branch formation by tropomyosin . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1300 – 1304 . 56 . Bugyi , B . , Didry , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2010 ) . How tropomyosin regulates lamellipodial actin - based motility : a combined biochemical and reconsti - tuted motility approach . EMBO J . 29 , 14 – 26 . 57 . Gupton , S . L . , Anderson , K . L . , Kole , T . P . , Fischer , R . S . , Ponti , A . , Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . , Danuser , G . , Fowler , V . M . , Wirtz , D . , Hanein , D . , and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2005 ) . Cell migration without a lamellipodium : translationofactindynamicsintocellmovementmediatedbytropomyosin . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 619 – 631 . 58 . Iwasa , J . H . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2007 ) . Spatial and temporal relationships between actin - ﬁlament nucleation , capping , and disassembly . Curr . Biol . 17 , 395 – 406 . 59 . Blanchoin , L . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) . Mechanism of interaction of Acanthamoeba actophorin ( ADF / Coﬁlin ) with actin ﬁlaments . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 15538 – 15546 . 60 . Andrianantoandro , E . , andPollard , T . D . ( 2006 ) . Mechanismofactinﬁlament turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / coﬁlin . Mol . Cell 24 , 13 – 23 . 61 . Ressad , F . , Didry , D . , Xia , G . X . , Hong , Y . , Chua , N . H . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1998 ) . Kineticanalysisoftheinteractionofactin - depolymeriz - ing factor ( ADF ) / coﬁlin with G - and F - actins . Comparison of plant and human ADFs and effect of phosphorylation . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 20894 – 20902 . 62 . Suarez , C . , Roland , J . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Kang , H . , McCullough , B . R . , Reymann , A . C . , Guerin , C . , Martiel , J . L . , DeLaCruz , E . M . , andBlanchoin , L . ( 2011 ) . Coﬁlin tunes the nucleotide state of actin ﬁlaments and severs at bare and decorated segment boundaries . Curr . Biol . 21 , 862 – 868 . 63 . Bernstein , B . W . , andBamburg , J . R . ( 1982 ) . TropomyosinbindingtoF - actin protectstheF - actinfromdisassemblybybrainactin - depolymerizingfactor ( ADF ) . Cell Motil . 2 , 1 – 8 . 64 . Nishida , E . , Maekawa , S . , and Sakai , H . ( 1984 ) . Coﬁlin , a protein in porcine brainthatbindstoactinﬁlamentsandinhibitstheirinteractionswithmyosinandtropomyosin . Biochemistry 23 , 5307 – 5313 . 65 . Kuhn , T . B . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2008 ) . Tropomyosin and ADF / coﬁlin as collaborators and competitors . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 644 , 232 – 249 . 66 . Skau , C . T . , and Kovar , D . R . ( 2010 ) . Fimbrin and tropomyosin competition regulates endocytosis and cytokinesis kinetics in ﬁssion yeast . Curr . Biol . 20 , 1415 – 1422 . 67 . Ott , A . , Magnasco , M . , Simon , A . , andLibchaber , A . ( 1993 ) . Measurementof the persistence length of polymerized actin using ﬂuorescence micros - copy . Phys . Rev . E Stat . Phys . Plasmas Fluids Relat . Interdiscip . Topics 48 , R1642 – R1645 . 68 . Egelman , E . H . , Francis , N . , and DeRosier , D . J . ( 1982 ) . F - actinisahelixwith a random variable twist . Nature 298 , 131 – 135 . 69 . Galkin , V . E . , VanLoock , M . S . , Orlova , A . , and Egelman , E . H . ( 2002 ) . A new internal mode in F - actin helps explain the remarkable evolutionary conser - vation of actin’s sequence and structure . Curr . Biol . 12 , 570 – 575 . 70 . Reisler , E . , andEgelman , E . H . ( 2007 ) . Actinstructureandfunction : whatwe still do not understand . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 36133 – 36137 . 71 . Belmont , L . D . , Orlova , A . , Drubin , D . G . , andEgelman , E . H . ( 1999 ) . Achange in actin conformation associated with ﬁlament instability after Pi release . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 29 – 34 . 72 . Murakami , K . , Yasunaga , T . , Noguchi , T . Q . , Gomibuchi , Y . , Ngo , K . X . , Uyeda , T . Q . , and Wakabayashi , T . ( 2010 ) . Structural basis for actin assembly , activation of ATP hydrolysis , and delayed phosphate release . Cell 143 , 275 – 287 . 73 . Kueh , H . Y . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2009 ) . Structural plasticity in actin and tubulin polymer dynamics . Science 325 , 960 – 963 . 74 . Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , Schroder , G . F . , andEgelman , E . H . ( 2010 ) . Structural polymorphism in F - actin . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 17 , 1318 – 1323 . 75 . Hild , G . , Bugyi , B . , andNyitrai , M . ( 2010 ) . Conformationaldynamicsofactin : effectors and implications for biological function . Cytoskeleton 67 , 609 – 629 . 76 . Oda , T . , and Maeda , Y . ( 2010 ) . Multiple conformations of F - actin . Structure 18 , 761 – 767 . 77 . Cao , W . , Goodarzi , J . P . , and De La Cruz , E . M . ( 2006 ) . Energetics and kinetics of cooperative coﬁlin - actin ﬁlament interactions . J . Mol . Biol . 361 , 257 – 267 . 78 . Kueh , H . Y . , Brieher , W . M . , andMitchison , T . J . ( 2008 ) . Dynamicstabilization of actin ﬁlaments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 16531 – 16536 . 79 . McGough , A . , Pope , B . , Chiu , W . , and Weeds , A . ( 1997 ) . Coﬁlin changes the twist of F - actin : implications for actin ﬁlament dynamics and cellular function . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 771 – 781 . 80 . Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , Lukoyanova , N . , Wriggers , W . , and Egelman , E . H . ( 2001 ) . Actin depolymerizing factor stabilizes an existing state of F - actin and can change the tilt of F - actin subunits . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 75 – 86 . 81 . Prochniewicz , E . , Janson , N . , Thomas , D . D . , and De la Cruz , E . M . ( 2005 ) . Coﬁlin increases the torsional ﬂexibility and dynamics of actin ﬁlaments . J . Mol . Biol . 353 , 990 – 1000 . 82 . McCullough , B . R . , Blanchoin , L . , Martiel , J . L . , and De la Cruz , E . M . ( 2008 ) . Coﬁlin increases the bending ﬂexibility of actin ﬁlaments : implications for severing and cell mechanics . J . Mol . Biol . 381 , 550 – 558 . 83 . DeLaCruz , E . M . ( 2009 ) . Howcoﬁlinseversanactinﬁlament . Biophys . Rev . 1 , 51 – 59 . 84 . Prochniewicz , E . , and Thomas , D . D . ( 1997 ) . Perturbations of functional interactions with myosin induce long - range allosteric and cooperative structural changes in actin . Biochemistry 36 , 12845 – 12853 . 85 . Orlova , A . , andEgelman , E . H . ( 1997 ) . Cooperativerigorbindingofmyosinto actin is a function of F - actin structure . J . Mol . Biol . 265 , 469 – 474 . 86 . Prochniewicz , E . , Chin , H . F . , Henn , A . , Hannemann , D . E . , Olivares , A . O . , Thomas , D . D . , and De La Cruz , E . M . ( 2010 ) . Myosin isoform determines the conformational dynamics and cooperativity of actin ﬁlaments in the strongly bound actomyosin complex . J . Mol . Biol . 396 , 501 – 509 . 87 . Orlova , A . , Prochniewicz , E . , andEgelman , E . H . ( 1995 ) . Structuraldynamics of F - actin : II . Cooperativity in structural transitions . J . Mol . Biol . 245 , 598 – 607 . 88 . Prochniewicz , E . , Zhang , Q . , Janmey , P . A . , and Thomas , D . D . ( 1996 ) . CooperativityinF - actin : bindingofgelsolinatthebarbedendaffectsstruc - ture and dynamics of the whole ﬁlament . J . Mol . Biol . 260 , 756 – 766 . 89 . Khaitlina , S . , and Hinssen , H . ( 1997 ) . Conformational changes in actin induced by its interaction with gelsolin . Biophys . J . 73 , 929 – 937 . 90 . De La Cruz , E . M . ( 2005 ) . Coﬁlin binding to muscle and non - muscle actin ﬁlaments : isoform - dependent cooperative interactions . J . Mol . Biol . 346 , 557 – 564 . 91 . Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , VanLoock , M . S . , Shvetsov , A . , Reisler , E . , andEgel - man , E . H . ( 2003 ) . ADF / coﬁlin use an intrinsic mode of F - actin instability to disrupt actin ﬁlaments . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 1057 – 1066 . Current Biology Vol 21 No 14 R568 92 . Papp , G . , Bugyi , B . , Ujfalusi , Z . , Barko , S . , Hild , G . , Somogyi , B . , andNyitrai , M . ( 2006 ) . Conformational changes in actin ﬁlaments induced by formin binding to the barbed end . Biophys . J . 91 , 2564 – 2572 . 93 . Bugyi , B . , Papp , G . , Hild , G . , Lorinczy , D . , Nevalainen , E . M . , Lappalainen , P . , Somogyi , B . , and Nyitrai , M . ( 2006 ) . Formins regulate actin ﬁlament ﬂexibility through long range allosteric interactions . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 10727 – 10736 . 94 . Kupi , T . , Grof , P . , Nyitrai , M . , and Belagyi , J . ( 2009 ) . The uncoupling of the effects of formins on the local and global dynamics of actin ﬁlaments . Biophys . J . 96 , 2901 – 2911 . 95 . Romero , S . , Didry , D . , Larquet , E . , Boisset , N . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2007 ) . How ATP hydrolysis controls ﬁlament assembly from proﬁlin - actin : implication for formin processivity . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 8435 – 8445 . 96 . Kovar , D . R . , Harris , E . S . , Mahaffy , R . , Higgs , H . N . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2006 ) . ControloftheassemblyofATP - andADP - actinbyforminsandproﬁlin . Cell 124 , 423 – 435 . 97 . Paul , A . S . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2009 ) . Energetic requirements for processive elongation of actin ﬁlaments by FH1FH2 - formins . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 12533 – 12540 . 98 . Rouiller , I . , Xu , X . P . , Amann , K . J . , Egile , C . , Nickell , S . , Nicastro , D . , Li , R . , Pollard , T . D . , Volkmann , N . , and Hanein , D . ( 2008 ) . The structural basis of actin ﬁlament branching by the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 887 – 895 . 99 . Wawro , B . , Greenﬁeld , N . J . , Wear , M . A . , Cooper , J . A . , Higgs , H . N . , and Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . ( 2007 ) . Tropomyosin regulates elongation by formin at the fast - growing end of the actin ﬁlament . Biochemistry 46 , 8146 – 8155 . 100 . Skau , C . T . , Neidt , E . M . , and Kovar , D . R . ( 2009 ) . Role of tropomyosin in for - min - mediated contractile ring assembly in ﬁssion yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 2160 – 2173 . 101 . Reymann , A . C . , Martiel , J . L . , Cambier , T . , Blanchoin , L . , Boujemaa - Pater - ski , R . , and Thery , M . ( 2010 ) . Nucleation geometry governs ordered actin networks structures . Nat . Mater . 9 , 827 – 832 . 102 . Nagy , S . , Ricca , B . L . , Norstrom , M . F . , Courson , D . S . , Brawley , C . M . , Smith - back , P . A . , and Rock , R . S . ( 2008 ) . A myosin motor that selects bundled actin for motility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 9616 – 9620 . 103 . Nagy , S . , and Rock , R . S . ( 2010 ) . Structured post - IQ domain governs selec - tivityofmyosinXforfascin - actinbundles . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 26608 – 26617 . 104 . Huang , S . , Robinson , R . C . , Gao , L . Y . , Matsumoto , T . , Brunet , A . , Blanchoin , L . , and Staiger , C . J . ( 2005 ) . Arabidopsis VILLIN1 generates actin ﬁlament cables that are resistant to depolymerization . Plant Cell 17 , 486 – 501 . 105 . Yang , C . , Czech , L . , Gerboth , S . , Kojima , S . , Scita , G . , and Svitkina , T . ( 2007 ) . Novel roles of formin mDia2 in lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia formation in motile cells . PLoS Biol . 5 , e317 . 106 . Gandhi , M . , Smith , B . A . , Bovellan , M . , Paavilainen , V . , Daugherty - Clarke , K . , Gelles , J . , Lappalainen , P . , andGoode , B . L . ( 2010 ) . GMFisacoﬁlinhomolog that binds Arp2 / 3 complex to stimulate ﬁlament debranching and inhibit actin nucleation . Curr . Biol . 20 , 861 – 867 . 107 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . , andCarlier , M . F . ( 1999 ) . Reconsti - tution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 , 613 – 616 . 108 . Heald , R . , Tournebize , R . , Blank , T . , Sandaltzopoulos , R . , Becker , P . , Hyman , A . , and Karsenti , E . ( 1996 ) . Self - organization of microtubules into bipolar spindles around artiﬁcial chromosomes in Xenopus egg extracts . Nature 382 , 420 – 425 . 109 . Wu , M . , Huang , B . , Graham , M . , Raimondi , A . , Heuser , J . E . , Zhuang , X . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2010 ) . Coupling between clathrin - dependent endocytic budding and F - BAR - dependent tubulation in a cell - free system . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 902 – 908 . 110 . Harris , E . S . , Li , F . , and Higgs , H . N . ( 2004 ) . The mouse formin , FRLalpha , slows actin ﬁlament barbed end elongation , competes with capping protein , accelerates polymerization from monomers , and severs ﬁlaments . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 20076 – 20087 . 111 . Moseley , J . B . , Sagot , I . , Manning , A . L . , Xu , Y . , Eck , M . J . , Pellman , D . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2004 ) . A conserved mechanism for Bni1 - and mDia1 - induced actin assembly and dual regulation of Bni1 by Bud6 and proﬁlin . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 896 – 907 . 112 . Michelot , A . , Guerin , C . , Huang , S . , Ingouff , M . , Richard , S . , Rodiuc , N . , Staiger , C . J . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2005 ) . The formin homology 1 domain modulates the actin nucleation and bundling activity of Arabidopsis FORMIN1 . Plant Cell 17 , 2296 – 2313 . 113 . Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , Cherepanova , O . , Lebart , M . C . , and Egelman , E . H . ( 2008 ) . High - resolution cryo - EM structure of the F - actin - ﬁmbrin / plastin ABD2 complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 1494 – 1498 . Review R569