“Guilty of Talking Too Much” : How Psychotherapists Gamify Therapy Elina Tochilnikova Northeastern University United States Amrit Patnaik Northeastern University United States Ghada Alsebayel Northeastern University United States Uttkarsh Narayan Northeastern University United States Andrew Coeytaux Northeastern University United States Valeria Ramdin Northeastern University United States Miso Kim Northeastern University United States Casper Harteveld Northeastern University United States Abstract Traditionally , game designers have driven the development pro - cess of psychotherapeutic games with psychotherapists playing a consultant role . In contrast , our study explores psychotherapists in - dependently designing digitally gamified psychotherapy . Our work - shop participants consisted of six psychotherapists who created gamified digital therapies with the design prompt of anxiety disor - der . We analyze the resulting six prototypes from a game design and psychotherapy perspective . We present insights into strate - gies for digitally gamifying therapy and identify challenges and opportunities for the future of gamified psychotherapy , grounded in the experiences of psychotherapists designing such therapies . This study also reflects on the use of user - friendly development tools for independently curating gamified digital therapies , especially by non - technical users such as psychotherapists . CCS Concepts • Human - centered computing → User studies ; Participatory design ; Collaborative and social computing design and evaluation methods . Keywords Game design , games for health , mental health , anxiety disorder , meta - design , research - through - design , digital psychotherapy ACM Reference Format : Elina Tochilnikova , Amrit Patnaik , Ghada Alsebayel , Uttkarsh Narayan , Andrew Coeytaux , Valeria Ramdin , Miso Kim , and Casper Harteveld . 2022 . “Guilty of Talking Too Much” : How Psychotherapists Gamify Therapy . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’22 ) , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 17 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517437 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspecificpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA © 2022 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9157 - 3 / 22 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517437 1 Introduction The prevalence of mental illness is increasing globally [ 117 ] and in - person psychotherapy is considered the standard treatment for those suffering from mental illness [ 67 ] . Although this method is accepted , it bears limitations : ( 1 ) As psychotherapy is expensive [ 123 ] and insurance acceptance rates for mental health services are limited [ 13 ] , access issues remain ; ( 2 ) Commuting to in - person therapy sessions is challenging for those with mobility , health , and transportation issues ; ( 3 ) There is stigma against psychiatry [ 48 ] , and by extension against in - person psychotherapy , especially amongst certain demographics including older adults [ 31 ] ; ( 4 ) As in - person therapy requires the psychotherapist to assume the central role of leading the progression of the therapeutic process , this makes the success of the therapy and the experience of the patient almost purely dependent on the caliber and abilities of the therapist [ 26 ] ; and ( 5 ) Due to the unpredictable nature of mental illness episodes , there is often a time - gap between patient need and treatment access . These limitations have only become more evident during COVID - 19 . The advent of a global quarantine requirement confined individ - uals to their homes , thereby increasing the degree of social isolation and rendering most psychotherapy services inaccessible . Moreover , navigating life during the pandemic characterized by loss , death , and hysteria , amplified mental health issues [ 28 ] . As a result , a greater need for remotely accessible psychotherapy has emerged . Remote psychotherapy has been explored as both a replacement [ 99 ] and a complement for standard treatment [ 7 , 33 , 34 ] . While successful in increasing accessibility [ 7 ] , remote psychotherapy in - troduces new challenges , particularly pertaining to engagement and patient acceptance [ 35 , 87 ] . To overcome obstacles of engagement and acceptance , digital games have been proposed as a medium to deliver psychotherapy [ 60 ] . Gamified psychotherapy involves using the medium of games to administer therapy . Gamified psychotherapy may remove the stigma of being a ‘treatment for mental health’ , and allow the patient to approach the exercise from a positive disposition [ 23 ] , thereby effectively eliminating barriers to entry . When gamified therapy is presented in a digital format , it consistently delivers the same level of experiential therapy in every iteration . Games maintain player engagement over an extended time [ 62 ] and sustained consistency in therapy correlates with positive outcomes [ 93 ] . CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Tochilnikova , et al . Gamified psychotherapy has been explored primarily through participatory design approaches [ 29 , 84 , 95 ] , where psychothera - pists are invited as end - users or stakeholders to collaborate with technology experts during the design process . In a co - design pro - cess , psychotherapists iterate with experienced game designers and HCI professionals to co - create digital interventions for a particular context ( e . g . , eating disorders , see [ 84 ] ; learning CBT skills , see [ 29 ] and [ 33 ] ) . In such settings , the role of the psychotherapist is to provide consultations regarding best - practices and feedback on design prototypes , while the actual design and development is left to technology experts . We take a different approach by inviting therapists to take authorship and individually design their own gamified therapy with complete creative freedom and with support limited to technical troubleshooting . The motivation for this approach is two - fold . First , we seek to explore gamified therapy as imagined by psychotherapists ( i . e . , research - through - design [ 20 ] ) . We study the artifacts developed by psychotherapists , from two perspectives ; a game and psychother - apeutic perspective . Second , we seek to explore the possibility of having psychotherapists adopt a designer mindset , developing dig - ital gamified therapy autonomously . We look at ‘design’ in the context of creating an environment that allows users to act as designers ( i . e . , meta - design [ 44 ] ) . While off - the - shelf gamified ther - apies may be available in certain countries for select conditions ( i . e . , SPARX in New Zealand [ 86 ] ; EndeavorRx in the United States [ 22 ] ) , having psychotherapists develop their own games may expand and diversify available treatments . We study the value of having psychotherapists directly design gamified therapies and experience with the design process , in order to assess the possibility of making this practice mainstream . We invited psychotherapists to use an online authoring tool , StudyCrafter , to enable them to actively contribute to designing a gamified psychotherapy and observed their design process , which included debating and discussing how they envision gamified psy - chotherapy . Specifically , for our study , we asked participants to cre - ate a gamified therapy prototype with anxiety as a design prompt in a period of six weeks . To scaffold the design process and facili - tate collaborative knowledge sharing , we included an introductory , check - in , and final workshop . This study contributes the following : ( 1 ) Insights into how ther - apy can be gamified , in terms of its purpose , role , and design ; ( 2 ) Exploring challenges and opportunities for developing future gam - ified therapies on the basis of prototypes of established psychother - apists ; and ( 3 ) Reflections on the use of authoring tools for having psychotherapists develop gamified therapies by themselves . 2 Related Work Here , we give further background on the emerging practice of gamified therapy , explaining what its precedents are and what has been achieved so far . More specifically , our work falls into the area of gamified psycho therapy and we explain how we extend the current work . Given that our study had psychotherapists design gamified psychotherapy with an authoring tool , we ground how our work relates to ongoing efforts in the area of serious game design . Finally , because we asked the psychotherapists to create a gamified therapy for anxiety , we discuss therapy for anxiety . 2 . 1 Gamified Therapy While gamified therapy still needs to be established , play therapy is an already recognized psychotherapeutic modality . It adopts play as a way to create a sacred space in which patients are free to explore their experiences without judgment or censorship of their self - expression and rehabilitation [ 82 ] . Play therapy is defined as “the systematic use of a theoretical model to establish an interpersonal process wherein trained therapists use the therapeutic power of play to help clients prevent or resolve psychological difficulties and achieve optimal growth and development” [ 81 ] ( p . 3 ) . The difference between ‘play’ and ‘a game’ has been extensively discussed in game studies literature [ 54 , 112 ] , where play is more freeform and open - ended ( e . g . , playing doctor & nurse ) , whereas games are more structured by rules and a strife towards goals that is either competitive or cooperative ( e . g . , poker ) . Importantly , gamified therapy extends and systematizes principles of play therapy to predictably meet and scale therapeutic goals for a wide audience . Another precedent for gamified therapy is digital therapy , which has proliferated over the last two decades . One example of such a therapy is Internet - Based Cognitive Behavioral Training ( ICBT ) , which provides “web - based access to materials that teach partici - pants the core cognitive skills ( e . g . , the ability to identify and modify negative cognitions and depressogenic biases in information process - ing ) and behavioral skills ( e . g . , behavioral activation , problem - solving strategies ) encouraged in traditional face - to - face CBT” [ 121 ] ( p . 1 ) . Such therapies provide ‘structured’ treatment delivery , improve ac - cess , reduce cost , scale treatment [ 85 ] , and may address the stigma that often prevents patients from admitting that they have a mental illness and seeking treatment . Moreover , evidence suggests that digital therapy , specifically ICBT , is effective [ 3 , 74 ] . Unguided or ‘stand - alone’ digital therapy programs have been associated with relatively poorer outcomes and higher drop - out rates compared to programs that incorporate therapist or administrative support [ 121 ] . There are also doubts regarding the effectiveness of ‘one - size - fits - all’ programs ; outcomes are likely to be better if the treatment can adapt to the idiosyncratic needs of each patient . If provided in a digital format , gamified therapy shares the same benefits and challenges as digital therapy . However , because of its playful nature , gamified therapy also shares the advantages of play therapy and has the affordance that all games have : engagement [ 49 ] . We define ‘gamified therapy’ as the use of games and gamifica - tion as part of therapy . As such , we embrace gamified therapy as a treatment approach that involves various efforts to gamify ther - apy , producing creations which range from those using selective elements of game design to full - fledged games ( i . e . , gamification , see [ 36 ] ) . Various forms of gamified therapy have been explored already , for a wide variety of users , including children , adolescents , and older adults [ 46 , 119 ] . Amongst others , there are games for managing and preventing chemotherapy side - effects [ 124 ] , pro - moting safe administration of blood transfusion [ 111 ] , helping to understand chemotherapy and foster adherence to medicine intake [ 18 , 66 ] , promoting physical rehabilitation [ 100 , 110 ] , managing phobias [ 16 ] , dealing with post - traumatic stress disorder ( PTSD ) [ 59 ] , etc . The emerging modalities of virtual reality ( VR ) and aug - mented reality ( AR ) have also been explored ( e . g . , [ 122 ] ) . A major “Guilty of Talking Too Much” : How Psychotherapists Gamify Therapy CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA milestone for the field of gamified therapeutics has been Endeav - orRX , the first FDA approved prescription treatment for pediatric attention deficits delivered through a video game [ 22 , 73 ] . In our case , we focus on gamifying psycho therapy and its delivery through a simple online format ( with StudyCrafter ) . This has to do with the key extension of our work for gamified therapy at large ; we are enabling therapists to create gamified therapy themselves . 2 . 2 Gamified Psychotherapy Psychotherapy is a type of therapy that applies psychological meth - ods to help a person overcome problems by altering their thought and behavior [ 21 ] . Games have shown high levels of feasibility and acceptability for promoting mental health treatment [ 45 ] . In their review , Ceranoglu [ 24 ] concludes : “The use of video games in psychotherapy helped young patients become more cooperative and enthusiastic about treatment” ( p . 143 ) . Most of the research on gamifying psychotherapy is motivated by this same notion ; that applying gamification to psychotherapy can improve patients’ engagement and encourage the intended therapeutic outcomes [ 27 , 38 ] . However , it is important to note that current findings are still inconclusive and that further research is needed [ 17 ] . Current research shows that the most commonly used gamifica - tion techniques to gamify psychotherapy are : levels ( or progress ) feedback , points or scoring , rewards or prizes , narrative or theme , personalization , and customization [ 27 ] . Although there is an over - lap between gamification techniques and established behavioral change frameworks , gamifying psychotherapy is rarely driven by health behavioral change theory [ 27 ] . Cheng et al . [ 27 ] emphasize : “Many researchers may treat gamification as a black box without consideration for its underlying mechanisms” ( p . 1 ) . Furthermore , the need for collaborative efforts , involving both domain experts ( psychologists , mental healthcare providers , clini - cians , etc . ) and technology experts ( HCI researchers and practition - ers , game designers , software engineers , etc . ) , is well recognized in the literature [ 92 ] , and has often been addressed through partici - patory design methods and practices , such as informal interviews with therapists [ 33 ] , iterative co - design sessions [ 29 , 33 , 84 , 95 ] , and workshops involving end users [ 118 ] . This notion of adopting a multidisciplinary approach to gamified psychotherapy was recently encouraged through two workshops ( 2017 and 2018 ) organized as part of the CHI PLAY conference series [ 12 ] . Following participatory design approaches to gamify psychother - apy has led to the development of games that often make use of ‘structured’ , well - established therapeutic approaches such as Cog - nitive Behavioral Training ( CBT ) [ 34 ] . For example , Pesky gNATs complements face - to - face psychotherapy sessions by offering a game experience in which patients interact with a team of wild - life explorers ( game characters ) as each character introduces a single CBT concept [ 25 ] . Personal Investigator is a role - play game that makes use of Solution - Focused Therapy ( SFT ) to support mental healthcare interventions for adolescents in clinical settings [ 33 ] . Finally , Macleod and Sloan [ 80 ] integrate mindfulness techniques into the design of a game for PTSD ( e . g . , to pass a level , the user must engage in deep breathing exercise ) . Previous research provides strong evidence for the value of in - volving mental health experts in the design process to maximize the effectiveness of gamified psychotherapy for mental health [ 33 , 118 ] . Previous research also reveals that effective collaboration is chal - lenging [ 33 ] . For example , making critical design decisions requires an appropriate level of input from both domains : HCI and mental health care . Successful collaboration also requires investing exten - sive time and energy from game designers , HCI experts , and mental healthcare providers to evaluate the design of the game , and guide future development [ 118 ] . Our study seeks to support and enrich these efforts by enabling the experts themselves to lead the ( game ) design process . Through this , we can observe how psychotherapists gamify psychotherapy and investigate the opportunity for having psychotherapists act as designers to create gamified therapy . 2 . 3 Game Design Game design is the art and practice of creating a game , or of ap - plying elements and principles of games to other interactions ( i . e . , gamification ) . Designing for gamified therapy belongs to the sub - discipline of serious game design , which is dedicated to the creation of games for non - entertainment purposes ( e . g . , education ) [ 54 ] . For a successful outcome , it is recommended to apply participatory or co - design [ 71 , 108 ] , which involves the end - users and stakeholders as part of the design process . In the context of gamified therapy , they are the therapists and patients . Various scholars have also developed principles and frameworks to help assist in this specific design process [ 5 , 54 ] . However , ( serious ) game design can also be leveraged differ - ently by having the users lead the design process . Inspired by the constructionist learning paradigm , which emphasizes ‘learn - by - making’ [ 65 ] , game design has been successfully integrated into education to have young students design games to learn about , for example , computer science [ 106 ] , mathematics [ 68 ] , and climate science [ 114 ] . Moreover , game design has been suggested and ap - plied for design fiction and speculative design [ 115 ] , thus to explore alternative and future possibilities . The idea that we can learn about a topic through game design can be associated with the research - through - design method [ 128 ] , where knowledge is generated as a result of designing an artifact . In our case , we apply game design to learn about how psychotherapists gamify psychotherapy : the artifacts they create are demonstrations of gamified psychotherapy that we can analyze , both from the perspective of what they are as games as well as their form of psychotherapy . However , designing games is challenging . Although increasingly more accessible game - development tools have become available , often referred to as ‘game engines’ , developing games is both time consuming and expensive . Also , using game engines still requires significant skill and experience . To address this problem , a rich area of research has emerged to develop methods , tools , and techniques for easing game development , specifically by allowing the computer partially or completely to generate game content [ 105 ] or to assist in the creation of games [ 50 ] . Other efforts have focused on creating such ‘game engines’ or ‘authoring tools’ for non - technical audi - ences [ 51 ] . While such tools are far more limited than the typical game engines ( e . g . , Unity ) , they allow more people to make games . In our work , we leverage an authoring tool called StudyCrafter , which allows users without coding or artistic skills to make in - teractive projects in the form of games or gamified experiences . CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Tochilnikova , et al . Through utilizing the StudyCrafter platform we seek to explore the opportunity of enabling psychotherapists to be designers of gamified therapy . This idea is associated with meta - design 1 , a de - sign framework that highlights supporting users to act as designers [ 32 , 37 , 44 , 125 ] . Meta - design is in alignment with participatory design and co - design in that they all emphasize the essentiality of stakeholders’ participation in design . However , meta - design as a framework puts even more emphasis on the creative autonomy of the stakeholders beyond providing a method to utilize stakeholders’ participation in the design process . Meta - design seeks to create “systems as living entities that can evolve over time” ( p . 19 ) as a solu - tion space that can be co - created by the stakeholders , rather than providing a fixed answer to a problem [ 47 ] . It ultimately aims for empowering the stakeholders to become a creative agent who can continue co - adapting in the interaction with such systems to solve problems on their own . Meta - design is , among others , based on the following premise [ 42 ] : not everyone wants to be a designer ; we are not designers all the time and in all contexts . However , when people have the need and desire to participate in a design pro - cess , we must provide contexts in which they can be designers ( p . 398 ) . Part of our goal is to find out if psychotherapists can be game de - signers with the help of a tool such as StudyCrafter . Psychotherapy is an area where high customization for patients and the creation of personal rapport is essential . Its effectiveness is highly context - dependent and , therefore , offering a one - size - fits - all approach is not optimal . If psychotherapists can be game designers , they will have creative autonomy to create new or change existing gami - fied psychotherapies based on the needs of their patients and their therapeutic style . 2 . 4 Therapy for Anxiety Aside from prompting participants to realize their gamified psy - chotherapy with StudyCrafter , we also prompted them to create a gamified psychotherapy focused on managing Anxiety Disorder . We chose Anxiety Disorder as a design prompt due to it being the most commonly diagnosed mental illness in the United States [ 19 ] as well as our participants’ shared experience in treating the condi - tion . Then , this choice is also timely as COVID - 19 amplified mental health issues [ 28 ] , including a particular COVID - 19 anxiety [ 76 ] . Anxiety is a normative , common , and often beneficial reaction to stress [ 113 ] . There is a huge distinction between normative daily circumstantial anxiety and the psychiatric condition of Anxiety Disorder which belongs to the category of functional mental illness and is characterized by a loss of functioning . Specifically , the Di - agnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fifth Edition ( DSM - 5 ) [ 6 ] describes Generalized Anxiety Disorder GAD as “an excessive worry occurring more days than not for at least 6 months , causing significant distress or impairment in social , occupational , or other areas of functioning . ” Therapeutic approaches to anxiety disorder can be psycholog - ical , pharmacological , or a combination of both [ 9 ] . Nonetheless , 1 We acknowledge that there are many different interpretations and uses of the term meta - design . Here , we follow its use for enabling others to design , as described by Fischer and Scharff [ 44 ] . psychotherapy is typically regarded as the first line of treatment [ 96 ] . Under psychotherapy , Cognitive Behavioral Therapy ( CBT ) is considered as the dominant , empirically validated therapy for anxi - ety disorders [ 4 , 9 ] . CBT is a combination of interventions aiming to help patients reduce distress by altering cognitive and behavioral responses through cognitive restructuring [ 4 ] . Exposure therapy is another therapeutic approach in which repeated exposure to feared stimuli is introduced [ 4 ] . Alternative treatments for anxiety related disorders include exercise [ 104 ] , yoga [ 104 ] , acupuncture [ 40 ] , mindfulness practices such as meditation [ 104 ] , near - infrared laser phototherapy therapy [ 90 ] , as well as art therapy [ 1 ] and spir - itual counseling [ 72 ] . Alternative treatments emerged in the United States in the 1950’s with the importation of eastern philosophy and spiritual practice and their application to resolving the crisis of mental illness . Mindfulness practices , which are core to Dialectical Behavioral Therapy ( DBT ) , such as meditation and breathing exer - cises are effective in relieving stress , however proper instruction , accessibility and regular practice are necessary for long - term bene - fits [ 15 ] . There have been efforts to increase accessibility through Internet - based mindfulness treatments , but such efforts remain lim - ited by lack of information and research on their design intent and presented mechanisms [ 15 ] . In contrast , in our work we focus on the design : we seek to understand how psychotherapists gamify psychotherapy for anxiety , and thus what modalities , techniques , and mechanics they leverage . 3 Methods We conducted an exploratory study consisting of three two - hour workshops over six weeks with the aim to answer the following research questions : ( 1 ) From the perspective of game design and psychotherapy : What can we learn about gamified psychotherapy from what psychotherapists create ? ( 2 ) What do psychotherapists think about the potential of apply - ing games for psychotherapy ( i . e . , gamified psychotherapy ) generally and specifically for having them design such ther - apy ? During the workshops , participants were trained in the user - friendly online authoring tool Studycrafter and were tasked to think on , discuss , and begin developing a prototype of a gamified psychotherapy based on a design prompt of managing Anxiety Disorder . In this section , we provide further details regarding the participants , StudyCrafter , the design process we set up for our study , and how we analyzed the data resulting from the study . 3 . 1 Participants Our participants consisted of 7 psychotherapists which we will refer to as ‘P1’ , ‘P2’ and so on . Their age ranged between 31 and 78 years old . Two participants self - identified as Hispanic , one as Indian , one as part native American , one as Ukrainian , and the rest as broadly Caucasian American . Each psychotherapist had several years of experience of practicing in the field ( ranging from 2 to 35 years ) and most were in private practice specializing in cognitive behavioral therapy ( CBT ) ( P1 , P3 - 7 ) , dialectical behavior therapy ( DBT ) ( P3 - 5 ) , Gestalt Therapy ( P2 ) , psychodynamic therapy ( P7 ) , acceptance and commitment therapy ( ACT ) ( P7 ) and / or Mindfulness Practice ( P1 , “Guilty of Talking Too Much” : How Psychotherapists Gamify Therapy CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Table 1 : Overview of the psychotherapists and the games they created . ID Participant Game Description P1 P1 is a practicing psychotherapist aged 62 in the United States with two decades of experience . He specializes in depression , anxiety , infidelity and geriatric issues . He is trained in Cognitive Behavioral Therapy , the Gottman Marital Method , Family Systems , and Solution Focused Methodology . His patients are primarily adults . A character begins to levitate as her anxiety rises . The player needs to enact the appropriate choices from different sets of possible responses in order to return her to earth . The narrative is presented in a poetic , dramatic style with special effects of psychedelic visuals and music . P2 P2 is an accredited Gestalt Therapist aged 37 , practicing in Ukraine and globally with 14 years of experience , runs global training programs in Gestalt Therapy , and designed a psychotherapy robot . He also runs an online community which aims to popularize psychotherapy and develop practices for Gestalt therapists . His patients are primarily adults . A character with anxiety is consulting a therapist . The player controls the therapist’s responses to the patient , therefore guid - ing the patient with how to manage their anxiety . The player is offered ‘right’ and ‘wrong’ answers to prompts . P3 P3 is a practicing psychotherapist aged 31 in the United States who works with adolescents and adults for 11 years . She specializes in anxi - ety , depression , and dual - diagnosis . She has worked at the VA Medical Center along with experience working in inpatient psychiatric hospitals . Her patients are primarily adults . Several characters in different scenarios are suffering from anx - iety . After demonstrating how each character manages their anxiety , the game quizzes the player to allow them to reflect on what they have learned . P4 P4 is a practicing psychotherapist aged 48 with 2 years of experience and professor of psychology in the United States identifying as Latina . She holds multiple Masters degrees in Mental Health Counseling and her research is focused on moral disengagement , transitional justice systems and reconciliation process in post conflict situations , on which she has published extensively . Her specialization is CBT and in working with those 17 years old until 65 years old . This narrative game revolves around a group of 2 individuals exchanging dialog in a home setting in which one is displeased with the other . The player must navigate the dialog and choose appropriate responses to resolve the conflict successfully . P5 P5 is a practicing psychotherapist aged 41 to individuals and couples in a United States metropolis with 5 . 5 years of experience . Her area of expertise includes working with clients who struggle with anxiety or depression , have experienced trauma or who face challenges navi - gating life transitions , such as college graduation , career changes , new relationships and new parenthood . A character is anxious about choosing which college to attend . The player explores several grounding techniques with her , from breathing exercises and taking walks to receiving emo - tional support from friends , ‘pet therapy’ , and entering relaxing environments . P6 P6 is an experienced psychiatrist aged 46 with 13 years of experience . He is an innovator in private practice working both as a clinician and consultant / advisor in a major metropolis in the United States identi - fying as Asian . He focuses on the universal view of population health and capitated health systems , the business side of delivery systems , and the very intimate view of individualized patient care . He has led multiple pilots of clinical programs in several digital health technology companies and non - profits . A baby is floating in the sea , and the player is tasked with practicing breathing exercises that will return it to shore . The sound of gongs informs the player when they are done with the breathing exercise and when the baby has been returned to shore . P3 - 7 ) , amongst others . Six participant practices focused heavily on CBT and DBT ( P1 , P3 - 7 ) . Two combined CBT and or psychodynamic psychotherapy / acceptance and commitment therapy ( ACT ) with mindfulness practice . Three participants ( P3 - 5 ) combined CBT and DBT with a trauma - focused and trauma - resolution approach . One psychotherapist’s therapy also focused on issues of gender and sexual experience and identity ( P3 ) . Another psychotherapist ( P2 ) reported only practicing Gestalt Therapy at the exclusion of other modalities . All have experience with treating anxiety . The participants had a varying degree of familiarity with game playing , but utilizing digital technology has been part of their work - flow in the clinical practice . One therapist ( P2 ) had some or “a lot” of experience in playing computer games ( 3 - 5 times every week ) such as open world games , sandbox games , and economic strat - egy games . One participant ( P4 ) had familiarity with observing and using digital therapy services for the purpose of learning and minimal familiarity with playing video games for entertainment . Additionally , she utilized meditation and mindfulness apps as a consumer and for educational and market research purposes . Three ( P2 , P4 , P6 ) described themselves as technologically literate and comfortable with computers and keep up with the latest technology . Two have basic computer programming skills ( such as HTML and / or web development ) while four ( P1 , P3 , P5 , P7 ) describe them - selves as moderately familiar with using digital technology , such as web browsing and using email for communications . One ( P2 ) designed a therapy bot that would simulate the experience of pro - viding emotional support and therapeutic advice for patients in distress . Another ( P6 ) was an active advisor for clinical programs in digital health technology programs . No therapist had ever designed a digital therapy game or a ther - apeutic game before . Six therapists ( all except P4 ) reported experi - ence with practicing psychotherapy remotely through phone calls and / or through video platforms ( e . g . , Zoom , Skype , Doxy . me , Vsee ) . One ( P4 ) reported only experience with in - person therapy . All par - ticipants reported treating mostly adults of all ages and across economic and ethnic backgrounds . CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Tochilnikova , et al . Figure 1 : Layout Page of P6’s Prototype in Studycrafter Table 1 describes our participants and the games they created . Participants were recruited through one of the author’s professional networks . They were compensated with $ 75 per workshop ( $ 225 in total ) for their participation and were informed that they could discontinue their participation at any time . In fact , one participant ( P7 ) left after the first workshop . She explained that she did not have the technological experience necessary to complete the remaining workshops . Between workshops each participant spent between one and several hours curating their prototype . 3 . 2 StudyCrafter StudyCrafter 2 is an online authoring tool , in which users can easily create , share , and play interactive projects in the form of digital games or gamified experiences [ 55 ] . It consists of two components : A website for sharing and discussing projects , and an interactive ed - itor based on an intuitive graphical user interface ( GUI ) . The editor allows users to design interactive projects through visual program - ming and provides preloaded content ( e . g . , pictures , interactive buttons ) that serve as inspirational material . With StudyCrafter users can design various game genres ( e . g . , action , puzzle ) , but its affordances primarily support the creation of interactive narratives : “A form of digital interactive experience in which users create or in - fluence a dramatic storyline through actions , either by assuming the role of a character in a fictional virtual world , issuing commands to computer - controlled characters , or directly manipulating the fictional world state” [ 102 ] ( p . 67 ) . A StudyCrafter interactive project consists of one or more scenes . A scene consists of a layout and a script . With the StudyCrafter editor ( see fig 1 ) , users can edit the layout with the layout tab . With this tab , users can add graphical elements ( i . e . , backgrounds , objects , and characters ) , add user interaction elements ( e . g . , clickable but - tons , text - boxes ) , or upload custom elements . The script tab allows users to program dialogue , animations , and interactions . Users con - nect programming objects together ( e . g . , variables , functions ) in a tree - like fashion to create algorithms and nodes , which form the ba - sis for what happens when the project is played . With the script tab ( see fig 2 ) , users can also connect different scenes such that players are directed to a particular scene . At any time , users can switch to the play tab to playtest their project . Once the project is ready , users 2 https : / / studycrafter . com can publish their project on the StudyCrafter website . Each project has its own web page , which provides ( user - provided ) information and ( automated ) statistics about the project ( e . g . , number of plays ) . Figure 2 : Script Page of P6’s Prototype in Studycrafter Over the last couple of years , StudyCrafter has been used to teach experimental research [ 2 ] , study decision making [ 109 ] , col - lect data from humans to inform simulation models [ 88 ] , develop gamified surveys [ 55 ] and psychological assessments [ 41 ] , perform speculative design [ 115 ] , and for developing serious games [ 116 ] . While its user - friendliness has been confirmed , and it has been used previously with non - technical users ( e . g . psychology students [ 2 ] , law school students [ 116 ] ) , StudyCrafter is not yet a fully mature product . For example , there are currently no tutorials , user docu - mentation , or guides to help users . To address this , we included a brief overview of StudyCrafter during the first workshop , and made sure participants could reach out to us if they had any questions with regards to using the tool . Furthermore , we purposefully did not disclose the more advanced features of StudyCrafter ( e . g . , API , functions ) , unless participants requested how to do this . 3 . 3 Design Process From our intake conversations it became clear that some partici - pants had ambitious plans , and were , amongst others , interested in exploring VR and AR . As such , there was a need to frame what they can make with StudyCrafter . We addressed this in the first workshop by explaining the limitations of the tool , yet focused on the opportunities it brings and the amount of creative freedom they have to realize their vision of gamified psychotherapy . In addition , given how challenging making games is , we emphasized that the effort they are participating in is inherently innovative . Finally , we explained that for the sake of collective knowledge creation all participants should create a gamified therapy focused on managing Anxiety Disorder . They had to imagine that they would create this for their own practice . As such , the ‘players’ or their target audience would be the clients they typically serve . For our exploratory study , we intentionally set up a relatively short but structured design process which spanned six weeks . As part of the envisioned design process , we intended to observe at least one iteration of participants’ prototypes . To facilitate this , we organized three workshops in this time period : at the start , in “Guilty of Talking Too Much” : How Psychotherapists Gamify Therapy CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA the middle ( i . e . , after two weeks ) , and at the end . In between the workshops , we expected participants to develop their prototype . In the first workshop we started by introducing games designed for mental health , such as SPARX [ 86 ] . We chose to present SPARX as it was being administered as an anxiety treatment in New Zealand . Next , participants engaged in a discussion of their ex - perience with digital therapy and we brainstormed potential ap - plications for treating Anxiety Disorder with gamified psychother - apy . Finally , participants were introduced to Studycrafter which involved an overview of its basic features , such as how to create a dialogue . The second workshop focused on reviewing participants’ proto - types . This involved a live demonstration of each prototype during which participants role - played the characters in a given prototype , followed by a discussion of the prototype . As result of participant’s requests , more advanced features of StudyCrafter were also high - lighted , such as adding sound and uploading new art assets . At the end of this workshop , participants were directed to iterate their prototype in the next two weeks , based on the feedback provided . The final workshop began with briefly reviewing participants’ newest iterations . In the second part of this workshop we asked participants to reflect on what they learned , their insights on gami - fying psychotherapy , and what next steps they would like to take . Notably , participants enjoyed showing off their iterations and there was a healthy sense of competition amongst them . All three workshops took place with the teleconference software Zoom . Communication in between workshops occurred at the preference of participants , either by email or text message . Any troubleshooting took place using Zoom , as needed . This only happened three times ( for P1 and P6 ) because we were able to address most queries asynchronously . The team only supported troubleshooting issues with StudyCrafter and no design advice was provided . The only exception is that we prompted participants during the second workshop to make more use of the features that StudyCrafter provides ( e . g . , pressing buttons , including sound , moving characters ) , and go beyond the heavy use of text to which P6 responded that this is not surprising because they as psychother - apists are “guilty of talking too much . ” Participants regularly sought validation in their design decisions from the coordinator , and the emotional support and the reassurance provided them with the motivation and confidence to continue iterating on their design . 3 . 4 Data Analysis We collected the following types of data : psychotherapist - designed artifacts ( built with StudyCrafter ) , video recordings and transcripts of the three workshops , and facilitator notes . The notes are observa - tions we made during the workshops and while interacting with the psychotherapists outside of the workshops , and were used to sup - port our findings from the analyses described here . We started with a qualitative analysis of the workshop transcripts followed by game content . Coding was conducted using a two - step iterative process by a cohort of five researchers , composed of four game designers ( one with a background in psychotherapy who worked under a psychiatrist as a counseling therapist ) , and led by a psychotherapist with 12 years of experience in anxiety disorder . 3 . 4 . 1 Game Design Perspective The first step involved a thematic content analysis of the transcripts which was based on the fre - quency of recurrent themes and keywords used in the description and discussion of the psychotherapists’ game designs . If codes representing a specific theme were mentioned many times , we iden - tified that theme as meaningful in reference to our data . Similar approaches for content analysis have been conducted [ 61 , 89 ] . This was combined with an analysis of the individual games , where we considered both overtly present aesthetics and mechanics in an attempt to find common thematic patterns and correlate them to the codes established from the transcripts . The themes or groupings that emerged from this analysis entail genres of gamified psychotherapy ( i . e . , educational , advocacy , call to action , and hybrid ) . Genres are often used to categorize media , in - cluding games . For games such genres are often focused on the type of challenges ( e . g . , action , puzzle , adventure ) [ 103 ] . Here , however , we identified genres based on the purpose they have , similar to how serious games are often classified [ 54 ] . As we engaged in this process , we recognized that a deeper analysis was needed to better understand therapeutic aspects of the games . We also wanted to identify the specific therapeutic tactics used by these games through the design and implementation of the individual game concepts and mechanics . We decided to research and play a number of com - mercial games with psychocentric elements to develop a shared understanding and language to discuss the therapeutic aspects of games . We brainstormed a list of 24 such single player games avail - able on the Steam gaming platform . 3 We used player reviews as a reference as this is a process which has proven successful in identifying therapeutic commercial games [ 98 ] . This allowed us to generate a comprehensive list of psychotherapeutic techniques and elements commonly found in mainstream games and connect them to the specific game mechanics and design tools ( e . g . , background , aesthetics , narrative , etc . ) used to implement them . As a result we were able to determine therapeutic tactics frequently implemented through game design techniques . This enabled us to recognize sim - ilar patterns found in the psychotherapists’ games . It also allowed us to deconstruct them in the context of the previously identified typologies through the lens of therapeutic game design . 3 . 4 . 2 Psychotherapy Perspective The second step of our analysis aimed at iterating on our findings from a clinical psychotherapy perspective . The intention was to connect the techniques identified in the previous step to specific clinical therapy techniques used by therapists for treating patients with anxiety with comparable situations . Specifically , our process involved evaluating the psycho - logical elements and strategies utilized by psychotherapists and identifying how these strategies have been implemented in the context of a game . We connected psychotherapeutic techniques to the specific game mechanics and design elements by identifying how psychological techniques ( see [ 33 , 34 , 118 ] ) and psychothera - peutic frameworks [ 91 ] were used in the participants’ games . This approach was inspired by the Learning Mechanics ( LM ) – Game Me - chanics ( GM ) Model [ 5 ] , which analyzes how learning mechanics are connected to game mechanics in serious games . It is also similar to Kertz et al . [ 70 ] who evaluated if iPhone apps targeting symp - toms of worry and anxiety incorporate content consistent with 3 https : / / store . steampowered . com / CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Tochilnikova , et al . evidence - based cognitive - behavioral therapy interventions . How - ever , instead of mapping an existing list of therapeutic techniques , we opted for an iterative and emergent approach by going back and forth between the observations from Step 1 and the literature and practices in psychotherapy . As a result of our process , we were successful in isolating two primary clinical therapy modalities , commonly used for the treat - ment of anxiety by psychotherapists in standard therapy ( i . e . , CBT and DBT ) , along with multiple secondary therapeutic techniques that are used in conjunction with the base therapy to accentuate their impact . Although these secondary techniques are known to amplify the efficacy of therapeutic interventions , the technolog - ical prerequisites for their successful implementation in clinical settings prevent their widespread inclusion in standard treatment . This barrier is observably circumvented through the digitization of therapies , thereby making supportive therapeutic components ( like curative environmental design and audio visual feedback ) more commonly usable in mainstream therapy . To validate these results , we referred to multiple psychotherapy resources and verified the outcomes by deferring to the expert opinion of a practicing psy - chotherapist with 12 years of experience [ 58 , 75 , 97 , 107 ] . 4 Results While there was a precedent in offering StudyCrafter to non - technical users , there was no guarantee beforehand that our effort would succeed . However , except for one psychotherapist ( P7 ) who left after the first workshop , all others fully participated and were able to complete a working prototype of a gamified therapy for Anxiety Disorder . The workshops provided an environment for our participants to imagine themselves as both psychotherapeutic and technological innovators and entrepreneurs and a space for cultivating enthusiasm regarding the hypothetical benefits of gam - ified therapy such as access for all . Six of our participants were so enthusiastic about the project that they stayed in touch with one of the authors and continued to ask her for opportunities to engage with the project . Their intrinsic motivation for the mission of advancing gamified psychotherapy was evident . Figure 3 shows a screenshot of the gamified therapies each psy - chotherapist created , and Table 1 briefly describes them . Our supple - mentary material includes six prototypes , one from each participant . Guided by our research questions ( see Section 3 ) , we use this section to mark our observations of gamified psychotherapy based on what the psychotherapists created as well as what the psychotherapists think on the potential of applying games to psychotherapy , and on having them design such therapy . 4 . 1 Insights from Psychotherapists’ Games Our first research question pertains to what can be learned from the psychotherapists’ creations in StudyCrafter . Here , we analyzed the psychotherapist - designed artifact from a game as well as from the psychotherapy perspective ( as described in Section 3 . 4 ) . This resulted in identifying different genres of gamified therapy and psy - chotherapeutic mechanics that can be included in gamified therapy , which we describe below . 4 . 1 . 1 Game Design Perspective Based on the common themes found in our content analysis as a result of repeatedly grouping and narrowing down the words most commonly used by partici - pants , we identified the following genres of gamified psychotherapy , which we describe in detail below : Educational , Advocacy , Call to Action , and Hybrid . We note that although StudyCrafter can be used to create different types of games , some participants mentioned that StudyCrafter was “an efficient tool for creating linear narrative roleplay scenarios” ( P6 ) . This is not surprising given that Study - Crafter particularly supports the creation of so - called interactive narratives ( see Section 3 . 2 ) . Educational . Educational gamified therapies offer the player information about anxiety spectrum disorders . They delimit and describe the symptomology and experience of anxiety and offer solutions and management strategies for coping with the condition . Every single one of the psychotherapist - designed artifacts offered educational elements and all of the first prototypes were heavily biased towards relaying information . For example , P2’s first proto - type included a character who is given two options by her therapist to resolve her anxiety . When the player chooses the wrong option , the therapist explains that this approach would actually amplify the character’s anxiety . As with P2’s game , many of the first proto - types offered the widely - accepted intermittent reward system [ 78 ] choices of ‘right’ and ‘wrong’ answers regarding players’ anxiety knowledge . Such reward systems are used widely in psychotherapy in reward - related learning [ 30 ] and gamified therapeutic interven - tions [ 77 ] . This allowed for a satisfaction / reward when choosing the ‘right’ option and a learning opportunity when choosing the ‘wrong’ ( potentially harmful ) option . Regarding providing these options , P3 stated : " I liked the try again part because it felt like you were learning the right response to the negative thought . " Partici - pants noted that educational games would be an excellent starting place for those who are experiencing anxiety and know little about their condition . Importantly , therapists in the games were relatable in character , authentic - looking , conveyed authority , and their char - acter was recognizable universally . This approach was deliberately enacted to simulate real in - person therapy and familiarity with one’s personal therapist . Advocacy . Advocacy gamified therapies offer the player a first person account of characters who experience anxiety . They engage with concepts of projection and empathy , allowing players to vir - tually emulate the emotions experienced by the characters who suffer from anxiety . The techniques of advocacy games are utilized in group therapy which offers patients the opportunity to share their narrative with others to invoke a ‘unison’ effect – allowing them examples of others’ experiences . P3 describes advocacy based gamified therapies : “ [ They make you ] think about an anxiety you actually were going through in your actual life . ” Players benefit from this virtual representation of real life problems in games by : ( 1 ) Experiencing a sense of relief from ‘unison’ [ 126 ] ; and ( 2 ) Learn - ing solutions to problems by following the game narratives which unanimously lead to the central character finding a resolution to their problems , either through guidance from encounters with other characters or through branching dialogue narratives selected by the player . These games advocate for those individuals suffering from anxiety and also allow those alien to the concept of anxiety to obtain an understanding of its core experience and cyclical nature . This is illustrated most explicitly in P5’s game where the player follows the story of an individual who is enacting the momentous “Guilty of Talking Too Much” : How Psychotherapists Gamify Therapy CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Figure 3 : Screenshots of the gamified psychotherapies developed by our participants . Top row , from left to right : P1 - 3 . Bottom row , from left to right : P4 - 6 . decision of selecting a college . She presents as disoriented by ‘choice paralysis’ . The consequences of each choice are further explored . As players progress through various respective questions , they engage with solutions for each concern . These solutions are either provided through practical guidance and emotional support given to her by her friends or are facilitated by noteworthy relaxing events like visiting a park and meeting dogs . Entering a relaxed state , which P5 calls “one’s happy place , ” allows the character to resolve her issue on her own by realizing her own conclusions . The narrative also elucidates the availability of invoking the power of imagination to alter one’s perspective and envision calming scenery . This concept is also demonstrated in P4’s game , where perform - ing relaxation techniques as instructed by the Non - Player Character ( NPC ) leads to a change in the background scenery . This game ad - vocates a character’s anxiety due to the COVID - 19 pandemic and has ‘Pedro’ give advice on reducing levels of anxiety and avoiding panic attacks . It achieves this purpose through a combination of controlled breathing exercises , soothing audio visual cues ( flowing water , chirping birds , natural scenery ) and grounding techniques which are centered around focusing on natural stimuli . Above all , advocacy gamified therapies offer ‘natural’ avenues for stress relief such as confiding in friends , seeking advice , and exploring nature , and emphasizes the necessity to avail them in times of need . Call to Action . Call to action gamified therapies offer a first person interactive experience such as engaging in a grounding or meditation exercise . Similar techniques are frequently utilized in the grounding exercises of DBT and therapies that integrate mind - fulness . This category of games operates under the assumption that players will follow along with the game’s instructions as a form of illusory interaction stemming from a lusory attitude towards the gamified nature of the therapeutic process [ 69 ] . This is exemplified by P6’s game which takes the form of an interactive breathing ex - ercise supported by simultaneous visual stimuli to provide context and meaning for the player , which enhances engagement . In the game , the player must return a baby floating in the sea to shore through breathing exercises . The baby floating in the ocean repre - sents a state of elevated anxiety which may be resolved through conscious breathing . The player is motivated to accomplish the goal of saving the baby while also overcoming their anxiety in the process . The synchronized breathing exercises gradually slow the rate of inhalation and exhalation to a steady rhythm through the use of gongs and bells , as an audio feedback tool so as to allow the player to keep count . Such exercises ground the player in the present moment by diverting their attention to the steady mechan - ical process of breathing . This also prevents hyperventilation and allows for normalizing the heart and respiratory rate . These games provide instructionary exercises with an immediate solution for players not wishing to experience a narrative and only looking for an instantaneous solution to reduce their stress levels . P6 describes his game : “My immediate thought was why not use this tool to just do a quick breath training and have the character guided through some breathing ? And maybe you can teach your breath technique and then keep a timer with some noises on – to coach them through it , see how they do before and after . . . getting immediate symptom reduction at the front end . ” Hence , call to action games are skills and results - driven and a form of exercise - based therapy . Hybrid . The fourth category of gamified therapies offer a com - bination of approaches . These games provide a visually stimulating narrative experience that engages users through the enactment of multiple auditory positive feedback cues . These are interspersed with ‘calls to action’ for the player , adding an additional layer of engagement . The purpose of integrating these approaches is to both provide the benefits of learning a technique , while incentivizing the player to follow through with resolving their anxiety . This strategy is best epitomized by P3’s game in which the player follows the narratives of multiple people who have suffered from traumatic experiences and learned effective grounding techniques . Grounding techniques consisted of identifying three sources of audio , visual , tactile or olfactory stimulus . These served as ‘totems’ that root the CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Tochilnikova , et al . player in the present moment . This is seen best through P1’s game , which enacts an interesting ‘sci - fi’ effect in which the character’s anxiety levitates her in the air after being stranded all alone . The player must lower her to the ground by answering a series of ques - tions correctly . The last step of the character’s recovery involves practicing a breathing exercise which returns her to normalcy . 4 . 1 . 2 Psychotherapy Perspective We identified several mechanics focused on achieving a therapeutic effect , rooted in traditional techniques or by making use of the medium of games , which we discuss below . Dialectical Behavioral Therapy ( DBT ) . Four out of the six games created by our participants incorporate DBT and focus on grounding techniques which serve to center the player’s conscious - ness in the present moment by concentrating on sensory infor - mation . This is also achieved through the use of mindfulness and rhythmic breathing techniques which also reduce the level of other biometric indicators of stress ( i . e . , heart and respiratory rate ) . While the implementation of DBT is more explicit in certain purely educa - tional games like P6 or P3’s , where players are guided through the process by game prompts , other games ( i . e , P1’s and P5’s ) implement it in a more implicit method . This is done with game characters who show the execution and effect of breathing techniques in different contextual life settings . Cognitive Behavioral Therapy ( CBT ) . The remaining two games ( i . e . , P2’s and P4’s ) are inspired by CBT as they operate under a premise that knowledge about anxiety is critical to under - standing and thereby preventing it in a behavioral context . This is epitomized through P2’s game where the player takes on the role of a therapist who must guide a patient through an episode of anxiety by selecting the correct response to the patient’s questions , from two available options . Selecting the incorrect response elicits feed - back regarding the incorrect choice in the current context while the correct response elicits positive feedback from the game character and advances the game to the next question scenario . Through the process of answering the patient’s questions and receiving feedback on why it is the correct contextual response , the player learns about the onset of the physiological symptoms of anxiety , its mental trig - gers and the best action response to prevent it from escalating into a panic attack ( i . e . , identifying the sources of the stress and then exploring through introspection why it elicits a stress response ) . Through the behavioral experiment orchestrated by such games , players are able to identify the relationship between the stressor and their personal stress response . Utilizing a CBT - influenced digital therapy , the player has the opportunity to identify their automatic negative thoughts and core beliefs and to resolve them . Additionally , the player has the opportunity to explore new behavioral patterns and gain the confidence to eventually practice them in stressful situations in the real world . We found that a number of therapeutic techniques were promi - nent in gamification in addition to CBT and DBT . Certain techniques that are less common in in - person psychotherapy were more com - monly applied as a result of the digital nature and narrative flow of Studycrafter . For example , music , sound , and directed breathing exercises which are seldom used in in - person therapy were inte - grated ubiquitously in our participants’ gamified therapies . The three most prominent mechanics are : diverting attention , removing uncertainty , and giving sensory feedback . Diverting Attention . All therapeutic approaches incorporated in the games were based on a combination of a multitude of tactics to de - escalate anxiety levels , including interjection of humor , diverting attention to calming visual stimuli and eliciting relaxation responses through the use of specific words . P6 highlights the role of humor while supporting a fellow psychotherapist in the design process : “I loved how you interjected humor through it [ referring to P1’s game ] , which kept the plot line relatable and engaged . . . Otherwise the mind drifts off by clicking on dry text . ” These modalities and techniques were facilitated through the use of game mechanics in conjunction with psychotherapeutic tools ; for example , decision response trees , which allowed for replication of therapies in the form of third person narratives , also provided patients with a degree of control over their experience . Removing Uncertainty . Dialogue trees further allowed the participants to frame resolutions to common mental blocks patients encounter while logically navigating through the mental processes responsible for triggering anxiety , through a question - answer re - lationship . The experience enables patients to explore multiple contextual dialogue or action options and to understand the reason - ing behind why they are inadvisable choices in that scenario . Thus , the games serve as a disambiguation tool to remove uncertainty , especially for patients suffering from decision paralysis . Giving Sensory Feedback . Design elements invoke cognitive and sensory experience . Cognitive experience is driven by narra - tive ( story progression and context ) , language ( indicative tonality of communication / feedback ) , and design concepts ( simulation of nature , relaxation using specific audio cues ) . Sensory experience is driven by visuals ( natural environment , trees ) , sounds ( calming , nature : birds chirping , leaves fluttering , waves ) , and color therapy ( influencing moods through color association ; i . e . , brighter , greener and soothing colors ) . Specifically , therapists use sensory feedback to create a desired mental state and produce calming responses in patients . For example , P4’s game utilizes audio cues like flowing water combined with a change in background scenery . 4 . 2 Insights based on Psychotherapists’ Experiences Our second research question pertains to what psychotherapists think about gamified psychotherapy , as a result of engaging with developing such therapy themselves . Here , we analyzed the tran - scripts from the workshops and supplemented this with our fa - cilitator notes ( as described in Section 3 . 4 ) . Below we present the reflections on gamified therapy in general , followed by their specific experience of acting as designers of their psychotherapeutic games . Enabling psychotherapists to fully engage in the process of de - signing psychotherapeutic games has sparked many interesting discussion points on the potential applications of gamified psy - chotherapy . Three of our participants expressed that digital psy - chotherapy and in - person psychotherapy are not interchangeable , each offering unique opportunities and challenges . P1 expressed this by saying the following : “I don’t think digital therapy will ever put face to face therapy out of business . ” Some of the perceived ben - efits to digital therapy included enhanced accessibility ( i . e . , remote “Guilty of Talking Too Much” : How Psychotherapists Gamify Therapy CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA access , access for urgent cases , general inclusivity , reduced stigma , increased approachability ) , and greater degrees of self - expression ( facilitated via the anonymity and absence of judgment offered by technology ) . P2 articulated the value of self - expression in the ab - sence of judgment from technology : “I think it’s very important to express yourself when you have anxiety or when you feel depressed . And some people have some difficulty speaking with psychotherapists . So [ patients prefer ] the robot because he will not judge . ” There is also the element of increased temporality and control , which is enabled by giving the patient the exclusive ability to schedule and pace their own progression in therapy . Another opportunity that the psychotherapists saw was the integration of gamified psychotherapies into in - person sessions as a way to boost engagement and enjoyment . Our participants suggested three modes of integrating gamified psychotherapy into standard sessions . The first uses gamified therapy as an educational element that is created by the psychotherapist as a way to teach the patient about their condition ( in our case , anxiety ) and how they can deal with it . In this setting , the patient can play a therapeutic game during the session , then the psychotherapist can use this experience as a starting point for further discussion and reflection . The following quote from P1 illustrates this point : I would love to show these [ gamified therapies ] to one of my teen clients . I could just see one of these creating so much discussion , so [ the therapy could start with ] ‘Sit and watch it , ’ and then the rest of the therapy session could be ‘What did you learn ? Let’s talk about what you just saw . ’ - P1 The second mode of integrating psychotherapy games into stan - dard psychotherapy practices builds on the idea of using digital games as avenues for group therapy , where individuals may experi - ence therapy together and can engage in working towards common goals . Collaborative multiplayer digital psychotherapy games share the same therapeutic value of group therapy and enhance it by overcoming limitations of physical location . It was also suggested that these collaborative games can offer the feature of matching players to their peers . The inclusion within such a group that shares similar issues and goals motivates individual members and provides a sense of community and social support . P3 noted that : “If we go through our anxiety with someone else . . . it’s better for them to feel someone else is confused , too . We can do this together . . . that social support , especially for teenagers , is huge . ” The third mode for integrating gamified psychotherapy into standard sessions has the patient assume a more active role when creating the game experience . The psychotherapist may ask the patient to create a gamified psychotherapy experience . Our partici - pants envisioned three benefits to such practice , the first being that enabling the patient to create a gamified therapeutic experience may ignite a deep thought process regarding what triggers anxi - ety as well as what would be required in order to evolve past this hyper - anxious state . The second benefit is that placing the patient in the ‘driver seat’ might encourage a higher sense of responsibil - ity for the healing process . Lastly , creating gamified experiences requires creativity , which might be a healing element in itself . This was articulated by the facilitator as “a shift from anxiety to a more creative state of being . . . [ it ] lets one stay in - flow or total immersion in the creative art of designing their own therapy . ” In this context , StudyCrafter would be a tool that psychotherapists can add to their toolkit : [ StudyCrafter ] would be a great homework to give stu - dents or clients [ to ] have them identify their . . . cognitive distortions [ as well as ] their triggers for anxiety through just making their own scenes . . . So the [ patient designing a gamified psychotherapy experience ] in this case is in - vited to solve his own problem creatively . So he’s taking responsibility for it and responsibility for the problem and for the solution . But also maybe creativity in itself has a therapeutic effect . - P4 When it comes to the challenges of creating digital gamified psychotherapy , one of the participants reported finding it more challenging to communicate therapeutic techniques through a digi - tal medium . This complexity allowed for a deeper examination into all of the steps that a psychotherapist takes for granted in normal communication . In other words , creating gamified digital therapies allows for deconstructing in - person therapy sessions into micro steps and then carefully evaluating the therapeutic value of each of these steps as a digital version . 4 . 3 Potential of Psychotherapists Developing Gamified Therapy From the first workshop , our participants expressed passion and excitement for designing gamified therapy . However , although suc - cessful in completing their prototypes , some participants reported the need for more technical assistance during the development pro - cess . The level of technical support suggested ranged from none to full involvement of technical staff . For example , while P2 described the experience of using StudyCrafter as “easy” and “interesting , ” P4 reported the need for pairing psychotherapists with technical experts during the entire development process : “It was a great learn - ing experience and I enjoyed doing it . . . But I think in the future , if you’re going to really implement this . . . maybe it would be good to pair therapists with more technical people so that things can maybe move a lot quicker . ” P1 , on the other hand , envisions an iterative development setting where technical support is available upon re - quest ; “I would like to have a technician - They’re with me at first . And we would create the draft together . And then I’d like to take that project by myself and do some fine tuning . . . And then I’d probably even still do fine tuning 10 more times . ” Aside from technical challenges , our participants reported that the mere act of incorporating psychotherapeutic modalities and techniques into the design of a digital game was challenging . Yet , being fully immersed in the design process allowed for deep reflec - tion on what therapeutic techniques to use and how to incorporate those into the design of the game . To that end , our participants produced a variety of genres and mechanics that can be considered for designing psychotherapeutic games ( see Section 4 . 1 ) . Presenting and discussing the psychotherapies that each partici - pant created for the group ignited discussions on the possibilities of designing gamified therapies , including the aforementioned idea of having patients use StudyCrafter but also game ideas that surpass the capabilities of StudyCrafter . Participants further mentioned biometric sensors which provide biofeedback as a physiological CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Tochilnikova , et al . index of how stressed a person is . Robotics and artificial intelli - gence were considered in reference to providing emotional support without human judgment . Digital pets were mentioned in reference to achieving acceptance and instant relief : Can we get a little kitten we show people : little furry cuddle animals of various kinds ? Will that work ? Will that bring their anxiety down ? Will that make them feel better ? - P6 As such , we see a tension between the therapists’ desires of in - corporating advanced technologies into therapy , and the technical barriers to accomplish their vision . This tension leads both to frus - tration yet serves to generate motivation to learn a new technology . Although this tension may have been experienced as ‘learned help - lessness’ by P7 and driven her to leave our study , for the rest of our participants it was manageable and productive . Although technical support is requested in varying levels , we see an overall willingness and interest by the therapists to act as game designers . We also observe an eagerness to continue to explore gamifying therapy : I have zero experience in this , as I’m sure you’ll learn when I present my project , but I’m very excited to learn it . And again , the more we can get kind of mental health services out there , the better . - P5 5 Discussion In our work , we invited psychotherapists to exercise their creative autonomy by designing their own gamified psychotherapies with minimal technical support . Here , we reflect on our findings , starting with discussing our approach to gamifying therapy . We then discuss the opportunities and considerations for the future of gamified psychotherapy , followed by the limitations of our study . 5 . 1 Psychotherapists Can Be Designers As demonstrated in Section 4 , the study supports that ( 1 ) non - designer psychotherapists can take ownership of design and make creative and engaging games with StudyCrafter ; and ( 2 ) the idea of using gamified therapy is embraced by existing psychotherapists . In their design process participants focused on the objective and the tool of creation simultaneously [ 43 ] . We empowered users to iterate on their work and engage actively in the continuous development of their gamified therapies . This process , known as rapid iterative prototyping , was facilitated through peer - reviews . Our workshops provided them with the ability to create a digitized psychotherapy independent of a third party ( i . e . , a developer ) . This extends the traditional notion of system design by allowing users to become co - designers [ 29 , 84 , 95 ] . Participatory design or co - design has been the paradigm in the realm of gamifying psychotherapy [ 29 , 84 , 95 ] . The iterative process of creation is restricted via the creative capabilities of the devel - oper and the communication abilities of the psychotherapist in charge . The interdisciplinary nature of the collaboration between developers and psychotherapists might result in a gap between initial vision and result . This is accentuated by therapists having inadequate knowledge about digital design and its production pro - cess , while also being unfamiliar with functionalities of technical systems and operational norms in the gaming industry . Thus , the effectiveness and acuity of a given therapy would primarily pivot on the game designer , specifically , on their level of comprehension of psychotherapy and technical execution skills . As both parties have different prerogatives about design , this degree of imbalance in the level of influence on design decisions , in a co - creation process , confuses the singularity and clarity of purpose of the overall design [ 52 ] . In this study , we attempted to resolve such issues ( catalyzed by a co - design process ) , by bridging a major gap which bypasses the issue of technical skill insufficiency on the part of psychotherapists , enabling them to have exclusive authorship of their curated digital therapies , undiluted by any external design . This is achieved by di - rectly providing psychotherapists with user - friendly , independent publishing tools like Studycrafter . Yeah , like I felt that I was as I was doing my project . Like , at first it was arduous , then it was unbearable , trying to deal with the technical aspects of the first time . But then once I understood the technical and then for me , when I got to the sound options , I really started to have fun and then the creativity started to flow . - P1 Psychotherapists requested real - time technological support to help them develop the details of their game . However , the support they requested was not related to designing the games at a con - ceptual or ideational level . Rather , the psychotherapists needed skill - level assistance from support staff to implement their ideas . We propose that the following enhancements should be made to the platform to develop gamified therapy . First , the design process should provide a more timely and structured experience for learn - ing the tools themselves , so users can better navigate the tools independently . Second , a library of therapeutic components that were collected from this workshop should be provided so users can apply them more easily in the future ( see below discussion on ‘design examples’ ) . Third , there is an opportunity to consider the involvement of AI to assist in the creation of gamified therapy [ 50 ] . 5 . 2 Opportunities and Considerations for Gamified Psychotherapy We identified the following opportunities and considerations for the future of gamified psychotherapy , and by extension gamified therapy . While our work and some of our findings are idiosyncratic to psychotherapy , we argue that several of these opportunities and considerations apply to gamified and even digital therapy at large . Digital therapies can leverage the genres and mechanics we identified , as well as be built with authoring tools . Therapeutic Game Genres and Mechanics . By analyzing the psychotherapist - designed artifacts from a game design and psy - chotherapy perspective , we identified key genres and mechanics of gamified psychotherapies . Specifically , we found four game genres ( educational , advocacy , call to action , and hybrid ) and five mechan - ics ( DBT , CBT , diverting attention , removing uncertainty , and giving sensory feedback ) . These genres and mechanics are important to articulate so that others may apply and use them , and this could lead to establishing principles for therapeutic game design similar to how in game design at large ‘game design patterns’ are identified to be re - used by others [ 14 ] . Future authoring tools to create such games can also build on these principles , for example , by support - ing the creative process with templates based on these principles . However , future work should first seek to diversify . While we found “Guilty of Talking Too Much” : How Psychotherapists Gamify Therapy CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA a rich diversity in the psychotherapists - designed artifacts , we only worked with six psychotherapists who each created a single gam - ified psychotherapy . Notably , the participating psychotherapists practiced CBT and DBT foremost , which was reflected in their games . Thus , by expanding this approach to more therapists , more genres and mechanics may be identified . Another challenge is to clinically prove the therapeutic effect of the identified genres and mechanics , which will need to be addressed in follow - up studies . In fact , it remains an open question what the effectiveness is of the psychotherapist - designed gamified therapies , and how much it can support in - person and self - administered therapy . Need for Design Examples and Analytics . A successful au - thoring tool would allow psychotherapists to freely refine the game components and move quickly without being constrained by the interface and technology . We propose that the tools for creating psychotherapeutic games should have the ability to store examples of scenarios and components that can inspire the creative process – thus leveraging design examples , which is a proven method in other design fields [ 56 , 57 ] . Based on our observation that psy - chotherapists draw inspiration from therapeutic techniques that they already use , we suggest that the games or the tool would ini - tially be organized around therapeutic techniques in combination with characters and stories that represent typical cases , and then allow room to move into customization and personalization . We further note that there is a need to look into the analysis of gami - fied therapies , and specifically how such information is provided to psychotherapists . When gamified therapies will complement face - to - face therapy , it would be beneficial if psychotherapists can extract meaningful information from the play data in order to en - hance face - to - face therapy . Such analysis belongs to the areas of game analytics [ 39 ] and game data visualization [ 64 ] . Customization of Therapy . Although the existence and uni - versal adoption of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM ) suggests the standardization of treatment , much of the literature makes a case for customizing psychotherapy ( see [ 10 , 79 , 127 ] ) . Platforms such as StudyCrafter offer psychotherapists the possibility of creating personalized gamified therapies curated for specific patients or conditions , as suggested by P1 : This could become so organized that you could have StudyCrafters on CBT and DBT . Yes , it could . And then you could tailor it to your client . You know , [ for ] some clients . . . DBT works better than CBT . . . It can all be so organized and so tailored . - P1 Additionally , they enable therapists to draft and test prototypes with greater ease at accelerated rates and revisit them for improve - ments . All of this expands opportunities for developing a variety of therapeutic games for the masses on a case by case basis , encom - passing a vast spectrum of untreated or unidentified mental health issues . Paradoxically , these therapies could then potentially become the standardized form of treatments of certain niche disorders . Opportunities For Patients . As suggested by our psychother - apists , patients may also use platforms such as StudyCrafter to cu - rate a therapy for themselves . Being involved in the design process of gamifying psychotherapy may assist the patient in developing a healthy level of independence and self - sufficiency [ 94 ] . Such a process would inherently involve introspecting and making one’s symptomological experience and one’s process of resolution ex - plicit . Hence , cultivating a meta - process or self - awareness of their own experience would inherently be part of their design process . Extensive research shows that cultivating a meta - process is an es - sential part of healing from mental illness . When one sees their experience with a degree of separation ( from the outside ) their suffering becomes less personal and they learn to dis - identify from their condition [ 63 ] . Such a process would also require the patient to directly engage with their symptoms instead of falling victim to avoidance . Patient - designed gamified psychotherapy may also facilitate cathartic expression , providing patients with an outlet for self - expression , emotional validation , and feeling understood . Ethical Considerations As digital psychotherapy is a cutting edge field with few released and in - use digital therapies , we are just starting to learn about ethical considerations . Although there is no standard framework for evaluation of ethical constraints with regard to digital adaptations of psychotherapy , such considerations may be examined from the lens of feminist HCI principles . As feminist HCI offers a user - centric theoretical lens to view digitally - developed interaction programs , its framework may be useful in understanding the ethics of digital psychotherapy . Bardzell and Bardzell [ 11 ] identify the following six core qualities of feminist in - teraction : pluralism , participation , advocacy , ecology , embodiment , and self - disclosure . For example , the principle of embodiment may assist gamified psychotherapy designers in curating user - interface which appreciates the diversity of embodied experience . Each prin - ciple should be systematically considered across the design process , from concept - development to product release . Additionally , Martinez - Martin and Karola [ 83 ] identified “the ethical challenges presented by direct - to - consumer ( DTC ) digital psychotherapy services that do not involve oversight by a pro - fessional mental health provider . ” These challenges include : ( 1 ) Protecting sensitive user data , ( 2 ) Safety and efficacy of digital psy - chotherapy ventures , ( 3 ) Accountability and liability of developers and curators of such ventures , and ( 4 ) Acquiring informed consent from users . As gamified therapy evolves and becomes more ubiq - uitous , protocols and laws for protecting user data , such as their diagnoses and personal needs , will need to be systematically devel - oped to ensure data privacy . Considering the development of digital psychotherapy is in its nascence , there is currently no identified tension in the literature between therapists’ workflows and their interest in digitizing psychotherapy . However , both therapists and patients may have concerns about digital therapy being as effective as in - person therapy [ 101 ] . 5 . 3 Limitations Participants may have been motivated to imitate design archetypes based on the games presented to them as examples prior to the introduction of Studycrafter . This may have prevented participants from approaching the task of designing a digital therapeutic inter - vention without outside influence , thereby subliminally influencing their conceptualization process . Similarly , Studycrafter particularly enables the creation of inter - active narratives ( see Section 3 . 2 ) . However , by virtue of this facet , the platform may limit its users by providing an implicit design di - rection for their games , encouraging the design of narrative games CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Tochilnikova , et al . at the possible exclusion of other genres . Moreover , the identified genres may have been partially shaped by the platform and design features of Studycrafter . Future work should focus on applying gamified therapy via multiple creation tools so that these game themes can be verified independently of the creation tool used . However , we opted to limit to Studycrafter out of concern for user fatigue in learning a new technology and providing for a shared experience . Importantly , although participants discussed possibilities beyond the scope of Studycrafter as a platform , they rarely mentioned specific limitations regarding the conceptual de - velopment of therapists and patients designing their own gamified psychotherapy . Moreover , with more comprehensive creation tools the design process would require an extensive investment of time and effort to learn the specific design tool , as well as to complete the design process . We conjecture that the design process may have resulted in different outcomes in terms of game genres and typologies . More - over , the usage of more robust and capable creation tools without time constraints on participants could possibly have allowed for the development of full - scale playable digital games with more individually diverse concepts . These games could be explored fur - ther independently in future studies and tested for efficacy using empirical methods for evaluating serious games ( e . g . , [ 8 ] ) . Over the six week workshop period , some participants showed greater proficiency with Studycrafter than others . One participant found Studycrafter challenging and dropped out of our study after the first workshop . Five participants reported that learning Study - crafter initially overwhelmed their cognitive capacities . However , one participant mentioned that the process became easier over - time and was enjoyable after a certain point in the learning curve . Hence , mastering Studycrafter could prove to be a hurdle based on the individual’s familiarity with technology . Thus , there is a need for further simplification , the inclusion of a formal tutorial , and workshop structure designed to be inclusive to participants with a broader range of technology literacy . Furthermore , participants discussed the importance of introspec - tion and independence for patients creating their own gamified therapy . However , allowing and encouraging patients to curate their own therapy without the guidance and supervision of a trained professional poses concerns related to safety and efficacy . Hence , external protocols with safeguards and safety features would have to be standardized into the design process . Such a process may be technologically complex and , thus , may not be viable for all psychotherapeutic approaches . Additionally , the issue of the digital divide will need to be addressed to include marginalized popula - tions like older adults and people with disability who have limited access to digital devices and technology [ 53 , 120 ] . Finally , as one of the author’s recruited participants through her professional network , self - selection and sampling bias were present . Such bias may have influenced the results . Future study will need to recruit the participants from a broader network . For example , the recruitment was done through networks of psychotherapists with a focus on professional qualification rather than expertise with technology . Therefore , much effort and time were utilized on mastering StudyCrafter technology , which left less time for the creative process of curating digital psychotherapy . 6 Conclusion In this exploratory study , we investigated letting psychothera - pists create their own unique gamified psychotherapies . From the psychotherapist - designed artifacts we extracted several genres for gamified therapy and game mechanics to facilitate therapeutic ef - fects , which are insights helpful toward establishing principles for psychotherapeutic game design . More importantly , our work demonstrates that psychotherapists can be designers and that we can learn from how psychotherapists gamify their therapy . If pro - vided with the right tools and support , the future of gamified psy - chotherapy may be ( co - ) created by psychotherapists . Acknowledgments This work was supported with funding from Northeastern Univer - sity . We further thank the psychotherapists for their participation . References [ 1 ] AnnemarieAbbing , AnnePonstein , SusanvanHooren , LeodeSonneville , Hanna Swaab , andErikBaars . 2018 . Theeffectivenessofarttherapyforanxietyinadults : A systematic review of randomised and non - randomised controlled trials . PLOS ONE 13 , 12 ( Dec . 2018 ) , e0208716 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0208716 Publisher : Public Library of Science . [ 2 ] Anna Amato . 2020 . What do students learn about experimental research by designinginteractivefictiongames ? . In TheInterdisciplinarityoftheLearningSci - ences , 14th International Conference of the Learning Sciences ( ICLS ) 2020 , Volume 1 ( pp . 553 - 556 ) , Vol . 1 . [ 3 ] Gerhard Andersson . 2016 . Internet - delivered psychological treatments . Annual Review of Clinical Psychology 12 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 157 – 179 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - clinpsy - 021815 - 093006 [ 4 ] Joanna J . Arch and Michelle G . Craske . 2009 . First - line treatment : A critical appraisal of cognitive behavioral therapy developments and alternatives . The Psychiatric Clinics of North America 32 , 3 ( Sept . 2009 ) , 525 – 547 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . psc . 2009 . 05 . 001 [ 5 ] Sylvester Arnab , Theodore Lim , Maira B . Carvalho , Francesco Bellotti , Sara de Freitas , Sandy Louchart , Neil Suttie , Riccardo Berta , and Alessandro De Gloria . 2015 . Mapping learning and game mechanics for serious games analysis . British JournalofEducationalTechnology 46 , 2 ( 2015 ) , 391 – 411 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / bjet . 12113 [ 6 ] American Psychiatric Association , American Psychiatric Association , et al . 2013 . Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders : DSM - 5 . Arlington , VA ( 2013 ) . [ 7 ] Autumn Backhaus , Zia Agha , Melissa L . Maglione , Andrea Repp , Bridgett Ross , Danielle Zuest , Natalie M . Rice - Thorp , James Lohr , and Steven R . Thorp . 2012 . Videoconferencing psychotherapy : A systematic review . Psychological Services 9 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 111 – 131 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0027924 Place : US Publisher : Educational Publishing Foundation . [ 8 ] Imre Dániel Báldy , Nikolaj Hansen , and Thomas Bjørner . 2021 . An engaging seriousgameaimingatawarenessoftherapyskillsassociatedwithsocialanxiety disorder . Mobile Networks and Applications ( 2021 ) , 1 – 12 . [ 9 ] Borwin Bandelow , Sophie Michaelis , and Dirk Wedekind . 2017 . Treatment of anxiety disorders . Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience 19 , 2 ( June 2017 ) , 93 – 107 . https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc / articles / PMC5573566 / [ 10 ] Jacques P Barber and Nili Solomonov . 2019 . Toward a personalized approach to psychotherapy outcome and the study of therapeutic change . World Psychiatry 18 , 3 ( 2019 ) , 291 . [ 11 ] Shaowen Bardzell and Jeffrey Bardzell . 2011 . Towards a feminist HCI methodol - ogy : social science , feminism , and HCI . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 675 – 684 . [ 12 ] Max V . Birk , Greg Wadley , Vero Vanden Abeele , Regan Mandryk , and John Torous . 2019 . Video games for mental health . Interactions 26 , 4 ( June 2019 ) , 32 – 36 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3328483 [ 13 ] Tara F . Bishop , Matthew J . Press , Salomeh Keyhani , and Harold Alan Pincus . 2014 . Acceptance of insurance by psychiatrists and the implications for access to mental health care . JAMA Psychiatry 71 , 2 ( Feb . 2014 ) , 181 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1001 / jamapsychiatry . 2013 . 2862 [ 14 ] Staffan Björk and Jussi Holopainen . 2006 . Games and design patterns . The game design reader ( 2006 ) , 410 – 437 . [ 15 ] Johanna Boettcher , Viktor Aström , Daniel Påhlsson , Ola Schenström , Gerhard Andersson , and Per Carlbring . 2014 . Internet - based mindfulness treatment for anxiety disorders : A randomized controlled trial . Behavior Therapy 45 , 2 ( March “Guilty of Talking Too Much” : How Psychotherapists Gamify Therapy CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA 2014 ) , 241 – 253 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . beth . 2013 . 11 . 003 [ 16 ] Cristina Botella , Juani Bretón - López , Soledad Quero , Rosa Baños , and Azucena Garcia - Palacios . 2010 . Treating cockroach phobia with augmented reality . Behavior therapy 41 ( Sept . 2010 ) , 401 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . beth . 2009 . 07 . 002 [ 17 ] Menna Brown , Noelle O’Neill , Hugo van Woerden , Parisa Eslambolchilar , Matt Jones , and Ann John . 2016 . Gamification and adherence to web - based mental health interventions : A systematic review . JMIR mental health 3 , 3 ( 2016 ) , e39 . [ 18 ] S . J . Brown , D . A . Lieberman , B . A . Germeny , Y . C . Fan , D . M . Wilson , and D . J . Pasta . 1997 . Educationalvideogameforjuvenilediabetes : Resultsofacontrolled trial . Medical Informatics = Medecine Et Informatique 22 , 1 ( March 1997 ) , 77 – 89 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3109 / 14639239709089835 [ 19 ] TimothyJ . BruceandSyAtezazSaeed . 1999 . Socialanxietydisorder : Acommon , underrecognized mental disorder . American Family Physician 60 , 8 ( Nov . 1999 ) , 2311 . https : / / www . aafp . org / afp / 1999 / 1115 / p2311 . html [ 20 ] Oğuz Turan Buruk and Oğuzhan Özcan . 2018 . Extracting design guidelines for wearables and movement in tabletop role - playing games via a research through design process . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174087 [ 21 ] Linda F . Campbell , John C . Norcross , Melba J . T . Vasquez , and Nadine J . Kaslow . 2013 . Recognition of psychotherapy effectiveness : The APA resolution . Psy - chotherapy ( Chicago , Ill . ) 50 , 1 ( March 2013 ) , 98 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0031817 [ 22 ] Valerie A . Canady . 2020 . FDA approves first video game Rx treatment for children with ADHD . Mental Health Weekly 30 , 26 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / mhw . 32423 [ 23 ] Adolfo J . Cangas , Noelia Navarro , José M . A . Parra , Juan J . Ojeda , Diego Cangas , Jose A . Piedra , and Jose Gallego . 2017 . Stigma - stop : A serious game against the stigma toward mental health in educational settings . Frontiers in Psychology 8 ( Aug . 2017 ) , 1385 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2017 . 01385 [ 24 ] Tolga Ceranoglu . 2010 . Video games in psychotherapy . Review of General Psychology 14 ( June 2010 ) , 141 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0019439 [ 25 ] Rosanna Chapman , Maria Loades , Gary O’Reilly , David Coyle , Mags Patterson , andPaulSalkovskis . 2016 . ‘PeskygNATs’ : Investigatingthefeasibilityofanovel computerized CBT intervention for adolescents with anxiety and / or depression in a tier 3 CAMHS setting . The Cognitive Behaviour Therapist 9 ( 2016 ) . [ 26 ] Cory K . Chen , Nicole Nehrig , Lauren Wash , Jennifer A . Schneider , Sagiv Ashkenazi , Elana Cairo , Angel F . Guyton , and Amy Palfrey . 2020 . When dis - tance brings us closer : Leveraging tele - psychotherapy to build deeper con - nection . Counselling Psychology Quarterly 0 , 0 ( June 2020 ) , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09515070 . 2020 . 1779031 [ 27 ] Vanessa Wan Sze Cheng , Tracey Davenport , Daniel Johnson , Kellie Vella , and IanB . Hickie . 2019 . Gamificationinappsandtechnologiesforimprovingmental health and well - being : Systematic review . JMIR mental health 6 , 6 ( June 2019 ) , e13717 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / 13717 [ 28 ] KristenR . Choi , MarySueV . Heilemann , AlexFauer , andMeredithMead . 2020 . A second pandemic : Mental health spillover from the novel Coronavirus ( COVID - 19 ) . Journal of the American Psychiatric Nurses Association 26 , 4 ( Aug . 2020 ) , 340 – 343 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1078390320919803 [ 29 ] Grant I . Christie , Matthew Shepherd , Sally N . Merry , Sarah Hopkins , Stephen Knightly , andKarolinaStasiak . 2019 . GamifyingCBTtodeliveremotionalhealth treatmenttoyoungpeopleonsmartphones . InternetInterventions 18 ( Dec . 2019 ) , 100286 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . invent . 2019 . 100286 [ 30 ] Marie - Laure Cléry - Melin , Fabrice Jollant , and Philip Gorwood . 2019 . Reward systems and cognitions in major depressive disorder . CNS spectrums 24 , 1 ( Feb . 2019 ) , 64 – 77 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S1092852918001335 [ 31 ] Kyaien O . Conner , Valire Carr Copeland , Nancy K . Grote , Gary Koeske , Daniel Rosen , CharlesF . Reynolds , andCharlotteBrown . 2010 . Mentalhealthtreatment seeking among older adults with depression : The impact of stigma and race . The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 18 , 6 ( June 2010 ) , 531 – 543 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1097 / JGP . 0b013e3181cc0366 [ 32 ] M . F . Costabile , D . Fogli , P . Mussio , and A . Piccinno . 2005 . A meta - design approachtoend - userdevelopment . In 2005IEEESymposiumonVisualLanguages and Human - Centric Computing ( VL / HCC’05 ) . 308 – 310 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / VLHCC . 2005 . 7 ISSN : 1943 - 6106 . [ 33 ] David Coyle and Gavin Doherty . 2009 . Clinical evaluations and collaborative design : Developing new technologies for mental healthcare interventions . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2051 – 2060 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1519013 [ 34 ] David Coyle , Hidde van der Meulen , Connal Tunney , Patricia Cooney , and Catherine Jackman . 2017 . Pesky gNATs : Using games to support mental health interventions for adolescents . ACM . https : / / researchrepository . ucd . ie / handle / 10197 / 9310 [ 35 ] Tisha L . Deen , John C . Fortney , and Gary Schroeder . 2013 . Patient acceptance of andinitiationandengagementintelepsychotherapyinprimarycare . Psychiatric Services 64 , 4 ( April 2013 ) , 380 – 384 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1176 / appi . ps . 201200198 Publisher : American Psychiatric Publishing . [ 36 ] Sebastian Deterding , Dan Dixon , Rilla Khaled , and Lennart Nacke . 2011 . From game design elements to gamefulness : Defining " gamification " . In Proceedings of the 15th International Academic MindTrek Conference : Envisioning Future Media Environments ( MindTrek ’11 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 9 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2181037 . 2181040 [ 37 ] Holger Dick , Hal Eden , Gerhard Fischer , and Jason Zietz . 2012 . Empowering users to become designers : Using meta - design environments to enable and motivate sustainable energy decisions . In Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference : Exploratory Papers , Workshop Descriptions , Industry Cases - Volume 2 ( PDC ’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 49 – 52 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2348144 . 2348160 [ 38 ] Christiane Eichenberg and Markus Schott . 2017 . Serious games for psychother - apy : A systematic review . Games for Health Journal 6 , 3 ( June 2017 ) , 127 – 135 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / g4h . 2016 . 0068 [ 39 ] Magy Seif El - Nasr , Anders Drachen , and Alessandro Canossa . 2016 . Game analytics . Springer . [ 40 ] Nick Errington - Evans . 2012 . Acupuncture for anxiety . CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 18 , 4 ( 2012 ) , 277 – 284 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1755 - 5949 . 2011 . 00254 . x [ 41 ] BornaFatehi , ChristofferHolmgård , SamSnodgrass , andCasperHarteveld . 2019 . Gamifying psychological assessment : Insights from gamifying the thematic apperception test . In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games . 1 – 12 . [ 42 ] Gerhard Fischer and Elisa Giaccardi . 2006 . Meta - design : A framework for the future of end - user development . In End User Development , Henry Lieberman , FabioPaternò , andVolkerWulf ( Eds . ) . SpringerNetherlands , Dordrecht , 427 – 457 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 1 - 4020 - 5386 - X _ 19 [ 43 ] G . Fischer , E . Giaccardi , Y . Ye , A . G . Sutcliffe , and N . Mehandjiev . 2004 . Meta - design : Amanifestoforend - userdevelopment . Commun . ACM 47 , 9 ( Sept . 2004 ) , 33 – 37 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1015864 . 1015884 [ 44 ] Gerhard Fischer and Eric Scharff . 2000 . Meta - design : Design for designers . In Proceedings of the 3rd conference on Designing interactive systems : processes , prac - tices , methods , and techniques ( DIS ’00 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 396 – 405 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 347642 . 347798 [ 45 ] Martin Fitzgerald and Gemma Ratcliffe . 2020 . Serious games , gamification , and serious mental illness : A scoping review . Psychiatric Services 71 , 2 ( Feb . 2020 ) , 170 – 183 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1176 / appi . ps . 201800567 Publisher : American Psychiatric Publishing . [ 46 ] Theresa M Fleming , Lynda Bavin , Karolina Stasiak , Eve Hermansson - Webb , SallyNMerry , ColleenCheek , MathijsLucassen , HoMingLau , BrittaPollmuller , and Sarah Hetrick . 2017 . Serious games and gamification for mental health : Current status and promising directions . Frontiers in psychiatry 7 ( 2017 ) , 215 . [ 47 ] Elisa Giaccardi and Gerhard Fischer . 2008 . Creativity and evolution : A metade - sign perspective . Digital Creativity 19 , 1 ( March 2008 ) , 19 – 32 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14626260701847456 [ 48 ] AlisonJGray . 2002 . Stigmainpsychiatry . JournaloftheRoyalSocietyofMedicine 95 , 2 ( Feb . 2002 ) , 72 – 76 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 014107680209500205 Publisher : SAGE Publications . [ 49 ] Eric J . Green . 2014 . The handbook of Jungian play therapy with children and adolescents . Johns Hopkins University Press , Baltimore , MD , US . Pages : xxiv , 177 . [ 50 ] Matthew Guzdial , Nicholas Liao , Jonathan Chen , Shao - Yu Chen , Shukan Shah , Vishwa Shah , Joshua Reno , Gillian Smith , and Mark O . Riedl . 2019 . Friend , collaborator , student , manager : How design of an AI - driven game level editor affects creators . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300854 [ 51 ] Jacob Habgood and Mark Overmars . 2006 . The game maker’s apprentice : Game development for beginners . Apress . [ 52 ] KamiHansonandBrettE . Shelton . 2008 . Designanddevelopmentofvirtualreal - ity : Analysisofchallengesfacedbyeducators . JournalofEducationalTechnology & Society 11 , 1 ( 2008 ) , 118 – 131 . https : / / www . jstor . org / stable / jeductechsoci . 11 . 1 . 118 Publisher : International Forum of Educational Technology & Society . [ 53 ] VickiLHanson . 2009 . Ageandwebaccess : thenextgeneration . In Proceedingsof the 2009 International Cross - Disciplinary Conference on Web Accessibililty ( W4A ) . 7 – 15 . [ 54 ] Casper Harteveld . 2011 . Triadic game design : Balancing reality , meaning and play . Springer - Verlag , London . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 84996 - 157 - 8 [ 55 ] Casper Harteveld , Sam Snodgrass , Omid Mohaddesi , Jack Hart , Tyler Corwin , and Guillermo Rodriguez . 2018 . The development of a methodology for gamify - ing surveys . 461 – 467 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3270316 . 3271544 [ 56 ] Scarlett R Herring , Chia - Chen Chang , Jesse Krantzler , and Brian P Bailey . 2009 . Getting inspired ! : Understanding how and why examples are used in creative design practice . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 87 – 96 . [ 57 ] Scarlett R Herring , Brett R Jones , and Brian P Bailey . 2009 . Idea generation techniques among creative professionals . In 2009 42nd Hawaii International CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Tochilnikova , et al . Conference on System Sciences . IEEE , 1 – 10 . [ 58 ] Michel Ed Hersen and William Ed Sledge . 2002 . Encyclopedia of psychotherapy , Vol . 2 : IZ . Academic Press . [ 59 ] Emily A . Holmes , Ella L . James , Thomas Coode - Bate , and Catherine Deeprose . 2009 . Can playing the computer game " Tetris " reduce the build - up of flashbacks for trauma ? A proposal from cognitive science . PloS One 4 , 1 ( 2009 ) , e4153 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0004153 [ 60 ] H . LynnHorne - Moyer , BrianH . Moyer , DrewC . Messer , andElizabethS . Messer . 2014 . Theuseofelectronicgamesintherapy : Areviewwithclinicalimplications . Current Psychiatry Reports 16 , 12 ( 2014 ) , 520 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11920 - 014 - 0520 - 6 [ 61 ] Hsiu - Fang Hsieh and Sarah E . Shannon . 2005 . Three approaches to qualitative content analysis . Qualitative Health Research 15 , 9 ( Nov . 2005 ) , 1277 – 1288 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1049732305276687 Publisher : SAGE Publications Inc . [ 62 ] Jason K Hsu , Richard Thibodeau , Stephanie J Wong , Daniel Zukiwsky , Sara Cecile , and David M Walton . 2011 . A “Wii” bit of fun : The effects of adding Nintendo Wii® Bowling to a standard exercise regimen for residents of long - term care with upper extremity dysfunction . Physiotherapy Theory and Practice 27 , 3 ( April 2011 ) , 185 – 193 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3109 / 09593985 . 2010 . 483267 [ 63 ] Dilwar Hussain . 2015 . Meta - cognition in mindfulness : A conceptual analysis . ( Oct . 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 23668 / psycharchives . 1972 [ 64 ] Nithesh Javvaji , Casper Harteveld , and Magy Seif El - Nasr . 2020 . Understanding playerpatternsbycombiningknowledge - baseddataabstractionwithinteractive visualization . In Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play . 254 – 266 . [ 65 ] Yasmin B . Kafai . 2006 . Playing and making games for learning : Instructionist and constructionist perspectives for game studies . Games and Culture 1 , 1 ( Jan . 2006 ) , 36 – 40 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1555412005281767 Publisher : SAGE Publications . [ 66 ] Pamela M . Kato . 2010 . Video games in health care : Closing the gap . Review of General Psychology 14 , 2 ( June 2010 ) , 113 – 121 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0019441 Publisher : SAGE Publications Inc . [ 67 ] Alan E . Kazdin and Stacey L . Blase . 2011 . Rebooting psychotherapy research and practice to reduce the burden of mental illness . Perspectives on Psychologi - cal Science 6 , 1 ( Jan . 2011 ) , 21 – 37 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1745691610393527 Publisher : SAGE Publications Inc . [ 68 ] FengfengKe . 2008 . Acasestudyofcomputergamingformath : Engagedlearning from gameplay ? Computers & Education 51 , 4 ( Dec . 2008 ) , 1609 – 1620 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2008 . 03 . 003 [ 69 ] Jarrod Kelly . 2020 . Level up : Using gamification to improve student evaluation and motivation . ( Feb . 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 33774 / apsa - 2020 - 0cxhs [ 70 ] Sarah J Kertz , J MacLaren Kelly , Kimberly T Stevens , Matthew Schrock , and Sara B Danitz . 2017 . A review of free iPhone applications designed to target anxietyandworry . JournalofTechnologyinBehavioralScience 2 , 2 ( 2017 ) , 61 – 70 . [ 71 ] Rilla Khaled and Asimina Vasalou . 2014 . Bridging serious games and participa - tory design . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 2 , 2 ( May 2014 ) , 93 – 100 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2014 . 03 . 001 [ 72 ] Batul Khodakarami , Farzaneh Soltani , Golalizadeh Golalizadeh , Alireza Solta - nian , and Hussein Mohagheghi . 2015 . The effect of spiritual counseling on depression , anxiety and stress of pregnant women : A randomized clinical trial . Avicenna Journal of Nursing and Midwifery Care 23 , 4 ( Dec . 2015 ) , 39 – 53 . http : / / nmj . umsha . ac . ir / article - 1 - 1429 - en . html Publisher : Avicenna Journal of Nursing and Midwifery Care . [ 73 ] Scott H . Kollins , Denton J . DeLoss , Elena Cañadas , Jacqueline Lutz , Robert L . Findling , RichardS . E . Keefe , JefferyN . Epstein , AndrewJ . Cutler , andStephenV . Faraone . 2020 . A novel digital intervention for actively reducing severity of paediatric ADHD ( STARS - ADHD ) : A randomised controlled trial . The Lancet . Digital Health 2 , 4 ( April 2020 ) , e168 – e178 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S2589 - 7500 ( 20 ) 30017 - 0 [ 74 ] Anton Käll , Sofia Jägholm , Hugo Hesser , Frida Andersson , Aleksi Mathaldi , Beatrice Tiger Norkvist , Roz Shafran , and Gerhard Andersson . 2020 . Internet - based cognitive behavior therapy for loneliness : A pilot randomized controlled trial . Behavior Therapy 51 , 1 ( Jan . 2020 ) , 54 – 68 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . beth . 2019 . 05 . 001 [ 75 ] Robert L Leahy . 2017 . Cognitive therapy techniques : A practitioner’s guide . Guil - ford Publications . [ 76 ] Sherman A Lee , Amanda A Mathis , Mary C Jobe , and Emily A Pappalardo . 2020 . Clinically significant fear and anxiety of COVID - 19 : A psychometric examination of the Coronavirus Anxiety Scale . Psychiatry research 290 ( 2020 ) , 113112 . [ 77 ] Zakkoyya H . Lewis , Maria C . Swartz , and Elizabeth J . Lyons . 2016 . What’s the point ? : A review of reward systems implemented in gamification interventions . Games for Health Journal 5 , 2 ( April 2016 ) , 93 – 99 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / g4h . 2015 . 0078 Publisher : Mary Ann Liebert , Inc . , publishers . [ 78 ] Robert C . Lorenz , Tobias Gleich , Jürgen Gallinat , and Simone Kühn . 2015 . Video game training and the reward system . Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 9 ( 2015 ) , 40 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fnhum . 2015 . 00040 [ 79 ] Wolfgang Lutz , Dirk Zimmermann , Viola NLS Müller , Anne - Katharina Deisen - hofer , and Julian A Rubel . 2017 . Randomized controlled trial to evaluate the effects of personalized prediction and adaptation tools on treatment outcome in outpatient psychotherapy : study protocol . BMC psychiatry 17 , 1 ( 2017 ) , 1 – 11 . [ 80 ] Eilidh Macleod and Robin J . S . Sloan . 2017 . Recover : Designing a videogame to assist with recovery from PTSD . https : / / rke . abertay . ac . uk / en / publications / recover - designing - a - videogame - to - assist - with - recovery - from - ptsd [ 81 ] Cathy A . Malchiodi . 2006 . Expressive therapies . Guilford Press . [ 82 ] Cathy A . Malchiodi . 2012 . Art therapy and health care . Guilford Press . [ 83 ] Nicole Martinez - Martin and Karola Kreitmair . 2018 . Ethical issues for direct - to - consumer digital psychotherapy apps : Addressing accountability , data protec - tion , and consent . JMIR mental health 5 , 2 ( 2018 ) , e32 . [ 84 ] Maria Matsangidou , Boris Otkhmezuri , Chee Siang Ang , Marios Avraamides , Giuseppe Riva , Andrea Gaggioli , Despoina Iosif , and Maria Karekla . 2020 . “Now i can see me” designing a multi - user virtual reality remote psychotherapy for body weight and shape concerns . Human – Computer Interaction ( Oct . 2020 ) , 1 – 27 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370024 . 2020 . 1788945 [ 85 ] Annabel McDonald , Jessica A . Eccles , Sanaz Fallahkhair , and Hugo D . Critchley . 2020 . Online psychotherapy : Trailblazing digital healthcare . BJPsych Bulletin 44 , 2 ( April 2020 ) , 60 – 66 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1192 / bjb . 2019 . 66 Publisher : Cambridge University Press . [ 86 ] Sally N . Merry , Karolina Stasiak , Matthew Shepherd , Chris Frampton , Theresa Fleming , and Mathijs F . G . Lucassen . 2012 . The effectiveness of SPARX , a computerised self help intervention for adolescents seeking help for depression : Randomisedcontrollednon - inferioritytrial . BMJ : BritishMedicalJournal ( 2012 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1136 / bmj . e2598 [ 87 ] Adriana S . Miu , Hoa T . Vo , Jayme M . Palka , Christopher R . Glowacki , and Reed J . Robinson . 2020 . Teletherapy with serious mental illness populations during COVID - 19 : Telehealth conversion and engagement . Counselling Psychology Quarterly 0 , 0 ( July 2020 ) , 1 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09515070 . 2020 . 1791800 [ 88 ] Omid Mohaddesi , Yifan Sun , Rana Azghandi , Rozhin Doroudi , Sam Snodgrass , Ozlem Ergun , Jacqueline Griffin , David Kaeli , Stacy Marsella , and Casper Harteveld . 2020 . Introducing gamettes : A playful approach for capturing decision - making for informing behavioral models . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 13 . [ 89 ] David L . Morgan . 1993 . Qualitative content analysis : A guide to paths not taken . Qualitative Health Research 3 , 1 ( Feb . 1993 ) , 112 – 121 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 104973239300300107 Publisher : SAGE Publications Inc . [ 90 ] Larry D Morries , Paolo Cassano , and Theodore A Henderson . 2015 . Treatments for traumatic brain injury with emphasis on transcranial near - infrared laser phototherapy . NeuropsychiatricDiseaseandTreatment 11 ( Aug . 2015 ) , 2159 – 2175 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2147 / NDT . S65809 [ 91 ] Benedikt Morschheuser , Lobna Hassan , Karl Werder , and Juho Hamari . 2018 . How to design gamification ? A method for engineering gamified software . Information and Software Technology 95 ( March 2018 ) , 219 – 237 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . infsof . 2017 . 10 . 015 [ 92 ] Siti Azreena Mubin and Matthew Wee Ann Poh . 2019 . A review on gamification design framework : How they incorporated for autism children . In 2019 4th International Conference and Workshops on Recent Advances and Innovations in Engineering ( ICRAIE ) . 1 – 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICRAIE47735 . 2019 . 9037765 [ 93 ] Melinda Mueller and Gene Pekarik . 2000 . Treatment duration prediction : Client accuracy and its relationship to dropout , outcome , and satisfaction . Psychother - apy : Theory , Research , Practice , Training 37 , 2 ( 2000 ) , 117 . [ 94 ] Joanna Nieznaj . 2021 . Gamification for the long - term unemployed youth : Digital concept ideas for increasing motivation in the Swedish Welfare System . http : / / urn . kb . se / resolve ? urn = urn : nbn : se : liu : diva - 177665 [ 95 ] Laura Ospina - Pinillos , Tracey Davenport , Antonio Mendoza Diaz , Alvaro Navarro - Mancilla , Elizabeth M . Scott , and Ian B . Hickie . 2019 . Using participa - torydesignmethodologiestoco - designandculturallyadaptthespanishversion of the mental health eClinic : Qualitative study . Journal of Medical Internet Research 21 , 8 ( Aug . 2019 ) , e14127 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / 14127 Publisher : JMIR Publications Inc . , Toronto , Canada . [ 96 ] SagarV . Parikh , ZindelV . Segal , SophieGrigoriadis , ArunV . Ravindran , SidneyH . Kennedy , Raymond W . Lam , and Scott B . Patten . 2009 . Canadian network for moodandanxietytreatments ( CANMAT ) clinicalguidelinesforthemanagement ofmajordepressivedisorderinadults . II . Psychotherapyaloneorincombination with antidepressant medication . Journal of Affective Disorders 117 ( Oct . 2009 ) , S15 – S25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jad . 2009 . 06 . 042 [ 97 ] Lane Pederson and Cortney Sidwell Pederson . 2012 . The expanded dialectical behaviortherapyskillstrainingmanual : PracticalDBTforself - help , andindividual and group treatment settings . PESI Publishing & Media . [ 98 ] Cody Phillips , Madison Klarkowski , Julian Frommel , Carl Gutwin , and Re - gan L . Mandryk . 2021 . Identifying commercial games with therapeutic po - tential through a content analysis of Steam reviews . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 , CHI PLAY ( Oct . 2021 ) , 255 : 1 – 255 : 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3474682 [ 99 ] Barbara Poletti , Sofia Tagini , Agostino Brugnera , Laura Parolin , Luca Pievani , Roberta Ferrucci , Angelo Compare , and Vincenzo Silani . 2020 . Telepsychother - apy : A leaflet for psychotherapists in the age of COVID - 19 . A review of the “Guilty of Talking Too Much” : How Psychotherapists Gamify Therapy CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA evidence . Counselling Psychology Quarterly 0 , 0 ( May 2020 ) , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09515070 . 2020 . 1769557 [ 100 ] Octavian Postolache , Filipe Lourenço , J . M . Dias Pereira , and Pedro Girão . 2017 . Serious game for physical rehabilitation : Measuring the effectiveness of virtual and real training environments . In 2017 IEEE International Instrumentation and Measurement Technology Conference ( I2MTC ) . 1 – 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / I2MTC . 2017 . 7969978 [ 101 ] Brenna N . Renn , Theresa J . Hoeft , Heather Sophia Lee , Amy M . Bauer , and Patricia A . Areán . 2019 . Preference for in - person psychotherapy versus digital psychotherapy options for depression : Survey of adults in the U . S . npj Digi - tal Medicine 2 , 1 ( Feb . 2019 ) , 1 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41746 - 019 - 0077 - 1 Publisher : Nature Publishing Group . [ 102 ] Mark Owen Riedl and Vadim Bulitko . 2013 . Interactive narrative : An intelligent systems approach . AI Magazine 34 , 1 ( 2013 ) , 67 – 67 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1609 / aimag . v34i1 . 2449 Number : 1 . [ 103 ] Andrew Rollings and Dave Morris . 1999 . Game architecture and design . Paraglyph Pr . [ 104 ] SyAtezazSaeed , DianaJ . Antonacci , andRichardM . Bloch . 2010 . Exercise , yoga , and meditation for depressive and anxiety disorders . American Family Physician 81 , 8 ( April 2010 ) , 981 – 986 . https : / / www . aafp . org / afp / 2010 / 0415 / p981 . html [ 105 ] Noor Shaker , Julian Togelius , and Mark J . Nelson . 2016 . Procedural content generation in games ( 1st ed . 2016 edition ed . ) . Springer , New York , NY . [ 106 ] Yoav Shoham . 2008 . Computer science and game theory . Commun . ACM 51 , 8 ( Aug . 2008 ) , 74 – 79 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1378704 . 1378721 [ 107 ] LeslieSokolandMarciFox . 2019 . Thecomprehensiveclinician’sguidetocognitive behavioral therapy . Pesi . [ 108 ] Norbert Streitz , Panos Markopoulos , and Shin’ichi Konomi . 2020 . Distributed , ambient and pervasive interactions : 8th international conference , DAPI 2020 , held aspartofthe22ndHCIinternationalconference , HCII2020 , Copenhagen , Denmark , July 19 - 24 , 2020 , proceedings . Springer Nature . [ 109 ] Steven C Sutherland , Casper Harteveld , Gillian Smith , Joseph Schwartz , and Cigdem Talgar . 2015 . Exploring digital games as a research and educational platform for replicating experiments . In NEDSI Conference . [ 110 ] J Szer . 1983 . Video games as physiotherapy . The Medical Journal of Australia 1 , 9 ( April 1983 ) , 401 – 402 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5694 / j . 1326 - 5377 . 1983 . tb136123 . x [ 111 ] Apphia Jia Qi Tan , Cindy Ching Siang Lee , Patrick Yongxing Lin , Simon Cooper , Lydia Siew Tiang Lau , Wei Ling Chua , and Sok Ying Liaw . 2017 . Designing and evaluating the effectiveness of a serious game for safe administration of blood transfusion : A randomized controlled trial . Nurse Education Today 55 ( Aug . 2017 ) , 38 – 44 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . nedt . 2017 . 04 . 027 [ 112 ] Katie Salen Tekinbaş and Eric Zimmerman . 2003 . Rules of play : Game design fundamentals . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , USA . [ 113 ] Elina Tochilnikova . 2020 . Towards a general theory of boredom ( 1st edition ed . ) . Routledge . [ 114 ] Giovanni Maria Troiano , Qinyu Chen , Ángela Vargas Alba , Gregorio Robles , GillianSmith , MichaelCassidy , EliTucker - Raymond , GillianPuttick , andCasper Harteveld . 2020 . Exploring how game genre in student - designed games influ - ences computational thinking development . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376755 [ 115 ] Giovanni M Troiano , Matthew Wood , Mustafa Feyyaz Sonbudak , Riddhi Chan - dan Padte , and Casper Harteveld . 2021 . Are we now post - COVID ? : Exploring post - COVID futures through a gamified story completion method . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 ( DIS ’21 ) . Association for Computing Ma - chinery , New York , NY , USA , 48 – 63 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461778 . 3462069 [ 116 ] Jack Tsai , Minda Huang , Billy Huang , Kathleen Daniels , Casper Harteveld , and Dan Jackson . 2020 . Psychosocial and mental health characteristics of RePresent game users . The journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law ( 2020 ) . [ 117 ] Veronica Tucci and Nidal Moukaddam . 2017 . We are the hollow men : The worldwide epidemic of mental illness , psychiatric and behavioral emergencies , and its impact on patients and providers . Journal of Emergencies , Trauma , and Shock 10 , 1 ( 2017 ) , 4 – 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4103 / 0974 - 2700 . 199517 [ 118 ] Anouk Tuijnman , Isabela Granic , Josh Whitkin , and Rutger C . M . E . Engels . 2017 . DevelopingandtestingScrollQuest : Avideogametargetingrejectionsensitivity in adolescents . In Extended Abstracts Publication of the Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play ( CHI PLAY ’17 Extended Abstracts ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 213 – 221 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3130859 . 3131302 [ 119 ] Bhavika Vajawat , Prateek Varshney , and Debanjan Banerjee . 2021 . Digital gaming interventions in psychiatry : Evidence , applications and challenges . Psychiatry Research 295 ( 2021 ) , 113585 . [ 120 ] Jan Van Dijk . 2020 . The digital divide . John Wiley & Sons . [ 121 ] Christian A . Webb , Isabelle M . Rosso , and Scott L . Rauch . 2017 . Internet - based cognitive behavioral therapy for depression : Current progress & fu - ture directions . Harvard Review of Psychiatry 25 , 3 ( 2017 ) , 114 – 122 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1097 / HRP . 0000000000000139 [ 122 ] Brenda K . Wiederhold , Ian T . Miller , and Mark D . Wiederhold . 2018 . Using virtual reality to mobilize health care : Mobile virtual reality technology for attenuation of anxiety and pain . IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine 7 , 1 ( Jan . 2018 ) , 106 – 109 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MCE . 2017 . 2715365 Conference Name : IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine . [ 123 ] Lea Winerman . 2017 . The cost of treatment . http : / / www . apa . org / monitor / 2017 / 03 / numbers [ 124 ] Victoria Wochna Loerzel , John M . Clochesy , and Patricia I . Geddie . 2020 . Using serious games to increase prevention and self - management of chemotherapy - induced nausea and vomiting in older adults with cancer . Oncology Nursing Forum 47 , 5 ( Sept . 2020 ) , 567 – 576 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1188 / 20 . ONF . 567 - 576 [ 125 ] Michael Wright , Mary Marlino , and Tamara Sumner . 2002 . Meta - design of a community digital library . D - Lib Magazine 8 , 5 ( May 2002 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1045 / may2002 - wright [ 126 ] Irvin D . Yalom . 2020 . Existential psychotherapy . Hachette UK . [ 127 ] Sigal Zilcha - Mano . 2021 . Toward personalized psychotherapy : The importance of the trait - like / state - like distinction for understanding therapeutic change . American Psychologist 76 , 3 ( 2021 ) , 516 . [ 128 ] John Zimmerman , Jodi Forlizzi , and Shelley Evenson . 2007 . Research through design as a method for interaction design research in HCI . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 493 – 502 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1240624 . 1240704