PROBLEM SOLVING Analyzes problems by evaluating available information and resources ; develops effective , viable solutions to problems which can help drive the effectiveness of the agency . NEEDS IMPROVEMENT MEETS EXPECTATIONS EXCEEDS EXPECTATIONS Analysis Engages in little or no independent thought and analysis ; uses a haphazard approach to problem solving . Incorrectly applies rules , standards and precedent . Independently analyzes issues and problems and undertakes or proposes a course of action using a logical , systematic , sequential approach . Correctly applies rules , standards and precedent . Engages in comprehensive analysis of issues and problems using a logical , systematic , sequential approach to find and implement superior solutions that take into account applicable rules , standards and precedent . Conceptual Thinking Fails to consider or take into account all relevant factors . Proposed solutions lack consideration of hypothetical or abstract components that may impact success . Finds effective solutions by taking a holistic , abstract , or theoretical perspective . Uses a holistic , abstract or theoretical perspective to find compelling solutions that take into account all relevant factors . Outcomes and Feasibility Inconsistently predicts consequences , implications and feasibility of alternative solutions . Reliably predicts and takes into account likely outcomes , consequences and the feasibility of alternatives to problems . Proactively addresses probable outcomes , consequences and feasibility of alternatives taking into account inter - relationships between issues . Uncertainty and Resourcefulness Does not address problems or issues unless given specific guidelines or directives . Copes with uncertainty or limited facts to develop a feasible solution . Develops highly effective solutions despite a lack of definitive information . For Supervisors Tends to make decisions about the day - to - day operations of the organization that could be handled at a lower organizational level . Delegates decision - making responsibilities to the appropriate organizational level and holds decision makers accountable for the results of their decisions . Has an established reputation for being an innovative and creative problem solver and is willing to help others solve problems .