Current Biology 21 , 1460 – 1469 , September 13 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2011 . 06 . 065 Article Cortactin Controls Cell Motility and Lamellipodial Dynamics by Regulating ECM Secretion Bong Hwan Sung , 1 Xiaodong Zhu , 2 Irina Kaverina , 2 and Alissa M . Weaver 1 , 3 , * 1 Department of Cancer Biology 2 Department of Cell and Developmental Biology 3 Department of Pathology Vanderbilt University Medical Center , Nashville , TN 37232 , USA Summary Background : Branched actin assembly is critical for both cell motility and membrane trafﬁcking . The branched actin regu - latorcortactinisgenerallyconsideredtopromotecellmigrationbycontrollingleading - edge lamellipodial dynamics . However , recent reports indicate that lamellipodia are not required for cell movement , suggesting an alternate mechanism . Results : Because cortactin also regulates membrane traf - ﬁcking and adhesion dynamics , we hypothesized that altered secretion of extracellular matrix ( ECM ) and / or integrin traf - ﬁcking might underlie motility defects of cortactin - knockdown ( KD ) cells . Consistent with a primary defect in ECM secretion , both motility and lamellipodial defects of cortactin - KD cells were fully rescued by plating on increasing concentrations of exogenous ECM . Furthermore , cortactin - KD cell speed defects were rescued on cell - free autocrine ECM produced by control cells , but not on ECM produced by cortactin - KD cells . Investigation of the mechanism revealed that whereas endocytosed ﬁbronectin ( FN ) is redeposited at the basal cell surface by control cells , cortactin - KD cells exhibit defective FN secretion and abnormal FN retention in a late endocytic / lysosomal compartment . Cortactin - KD motility and FN deposi - tion defects were phenocopied by KD in control cells of the lysosomal fusion regulator synaptotagmin - 7 . Rescue of cor - tactin - KD cells by expression of cortactin - binding domain mutants revealed that interaction with the Arp2 / 3 complex and actin ﬁlaments is essential for rescue of both cell motility and autocrine ECM secretion phenotypes , whereas binding of SH3 - domain partners is not required . Conclusions : Efﬁcient cell motility , promoted by cortactin regulation of branched actin networks , involves processing and resecretion of internalized ECM from a late endosomal / lysosomal compartment . Introduction Cell motility is a fundamental component of many physiolog - ical and pathological processes , including embryogenesis , wound healing , and cancer metastasis . Intrinsic cell motility cycles canonically consist of protrusion of leading - edge lamel - lipodia , formation of new adhesions , cell body contraction , and tail detachment . These cycles are modiﬁed by cellular interaction with extrinsic factors , including growth factors and extracellular matrix ( ECM ) [ 1 ] . A motility molecule that has received a great deal of attention is cortactin , as a result of its presence in leading - edge lamellipodia and its function as a regulator of the actin - nucleating Arp2 / 3 complex [ 2 ] . Numerous studies have shown that cortactin regulates cell migration in diverse cell types [ 3 ] , including Drosophila border cells migrating in vivo [ 4 ] . In contrast , some other reports have found little or no effect of cortactin expression on cell migra - tion , suggesting either cell type or microenvironmental inﬂu - ences [ 5 , 6 ] . The underlying mechanism for cortactin regulation of cell motility has been variably attributed to regulation of Arp2 / 3 - mediated branched actin dynamics in leading - edge protru - sions or to regulation of signaling [ 2 , 7 , 8 ] . However , a number of studies have found that cortactin is not essential for lamelli - podial protrusion but rather affects lamellipodial dynamics [ 3 ] . In addition , lamellipodial protrusion has been shown to be dispensable for cell movement [ 9 ] , suggesting that lamellipo - dial protrusion may serve primarily to direct the cell rather than drive the actual mechanics of intrinsic cell motility . By contrast , adhesion of cells to ECM is known to be critical for cell motility [ 1 , 10 ] . Previously , we identiﬁed speciﬁc defects in both lamellipo - dial persistence ( e . g . , stability ) and adhesion assembly in cortactin - knockdown ( KD ) cells [ 7 ] that were coordinately rescued along with cell motility by a minimal cortactin trunca - tion protein that contained the Arp2 / 3 complex and F - actin binding sites . Interestingly , lamellipodial persistence defects are frequently associated with primary defects in integrin activity or expression [ 11 – 13 ] , which suggests that the adhe - sion assembly defect of cortactin - KD cells might cause lamel - lipodial instability rather than vice versa . Because cortactin is known to regulate membrane trafﬁcking [ 3 ] , we hypothesized that the lamellipodial , adhesion , and motility defects observed in cortactin - deﬁcient cells [ 3 ] could be a consequence of defective ECM secretion or altered integrin trafﬁcking . Indeed , in this study we report that cortactin - KD cells exhibit decreased ﬁbronectin ( FN ) secretion that leads to defects in cell motility and lamellipodial dynamics . Interestingly , investi - gation of the mechanism revealed that , dependent on cortac - tin interaction with branched actin networks , exogenous FN is internalized and resecreted from a late endocytic / lysosomal compartment to promote efﬁcient cell motility . Results The goal of this study was to test the hypothesis that cortactin regulates cell motility by altering membrane trafﬁcking of either ECM components or integrins . Such a mechanism would link two major cellular functions ( migration and vesicular trafﬁcking ) described for cortactin and might explain divergent reports on the role of cortactin in cell motility . Migration and Lamellipodial Defects of Cortactin - KD Cells Are Rescued on Exogenous ECM If cortactin primarily regulates motility through autocrine secretion of ECM , then the defective motility of cortactin - KD cells should be rescued by performing cell motility assays on ECM - coated surfaces . To test this possibility , we coated seri - ally diluted FN or collagen I on the bottom of tissue culture * Correspondence : alissa . weaver @ vanderbilt . edu plates for single - cell ( Figures 1A and 1C ) or transwell mem - branes for transwell ( Figures 1B and 1D ) migration assays . As reported previously [ 7 ] , in the absence of exogenous ECM , cortactin - KD HT1080 ﬁbrosarcoma cells migrated less efﬁciently than scrambled oligo - expressing control cells Figure 1 . Cortactin - Knockdown Cell Motility and Lamellipodial Defects Are Rescued on Substrates Coated with Exogenous Extracellular Matrix ( A and C ) Single - cell migration assays on ﬁbro - nectin - coated ( A ) or collagen - coated ( C ) plates . The following abbreviations are used : Sc , scrambled oligo ; KD , cortactin - knockdown ; OE , cortactin - overexpressing ; Res , rescued ( KD cells re - expressing shRNA - insensitive mouse cortac - tin ) . n R 45 cells from three independent experi - ments for each cell line . ( B and D ) Transwell migration assays on ﬁbro - nectin - coated ( B ) or collagen - coated ( D ) trans - well ﬁlters . Four different ﬁelds were observed in each of three independent experiments . ( E ) Representative kymographs on uncoated or ﬁbronectin - coated ( FN ; 10 m g / ml ) plates . Note deﬁnitions of lamellipodial persistence ( length of time that a protrusion lasts before retraction , D x ) , protrusion distance ( D y2 ) , and protrusion speed ( initial rate , D y1 / D x1 ) . Scale bars indicate distance and time axes . ( F – I ) Quantitation of lamellipodial persistence ( F ) , protrusiondistance ( G ) , protrusionspeed ( H ) , and retraction speed ( I ) . n R 20 cells from three or more independent experiments . * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 compared to Sc . Error bars indicate standard error of the mean ( SEM ) . ( scrambled ) or KD cells rescued with short hairpin RNA ( shRNA ) - insensitive mouse cortactin cDNA ( Res ) , whereas cortactin - overexpressing ( OE ) cells migrated faster ( Figures 1A and 1B , 0 m g / ml FN ; see Figure S1A available on - line for cortactin protein abundance ) . However , plating cells on increasing concentrations of FN or collagen I led to full rescue of cortactin - KD motility defects to the level of control cells ( Figures 1A – 1D ) at higher ECM concen - trations . Similarly , single - cell motility defects of cortactin - KD MDA - MB - 231 breast cancer cells were rescued by plating cells on the highest tested concentrations of FN or collagen I ( Fig - ure S1 ) . There was much less effect of exogenous ECM on control and OE cell speed , suggesting a more optimal ECM - adhesion axis [ 10 ] on uncoated surfaces as might occur with autocrine secretion of ECM . These data suggest an extrinsic and not intrinsic motility defect in cortactin - KD cells . We previously reported that cortactin - KD cells have defective stability and persistence of lamellipodial protrusions that parallel the motility defects [ 7 ] . To analyze the effect of exogenous ECM on lamellipodial dynamics , we recorded membrane rufﬂing of cortactin - manipulated HT1080 cells plated on 0 or 10 m g / ml FN in time - lapse movies and performed analysis by kymog - raphy [ 7 , 14 ] ( Figure 1E ) . Consistent with the migration assays , the lamellipodial persistence defect of cortactin - KD cells [ 7 ] Cortactin Regulates ECM Secretion and Motility 1461 was fully rescued on 10 m g / ml FN ( Figure 1F ) . Exogenous FN also normalized the increased protrusion speed of cortactin - KD cells [ 7 ] to the level of controls ( Figure 1H ) . Protrusion distance and retraction speed were not signiﬁcantly different between cortactin - manipulated cells in either the absence [ 7 ] or presence of exogenous FN ( Figures 1G and 1I ) . Alterations in lamellipodial dynamics with OE cells were also equalized to the level of scrambled controls by plating on 10 m g / ml FN . HT1080 cells are known to express integrin receptors a 2 b 1 for collagen I , a 3 b 1 for laminin , and a 5 b 1 for FN [ 15 ] . Because cortactin - regulated motility was sensitive to the levels of the b 1 integrin ligands collagen I and FN , we tested whether b 1 expression was altered . The total cellular level of b 1 integrin was similar between control and cortactin - KD cells by western blot analyses ( Figure 2A ) . In addition , ﬂow cytometry revealed no differences in cell - surface expression of b 1 , a 2 , a 3 , and a 5 integrins ( Figure 2B ; Figure S2A ) . We also quantitated the pres - ence of b 1 integrin in adhesions in cortactin - manipulated cells plated on the non - integrin - binding attachment substrate poly - D - lysine ( PDL ) or 10 m g / ml FN by immunostaining ﬁxed , per - meabilized cells for the presence of total ( AIIB2 ) or activated ( 12G10 ) b 1 and imaging the cell - substrate interface with total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy . Consistent with the motility and lamellipodial dynamics results , cortactin - KD cells had reduced total and activated b 1 present in adhe - sions when plated on PDL , but not on FN ( Figure 2 ; Figure S2 ) . Analysis of b 1 integrin endocytosis exhibited a similar proﬁle , with an increase in early b 1 internalization in cortactin - KD cells when plated on low but not high FN ( 2 and 5 min time points , Figure S2 ) . We speculate that the increased endocytosis of b 1 integrin in cortactin - KD cells plated on low concentrations of FN is likely due to defective adhesion formation ( Figure 2 ; Figure S2 ; [ 7 ] ) , leading to a larger population of unengaged b 1 integrins available for endocytosis [ 16 ] . Because both the low adhesion formation and the increase in early b 1 endocytosis were rescued when cortactin - KD cells were plated on high FNconcentrations , we hypothesize that theprimary underlying defect in cortactin - KD cells is defective secretion of ECM . Motility Defects of Cortactin - KD Cells Are Due to Defective Secretion of Autocrine ECM To directly test the effect of autocrine - produced ECM on cell motility , we prepared tissue culture plates coated with cell - free autocrine ECM from cortactin - manipulated HT1080 Figure 2 . Cortactin Expression Affects Adhesion Formation on Low - Extracellular Matrix Substrates but Not Total or Cell Surface Levels of b 1 Integrin ( A ) Western blot analysis of total cell lysates from scrambled control ( Sc ) , cortactin - KD ( KD ) , and cortactin - rescued ( Res ) HT1080 cells shows no difference in total cell b 1 integrin levels . Representative blot from n = 2 experiments . ( B ) Flow cytometry analysis shows no difference in b 1 cell - surface expression . Representative proﬁles are shown . The following abbreviations are used : C , control IgG ; b 1 , integrin b 1 . n = 2 experiments . ( C ) Representative TIRF images of activated ( visualized using 12G10 mAb staining ) integrin b 1 at basal surface of cells cultured on poly - D - lysine - coated ( PDL ; 100 m g / ml ) orFN - coated ( 10 m g / ml ) glasssurfaces . Cellboundariesfromdifferentialinterferencecontrast ( DIC ) images ( FigureS2 ) areoutlinedinwhite . Scale bar represents 30 m m . ( D ) Quantitation of activated integrin b 1 - positive area per cell and intensity per cell calculated with orwithout ( w / o ) thresholding of TIRF images . n > 30 cells from three independent experiments . * * * p < 0 . 001 . Error bars indicate SEM . Current Biology Vol 21 No 17 1462 cells . Conﬂuent cultures were grown for 48 hr on 12 - well plates before removal of cells with 20 mM ammonium hydroxide ( NH 4 OH ) . NH 4 OH is minimally damaging to autocrine - pro - duced ECM and leaves many biological properties intact , including adhesion , spreading , and growth [ 17 ] . New cultures of cortactin - manipulated HT1080s were then plated on the autocrine - ECM - coated dishes for 2 hr before testing in 5 hr single - cell motility assays . As predicted , cortactin - KD cell motility was fully rescued on autocrine ECM extracted from scrambled and rescue cells , but not on cortactin - KD - derived autocrine ECM ( Figure 3A ) . However , the motility of scrambled and rescue cells was similar regardless of the source of auto - crine ECM , suggesting that cortactin - expressing cells can sufﬁciently modulate the ECM environment during the experi - ment for efﬁcient migration . Cortactin - manipulated MDA - MB - 231 cells responded similarly , with rescue of KD motility on autocrine - produced ECM from cells expressing cortactin ( Figure 3B ) . Immunoﬂuorescent staining for FN in the autocrine - produced cell - free ECM revealed little detectable deposition in HT1080 - produced ECM ; however , FN staining was detect - able in MDA - MB - 231 - produced ECM , and there was less FN deposition in cortactin - KD cell - produced ECM ( Figures 3C and 3D ) . To verify this ﬁnding in a second cell type , we obtained previously published control and cortactin - KD mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts ( MEFs ) [ 18 ] and prepared cell - free ECM . As expected , there was less FN detected in auto - crine ECM prepared from cortactin - KD MEFs , compared with control - derived ECM ( Figure S3 ) . We speculate that the inability to visualize HT1080 - produced cell - free FN represents either a signal - to - noise issue or greater extractability of HT1080 ECM from glass coverslips by NH 4 OH , because we visualized it easily below cortactin - manipulated HT1080 cells by TIRF microscopy ( Figures 3E and 3F ) . Note also that the cell motility experiments were performed on autocrine - produced ECM - coated plastic , and plastic adsorbs ECM more efﬁciently than glass [ 19 ] . These data indicate that cor - tactin is critical for FN secretion at the cell - substrate interface . Cortactin Regulates Secretion of FN from an Endocytic Compartment To determine whether changes in FN expression could explain the decreased FN secretion into cortactin - KD - produced auto - crine ECM , we performed quantitative RT - PCR and western blot analyses . No signiﬁcant differences were observed in total cell levels of FN mRNA or protein between any of the cortactin - manipulated cell lines ( Figures 4A and 4B ) , suggesting that cortactin may instead regulate FN trafﬁcking . Indeed , exami - nation of permeabilized cells immunostained for FN revealed that twice as many cortactin - KD cells contained large perinu - clear FN - containing puncta as compared with control cells ( Figure 4C , top panels ) , suggesting an exit defect from a secre - tory compartment . To identify that compartment , we ﬁrst tested whether the major source of secreted FN was exogenous ( i . e . , the serum contains signiﬁcant amounts of FN [ 20 ] ) as opposed to biosyn - thetic pathways . Up to this point , all experiments had been performed in media containing regular serum . To determine the predominant pathway in our system , we repeated two crit - ical experiments in media containing FN - depleted serum : immunostaining of intracellular FN and single - cell motility on autocrine - produced ECM . For immunostaining , cells were Figure 3 . Autocrine - Produced Extracellular Matrix from Cortactin - Expressing Cells Rescues the Motility Defect of Cortactin - KD Cells ( A and B ) Single - cell migration assays of cortactin - manipulated HT1080 ( A ) and MDA - MB - 231 ( B ) cells plated on cell - free autocrine extracellular matrix ( ECM ) derived from control or KD cells as indicated . The following abbreviations are used : Sc , scrambled control ; pRS , vector - expressing ; KD , cortac - tin - KD ; Res , cortactin - rescued . n > 50 cells from three independent experiments . ( C ) Representative images of FN immunostaining of cell - free ECM derived from cortactin - manipulated MDA - MB - 231 cells . Scale bar represents 30 m m . ( D ) Quantitation of the area per frame and intensity per frame of MDA - MB - 231 - derived cell - free ECM images . n > 30 images from three independent exper - iments . ( E and F ) Analysis of basally secreted FN in HT1080 cells . ( E ) Representative matched DIC and TIRF images from ﬁxed , immunostained cortactin - manipulated HT1080 cells showing a deﬁcit in basal FN underneath cortactin - KD cells . Scale bar represents 30 m m . ( F ) Quantitation of FN - positive area per cell and intensity per cell from TIRF images . n R 25 images from three independent experiments . * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 compared to control cells . Error bars indicate SEM . Cortactin Regulates ECM Secretion and Motility 1463 plated on PDL - coated coverslips for 48 hr in media containing 10 % bovine growth serum ( BGS ) or 10 % FN - depleted BGS ( Figure S4 ) followed by ﬁxation ( Figures 4C and 4D ) . For motility experiments , cell - free autocrine ECM was prepared as before , cells were plated in media containing FN - depleted BGS and equilibrated for 2 hr , and movies were then taken for 5 hr ( Figure 4E ) . Interestingly , intracellular FN accumulation in cortactin - KD cells was decreased and equivalent to control cells upon culturing in FN - depleted BGS ( Figures 4C and 4D ) . Likewise , single - cell motility of all cortactin - manipulated HT1080 cells was equivalent and dampened ( by almost 2 - fold ) when the experiment was performed in FN - depleted BGS ( Figure 4E ; compare to Figure 3A ) . These data indicate that , dependent on cortactin , cells internalize and resecrete exogenous ECM to facilitate effective migration . Because our motility experiments indicated that internalized FN is critical for cortactin - regulated motility , we performed a pulse - chase experiment to determine whether cortactin affects resecretion of internalized FN into conditioned media . HT1080 cells were incubated with 20 m g / ml biotinylated FN for 1 hr followed by washing and collection of conditioned medium after 24 hr . Indeed , despite equivalent FN uptake , cor - tactin - KD cells secreted 2 - fold less biotinylated FN into condi - tioned medium compared with controls ( Figures 4F and 4G ) . Cortactin Regulates a Late Endosomal / Lysosomal Secretory Compartment To determine which secretory compartment is regulated by cortactin , we colocalized internalized FN with vesicular markers associated with recycling endosomes , apicobasal trafﬁcking , and secretory lysosomes [ 21 ] . Whereas there was little colocalization of FN with Rab8a or Rab11a ( Figure S5A ) , a substantial proportion of the internalized FN colocalized with the late endosomal marker Rab7 and the lysosomal marker LAMP1 ( Figures 5A and 5B ) . Interestingly , cortactin - KD cells exhibited a signiﬁcant increase in colocalization of FN with Rab7 - positive and Rab7 / LAMP1 double - positive compartments compared with control cells ( Figures 5A and 5B ; Figures S5B and S5C ) . There was also a large increase in the size of the Rab7 compartment in cortactin - KD cells ( Fig - ure 5C ) , suggesting a block in secretion from and / or matura - tion of late endosomes . There was also a small decrease in the size of the LAMP1 - compartment ( Figure 5D ) , suggesting a shift in the overall late endosomal / lysosomal population upon cortactin manipulation . Cortactin was also found to colocalize with Rab7 - and LAMP1 - positive vesicles ( Fig - ure S5D ) . Most KD phenotypes , including FN accumulation in Rab7 - positive compartments , were rescued or diminished by removal of FN from the media ( FN - depleted BGS condition , Figures 5B – 5D ) , consistent with an exogenous source of accu - mulated FN . To provide additional evidence that FN derived from the media and processed by the endocytic system is deposited at the basal surface of cells , we incubated cells with DyLight 550 - conjugated FN and performed live - cell imaging . By confocal microscopy , DyLight - FN localized to acidic organ - elles labeled with LysoTracker Green ( Figure S5E ) . By TIRF microscopy , DyLight - FN was visible in moving vesicles and Figure 4 . Internalized Fibronectin Is Used for Motility ( A ) Quantitative real - time PCR . Relative FN mRNA abundance was measured by 2 - DD Ct . n = 3 experiments . ( B ) RepresentativewesternblotimagesandanalysesofFNproteinabundanceintotalcelllysates . FNintensitieswerenormalizedbyGAPDHintensities . n = 3 experiments . ( C and D ) To analyze intracellular accumulation of ECM , cortactin - manipulated HT1080 cells were cultured in media containing complete bovine growth serum ( BGS ) or FN - depleted BGS ( D FN ) and immunostained for FN . ( C ) Representative ﬂuorescence confocal images . Scale bar represents 30 m m . ( D ) Percentage of cells with large intracellular FN - positive puncta ( R 2 m m diameter ) . n R 200 cells from three independent experiments . ( E ) Single - cell migration on cell - free autocrine ECM with FN - depleted BGS - containing media ( compare to Figure 3A ) . n R 50 cells from three independent experiments . ( F ) Representative western blot images from pulse - chase assay performed using poly - HRP - conjugated streptavidin ( ‘‘biotinylated’’ ) and FN antibody ( ‘‘total’’ ) . Total cell lysates were gathered after the 1 hr pulse to show biotinylated FN uptake . Conditioned media were gathered 24 hr after the pulse chase . ( G ) Quantitation of experiments in ( F ) . TCL indicates total cell lysates and represents biotinylated FN signal normalized by the GAPDH loading control . n = 3 experiments . * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 compared to control cells . Error bars indicate SEM . Current Biology Vol 21 No 17 1464 also appeared to be deposited at the basal surface of cells , as evidenced by progressive accumulation in elongated immo - bile structures that may represent newly assembling adhe - sions ( Movie S1 ; Movie S2 ) . In addition , a few of the elongated structures disappeared before the end of recording , indicating either that nascent FN deposits were re - endocytosed or that they represented tethered lysosomes that had not yet fused with the plasma membrane ( Movie S1 ; Movie S2 ) . Compared with control cells , there was an w 4 - fold slower rate of total Dy - Light - FN accumulation at the base of cortactin - KD cells ( Figures 5E and 5F ) . Size and shape analyses of the movie data indicated that KD cells exhibited a signiﬁcant reduction Figure 5 . Cortactin Promotes Fibronectin Trafﬁcking from a Late Endosomal / Lysosomal Secretory Compartment ( A – D ) Colocalization of FN with vesicular compartments . ( A ) Representative confocal images of FN ( red ) , Rab7 ( late endosomes , green ) , and LAMP1 ( lysosomes , blue ) triple stainingofcellsculturedincompleteBGS - containingmedia . White indicates triple colocalization ; magniﬁcations of boxed areas are shown below . Scale bar represents 30 m m . ( B ) SummarygraphofFNlocalizationshowsaccumulationof FN in a Rab7 / LAMP1 double - positive compartment in KD cells . ( C ) Area of Rab7 staining out of total cell area ( from single confocal slices ) . ( D ) Area of LAMP1 confocal staining out of total cell area . Errorbarsin ( C ) and ( D ) indicateSEMfromthreeindependent experiments ( n R 50 cells total ) . * p < 0 . 05 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 compared to control cells . ( E and F ) Cortactin is necessary for accumulation of endocy - tosed DyLight 550 - FN at the cell - substrate interface . ( E ) Frames from TIRF live - cell imaging sequences taken at one frame per minute ( see also Movie S1 [ control ] and Movie [ KD ] ) . The ﬁrst frame of the movie ( time 0 ) has been sub - tracted from each frame of the time sequence in order to detect only newly accumulated FN . Note efﬁcient accumula - tion for Sc as compared to KD cells . DIC images illustrate conﬂuence of cell monolayers . ( F ) Quantitation of live - cell imaging data as in ( E ) . FN accu - mulation was quantitated as mean ﬂuorescence intensity beneath ten individual cells from four independent experi - ments and was signiﬁcantly different between Sc and KD cells ( p < 0 . 001 , assessed by MatLab analysis of covariance comparing the two regression lines ) . Both Sc and KD cells exhibit constant FN accumulation ( line function ﬁtting conﬁrmed by R 2 > 0 . 9 ) . Slope coefﬁcient is 27 . 965 for Sc and 6 . 56 for KD . Error bars indicate SEM . in the numberof all types of FN structures appear - ing in the TIRF plane , including both large linear accumulations and small circular objects ( Figures S5F and S5G ; Movie S1 ; Movie S2 ) . These data , in combination with our ﬁnding that in cortactin - KD cells FN accumulates in an enlarged Rab7 - posi - tive compartment ( Figures 5A – 5C ) , suggest that cortactin is important for trafﬁcking of endocy - tosed FN to the plasma membrane . To test the general mechanism of lysosomal secretion in ECM deposition and cell motility , shRNA targeting the secretory lysosome fusion regulator synaptotagmin - 7 ( Syt7 ) was expressed in HT1080 cells . Indeed , similar to cortactin - KD , Syt7 - KD HT1080 cells exhibited decreased basal FN deposition and decreased motility on uncoated tissue culture dishes compared with control cells ( Figure 6 ) . Also similar to cortactin - KD cells , the motility of control and Syt7 - KD cells was equiva - lent and increased on 10 m g / ml FN - coated dishes . Interaction of Cortactin with the Arp2 / 3 Complex and Actin Filaments Is Critical for Motility and Secretion Phenotypes To determine underlying molecular interactions that mediate cortactin regulation of FN secretion and cell motility , we per - formed rescue experiments in which cortactin proteins with mutations in the binding sites for the Arp2 / 3 complex ( W22A ) , actin ﬁlaments ( D 4RP ) , or SH3 - domain binding part - ners ( W525K ) or in Src ( 3Y ) or Erk ( S405A and S418A ) phos - phorylation sites [ 7 , 22 – 24 ] were re - expressed in KD cells . Cortactin Regulates ECM Secretion and Motility 1465 Interestingly , both cell motility and FN deposition defects of KD cells were rescued by re - expression of W525K and 3Y mutants ( Figure 7 ; Figure S6 ) . The rescue by W525K was frequently not to the level of that by wild - type cortactin or 3Y , although the differences were not statistically signiﬁcant . Conversely , KD defects were not rescued by W22A , D 4RP , S405A , or S418A in either assay . Analysis of intracellular accu - mulation of large FN puncta yielded similar results , except that theErkmutantsalsorescuedKDdefectsinthisassay ( Figure7 ; Figure S6 ) . Our interpretation of these results is that the most critical activity of cortactin in FN secretion and cell motility is to regulate branched actin networks . A secondary ( nonessen - tial ) activity may be to recruit or otherwise interact with SH3 binding partners at those networks . Discussion Cortactin regulates cell migration ; however , diverse underlying mechanisms have been proposed . In this study , we report the novel ﬁnding that cortactin regulates extrinsic rather than intrinsic mechanisms of cell motility by promoting ECM secre - tion from a late endosomal / lysosomal compartment ( see model in Figure 7E ) . Consistent with lysosomal secretion of ECM as a critical regulatory point for cell motility , cortactin - KD motility and secretion defects were phenocopied by KD of the late endosomal / lysosomal fusion regulator Syt7 . Cortac - tin functions in motility and secretion were dependent on inter - action with branched actin networks but not the SH3 domain . Cortactin has been intensively studied as a motility factor since the discovery that it can serve as a cofactor for Arp2 / 3 activation as well as a stabilizer of actin branches [ 25 , 26 ] . Numerous studies have demonstrated that cortactin promotes cell motility as well as proteolytic invasion through ECM [ 3 ] . However , conﬂicting results between studies suggest context - dependent cortactin functions . For example , several studies have reported no effect of cortactin loss on cell migra - tion [ 6 ] or lamellipodial architecture [ 8 ] . Interestingly , the cell migration and electron microscopy studies in those reports were respectively performed using cells plated on 10 m g / ml [ 6 ] and 50 m g / ml [ 8 ] FN . Consistent with those results , we ﬁnd that cortactin - KD cell defects in motility and lamellipodial dynamics are fully rescued to the level of control cells upon plating on similar concentrations of ECM . Our discovery that cortactin regulates cell motility by promoting ECM deposition provides a unifying mechanism that explains disparate litera - ture ﬁndings and links reported cortactin functions in motility and membrane trafﬁcking . Through mutant rescue studies , we tested the requirements for key molecular interactions in cortactin regulation of FN traf - ﬁcking and cell motility . Consistent with our previous report [ 7 ] , we ﬁnd that cortactin binding to the Arp2 / 3 complex and actin ﬁlaments is essential for rescue of all phenotypes . The other sites examined were in the C terminus and regulate binding of additional partners . Neither the SH3 domain , which binds most known cortactin binding partners , or the Src / Abl phosphosites , which create an SH2 binding domain when phosphorylated [ 3 ] and are thought to negatively regulate the SH3 domain [ 23 ] , were required for rescue of any cortac - tin - KD phenotype . These data were somewhat surprising because several SH3 - domain binding partners are good candidates for regulating vesicle trafﬁcking , including the pin - chasedynamin 2 , the cdc42 GEF Fgd1 , and the Arf GAPASAP1 [ 3 ] . By contrast , intact Erk phosphorylation sites are required for rescue of motility [ 27 ] and FN deposition , suggesting that Erk phosphorylation may regulate more cortactin functions than just SH3 - domain accessibility [ 23 , 28 ] . Based on the requirement for intact Arp2 / 3 - and F - actin binding domains but not SH3 - domain binding partners , we speculate that the truly essential role of cortactin in ECM trafﬁcking is to regulate branched actin networks at late endosomes or at docking sites Figure 6 . Loss ofthe Lysosomal Secretion Regulator Synaptotagmin - 7also Results in Defective Basal Fibronectin Secretion and Motility ( A ) Western blot of synaptotagmin - 7 ( Syt7 ) expression in control ( shGFP ) and Syt7 - KD ( shSyt7 - 1 and shSyt7 - 2 ) HT1080 cells . ( B ) Single - cell migration assays on uncoated ( no FN ) or FN - coated ( FN 10 ; 10 m g / ml ) plates . n R 45 cells for each cell line from three independent experiments . ( C ) Representative matched DIC and TIRF images from ﬁxed , immuno - stainedSyt7 - manipulatedHT1080cellsshowing adeﬁcitofbasalFNunder - neath Syt7 - KD cells . Cell boundaries are outlined in white in TIRF images . Scale bar represents 30 m m . ( D ) Quantitation of basal FN - positive area per cell or intensity per cell with ( w / ) or without ( w / o ) thresholding . n > 30 cells from three independent experiments . * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 compared to shGFP control . Error bars indicate SEM . Current Biology Vol 21 No 17 1466 for secretory endosomal / lysosomal carriers . Binding of SH3 - domain partners by cortactin might contribute to cortactin - regulated vesicular trafﬁcking events ( e . g . , ﬁssion or fusion ) but may not be essential if a stable actin network in conjunc - tion with membrane - bound signaling factors is sufﬁcient to assemble the required multiprotein trafﬁcking complexes . Figure 7 . Binding of Cortactin to the Arp2 / 3 Complex and Actin Filaments Is Critical for Cell Motility and ECM Secretion ( A ) Cortactindomainstructuremarkedwithmuta - tion sites : W22 , critical Arp2 / 3 complex binding residue ; NTA , N - terminal acidic domain ; 4RP , F - actinbindingdomain ; S405andS418 , Erkphos - phorylationsites ; YYY , Srkphosphorylationsites ; SH3 , Src homology 3 domain . Ovals represent cortactin repeat domains . Mutation of the W525 residue prevents binding to the SH3 domain . ( B ) Quantitation of transwell migration assays of cortactin mutant - rescued cells on low ( 1 m g / ml ) or high ( 10 m g / ml ) FN coating concentrations . Four ﬁelds per ﬁlter were observed in each of four independent experiments . ( C ) Quantitation of area per cell and intensity per cell of deposited FN from TIRF images ( represen - tative DIC and TIRF images are shown in Fig - ure S6B ) . n R 25 images per cell line from three experiments . ( D ) The percentage of cells with large intracellular FN accumulations ( R 2 m m diameter puncta ) was quantitated from wide - ﬁeld images ( see Fig - ure S6C for representative images ) . n R 80 cells from three independent experiments . ( E ) Model of cortactin regulation of ECM deposi - tion and cell motility . ECM ( and potentially other motility molecules such as integrins ) is internal - ized and resecreted from a late endosomal / lysosomal compartment to support cell motility . Cortactin regulation of branched actin networks is likely to be critical for either the generation or docking of ECM - containing secretory carriers derived from a Rab7 / LAMP1 - positive compart - ment , whereas Syt7 regulates vesicle fusion at the plasma membrane . The proposed model in whichcortactin - mediatedsecretionofECMleads to adhesion formation , lamellipodial stability , and cell motility links known cortactin functions but provides an alternate mechanism to the current model in which lamellipodial dynamics drive cell motility . * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 compared to rescue ( Res ) . Error bars indicate SEM . A somewhat surprising ﬁnding from this study is that cortactin - KD does not inhibit endocytosis of b 1 integrin or , apparently , FN . A number of studies have examined the role of cortactin in endocytosis , and most have found that KD or inhibition of cortactin reduces en - docytic rates [ 29 – 36 ] . However , the vast majority of those studies examined cla - thrin - dependent endocytosis , and b 1 in - tegrin has been reported to undergo cla - thrin - independent , lipid - raft - dependent endocytosis [ 16 , 37 ] . Although cortactin has also been reported to regulate cla - thrin - independent endocytosis [ 32 , 34 ] , b 1 integrin has not been previously examined as a cargo , and there are multiple clathrin - indepen - dent pathways [ 37 ] . Furthermore , cortactin likely does not affect all endocytic events , because dextran uptake is appar - ently unperturbed by cortactin inhibition [ 30 ] . A key ﬁnding of this study is that FN that is internalized , processed , and resecreted via a late endocytic / lysosomal Cortactin Regulates ECM Secretion and Motility 1467 compartment is reused as a motility substrate . Lysosomally processed FN may be particularly potent as a substrate , because partial degradation of FN can yield fragments with increased adhesiveness [ 38 ] , and the lysosomal proteinase cathepsin produces biologically active fragments of FN [ 39 ] . To directly test this potential mechanism , we knocked down the lysosomal fusion regulator Syt7 . Indeed , KD of Syt7 phenocopied cortactin - KD and inhibited both basal FN secretion and cell motility . Interestingly , a recent report implicated Syt7 - mediated lysosomal secretion in leukocyte chemotaxis , and another study described regulation of epithelial cell migration by the late endosomal / lysosomal v - SNARE VAMP7 [ 40 , 41 ] , suggesting that this mechanism of motility regulation may be general . Both studies showed localization of lysosomal markers at lamellipodia , consistent with exocytosis occurring at the leading edge of migrating cells . Although we focused on ﬁbronectin secretion in this study , it is likely that the same vesicular carriers contain other motility - regulating molecules ( Figure 7E ) . Indeed , integrins may be cosecreted with their ligands , because a 5 b 1 integrin - FN cotrafﬁcking through multivesicular bodies to lysosomes was recently shown to be important for cell migration [ 42 ] . Consistent with that idea , in our b 1 integrin endocytosis assays , the only change in KD cells that was not rescued by plating on high FN was intracellular accumulation of b 1 integrin at the late 15 min time point , suggesting a block in late endo - somal trafﬁcking . It is also possible that newly synthesized motility molecules may be secreted via the same pathway , because post - Golgi packaging can occur in endosomes and secretory lysosomes [ 43 , 44 ] . In light of our ﬁndings , how do we consider the role of cor - tactin throughout the cell ? Cortactin is one of the best markers of branched actin at various cellular sites and is particularly popular as a marker for branched - actin - rich lamellipodia and invadopodia [ 2 ] . Given the afﬁnity of cortactin for the Arp2 / 3 complex [ 25 ] and newly polymerized actin [ 7 ] and the cooper - ative regulation of branched actin assembly noted by many investigators [ 26 , 45 – 48 ] , it seems likely that cortactin does regulate branched actin in lamellipodia and elsewhere . In fact , cortactin has been shown to affect cell edge protrusion during initial cell spreading on ECM - coated substrates [ 18 ] , suggesting that cortactin does indeed regulate branched actin dynamics within cellular protrusions [ 7 , 8 , 49 ] . However , we found that interaction of cortactin with the Arp2 / 3 complex and F - actin is also required for FN secretion , suggesting that regulation of exocytosis is a key consequence of cortactin action on branched actin networks that promotes migration and invasion [ 3 ] . Experimental Procedures Cell Culture and Gene Manipulation HT1080 cell lines , knockdown and rescue constructs , and motility and lamellipodial dynamics assays were as described previously [ 7 ] . Cortactin mutants were gifts from Thomas Parson ( University of Virginia ) and were cloned into LZRS retroviral vector . A lentiviral shRNA expression system , pLKO . 1 , was used to knock down synaptotagmin - 7 ( Open Biosystems RHS3979 - 9577052 for KD - 1 and RHS3979 - 9577053 for KD - 2 ) or GFP ( Sigma - Aldrich SHC005 ) in HT1080 cells . Antibodies and Reagents Anti - b 1 ( 12G10 for ﬂow cytometry and M - 106 for western blots ) , anti - a 2 ( P1E6 ) , anti - a 3 ( P1B5 ) , and anti - a 5 ( P1D6 ) integrin antibodies and normal mouse IgG 1 isotype control for ﬂuorescence - activated cell sorting ( sc - 3877 ) , anti - FN rabbit polyclonal ( H - 300 used in the triple staining with Rab7 and LAMP1 antibodies ) , and anti - Rab7 ( goat , A - 16 ) antibodies were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology . Anti - cortactin mouse monoclonal ( 4F11 , Upstate ) and rabbit polyclonal ( H - 191 , Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) , anti - b - actin ( Ac - 74 , Sigma ) , anti - GAPDH ( 14C10 , Cell Signaling ) , anti - FN mouse monoclonal ( 610077 , used in TIRF and intracellular accumulation assays ) , anti - EEA1 ( 610456 ) , and anti - CD107a ( LAMP1 , mouse , 555798 ) ( BD Trans - duction Laboratories ) antibodies were purchased from the listed manufac - turers . Anti - b 1 integrin rat monoclonal antibody ( AIIB2 ) was a gift from Roy Zent ( Vanderbilt University ) . Anti - Rab8a and anti - Rab11a antibodies were gifts from James Goldenring ( Vanderbilt University ) . Anti - synaptotagmin 7 antibody ( 105 173 ) was from Synaptic Systems . Alexa Fluor - conjugated secondary antibodies were from Invitrogen . Human plasma FN was from GIBCO BRL , and human collagen type I was from Sigma . DyLight 550 NHS ester ( 62262 ) and EZ - Link sulfo - NHS - LC - LC - biotin ( 21338 ) were from Thermo Scientiﬁc and were conjugated to FN following the manufacturer’s instructions . LysoTracker Green DND - 26 ( L - 7526 ) was from Molecular Probes . Statistical Analyses Allstatisticalanalyses were performed usingStudent’sttestandcalculated by Microsoft Excel software , except for the live TIRF imaging , for which statistical analysis was performed using MatLab . For more materials and methods , see Supplemental Experimental Procedures . Supplemental Information Supplemental Information includes six ﬁgures , Supplemental Experimental Procedures , and two movies and can be found with this article online at doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2011 . 06 . 065 . Acknowledgments We thank members of the Weaver laboratory and Geri Kreitzer for helpful comments . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) grant 1R01 - GM075126 and American Cancer Society grant RSG - 118085 to A . M . W . and NIH grant R01 - GM078373 and American Heart Association grant 10GRNT4230026 to I . K . Some experiments involved use of the Vanderbilt University Medical Center Flow Cytometry Core . Received : November 17 , 2010 Revised : June 22 , 2011 Accepted : July 28 , 2011 Published online : August 18 , 2011 References 1 . Ridley , A . J . , Schwartz , M . A . , Burridge , K . , Firtel , R . A . , Ginsberg , M . H . , Borisy , G . , Parsons , J . T . , and Horwitz , A . R . ( 2003 ) . Cell migration : Integrating signals from front to back . Science 302 , 1704 – 1709 . 2 . Weaver , A . M . ( 2008 ) . Cortactin in tumor invasiveness . Cancer Lett . 265 , 157 – 166 . 3 . Kirkbride , K . C . , Sung , B . H . , Sinha , S . , and Weaver , A . M . ( 2011 ) . Cortactin : A multifunctional regulator of cellular invasiveness . Cell Adh Migr 5 , 187 – 198 . 4 . Somogyi , K . , and Rørth , P . ( 2004 ) . Cortactin modulates cell migration and ring canal morphogenesis during Drosophila oogenesis . Mech . Dev . 121 , 57 – 64 . 5 . Perrin , B . J . , Amann , K . J . , andHuttenlocher , A . ( 2006 ) . Proteolysisofcor - tactin by calpain regulates membrane protrusion during cell migration . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 239 – 250 . 6 . Tanaka , S . , Kunii , M . , Harada , A . , and Okabe , S . ( 2009 ) . Generation of cortactin ﬂoxed mice and cellular analysis of motility in ﬁbroblasts . Genesis 47 , 638 – 646 . 7 . Bryce , N . S . , Clark , E . S . , Leysath , J . L . , Currie , J . D . , Webb , D . J . , and Weaver , A . M . ( 2005 ) . Cortactin promotes cell motility by enhancing lamellipodial persistence . Curr . Biol . 15 , 1276 – 1285 . 8 . Lai , F . P . , Szczodrak , M . , Oelkers , J . M . , Ladwein , M . , Acconcia , F . , Benesch , S . , Auinger , S . , Faix , J . , Small , J . V . , Polo , S . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Cortactin promotes migration and platelet - derived growth factor - induced actin reorganization by signaling to Rho - GTPases . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 3209 – 3223 . 9 . Gupton , S . L . , Anderson , K . L . , Kole , T . P . , Fischer , R . S . , Ponti , A . , Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . , Danuser , G . , Fowler , V . M . , Wirtz , D . , Current Biology Vol 21 No 17 1468 Hanein , D . , and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2005 ) . Cell migration without a lamellipodium : Translation of actin dynamics into cell movement mediated by tropomyosin . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 619 – 631 . 10 . Gupton , S . L . , and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2006 ) . Spatiotemporal feed - back between actomyosin and focal - adhesion systems optimizes rapid cell migration . Cell 125 , 1361 – 1374 . 11 . Borm , B . , Requardt , R . P . , Herzog , V . , and Kirfel , G . ( 2005 ) . Membrane rufﬂes in cell migration : Indicators of inefﬁcient lamellipodia adhesion and compartments of actin ﬁlament reorganization . Exp . Cell Res . 302 , 83 – 95 . 12 . Goldﬁnger , L . E . , Han , J . , Kiosses , W . B . , Howe , A . K . , andGinsberg , M . H . ( 2003 ) . Spatial restriction of alpha4 integrin phosphorylation regulates lamellipodial stability and alpha4beta1 - dependent cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 731 – 741 . 13 . Owen , K . A . , Pixley , F . J . , Thomas , K . S . , Vicente - Manzanares , M . , Ray , B . J . , Horwitz , A . F . , Parsons , J . T . , Beggs , H . E . , Stanley , E . R . , and Bouton , A . H . ( 2007 ) . Regulation of lamellipodial persistence , adhesion turnover , and motility in macrophages by focal adhesion kinase . J . Cell Biol . 179 , 1275 – 1287 . 14 . Hinz , B . , Alt , W . , Johnen , C . , Herzog , V . , and Kaiser , H . W . ( 1999 ) . Quantifying lamella dynamics of cultured cells by SACED , a new computer - assisted motion analysis . Exp . Cell Res . 251 , 234 – 243 . 15 . Schifferli , K . P . , and Henrich , C . J . ( 1996 ) . Analysis of integrin expression and function in HT1080 cells using inhibitory anti - integrin antibodies . Focus 18 , 13 – 15 . 16 . Shi , F . , andSottile , J . ( 2008 ) . Caveolin - 1 - dependentbeta1integrinendo - cytosis is a critical regulator of ﬁbronectin turnover . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 2360 – 2371 . 17 . Kruk , P . A . , andAuersperg , N . ( 1994 ) . Alineofratovariansurfaceepithe - lium provides a continuous source of complex extracellular matrix . In Vitro Cell . Dev . Biol . Anim . 30A , 217 – 225 . 18 . Lapetina , S . , Mader , C . C . , Machida , K . , Mayer , B . J . , and Koleske , A . J . ( 2009 ) . Arg interacts with cortactin to promote adhesion - dependent cell edge protrusion . J . Cell Biol . 185 , 503 – 519 . 19 . Boettiger , D . ( 2007 ) . Quantitative measurements of integrin - mediated adhesion to extracellular matrix . Methods Enzymol . 426 , 1 – 25 . 20 . Hayman , E . G . , and Ruoslahti , E . ( 1979 ) . Distribution of fetal bovine serum ﬁbronectin and endogenous rat cell ﬁbronectin in extracellular matrix . J . Cell Biol . 83 , 255 – 259 . 21 . Hsu , V . W . , andPrekeris , R . ( 2010 ) . Transportattherecyclingendosome . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 22 , 528 – 534 . 22 . Kinley , A . W . , Weed , S . A . , Weaver , A . M . , Karginov , A . V . , Bissonette , E . , Cooper , J . A . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 2003 ) . Cortactin interacts with WIP in regulating Arp2 / 3 activation and membrane protrusion . Curr . Biol . 13 , 384 – 393 . 23 . Martinez - Quiles , N . , Ho , H . Y . , Kirschner , M . W . , Ramesh , N . , and Geha , R . S . ( 2004 ) . Erk / Src phosphorylation of cortactin acts as a switch on - switch off mechanism that controls its ability to activate N - WASP . Mol . Cell . Biol . 24 , 5269 – 5280 . 24 . Weed , S . A . , Karginov , A . V . , Schafer , D . A . , Weaver , A . M . , Kinley , A . W . , Cooper , J . A . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 2000 ) . Cortactin localization to sites of actin assembly in lamellipodia requires interactions with F - actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 29 – 40 . 25 . Uruno , T . , Liu , J . , Zhang , P . , FanYx , Y . , Egile , C . , Li , R . , Mueller , S . C . , and Zhan , X . ( 2001 ) . Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin polymer - ization by cortactin . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 259 – 266 . 26 . Weaver , A . M . , Karginov , A . V . , Kinley , A . W . , Weed , S . A . , Li , Y . , Parsons , J . T . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2001 ) . Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin ﬁlament network formation . Curr . Biol . 11 , 370 – 374 . 27 . Kelley , L . C . , Hayes , K . E . , Ammer , A . G . , Martin , K . H . , and Weed , S . A . ( 2010 ) . Cortactin phosphorylated by ERK1 / 2 localizes to sites of dynamic actin regulation and is required for carcinoma lamellipodia persistence . PLoS ONE 5 , e13847 . 28 . Kelley , L . C . , Hayes , K . E . , Ammer , A . G . , Martin , K . H . , and Weed , S . A . ( 2011 ) . Revisiting the ERK / Src cortactin switch . Commun Integr Biol 4 , 205 – 207 . 29 . Cao , H . , Chen , J . , Krueger , E . W . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2010 ) . SRC - medi - ated phosphorylation of dynamin and cortactin regulates the ‘‘constitu - tive’’ endocytosis of transferrin . Mol . Cell . Biol . 30 , 781 – 792 . 30 . Cao , H . , Orth , J . D . , Chen , J . , Weller , S . G . , Heuser , J . E . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2003 ) . Cortactinisacomponentofclathrin - coated pitsandpartic - ipatesinreceptor - mediatedendocytosis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 , 2162 – 2170 . 31 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , Zhang , C . X . , Carreno , S . , Barroso , C . , Heuser , J . E . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2004 ) . RNAi - mediated Hip1R silencing results in stable association between the endocytic machinery and the actin assembly machinery . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 1666 – 1679 . 32 . Grassart , A . , Meas - Yedid , V . , Dufour , A . , Olivo - Marin , J . C . , Dautry - Varsat , A . , and Sauvonnet , N . ( 2010 ) . Pak1 phosphorylation enhances cortactin - N - WASP interaction in clathrin - caveolin - independent endo - cytosis . Trafﬁc 11 , 1079 – 1091 . 33 . Merriﬁeld , C . J . , Perrais , D . , and Zenisek , D . ( 2005 ) . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 , 593 – 606 . 34 . Sauvonnet , N . , Dujeancourt , A . , and Dautry - Varsat , A . ( 2005 ) . Cortactin and dynamin are required for the clathrin - independent endocytosis of gammac cytokine receptor . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 155 – 163 . 35 . Zhu , J . , Yu , D . , Zeng , X . C . , Zhou , K . , and Zhan , X . ( 2007 ) . Receptor - mediated endocytosis involves tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 16086 – 16094 . 36 . Zhu , J . , Zhou , K . , Hao , J . J . , Liu , J . , Smith , N . , and Zhan , X . ( 2005 ) . Regulation of cortactin / dynamin interaction by actin polymerization during the ﬁssion of clathrin - coated pits . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 807 – 817 . 37 . Mayor , S . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 2007 ) . Pathways of clathrin - independent endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 603 – 612 . 38 . Valenick , L . V . , Hsia , H . C . , and Schwarzbauer , J . E . ( 2005 ) . Fibronectin fragmentation promotes alpha4beta1 integrin - mediated contraction of a ﬁbrin - ﬁbronectin provisional matrix . Exp . Cell Res . 309 , 48 – 55 . 39 . Humphries , M . J . , andAyad , S . R . ( 1983 ) . StimulationofDNAsynthesisby cathepsin D digests of ﬁbronectin . Nature 305 , 811 – 813 . 40 . Colvin , R . A . , Means , T . K . , Diefenbach , T . J . , Moita , L . F . , Friday , R . P . , Sever , S . , Campanella , G . S . , Abrazinski , T . , Manice , L . A . , Moita , C . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Synaptotagmin - mediated vesicle fusion regulates cell migration . Nat . Immunol . 11 , 495 – 502 . 41 . Proux - Gillardeaux , V . , Raposo , G . , Irinopoulou , T . , and Galli , T . ( 2007 ) . Expression of the Longin domain of TI - VAMP impairs lysosomal secre - tion and epithelial cell migration . Biol . Cell 99 , 261 – 271 . 42 . Lobert , V . H . , Brech , A . , Pedersen , N . M . , Wesche , J . , Oppelt , A . , Malerød , L . , and Stenmark , H . ( 2010 ) . Ubiquitination of alpha 5 beta 1 integrin controls ﬁbroblast migration through lysosomal degradation of ﬁbronectin - integrin complexes . Dev . Cell 19 , 148 – 159 . 43 . Ang , A . L . , Taguchi , T . , Francis , S . , Fo¨lsch , H . , Murrells , L . J . , Pypaert , M . , Warren , G . , and Mellman , I . ( 2004 ) . Recycling endosomes can serve as intermediates during transport from the Golgi to the plasma membrane of MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 531 – 543 . 44 . Blott , E . J . , and Grifﬁths , G . M . ( 2002 ) . Secretory lysosomes . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 122 – 131 . 45 . Oser , M . , Mader , C . C . , Gil - Henn , H . , Magalhaes , M . , Bravo - Cordero , J . J . , Koleske , A . J . , andCondeelis , J . ( 2010 ) . Speciﬁctyrosinephosphor - ylationsites oncortactinregulateNck1 - dependentactinpolymerization in invadopodia . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 3662 – 3673 . 46 . Oser , M . , Yamaguchi , H . , Mader , C . C . , Bravo - Cordero , J . J . , Arias , M . , Chen , X . , Desmarais , V . , van Rheenen , J . , Koleske , A . J . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2009 ) . Cortactin regulates coﬁlin and N - WASp activities to control the stages of invadopodium assembly and maturation . J . Cell Biol . 186 , 571 – 587 . 47 . Tehrani , S . , Tomasevic , N . , Weed , S . , Sakowicz , R . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2007 ) . Src phosphorylation of cortactin enhances actin assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 11933 – 11938 . 48 . Weaver , A . M . , Heuser , J . E . , Karginov , A . V . , Lee , W . L . , Parsons , J . T . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2002 ) . Interaction of cortactin and N - WASp with Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1270 – 1278 . 49 . Cai , L . , Makhov , A . M . , Schafer , D . A . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2008 ) . Coronin 1B antagonizes cortactin and remodels Arp2 / 3 - containing actin branches in lamellipodia . Cell 134 , 828 – 842 . Cortactin Regulates ECM Secretion and Motility 1469