111 The Differential Effect of Privacy - Related Trust on Groupware Application Adoption and Use during the COVID - 19 pandemic MOSES NAMARA , Clemson University , USA BART P . KNIJNENBURG , Clemson University , USA The COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown lead to the rapid adoption and use of various groupware applications ( “apps” ) for remote connection with colleagues , friends , and family . Different factors such as user experiences , trust , and social influences ( “user - situational motivations” ) were instrumental in determining how and what apps people adopted and used , especially at the onset of the COVID - 19 pandemic . In this empirical study , we examine how these factors and four predominant user - situational motivations ( i . e . , the mandated use of an app by an employer / institution , recommended use of an app by an employer / institution , recommended use of an app by a peer ( s ) , and self - selection of an app ) influenced the rapid adoption and use of groupware applications . Specifically , we develop an “emergency adoption model” of groupware applications using 195 valid survey responses to highlight the factors that motivated these apps’ use at the onset of COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown . We leverage the Technology Adoption Model ( TAM ) and integrate it with the users’ past use of the application before the COVID - 19 lockdown , user - situational motivation , and their privacy - related trust in the application provider to develop a more comprehensive model . Using confirmatory factor analysis ( CFA ) and structural equation modeling ( SEM ) , we find that the users who used a groupware app in the past continued to use it , and in line with TAM , users’ intention to adopt and use a groupware application was largely driven by the ease - of - use and usefulness of the app . Furthermore , while not a part of the traditional TAM model , we find that privacy - related trust in the application provider plays an important role in emergency adoption . However , unlike typical adoption models , the nature of all these effects—most prominently those related to privacy - related trust—depend on the underlying situational motivation . We discuss the implications of these findings and suggest ways to improve the adoption and use of groupware applications , especially during crises like the COVID - 19 pandemic . CCS Concepts : • General and reference → Empirical studies ; Validation ; Evaluation ; • Human - centered computing → Computer supported cooperative work ; HCI theory , concepts and models . Additional Key Words and Phrases : Technology Adoption ; Groupware Applications ; TAM ; Privacy - Related Trust ; Trust , Privacy , User Experience ; COVID - 19 ; pandemic ACM Reference Format : Moses Namara and Bart P . Knijnenburg . 2021 . The Differential Effect of Privacy - Related Trust on Groupware Application Adoption and Use during the COVID - 19 pandemic . J . ACM 37 , 4 , Article 111 ( August 2021 ) , 34 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1122445 . 1122456 Authors’ addresses : Moses Namara , Clemson University , Clemson , USA , mosesn @ clemson . edu ; Bart P . Knijnenburg , Clemson University , Clemson , USA , bartk @ clemson . edu . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . © 2021 Association for Computing Machinery . 0004 - 5411 / 2021 / 8 - ART111 $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1122445 . 1122456 J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . 111 : 2 Namara and Knijnenburg . 1 INTRODUCTION In the Spring of 2020 , the novel coronavirus disease ( COVID - 19 ) pandemic drastically changed the way people live . The lockdown and physical distancing measures that governments put in place to curb the spread of the virus led to the closure of physical commercial , academic , and office buildings to limit the physical contact between people . These lockdown measures compelled many people to stay home . As a result , there was a massive and rapid transition to remote work and collaboration . While on short notice , this was the first remote work experience for many people . This transition involved the accelerated adoption , increased use , and reliance on groupware applications—a phenomenon we term “emergency adoption“ in this paper . Groupware applications are defined as applications “that support groups of people engaged in a common task ( or goal ) and provide an interface to a shared environment . ” [ 22 , p . 40 ] . Groupware applications , such as video conferencing applications like Zoom , Microsoft Teams , Skype , and collaborative tools like Slack and Google Docs , significantly facilitated the continuity of work , study , research during the COVID - 19 pandemic [ 5 , 10 , 13 , 98 ] . For example , the closure of institutions such as universities’ ruled out conventional face - to - face interactions [ 10 ] . Thus , some people ( e . g . , teachers , employees , and students ) had to rapidly adopt groupware applications , including those who had never used any in the past . During this time period , these applications experienced a tremendous increase in the number of users [ 45 ] . In this study , we leverage the Technology Adoption Model ( TAM ) [ 14 ] , a well - established adoption and acceptance model to study and develop an emergency adoption model of these groupware applications at the onset of the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown . TAM asserts that an applications’ usability and usefulness primarily drive users’ intention to use it . We expand upon TAM by including past use , given that for some people the use of these applications might not have been entirely new . We also include privacy - related trust in the application provider due to the accelerated and unconventional adoption of these applications , making trust important for successful use [ 70 ] . In this accelerated adoption process , people , especially those who had never used groupware applications , had little time to acquaint themselves with the application providers’ competence , integrity , and benevolence in the privacy and management of user information—a key antecedent for online information exchanges [ 72 ] . Furthermore , we include four social influences ( termed “user - situational motivations“ in this paper ) that could have affected the traditional adoption process . We consider four potential situational motivators for adoption : Mandated use of an application by an employer / institution , facilitated use of an application by an employer / institution , recommended use of an application by others ( peers ) , and self - selection of an application . As people scrambled to continue their work remotely , some of them adopted groupware applications of their choosing and on their own accord , or consulted their peers for suggestions on authentic , reliable , and easy - to - use applications [ 10 , 80 , 100 ] . In other cases , key personnel ( e . g . , IT staff ) were tasked with making the adoption decision , introducing and supporting the eventual use of such applications [ 90 ] . As a result , depending on the institutional technology adoption processes and use policies , groupware applications among these people might either have been mandated or supported ( facilitated ) by their institution to fulfill business , research , education , and work needs . While coordinated adoption may have infrastructural benefits , past research has shown that a top - down adoption approach and non - involvement in institutional decision - making processes affect how people perceive and use such applications [ 90 ] . Hence , we hypothesize that the aforementioned factors ( i . e . , past use , privacy - related trust in the application provider , and user - situational motivations for adoption ) could have strongly influenced the adoption process of groupware applications in ways that are not entirely captured within the traditional TAM . J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . The Differential Effect of Privacy - Related Trust on Groupware Application Adoption and Use during the COVID - 19 pandemic 111 : 3 Therefore , this paper examines the factors that influenced the rapid adoption and use of group - ware applications at the onset of the pandemic . Based on TAM [ 14 ] and cognisant that the threat of a pandemic is an ever - recurring risk [ 71 , 75 , 82 ] , we also develop an “emergency adoption model“ that can be used to facilitate the rapid adoption of groupware applications in future emergencies / crises . Thus , we examine the following two research questions : ● RQ1 : How did factors ( e . g . , past use , privacy - related trust in the application provider ) in - fluence the rapid adoption and increased use of groupware applications at the onset of the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown ? ● RQ2 : What were the effects of user - situational motivations ( i . e . , mandated use of an app by an employer / institution , facilitated use of an app by an employer / institution , recommended use of an app by a peer ( s ) , and self - selection of an app ) on the adoption of groupware applications at the onset of the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown ? To answer our research questions , we conducted a quantitative survey study between April and May 2020 and specifically inquired about the groupware application with the most marked change in use since the start of the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown . The theoretical research model and corresponding hypotheses were tested by structural equation modeling ( SEM ) to explore the effect of the additional factors and the process of adoption and usage of groupware applications due to the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown . In line with TAM , we find that users’ intention to adopt and use groupware applications was largely driven by past use , the ease - of - use , and usefulness of the app . Furthermore , while not part of the traditional TAM , we find that privacy - related trust in the application provider plays an important role within our adoption context . Moreover , we find that unlike typical adoption models , the nature of these effects—most prominently those related to trust—depends on the underlying situational motivation for adoption . We discuss the related work on the predominant technology adoption model ( TAM ) , the classifi - cation , and increased use of groupware applications during the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown in section 2 . In section 3 , we describe our research hypotheses and theoretical model . In section 4 , we discuss our methodology . In section 5 , we present our findings , and the implications are discussed in Section 6 . Section 7 conveys our limitations , followed by our conclusion 2 RELATED WORK In the following subsections we first synthesize the related work on the genesis of the technology adoption model that we use as a basis of our research work . Then , we review the related literature on classification , and adoption and use of groupware applications due to the COVID - 19 pandemic . 2 . 1 The Technology Adoption Model The Technology Adoption Model ( TAM ) is an effective adoption model from the Management and Information sciences disciplines that highlights and explains the determinants of technology acceptance and usage [ 14 ] . TAM was derived from the psychology - based theory of reasoned action ( TRA ) , which explains the relationships between people’s beliefs , attitudes , and intentions with their ultimate actual behavior [ 25 ] . TRA postulates that a person’s actual behavior can be determined by considering his / her attitude ( “the degree of one’s positive or negative feelings about performing the target behavior” [ 16 , p . 984 ] ) , subjective norms ( or the expectations of other people ) , and intention ( “the strength of one’s intention to perform a specified behavior” [ 16 , p . 984 ] ) . Davis et al . [ 16 ] extended TRA to examine computer usage behavior as a special case premised on the fact that TRA was designed to explain virtually any human behavior . J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . 111 : 4 Namara and Knijnenburg . TAM asserts that actual use of technology is determined by a user’s behavioral intention which in turn is influenced by the perceived usefulness and ease of use of the technology [ 14 ] . In other words , “a person perceiving technology to be too difficult and not very useful , will most likely try not to use it , whereas a user on the opposite side of the spectrum would very likely do the opposite” [ 57 , p . 2 ] . We leverage TAM as an appropriate model to examine how usability and usefulness influenced the adoption of groupware applications during the COVID - 19 pandemic . TAM has been used as a theoretical basis for many empirical studies on user technology adoption across various computing domains and user populations , including human - computer interaction ( HCI ) [ 1 , 27 , 58 , 60 , 100 , 101 ] . However , to increase the model’s external validity , several researchers have had to extend TAM ( based on new technological developments , features , personalities , gender , culture , research situations , and goals , etc . ) by adding new external variables ( constructs ) to determine their effect on intentions to use technology ( for a full review see [ 64 , 105 ] ) . Beyond TAM , other adoption models have been proposed and used to examine technology adoption . For example , Venkatesh et al . [ 102 ] unified TAM with seven other common theoretical frameworks and models into a resultant unified model termed—the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology ( UTAUT ) . UTAUT suggested that four key determinants ( performance expectancy—“the degree to which an individual believes that technology will assist them in performing job duties” , effort expectancy—“the degree to which an individual perceives a particular technology to be easy to use” , social influence—“the degree to which an individual feels social pressure to use a particular information technology“ , facilitating conditions—“the degree to which an individual believes that his or her organization is supporting the use of technology” ) and four moderators ( gender , age , experience , and voluntaries of use ) were all essential factors for predicting technology adoption . Venkatesh et al . [ 103 ] subsequently proposed a successor model—UTAUT2—to examine technology adoption from a consumer rather than organizational context . However , while UTAUT ( and its successor UTAUT2 ) are increasingly being used ( see [ 20 ] ) , they have been criticized as complex models due to the high number of independent variables that they postulate as predictors of technology adoption [ 7 ] . As a result , researchers continue to use TAM as it provides a simpler technology adoption framework [ 20 ] . Keeping in line with other researchers who have examined technology adoption during the COVID - 19 pandemic using either TAM [ 3 ] or UTAUT [ 88 , 108 ] , we leverage TAM ( as the simpler model ) and expand it with additional factors ( i . e . , past use , privacy - related trust in an application provider , user - situational motivations ) to also keep the proposed “emergency adoption model“ simple . Our study aims to apply TAM as an existing adoption model to a new scenario ( i . e . , the COVID - 19 pandemic ) rather than focusing on pushing the envelope in terms of adoption research . In the development of TAM , Davis et al . [ 16 ] omitted the role of social influences such as the effect of the other people’s expectations ( i . e . , subjective norms ) , yet , this was highlighted in TRA as a key determinant of behavior [ 2 , 16 ] . The authors reasoned that social influences could not be included in the model at the time due to the uncertainty surrounding their psychometric status ( i . e . , difficulty in measuring or categorizing them ) . However , Venkatesh and Davis [ 101 ] , in a longitudinal study examined the effect of some social influences ( subjective norms , voluntariness and image ) on the perceived usefulness and intention to use technology . They found that social influences ( e . g . , subjective norms ) significantly affect behavioral “intentions over , and above - perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use . “ [ 101 , p . 198 ] , especially when mandated . Thus , we add the user - situational motivation for the adoption of an application to TAM since the adoption of groupware applications at the onset of the pandemic occurred in uncommon situational circumstances . The four user - situational motivations for adoption were chosen based on the common ways in which individuals came to adopt and use groupware applications [ 3 , 10 , 100 ] . J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . The Differential Effect of Privacy - Related Trust on Groupware Application Adoption and Use during the COVID - 19 pandemic 111 : 5 Additionally , trust is also a central aspect of technology adoption since it helps mitigate the uncertainties , vulnerabilities , and power imbalances inherent in sharing information [ 27 , 72 ] . Thus , we add privacy - related trust in the application provider to TAM as an additional variable and to account for the fact that the rapid adoption and use of groupware applications at the onset of the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown left little time to quickly develop specific beliefs about the competence , integrity , and benevolence of an application , especially if one had never used it . Gefen et al . [ 27 ] , extended TAM with—“trust in the e - vendor”—as a variable to examine how trust in a e - vendor affects users’ intention to use e - commerce sites for online shopping . Munoz - Leiva et al . [ 77 ] also extended TAM with “trust in the application provider” to investigate and determine its effect on user intentions to use a mobile banking application . 2 . 2 Classifications of Groupware Applications We identified groupware applications ( desktop or mobile ) to examine based on their reported widespread adoption and increased usage due to the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown [ 4 , 11 , 52 ] . Whereas most of the applications were from different app providers , we analyzed them as a group since they were all used to improve communication and collaboration during the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown . Groupware applications like Zoom , Microsoft Teams , Cisco Webex , and Slack enable people to communicate via video and are classified as communication applications . In contrast , remote control and online storage applications such as TeamViewer , Dropbox , Evernote , and Google Drive enable people to access , document , share and collaborate , and thus are classified as collaboration applications [ 28 ] . Participants had to select only one application with the most marked change in use due to the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown among the identified groupware applications . The selected groupware application was the basis of the study ( Table 1 showcases the selected applications , their classification , and the number of participants ) . Participants had the option to add to our identified list of groupware applications , but only one application was added , suggesting that our initial list was relatively comprehensive . Application Classification Total ( N = 195 ) Percent ( % ) Zoom Communication application 70 35 . 9 Gmail Communication application 35 17 . 95 Google Meet ( GMeet ) Communication application 22 11 . 28 Google Drive ( GDrive ) ( Docs , Sheets , Slides ) Collaboration application 17 8 . 72 Slack Communication application 11 5 . 64 TeamViewer Collaboration application 10 5 . 13 Microsoft Teams ( Teams ) Communication application 8 4 . 10 Qualtrics Collaboration application 6 07 Cisco Webex Communication application 6 3 . 07 Google Calender ( GCalender ) Communication application 4 2 . 05 Dropbox Collaboration application 3 1 . 54 Evernote Collaboration application 1 0 . 51 Trello Collaboration application 1 0 . 51 Others 1 0 . 51 Table 1 . The classification of the “selected” groupware applications that participants indicated had the most marked change in use due to the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown . We also include the total number of participants who used the application . J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . 111 : 6 Namara and Knijnenburg . 2 . 3 The Conventional Adoption of Groupware Applications before the COVID - 19 pandemic Beginning in the 1980s and 90s , groupware applications such as e - mail , instant messaging , and conferencing tools—voice and video , were developed to support and enhance workplace communi - cation and productivity among groups primarily embedded within organizations [ 81 ] . Initially , the adoption and use of groupware applications was relatively low and not as widespread [ 29 , 30 , 81 ] . The low adoption of groupware applications was primarily due to issues with the lack of usability ( e . g . , non - intuitive user interfaces of the applications ) , unreliability , mismatch in functionality , lack of application developer involvement or support , privacy concerns , and the top - down adop - tion approach employed to increase adoption within most organizations [ 29 , 30 , 42 , 83 , 85 ] . The top - down approach was meant to foster initial adoption to create a critical mass of users whose subtle peer pressure could then propel and subsequently foster the maintenance of broader use of the groupware applications within the organization ( s ) [ 30 , 61 ] . Hence , unlike single - user applica - tions voluntarily adopted and designed to appeal to individual users , the adoption of groupware applications has traditionally been slow and trickier [ 29 ] . Most of the research studies on the conventional adoption of groupware applications ( Pre - COVID - 19 ) focused on the application development issues that hindered their widespread adoption and acceptance . Primarily , these studies focused on approaches to enhance the usefulness of groupware applications , how to attain and sustain a critical mass of users , and improvements to the technical infrastructures ( e . g . , internet bandwidth , security protocols , exception handling ) [ 29 ] . Hence , over the last decade , improvements have been made to the technical infrastructure , privacy and security protocols and features , development of groupware applications to work across a diverse range of devices ( from desktops to mobile ) . These significant improvements to the development of groupware applications have fostered their integration into the daily lives of people to support them in their everyday tasks [ 37 ] . In examining the conventional adoption of groupware applications , Palen [ 83 , 85 ] revealed that while groupware applications ( e . g . , email ) provide an opportunity to socially coordinate and collaborate , they also introduce notions of personal privacy and control over information [ 83 ] . More importantly , Palen emphasized the importance of trust ( in others ) to facilitate collaboration . While the study primarily referred to interpersonal trust , it implied that trust was essential in using groupware applications . Separate studies that examined the effect of other facets of trust ( e . g . , privacy - related trust ) in related technologies ( e . g . , e - commerce and mobile banking applications ) highlighted the fact that the open nature of the internet as a transaction and information exchange medium creates uncertainty around users partaking in these activities [ 27 , 77 , 87 , 109 ] . User per - ceptions of privacy - related trust ( of the application provider ) are essential in predicting technology adoption [ 87 ] . Hoffman et al . [ 34 ] advocated for application providers to earn their user’s trust if they were to ensure profitable user transactions and information exchanges . Malhotra et al . [ 63 ] also postulated the importance of examining ( privacy - related ) trust to assess user intentions to adopt and use technology effectively . Hence , in this study , we add and examine the influence of privacy - related trust in adopting groupware applications during the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown . 2 . 4 Adoption and use of Groupware Applications due to the COVID - 19 Pandemic Adopting technology is a complex process that is not only influenced by the technology itself but also by the social contexts and strategies used to foster its use [ 60 ] . Governments’ mandatory lockdown measures due to COVID - 19 led to the rapid adoption and increased use of groupware applications . People who had never used a groupware application before adopted it , and those who were already familiar with the application were more likely to spend more time using it for remote J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . The Differential Effect of Privacy - Related Trust on Groupware Application Adoption and Use during the COVID - 19 pandemic 111 : 7 work and study ( see Fig . 1 for the past ( i . e . , before the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown ) and current use ( i . e . , during the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown—a period when this study was conducted ) of the selected groupware applications [ 4 ] . According to a Pew Research study [ 86 ] , groupware applications ( like Zoom or Webex ) have become a vital part of the workday with 81 % of employed adults in the United States indicating that they use one . In their study on the adoption of Google Meet ( a video conferencing application ) due to COVID - 19 , Al - Maroof et al . [ 3 ] found that students rapidly adopted the application due to the fear of educational failure , job loss , and loss of social relationships . However , adoption was also fostered by the ease of use , usefulness , and social influences such as classmates’ recommendation , their presence on the application , and subsequent use [ 3 ] . Similarly , Brynes et al . [ 10 ] found that the restrictions placed on universities due to COVID - 19 precluded any conventional forms of education , assessment , research , and scientific discourse ; thus , medical students had to rely on robust and easy - to - use groupware applications ( e . g . , Zoom , Google Meet , and Webex , etc ) to facilitate remote teaching , learning , and research . In particular , the availability of features such as whiteboarding , screen sharing , screen annotation , group chat , and breakout rooms made it easy to transition and use these applications . Thus , the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown not only compelled organizations and individuals to adopt groupware applications rapidly—if they were not using them already—but also left them with no choice but to rely on them . Unlike this prior work , we examine the influence of additional factors ( e . g . , past use , privacy - related trust in an application provider , and user - situational motivations for adoption ) on the rapid adoption of groupware applications due to the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown . Although this study includes the two important constructs of the TAM ( perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use ) the focus of the paper is not on these variables . Perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use can only really be assessed after prolonged use . At the onset of the pandemic , users had to form an opinion about these aspects , especially if they had never used the application . Factors such as past use , user - situational motivations , privacy - related trust in the application provider likely played an important role as well , given that users were making a sudden shift towards using applications that they were previously ( relatively ) unfamiliar with—an action that requires trust in the benevolence , competence , and integrity of the application provider . The process of adoption of technology , especially among organizations , involves the intention to adopt ( based on the need and suitability of the application ) , followed by making the adoption decision , and ultimately deploying or implementing the application for use ( either by mandating use or providing users with a host of applications they can select to use ) [ 55 ] . However , end - users are often not involved in the decision - making process . This non - involvement of end - users in the adoption decision - making process has implications on the ultimate use of applications . For example , among academics , the mandated use of applications has been accompanied by the perceived loss of control and choice mainly due to non - involvement in the decision - making process [ 39 ] . At times , the adopted applications also require specialized training to use , thereby increasing the end - user workload , such as converting work to a suitable format for online delivery [ 19 ] . As an outcome , end - users can either embrace the application and grow more dependent on it—“if it is efficient and meets their need” , reduce their use to only some features of the application—“through exploration and trial of the different functionalities of the application” , or discontinue use of the application and actively seek replacement options—“if they find the application difficult to use or hard to integrate into their daily practice” [ 104 ] . Additionally , if there is pressure ( real or perceived ) from peers , colleagues , administrators , or employers , end - users are known to either embrace or discontinue use of such technology [ 26 , 104 ] . Conventionally the adoption , usage , success , failures , and effects of groupware applications have been researched [ 18 , 21 , 46 , 66 , 106 ] , through a voluntary adoption perspective and not due to a crisis such as the COVID - 19 pandemic . Therefore , insights J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . 111 : 8 Namara and Knijnenburg . Current Use : During COVID - 19 lockdown Past Use : Before the COVID - 19 lockdown Fig . 1 . The adoption and use ( before and during the lockdown ) of the selected groupware applications that participants indicated had the most marked change in use due to the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown ( based on the time per day spent using the application [ 23 ] ) . The lines running from left ( Past Use ) to right ( Current Use ) indicate the pattern change in the average time spent per day using groupware application ( s ) before and during the COVID - 19 lockdown . The thickness of the line corresponds to the number of participants in that situation . e . g . , the uppermost line represents 9 participants who did not use groupware at all pre - pandemic and less than 10 minutes per day during the COVID - 19 lockdown . Note : Some apparent decreases in time spent are likely due to an overall reduction in work hours due to the COVID - 19 pandemic . from this study could help motivate the refinement , innovation , and better adoption of groupware applications , especially during crises such as a pandemic . 3 RESEARCH HYPOTHESES AND THEORETICAL MODEL We develop our research framework and hypotheses using TAM as the baseline model and extend it with the external factors ( past use , privacy - related trust in the application provider , user - situational motivations for adoption ) critical in the adoption and increased use of groupware applications due to the COVID - 19 pandemic ( see Figure 2 ) . 3 . 1 Past Use of an application Past use is defined here as the amount of interaction and experience gained using the application before the COVID - 19 lockdown . In their investigation on the long term usage of information systems , Kim and Malhotra et al . [ 48 ] found that past use is a strong predictor of future use ; the more experience a user gains , the more likely they are to continue using a system . Over time , the use of an application becomes routine rather than an outcome of conscious decision - making [ 38 ] . Indeed , in a study examining the influence of “experience” as an external variable to TAM on students’ acceptance and use of e - portfolios for learning , Abdullah et al . [ 1 ] found that experience was an effective predictor of the continued use of e - portfolios ( i . e . , e - learning systems ) . Similarly , in a study on the adoption of mobile library applications , Rafique et al . [ 92 ] found that past use as a routine habit directly influences the perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness of the application . Since the groupware applications that we examined ( see Table 1 ) were not new applications and had existed for quite some time , some people had already adopted , become accustomed to , and gained experience using them before the COVID - 19 lockdown ( see Figure 1 ) [ 3 , 6 ] . Thus , to account J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . The Differential Effect of Privacy - Related Trust on Groupware Application Adoption and Use during the COVID - 19 pandemic 111 : 9 1 Past Use User - Situational Motivations for Adoption ( self selection ( Self ) as the reference group ) vs . peer recommended ( Peers ) vs . facilitated by employer / institution ( Facilitated ) vs . mandated by employer / institution ( Mandated ) H1 * PerceivedUsefulness PerceivedEase of Use BehavioralIntention to Use Current Use Trust in the Application Provider H6 * H8 * H7 * H4 * H5 * H9 * H10 H12 H11 H2 * H3 * Fig . 2 . The proposed research model integrates the Technology Adoption Model ( TAM ) [ 14 ] constructs ( Perceived Ease of Use , Perceived Usefulness , Behavioral Intention to Use , Actual Use as Current Use ) with Past Use , Privacy - Related Trust in the Application Provider , and four different user - situational motivations for adoption . ( * ) indicates the relationships separately re - examined to assess the moderating effect of the user - situational motivations ( i . e . , effects under each of the situational motivations ) for adoption . for that experience in this adoption context , we include past use as a relevant variable to TAM and propose the following hypotheses : ● H1 : The past use of a groupware application will be positively associated with the perceived usefulness of the application . ● H2 : The past use of a groupware application will be positively associated with the perceived ease of use of the application . ● H3 : The past use of a groupware application will be positively associated with the increased current use of the application . 3 . 2 Perceived Usefulness of the application Perceived usefulness is defined as the “degree to which a user believes that using an application will provide them with benefits and enhance their work performance” [ 15 , p . 320 ] . Perceived usefulness significantly affects users’ intention to use an application based on their personal or work needs [ 14 ] . Behavioral Intention is defined as “the strength of one’s intention to perform a specified behavior” [ 15 , p . 984 ] . Several researchers have highlighted perceived usefulness as an integral factor in fostering users’ intention to continue using applications , such as mobile banking [ 56 , 77 ] , library [ 92 ] , and social media [ 93 ] apps . Some of the benefits of using groupware applications include helping people who are geographically apart to connect and the associated low costs to set up [ 6 ] . Nevertheless , the interactions ( e . g . , meetings , collaborations , social events ) that occur on these applications tend to be private and limited to the participating individuals , thus trust in the application provider is an important factor in fostering use [ 24 ] . The perceived usefulness of the application may contribute to the formation of privacy - related trust in the application provider based on how their positive experiences using the application builds their perception J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . 111 : 10 Namara and Knijnenburg . of the competence ( an important sub - component of trust , cf . [ 68 ] ) of the application provider . For example , if users of a teleconferencing tool are able to successfully conduct a meeting without any privacy - related incidents ( e . g . “zoom bombing” [ 43 ] ) their trust in the application provider is likely to increase , since the application behaves in accordance with their beliefs about its competence to deal with privacy - related issues [ 12 , 27 ] . Therefore , we hypothesize the following effects of perceived usefulness on users’ intentions to use , and trust in a groupware application provider during the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown : ● H4 : The perceived usefulness of a groupware application will be positively associated with the privacy - related trust in the application provider . ● H5 : The perceived usefulness of a groupware application will be positively associated with the behavioral intention to use the application . 3 . 3 Perceived Ease of Use of the application Perceived ease of use is defined as the “degree to which a user believes that using an application would be free of effort” [ 15 , p . 320 ] . An application that is easy to use is deemed more useful based on the effort it takes to engage with its features [ 14 ] . Users consider groupware applications to be user - friendly ( easy to use ) if they are easy to connect to ( e . g . , have a seamless login process ) , have clear and straightforward functionalities ( e . g . , can easily mute or unmute the microphone , share a screen / document , download / upload a document , etc . ) , have robust yet simple privacy and security settings ( e . g . , offer the ability to manage user and call metadata , securely record meetings , etc . ) [ 6 ] . Users are more likely to have a positive attitude ( i . e . , behavioral intention to use ) towards applications that are easy to use [ 3 , 14 , 79 ] . Perceptions about the ease of use can easily be formulated based on information cues like the visual appeal and navigation without the need to carefully scrutinize the whole application [ 109 ] . Gefen et al . [ 27 ] found that users were more likely to trust an application that is easy to use because it signals the extent to which the application developer is committed , cares , and values them . Additionally , perceived ease of use also communicates to users that the application developer is willing to invest enough effort and resources on the quality of the application by making it usable , intuitive , and easy to navigate [ 27 ] . The availability , access and engagement of features—particularly features related to data management and privacy—enhance user trust in the application provider due to the control they afford users over the personal information they share and / or generate with the application [ 34 ] . Hence , trust in the application provider can also play a mediating role in the relationship between perceived ease of use and users’ behavioral intention to use an application . On the contrary , an application that is difficult to use might communicate , to users , that the application developer does not care or value them enough to make the application easy to use . It can even insinuate that a developer is dishonest or is hiding something by making the application hard to use , and hence difficult to trust [ 27 ] . Based on this empirical work , we hypothesize the following : ● H6 : The perceived ease of use of a groupware application will be positively associated with the perceived usefulness of the application . ● H7 : The perceived ease of use of a groupware application will be positively associated with the behavioral intention to use the application . ● H8 : The perceived ease of use of a groupware application will be positively associated with the privacy - related trust in the application provider . J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . The Differential Effect of Privacy - Related Trust on Groupware Application Adoption and Use during the COVID - 19 pandemic 111 : 11 3 . 4 Privacy - related trust in the application provider For the purposes of our work , “privacy - related trust in the application provider” is defined as a user’s belief in the expectation that the provider of an application will uphold or engage in generally acceptable ways in the management of the user’s personal information [ 63 , 95 ] . In this light , trust in the application provider encompasses a willingness to depend on or be vulnerable to the specific application provider , especially when individuals depend on the application to complete work - related tasks [ 47 , 54 , 87 ] . For example , groupware applications support synchronous collaboration among multiple users , typically within a shared environment . The characteristics of the users , which include “items such as their names , appearances , address , their business , etc . ” [ 97 , p . 53 ] are usually personal and private in nature . Yet , the “shared environment , focus of collaboration , and tasks or activities ( e . g . , teaching a course , negotiating a contract , etc ) consist of data that is accessed concurrently by those participating“ [ 96 , p . 1 ] —or by the provider , when this concurrent information is recorded and stored on its severs . This introduces information - related privacy risks , such as the risk of information loss , eavesdropping or replaying of messages [ 43 , 96 ] . Additionally , as a communication medium , groupware applications facilitate exchange of information that is usually private in nature ( e . g . , medical information , propriety information about undisclosed business strategies , etc ) to the people involved [ 83 ] . Therefore , when an individual trusts a groupware application ( e . g . , Zoom , Webex , Teams , etc ) to relay ( and often record ) an interaction , they become exposed to the risk and uncertainty tied to transmitting data over the internet and storing confidential information on the providers’ servers [ 43 ] . Hence , trust in the application provider is essential for the successful adoption and use of groupware applications . Beyond the conventional TAM constructs of perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use , research in the area of privacy has shown that trust in the application provider is a primary factor in shaping users’ beliefs and that it is a strong antecedent to their intention to use the application [ 12 , 27 , 47 , 72 , 87 ] . When individuals do not have enough trust in the application provider they refrain from using the application—especially if it involves the disclosure of personal information [ 34 ] . In this context , the lack of trust in the application provider arises from user concerns that application providers will misuse , misrepresent , leak , or sell their information to third parties without their knowledge or permission . However , prior work that has examined TAM has often not investigated the impact of privacy - related trust in the application provider on users’ behavioral intention [ 27 , 69 ] . Examining the association between privacy - related trust in the application provider and behavioral intention has practical and theoretical relevance , since it can help application developers , practitioners and researchers of groupware applications explore ways to better secure user trust . During the COVID - 19 pandemic , trust in the application provider was crucial in the adoption of food delivery applications [ 108 ] , and the preceding text makes a similar argument regarding trust ( particularly privacy - related trust ) in groupware applications . Therefore , in this study , we include trust in the application provider as a relevant variable and propose the following hypothesis : ● H9 : The privacy - related trust in the application provider will be positively associated with the behavioral intention to use the application . 3 . 5 Behavioral Intention to Use Additionally , in this work , “behavioral intention” reflects users’ intention to continue and sustain use of groupware applications in the near future ( both during and beyond the pandemic ) . In this realm , a common critique of HCI research studies on technology adoption is that they usually employ user behavior intentions as a proxy for actual use [ 35 ] . To overcome this shortcoming and J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . 111 : 12 Namara and Knijnenburg . consider the unnoticeable shift from adoption to continued use , we inquired about users’ “current“ 1 use of the application as a measure of their actual behavior . Taken together in this study , both behavioral intention and current use serve as predictors of users’ future use behavior . Therefore , we assume a correlation ( rather than a direct causal relationship ) between user behavioral intention and current use . ● H10 : The behavioral Intention to use groupware applications will be positively correlated with the actual current use of the application . 3 . 6 User - Situational Motivations for Adoption Groupware applications were rapidly adopted under uncommon situational circumstances due to the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown . More specifically , different user - situational motivations drove the adoption and use of groupware applications . In this study , we consider four potential situational motivators for adoption : Mandated use of an application employer / institution , facilitated use of an application by an employer / institution , recommended use of an application by peers , and self - selection of an application . As people scrambled to continue their work remotely , some of them adopted groupware applications of their own choosing and on their own accord , or consulted their peers for suggestions on authentic , reliable , and easy - to - use applications [ 10 , 80 , 100 ] . In other cases , key personnel ( e . g . , IT staff ) were tasked with making the adoption decision , introducing and supporting the eventual use of such applications [ 90 ] . As a result , depending on the institutional technology adoption processes and use policies , groupware applications among these people might either have been mandated or supported ( facilitated ) by their institution to fulfill business , research , education , and work needs . These user - situational motivations for adoption could have differently affected how people adopted and used the applications . In our study , we define and examine the following user - situational motivations for adoption : ( 1 ) Self - selection of an app ( Self ) : The adoption and use of a groupware application from personal experience , without influence from others . ( 2 ) Peer Recommended use of an app ( Peers ) : The adoption and use of a groupware appli - cation based on a family or friend recommendation . ( 3 ) Facilitated use by employer / institution ( Facilitated ) : The adoption and use of a group - ware application based on a recommendation by an employer or institution ( i . e . , the appli - cation is provided for free , supported by the IT department , encouraged by the leadership , taught in training sessions , a combination of the above among all other modes of support ) . ( 4 ) Mandated use by employer / institution ( Mandated ) : The mandated use of a groupware application in adherence to an employer or institution technology use policy . Herein , the individual has no choice and say on the application that they end up using . Groupware Use Motivation Total ( N = 195 ) Percent ( % ) Self Selection 41 21 . 03 Peer Recommendation 34 17 . 44 Facilitated by Employer / Institution 62 31 . 80 Mandated by Employer / Institution 58 29 . 74 Table 2 . The number of participants per user - situational motivation for adoption . 1 Based on the average time per day spent using the application when the participants responded to the survey J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . The Differential Effect of Privacy - Related Trust on Groupware Application Adoption and Use during the COVID - 19 pandemic 111 : 13 0 20 40 60 Z o o m G m a il G M e e t G D r i v e T e a m s Q u a l t r i cs S l a ck T e a m V i e w e r W e b e x D r o p b o x G C a l e n d e r E v e r n o t e T r e ll o Groupware Applications N u m be r o f U s e r s User−Situational Motivation Mandated by employer / institution Facilitated by employer / institution Peer recommended Self selection Fig . 3 . The selected groupware applications that participants indicated had the most marked change in use due to the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown based on the user - situational motivations for adoption . Table 2 and Figure 3 showcase the breakdown of how the selected groupware applications within our study were adopted based on the user - situational motivations for adoption . Overall , we observe a relatively uniform distribution in the user - situational motivations for adoption , with most of the application adoption being facilitated ( 31 . 80 % ) or mandated ( 29 . 74 % ) . For example , a groupware application like Zoom was widely adopted based on self - selection ( 11 . 4 % ) , peer recommendations ( 27 . 1 % ) , facilitation by institutions / employers ( 27 . 1 % ) , and mandates by institutions / employers ( 34 . 3 % ) . Whereas social influences were not included in the original TAM due to difficulty in identifying and measuring them , we include them in this study . In this adoption context , it was easier to determine and measure the social influences ( i . e . , user - situational motivations for adoption ) because adoption was more rapid and event - driven . Thus , it was easier for respondents to recall how they ended up using their groupware application ( s ) at the onset of the COVID - 19 lockdown . In their study , Venkatesh and Davis [ 101 ] extended TAM with some social influences processes ( e . g . , subjective norms , voluntariness , and image ) . They found that social Influences ( e . g . , subjective norms ) are significant determinants of behavioral intention and affect users’ perceived usefulness of technology , especially when the use of technology is mandated . Therefore , we hypothesize the following : ● H11 : The user - situational motivation will have a positive effect on the perceived usefulness of a groupware application . ● H12 : The user - situational motivation will have a positive effect on the behavioral intention to use a groupware application . The proposed research model ( see Figure 2 ) highlights all the relationships hypothesized . To answer RQ1 , the effects of these relationships ( H1 - H10 ) are comprehensively examined including the effect of user - situational motivation conditions , H11 - H12 address RQ2 . J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . 111 : 14 Namara and Knijnenburg . 3 . 7 The Moderating Effect of User - situational Motivations for Adoption Each user - situational motivation for adoption can lead to different use patterns [ 33 , 101 ] . For instance , when application use is mandatory , an institution / employer requires the user to use the application ; however , this might vary based on how a user perceives the application ( e . g . , trust in the application provider could be more important when the application is mandated rather than voluntary because the user has no say in its adoption ) . Additionally , self - selection of an application could reflect an individual’s true use intentions since they select an application of their own liking without any external influence . Therefore , the way people perceive or use an application is likely to vary based on the user - situational motivation for adoption . In this study , we assess the adoption and use pattern under each of the user - situational motivations for adoption through a multi - group model analysis . This analysis allows for the examination of the moderating effect of the user - situational motivations for adoption on the hypothesized relationships ( H1 * - H9 * ) . 4 METHODOLOGY This section provides an overview of the study , explains how we developed and validated our survey questionnaire , outlines participant recruitment , and describes our data analysis approach . The study was approved by the Clemson University Institutional Review Board ( IRB ) . 4 . 1 Study Overview This study’s main objective is to examine the factors that influenced the adoption and increased use of groupware applications at the onset of the COVID - 19 lockdown . In the process , we develop and validate an “emergency adoption model“ that shows how these factors are interrelated . This study was conducted when most people within the United States had transitioned to working from home due to the COVID - 19 pandemic between April and May 2020 . We used Amazon Mechanical Turk ( MTurk ) to distribute a survey composed of several multiple choice and 7 - point scale questions to examine the adoption and increased use of groupware applications ( see Table 1 for a list of the applications examined ) . To ensure that we asked the right questions , the survey was validated through synchronous expert review with two external human - computer interaction researchers and in a pilot study with five participants , we pretested it before distribution . The purpose of the pilot study was to assess the clarity , appropriateness , typos and necessity of each of the questions to ensure that the collected data would allow us to answer our research questions [ 8 ] . For example , through the pilot we learnt that the term “groupware applications” would not be known by most of our participants , thus we added a definition “ ( i . e . , apps / websites that help you carry out business and work - related tasks ) ” to the questions with the term for better clarity . Furthermore , rather than inquire about how users had come to use groupware applications using an unclear question such as “How did you embark on the use [ groupware application ] “ , we rephrased the question to “You reported that you use [ groupware application ] more frequently due to COVID - 19 . Why ? ” for better clarity and to match the answer choices stated in Section 4 . 2 . Additionally , two attention check questions based on the objective of the study and the estimated time it would take to complete the study were included based on feedback from the pilot study [ 53 ] . We elaborate further on our survey design and participant recruitment in Sections 4 . 2 and 4 . 3 respectively . 4 . 2 Survey Design and Operationalization of Constructs In the survey , participants were provided a list of 14 commonly used groupware applications and given the option to include any other application that they were using but was not included on the list . Using the following question , “As a result of the quarantine , your responsibilities , and J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . The Differential Effect of Privacy - Related Trust on Groupware Application Adoption and Use during the COVID - 19 pandemic 111 : 15 how you feel , how have you used the following groupware applications ( i . e . , apps / websites that help you carry out business and work - related tasks ) ? ” participants were asked to indicate how they used each of the applications using the six options ( “I have never used it” , “I stopped using it due to COVID - 19“ , “I use it less frequently due to COVID - 19” , “I use it the same amount as before COVID - 19” , “I use it more frequently due to COVID - 19” , “I started using it due to COVID - 19” ) . As an additional attention check , we included a fictitious application to ensure that participants provided accurate responses to applications that they had actually used or were familiar with . Based on their answers , respondents were implored to select only one of the applications ( that had seen the most marked change in use ) from the list of applications that they had indicated as having “ [ started using | used more frequently ] ” due to COVID - 19 . Subsequently , all the questions were then framed around this one selected groupware application . To determine how they had come to use the selected groupware application ( i . e . , user - situational motivation for adoption ) , respondents were specifically asked whether their use of the application was because “their employer / institution mandated it” or “their employer / institution facilitated it” or “it was recommended by their peer ( s ) ” or “it was on their own choice . ” Participants were also asked about their past experience using the selected groupware application— “before the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown” and current use—“after the COVID - 19 pandemic lock - down ( and based on when they took the survey ) ” using a scale adapted from Ernala et al . [ 23 ] with the questions , “ [ Before the start | In the past week ] of the coronavirus outbreak , on average , approximately how much time per day did you spend actively using [ the groupware application ] “ ) based on the answer options ranging from “Did not use [ the groupware application ] at all“ to “More than 3 hours per day“ . This scale ensured that we accurately capture the actual use of the application ( see Figure 1 ) before and after the COVID - 19 lockdown was instituted ( i . e . , “past use” and “current use” in the research model ) . The prevalidated scale items of the perceived usefulness , ease of use , and behavioral intention were adapted from the earlier works on the technology adoption model ( TAM ) [ 14 ] . We assessed for user privacy - related trust in the application provider using a scale adapted from Knijnenbuerg and Kobsa [ 50 ] . All responses corresponding to these constructs were measured using a 7 - point scale , ranging from strongly disagree = " 1 " to strongly agree = " 7 " . See ( Table 5 , Appendix A ) for all the survey items used in this study and their subsequent measurement validity . 4 . 3 Participant Recruitment and Data Collection The survey was developed using Qualitrics [ 89 ] and distributed via Amazon Mechanical Turk ( MTurk ) platform where the sample population tends to be more tech - savvy [ 94 ] . Participants accessed the survey through a Human Intelligence Task ( HIT ) on MTurk . MTurkers were required to have a historical HIT approval rate greater than 95 % with at least 50 approved past HITs to ensure satisfactory response quality . Furthermore , participation was limited to U . S . adults ( 18 years + ) . Upon reading the study description , participants who consented to participate in the study were provided with the two attention check questions to ensure they fully comprehended the objective of the study . They were then shown the list of groupware applications and asked questions on the experience using the selected application they had adopted or markedly used due to the COVID - 19 lockdown . The last part of the survey asked for demographic information . A random unique completion code was then generated and entered on Amazon Mechanical Turk as proof of study completion . As a token of appreciation for their participation and time , participants who completed the survey were compensated $ 1 . The survey took , on average , about 10 minutes to complete . A total of 294 participants responded to the survey , with only 210 indicating that they used groupware applications . After removing the incomplete responses and those who failed the attention J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . 111 : 16 Namara and Knijnenburg . Variables Total ( N = 195 ) Percent ( % ) Gender Male 106 54 . 4 Female 85 43 . 6 Not Specified 4 2 . 05 Education Some high school 1 0 . 51 High School 5 2 . 56 Some college 18 4 . 10 Trade , technical / Vocational training 2 1 . 02 Associate’s degree 13 6 . 67 Bachelor’s degree 100 51 . 30 Master’s degree 45 23 . 08 Doctoral degree 3 1 . 54 Professional degree ( e . g . MBA , MD , JD , etc ) 7 3 . 59 Not Specified 1 0 . 51 Age 18 - 29 years old 55 28 . 2 30 - 49 years old 120 61 . 54 50 - 64 years old 18 9 . 23 65 + 2 1 . 03 Race White 139 71 . 28 Black or African American 25 12 . 82 Hispanic or Latino 13 6 . 67 Asian 14 7 . 18 American Indian or Alaska Native 1 0 . 51 Not Specified 3 1 . 54 Area Urban 95 48 . 72 Suburban 75 38 . 46 Rural 23 11 . 79 Not Specified 2 1 . 03 Table 3 . Demographics ( gender , education , age , race and area ) of our study participants . check questions , a total number of 195 valid responses were accepted and are the basis of our data analysis . The specific demographic distribution of our respondents is listed in Table 3 . 4 . 4 Data Analysis Approach Our data analysis approach was two - fold ; 1 ) we first assessed the reliability and validity of the pre - validated survey items that we adopted for this study using confirmatory factors analysis ( CFA ) ( see Section 4 . 4 . 1 ) [ 51 ] , and 2 ) we examined the research model and tested the hypotheses using structural equation modeling ( SEM ) ( see Section 4 . 4 . 2 ) [ 51 ] . CFA and SEM are common methods for analyzing TAM - like frameworks . SEM is among the advanced stastical analysis techniques that combine aspects of factor analysis and regression to enable stimultaneous examination of relationships among measured variables and latent variables ( i . e . , assessment of the measurement model , see Section 4 . 4 . 1 ) as well between latent variables ( assessment of the structural model , see Section 4 . 4 . 2 ) [ 31 ] . Although SEM , has mostly been used for only correctional data ( e . g . , survey data ) , it is also perfectly capable of modelling experimental data [ 49 ] . In our case , we use SEM because it offers two important advantages ; 1 ) SEM can deal with latent variables e . g . , when we measure subjective constructs with multiple items like Perceived Ease of Use that had 10 items ( see Appendix 5 ) . In this case , SEM offers additional robustness and precision . Second , SEM allows for testing of multiple mediation effects ( e . g . , from Ease of Use to Perceived Usefulness to Behavioral J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . The Differential Effect of Privacy - Related Trust on Groupware Application Adoption and Use during the COVID - 19 pandemic 111 : 17 Intention ) within a single model . In our case , this allows us to model the adoption process rather than simply the outcome . CFA helps ensure the reliability of the latent variables ( i . e . , Perceived Ease of Use , Perceived Usefulness and Behavioral Intention constitute multi - item measurement scales ) . The robust maximum likelihood estimator ( MLR ) —that accounts for non - normal distributions of observed variables—was used as the model estimator in this study . The Kaiser - Meyer - Olkin Measure of Sampling Adequacy 2 revealed that each individual items of the latent constructs ( i . e . , Perceived Usefulness , Perceived Ease of Use , Trust in the Application Provider , and Behavioral Intention ) had a value above . 85 , indicating that all items were highly adequate for factor analysis using CFA or SEM [ 44 ] . The overall KMO value was 0 . 90 , hence the data sample as a whole was adequate for factor analysis [ 44 ] . 4 . 4 . 1 Measurement Model . The validity of our constructs was assessed using confirmatory factor analysis ( CFA ) in MPlus . CFA helps establish convergent and discriminant validity to ensure that the survey items are a valid measurement of the constructs [ 51 ] . More specifically , convergent validity helps “determine whether the items of a scale measure a single construct ( i . e . , that the scale is not a combination of multiple constructs , or simply a collection of items with no common ground ) , while discriminant validity determines whether two scales indeed measure two separate constructs ( i . e . , that two scales are not so similar that they actually measure the same construct ) ” [ 51 , p . 25 ] . In CFA , survey items that belong to the same scale are represented by a latent factor . The analysis determines to what extent the item serves as an adequate indicator of the factor ( loading ) . We iteratively removed items with high cross - loadings and items with low ( < . 70 ) loadings on their own factor ; these items have no loading in Table 5 , Appendix A . Overall , the results in Table 5 show adequate convergent ( AVE > 0 . 50 ) and discriminant validity ( ⌋︂ ( AVE ) > largest correlation ) for each factor , and a substantial loading for each item ( i . e . , each item loading exceeded 0 . 70 ) , with a good 3 overall model fit [ 49 ] : 𝜒 2 ( 539 ) = 2370 . 739 , p < 0 . 001 ; RMSEA = 0 . 071 , CFI = 0 . 976 , TLI = 0 . 974 , albeit with a high RMSEA . 4 . 4 . 2 Structural Model . Next , to answer RQ1 and RQ2 , we examined the research model ( Figure 2 ) and determined the statistical significance of the hypothesized relationships between the constructs using structural equation modeling ( SEM ) . SEM is an “integrative statistical procedure that tests the measurement model and all hypotheses ( known as the structural model ) at the same time . Practically speaking , SEM is a CFA where the factors are regressed on each other and on the experiment manipulations“ [ 51 , p . 30 ] . Therefore , our research model with the constructs ; past use , user - situational motivations for adoption , perceived ease of use , usefulness , privacy - related trust in application provider , behavioral intention , and current use , was examined for both hypothesized and potential non - hypothesized effects using a “saturated” path model of these core factors [ 51 ] . We iteratively pruned the non - significant effects of the model and examined the sign and significance of the path coefficients ; in our resulting model ( see Figure 4 ) . 2 A KMO measure in the . 90s is usually considered “marvelous” [ 44 , p . 2 ] 3 A good model has 𝜒 2 that is not statistically different from a saturated model ( p > . 05 ) , but this statistic is considered too sensitive . Researchers have considered other fit indices [ 9 ] . Hu and Bentler [ 36 ] propose cutoff values for other fit indices to be : CFI > . 96 , TLI > . 95 , and RMSEA < . 05 , with the upper bound of its 90 % CI below 0 . 10 . J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . 111 : 18 Namara and Knijnenburg . 1 Past Use User - Situational Motivations for Adoption ( self selection ( Self ) as reference group ) vs . peer recommended ( Peers ) vs . facilitated by employer / institution ( Facilitated ) vs . mandated by employer / institution ( Mandated ) 0 . 668 * * * ( 0 . 083 ) 0 . 270 * * * ( 0 . 059 ) 0 . 257 * * * ( 0 . 053 ) 0 . 433 * * * ( 0 . 064 ) 0 . 440 * * * ( 0 . 091 ) 0 . 381 * * * ( 0 . 072 ) 0 . 386 * * * ( 0 . 097 ) PerceivedUsefulness ( R 2 = . 393 ) PerceivedEase of Use BehavioralIntention to Use ( R 2 = . 625 ) Current Use Trust in the Application Provider ( R 2 = . 447 ) 0 . 301 * * * ( 0 . 070 ) X 2 ( 3 ) = 12 . 878 * * Peers : - 1 . 215 * * ( 0 . 400 ) Facilitated : - 0 . 693 * ( 0 . 356 ) Mandated : - 1 . 128 * * ( 0 . 351 ) 0 . 350 * * ( 0 . 103 ) 0 . 458 * * ( 0 . 139 ) Fig . 4 . The Structural Equation Model ( SEM ) for the survey results . The model shows the direct effects of the hypothesized determinants ( Significance levels : * * * p < . 001 , * * p < . 01 , ’ns’ p > . 05 , R 2 is the proportion of variance explained by the model . Numbers on the arrows represent the 𝛽 coefficients and standard errors ( in parenthesis ) of the effect ) . Factors are scaled to have an SD of 1 The solid incoming arrows ( → ) between constructs represent significant relationships while the broken line arrows ( ⇢ ) represent tested relationships that were found to be non - significant . Each regression contains a regression coefficient ( indicated by the number on the arrow ) , the standard error of the regression effect ( in parenthesis ) and the significance level denoted by asterisks ( * ) or “ns” for non - significant effects ) . The latent constructs were scaled to have a standard deviation ( SD ) of one , so that one SD difference in a construct ( e . g . perceived ease of use ) causes a 𝛽 SD difference in another construct ( e . g . perceived usefulness ) . Next , we tested for significant moderation effects of the user - situational motivations by running a multi - group SEM of our research model , and only kept the ones that were significant . Moderation effects “occur when a certain manipulation has an effect in certain condition ( s ) of the other manip - ulation , but no effect ( or the opposite effect ) in other condition ( s ) of the other manipulation“ [ 51 , p . 18 ] . All possible moderators were tested , but the final model only contains the significant ones , represented by red line arrows ( ⇢ ) in Figure 5 ) . Finally , we plotted the effects for each of the user - situational motivations for adoption wherever an significant interaction effect was observed ( Figures 6 – 9 ) . Visually inspecting these plots helped us better understand the effects . 5 RESULTS In this section , we detail our results regarding the research model and subsequent interaction effects of the user - situational motivations for adoption on the examined constructs . Specifically , we describe the factors that influenced the rapid adoption and increased use of groupware application at the onset of the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown . 5 . 1 Structural Model We tested our hypotheses on the measured subjective constructs using structural equation modelling ( SEM ) with the robust maximum likelihood estimator ( MLR ) . Having removed the non - significant J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . The Differential Effect of Privacy - Related Trust on Groupware Application Adoption and Use during the COVID - 19 pandemic 111 : 19 effects in the research model , we analyze the significant effects . The resulting model ( see Fig . 4 ) , had a good model fit ( 𝜒 2 ( 336 ) = 634 . 35 , p < 0 . 000 ; RMSEA = 0 . 067 ( which is close to the suggested maximum of . 05 ) , CFI = 0 . 960 , TLI = 0 . 950 [ 36 ] ) . Below , we discuss the individual hypothesized effects summarized in Table 4 . Hypothesis Supported ? H1 : Past Use → Perceived Usefulness ( + ) Yes H2 : Past Use → Perceived Ease of use ( + ) No H3 : Past Use → Current Use ( + ) Yes H4 : Perceived Usefulness → Trust in the application provider ( + ) Yes H5 : Perceived Usefulness → Intention to use app ( + ) Yes H6 : Perceived Ease of use → Perceived Usefulness ( + ) Yes H7 : Perceived Ease of Use → Intention to use app ( + ) Yes H8 : Perceived Ease of Use → Trust in the application provider ( + ) Yes H9 : Trust in application provider → Intention to use app ( + ) Yes H10 : Intention to use app ↔ Current Use ( + ) Yes H11 : User - Situational motivations for adoption → Perceived Usefulness ( + ) No H12 : User - situational motivations for adoption → Intention to use app ( + ) Yes Table 4 . Overview of the supported and rejected hypotheses . 5 . 1 . 1 Past Use ( H1 - H3 ) . The model shows that past use is associated with a positive effect on perceived usefulness ( 𝛽 = 0 . 270 , p < . 001 ; H1 supported ) and current use ( 𝛽 = 0 . 433 , p < . 001 ; H3 supported ) , but not on ease of use ( H2 not supported ) : people who had prior experience using the groupware application before the COVID - 19 lockdown were more likely to find it useful and continued using it . Additionally , we find a non - hypothesized relationship between past use and trust in the application provider , with people who have prior experience using the application trusting its provider more ( 𝛽 = 0 . 257 , p < . 001 ) . This suggests that users’ trust in an application provider increases as they continue to use the application . 5 . 1 . 2 Perceived Usefulness ( H4 - H5 ) . In line with H4 and H5 , we find that perceived usefulness is positively associated with trust in the application provider ( 𝛽 = 0 . 381 , p < . 001 ; H4 is supported ) and intention to use the app ( 𝛽 = 0 . 386 , p < . 001 ; H5 is supported ) . People who found the groupware application useful were more likely to trust and use it . 5 . 1 . 3 Perceived Ease of Use ( H6 - H8 ) . We find that perceived ease of use is positively associated with perceived usefulness ( 𝛽 = 0 . 668 , p < . 001 ; H6 is supported ) , intention to use the app ( 𝛽 = 0 . 350 , p < . 01 ; H7 is supported ) , and trust in the application provider ( 𝛽 = 0 . 301 , p < . 001 ; H8 is supported ) . People who found the groupware application easy to use were more likely to also find it useful . Additionally , people who found the groupware application easy to use were also more likely to trust and also use it . 5 . 1 . 4 Privacy - related trust in the application provider ( H9 ) . Participants’ trust in the application provider is positively associated with their intention to use the groupware application ( 𝛽 = 0 . 440 , p < . 001 ; H9 is supported ) . Hence , people who had trust in the groupware application provider were more likely to use the application . 5 . 1 . 5 Behavioral Intention to use ( H10 ) . Participants’ intention to use the groupware application was positively correlated with their current use of the application ( 𝑟 = 0 . 458 , p < . 01 ; H10 is supported ) . Hence , people who had the intention to continue using the application were more likely to currently be using the application , and vice versa . J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . 111 : 20 Namara and Knijnenburg . 5 . 1 . 6 User - situational Motivations for Adoption ( H11 - H12 ) . Interestingly , user - situational motiva - tions for adoption did not have an effect on perceived usefulness ( H11 is not supported ) , but rather were positively associated with participants’ intention to use the groupware application ( 𝜒 2 ( 3 ) = 12 . 878 , p < . 01 ; H12 is supported ) . Specifically , people had a higher intention to use the groupware application when they decided to do so on their own rather than when it was recommended by a peer or facilitated or mandated by an employer / institution . 5 . 2 Interaction Effects The user - situational motivations for adoption significantly affected the participant’s intention ( s ) to adopt and use groupware applications . However , for each situational motivation for adoption , there was a difference in the control , choice , and flexibility afforded in selecting the groupware application . Specifically , people who were self - motivated or motivated by their peers could voluntarily choose what groupware application ( s ) to use . In contrast , those who were facilitated or mandated to use their employer / institution’s applications had limited to no control over the application used . A multi - group model revealed significant interaction effects ( i . e . , the relationships represented by red line arrows ( ⇢ ) in Fig . 5 ) , of the user - situational motivations on a number of hypothesized relationships ( H1 * - H9 * ) . Hence , there were differences in how these relationships manifested across the four user - situational motivations . We examine these differences . 1 Past Use User - Situational Motivations for Adoption ( self selection ( Self ) as reference group ) vs . peer recommended ( Peers ) vs . facilitated by employer / institution ( Facilitated ) vs . mandated by employer / institution ( Mandated ) 0 . 668 * * * ( 0 . 083 ) 0 . 270 * * * ( 0 . 059 ) 0 . 257 * * * ( 0 . 053 ) 0 . 433 * * * ( 0 . 064 ) 0 . 458 * * ( 0 . 139 ) X 2 ( 3 ) = 17 . 136 * * * Self : - 0 . 078 n . s ( 0 . 105 ) Peers : 0 . 389 n . s ( 0 . 252 ) Facilitated : 0 . 683 * ( 0 . 350 ) Mandated : 0 . 909 * * * ( 0 . 223 ) X 2 ( 3 ) = 5 . 449 * * Self : 0 . 183 n . s ( 0 . 150 ) Peers : 0 . 654 * * ( 0 . 247 ) Facilitated : 0 . 171 n . s ( 0 . 171 ) Mandated : 0 . 743 * * ( 0 . 316 ) 0 . 386 * * * ( 0 . 097 ) PerceivedUsefulness ( R 2 = . 393 ) PerceivedEase of Use BehavioralIntention to Use ( R 2 = . 625 ) Current Use Trust in the Application Provider ( R 2 = . 447 ) X 2 ( 3 ) = 8 . 055 * Self : 0 . 303 n . s ( 0 . 207 ) Peers : - 0 . 362 n . s ( 0 . 405 ) Facilitated : 0 . 695 * * * ( 0 . 191 ) Mandated : 0 . 024 n . s ( 0 . 335 ) X 2 ( 3 ) = 12 . 53 * * Peers : - 1 . 205 * * ( 0 . 406 ) Facilitated : - 0 . 664 * ( 0 . 357 ) Mandated : - 1 . 105 * * ( 0 . 350 ) X 2 ( 3 ) = 13 . 318 * * Self : 0 . 667 * * * ( 0 . 190 ) Peers : 0 . 326 n . s ( 0 . 324 ) Facilitated : 0 . 395 n . s ( 0 . 384 ) Mandated : - 0 . 243 n . s ( 0 . 173 ) Fig . 5 . The Structural Equation Model ( SEM ) outcome of our research model . The model shows the factors and the effects of different user - situational motivational settings ( against the baseline of " Self " ) as motivators for adaptation and use of work - related applications during the COVID - 19 pandemic ( Significance levels : * * * p < . 001 , * * p < . 01 , * p < . 05 , ’ns’ p > . 05 , R 2 is the proportion of variance explained by the model , on the arrows are the coefficients and standard errors ( in parenthesis ) , the red arrows ( ⇢ ) represent the observed interaction effects ) 5 . 2 . 1 Privacy - related trust in the application provider . The effect of perceived usefulness on trust in the application provider differs significantly between the user - situational motivations for adoption ( overall p < . 01 ) . Specifically , Figure 6 shows that this effect is only significant when the use of the groupware application is recommended by a peer ( 𝛽 = 0 . 654 , p < . 01 ) or mandated by an employer / institution ( 𝛽 = 0 . 743 , p < . 01 ) . In other words , when application use is due to a peer J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . The Differential Effect of Privacy - Related Trust on Groupware Application Adoption and Use during the COVID - 19 pandemic 111 : 21 recommendation or is mandated by an employer / institution , trust in the application provider is reinforced only when the application is deemed to be useful . When application use is self motivated or facilitated by the employer / institution , trust in the application provider is high regardless of the perceived usefulness . - 2 - 1 0 1 - 2 - 1 0 1 2 Perceived Usefulness T r u s t i n t he app li c a t i on p r o v i de r User - Situational Motivation for Adoption Self Selection Peer - Recommended * Facilitated by Employer / Institution Mandated by Employer / Institution * * * Fig . 6 . The interaction effect of perceived usefulness on trust in the application provider for the different user - situational motivations for adoption . Marks indicate significant slopes : * * * p < . 001 , * * p < . 01 , * p < . 05 . The scales on the axes in sample standard deviations Additionally , the effect of perceived ease of use on trust in the application provider differs significantly between the user - situational motivations for adoption ( overall p < . 001 ) . Specifically , Figure 7 shows that this effect is only significant when the use of the groupware application is facilitated by an employer / institution ( 𝛽 = 0 . 695 , p < . 001 ) . In other words , when facilitated , trust in the application provider is high only when the application is easy to use . Otherwise , trust does not vary significantly by ease of use . - 1 0 1 - 2 - 1 0 1 2 Perceived Ease of Use T r u s t i n t he app li c a t i on p r o v i de r User - Situational Motivationfor Adoption Self Selection Peer - Recommended Facilitated by Employer / Institution * * * Mandated by Employer / Institution * * * Fig . 7 . The interaction effect of perceived ease of use on trust in the application provider for the different user - situational motivations . Marks indicate significant slopes : * * * p < . 001 , * * p < . 01 , * p < . 05 . The scales on the axes in sample standard deviations J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . 111 : 22 Namara and Knijnenburg . 5 . 2 . 2 Behavioural Intention . The effect of trust in the application provider on behavioral intention to use the application differs significantly between the user - situational motivations for adoption ( overall p < . 001 ) . Specifically , Figure 8 shows that this effect is only significant when the use of the groupware application is mandated by an employer / institution ( 𝛽 = 0 . 909 , p < . 001 ) and significant when facilitated by an employer / institution ( 𝛽 = 0 . 683 , p < . 05 ) . In other words , if adoption is mandated or facilitated , people have a higher intention to use the application only when they trust the application . When adoption is self - motivated , the intention to use the application is high regardless of the amount of trust in the application provider . - 3 - 2 - 1 0 - 2 - 1 0 1 2 Trust in the applicationprovider B eha v i o r a li n t en t i on t o u s e t he app li c a t i on User - Situational Motivationfor Adoption Self Selection Peer - Recommended Facilitated by Employer / Institution * Mandated by Employer / Institution * * * * * * * Fig . 8 . The interaction effect of trust in the application provider on behavioral intention to use the application for the different user - situational motivations . Marks indicate significant slopes : * * * p < . 001 , * * p < . 01 , * p < . 05 . The scales on the axes in sample standard deviations Additionally , the effect of perceived ease of use on behavioral intention to use the application differs significantly between the user - situational motivations for adoption ( overall p < . 001 ) . Specif - ically , Figure 9 shows that this effect is only significant when the use of the groupware application is self motivated ( 𝛽 = 0 . 667 , p < . 001 ) . In other words , when adoption is self - motivated , people have a higher intention to use the application when it is easy to use . This effect is not signifi - cant when application use is based on peer recommendation or facilitated or mandated by an employer / institution . - 2 - 1 0 1 - 2 - 1 0 1 2 Perceived Ease of Use B eha v i o r i a l I n t en t i on t o U s e t he A pp li c a t i on User - Situational Motivationfor Adoption Self Selection * * * Peer - Recommended Facilitated by Employer / Institution Mandated by Employer / Institution * * * Fig . 9 . The interaction effect of perceived ease of use of the groupware application on behavioral intention to use the application for the different user - situational motivations . Marks indicate significant slopes : * * * p < . 001 , * * p < . 01 , * p < . 05 . The scales on the axes in sample standard deviations J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . The Differential Effect of Privacy - Related Trust on Groupware Application Adoption and Use during the COVID - 19 pandemic 111 : 23 6 DISCUSSION In this section , we highlight our findings and discuss the implications of the observed effects in adopting and using groupware applications at the onset of the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown . Additionally , we detail practical implications and recommendations to improve upon the adoption and to increase the use of groupware applications among individuals , institutions , and managers in times of crisis . We conclude with a discussion of the limitations of our work and future research opportunities . 6 . 1 Summary and Reflection on the Results Groupware applications are not necessarily new technologies and have traditionally been adopted and used over time [ 6 , 22 , 62 ] . As indicated in Section 2 . 3 , pre - COVID - 19 , the conventional adoption of groupware applications was slow due to various technical and social issues [ 29 , 30 , 81 ] . However , the COVID - 19 pandemic accelerated their adoption and increased their use [ 86 ] . The use of group - ware applications was essential to sustain remote work and study during the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown . People used these groupware applications to have virtual meetings , collaborate , and interact with each other [ 24 ] . In line with TAM [ 15 ] , we find that the users’ intention to adopt and use groupware applications was largely driven by past use , the ease - of - use and usefulness of the app . This finding is consistent with previous studies that examined the factors that fostered the adoption of specific groupware ( e . g . , Google Meet , Zoom , Webex , etc ) during the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown [ 3 , 10 ] . Furthermore , while not part of the traditional TAM model , we find that privacy - related trust in the application provider also plays an important role within this adoption context . Unlike traditional adoption models , the nature of these effects—most prominently those related to trust—depends on the underlying situational motivation for adoption . While prior studies have added trust as a factor to TAM [ 27 ] , our study is the first to show that this effect significantly differs depending on the user - situational motivation to adopt a certain application , especially within a crisis which requires quick adoption of new technology . 6 . 2 Self - Motivated Adoption and Use of Groupware Applications For self - motivated adoption , we find that the observed significant effects align with TAM [ 14 ] . More specifically , the effect of perceived ease - of - use on perceived usefulness , the effects of perceived usefulness and ease - of - use on behavioral intention , and the relation between behavioral intention and actual use are all part of this well - established model of technology acceptance . Our results also suggest that when individuals are self - motivated to rapidly adopt and use groupware applications , privacy - related trust in the application provider is not a significant concern . When users have the ability to self - select a groupware application that meets their needs , they are likely to select an application that they trust with their data . With trust already high , their intention to continue using the app is no longer predicated on their trust , but rather on the application’s usability and usefulness . Therefore , in case of self - motivated adoption , application developers who wish to retain users should focus on improving the ease - of - use of the application and on meeting the user’s needs . Focusing on these aspects of the application has the best chance of fostering sustained use , especially in emergency circumstances . 6 . 3 Peer Recommended Adoption and Use of Groupware Applications When individuals adopt and use groupware applications based on peer recommendation , we observe significant effects of perceived ease - of - use on perceived usefulness , and perceived usefulness on behavioral intention . We also observe a significant effect of perceived usefulness on trust in the J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . 111 : 24 Namara and Knijnenburg . application provider . However , under this situational motivation to adopt , trust in the application provider does not influence behavioral intention . Arguably , users’ trust in the data privacy practices of the application provider can transfer from their peers’ recommendation , as long as they agree with their peers regarding the usefulness of the application . When users find the application to be useful , this increases their trust in the application provider even though it does not necessarily influence their behavioral intention . Overall , our results suggest that when individuals rely on peer recommendations , adoption and intention to use is primarily motivated by the application’s usefulness . Hence , application developers could encourage users to highlight the usefulness of the application when they recommend it to a peer . 6 . 4 Facilitated Adoption and Use of Groupware Applications When the adoption and use of groupware applications is facilitated ( e . g . , the application is provided for free , supported by the IT department , encouraged by the leadership , and / or taught in training sessions ) , we find that the adoption and use patterns are different from those observed in the self - motivated and peer - recommended motivational situations for adoption . Specifically , in this situation , users’ trust in the data privacy practices of the application provider mediates the effect of their perceived ease - of - use on their intention to use the application . Our results suggest that when the adoption and use of a groupware application is facilitated , users’ privacy - related trust in the application provider is essential for adoption and sustained use . Moreover , individuals are more likely to trust the data management practices of a facilitated groupware application if it is easy to use . One could argue that users who are willing to give facilitated applications a try derive their trust from , e . g . , the convenience with which privacy settings can be changed in the system [ 34 ] . Therefore , if an employer / institution is to facilitate one specific groupware application among many , it might be advisable to recommend to users the easiest one to use , especially when it comes to its privacy settings . Similarly , when encouraging employees / students to adopt and use a groupware application , especially during a crisis , the ease - of - use ( e . g . , the apps’ well - designed privacy interface and features ) should be highlighted and emphasized in training to increase trust . Another approach that could help increase trust in the data management practices of a facilitated application could be through reviews , user testimonials , and trust seals ( although the trust - increasing effects of seals has been debated [ 78 ] ) . 6 . 5 Mandated Adoption and Use of Groupware Applications When employers / institutions mandate the adoption and use of groupware applications , we find that the adoption and use patterns are different from those observed in the self - motivated , peer - recommended , and facilitated motivational situations for adoption . Specifically , trust in the appli - cation provider mediates the effect of perceived usefulness on the intention to use the application . The mediating effect of trust may suggest that users establish trust in the application provider by judging its competence in providing a risk - free usage experience [ 43 ] . The mediating effect of privacy - related trust in this context suggests that this factor is essential in giving users the confidence and comfort needed to use the application , despite having no personal choice in its adoption . Therefore , we recommend that managers who plan to mandate using a specific groupware application not only highlight how the universal adoption of the application within the institution could help make it useful , but also to ensure that the application protects the user’s information . Mechanisms through which the application manages personal data and protects user privacy should be clearly communicated to users . Moreover , when mandating a groupware application , managers should ensure that the individuals do , in fact , find it useful ; otherwise , adoption may not occur , or they might become demotivated J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . The Differential Effect of Privacy - Related Trust on Groupware Application Adoption and Use during the COVID - 19 pandemic 111 : 25 to use it and instead find a workaround [ 40 ] . Another approach could be to directly increase privacy - related trust in the mandated application based on its reviews , features , and functionality . 6 . 6 Practical Implications for Institutions and Technology Managers The threat of a crisis such as a pandemic is an ever - recurring risk [ 71 , 75 , 82 ] . Therefore , we must learn how to foster technology adoption within such contexts that accelerate the adoption process . Our findings reveal that privacy - related trust in the application provider is imperative when the adoption and use of a technology ( e . g . , a groupware application ) is facilitated or mandated by an institution . Why is privacy - related trust essential in these contexts ? When institutions mandate or facilitate the adoption and use of groupware applications , such applications are primarily used to facilitate work collaborations and communications . In most instances , these applications track and monitor the productivity of users based on metrics such as their attendance , meeting sessions , chats , voicemails , shared meetings , files , transcriptions , including profile details such as email address , profile picture , and phone numbers [ 43 , 67 , 73 ] . As a result of the top - down technology adoption approach [ 90 ] , end - users are usually not privy to the information policies or agreements that govern the collection and storage of their information , nor are they asked for consent ( or afforded the ability to control the information settings in some instances ) . Hence , users usually do not have control over how their information is collected , used , or stored by the applications they are encouraged or mandated to use . Privacy - related trust in the application provider reflects people’s confidence and comfort with the application provider based upon their privacy concerns and expectations that the provider will uphold or engage in generally acceptable ways when it comes to the protection and handling of their information . In other words , privacy - related trust in the application provider increases users’ intention to use and rely on the application . How can institutions and managers effectively improve user trust in the application provider ? Most importantly , we recommend that application providers reduce the amount of information they collect via their applications . Users who are asked or required to adopt a certain groupware application will want to know how any information collected will be stored , shared , or used , so these practices must be clearly explained during training or on - boarding . Moreover , in negotiations with the application providers , institutions ( or managers ) should ensure that the application providers’ information privacy policies comply with institutional and applicable jurisdictional privacy and data protection laws . Finally , rather than setting invasive defaults at the institutional level , technology managers should give end users some ability to control the collection and use of their personal information . We posit that this would improve user trust in the application provider . More generally , how can institutions and managers effectively improve the adoption process during a crisis ? The COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown demonstrated how accelerated adoption and shift in usage patterns could occur on short notice and at a large scale with the potential of forcing a change in work arrangements . Working remotely is a practice that is likely to continue for the foreseeable future ; thus , if technology managers have the choice , what strategies could they use to decide whether they should mandate or facilitate or let individuals independently select what groupware application ( s ) to use ? We recommend that if managers have applications that are easy to use , they could facilitate their adoption and use by highlighting this aspect ( e . g . , its well - designed interface and features ) . However , if an application’s usefulness depends on universal adoption within the institution , we recommend that it be mandated for use . However , its usefulness should be clearly explained to potential users . Additionally , institutions can encourage their IT staff to provide institutionally - supported applications that are both easy to use and useful . In this context , allowing users to provide feedback based on their experience using different applications and or features could foster adoption and acceptance and trust . Institutions can also use their power ( based on the number of users ) to negotiate contracts and implore app developers / vendors to improve J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . 111 : 26 Namara and Knijnenburg . their applications’ usability and features . Additionally , resources or tutorials can be provided to train and help users understand the benefit of using these applications [ 6 , 80 , 104 ] . We posit that this would improve user adoption of and use of mandated or facilitated applications . 6 . 7 Practical Implications for Developers In their groundbreaking work , Grudin and Palen noted that groupware developers have traditionally “been isolated from user environments and have little awareness of the factors other than utility and usability that govern a product’s” adoption and use [ 29 , p . 102 ] . One could argue this lack of awareness to be ever so prominent when it comes to the adoption and use of groupware applications in the rapidly changing context of the COVID - 19 pandemic . Groupware applications require careful introduction , leaving little to chance if they are to be successfully adopted [ 29 ] . Developers can use the findings of the current study to understand the effect of different user - situational adoption motivations to devise strategies that could better support application adoption within an “emergency“ context . For example , we suggest that developers of applications that are particularly easy to use should encourage facilitated adoption of their applications by organizations rather than mandated use , as our results show that ease of use plays a more important role in facilitated adoption than in mandated adoption . Conversely , developers of applications that score particularly high in terms of usefulness might actually benefit from encouraging managers to mandate their adoption , as our results show that usefulness plays a more important role in mandated adoption than in facilitated adoption . Moreover , developers of applications that depend on institutional adoption ( be it mandated or facilitated ) to garner critical mass ( cf . [ 61 ] ) must work hand in hand with those institutions to address any trust issues that their users might have . Hoffman et al . [ 34 ] suggest that “the most effective way for [ providers ] to develop profitable exchange relationships with [ users ] is to earn their trust” [ 34 , p . 82 ] . The authors posit that trust would allow for the balance of power to shift toward a more cooperative interaction between application providers and their users . Indeed , our results show that the establishment of privacy - related trust in the application provider is most critical when the use of groupware application is mandated or facilitated . Since under these conditions developers typically cannot directly access the end - users of their products , they should routinely work with the institutions to survey for any privacy - related concerns their users have about the groupware application in use . Luckily , ample research exists that can help application developers resolve such privacy issues , should they occur [ 29 , 34 , 72 ] . For example , developers could create features that allow users to control the use of their information , ensure that the application offers an assessment of the data privacy risks in clear and simple terms , provide evidence of their past performance in terms of privacy , include indicators of credentials or competence , or display customer feedback and / or testimonials [ 29 ] . 6 . 8 Practical Implications for End - Users End users should be aware that they are likely to evaluate the adoption and use of groupware applications based on their situational motivation ( s ) ( i . e . , whether the use of the application is facilitated , mandated , peer recommended , self selected ) . This can lead to inadvertent preference reversals . For example , let us assume that a certain user is presented with two groupware applica - tions : Application A is simpler but generally more usable , while application B has more powerful features but is more difficult to use . If the user is encouraged to use either of the two applications , our results suggest that they are relatively more likely to choose the more usable one ( application A ) . If , on the other hand , the same user is mandated to use either application A or B , our results suggest that they are relatively more likely to choose the more useful one ( application B ) . Arguably , if people are aware ( even to a small extent ) of the fact that they make different decisions based J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . The Differential Effect of Privacy - Related Trust on Groupware Application Adoption and Use during the COVID - 19 pandemic 111 : 27 on different situations , then they may be able to reflect upon this fact and form a more robust ( situation - invariant ) set of preferences . This is especially important given that institutions ( and their users ) will likely experience some amount of “vendor lock - in” , meaning that their decisions may have an impact long after the pandemic is over . 7 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK The study proposes an emergency adoption model ( guided by prior work on technology adoption [ 14 , 64 ] ) that emphasizes the role of past use , privacy - related trust in the application provider , and user - situational motivations on groupware application adoption . We leveraged TAM as a widely used and simpler adoption model in lieu of newer but a little more complex models ; UTAUT / UTAUT2 [ 7 ] . Whereas there are some similarities between the two prominent models [ 20 ] , we recognize this was a tradeoff . Future work can attempt the integration’s conducted in this work using UTAUT / UTAUT2 . We also measure privacy - related trust in the application provider rather than trust in the platform itself . In some cases , the responses to this measure might differ because if one assess for trust in the platform , people might respond based on specific features on the platform that inspire or reduce trust . Privacy - related trust in the application provider tends to be a holistic evaluation , that , certain exceptions notwithstanding , does not strongly relate to specific features of the platform . Moreover , in the area of groupware applications the provider is often synonymous with the platform itself ( e . g . , Zoom ) . Additionally , we recognize that there are other external physiological and technological factors ( e . g . , technical expertise , user characteristics , low internet - speeds or lack thereof [ 17 ] , cultural differences and access [ 41 ] , etc . ) not considered in this study . However , they could have different influences on the adoption and use of groupware applications . Future work can investigate and highlight the effects of these factors in the context of emergencies . We recruited participants from Amazon Mechanical Turk and restricted the participant pool to only adult users within the U . S . Additionally , we acknowledge that the demographics of Amazon MTurkers may deviate from the general population of all groupware application users . Future work , can investigate the the generalizability of our findings to other types of applications and populations . Apart from providing users with a definition of what groupware applications were , we did not inquire about users’ specific use purposes . We recognize that purpose for adoption / use could also influence how people adopt and use groupware applications . Future work can examine the true influence of this factor . Likewise , we examine a subset of groupware applications ( listed in Table 1 ) identified through reports of applications that experienced drastic user adoption and used due to the COVID - 19 pandemic [ 4 ] . However , there could have been other groupware applications that were adopted and used during this period , but we did not include them in our study . Nevertheless , respondents had the option and ability to add any missed groupware applications that they markedly used due to the pandemic . Additionally , participants were advised to select only one application that they markedly used since the start of the COVID - 19 pandemic to help focus all their responses on that particular application . However , we realize that people could have used two or more groupware applications and / or a combination of other applications based on their context , needs , and vice versa . Future work can examine if our findings hold for other kinds of applications as well . Our model captures past and current use , but it is unclear whether the modeled relationships are indeed predictive of users’ sustained use of the adopted groupware application . Our measure of behavioral intention provides a proxy of this measure ; we plan to survey the same participants in the near future to test whether behavioral intention is indeed predictive of sustained use . Lastly , the examined emergency adoption and use pattern is one specific type of rapid adoption captured at one specific snap shot ( when the survey was distributed ) ; other crises or events may cause different adoption patterns . Future work can longitudinally examine other types and instances of J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . 111 : 28 Namara and Knijnenburg . emergency adoption and / or if the proposed emergency adoption model translates to other contexts beyond just the COVID - 19 pandemic . 8 CONCLUSION The ongoing COVID - 19 pandemic has disrupted personal , societal , and professional lives in a variety of ways . This study examined an emergency adoption model under which groupware applications were rapidly adopted and markedly used at the onset of the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown . For a more comprehensive model , we purposefully integrated TAM [ 14 ] with three additional factors ( i . e . , past use , trust in the application provider , and user - situational motivations for adoption ) . In line with TAM , we find that the users’ intention to adopt and use groupware applications was largely driven by past use , the ease - of - use , and usefulness of the app . Furthermore , while not part of the traditional TAM , we find that trust in the application provider plays an important role within our adoption context . However , unlike typical adoption models , the nature of these effects—most prominently those related to trust—depends on the underlying situational motivation for adoption . Studying the adoption of technologies ( e . g . , groupware applications ) is not a new phenomenon within the HCI / CSCW community [ 59 , 62 , 76 , 91 , 99 ] . However , the COVID - 19 pandemic lockdown presented a unique opportunity to uncover and understand the rapid adoption and use patterns of technology in the management of a crisis . Beyond the pandemic , the new normal will also include using groupware applications more extensively particularly for remote learning , medical diagnostics , entertainment , business and commercial activities . To meet these new demands , new groupware applications will be developed to facilitate the different facets and ways for online collaboration and communication . Hence , there will be more pressure to ensure privacy as users increasingly interact and gain experience using these applications . Lindley et al . [ 58 ] , posit that it is important to study adoption to understand the ever - evolving individual and societal relationships users have with technology . Through these studies , we as a research community can continue to understand the intricate relationships people have with technology . Therefore , our study contributions are threefold ; 1 ) we provide insight and empirical research on the factors that facilitated the rapid adoption and increased use of groupware applications at the onset of the COVID - 19 pandemic within the United States , 2 ) we validate an emergency adoption model that shows how these factors are interrelated , and 3 ) we contribute towards a growing broader research agenda in HCI and CSCW on adoption and use of technology in crises like a pandemic [ 3 , 13 , 32 , 55 ] , natural disasters [ 74 , 107 ] , unexpected events [ 84 ] , and wars [ 65 ] . 9 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to thank Marie Jarell , PhD , Byron Lowens , PhD , Ryan Preston , and Likitha Valluru for the time taken to review our study protocol and critique our survey items . We would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their useful comments on earlier versions of this manuscript . Moses Namara acknowledges support from a Facebook Fellowship Award . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Fazil Abdullah , Rupert Ward , and Ejaz Ahmed . 2016 . Investigating the influence of the most commonly used external variables of TAM on students’ Perceived Ease of Use ( PEOU ) and Perceived Usefulness ( PU ) of e - portfolios . Computers in Human Behavior 63 ( 2016 ) , 75 – 90 . [ 2 ] Icek Ajzen . 1985 . From intentions to actions : A theory of planned behavior . In Action control . Springer , 11 – 39 . [ 3 ] Rana Saeed Al - Maroof , Said A Salloum , Aboul Ella Hassanien , and Khaled Shaalan . 2020 . Fear from COVID - 19 and technology adoption : the impact of Google Meet during Coronavirus pandemic . Interactive Learning Environments ( 2020 ) , 1 – 16 . [ 4 ] Monica Anderson and Emily A . Vogels . 2020 . Americans turn to technology during COVID - 19 outbreak , say an outage would be a problem . https : / / www . pewresearch . org / fact - tank / 2020 / 03 / 31 / americans - turn - to - technology - J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . The Differential Effect of Privacy - Related Trust on Groupware Application Adoption and Use during the COVID - 19 pandemic 111 : 29 during - covid - 19 - outbreak - say - an - outage - would - be - a - problem / [ 5 ] Sam A Ankenbauer and Alex Jiahong Lu . 2020 . Engaging Offline Communities Online Amid COVID - 19 : A Case Study of Independent Theaters . In Conference Companion Publication of the 2020 on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . 209 – 213 . [ 6 ] Mandy M Archibald , Rachel C Ambagtsheer , Mavourneen G Casey , and Michael Lawless . 2019 . Using Zoom videoconferencing for qualitative data collection : perceptions and experiences of researchers and participants . International Journal of Qualitative Methods 18 ( 2019 ) , 1609406919874596 . [ 7 ] Richard P Bagozzi . 2007 . The legacy of the technology acceptance model and a proposal for a paradigm shift . Journal of the association for information systems 8 , 4 ( 2007 ) , 3 . [ 8 ] Kathy Baxter , Catherine Courage , and Kelly Caine . 2015 . Understanding your users : a practical guide to user research methods . Morgan Kaufmann . [ 9 ] Peter M Bentler and Douglas G Bonett . 1980 . Significance tests and goodness of fit in the analysis of covariance structures . Psychological bulletin 88 , 3 ( 1980 ) , 588 . [ 10 ] KevinGByrnes , PatrickAKiely , ColumPDunne , KieranWMcDermott , andJohnCalvinCoffey . 2020 . Communication , collaboration and contagion : “Virtualisation” of anatomy during COVID - 19 . Clinical Anatomy ( 2020 ) . [ 11 ] Brian X . Chen . 2020 . The Virus Revealed Our Essential Tech ( and Weeded Out the Excess ) . https : / / www . nytimes . com / 2020 / 04 / 15 / technology / personaltech / virus - essential - tech . html [ 12 ] Alina M Chircu , Gordon B Davis , and Robert J Kauffman . 2000 . Trust , expertise , and e - commerce intermediary adoption . AMCIS 2000 Proceedings ( 2000 ) , 405 . [ 13 ] Tom Crick , Cathryn Knight , Richard Watermeyer , and Janet Goodall . 2020 . The Impact of COVID - 19 and “Emergency Remote Teaching” on the UK Computer Science Education Community . In United Kingdom & Ireland Computing Education Research conference . 31 – 37 . [ 14 ] Fred D Davis . 1985 . A technology acceptance model for empirically testing new end - user information systems : Theory and results . Ph . D . Dissertation . Massachusetts Institute of Technology . [ 15 ] Fred D Davis . 1989 . Perceived usefulness , perceived ease of use , and user acceptance of information technology . MIS quarterly ( 1989 ) , 319 – 340 . [ 16 ] Fred D Davis , Richard P Bagozzi , and Paul R Warshaw . 1989 . User acceptance of computer technology : a comparison of two theoretical models . Management science 35 , 8 ( 1989 ) , 982 – 1003 . [ 17 ] Edilaine de Azevedo Vieira , Álvaro Maximiliano Pino Coviello , and Taiane Ritta Coelho . 2020 . Technological infrastructure for remote classes in Brazilian public schools during the COVID - 19 pandemic . In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance . 226 – 229 . [ 18 ] William H Dutton , Janet Fulk , and Charles Steinfield . 1982 . Utilization of video conferencing . Telecommunications Policy 6 , 3 ( 1982 ) , 164 – 178 . [ 19 ] Yogesh K Dwivedi , D Laurie Hughes , Crispin Coombs , Ioanna Constantiou , Yanqing Duan , John S Edwards , Babita Gupta , Banita Lal , Santosh Misra , Prakhar Prashant , et al . 2020 . Impact of COVID - 19 pandemic on information management research and practice : Transforming education , work and life . International Journal of Information Management 55 ( 2020 ) , 102211 . [ 20 ] Yogesh Kumar Dwivedi , Navonil Mustafee , Lemuria D Carter , and Michael D Williams . 2010 . A Bibliometric Comparision of the Usage of Two Theories of IS / IT Acceptance ( TAM and UTAUT ) . . In AMCIS . 183 . [ 21 ] Carmen Egido . 1988 . Video conferencing as a technology to support group work : a review of its failures . In Proceedings of the 1988 ACM conference on Computer - supported cooperative work . 13 – 24 . [ 22 ] Clarence A Ellis , Simon J Gibbs , and Gail Rein . 1991 . Groupware : some issues and experiences . Commun . ACM 34 , 1 ( 1991 ) , 39 – 58 . [ 23 ] Sindhu Kiranmai Ernala , Moira Burke , Alex Leavitt , and Nicole B Ellison . 2020 . How well do people report time spent on Facebook ? An evaluation of established survey questions with recommendations . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 14 . [ 24 ] Lauren Fell . 2020 . Trust and COVID - 19 : Implications for interpersonal , workplace , institutional , and information - based trust . Digital Government : Research and Practice ( 2020 ) . [ 25 ] Martin Fishbein and Icek Ajzen . 1975 . Belief . Attitude , Intention and Behavior : An Introduction to Theory and Research 578 ( 1975 ) . [ 26 ] Janet Fulk , Joseph Schmitz , and Charles W Steinfield . 1990 . A social influence model of technology use . Organizations and communication technology 117 ( 1990 ) , 140 . [ 27 ] David Gefen , Elena Karahanna , and Detmar W Straub . 2003 . Trust and TAM in online shopping : An integrated model . MIS quarterly 27 , 1 ( 2003 ) , 51 – 90 . [ 28 ] Sarah Glover . 2020 . Free Tech Tools Have Kept Communities Connected During Coronavirus . https : / / www . nbcnewyork . com / news / coronavirus / free - tech - tools - have - kept - communities - con - nected - during - coronavirus / 2336787 / J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . 111 : 30 Namara and Knijnenburg . [ 29 ] Jonathan Grudin . 1994 . Groupware and social dynamics : Eight challenges for developers . Commun . ACM 37 , 1 ( 1994 ) , 92 – 105 . [ 30 ] Jonathan Grudin and Leysia Palen . 1995 . Why groupware succeeds : Discretion or mandate ? . In Proceedings of the Fourth European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ECSCW’95 . Springer , 263 – 278 . [ 31 ] Joseph F Hair Jr , G Tomas M Hult , Christian Ringle , and Marko Sarstedt . 2016 . A primer on partial least squares structural equation modeling ( PLS - SEM ) . Sage publications . [ 32 ] Jonna Häkkilä , Mari Karhu , Matilda Kalving , and Ashley Colley . 2020 . Practical Family Challenges of Remote Schooling during COVID - 19 Pandemic in Finland . In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Shaping Experiences , Shaping Society . 1 – 9 . [ 33 ] Jon Hartwick and Henri Barki . 1994 . Explaining the role of user participation in information system use . Management science 40 , 4 ( 1994 ) , 440 – 465 . [ 34 ] Donna L Hoffman , Thomas P Novak , and Marcos Peralta . 1999 . Building consumer trust online . Commun . ACM 42 , 4 ( 1999 ) , 80 – 85 . [ 35 ] Kasper Hornbæk and Morten Hertzum . 2017 . Technology acceptance and user experience : A review of the experiential component in HCI . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 24 , 5 ( 2017 ) , 1 – 30 . [ 36 ] Li - tze Hu and Peter M Bentler . 1999 . Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure analysis : Conventional criteria versus new alternatives . Structural equation modeling : a multidisciplinary journal 6 , 1 ( 1999 ) , 1 – 55 . [ 37 ] Elaine M Huang , Elizabeth D Mynatt , Daniel M Russell , and Alison E Sue . 2006 . Secrets to success and fatal flaws : The design of large - display groupware . IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 26 , 1 ( 2006 ) , 37 – 45 . [ 38 ] Marco Hubert , Markus Blut , Christian Brock , Christof Backhaus , and Tim Eberhardt . 2017 . Acceptance of smartphone - based mobile shopping : Mobile benefits , customer characteristics , perceived risks , and the impact of application context . Psychology & Marketing 34 , 2 ( 2017 ) , 175 – 194 . [ 39 ] David R Johnson . 2013 . Technological change and professional control in the professoriate . Science , technology , & human values 38 , 1 ( 2013 ) , 126 – 149 . [ 40 ] Matthew R Jones and Helena Karsten . 2008 . Giddens’s structuration theory and information systems research . MIS quarterly 32 , 1 ( 2008 ) , 127 – 157 . [ 41 ] Anirudha Joshi . 2013 . Technology adoption by’emergent’users : the user - usage model . In Proceedings of the 11th Asia Pacific conference on computer human interaction . 28 – 38 . [ 42 ] Laddawan Kaewkitipong . 2012 . Diffusion of an online collaboration tool : The case of google wave adoption failure . In 2012 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences . IEEE , 3990 – 3999 . [ 43 ] Dima Kagan , Galit Fuhrmann Alpert , and Michael Fire . 2020 . Zooming Into Video Conferencing Privacy and Security Threats . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2007 . 01059 ( 2020 ) . [ 44 ] Henry F Kaiser and John Rice . 1974 . Little jiffy , mark IV . Educational and psychological measurement 34 , 1 ( 1974 ) , 111 – 117 . [ 45 ] Jacob Kastrenakes . 2020 . Zoom saw a huge increase in subscribers - and revenue - thanks to the pandemic . https : / / www . theverge . com / 2020 / 6 / 2 / 21277006 / zoom - q1 - 2021 - earnings - coronavirus - pandemic - work - from - home [ 46 ] Md Saifuddin Khalid and Md Iqbal Hossan . 2016 . Usability evaluation of a video conferencing system in a university’s classroom . In 2016 19th International Conference on Computer and Information Technology ( ICCIT ) . IEEE , 184 – 190 . [ 47 ] Dan J Kim , Donald L Ferrin , and H Raghav Rao . 2008 . A trust - based consumer decision - making model in electronic commerce : The role of trust , perceived risk , and their antecedents . Decision support systems 44 , 2 ( 2008 ) , 544 – 564 . [ 48 ] Sung S Kim and Naresh K Malhotra . 2005 . A longitudinal model of continued IS use : An integrative view of four mechanisms underlying postadoption phenomena . Management science 51 , 5 ( 2005 ) , 741 – 755 . [ 49 ] Rex B Kline . 2015 . Principles and practice of structural equation modeling . Guilford publications . [ 50 ] Bart P Knijnenburg and Alfred Kobsa . 2013 . Making decisions about privacy : information disclosure in context - aware recommender systems . ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems ( TiiS ) 3 , 3 ( 2013 ) , 1 – 23 . [ 51 ] Bart P Knijnenburg and Martijn C Willemsen . 2015 . Evaluating recommender systems with user experiments . In Recommender Systems Handbook . Springer , 309 – 352 . [ 52 ] Ella Koeze and Nathaniel Popper . 2020 . The Virus Changed the Way We Internet . https : / / www . nytimes . com / interactive / 2020 / 04 / 07 / technology / coronavirus - internet - use . html [ 53 ] Franki YH Kung , Navio Kwok , and Douglas J Brown . 2018 . Are attention check questions a threat to scale validity ? Applied Psychology 67 , 2 ( 2018 ) , 264 – 283 . [ 54 ] Nancy K Lankton , D Harrison McKnight , Ryan T Wright , and Jason Bennett Thatcher . 2016 . Research Note—using Expectation Disconfirmation Theory and Polynomial Modeling to understand trust in technology . Information Systems Research 27 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 197 – 213 . [ 55 ] Chidi M Lebopo , Lisa F Seymour , and Henri Knoesen . 2020 . Explaining factors affecting telework adoption in South African organisations pre - COVID - 19 . In Conference of the South African Institute of Computer Scientists and Information Technologists 2020 . 94 – 101 . J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . The Differential Effect of Privacy - Related Trust on Groupware Application Adoption and Use during the COVID - 19 pandemic 111 : 31 [ 56 ] Francisco Liébana - Cabanillas , Francisco Muñoz - Leiva , Juan Sánchez - Fernández , and María I Viedma - del Jesús . 2016 . The moderating effect of user experience on satisfaction with electronic banking : empirical evidence from the Spanish case . Information Systems and e - Business Management 14 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 141 – 165 . [ 57 ] Renny SN Lindberg and Olga De Troyer . 2020 . Towards a Reference Model of Guidelines for the Elderly Based on Technology Adoption Factors . In Proceedings of the 6th EAI International Conference on Smart Objects and Technologies for Social Good . 30 – 35 . [ 58 ] Joseph Lindley , Paul Coulton , and Miriam Sturdee . 2017 . Implications for adoption . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 265 – 277 . [ 59 ] Pei - Ju Liu , James M Laffey , and Karen R Cox . 2008 . Operationalization of technology use and cooperation in CSCW . In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work . 505 – 514 . [ 60 ] Qian Liu , Susan Geertshuis , and Rebecca Grainger . 2020 . Understanding academics’ adoption of learning technologies : A systematic review . Computers & Education ( 2020 ) , 103857 . [ 61 ] H Lou , Wenhong Luo , and Diane Strong . 2000 . Perceived critical mass effect on groupware acceptance . European journal of information systems 9 , 2 ( 2000 ) , 91 – 103 . [ 62 ] M Lynne Markus and Terry Connolly . 1990 . Why CSCW applications fail : Problems in the adoption of interdependent work tools . In Proceedings of the 1990 ACM conference on Computer - supported cooperative work . 371 – 380 . [ 63 ] Naresh K Malhotra , Sung S Kim , and James Agarwal . 2004 . Internet users’ information privacy concerns ( IUIPC ) : The construct , the scale , and a causal model . Information systems research 15 , 4 ( 2004 ) , 336 – 355 . [ 64 ] Nikola Marangunić and Andrina Granić . 2015 . Technology acceptance model : a literature review from 1986 to 2013 . Universal access in the information society 14 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 81 – 95 . [ 65 ] Gloria J Mark , Ban Al - Ani , and Bryan Semaan . 2009 . Resilience through technology adoption : merging the old and the new in Iraq . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 689 – 698 . [ 66 ] Jennifer Marlow , Eveline Van Everdingen , and Daniel Avrahami . 2016 . Taking notes or playing games ? Understanding multitasking in video communication . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . 1726 – 1737 . [ 67 ] Chris Matyszczyk . 2021 . I looked at all the ways Microsoft Teams tracks users and my head is spinning . https : / / www . zdnet . com / article / i - looked - at - all - the - ways - microsoft - teams - tracks - users - and - my - head - is - spinning / [ 68 ] D Harrison McKnight . 2005 . Trust in information technology . The Blackwell encyclopedia of management 7 ( 2005 ) , 329 – 331 . [ 69 ] D Harrison Mcknight , Michelle Carter , Jason Bennett Thatcher , and Paul F Clay . 2011 . Trust in a specific technology : An investigation of its components and measures . ACM Transactions on management information systems ( TMIS ) 2 , 2 ( 2011 ) , 1 – 25 . [ 70 ] D Harrison McKnight , Larry L Cummings , and Norman L Chervany . 1998 . Initial trust formation in new organizational relationships . Academy of Management review 23 , 3 ( 1998 ) , 473 – 490 . [ 71 ] Rafael A Medina . 2018 . 1918 influenza virus : 100 years on , are we prepared against the next influenza pandemic ? Nature Reviews Microbiology 16 , 2 ( 2018 ) , 61 – 62 . [ 72 ] Miriam J Metzger . 2004 . Privacy , trust , and disclosure : Exploring barriers to electronic commerce . Journal of computer - mediated communication 9 , 4 ( 2004 ) , JCMC942 . [ 73 ] MicrosoftHeidi . [ n . d . ] . Microsoft Teams Privacy - Microsoft Teams . https : / / docs . microsoft . com / en - us / microsoftteams / teams - privacy [ 74 ] Volodymyr V Mihunov , Nina SN Lam , Lei Zou , Zheye Wang , and Kejin Wang . 2020 . Use of Twitter in disaster rescue : lessons learned from Hurricane Harvey . International Journal of Digital Earth ( 2020 ) , 1 – 13 . [ 75 ] David M Morens and Anthony S Fauci . 2007 . The 1918 influenza pandemic : insights for the 21st century . The Journal of infectious diseases 195 , 7 ( 2007 ) , 1018 – 1028 . [ 76 ] Michael Muller , Katja Neureiter , Nervo Verdezoto , Alina Krischkowsky , Anna Maria Al Zubaidi - Polli , and Manfred Tscheligi . 2016 . Collaborative appropriation : How couples , teams , groups and communities adapt and adopt tech - nologies . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing Companion . 473 – 480 . [ 77 ] Francisco Munoz - Leiva , S Climent - Climent , and Francisco Liébana - Cabanillas . 2017 . Determinants of intention to use the mobile banking apps : An extension of the classic TAM model . Spanish Journal of Marketing - ESIC 21 , 1 ( 2017 ) , 25 – 38 . [ 78 ] Francisco Muñoz - Leiva , Teodoro Luque - Martínez , and Juan Sánchez - Fernández . 2010 . How to improve trust toward electronic banking . Online Information Review ( 2010 ) . [ 79 ] Thanh Thuy Ngo , Thi Thuong Thuong Nguyen , and Thu - Giang Tran . 2020 . Influence of Learning by Using Video Conferencing Tools on Perceptions and Attitude of Vietnamese Female Students in COVID - 19 Pandemic . Available at SSRN 3697029 ( 2020 ) . J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . 111 : 32 Namara and Knijnenburg . [ 80 ] Pam S Nicolle and Yiping Lou . 2008 . Technology adoption into teaching and learning by mainstream university faculty : A mixed methodology study revealing the “how , when , why , and why not” . Journal of Educational Computing Research 39 , 3 ( 2008 ) , 235 – 265 . [ 81 ] GaryMOlsonandJudithSOlson . 2010 . Groupwareandcomputer - supportedcooperativework . OnlineCommunication and Collaboration : A reader , Helen Donelan , Karen Kear , and Magnus Ramage ( Eds . ) ( 2010 ) , 39 – 57 . [ 82 ] World Health Organization et al . 2018 . A checklist for pandemic influenza risk and impact management : building capacity for pandemic response . ( 2018 ) . [ 83 ] Leysia Palen . 1999 . Social , individual and technological issues for groupware calendar systems . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . 17 – 24 . [ 84 ] Leysia Palen and Sarah Vieweg . 2008 . The emergence of online widescale interaction in unexpected events : assistance , alliance & retreat . In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work . 117 – 126 . [ 85 ] Leysia Ann Palen . 1997 . Groupware adoption & adaptation . In CHI’97 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 67 – 68 . [ 86 ] Kim Parker , Juliana Menasce Horowitz , and Rachel Minkin . 2021 . How Coronavirus Has Changed the Way Americans Work . https : / / www . pewresearch . org / social - trends / 2020 / 12 / 09 / how - the - coronavirus - outbreak - has - and - hasnt - changed - the - way - americans - work / [ 87 ] Paul A Pavlou . 2003 . Consumer acceptance of electronic commerce : Integrating trust and risk with the technology acceptance model . International journal of electronic commerce 7 , 3 ( 2003 ) , 101 – 134 . [ 88 ] Ping Qiao , Xiaoman Zhu , Yangzhi Guo , Ying Sun , and Chuan Qin . 2021 . The Development and Adoption of Online Learning in Pre - and Post - COVID - 19 : Combination of Technological System Evolution Theory and Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology . Journal of Risk and Financial Management 14 , 4 ( 2021 ) , 162 . [ 89 ] Qualtrics . [ n . d . ] . Qualtrics : The Leading Research & Experience Software . https : / / www . qualtrics . com / Accessed : 2020 - 04 - 1 . [ 90 ] Pablo - Alejandro Quinones . 2014 . Cultivating practice & shepherding technology use : supporting appropriation among unanticipated users . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing . 305 – 318 . [ 91 ] Pablo - Alejandro Quinones , Stephanie D Teasley , and Steven Lonn . 2013 . Appropriation by unanticipated users : looking beyond design intent and expected use . In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer supported cooperative work . 1515 – 1526 . [ 92 ] Hamaad Rafique , Alaa Omran Almagrabi , Azra Shamim , Fozia Anwar , and Ali Kashif Bashir . 2020 . Investigating the acceptance of mobile library applications with an extended technology acceptance model ( TAM ) . Computers & Education 145 ( 2020 ) , 103732 . [ 93 ] Rupak Rauniar , Greg Rawski , Jei Yang , and Ben Johnson . 2014 . Technology acceptance model ( TAM ) and social media usage : an empirical study on Facebook . Journal of Enterprise Information Management ( 2014 ) . [ 94 ] Elissa M Redmiles , Sean Kross , and Michelle L Mazurek . 2019 . How well do my results generalize ? comparing security and privacy survey results from mturk , web , and telephone samples . In 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy ( SP ) . IEEE , 1326 – 1343 . [ 95 ] Denise M Rousseau , Sim B Sitkin , Ronald S Burt , and Colin Camerer . 1998 . Not so different after all : A cross - discipline view of trust . Academy of management review 23 , 3 ( 1998 ) , 393 – 404 . [ 96 ] Andrew Rowley and Jean Dollimore . 1997 . Secure group communication for groupware applications . In Proceedings of European Research Seminar in Advanced Distributed Systems ( ERSADS’97 ) . Citeseer , 222 – 227 . [ 97 ] Tony Salvador , Jean Scholtz , and James Larson . 1996 . The Denver model for groupware design . ACM SIGCHI Bulletin 28 , 1 ( 1996 ) , 52 – 58 . [ 98 ] Kavita Saxena . 2020 . Coronavirus Accelerates Pace of Digital Education in India . ( 2020 ) . [ 99 ] Emily Sun , Ross McLachlan , and Mor Naaman . 2017 . TAMIES : a study and model of adoption in P2P resource sharing and indirect exchange systems . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work and Social Computing . 2385 – 2396 . [ 100 ] Urvashi Tandon . 2020 . Factors influencing adoption of online teaching by school teachers : A study during COVID - 19 pandemic . Journal of Public Affairs ( 2020 ) , e2503 . [ 101 ] Viswanath Venkatesh and Fred D Davis . 2000 . A theoretical extension of the technology acceptance model : Four longitudinal field studies . Management science 46 , 2 ( 2000 ) , 186 – 204 . [ 102 ] Viswanath Venkatesh , Michael G Morris , Gordon B Davis , and Fred D Davis . 2003 . User acceptance of information technology : Toward a unified view . MIS quarterly ( 2003 ) , 425 – 478 . [ 103 ] Viswanath Venkatesh , James YL Thong , and Xin Xu . 2012 . Consumer acceptance and use of information technology : extending the unified theory of acceptance and use of technology . MIS quarterly ( 2012 ) , 157 – 178 . [ 104 ] Richard E West , Greg Waddoups , and Charles R Graham . 2007 . Understanding the experiences of instructors as they adopt a course management system . Educational Technology Research and Development 55 , 1 ( 2007 ) , 1 – 26 . J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . The Differential Effect of Privacy - Related Trust on Groupware Application Adoption and Use during the COVID - 19 pandemic 111 : 33 [ 105 ] Michael D Williams , Yogesh K Dwivedi , Banita Lal , and Andrew Schwarz . 2009 . Contemporary trends and issues in IT adoption and diffusion research . Journal of Information Technology 24 , 1 ( 2009 ) , 1 – 10 . [ 106 ] Takashi Yamauchi , Takehiko Ohno , Momoko Nakatani , Yoichi Kato , and Arthur Markman . 2012 . Psychology of user experience in a collaborative video - conference system . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . 187 – 196 . [ 107 ] Yixuan Zhang , Nurul Suhaimi , Rana Azghandi , Mary Amulya Joseph , Miso Kim , Jacqueline Griffin , and Andrea G Parker . 2020 . Understanding the Use of Crisis Informatics Technology among Older Adults . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 13 . [ 108 ] Yuyang Zhao and Fernando Bacao . 2020 . What factors determining customer continuingly using food delivery apps during 2019 novel coronavirus pandemic period ? International journal of hospitality management 91 ( 2020 ) , 102683 . [ 109 ] Tao Zhou . 2012 . Understanding users’ initialtrust in mobile banking : An elaboration likelihoodperspective . Computers in Human Behavior 28 , 4 ( 2012 ) , 1518 – 1525 . J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 . 111 : 34 Namara and Knijnenburg . A THE SURVEY MEASURES : Factor Item Loading Behavioral Intention ( BI ) ( Adapted from [ 14 ] ) I intend to continue using [ the groupware application ] in the future 0 . 914 Alpha : 0 . 924 , AVE : 0 . 837 I will always try to use [ the groupware application ] in my daily life 0 . 889 I plan to continue using [ the groupware application ] frequently 0 . 941 Correlations with : TR : 0 . 679 PU : 0 . 654 PEOU : 0 . 611 Trust in the application provider ( TR ) ( Adapted from [ 50 ] ) I believe [ the company providing the groupware application ] is trustworthy in handling my information 0 . 888 Alpha : 0 . 925 , AVE : 0 . 733 I believe [ the company providing the groupware application ] tells the truth and fulfills promises related to the information I provide 0 . 858 I believe [ the company providing the groupware application ] is predictable and consistent regarding the usage of my information 0 . 803 Correlations with : I believe [ the companyproviding the groupware application ] is honest when it comes to using the information I provide 0 . 870 PEOU : 0 . 499 PU : 0 . 593 I believe [ the company providing the groupware application ] keeps my best interests in mind when dealing with my information 0 . 862 Perceived Usefulness ( PU ) ( Adapted from [ 14 ] ) Using [ the groupware application ] improves the quality of work I do 0 . 726 Alpha : 0 . 927 , AVE : 0 . 624 Using [ the groupware application ] gives me greater control over my work 0 . 843 Using [ the groupware application ] enables me to accomplish tasks more quickly 0 . 733 Correlations with : Using [ the groupware application ] supports critical aspects of my job PEOU : 0 . 568 Using [ the groupware application ] increases my productivity 0 . 810 Using [ the groupware application ] increases my job performance 0 . 746 Using [ the groupware application ] allows me to accomplish more work than would otherwise be possible 0 . 733 Using [ the groupware application ] enhances my effectiveness on the job 0 . 822 Using [ the groupware application ] makes it easier to do my job 0 . 843 Overall , I find [ the groupware application ] useful in my job 0 . 836 Perceived Ease of use ( PEOU ) ( Adapted from [ 14 ] ) I find [ the groupware application ] cumbersome to use Alpha : 0 . 855 , AVE : 0 . 630 Learning to operate [ the groupware application ] is easy for me 0 . 752 Interacting with [ the groupware application ] is often frustrating I find it easy to get [ the groupware application ] to do what I want it to do 0 . 780 [ The groupware application ] is rigid and inflexible to interact with It is easy for me to remember how to perform tasks using [ the groupware application ] 0 . 713 Interacting with [ the groupware application ] requires a lot of mental effort Myinteractionwith [ thegroupwareapplication ] isclearandunderstandable 0 . 813 I find it takes a lot of effort to become skillful at using [ the groupware application ] Overall , I find [ the groupware application ] easy to use 0 . 900 Table 5 . The survey items used in the study , along with the factor loadings of the CFA ( only items with a factor loading were included in the analysis ) . J . ACM , Vol . 37 , No . 4 , Article 111 . Publication date : August 2021 .