© 2006 Nature Publishing Group The secretory system of eukaryotic cells is organized as a series of membrane - enclosed compartments that include the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) , Golgi cisternae , the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) , various types of secre - tory vesicle and the plasma membrane 1 . This system interconnects at several junctures with the endosomal – lysosomal system 1 , another array of membrane - enclosed compartments that comprises different types of endosome ( for example , early , late and recycling endo - somes ) and lysosomes , as well as a group of cell - type - specific organelles that are collectively referred to as lysosome - related organelles ( for example , melanosomes , platelet dense bodies and cytotoxic granules ) . Newly synthesized proteins that are destined for secretion into the extracellular space or for residence within organelles of the secretory and endosomal – lysosomal system move in a vectorial manner from the ER to their final destin - ations . This outward flow is counterbalanced by an influx of proteins that follow the endocytic pathway and by various retrograde - transport pathways . Both forward / anterograde - and backward / retrograde - transport pathways are highly regulated and selective , which allows the composition and function of the constituent organelles to be maintained . Among the organelles of the secretory pathway , the TGN has a central role as a site of protein sorting 2 , 3 . The transport of newly synthesized proteins through the ER and Golgi cisternae occurs with virtually no diversion to alternative routes . However , once proteins reach the TGN they face several possible destinations : the extracellular space , different domains of the plasma membrane , secre - tory vesicles and endosomes . The TGN sorts proteins to each of these destinations by segregating them into spe - cific sets of membrane - enclosed carriers . This role of the TGN as a traffic hub is not limited to forward - transport pathways , however , because the TGN also receives proteins by retrograde transport from more distal organelles , most notably endosomes 4 . Whereas forward transport from the TGN has been extensively studied and reviewed in the literature 2 , 3 , retrograde transport from endosomes to the TGN has received less attention . This situation is beginning to change , as recent studies have provided new insights into this route . This article reviews recent progress in the elucidation of the mechanisms of endosome - to - TGN transport , with particular emphasis on the molecular machinery that is involved in the retrograde transport of intracellular sorting receptors and extracellular toxins . We also pro - pose a role for a ‘tubular endosomal network’ as a sorting station for retrograde transport to the TGN . Retrograde cargo proteins Although most proteins that are internalized from the plasma membrane return to the TGN at some low level 5 , efficient transport from endosomes to the TGN is limited to specific sets of transmembrane proteins that cycle between these two organelles ( TABLE 1 ) . Most notable among these are acid - hydrolase receptors , transmem - brane enzymes and SNAREs ( soluble N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein ( NSF ) attachment protein receptors ) . Some bacterial and plant toxins that are internalized from the extracellular space also undergo retrograde transport . Acid - hydrolase receptors . The best studied retrograde - transport cargo proteins are intracellular sorting receptors such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae vacuolar protein sorting - 10 ( Vps10 ) 6 and mammalian mannose 6 - phosphate receptors ( MPRs ) 7 . There are two MPRs in humans , which are known as the cation - dependent Cell Biology and Metabolism Branch , National Institute of Child Health and Human Development , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , Maryland 20892 , USA . e - mails : juan @ helix . nih . gov ; rojasr @ mail . nih . gov doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1985 Retrograde transport from endosomes to the trans - Golgi network Juan S . Bonifacino and Raul Rojas Abstract | A subset of intracellular transmembrane proteins such as acid - hydrolase receptors , processing peptidases and SNAREs , as well as extracellular protein toxins such as Shiga toxin and ricin , undergoes ‘retrograde’ transport from endosomes to the trans - Golgi network . Here , we discuss recent studies that have begun to unravel the molecular machinery that is involved in this process . We also propose a central role for a ‘tubular endosomal network’ in sorting to recycling pathways that lead not only to the trans - Golgi network but also to different plasma - membrane domains and to specialized storage vesicles . R E V I E W S 568 | AUGUST 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2006 Nature Publishing Group MPR ( CD - MPR ) and the cation - independent MPR ( CI - MPR ) . Vps10 and MPRs are type - I integral membrane proteins that sort acid hydrolases to the S . cerevisiae vacu - ole and the mammalian lysosome , respectively . Newly synthesized hydrolase precursors bind to the receptors at the TGN ( which is usually referred to as the late Golgi in S . cerevisiae ) and the resulting complexes are pack - aged into coated vesicles that are destined for fusion with endosomes . There are different opinions as to whether this fusion occurs with early or late endosomes . In either case , the acidic pH of the endosomes eventually induces the release of the hydrolase precursors from the recep - tors . The hydrolase precursors are then carried with the fluid phase to the vacuole or lysosome , where they are proteolytically cleaved to produce their active forms . The receptors , on the other hand , return to the TGN to mediate further rounds of hydrolase - precursor sorting . Transmembrane enzymes . A second set of retrograde - transport cargoes includes transmembrane peptidases such as the S . cerevisiae dibasic endopeptidase Kex2 and its mammalian orthologue furin 8 , S . cerevisiae dipep - tidyl aminopeptidase A ( Ste13 ) 9 and mammalian car - boxypeptidase D 10 , all of which catalyse the proteolytic processing of many precursor proteins . These enzymes also undergo efficient cycling between the TGN and endosomes for reasons that are not entirely understood . Presumably , this cycling allows them to function on numerous substrates that pass through endosomes or the TGN . It is unclear , however , whether these enzymes are actively sorted into TGN - derived carriers , as is the case for acid - hydrolase receptors , or whether they simply escape and need to be retrieved from an endosomal compartment . For Kex2 , furin and Ste13 , recycling to the TGN is thought to occur from late endosomes . By con - trast , another S . cerevisiae enzyme , chitin synthase - III ( Chs3 ) , seems to cycle between the plasma membrane , early endosomes and the TGN as part of a process that allows the regulated expression of the enzyme at the junction between the mother cell and the bud 11 . SNAREs . Certain SNAREs constitute a third set of proteins that cycle between the TGN and endosomes 12 . Most SNAREs are C - terminally - anchored transmem - brane proteins that are mainly cytosolic . In the simplest model of SNARE function , transport vesicles that bud from the TGN carry specific vesicle - membrane SNAREs ( v - SNAREs ) that assemble with endosomal target - membrane SNAREs ( t - SNAREs ) to mediate membrane fusion 13 . After the dissociation of the v - SNARE – t - SNARE complex , the v - SNAREs must be returned to the TGN for repackaging into TGN - derived carriers . Similarly , retrograde - transport carriers must contain specific v - SNAREs that allow them to interact with TGN t - SNAREs to effect fusion . Among the v - SNAREs that have roles in vesicle fusion at the TGN and / or endosomes are Snc1 and Snc2 in S . cerevisiae 12 and VAMP4 ( vesicle - associated membrane protein - 4 ) and GS15 ( Golgi SNARE of 15 kDa ) in mammals 14 , 15 . Of these v - SNAREs , however , only Snc1 has been shown to undergo retrograde transport from early endosomes to the TGN 12 . Table 1 | Cargo proteins that undergo transport between endosomes and the trans - Golgi network Cargo proteins Functional information References Saccharomyces cerevisiae transmembrane proteins Vps10 Intracellular sorting receptor for vacuolar hydrolase precursors 89 Kex2 Subtilisin - like dibasic endopeptidase 8 Ste13 Dipeptidyl aminopeptidase A 90 Snc1 v - SNARE involved in fusion at the TGN , endosomes and plasma membrane 12 Chs3 Chitin synthase - III 11 Tlg1 TGN and endosomal t - SNARE 11 Mammalian transmembrane proteins CI - and CD - MPRs Cation - independent and cation - dependent mannose 6 - phosphate receptors 7 Furin Subtilisin - like dibasic endopeptidase ; orthologue of S . cerevisiae Kex2 8 Carboxypeptidase D Metallocarboxypeptidase 10 TGN38 / TGN46 Rat TGN38 and human TGN46 are orthologues of unknown function 91 Protein toxins Bacterial exotoxins ( for example , Shiga and cholera toxins ) Heteromeric proteins that bind to plasma - membrane glycoproteins or glycolipids 16 Plant exotoxins ( for example , ricin and abrin ) Heteromeric proteins that bind to plasma - membrane glycoproteins or glycolipids 16 Kex2 , killer expression - 2 ; SNARE , soluble N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein ( NSF ) attachment protein receptor ; Snc1 , suppressor of the full allele of CAD - 1 ; Ste13 , sterile - 13 ; TGN , trans - Golgi network ; TGN38 , TGN protein of 38 kDa ; TGN46 , TGN protein of 46 kDa ; Tlg1 , t - SNARE affecting a late Golgi compartment - 1 ; t - SNARE , target - membrane SNARE ; Vps10 , vacuolar protein sorting - 10 ; v - SNARE , vesicle - membrane SNARE . Type - I integral membrane protein A protein that contains a single membrane - spanning domain , with the C terminus orientated towards the cytosol and the N terminus orientated towards the lumen of a membrane compartment or in an extracellular direction . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | AUGUST 2006 | 569 © 2006 Nature Publishing Group Lysosome Early endosome Bilayered clathrin coat Rab9 TIP47 Grd19 Vps34Vps15Vps30Vps38 Snc1 / 2 Tlg1Tlg2Vti1 GS15Syntaxin - 5 GS28YKT6 Ypt6Ric1Rgp1 Arl1Arl3Sys1 GARP Imh1Golgin - 97 Golgin - 245 Snx4Snx41Snx42 ClathrinAP1EpsinRDynaminPACS1 Retromer OCRL Ypt1 COG Trans - Golgi network Tubularendosomal network Coatedendosome Late endosome Recruitment Budding and sorting Tethering Fusion Golgi Clathrin A structural protein that polymerizes onto membranes as a polyhedral lattice , which often leads to the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles . The sorting of transmembrane cargoes into these vesicles is mediated by various adaptor proteins that link the cytosolic domains of the cargoes to the clathrin lattice . Protein toxins . The members of the three sets of retro grade cargoes that have been discussed so far are all endogenous membrane - bound proteins , which , to some extent , are also present at the plasma membrane 7 , 8 , 12 . Following their internalization into endosomes , however , the pools of plasma - membrane - derived and TGN - derived cargoes merge , which renders them equally likely to return to the TGN regardless of their origin . This highlights the existence of a plasma - membrane – endosome – TGN pathway , which , in prin - ciple , could allow the delivery of extracellular ligands to the TGN . Indeed , this pathway is exploited by a fourth set of retrograde - transport cargoes , a subgroup of protein toxins that are secreted by bacteria ( for example , Shiga toxin and cholera toxin ) and plants ( for example , ricin and abrin ) 16 . Most of these toxins comprise a ligand moiety that mediates binding to cell - surface glycoproteins or gly - cosphingolipids and an enzymatically active moiety that inhibits essential cytosolic reactions . After binding to the cell surface , the toxins are internalized into endosomes by either clathrin - dependent or - independent pathways . Figure 1 | Components of the molecular machinery that mediates retrograde transport from endosomes to the trans - Golgi network . Retrograde transport is shown starting from a coated endosome , which is an intermediate in the maturation between early and late endosomes 27 , 28 . The coated endosome is connected to a vast ‘tubular endosomal network’ ( see FIGS 2 , 3 for more details ) , and from there some cargoes are transported to the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) 24 , 26 . Other cargoes remain in the vacuolar part as the coated endosome matures to the late endosome , and then they are transported to the TGN by vesicles 40 . Several parallel pathways seem to exist from both the coated endosome and the late endosome to the TGN , although this complexity is not represented in this scheme . All of the machinery components are colour coded according to their function in membrane recruitment , budding and sorting , tethering or fusion . Components are grouped on the basis of their functional or physical interactions . The scheme includes a mixture of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and mammalian components , and their positions in the scheme are tentative . In some cases , there are differences in the reported localization of components in S . cerevisiae and mammals . For example , retromer is thought to be on late endosomes in S . cerevisiae and mainly on the tubular endosomal network in mammals . For further information on the components of the retrograde - transport machinery , see TABLES 2 , 3 . AP1 , adaptor protein - 1 ; Arl , ADP - ribosylation factor - like ; COG , conserved oligomeric Golgi ; epsinR , epsin - related ; GARP , Golgi - associated retrograde transport ; Grd19 , Golgi retention defective - 19 ; GS15 , Golgi SNARE of 15 kDa ; GS28 , Golgi SNARE of 28 kDa ; Imh1 , integrin myosin homology - 1 ; OCRL , oculocerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe ; PACS1 , phosphofurin acidic - cluster - sorting protein - 1 ; Rgp1 , reduced growth phenotype - 1 ; Ric1 , regulation by myo - inositol and choline - 1 ; Snc , suppressor of the full allele of CAD ; Snx , sorting nexin ; Sys1 , suppressor of Ypt six - 1 ; TIP47 , tail - interacting protein of 47 kDa ; Tlg , t - SNARE affecting a late Golgi compartment ; Vps , vacuolar protein sorting ; Vti1 , Vps ten interacting - 1 ; Ypt , yeast protein transport . R E V I E W S 570 | AUGUST 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2006 Nature Publishing Group Retrotranslocation Transport from the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) to the cytosol . This process is the reverse of protein import into the ER , and is generally followed by proteins that are targeted for ER - associated degradation ( ERAD ) . Divalent - metal - containing phosphoesterases A family of enzymes that contain two divalent cations and hydrolyse phosphate – ester bonds . This family includes various phosphatases and nucleases . COPI ( coatomer protein complex - I ) . A heteroheptameric protein complex that is recruited to membranes by Arf ( ADP - ribosylation factor ) GTPases and that mediates intra - Golgi transport and retrograde transport from the Golgi complex to the endoplasmic reticulum . COPII ( coatomer protein complex - II ) . A protein complex consisting of two heterodimers , Sec23 – Sec24 and Sec13 – Sec31 , that are recruited to endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) exit sites by the small GTPase Sar1 . COPII promotes the formation of vesicles that mediate the export of cargo from the ER to the Golgi complex . They then undergo retrograde transport to the TGN , at which stage some are proteolytically activated by furin 8 . Remarkably , their journey into the cell does not end at the TGN , but continues through the Golgi cisternae and the ER , where the ligand and enzymatic moieties dissociate . The active moieties are eventually retrotrans - located into the cytosol , where they fulfil their lethal mission 16 . These toxins therefore represent extreme examples of the extent to which the secretory pathway can be navigated back to its source . Retrograde sorting of acid - hydrolase receptors Similar to other vesicular transport pathways 1 , retro - grade transport between endosomes and the TGN is thought to involve the budding of membrane - enclosed transport carriers from early or late endosomes , followed by fusion with the TGN . The formation of the carriers and the incorporation of cargo into the carriers depend on a molecular machinery that is recruited from the cytosol to specific endosomal domains ( FIG . 1 ; TABLE 2 ) . This machinery has been best characterized for acid - hydrolase receptors , although some of its components are probably also used for other types of endogenous retrograde cargo such as transmembrane enzymes and SNAREs . The following sections describe the compo - nents of this machinery that have been implicated in acid - hydrolase - receptor transport . Retromer . Genetic and biochemical analyses of acid - hydrolase sorting in S . cerevisiae were instrumental to the discovery of key components of the retrograde - transport machinery . Screening for mutant S . cerevisiae strains that secrete pro - carboxypeptidase Y ( pro - CPY ) instead of delivering it to the vacuole resulted in the identification of over 60 distinct Vps proteins that participate in pro - CPY sorting 6 . As expected , one of these proteins was the pro - CPY receptor , Vps10 , whereas others were regulators of Vps10 trafficking . Among these regulators , several were found to mediate the retrograde transport of Vps10 from endosomes to the TGN . In particular , five of these proteins — Vps5 , Vps17 , Vps26 , Vps29 and Vps35 — were shown to be subunits of a complex that was named ‘retromer’ 17 ( BOX 1 ) . Mutations in any of these subunits prevent Vps10 retrieval to the TGN , which leads to its delivery to , and degradation in , the vacuole . Insufficient amounts of Vps10 , in turn , lead to the missorting of pro - CPY in these mutant strains 17 . With the exception of Vps17 , which seems to be specific to fungi , retromer subunits are conserved in all eukaryotes . Humans , for example , have two Vps5 orthologues that are named sorting nexin - 1 and - 2 ( SNX1 and SNX2 ) , two Vps26 orthologues that are known as VPS26A and VPS26B , and one orthologue each of Vps29 and Vps35 ( VPS29 and VPS35 ) 18 , 19 . Vps5 , Vps17 , SNX1 and SNX2 are members of the sorting - nexin 20 family of proteins . VPS26 and VPS29 show structural homology to arrestins 21 and divalent - metal - containing phospho esterases 22 , 23 , respectively , although the functional significance of these homologies is unknown . Biochemical studies have shown that all of these orthologues interact with one another to form a human retromer complex 18 , 22 . In striking analogy to the S . cerevisiae retromer , human retromer functions in the retrograde transport of acid - hydrolase receptors . Indeed , the depletion of human VPS26 , VPS29 or SNX1 by RNA interference ( RNAi ) results in the decreased retrieval of the CI - MPR from endosomes to the TGN and its transport to lysosomes for degradation 24 – 26 . As a consequence , lysosomal acid hydrolases are released into the medium 24 . Electron - microscopy analyses have shown that retromer is associated with both vacuolar and tubular aspects of endosomes 24 , 26 ( FIG . 2a , b ) . These endosomes are characterized by the presence of ‘bilay - ered’ , flat clathrin coats 27 , 28 and are therefore referred to as ‘coated endosomes’ . Functionally , they correspond to intermediates in the maturation of early to late endo - somes . So far , however , retromer has not been shown to form electron - dense coats similar to the classical coatomer protein complex - I ( COPI ) , coatomer protein complex - II ( COPII ) and clathrin coats . In addition , the molecular mechanism by which it sorts cargo seems to be distinct from that of classical membrane coats 1 . A recent study has drawn attention to retromer by showing that affected regions of the brain of patients with Alzheimer’s disease have lower levels of retromer subunits 29 . Moreover , the RNAi - mediated depletion of retromer subunits in cultured cells increased the production of amyloid - β peptide , which is key to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease 29 . Amyloid - β peptide is produced by the proteolytic cleavage of the transmembrane β - amyloid - precursor protein by a trans - membrane aspartyl protease that is known as β - secretase or β - site amyloid - precursor - protein cleaving enzyme - 1 ( BACE1 ) 30 . This cleavage is believed to occur in endo - somes and it is possible that inhibiting the retrograde transport of either the enzyme or its substrate to the TGN enhances the production of amyloid - β peptide . These findings have led to speculation that decreased retromer expression could contribute to the develop - ment of Alzheimer’s disease , a hypothesis that has even caught the attention of the lay press 31 . Other SNX proteins . In addition to the Vps5 , Vps17 , SNX1 and SNX2 components of retromer , other sorting nexins have been implicated in retrograde transport in S . cerevisiae . Grd19 ( Golgi retention defective - 19 ) , for example , is required for the sorting of the t - SNARE Pep12 ( REF . 32 ) and the aminopeptidase Ste13 ( REF . 9 ) from late endosomes to the TGN . Snx4 , Snx41 and Snx42 , on the other hand , are required for the sorting of Snc1 from early endosomes to the TGN 32 . Snx4 can be crosslinked to Snc1 and binds to Snx41 and Snx42 , which indicates that these sorting nexins might constitute another sorting complex that is involved in retrograde transport 32 . PACS1 and AP1 . Another component of the retrograde - transport machinery is PACS1 ( phosphofurin acidic - cluster - sorting protein - 1 ) , which was originally identified as a result of its interactions with the furin cyto solic domain , but was later shown to bind to the cyto solic domain of the CI - MPR as well 33 . PACS1 recog - nizes phosphoserine residues that are embedded within R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | AUGUST 2006 | 571 © 2006 Nature Publishing Group Rab GTPases Members of the Ras superfamily of small GTP - binding proteins that function in the tethering and docking of vesicles to their target compartments prior to membrane fusion . Rab proteins also participate in cargo selection , vesicle budding and organelle motility . clusters of acidic amino - acid residues in the cytosolic domains of both furin and the CI - MPR . Depletion of PACS1 using antisense RNA was shown to result in a more scattered ( that is , less juxtanuclear ) distribution of both furin and the CI - MPR in the cytoplasm , which is probably due to the inhibition of retrograde transport 33 . Interestingly , PACS1 also interacts with the clathrin - associated heterotetrameric adaptor protein - 1 ( AP1 ) complex 33 , and this interaction is essential for its role in furin and CI - MPR sorting 34 . In line with these findings , embryonic fibroblasts from mice that were deficient in the µ 1A subunit of AP1 showed a more scattered , early endosomal distribution of both the CI - MPR and the CD - MPR , and a decreased recycling of the CD - MPR to the TGN in vivo 35 . In addition , a membrane prepara - tion from these cells was less capable of supporting the retrograde transport of the CD - MPR in vitro 36 . AP1 and clathrin have also been implicated in the recycling of the enzyme Chs3 and the t - SNARE Tlg1 ( t - SNARE affecting a late Golgi compartment - 1 ) from early endosomes to the TGN in S . cerevisiae 11 . Finally , the monomeric clathrin adaptor epsinR ( epsin - related ) is also required for the retrograde transport of the CI - MPR from early or recycling endosomes 37 . These observations are consist - ent with a role for clathrin coats that contain AP1 and epsinR adaptors , and perhaps also the PACS1 ‘connector’ molecule , in retrograde transport from early and / or recycling endosomes . Rab9 and TIP47 . Two other proteins that have been implicated in the retrograde transport of MPRs are the small GTPase Rab9 ( REF . 38 ) and one of its effectors , TIP47 ( tail - interacting protein of 47 kDa ) 39 . Rab9 is associated with late endosomes as well as with vesicles that bud from late endosomes and fuse with the TGN 40 . Recombinant Rab9 stimulates the retrograde trans - port of the CI - MPR in vitro 38 , and the expression of a dominant - negative GDP - locked mutant of Rab9 blocks this transport in vivo 41 . TIP47 was originally identified in a screen for proteins that interact with the cytosolic domains of both the CI - MPR and the CD - MPR 39 , and was later found also to interact with the GTP - bound Table 2 | Proteins that are involved in budding and cargo selection at endosomes Proteins Functional information References Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteins Vps5 , Vps17 Retromer components ; sorting nexins 17 Vps26 Retromer component ; predicted arrestin fold 17 , 21 Vps29 Retromer component ; predicted phosphoesterase fold 17 , 22 , 23 Vps35 Retromer component ; cargo - binding activity 17 , 79 Grd19 Sorting nexin that is involved in retrieving the t - SNARE Pep12 9 Snx4 , Snx41 , Snx42 Sorting nexins that are involved in retrieving the v - SNARE Snc1 32 Vps34 Phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase that is involved in retromer recruitment to membranes 92 Vps15 Serine / threonine kinase that activates Vps34 92 Vps30 , Vps38 These proteins form a complex with Vps15 and Vps34 and target them to endosomes 92 AP1 , clathrin Components of TGN and endosomal clathrin coats 11 Mammalian proteins SNX1 , SNX2 Retromer components ; sorting nexins 17 VPS26 Retromer component ; arrestin fold 17 , 21 VPS29 Retromer component ; phosphoesterase fold 17 , 22 , 23 VPS35 Retromer component ; cargo - binding activity 17 , 24 TIP47 Rab9 effector 39 , 42 Rab9 Small GTPase that regulates TIP47 function 38 , 42 PACS1 Phosphofurin acidic - cluster - sorting protein - 1 33 , 34 AP1 Heterotetrameric clathrin - adaptor complex that is localized to the TGN and endosomes 35 , 36 EpsinR Monomeric clathrin adaptor that is localized to the TGN and endosomes 37 Clathrin Structural protein that is the main component of clathrin coats 37 , 47 Dynamin Large GTPase that is involved in vesicle formation 47 OCRL Lowe - syndrome protein with phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate 5 - phosphatase activity that regulates clathrin - coat formation 93 AP1 , adaptor protein - 1 ; epsinR , epsin - related ; Grd19 , Golgi retention defective - 19 ; OCRL , oculocerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe ; SNARE , soluble N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein ( NSF ) attachment protein receptor ; Snc1 , suppressor of the full allele of CAD - 1 ; Snx / SNX , sorting nexin ; TGN , trans - Golgi network ; TIP47 , tail - interacting protein of 47 kDa ; t - SNARE , target - membrane SNARE ; Vps / VPS , vacuolar protein sorting ; v - SNARE , vesicle - membrane SNARE . R E V I E W S 572 | AUGUST 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2006 Nature Publishing Group VPS35 VPS35 Cargo VPS26 VPS26 VPS29 PX domain PX domain BAR domain BAR domain SNX1 / 2 SNX1 / 2 PtdIns3P PtdIns3P VPS29 Cargo PX domain ( Phox - homology domain ) . These domains are lipid - and protein - interaction domains that consist of 100 – 130 amino acids and are defined by sequences that are found in two components of the phagocyte NADPH oxidase ( phox ) complex . BAR domain This domain gets its acronym from the fact that it is found in the proteins Bin , amphiphysin and Rvs . This domain dimerizes and binds to highly curved membranes such as those found in the tubular elements of endosomes . form of Rab9 ( REF . 42 ) . Depletion of TIP47 inhibits the retrograde transport of the CD - MPR in vitro and the CI - MPR in vivo 39 . Rab9 can therefore be thought of as the regulated membrane - recruitment component of this particular sorting device , with TIP47 being the cargo - recognition component . Structurally , TIP47 is a member of the PAT ( perilipin , adipophilin , TIP47 ) family of lipid - droplet - binding proteins 43 and it has , in fact , been shown to associate with triacylglycerol - loaded lipid droplets 44 . This indicates that TIP47 might have a function in the regulation of lipid homeostasis . It remains to be estab - lished how TIP47 could have such dissimilar roles in transmembrane - protein sorting and lipid metabolism . Relationship between retrograde - sorting devices . Orthologues of retromer and AP1 subunits are found in all eukaryotes from S . cerevisiae to humans , so they are probably core components of a phylogenetically con - served molecular machinery for retrograde sorting . On the other hand , orthologues of Rab9 , TIP47 and PACS1 are found in metazoans , but not in S . cerevisiae , which indicates that these proteins might represent special - ized sorting devices that are required because of the greater complexity of higher eukaryotes . The physical and functional relationships between all of these pro - teins are currently unclear . The mammalian retromer and AP1 are mainly associated with endosomal tubules , whereas Rab9 and TIP47 are associated with vacuolar late endosomes and the derived vesicles . This indicates that retrograde transport can occur from different types of endosome , in some cases through the cooperation of more than one sorting device . Retrograde sorting of protein toxins Besides acid - hydrolase receptors , protein toxins are another set of cargoes for which the molecular machin - ery for retrograde sorting has been studied in some detail ( TABLE 2 ) . The retrograde transport of toxins is thought to occur exclusively from early and / or recy - cling endosomes 16 , 45 . Therefore , only those devices that Box 1 | Working model of retromer Retromer is a multisubunit complex that mediates the retrograde transport of acid - hydrolase receptors between endosomes and the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) . The subunits of Saccharomyces cerevisiae retromer are named vacuolar protein sorting - 5 ( Vps5 ) , Vps17 , Vps26 , Vps29 and Vps35 , whereas those of the human retromer are named sorting nexin - 1 ( SNX1 ) , SNX2 , VPS26 , VPS29 and VPS35 ( the status of SNX2 as a subunit of retromer is unclear ; see REFS 18 , 75 ) . Recent studies have shed light on the structures and possible functions of the different retromer subunits . Vps5 and Vps17 , as well as SNX1 and SNX2 , belong to a subfamily of sorting nexins that contain PX ( Phox - homology ) and BAR ( Bin , amphiphysin , Rvs ) domains 20 . PX domains bind to phosphatidylinositol - 3 - phosphate ( PtdIns3P ) and other phosphoinositides that are enriched in endosomal membranes 76 , whereas BAR domains mediate dimerization and attachment to highly curved membranes 77 . Driven by the properties of these domains , Vps5 and Vps17 heterodimerize and SNX1 and SNX2 form heterodimers or homodimers that bind to PtdIns3P - enriched endosomes 78 . The figure depicts the structures of the PX domain of p40 phox ( Protein Data Bank ( PDB ) accession code 1H6H ) 76 and the BAR domain of amphiphysin ( PDB accession code 1URU ) 77 , which are thought to be similar to those of retromer . X - ray crystallographic analyses have shown that VPS26 ( PDB accession code 2FAU ) and VPS29 ( PDB accession codes 1W24 and 1Z2X ) have structural homology to arrestins 21 and divalent - metal - containing phosphoesterases 22 , 23 , respectively . Vps35 and VPS35 have no sequence homology to any other protein and their crystal structures have not yet been reported . However , genetic and biochemical analyses have shown that both the S . cerevisiae Vps35 and human VPS35 proteins interact with the cytosolic domains of retrograde cargo proteins such as Vps10 ( REF . 79 ) and the cation - independent mannose 6 - phosphate receptor 24 , respectively . Vps26 , Vps29 and Vps35 in S . cerevisiae ( or VPS26 , VPS29 and VPS35 in mammals ) form another subcomplex 18 , 80 that might be responsible for cargo recognition and regulatory functions . The figure shows a working model for the assembly and function of mammalian retromer . In this model , SNX1 / 2 subcomplexes are recruited onto endosomal membranes through interactions between their PX and BAR domains and membrane phospholipids . The VPS26 – VPS29 – VPS35 subcomplex is then recruited through interactions with the N termini of SNX1 and SNX2 . Once in place , VPS35 captures retrograde cargo proteins in ‘retromer - coated’ membrane domains . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | AUGUST 2006 | 573 © 2006 Nature Publishing Group a b c VPS26 10 SNX2 15 CI - MPR 10 AP3 15 ASGPR 10 BSA 5 AP3 ( adaptor protein - 3 ) . A heterotetrameric protein complex that associates with endosomes and promotes the transport of tyrosinase to melanosomes and lysosome - associated membrane proteins to lysosomes . are involved in acid - hydrolase - receptor sorting from these compartments could , in principle , also be used for toxins . An involvement of retromer and PACS1 in toxin sorting has not been reported , and AP1 has been shown not to be required for the retrograde transport of Shiga toxin 37 . Not surprisingly , Rab9 , which medi - ates the retrograde transport of MPRs from late endo - somes 38 , is also not required for internalized ricin to reach the TGN 46 . This makes it unlikely that TIP47 is involved . Although these negative observations seem to indicate that acid - hydrolase receptors and toxins rely on different molecular machineries for their sorting into the retrograde pathway , some components of the retrograde - transport machinery seem to be shared by these two types of cargo , as discussed below . Clathrin - coat proteins . As was also shown for MPRs , the transport of Shiga toxin from endosomes to the TGN requires clathrin , epsinR and the large GTPase Figure 2 | Ultrastructural localization of various sorting devices to tubular endosomes . Ultrathin frozen sections of human cells were gold labelled for various sorting devices and cargo proteins . a | The vacuolar protein sorting - 26 ( VPS26 ) subunit of retromer was labelled with 10 - nm gold particles ( VPS26 10 ) . Arrows in a indicate tubules that contain associated retromer . This image is reproduced with permission from REF . 24 © ( 2004 ) Rockefeller University Press . b | The image shows sorting nexin - 2 ( SNX2 ) that was labelled with 15 - nm gold particles ( SNX2 15 ) and the cation - independent mannose 6 - phosphate receptor ( CI - MPR ) that was labelled with 10 - nm gold particles ( CI - MPR 10 ) . This image is reproduced with permission from REF . 75 © ( 2005 ) The Company of Biologists Ltd . c | The image shows adaptor protein - 3 ( AP3 ) that was labelled with 15 - nm gold particles ( AP3 15 ) and the asialoglycoprotein receptor ( ASGPR ) that was labelled with 10 - nm gold particles ( ASGPR 10 ) in cells that contained internalized bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) that was labelled with 5 - nm gold particles ( BSA 5 ) . AP3 mediates the transport of tyrosinase to melanosomes and lysosomal membrane proteins to lysosomes by a pathway that bypasses multivesicular bodies 81 . ASGPR is an endocytic receptor that cycles between the plasma membrane and endosomes , and BSA is used as a marker of fluid - phase endocytosis . This image is reproduced with permission from REF . 28 © ( 2004 ) Rockefeller University Press . It should be noted that all of these sorting devices and transmembrane cargoes are present on tubular – vesicular profiles that are in the vicinity of vacuolar endosomes with flat , electron - dense coats ( that is , coated endosomes ) , which are indicated by arrowheads . These tubular – vesicular profiles are part of what we call the ‘tubular endosomal network’ , an organelle that has a dual role in sorting and recycling to the trans - Golgi network and other compartments . The scale bars represent 0 . 1 μm in parts a and b and 0 . 2 μm in part c . Images from parts b and c are courtesy of Judith Klumperman ( University Medical Center Utrecht , The Netherlands ) . R E V I E W S 574 | AUGUST 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2006 Nature Publishing Group Dynamins Large G - proteins that belong to a protein superfamily that , in eukaryotes , includes classical dynamins , dynamin - like proteins , mitofusins and atlastins . Dynamins are involved in the scission of a wide range of vesicles and organelles . Palmitoylation A post - translational modification that involves the addition of a 16 - carbon fatty acid , palmitic acid , to a cysteine residue through a thioester bond . Arl GTPases Small Arf ( ADP - ribosylation factor ) - like GTPases that participate in the fusion of retrograde transport carriers with the trans - Golgi network . dynamin 37 , 47 . These proteins probably give rise to a specific set of clathrin - coated intermediates that carry Shiga toxin from early endosomes to the TGN . The concentration of cargo in clathrin - coated carriers normally requires interactions between clathrin adap - tors and sorting signals in the cytosolic domains of the cargo receptors . As the receptors for Shiga toxin are glycosphingolipids that are located in the exoplasmic leaflet of membranes , it is unclear how they could be incorporated into clathrin - coated carriers . In contrast to Shiga toxin , ricin does not require clathrin for retro - grade transport 46 , which indicates that different protein toxins might follow different paths to the TGN . Rafts . Given that the receptors for many protein tox - ins are glycosphingolipids , it is not surprising that the retrograde transport of at least some of those toxins ( for example , Shiga toxin and ricin ) is dependent on ‘rafts’ — membrane domains that are enriched in glyco sphingolipids and cholesterol 48 , 49 . This depend - ence probably reflects the fact that toxins make use of an endogenous pathway for the recycling of raft lipids between the plasma membrane and the TGN . The ret - rograde sorting of the CD - MPR is similarly influenced by cholesterol levels 48 . In line with this observation , both the CD - MPR and the CI - MPR are palmitoylated on cysteine residues in their cytoplasmic domains and , at least for the CD - MPR , this modification is required for the efficient retrieval of the receptor to the TGN 50 . Because palmitoylated proteins often partition into raft domains , it is possible that the retrograde transport of MPRs could also depend on rafts . However , it is unclear how the retrograde transport of toxins and MPRs could depend on both clathrin coats and rafts , because these are thought to represent different membrane domains . It is possible that each device could mediate a different event in a multi - step mechanism of retrograde trans - port from early endosomes , or that the integrity of one domain depends on the integrity of the other . Tethering and fusion with the TGN The nature and properties of the retrograde - transport carriers for most cargo proteins are unknown . The only putative carriers that have been identified so far are Rab9 - containing vesicles that detach from late endo - somes and fuse with the TGN 40 . The types of vesicu - lar or tubular intermediate that are responsible for retromer - , clathrin - or raft - dependent transport from early endosomes to the TGN have not been identified . Similar to other vesicular intermediates , the retrograde carriers would be expected to attach to tethering factors that are recruited from the cytosol to the TGN by small GTPases of the Rab or Arl ( ADP - ribosylation factor - like ) families 51 . This attachment would facilitate the assembly of SNARE complexes between v - SNAREs on the retrograde carriers and t - SNAREs on the TGN , which would lead to membrane fusion and the delivery of retrograde cargo . Genetic and biochemical analyses have identified several sets of tethering factors , small GTPases and SNAREs that participate in endosome - to - TGN transport ( FIG . 1 ; TABLE 3 ) . Tethering factors and small GTPases . All of the tethering factors that have been implicated in endosome - to - TGN transport have long coiled - coil regions that allow them to span long distances from the acceptor membranes 51 . Some of these tethering factors are hetero - oligomeric complexes — for example , GARP / VFT ( Golgi - associated retrograde transport / Vps fifty three ) , COG ( conserved oligomeric Golgi ) and TRAPP - II ( transport particle - II ) — whereas others are single polypeptides or homodim - ers ( for example , Imh1 ( also known as Sys3 ) , golgin - 245 and golgin - 97 ) . The GARP / VFT complex has been best character - ized in S . cerevisiae , and it comprises four subunits that are Vps51 , Vps52 , Vps53 and Vps54 ( REFS 52 , 53 ) . GARP / VFT is recruited to the TGN through interactions with the Ypt6 ( yeast protein transport - 6 ) Rab - family GTPase . It also interacts with the t - SNARE Tlg1 and therefore coordinates tethering with fusion 52 , 53 . Mutations that affect Ypt6 , GARP / VFT or its interactors interfere with retrograde transport from both early and late endo - somes , which indicates that GARP / VFT might have a general role in the tethering of various retrograde car - riers 53 – 55 . The mammalian Ypt6 orthologue RAB6a ′ is also required for the retrograde transport of Shiga toxin from early and / or recycling endosomes to the TGN both in vivo and in vitro 15 . The COG complex comprises eight subunits , Cog1 – 8 ( REF . 56 ) . Similar to GARP / VFT , S . cerevisiae COG inter - acts with a Rab - family GTPase , Ypt1 , and a t - SNARE , Sed5 , and these proteins are responsible for the mem - brane recruitment of the complex and vesicle fusion , respectively . Mutations of S . cerevisiae COG - subunit genes also impair retrograde transport from both early and late endosomes , although the primary function of COG might be in intra - Golgi transport 56 . The TRAPP - II complex has 10 subunits ( Bet3 , Bet5 , Trs20 , Trs23 , Trs31 , Trs33 , Trs65 , Trs85 , Trs120 and Trs130 ) and functions primarily in ER - to - Golgi and intra - Golgi traffic . However , a recent study has shown that mutations of some of the TRAPP - II subunits impair cargo retrieval from early endosomes to the TGN 57 . Finally , S . cerevisiae Imh1 / Sys3 ( REF . 58 ) and mam - malian golgin - 245 ( REF . 59 ) and golgin - 97 ( REF . 60 ) contain a C - terminal GRIP domain ( ‘golgin - 97 , RanBP2 α , Imh1 , p230’ domain ) that interacts with the S . cerevisiae and mammalian Arl1 GTPases and is responsible for recruiting these tethering factors to the TGN . The recruitment of Arl1 to membranes is regulated by another member of this GTPase family , Arl3 ( REFS 61 , 62 ) . Mutations in Imh1 , Arl1 or Arl3 cause phenotypes that are consistent with an impairment of trafficking from late endosomes to the TGN 58 , 63 . By contrast , the expression of a dominant - negative form of the mammalian Arl3 orthologue ARFRP1 ( ADP - ribosylation - factor - related protein - 1 ) 64 or the RNAi - mediated depletion of golgin - 245 ( REF . 59 ) or golgin - 97 ( REF . 60 ) interfere with the retrograde trans - port of Shiga toxin , which takes place from early and / or recycling endosomes . It therefore seems that Arl1 and its effectors function to tether carriers that are derived from different endosomal compartments . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | AUGUST 2006 | 575 © 2006 Nature Publishing Group GGA proteins ( Golgi - localized , γ - ear - containing , ADP - ribosylation - factor - binding proteins ) . Monomeric clathrin adaptors that mediate the transport of mannose 6 - phosphate receptors and other transmembrane proteins between the trans - Golgi network and endosomes . They also seem to have a role in targeting transmembrane proteins to the multivesicular - body pathway . SNAREs . Functional SNARE complexes generally com - prise one v - SNARE and two or three t - SNAREs 13 . There are over 20 SNAREs in S . cerevisiae and over 30 in humans . The combination of particular sets of cognate SNAREs and tethering factors is largely responsible for the specificity of organelle - fusion events . However , some SNARE subunits are interchangeable and some participate in more than one fusion event . For these reasons , the assignment of specific SNAREs to endosome - to - TGN traffic is still tentative . In S . cerevisiae , a complex that is formed by the v - SNAREs Snc1 or Snc2 ( which are themselves cargoes for retrograde transport ) and the t - SNAREs Tlg1 , Tlg2 and Vti1 ( Vps ten interacting - 1 ) has been implicated in retrograde trans - port to the TGN , presumably from early endosomes 12 , 65 , 66 . In human cells , two SNARE complexes have been impli - cated in the transport of Shiga toxin from early and / or recycling endosomes to the TGN — one is composed of the v - SNARE GS15 and the t - SNAREs syntaxin - 5 , GS28 ( Golgi SNARE of 28 kDa ) and YKT6 , and the other is composed of the v - SNARE VAMP4 ( or VAMP3 ) and the t - SNAREs syntaxin - 16 , syntaxin - 6 and VTI1a 14 , 15 . The VAMP4 / 3 – syntaxin - 16 – syntaxin - 6 – VTI1a complex is analogous to the S . cerevisiae complex that was mentioned above ( Snc1 / Snc2 – Tlg1 – Tlg2 – Vtil ) . It is currently unclear why two SNARE complexes would be required for the fusion of a single type of transport carrier in mammalian cells . No information is available concerning the SNARE complexes that mediate the transport of MPRs or other endogenous proteins between early or late endosomes and the TGN . Sorting at the tubular endosomal network Our account so far indicates that retrograde transport can occur from various donor endosomal compartments , including early , recycling and late endosomes , which range in morphology from vacuoles to tubules . Also , there are several devices that mediate carrier formation and cargo selection from endosomes , and several others that par - ticipate in tethering and fusion with the TGN . A general conclusion that can be drawn from these observations is Table 3 | Proteins that are involved in docking and fusion at the trans - Golgi network Proteins Functional information References Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteins Ypt6 Rab GTPase that recruits the GARP / VFT complex to membranes 94 Vps51 , Vps52 , Vps53 , Vps54 Components of the GARP / VFT complex ; Vps51 binds to the t - SNARE Tlg1 53 , 54 Snc1 or Snc2 , Tlg1 , Tlg2 , Vti1 These proteins form a SNARE complex that is involved in membrane fusion with the TGN 12 , 65 , 66 Ric1 , Rgp1 These proteins heterodimerize and function as a guanine nucleotide - exchange factor for Ypt6 95 Arl1 Small Arf - like GTPase that recruits Imh1 to membranes 61 , 62 , 96 Arl3 Small Arf - like GTPase that is required to recruit Arl1 to membranes 61 , 62 , 96 Imh1 / Sys3 Long coiled - coil protein that binds to Arl1 – GTP through its C - terminal GRIP domain 58 Sys1 Golgi - membrane protein that binds to the acetylated N terminus of Arl3 and recruits it to membranes 96 Cog3 / Grd20 Component of the COG complex 97 Trs120 Component of the TRAPP - II complex 57 Mammalian proteins NSF , α - SNAP Fusion factors that are involved in SNARE - complex disassembly 1 , 98 GS15 , syntaxin - 5 , GS28 , YKT6 SNAREs that form a complex that is involved in the retrograde transport of Shiga toxin 14 , 15 Syntaxin - 16 , syntaxin - 6 , VTI1a , VAMP4 SNAREs that form a second complex that is involved in the retrograde transport of Shiga toxin and mannose 6 - phosphate receptors 14 , 15 RAB6a ′ Isoform of the RAB6a GTPase ; orthologue of S . cerevisiae Ypt6 15 ARL3 / ARFRP1 Orthologue of the S . cerevisiae Arl3 GTPase 64 Golgin - 97 , golgin - 245 Long coiled - coil proteins that bind to Arl1 – GTP through their C - terminal GRIP domains 59 , 60 COG3 Component of the COG complex 99 Arf , ADP - ribosylation factor ; ARFRP1 , ADP - ribosylation - factor - related protein - 1 ; Arl / ARL , ADP - ribosylation factor - like ; Cog / COG , conserved oligomeric Golgi ; GARP / VFT , Golgi - associated retrograde transport / Vps fifty three ; Grd20 , Golgi retention defective - 20 ; GRIP , ‘golgin - 97 , RanBP2 α , Imh1 , p230’ ; GS15 , Golgi SNARE of 15 kDa ; GS28 , Golgi SNARE of 28 kDa ; Imh1 , integrin myosin homology - 1 ; NSF , N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein ; Rgp1 , reduced growth phenotype - 1 ; Ric1 , regulation by myo - inositol and choline - 1 ; α - SNAP , α - soluble NSF attachment protein ; SNARE , soluble NSF attachment protein receptor ; Snc , suppressor of the full allele of CAD ; Sys , suppressor of Ypt six ; TGN , trans - Golgi network ; Tlg , t - SNARE affecting a late Golgi compartment ; TRAPP - II , transport particle - II ; Trs120 , TRAPP - II subunit of 120 kDa ; t - SNARE , target - membrane SNARE ; VAMP4 , vesicle - associated membrane protein - 4 ; Vps , vacuolar protein sorting ; Vti / VTI , Vps ten interacting ; Ypt6 , yeast protein transport - 6 . R E V I E W S 576 | AUGUST 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2006 Nature Publishing Group Coatedendosome Vacuolar endosome Endocytic recycling compartment Bilayered clathrin coat Multivesicular - body pathway Retromer Retromer AP1Clathrin Dynamin Clathrin AP1EpsinRDynaminPACS1 AP3± clathrin Apical plasma membrane ( transcytosis ) Plasma membrane ( fast recycling ) ( basolateral ) Plasma membrane ( slow recycling ) Tubular endosomal network EHD1 / RME1 Rab11 Trans - Golgi network Melanosomes , lysosomes ( bypass pathway ) Storage vesicles ? ESCRT machinery ( Endosomal sorting complex required for transport machinery ) . Machinery that comprises three ESCRT complexes that mediate the sorting of transmembrane cargo from the limiting membrane into the intralumenal vesicles of multivesicular bodies . Multivesicular bodies Endocytic organelles that contain small vesicles in their interior and that are intermediate compartments in the lysosomal degradation pathway . that there are multiple pathways and carriers for cargo transport from endosomes to the TGN . Some cargoes are capable of following more than one pathway , whereas others seem to be restricted to only one . The existence of multiple pathways , devices and carri - ers for retrograde transport challenges some of the simpler models of trafficking in the endosomal system . For a long time , the thinking on cargo sorting in the endosomal system has been influenced by the notion of stable compartments ( for example , early , recycling and late endosomes ) between which cargoes traffic in vesicular intermediates . Manifestations of this thinking are sche - matic representations in which endosomal compart - ments are depicted as simple vacuoles with or without short tubular projections . In these schemes , each of these compartments is assumed to have a defined and constant composition , as well as a unique function in sorting or recycling . However , over the years , the view that endosomes undergo maturation has become more prev - alent . According to this view , early and late endosomes represent particular stages of a continuum . In addition , all of the stages of this continuum are viewed as an evolv - ing ‘mosaic’ of membrane domains 67 , 68 . Moreover , there is now a keener appreciation of the old observation 69 – 71 that vacuolar endosomes are connected to a vast network of tubules . The membrane area of this network far surpasses that of vacuolar endosomes . Last , there is more knowledge regarding the location of various molecular machineries that carry out sorting in the endosomal system 68 ( FIG . 2 ) . Remarkably , these machineries are associated with many distinct loci within both vacuolar and tubular endosomes . These thoughts lead us to propose the existence of an extensive tubular endosomal network ( TEN ) that sorts cargoes to various destinations , including the TGN , different domains of the plasma membrane , the limiting membrane of lysosomes and lysosome - related organelles , and specialized storage vesicles ( for example , vesicles that contain the glucose transporter GLUT4 ) ( FIG . 3 ) . In this context , the pericentriolar endocytic recycling compart - ment 72 , which recycles endocytic receptors such as the transferrin receptor to the plasma membrane , can be viewed as a differentiated subdomain of the TEN . Because the TEN distributes cargoes to various organelles , it is not just a recycling compartment , but is also a sorting com - partment . This concept accounts for the association of numerous sorting devices , such as retromer , clathrin , AP1 , epsinR , GGA proteins ( Golgi - localized , γ - ear - containing , ADP - ribosylation - factor - binding proteins ) , AP3 and dynamin , with distinct domains of tubular endosomes ( FIGS 2 , 3 ) . The TEN might be connected to the whole con - tinuum of vacuolar endosomes , and in particular with those maturation intermediates that lie between early and late endosomes . The TEN can therefore be thought of as a mirror image of the TGN , with an equally central role in cargo sorting . We envisage that cargoes that are derived from both the plasma membrane and the TGN can first access the endosomal system at the level of a vacuolar early endo - some . This endosome quickly starts to mature . Its lumen becomes progressively more acidic , which leads to the release of both endocytic cargoes ( for example , low - density lipoproteins from their receptor ) and biosynthetic cargoes ( for example , acid hydrolases from MPRs ) . Concurrently , the ESCRT machinery begins to invaginate parts of the limit - ing membrane of vacuolar endosomes to generate multi - vesicular bodies 73 . Signalling receptors and transporters that are in the process of being downregulated enter the forming intralumenal vesicles . Simultaneously , membrane tubules begin to be pulled out from the vacuolar endo - somes along microtubules , so that the endosomes become connected to ( or even create ) the TEN ( FIG . 3 ) . Several sort - ing decisions are made at these stages : released , soluble cargoes follow the lumenal fluid phase to the lysosome , whereas their receptors escape through the tubules and are recycled ; some transmembrane cargoes stay on the limiting membrane of the maturing endosomes , whereas others enter intralumenal vesicles . These processes even - tually produce what has been defined as a late endosome . Figure 3 | A schematic representation of the ‘tubular endosomal network’ . Coated endosomes 27 , 28 , which are intermediates in the maturation between early and late endosomes , are shown connected to tubular endosomes . The vacuolar region has ‘bilayered’ , flat coats that are composed of clathrin and Hrs ( hepatocyte - growth - factor - regulated tyrosine - kinase substrate ) . These coats are thought to recruit the machinery — including the ESCRT machinery — that targets proteins to intralumenal vesicles in the multivesicular - body pathway 73 . The vacuolar region matures into late endosomes . The tubular region forms a vast network that we refer to as the ‘tubular endosomal network’ ( TEN ) . The TEN has many domains that contain specific devices ( highlighted by different colours ) for carrier formation and cargo sorting . These devices include : retromer 24 , 26 , as well as clathrin and its associated proteins 11 , 33 – 37 , 47 , for the transport of recycling transmembrane proteins and protein toxins to the trans - Golgi network ( lower green and yellow regions , respectively ) ; adaptor protein - 3 ( AP3 ) with or without ( ± ) clathrin for tyrosinase transport to melanosomes and lysosomal membrane - protein transport to lysosomes through a ‘bypass’ pathway 28 , 80 ( red region ) ; retromer for polymeric immunoglobulin - A - receptor transport to the apical plasma membrane of polarized epithelial cells ( transcytosis ) 82 ( upper green region ) ; clathrin , AP1 and dynamin for the fast recycling of endocytic receptors to the plasma membrane 83 ( AP1B ( not specifically shown ) for the recycling of these cargoes to the basolateral plasma membrane of polarized epithelial cells ) 84 , 85 ( blue region ) ; and EHD1 ( eps15 - homology domain - 1 , also known as RME1 ( receptor - mediated endocytosis - 1 ) ) 74 , 86 and Rab11 ( REF . 87 ) ( purple region ) for the slow recycling of the transferrin receptor to the plasma membrane through the endocytic recycling compartment . We believe that storage vesicles , such as those that contain the glucose transporter GLUT4 ( REF . 88 ) , might also arise from the TEN . epsinR , epsin - related ; PACS1 , phosphofurin acidic - cluster - sorting protein - 1 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | AUGUST 2006 | 577 © 2006 Nature Publishing Group EHD proteins ( Eps15 - homology - domain proteins ) . These proteins are part of the machinery that returns internalized transmembrane proteins to the plasma membrane . Cargoes that remain in some part of the vacuolar endo - somes eventually end up in lysosomes , whereas those that enter the TEN avoid being targeted to lysosomes and are recycled . The removal of recycling proteins from the early – late endosome continuum into the TEN is therefore crucial for endosome maturation . Further sorting deci - sions are made at the TEN , which result in cargo delivery to different compartments . We believe that proteins with the capacity to tubulate membranes , such as members of the SNX 20 and eps15 - homology domain ( EHD ) 74 fami - lies , could have roles in the formation or stabilization of the tubules or in the recruitment of sorting devices , as is the case for retromer . The devices described above would then sort cargoes to the TGN or to other destina - tions by segregating them into different TEN domains from which carriers form ( FIG . 3 ) . 1 . Bonifacino , J . S . & Glick , B . S . The mechanisms of vesicle budding and fusion . Cell 116 , 153 – 166 ( 2004 ) . 2 . Griffiths , G . & Simons , K . The trans Golgi network : sorting at the exit site of the Golgi complex . Science 234 , 438 – 443 ( 1986 ) . 3 . Rodriguez - Boulan , E . & Musch , A . Protein sorting in the Golgi complex : shifting paradigms . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1744 , 455 – 464 ( 2005 ) . 4 . Rohn , W . M . , Rouille , Y . , Waguri , S . & Hoflack , B . Bi - directional trafficking between the trans - Golgi network and the endosomal / lysosomal system . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 2093 – 2101 ( 2000 ) . 5 . Snider , M . D . & Rogers , O . C . Intracellular movement of cell surface receptors after endocytosis : resialylation of asialo - transferrin receptor in human erythroleukemia cells . J . Cell Biol . 100 , 826 – 834 ( 1985 ) . 6 . Bowers , K . & Stevens , T . H . Protein transport from the late Golgi to the vacuole in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1744 , 438 – 454 ( 2005 ) . 7 . Ghosh , P . , Dahms , N . M . & Kornfeld , S . Mannose 6 - phosphate receptors : new twists in the tale . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 , 202 – 212 ( 2003 ) . References 6 and 7 are comprehensive reviews on the transport of acid hydrolases from the late Golgi to the vacuole in S . cerevisiae and from the TGN to lysosomes in mammalian cells , respectively . 8 . Molloy , S . S . , Anderson , E . D . , Jean , F . & Thomas , G . Bi - cycling the furin pathway : from TGN localization to pathogen activation and embryogenesis . Trends Cell Biol . 9 , 28 – 35 ( 1999 ) . 9 . Voos , W . & Stevens , T . H . Retrieval of resident late - Golgi membrane proteins from the prevacuolar compartment of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is dependent on the function of Grd19p . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 577 – 590 ( 1998 ) . 10 . Varlamov , O . & Fricker , L . D . Intracellular trafficking of metallocarboxypeptidase D in AtT - 20 cells : localization to the trans - Golgi network and recycling from the cell surface . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 877 – 885 ( 1998 ) . 11 . Valdivia , R . H . , Baggott , D . , Chuang , J . S . & Schekman , R . W . The yeast clathrin adaptor protein complex 1 is required for the efficient retention of a subset of late Golgi membrane proteins . Dev . Cell 2 , 283 – 294 ( 2002 ) . Together with references 35 and 36 , this article shows a requirement for the clathrin adaptor AP1 in the sorting of some proteins from endosomes to the TGN . 12 . Lewis , M . J . , Nichols , B . J . , Prescianotto - Baschong , C . , Riezman , H . & Pelham , H . R . Specific retrieval of the exocytic SNARE Snc1p from early yeast endosomes . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 23 – 38 ( 2000 ) . Together with reference 32 , this paper describes the molecular machinery that is involved in the recycling of the SNAREs Snc1 and Pep12 from endosomes to the late Golgi complex in S . cerevisiae . 13 . Hong , W . SNAREs and traffic . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1744 , 493 – 517 ( 2005 ) . 14 . Tai , G . et al . Participation of the syntaxin 5 / Ykt6 / GS28 / GS15 SNARE complex in transport from the early / recycling endosome to the trans - Golgi network . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 4011 – 4022 ( 2004 ) . 15 . Mallard , F . et al . Early / recycling endosomes - to - TGN transport involves two SNARE complexes and a Rab6 isoform . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 653 – 664 ( 2002 ) . References 14 and 15 describe two SNARE complexes that are involved in the fusion of endosome - derived retrograde carriers with the TGN . 16 . Sandvig , K . & van Deurs , B . Delivery into cells : lessons learned from plant and bacterial toxins . Gene Ther . 12 , 865 – 872 ( 2005 ) . This article reviews how exotoxins exploit the cell’s trafficking machinery to gain access to the cell . 17 . Seaman , M . N . Recycle your receptors with retromer . Trends Cell Biol . 15 , 68 – 75 ( 2005 ) . A comprehensive review on the structure and function of the S . cerevisiae and mammalian retromer complexes . 18 . Haft , C . R . et al . Human orthologs of yeast vacuolar protein sorting proteins Vps26 , 29 , and 35 : assembly into multimeric complexes . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 4105 – 4116 ( 2000 ) . 19 . Kerr , M . C . et al . A novel mammalian retromer component , Vps26B . Traffic 6 , 991 – 1001 ( 2005 ) . 20 . Carlton , J . , Bujny , M . , Rutherford , A . & Cullen , P . Sorting nexins — unifying trends and new perspectives . Traffic 6 , 75 – 82 ( 2005 ) . 21 . Shi , H . , Rojas , R . , Bonifacino , J . S . & Hurley , J . H . Human Vps26 has an arrestin fold and is integrated into the retromer complex through its C - terminal domain . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 13 , 540 – 548 ( 2006 ) . X - ray crystallography reveals an unexpected structural homology of the VPS26 subunit of mammalian retromer to arrestins . 22 . Collins , B . M . , Skinner , C . F . , Watson , P . J . , Seaman , M . N . & Owen , D . J . Vps29 has a phosphoesterase fold that acts as a protein interaction scaffold for retromer assembly . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 12 , 594 – 602 ( 2005 ) . 23 . Wang , D . et al . Crystal structure of human vacuolar protein sorting protein 29 reveals a phosphodiesterase / nuclease - like fold and two protein – protein interaction sites . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 22962 – 22967 ( 2005 ) . References 22 and 23 report that the VPS29 subunit of mammalian retromer has structural homology to divalent - metal - containing phosphoesterases . 24 . Arighi , C . N . , Hartnell , L . M . , Aguilar , R . C . , Haft , C . R . & Bonifacino , J . S . Role of the mammalian retromer in sorting of the cation - independent mannose 6 - phosphate receptor . J . Cell Biol . 165 , 123 – 133 ( 2004 ) . 25 . Seaman , M . N . Cargo - selective endosomal sorting for retrieval to the Golgi requires retromer . J . Cell Biol . 165 , 111 – 122 ( 2004 ) . 26 . Carlton , J . et al . Sorting nexin - 1 mediates tubular endosome - to - TGN transport through coincidence sensing of high - curvature membranes and 3 - phosphoinositides . Curr . Biol . 14 , 1791 – 1800 ( 2004 ) . References 24 – 26 report that the mammalian retromer complex mediates the sorting of MPRs from endosomes to the TGN . 27 . Raposo , G . , Tenza , D . , Murphy , D . M . , Berson , J . F . & Marks , M . S . Distinct protein sorting and localization to premelanosomes , melanosomes , and lysosomes in pigmented melanocytic cells . J . Cell Biol . 152 , 809 – 824 ( 2001 ) . 28 . Peden , A . A . et al . Localization of the AP - 3 adaptor complex defines a novel endosomal exit site for lysosomal membrane proteins . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 1065 – 1076 ( 2004 ) . 29 . Small , S . A . et al . Model - guided microarray implicates the retromer complex in Alzheimer’s disease . Ann . Neurol . 58 , 909 – 919 ( 2005 ) . Decreased levels of retromer are linked to the development of Alzheimer’s disease . 30 . Haass , C . Take five — BACE and the γ - secretase quartet conduct Alzheimer’s amyloid β - peptide generation . EMBO J . 23 , 483 – 488 ( 2004 ) . 31 . Halpern , S . The gene hunters . The New Yorker , 84 – 93 ( 12 December 2005 ) . 32 . Hettema , E . H . , Lewis , M . J . , Black , M . W . & Pelham , H . R . Retromer and the sorting nexins Snx4 / 41 / 42 mediate distinct retrieval pathways from yeast endosomes . EMBO J . 22 , 548 – 557 ( 2003 ) . 33 . Wan , L . et al . PACS - 1 defines a novel gene family of cytosolic sorting proteins required for trans - Golgi network localization . Cell 94 , 205 – 216 ( 1998 ) . 34 . Crump , C . M . et al . PACS - 1 binding to adaptors is required for acidic cluster motif - mediated protein traffic . EMBO J . 20 , 2191 – 2201 ( 2001 ) . 35 . Meyer , C . et al . µ 1A - adaptin - deficient mice : lethality , loss of AP - 1 binding and rerouting of mannose 6 - phosphate receptors . EMBO J . 19 , 2193 – 2203 ( 2000 ) . 36 . Medigeshi , G . R . & Schu , P . Characterization of the in vitro retrograde transport of MPR46 . Traffic 4 , 802 – 811 ( 2003 ) . 37 . Saint - Pol , A . et al . Clathrin adaptor epsinR is required for retrograde sorting on early endosomal membranes . Dev . Cell 6 , 525 – 538 ( 2004 ) . Clathrin and epsinR are implicated in the retrograde transport of Shiga toxin , TGN38 , TGN46 and MPRs from endosomes to the TGN . 38 . Lombardi , D . et al . Rab9 functions in transport between late endosomes and the trans Golgi network . EMBO J . 12 , 677 – 682 ( 1993 ) . 39 . Diaz , E . & Pfeffer , S . R . TIP47 : a cargo selection device for mannose 6 - phosphate receptor trafficking . Cell 93 , 433 – 443 ( 1998 ) . 40 . Barbero , P . , Bittova , L . & Pfeffer , S . R . Visualization of Rab9 - mediated vesicle transport from endosomes to the trans - Golgi in living cells . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 511 – 518 ( 2002 ) . 41 . Riederer , M . A . , Soldati , T . , Shapiro , A . D . , Lin , J . & Pfeffer , S . R . Lysosome biogenesis requires Rab9 function and receptor recycling from endosomes to the trans - Golgi network . J . Cell Biol . 125 , 573 – 582 ( 1994 ) . 42 . Carroll , K . S . et al . Role of Rab9 GTPase in facilitating receptor recruitment by TIP47 . Science 292 , 1373 – 1376 ( 2001 ) . 43 . Hickenbottom , S . J . , Kimmel , A . R . , Londos , C . & Hurley , J . H . Structure of a lipid droplet protein ; the PAT family member TIP47 . Structure 12 , 1199 – 1207 ( 2004 ) . Concluding remarks At present , the description of the molecular machinery that is involved in retrograde transport between endo - somes and the TGN resembles a catalogue of parts with little explanation of the mechanisms in which they are involved . It is not even clear if all the molecules that have been implicated in retrograde transport so far are directly or indirectly involved in this process . Future studies of these molecules using more refined biochemical , structural , genetic and morphological approaches will undoubtedly sort out the direct from the indirect effects , and will eventually lead to the elucidation of the actual mechanisms of transport . The growing appreciation that retrograde transport is crucial to cellular homeostasis and toxin action should provide the impetus to undertake such studies . R E V I E W S 578 | AUGUST 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2006 Nature Publishing Group 44 . Wolins , N . E . , Rubin , B . & Brasaemle , D . L . TIP47 associates with lipid droplets . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 5101 – 5108 ( 2001 ) . 45 . Mallard , F . et al . Direct pathway from early / recycling endosomes to the Golgi apparatus revealed through the study of Shiga toxin B - fragment transport . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 973 – 990 ( 1998 ) . 46 . Iversen , T . G . et al . Endosome to Golgi transport of ricin is independent of clathrin and of the Rab9 - and Rab11 - GTPases . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2099 – 2107 ( 2001 ) . 47 . Lauvrak , S . U . , Torgersen , M . L . & Sandvig , K . Efficient endosome - to - Golgi transport of Shiga toxin is dependent on dynamin and clathrin . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 2321 – 2331 ( 2004 ) . 48 . Grimmer , S . , Iversen , T . G . , van Deurs , B . & Sandvig , K . Endosome to Golgi transport of ricin is regulated by cholesterol . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 4205 – 4216 ( 2000 ) . 49 . Falguieres , T . et al . Targeting of Shiga toxin B - subunit to retrograde transport route in association with detergent - resistant membranes . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2453 – 2468 ( 2001 ) . 50 . Schweizer , A . , Kornfeld , S . & Rohrer , J . Cysteine 34 of the cytoplasmic tail of the cation - dependent mannose 6 - phosphate receptor is reversibly palmitoylated and required for normal trafficking and lysosomal enzyme sorting . J . Cell Biol . 132 , 577 – 584 ( 1996 ) . 51 . Sztul , E . & Lupashin , V . Role of tethering factors in secretory membrane traffic . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 290 , C11 – C26 ( 2006 ) . This review , as well as references 52 – 54 and 56 – 60 , describe the properties of proteins that mediate the tethering of endosome - derived carriers to the TGN . 52 . Conibear , E . & Stevens , T . H . Vps52p , Vps53p , and Vps54p form a novel multisubunit complex required for protein sorting at the yeast late Golgi . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 305 – 323 ( 2000 ) . 53 . Siniossoglou , S . & Pelham , H . R . An effector of Ypt6p binds the SNARE Tlg1p and mediates selective fusion of vesicles with late Golgi membranes . EMBO J . 20 , 5991 – 5998 ( 2001 ) . 54 . Conibear , E . , Cleck , J . N . & Stevens , T . H . Vps51p mediates the association of the GARP ( Vps52 / 53 / 54 ) complex with the late Golgi t - SNARE Tlg1p . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1610 – 1623 ( 2003 ) . 55 . Luo , Z . & Gallwitz , D . Biochemical and genetic evidence for the involvement of yeast Ypt6 - GTPase in protein retrieval to different Golgi compartments . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 791 – 799 ( 2003 ) . 56 . Ungar , D . , Oka , T . , Krieger , M . & Hughson , F . M . Retrograde transport on the COG railway . Trends Cell Biol . 16 , 113 – 120 ( 2006 ) . 57 . Cai , H . , Zhang , Y . , Pypaert , M . , Walker , L . & Ferro - Novick , S . Mutants in trs120 disrupt traffic from the early endosome to the late Golgi . J . Cell Biol . 171 , 823 – 833 ( 2005 ) . 58 . Tsukada , M . , Will , E . & Gallwitz , D . Structural and functional analysis of a novel coiled - coil protein involved in Ypt6 GTPase - regulated protein transport in yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 63 – 75 ( 1999 ) . 59 . Yoshino , A . et al . tGolgin - 1 ( p230 , golgin - 245 ) modulates Shiga - toxin transport to the Golgi and Golgi motility towards the microtubule - organizing centre . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 2279 – 2293 ( 2005 ) . 60 . Lu , L . , Tai , G . & Hong , W . Autoantigen Golgin - 97 , an effector of Arl1 GTPase , participates in traffic from the endosome to the trans - Golgi network . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 4426 – 4443 ( 2004 ) . 61 . Panic , B . , Whyte , J . R . & Munro , S . The ARF - like GTPases Arl1p and Arl3p act in a pathway that interacts with vesicle - tethering factors at the Golgi apparatus . Curr . Biol . 13 , 405 – 410 ( 2003 ) . References 61 , 62 , 64 and 96 describe the mechanism of recruitment and interaction with tethering factors for the Arl1 and Arl3 GTPases at the TGN . 62 . Setty , S . R . , Strochlic , T . I . , Tong , A . H . , Boone , C . & Burd , C . G . Golgi targeting of ARF - like GTPase Arl3p requires its N α - acetylation and the integral membrane protein Sys1p . Nature Cell Biol . 6 , 414 – 419 ( 2004 ) . 63 . Bonangelino , C . J . , Chavez , E . M . & Bonifacino , J . S . Genomic screen for vacuolar protein sorting genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 2486 – 2501 ( 2002 ) . 64 . Shin , H . W . et al . Roles of ARFRP1 ( ADP - ribosylation factor - related protein 1 ) in post - Golgi membrane trafficking . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 4039 – 4048 ( 2005 ) . 65 . Holthuis , J . C . , Nichols , B . J . , Dhruvakumar , S . & Pelham , H . R . Two syntaxin homologues in the TGN / endosomal system of yeast . EMBO J . 17 , 113 – 126 ( 1998 ) . 66 . Gurunathan , S . , Chapman - Shimshoni , D . , Trajkovic , S . & Gerst , J . E . Yeast exocytic v - SNAREs confer endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 3629 – 3643 ( 2000 ) . 67 . Miaczynska , M . & Zerial , M . Mosaic organization of the endocytic pathway . Exp . Cell Res . 272 , 8 – 14 ( 2002 ) . 68 . Perret , E . , Lakkaraju , A . , Deborde , S . , Schreiner , R . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Evolving endosomes : how many varieties and why ? Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 , 423 – 434 ( 2005 ) . 69 . Wall , D . A . , Wilson , G . & Hubbard , A . L . The galactose - specific recognition system of mammalian liver : the route of ligand internalization in rat hepatocytes . Cell 21 , 79 – 93 ( 1980 ) . 70 . Willingham , M . C . , Hanover , J . A . , Dickson , R . B . & Pastan , I . Morphologic characterization of the pathway of transferrin endocytosis and recycling in human KB cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 81 , 175 – 179 ( 1984 ) . 71 . Marsh , M . , Griffiths , G . , Dean , G . E . , Mellman , I . & Helenius , A . Three - dimensional structure of endosomes in BHK - 21 cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 83 , 2899 – 2903 ( 1986 ) . 72 . Maxfield , F . R . & McGraw , T . E . Endocytic recycling . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 121 – 132 ( 2004 ) . 73 . Hurley , J . H . & Emr , S . D . The ESCRT complexes : structure and mechanism of a membrane - trafficking network . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 35 , 277 – 298 ( 2006 ) . 74 . Caplan , S . et al . A tubular EHD1 - containing compartment involved in the recycling of major histocompatibility complex class I molecules to the plasma membrane . EMBO J . 21 , 2557 – 2567 ( 2002 ) . 75 . Carlton , J . G . et al . Sorting nexin - 2 is associated with tubular elements of the early endosome , but is not essential for retromer - mediated endosome - to - TGN transport . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 4527 – 4539 ( 2005 ) . 76 . Bravo , J . et al . The crystal structure of the PX domain from p40 phox bound to phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate . Mol Cell . 8 , 829 – 839 ( 2001 ) . 77 . Peter , B . J . et al . BAR domains as sensors of membrane curvature : the amphiphysin BAR structure . Science 303 , 495 – 499 ( 2004 ) . 78 . Horazdovsky , B . F . et al . A sorting nexin - 1 homologue , Vps5p , forms a complex with Vps17p and is required for recycling the vacuolar protein - sorting receptor . Mol . Biol . Cell 8 , 1529 – 1541 ( 1997 ) . 79 . Nothwehr , S . F . , Ha , S . A . & Bruinsma , P . Sorting of yeast membrane proteins into an endosome - to - Golgi pathway involves direct interaction of their cytosolic domains with Vps35p . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 297 – 310 ( 2000 ) . 80 . Seaman , M . N . , McCaffery , J . M . & Emr , S . D . A membrane coat complex essential for endosome - to - Golgi retrograde transport in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 665 – 681 ( 1998 ) . A landmark paper that first characterized the retromer complex . 81 . Theos , A . C . et al . Functions of adaptor protein ( AP ) - 3 and AP - 1 in tyrosinase sorting from endosomes to melanosomes . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 5356 – 5372 ( 2005 ) . 82 . Verges , M . et al . The mammalian retromer regulates transcytosis of the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor . Nature Cell Biol . 6 , 763 – 769 ( 2004 ) . 83 . Pagano , A . , Crottet , P . , Prescianotto - Baschong , C . & Spiess , M . In vitro formation of recycling vesicles from endosomes requires adaptor protein - 1 / clathrin and is regulated by rab4 and the connector rabaptin - 5 . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 4990 – 5000 ( 2004 ) . 84 . Fölsch , H . , Ohno , H . , Bonifacino , J . S . & Mellman , I . A novel clathrin adaptor complex mediates basolateral targeting in polarized epithelial cells . Cell 99 , 189 – 198 ( 1999 ) . 85 . Gan , Y . , McGraw , T . E . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . The epithelial - specific adaptor AP1B mediates post - endocytic recycling to the basolateral membrane . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 605 – 609 ( 2002 ) . 86 . Lin , S . X . , Grant , B . , Hirsh , D . & Maxfield , F . R . Rme - 1 regulates the distribution and function of the endocytic recycling compartment in mammalian cells . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 567 – 572 ( 2001 ) . 87 . Ullrich , O . , Reinsch , S . , Urbe , S . , Zerial , M . & Parton , R . G . Rab11 regulates recycling through the pericentriolar recycling endosome . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 913 – 924 ( 1996 ) . 88 . Dugani , C . B . & Klip , A . Glucose transporter 4 : cycling , compartments and controversies . EMBO Rep . 6 , 1137 – 1142 ( 2005 ) . 89 . Marcusson , E . G . , Horazdovsky , B . F . , Cereghino , J . L . , Gharakhanian , E . & Emr , S . D . The sorting receptor for yeast vacuolar carboxypeptidase Y is encoded by the VPS10 gene . Cell 77 , 579 – 586 ( 1994 ) . 90 . Bryant , N . J . & Stevens , T . H . Two separate signals act independently to localize a yeast late Golgi membrane protein through a combination of retrieval and retention . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 287 – 297 ( 1997 ) . 91 . Stanley , K . K . & Howell , K . E . TGN38 / 41 : a molecule on the move . Trends Cell Biol . 3 , 252 – 255 ( 1993 ) . 92 . Burda , P . , Padilla , S . M . , Sarkar , S . & Emr , S . D . Retromer function in endosome - to - Golgi retrograde transport is regulated by the yeast Vps34 PtdIns 3 - kinase . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 3889 – 3900 ( 2002 ) . 93 . Choudhury , R . et al . Lowe syndrome protein OCRL1 interacts with clathrin and regulates protein trafficking between endosomes and the trans - Golgi network . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 3467 – 3479 ( 2005 ) . References 92 and 93 implicate phosphoinositide - metabolizing enzymes in the regulation of retrograde transport . 94 . Li , B . & Warner , J . R . Mutation of the Rab6 homologue of Saccharomyces cerevisiae , YPT6 , inhibits both early Golgi function and ribosome biosynthesis . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 16813 – 16819 ( 1996 ) . 95 . Siniossoglou , S . , Peak - Chew , S . Y . & Pelham , H . R . Ric1p and Rgp1p form a complex that catalyses nucleotide exchange on Ypt6p . EMBO J . 19 , 4885 – 4894 ( 2000 ) . 96 . Munro , S . The Arf - like GTPase Arl1 and its role in membrane traffic . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 33 , 601 – 605 ( 2005 ) . 97 . Spelbrink , R . G . & Nothwehr , S . F . The yeast GRD20 gene is required for protein sorting in the trans - Golgi network / endosomal system and for polarization of the actin cytoskeleton . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 4263 – 4281 ( 1999 ) . 98 . Itin , C . , Rancano , C . , Nakajima , Y . & Pfeffer , S . R . A novel assay reveals a role for soluble N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion attachment protein in mannose 6 - phosphate receptor transport from endosomes to the trans Golgi network . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 27737 – 27744 ( 1997 ) . 99 . Zolov , S . N . & Lupashin , V . V . Cog3p depletion blocks vesicle - mediated Golgi retrograde trafficking in HeLa cells . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 747 – 759 ( 2005 ) . Acknowledgements We thank W . Smith for help with the figure in BOX 1 , D . Banfield , G . Fischer von Mollard , W . Hong , H . Pelham and K . Sandvig for helpful discussions , and G . Mardones and J . Hurley for comments on the manuscript . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . DATABASES The following terms in this article are linked online to : Protein Data Bank : http : / / www . rcsb . org / pdb 1H6H | 1URU | 1W24 | 1Z2X | 2FAU UniProtKB : http : / / ca . expasy . org / sprot CD - MPR | CI - MPR | PACS1 | SNX1 | SNX2 | Snx4 | TIP47 | Vps5 | Vps10 | Vps17 | Vps26 | Vps29 | Vps35 | Vps51 FURTHER INFORMATION Juan Bonifacino’s homepage : http : / / dir2 . nichd . nih . gov / nichd / cbmb / Juan _ Bonifacino . html Access to this links box is available online . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 7 | AUGUST 2006 | 579