Annals of Oncology 11 : 1591 - 1595 . 2000 . © 2000 Khmer Academic Publishers . Printed in the Netherlands . Original article Reporting and dissemination of industry versus non - profit sponsored economic analyses of six novel drugs used in oncology * K . S . Knox , 1 ' 4 J . R . Adams , 1 ' 4 B . Djulbegovic , 5 ' 6 T . J . Stinson , 1 ' 4 C . Tomori 1 ' 4 & C . L . Bennett ' Robert H . Lurie Cancer Center , 2 Institute for Health Services Research and Policy Studies , 3 Department of Medicine , Northwestern University , 4 VA Chicago Health Care System , Lakeside Division , Chicago ; S H Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute , 6 Division of Blood and Bone Marrow Transplant , University of South Florida , USA 1 - 4 Summary Purpose : Our prior study found that pharmaceutical - spon - sored and non - profit sponsored analyses differed in their pub - lished assessments of the economic value of six new oncology drugs . In this study , we expand on our earlier findings and evaluate the association between funding source and 1 ) charac - teristics of the published study report and 2 ) journal type for dissemination of the previously evaluated economic studies . Methods : We reviewed the published cost - effectiveness liter - ature for hematopoietic colony stimulating factors , 5 - HT3 antagonist antiemetics , and taxanes . Two blinded investigators rated specific aspects of study reporting based on the US Public Health Service Panel on Cost - effectiveness in Health and Medicine criteria . Dissemination strategies were evaluated using impact factor scores from the Science Citation Index . Results : The operational aspects of pharmaceutical - spon - sored study reporting were better overall than those associated with non - profit sponsored studies . Specifically , pharmaceuti - cal - sponsored studies were more likely to be reported based on data obtained from randomized clinical trials or detailed cost - models ( 90 % vs . 70 % ) , to include descriptions of the source of cost differences ( 90 % vs . 79 % ) , to state whether the study was carried out from a societal , governmental , or insurer perspec - tive ( 70 % vs . 42 % ) , and to clearly indicate the time - period over which costs were evaluated ( 65 % vs . 50 % ) . Nonprofit spon - sored studies were more likely than pharmaceutical sponsored studies to report the generalizability of the findings , including being more likely to include information about how the data could be extrapolated to other clinical settings ( 58 % vs . 35 % ) , to include statements on the statistical significance of the findings ( 38 % vs . 20 % ) , and to clearly outline the cost per unit and data sources for the cost analyses ( 67 % vs . 45 % ) . A similar percent of pharmaceutical and non - profit sponsored studies reported background and conclusions with about 80 % providing literature comparisons of the results ( about 80 % ) and two thirds to three fourths discussing the limitations of the finding ( 75 % for pharmaceutical - sponsored and 67 % for non - profit sponsored studies ) . Most studies were published in low impact factor peer - reviewed journals , and journal impact factor scores were similar between pharmaceutical and nonprofit sponsored studies . Conclusions : Upon reviewing the entire pharmacoeconom - ic literature for six new oncology drugs , we identified differ - ences in study reporting , but not in types of journals where studies were published , between pharmaceutical - sponsored and non - profit sponsored studies . These results , particularly the observed differences in data generalizability , may account in part for our previous finding of lower likelihood of reporting unfavorable conclusions in pharmaceutical - sponsored studies . Key words : cost - effectiveness , economic analyses , pharma - ceutical sponsorship Introduction With constant financial pressures on health care pro - viders , pharmacoeconomic analyses have increased in frequency over the past decade [ I , 2 ] . However , the usefulness of this literature has been questioned [ 3 , 4 ] and caution has been advised as many reports fail to adhere to fundamental analytic principles [ 3 ] . Reviews of studies from the 1980s and early 1990s found that the majority of economic analyses had substantial limitations [ 2 , 3 , 5 - 8 ] . In an effort to improve the quality of economic evaluations , several organizations and countries pro - duced guidelines for study design and reporting [ 2 , 9 ] . * This work was presented in part as an oral presentation at the American Society of Clinical Oncology conference in May 2000 . In one such effort , the British Medical Journal published formal guidelines for the acceptance of economic analyses for publication . Rather than improving reporting quality , however , implementation of the guidelines served only to streamline the journal ' s editorial process [ 10 ] . Clinical trials , which provide the data upon which economic analyses are based , have over the past 20 years been funded more often by pharmaceutical companies [ 11 , 12 ] . There is concern about the reporting of such pharmaceutical sponsored clinical trials [ 13 ] . Johansen and Gotzsche found that inappropriate methods in pharmaceutical sponsored studies led to over - estimates of the clinical benefits of a new antifungal agent , raising concerns about the quality of design and reporting of these studies [ 13 ] . We recently found empirical support for an alternative explanation in the setting of clinical 1592 trial reports , in which pharmaceutical - sponsored efforts focused a priori on settings where favorable results would be expected [ 14 ] . Similar concerns exist with respect to the pharmaco - economic literature . Economic analyses are far more likely to describe new agents as cost - effective when the study is sponsored by a pharmaceutical firm [ 15 , 16 ] . Azimi and Welch reported that pharmaceutical spon - sored cost - effectiveness studies found new agents to be cost - effective using thresholds that were significantly greater than those included in not - for - profit sponsored studies [ 15 ] . We found that pharmaceutical sponsored studies of six new agents used in oncology were nearly eight times less likely than nonprofit sponsored studies to report an unfavorable conclusion about the cost - effectiveness of a new agent [ 16 ] . One interpretation of these findings , based on the popular press [ 17 ] and the pharmacoeconomic literature [ 13 , 18 ] suggests that sponsored pharmacoeconomic literature may differ in reporting details as well as the quality of journal selected for dissemination . An alternative explanation is selective funding , reporting , or publishing of favorable pharma - coeconomic studies . As a continuation of the research outlined in our studies of pharmaceutical sponsored clinical and economic reports [ 14 , 16 ] , we formally evaluated the association between pharmaceutical ver - sus non - profit funding source of economic studies in oncology and 1 ) general aspects of economic study reporting and 2 ) preference for publication in lower impact journals . The data set included the 44 economic studies used in our earlier study [ 16 ] . Reporting assess - ments were based on generally accepted criteria adapted from the recently published report from the US Panel on Cost Effectiveness in Health and Medicine [ 19 - 21 ] . Methods The primary objective of this study was to evaluate the general reporting characteristics of all of the published pharmaceutical - and nonprofit - sponsored economic literature for six novel drugs in oncology . A secondary objective was to evaluate whether pharmaceutical and non - profit sponsored studies differed in the frequency with which their findings were disseminated in peer - reviewed journals with a large readership of oncologists and policy makers . Our data set for these studies consisted of the 44 economic analyses used in our previous report that identified potential conflicts of interest in pharmaceutical sponsored studies [ 16 ] . In these studies , we reviewed original reports of cost and cost - effectiveness analyses published from 1988 - 1998 of six recently - marketed cancer drugs ( hematopoietic growth factors ( granulocyte colony - stimulating factor and granulocyte - macrophage colony - stimulating factor ) ; seratonin antagonist antiemetics ( ondanse - tron hydrochloride and granisetron ) ; and taxane chemotherapy agents ( paclitaxel and docetaxel ) . A nine - item instrument for evaluating pharmacoeconomic reports was developed for this study . The instrument was based on the guide - lines for economic analyses recently published by the US Public Health Service Panel on Cost Effectiveness in Health and Medicine [ 19 - 21 ] . The instrument contained items related to reporting of study methods , generalizability of findings , and background / conclusions sections of the study . Reporting assessments were based on the following nine items : 1 ) a rigorous clinical design ( randomized with a control if based on a clinical trial or assumptions well - described if based on a model ) , 2 ) generalizable data sources ( sensitivity analyses of at least three variables or trial costs modified to represent standard use ) . 3 ) statisti - cal tests of significance performed on appropriate outcomes ( resulting in a P - value ) . 4 ) a statement regarding perspective , 5 ) a description of the costs of the main included resources , 6 ) a description of the time horizon , 7 ) a description of the source of total cost differences includ - ing a breakdown of cost areas . 8 ) a discussion of the limitations , and 9 ) comparisons to other published studies . No attempt was made to qualitatively evaluate each item further than to establish that each item was addressed or present . To evaluate the secondary objective related to publication sources of pharmaceutical - and non - profit sponsored economic studies , dis - semination was evaluated using the journal impact factor statistic . This statistic is reported for each journal in the 1996 edition of the Science Citation Index Journal Citation Reports ( JCR ) published by the Institute for Scientific Information . The journal impact factor is a measure of the frequency and timeliness with which an average article from a particular journal is cited . Two investigators ( J . R . Adams and K . . S . Knox ) independently abstracted information from each of the articles using the instrument described above . Articles were classified as either pharmaceutical company - sponsored or nonprofit - sponsored ( government agency , pro - fessional organization , nonprofit foundation , or academic institution ) . As noted previously , we obtained complete information on source of funding for each study [ 16 ] . Investigators abstracting quality aspects were blinded to the funding source . Disagreements over scores were reconciled by consensus during discussion with a third investigator . The quality scores were compared to a derived overall nine - point sum total representing the presence / absence of each individual quality measure . Impact values were also compared based on sponsorship type . Because the study is based on reviews of the entire population of pharmacoeconomic analyses of the six drugs rather than a sample of studies , formal statistical tests of differences are not reported . Results The 44 economic analyses represent the entire body of published pharmacoeconomic literature for the 6 oncology drugs . The studies varied in reporting detail . The percentage of pharmaceutical or non - profit spon - sored studies adhering to any given reporting criteria ranged from 20 % to 90 % ( Table 1 ) . Most studies con - tained detailed information related to study methods , including identification of specific areas of cost savings and detailed explanations of model design or rigorous clinical design . In contrast , less frequently described method areas related to study generalizability . Pharma - ceutical - and non - profit sponsored studies differed with respect to compliance with individual reporting consider - ations . Pharmaceutical - sponsored studies were more likely to include information reported from randomized controlled trials or detailed cost - models ( 90 % vs . 70 % ) , to clearly describe the source of cost differences ( 90 % vs . 79 % ) , to state whether the study was carried out from a societal , governmental , or insurer perspective ( 70 % vs . 42 % ) , and to clearly indicate the time - period over which costs were evaluated ( 65 % vs . 50 % ) . Nonprofit sponsored studies were more likely to include information about how the data could be extrapolated to other clinical settings ( 58 % vs . 35 % ) , to include a statistical comparison of the results ( 38 % vs . 20 % ) , and to clearly outline costs per unit and data sources for the cost analyses ( 67 % vs . 45 % ) . Pharmaceutical and non - profit sponsored studies 1593 Table 1 . Reporting assessment items for pharmaceutical and non - profit sponsored studies . Table 2 1996 journal impact factor scores for pharmaceutical and non - profit sponsored studies . Specific reporting aspects Pharma - Non - profit - ceutical - sponsored sponsored ( n = 24 ) ( n = 20 ) ( % ) Pharmaceutical - sponsored studies better than non - profit sponsored studies Based on a clinical trial randomized with a control or explicit cost - effectiveness model Source of cost differences clearly described Clearly stated if perspective is that of society , insurer , hospital , or individual Clear description of length of observation period Pharmaceutical and non - profit sponsored studies similar Limitations of the findings discussed Comparisons to prior findings in the literature 9090 70 65 75 80 7079 42 50 67 83 Non - profit sponsored studies belter than pharmaceutical sponsored studies Explicit statement of statistical significance of the findings 20 Source of cost data and costs per unit clearly outlined 45 Clear statements of the likelihood of the findings being reproduced in other settings 35 38 67 58 were similar with respect to providing literature com - parisons of the results ( about 80 % ) and discussing the limitations of the finding ( 75 % for pharmaceutical - sponsored and 67 % for non - profit sponsored studies ) . A majority of the economic analyses was published in journals with low journal impact factors . These low impact factor journals are generally targeted to limited readerships , primarily pharmacy , supportive care , and oncology subspecialty audiences ( Table 2 ) . Distributions of journal impact factor scores were sim - ilar between pharmaceutical versus nonprofit - sponsored studies ( Figure 1 ) . Discussion This study investigated the association between pharma - ceutical company sponsorship and study reporting and dissemination of findings in the peer - reviewed literature . In particular , we found that the body of literature for pharmaceutical - sponsored and non - profit sponsored economic studies for six new oncology drugs differed in specific aspects of reporting , but were disseminated in journals with similar target readership audiences . Pharmaceutical - sponsored economic analyses were less likely overall to formally report on study generalizability , Journal Impact Number of studies factor Non - Pharm profit co . ( n = 24 ) ( n = 20 ) New England Journal of Medicine 24 . 8 1 0 Annals of Internal Medicine 11 . 2 0 1 Blood 9 . 7 0 1 Journal of Clinical Oncology 7 . 9 4 3 Anesthesiology 5 . 0 1 0 British Journal of Cancer 3 . 7 0 1 Cancer 3 . 3 1 1 Journal of Pediatrics 3 . 0 1 0 Bone Marrow Transplant 2 . 8 1 0 Annals of Oncology 2 . 7 1 0 Oncology 2 . 1 1 0 European Journal of Cancer 2 . 0 0 4 Stem Cells 1 . 8 2 0 Cancer Investigation 1 . 7 0 1 Gynecologic Oncology 1 . 6 1 0 Canadian Journal of Anaesthesia 1 . 4 I 0 PharmacoEconomics 1 . 4 2 6 American Journal of Hospital Pharmacy 1 . 3 1 0 Leukemia and Lymphoma 1 . 1 1 1 Journal of Clinical Anesthesia 1 . 0 1 0 Support Care Cancer 1 . 0 1 0 Formulary 0 . 4 1 0 Journal of Clinical Pharmacy & Therapeutics 0 . 4 1 0 Journal of Chemotherapy 0 . 2 1 0 Ambulatory Anesthesia - a 0 1 a Not in the JCR . but were more likely to provide information on the key components of the methods section , including detailed information about data sources and the duration of the observation period . Our findings may help explain the observed bias in the pharmacoeconomic literature . Having detailed methods sections , the primary advantage noted in pharmaceutical - sponsored studies , facilitates interpretation of the validity and reliability of the cost estimates . In contrast , exten - sive reporting of generalizability , the primary advantage noted in non - profit sponsored studies , is essential if analyses are to be extrapolated from clinical trial or decision analytic modeling settings to routine clinical practice settings . However , even after reviewing the entire pharmacoeconomic literature for six new oncology drugs , one of the main study questions remains un - answered . In particular , we were not able to evaluate whether pharmaceutical sponsorship directly impacted the likelihood that unfavorable reports would not be submitted for publication . This concern has been raised previously as one of the main reasons for infrequent publication of unfavorable pharmaceutical - sponsored studies [ 14 , 16 ] . Since decision making is based on physician interpretation of published data , underreport - 1594 Impact Factor by sponsorship * ( 0 . 92 T > tn " 5 • ^ Q > U < 5 a . 40 % 30 % 20 % 10 % 0 % JJ • 1 . Idi k 111 1 I V fl 1 • Non - profit • Pharmaceutical • • • 2 3 4 5 8 Impact Factor 10 11 25 Figure I . Distribution of journal impact factor scores for pharmaceut - ical and non - profit sponsored studies . * Based on the 1996 Journal Citation Reports from the Institute for Scientific Information , rounded to the nearest whole number . ing research has been condemned as a form of scientific misconduct [ 25 ] . By not publishing some results , mis - perceptions can arise about treatment efficacy , safety and cost - effectiveness [ 25 - 28 ] . Journal editors have proposed establishing an international registry of randomized trials in order to reduce the impact of under - reporting and publication bias on clinical trials [ 26 ] . Our study provides further rationale for establishing a register of ongoing trials , including pharmacoeconomic analyses . Our results suggest that journal editors viewed phar - maceutical and non - pharmaceutical sponsored pharma - coeconomic studies as less relevant in comparison to clinical articles . The majority of industry and non - profit sponsored studies appeared in journals with low impact factor scores targeted to pharmacy , supportive care , and oncology subspecialty audiences . Nonetheless , pharma - ceutical sponsored studies tended to appear in journals targeted to pharmacists and non - profit sponsored studies tended to appear in journals targeted to physicians . While our study sample for six new oncology drugs spanned a ten - year publication period , this body of literature was not large enough nor published over a long enough time - period to detect a difference in study reporting over time . Inferences on this subject can be made after reviewing other reviews of economic analyses reported in the previous decade . While almost 70 % of the model - based economic evaluations from the 1990s reviewed in our study reported detailed sensitivity analyses , overview studies of cost - effectiveness articles from the years 1978 - 1994 found that only 6 % - 30 % included information on sensitivity analyses [ 3 , 5 , 6 ] One half of the studies reported whether the analyses were based on a societal , insurer , or patient perspective [ 2 , 7 ] , whereas only 18 % of articles surveyed in the 1970s and 1980s included similar information [ 3 ] . These find - ings suggest that study methods for economic studies may be improving over time . Continued improvements in several aspects of study reporting are needed to improve the overall credibility of the economic literature . Our study has several limitations . First , the review measures that we used do not represent a validated checklist . However , the framework of the US Panel on Cost Effectiveness in Health and Medicine [ 19 - 21 ] , from which we derived our design and reporting measures , is widely accepted today and represents a synthesis of study methods that have been developed over the past two decades . Second , we considered only one type of economic relationship between industry and researchers : direct funding of the analysis reported . Researchers often receive other types of financial and non - financial sup - port , including honorarium , consultation , and travel expenses . Third , the impact factor scoring system is an imperfect measure of the size of audience of a particular journal , and bore no relationship to the methodologic quality of individual studies . Nonetheless , the journals with high impact factor scores included in our study were targeted to general medical audiences and hema - tology and oncology specialty society members , and those with the lowest impact factor scores were targeted to pharmacy , supportive care , and oncology subspecialty readerships . Finally , while the number of articles in our study is small , it represents the entire population of cost - effectiveness analyses in the three important oncology markets . As such , a larger study addressing cost studies for these drugs is not possible , nor is it necessary . Finally , the choice of drugs in our study was based on data on pharmacy expenditures obtained from several cancer centers . Additional reviews of cost - effectiveness articles for other expensive pharmaceuticals is warranted in order to evaluate the generalizability of our findings . In conclusion , these results add to our prior insights about differences in the published literature between pharmaceutical - and non - profit sponsored economic studies . Pharmaceutical - sponsored cost studies for six new oncology drugs , as a consequence of relatively low rates of inclusion of detailed reports on study general - izability , tended to highlight specific clinical settings where the study drugs were cost - effective and left open questions about cost - effectiveness in other routine clinical practice settings . Additional studies are needed to see if this difference in focus applies to pharmacoeconomic studies of other oncology drugs and accounts in part for the lower likelihood of finding unfavorable results in the pharmaceutical - sponsored literature . Acknowledgements Drs Bennett and Djulbegovic and Ms Stinson have received research / educational ( unrestricted ) grants and consultancy fees from various pharmaceutical companies . References 1 . Elixhauser A , Halpern M , Schmier J et al . Health care CBA and CEA from 1991 to 1996 : An updated bibliography . Med Care 1998 ; 36 ( Suppl 5 ) : MS1 - 9 . MS18 - 147 . 2 . Bradley CA , Iskedjian M , Lanctot KL et al . Quality assessment of economic evaluations in selected pharmacy , medical , and health economics journals . Ann Pharmacother 1995 ; 29 : 681 9 . 3 . Udvarhelyi S , Colditz GA , Rai A et al . Cost - effectiveness and 1595 cost - benefit analyses in the medical literature . Ann Intern Med 1992 : 116 : 238 - 44 . 4 . Adams ME . McCall SM , Gray DTet al . Economic analysis in randomized control trials . Med Care 1992 : 30 : 231 - 43 . 5 . Lee JT . Sanchez LA . Interpretation of " cost - effective ' and sound - ness of economic evaluations in the pharmacy literature . AJHP 1991 ; 48 : 2622 - 7 . 6 . Heyland DK , Kernerman P , Gafni A et al . Economic evaluations in the critical care literature : Do they help us improve the efficiency of our unit ? Crit Care Med 1996 ; 24 : 1591 - 8 . 7 . Trakas K , Addis A . Kurk D et al . Quality assessment of pharmaco - econmic abstracts of original research articles in selected jour - nals . Ann Pharmacother 1997 ; 31 : 423 - 8 . 8 . Iskedjian M . Trakas K , Bradley CA et al . Quality assessment of economic evaluations published in PharmacoEconomics . Phar - macoEconomics 1997 ; 12 : 685 - 94 . 9 . Sacristan JA , Soto J , Galende I . Evaluation of pharmacoeconomic studies : Utilization of a checklist . Ann Pharmacother 1993 ; 27 : 1126 - 33 . 10 . Jefferson T , Smith R , Yee Y et al . Evaluating the BMJ guidelines for economic submissions . JAMA 1998 ; 280 : 275 - 7 . 11 . Bero LA , Rennie D . Influences on the quality of published drug studies . Int J Technol Assess Health Care 1996 ; 12 : 209 - 37 . 12 . Davidson DA . Source of funding and outcome of clinical trials . J Gen Intern Med 1986 ; 1 : 155 - 8 . 13 . Johansen HK , Gotzsche PC . Problems in the design and report - ing of trials of antifungal agents encountered during meta - analysis . JAMA 1999 ; 282 : 1752 - 9 . 14 . Djulbegovic B , Lacevic M , Cantor A et al . The uncertainty princi - ple and industry - sponsored research . Lancet 2000 ; 356 : 635 - 8 . 15 . Azimi NA , Welch G . The effectiveness of cost - effectiveness analysis in containing costs . J Gen Intern Med 1998 ; 13 : 664 - 9 . 16 . ' Friedberg M , Saffran B , StinsonTJ et al . Evaluation of conflict of interest in economic analyses of new drugs used in oncology . JAMA 1999 ; 282 : 1453 - 7 . 17 . Associated Press . Drug - Firm Backed Studies Are Tied to Positive Results . Wall Street Journal , October 20 , 1999 ; B4 . 18 . Spilker B . Developing guidelines for pharmacoeconomic trials . In Spilker B ( ed ) : Quality of Life and Pharmacoeconomics in Clinical Trials . 2nd edition . Philadelphia . Pennsylvania : Lippin - cott - Raven 1996 ; 1123 - 30 . 19 . Russell LB , Gold MR . Siegel JE et al . The role of cost - effective - ness analysis in health and medicine . JAMA 1996 : 276 : 1172 - 7 . 20 . Weinstein MC . Siegel JE . Gold MR et al . Recommendations of the panel on cost - effectivenss in health and medicine . JAMA 1996 ; 276 : 1253 - 8 . 21 . Siegel JE . Weinstein MC . Russell LB et al . Recommendations for reporting cost - effectiveness analyses . JAMA 1996 : 276 : 1339 - 41 . 22 . Cho MK . Bero LA . The quality of drug studies published in symmposium proceedings . Ann Intern Med 1996 ; 124 : 485 - 9 . 23 . Krimsky S . Conflict of interest and cost - effectiveness analysis . JAMA 1999 ; 282 : 1474 - 5 . 24 . Bennett CL , George SL , Hillner B et al . Free - riding and the prisoners dilemma : Problems in funding economic analysis of phase III cancer clinical trials . J Clin Oncol 1995 ; 13 : 2457 - 63 . 25 . Chalmers I . Under - reporting research is scientific misconduct . JAMA 1990 ; 263 : 1405 - 8 . 26 . Horton R , Smith R . Time to register randomized trials ( Editorial ) . BMJ 1999 : 319 : 865 - 6 . 27 . Dickersin . K . How important is publication bias ? A synthesis of available data . AIDS Edu Prev 1997 ; 9 ( Suppl A ) : 15 - 21 . 28 . Simes RJ . Publication Bias : The case for an international registry of clinical trials . J Clin Oncol 1986 ; 4 : 1529 - 41 . Received 6 April 2000 ; accepted 20 September 2000 Correspondence to : C . L Bennett , MD , PhD Medical Science Building 400 E . Ontario Ave Chicago , IL 60611 USAE - mail : cbenne @ nwu . edu