17 3D Printers as Sociable Technologies : Taking Appropriation Infrastructures to the Internet of Things THOMAS LUDWIG , Institute for Information Systems , University of Siegen ALEXANDER BODEN , Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Information Technology ( FIT ) VOLKMAR PIPEK , Institute for Information Systems , University of Siegen 3D printers have become continuously more present and are a perspicuous example of how technologies are becoming more complex and ubiquitous . To some extent , the emerging technological infrastructures around themexemplifywayshowdigitalizationwillchangeproductionmachinesandlines , ingeneral , intheInternet ofThings ( IoT ) . FromanEnd - UserDevelopmentperspective , themainquestionishowuserscanbesupported in managing those complex digital production lines . To reach a better understanding , we carefully analyzed 3D printers as an example of highly digitalized production machines with regard to the creative activities of their users that help them to make these machines work for their practices . In our study of appropriation processes , we are concerned with situational and social aspects of the conﬁguration and practice challenges associated with making digitalization work and how IoT technologies can support these collaborative appro - priation activities of end users by making these machines more “sociable . ” We therefore conceptualize the idea of “Sociable Technologies” and implement a prototype that provides hardware - integrated affordances for communicating and documenting practices of usage . Based on the ﬁndings of our evaluation , we derive lessons learnt when aiming at making complex technologies more usable . Categories and Subject Descriptors : H . 5 . 2 [ User Interfaces ] : User - centered design General Terms : Design Additional Key Words and Phrases : Sociable Technologies , End - User Development , Appropriation Infras - tructure , Infrastructuring , 3D Printer , Internet of Things , User - Centered Design , Design Case Study ACM Reference Format : Thomas Ludwig , Alexander Boden , and Volkmar Pipek . 2017 . 3D printers as sociable technologies : Taking appropriation infrastructures to the internet of things . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 24 , 2 , Article 17 ( April 2017 ) , 28 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3007205 1 . INTRODUCTION Until recently , digital fabrication technologies such as 3D printers or laser - based cut - ting machinery could only be found in specialized industrial companies with expert staff trained in modeling , printing , and ﬁnishing professional artifacts and prototypes . In the last few years , however , and going hand in hand with the idea of the Internet of Things ( IoT ) , entry level 3D printers and machines such as RepRaps or MakerBots have become more and more common in various professional and non - professional settings such as communities of hobbyist or semi - professional makers . Despite being based Authors’ addresses : T . Ludwig , Institute for Information Systems , University of Siegen , Kohlbettstr . 15 , 57072 Siegen , Germany ; email : thomas . ludwig @ uni - siegen . de ; A . Boden , Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Information Technology ( FIT ) , Schloss Birlinghoven , Konrad - Adenauer - Straße , 53754 Sankt Augustin , Ger - many ; email : alexander . boden @ ﬁt . fraunhofer . de ; V . Pipek , Institute for Information Systems , University of Siegen , Kohlbettstr . 15 , 57072 Siegen , Germany ; email : volkmar . pipek @ uni - siegen . de . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies show this notice on the ﬁrst page or initial screen of a display along with the full citation . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , to republish , to post on servers , to redistribute to lists , or to use any component of this work in other works requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Permissions may be requested from Publications Dept . , ACM , Inc . , 2 Penn Plaza , Suite 701 , New York , NY 10121 - 0701 USA , fax + 1 ( 212 ) 869 - 0481 , or permissions @ acm . org . c (cid:2) 2017 ACM 1073 - 0516 / 2017 / 04 - ART17 $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3007205 ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 17 : 2 T . Ludwig et al . on surprisingly simple materials , 3D printers constitute a relatively new technology that challenges established use of concepts from existing IT ecologies like desktop soft - ware , mobile devices , or “2D” printers . As Mota [ 2011 ] suggests , a “tech Do - It - Yourself ( DIY ) movement” is resulting , one in which a “growing desire among individuals to shape and personalize the material goods they consume” is occurring . Be that as it may , our understanding of what might be needed in order to maximize the potential of these creative , individual uses and their potentially transformative capacity remains incomplete . While there have been considerable advances in the usability and user experience design of classic printers in the last decade , handling contemporary 3D printers cannot be fully compared to the “plug - and - play” operation of common com - puter hardware . Speciﬁcally , hardware breakdowns , unexpected effects concerning the printing material , unintuitive modeling tools , and complex conﬁgurations make the handling ﬁnicky and difﬁcult to understand and consequently to manage . The open nature and “tinkerability” of the technology , rapid technical progress , and the close link between hardware and software as well as the different printing technologies pose challenges for end users that are difﬁcult to meet with existing supportive tools . 3D printers represent a particularly interesting example of the way in which materiality and digitalization intersect [ Ratto and Ree 2012 ] . New tools are therefore needed that enable end - users to keep up with rapid development and deal with the complexity of the technology . Moreover , users often discover ways of using technologies that were not anticipated by the designers and manufacturers of the machines by attempting to manage their understanding of sophisticated “new” technologies in the context of their existing ( and changing ) practices [ Dalton et al . 2012 ] . In this context , end users also engage in activities that can be characterized as End - User Development ( EUD ) in the sense that they make changes and additions to the hardware and software modules of the machines . As a research area , EUD is deﬁned by the ambition to develop “methods , techniques , and tools that allow users of software systems , acting as non - professional software developers , to create , modify , or extend a software artifact at some point” [ Lieberman et al . 2006 ] . EUD asks how end users can be provided with support to incorporate and adapt software artifacts to their work practice . As EUD aims to soften the boundaries between end users and professional developers as well as between use and development , it is an interesting question how to support users in making such changes and additions , implying a need for appropriation support and mutual learning . In this regard , there is an ongoing discourse in Human Computer Interaction ( HCI ) by researchers studying appropriation and related activities as well as how to design support for these activities [ Ehn 2008 ; Pipek and Wulf 2009 ] . A common insight is that it is important to preserve openness in order to make it possible for users to adapt the machines to their needs , and to learn how they operate at their very core—a stark contrast to the aims and methods of usability engineering that would rather suggest to hide away the complexity from the users as far as possible . While there are many studies that have suggested ways of supporting EUD and ap - propriation of software [ Stevens et al . 2009 ; Stevens et al . 2010 ; Pipek 2005 ; Draxler and Stevens 2011 ] , we are dealing with a more material , hardware - related ecology in the case of digital fabrication technologies , and thus need to take into account physical - material issues in the context of the challenges users encounter . This materiality poses a new dimension for EUD research too , as it is not clear in how far insights from software can be easily transferred or adapted to the hardware domain . As a basis for developing appropriation support / infrastructuring approaches for supporting EUD in hardware - oriented domains , we have conducted an empirical study in two different communities , illustrating how 3D printer users appropriate these technologies for their purposes , and what practices are entailed in doing so [ Ludwig et al . 2015 ; Ludwig et al . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 3D Printers as Sociable Technologies 17 : 3 2014 ] . Our empirical study shows that users of 3D printers require communication with other users around the use of the technology , but that—unfortunately—3D printers do not provide any affordances to support users in interacting with each other . Within this article , we continue our work by introducing the theoretical concept of “sociable technologies” for the conceptualization of appropriation infrastructures for hardware - oriented technologies such as 3D printers . Sociable technologies focus on providing hardware - integrated affordances for communicating and documenting practices of us - age , therefore aiming at making complex technologies more sociable and ultimately more usable . We further develop a technical concept for the implementation of sociable technolo - gies in the form of a prototype , which we have evaluated with end users . Based on the ﬁndings of our evaluation and against the background of our initial study , we discuss lessons we have learnt during the deployment of our approach of sociable technologies , which indicate a shift from a focus on the “IoT” toward the “Internet of Practices . ” 2 . RELATED WORK Research indicates that digital fabrication technologies signiﬁcantly inﬂuence and change the landscape of personal device fabrication [ Mellis and Buechley 2012 ] . Those technologies are also tied to maker and DIY communities that have been researched in a wide range of contexts , not only limited to digital fabrication , spanning from DIY biology [ Kuznetsov et al . 2012 ] to the fabrication of complex personal electronic devices [ Mellis and Buechley 2012 ] . Some experts assume that in the future , digital fabrication technologies might be available in every household [ Wittbrodt et al . 2013 ; Dougherty 2013 ] . There are , however , many obstacles to overcome to approach this level of pen - etration : The rapid advancements in those complex technologies [ Gershenfeld 2012 ] and their swiftly growing presence in new domains like those of hobbyists [ Tanenbaum et al . 2013 ] are seen to warrant or even necessitate corresponding advances in inter - faces and other tools to support the usage and especially the appropriation of these new technologies [ Avram et al . 2013 ; Sadar and Chyon 2011 ; Williams et al . 2012 ] . We base our research on two discourses , the one on ( IT ) infrastructures and the other one on EUD and especially the concept of appropriation , both considered in a speciﬁc ( hardware - oriented ) context . EUD is a domain that is interested in the development of tools and techniques that allow users to re - deﬁne the behavior of software systems and to tailor it to their situated needs , for instance by providing support for scripting languages [ Lieberman et al . 2006 ] . As such , EUD is already very close to what DIY and digital fabrication technologies constitute as a ﬁeld , albeit more targeted at novices as opposed to experienced users . EUD traditionally has been focused on the software domain , but the tools and concepts that have been developed can be successfully extended to Maker technologies , as has already been demonstrated by some projects ( e . g . , Scratch for Arduino , http : / / s4a . cat / ) . For the application and further development of appropriation infrastructures for the hardware domain , approaches from EUD provide a valuable basis [ Lieberman et al . 2006 ] . In this respect , we base our understanding of infrastruc - ture on Star and Ruhleder [ 1996 ] that focuses on a socio - technical relation between a technological system and the use dependencies that are established through practices that rely on them . Infrastructures are understood as running below other structures , are embedded in social and technological structures , encompass taken - for - granted artifacts and use arrangements learnt as part of a community membership , are shaped by and shape conventions of practice , and are usually invisible ( they become visible in breakdown situations ) . The importance of a “user network , ” i . e . , considering the social part of the socio - technological system is emphasized [ Star and Ruhleder 1996 ] . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 17 : 4 T . Ludwig et al . Following this notion of an infrastructure , it can be understood as a socio - technical construct encompassing the “entirety of devices , tools , technologies , standards , conven - tions , and protocols” [ Stevens et al . 2009 ] . Inspired through this perspective , processes of infrastructuring surface that connect “global” infrastructures to their “local” usages , the appropriation of an infrastructure becomes part of designing it and its usage . Con - cepts to analyze and design support for “infrastructuring activities” ( all activities that contribute to the successful establishment of an infrastructure usage [ Pipek and Wulf 2009 ] ) complement other user - oriented , user - centered , or participatory design method - ologies , e . g . , Sadar and Chyon [ 2011 ] by practice - driven approaches that radically focus on the established usage , not the completed technological artifact as the focal point of design [ Karasti and Syrj¨anen 2004 ] . Other approaches focus on the connection of in - frastructures and social systems like practice communities [ Pipek and Syrj ¨ anen 2006 ] . Following Pipek [ 2005 ] , appropriation is the discovery of , and the sense making entailed in , using an artifact ( like a new information system ) in practice . This un - derstanding has its roots in the established Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) and Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) literature , where appropriation is associated with the process of ﬁtting new technologies in users’ practices in situ by the adoption of as well as adaptation to those technologies [ Mackay 1990 ; Stevens et al . 2009 ; Dourish 2003 ; Balka and Wagner 2006 ] . The concept of appropriation goes deeper than that of customization or tailoring of software in that it can encompass fun - damental changes in practice and embraces the possibility of users adopting and using the technology in ways not anticipated by its designers [ Pipek 2005 ] . Furthermore , it has to be noted that appropriation is associated with the processes of exchange and interaction in networks of co - users where experiences and stories are shared between actors involved in the appropriation process [ Pipek 2005 ; Mackay 1990 ; Gantt and Nardi 1992 ; Pipek and Kahler 2006 ] . The ﬁrm grounding of appropriation in doing , i . e . , using the respective artifact and transforming it if needed , can be viewed as re - lating rather closely to the DIY and maker communities that utilize similar frames of mind and strategies when approaching new technologies [ Kuznetsov and Paulos 2010 ; Tanenbaum et al . 2013 ] . Pipek focuses on developing appropriation support functionalities for connecting users of one tool , while Stevens et al . [ 2009 ] and Pipek and Wulf [ 2009 ] look at en - sembles of tools and suggests an appropriation framework that would also address the developer’s interest in improving the technology . Aside from the core features of an interactive system ( e . g . , a CAD tool , an IDE or a printer ) , this framework adds second - level functionality to support all associated appropriation activities . Examples for appropriation frameworks for software - centered domains include the development and integration of a participative feedback tool into the Eclipse IDE [ Draxler et al . 2011 ; Draxler and Stevens 2011 ] or attempts at formalizing a theoretical appropria - tion model focused on software [ Belin and Pri´e 2012 ] . The integration of appropriation frameworks directly in the IS that it is intended to support has been thoroughly investi - gated and tested and seems to have merit [ Pipek 2005 ; Stevens et al . 2009 ; Yetim et al . 2012 ] . Traditionally , if hardware is involved in such studies , it is mostly considered in a systemic way in conjunction with software [ March et al . 2005 ; Dalton et al . 2012 ] . Generally speaking , this makes sense , since complex hardware usually also has soft - ware components , but given the particular character of work with 3D printers , meaning that the analysis of software versus hardware appropriation needs to be achieved in a mutually elaborative fashion . The connection of technologies and their user communities also requires a consid - eration of design issues for community technologies . The sociability of technologies has also been discussed in HCI , e . g . , with regard to social media . According to Preece [ 2001 ] , online communities with good sociability have social policies that support the ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 3D Printers as Sociable Technologies 17 : 5 community’s purpose and are understandable , socially acceptable , and practical . This includes as a technological design aspect a good usability , in particular with regard to registration issues , trust , security , and governance issues [ Lazar and Preece 2002 ] . To ensure participation in a community , Preece and Shneiderman [ 2009 ] described design concerns with regard to “reading” ( attraction / motivation to revisit the online commu - nity ) , “contributing” ( attraction / motivation to post , change , or comment content ) , and “collaborating” ( attraction / motivation to react to other users actions and engage in shared projects ) . Bouman et al . [ 2007 ] suggested design interactions that mimic “real” interactions , that help in building an identity , that help to actualize oneself , and , most importantly , that enable existing or envisioned practices of the intended target audi - ence . The idea of sociability embedded in new technology has been brought into the spot - light by Reeves and Nass [ 1996 ] , who argue that people interact with computers in ways that demonstrate existing sociality . Barraqand [ 2012 ] builds on this notion but argues that true sociable technologies need to facilitate sociability through the explicit design of technology . He tries to foster this by building a framework for sociable tech - nologies that is rooted in psychological considerations and emphasizes the importance of collaboration and context information . Norman [ 2008 ] connects the notion of socia - ble technologies with the need to support communication , team work , and with an approach to troubleshooting which , for him , means careful design with the cultural and social factors of the technology’s ﬁeld of application in mind . We want to base our understanding of sociable technologies on these approaches , derived from the necessity of building appropriation infrastructures that incorporate sociability into technology . We need , in other words , more design - related studies that connect ( online ) community interactions , material foundations ( in terms of materials and devices / technologies used in practices ) , and the emergence of practices themselves such that we can continue to develop appropriate concepts . Based on the approaches we discussed here , we analyze the practice of 3D printing for activities of infrastruc - turing , i . e . , individual , communicative , or collaborative activities aimed at the further development of technology and / or the conventions or usages associated with it . Such practices become visible around interruption , breakdown , and the incorporation of new and creative ideas . These “teaching moments” allow us to look for patterns of appro - priation and try to understand what would make the technologies sociable . Using a qualitative approach , we aim , then , to capture data that are highly infused with in - situ and contextual aspects in the “thick” manner associated originally with Ryle [ 1949 ] and Geertz [ 1973 ] , and more recently has been applied to the design of sociable technologies [ Norman 2008 ; Barraqand 2012 ] . 3 . METHODOLOGY Our study is organized in three different steps that follow the approach of design case studies as proposed by Wulf et al . [ 2015 ] . We ﬁrst conducted an empirical - based pre - study on the usage of 3D printers in two different communities ; based on a con - ceptual analysis of this pre - study , we implemented a prototype of an appropriation - infrastructure for 3D printers , which were then evaluated with regard to its potentials for supporting EUD in hardware - oriented contexts . In the following sections , we will provide details on the methodological approach with regard to each step . 3 . 1 . Pre - Study We conducted a comparative study in two different 3D printing communities , covering the entire usage from the 3D modeling , the printing itself , and the ﬁnishing of artifacts or prototypes . Since entry - level 3D printers are currently not very common to be found in private households , we focus on research and Maker settings ( as opposed to ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 17 : 6 T . Ludwig et al . Table I . Interview Participants No . Role Community I01 Research Associate ( PhD student ) HCI - UNI I02 Senior Researcher ( Post - Doc ) HCI - UNI I03 Research Associate ( PhD student ) HCI - UNI I04 MA student Human Computer Interaction HCI - UNI I05 Senior Researcher ( Post - Doc ) HCI - ART I06 Head of experimental imaging ( Post - Doc ) HCI - ART I07 Engineer and artist ( Post - Doc ) HCI - ART professional staff working in digital fabrication ) . The ﬁrst community is one of Human Computer Interaction researchers at a German University ( HCI - UNI ) . Here , two Fused Deposition Molding ( FDM ) printers ( MakerBot and MakerBot 2X ) and one full color powder composite printer ( ZPrinter ) are available . These are located centrally in the so - called HCI - Laboratory together with other workshop tools . The HCI - Laboratory is also used for team meetings or project groups and is frequented by students as well . This article mainly concerns projects related to the FDM - printers since the ZPrinter is a professional tool that is employed mainly for speciﬁc complex projects and rarely for non - or semiprofessional use . The second community is one of artists at a German Academia of Media Arts ( HCI - ART ) . They have just one FDM printer ( MakerBot 2 ) . It is located in an outbuilding , which is mainly used for printing purposes . The view on the ﬁeld was sensitized by our design intention . Within our analysis , we did not explore the ﬁeld with predeﬁned categories ( there were , in any case , very few available ) but derived categories from empirical data . To reconstruct the practices , we used observations and workshops as well as interviews . The observations ( 10 hours in both communities ) were used to acquire knowledge about practical work around 3D printing and its processes . The workshops ( two workshops , 2 hours each ) allowed us to understand the communicative practices involved in printer - speciﬁc knowledge and information sharing work by bringing together those actors in the communities who already handle 3D printing and give them an opportunity for discussing current practices and problems . The interviews ( Table I ) allowed us to analyze the work context and the use of printing tools and the communication systems of relevant users . The semi - structured interviews lasted about 1 hour each and followed a guideline that was divided into following three parts : ( 1 ) the participant’s work context , qualiﬁcations , and the work stages they went through with the 3D printers . ( 2 ) Entry obstacles , problems , and their articulation . ( 3 ) 3D modeling tools and related problems . The questions as well as the structure of the interviews were derived from previous ﬁeldwork ( workshops and observations ) . All interviews were recorded and transcribed for later analysis . This pre - study has already been published in large parts [ Ludwig et al . 2014 ] , but is presented in detail in Section 4 as a basis for developing our concept of “sociable technologies” in Section 5 . 3 . 2 . Design Our empirical study revealed that 3D printers do not provide any kind of affordances that allow 3D printer users to communicate and interact with other users about the printing process and all of its challenges and obstacles . In order to address this gap , we have integrated sensors and social media into the machinery as appropriation infrastructure . The new affordances aim to enable end - users of 3D printers to com - municate about the machinery in meaningful ways , supporting them to learn about its functionality and behavior . In doing so , we have covered three types of context and ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 3D Printers as Sociable Technologies 17 : 7 Table II . Evaluation Participants No . Role E01 Research Associate ( PhD student ) E02 Research Associate ( PhD student ) E03 Senior Researcher ( Post - Doc ) E04 Research Associate ( PhD student ) E05 Student ( Information Systems ) E06 Student ( Information Systems ) E07 Technical Administration Staff to communicate printer - speciﬁc information , including data on the internal state of the machine itself , the spatial - material context of the surroundings , and task - and process - related information about workﬂows of preparing and conducting prints . We argue that by addressing the challenges within the three contexts , we are able to make ( 3D printing ) technology more sociable and therefore more usable within communities . The details of the design are presented in detail in Section 6 . 3 . 3 . Evaluation To evaluate our overall concept and the prototype , we conducted three types of evalu - ation that are presented in Section 7 . The ﬁrst evaluation was a technical evaluation of our entire approach , in which we equipped the Arduino board with the 3D printer and set up the plugin to verify our framework’s technical functionality—especially the capturing of valid sensor data . We therefore performed different validation tests , e . g . , let down the shutters of the window to test brightness or perform vibrations to the 3D printer . This evaluation conﬁrmed the functional interaction between the prototype and its spatial - material context . The second type of evaluation was a live test during regular 3D printing processes , mainly with research associates and students interested in 3D printing since they are the primarily users of such an application ( Table II ) . We evaluated seven participants individually during seven 3D printing processes . During our evaluation , we aimed at testing the relevance of both usability as well as practice . We were primarily concerned with identifying in what ways our prototype is used , and what difﬁculties while using might be encountered . The philosophy behind the evaluation was derived from the notion of “situated evaluation” [ Twidale et al . 1994 ] in which qualitative methods are used to draw conclusions about the real - world use of a technology using experts . The aim was to derive views from experts about how useful the tool might be in professional use . During this exploration of our prototype , the participants were asked to “think aloud” [ Nielsen 1993 ] and were audio recorded . The third type of our evaluation was a semi - structured interview study conducted directly after the live tests with each of the seven participants , in which we aimed at a deeper understanding of potentials and obstacles in using the system as well as commenting the general idea . 4 . RESULTS OF THE PRE - STUDY 4 . 1 . From Playful First Steps to Semi - professional 3D Printing Unlike normal printers or ofﬁce tools , which are mainly used for practical reasons , printing with 3D printers evokes a certain fascination from users and other interested people . What really fascinates me with 3D printing is that you can ﬁnally create something on the laptop , which you can later hold in your hands . . . . One has the feeling of ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 17 : 8 T . Ludwig et al . having created something , so it is not comparable to creating just a graphic on the laptop : You can touch it , which is just so exciting . ( I07 ) The curiosity and above all these very personal playful interests are the main mo - tivational factors for dealing with such novel machines ( I02 ) . So , initially , it seems , people were motivated by the production of private artifacts such as a camera cover ( I01 ) , testing the functionality of printing a Minecraft landscape ( I02 ) or the printing of jacket holder [ hooks ] for the ofﬁce ( I03 ) . Then somehow over time , we got around to , from this hobby and side projects , to learning more and more about how we can work with the thing [ printer ] and also started to deal with 3D modeling , how it all works [ . . . ] , how to clean it , maintain it and what to do when it will not work ( I02 ) Shortly after the acquirement of the Zprinter , there was an ofﬁcial introduction within the group , in which a representative of the printer manufacturer explained the printer and its handling . After the representative left , for half a year nothing was printed . After this period , nobody really remembered how to use the printer ( I01 ) . Thus , the initial printing projects were a “ constant mix of experimenting and watching tutorials ” ( I01 ) . True to the motto “The proof is in the pudding” , most people read little literature before printing , but exchanged ideas and experiences directly with colleagues and started printing simple models ( I03 ) . As I see it , appropriation is most sustainable , if you just print and print . You can be productive very fast , because the learning curve is very ﬂat . But for me , each print is still another appropriation . ( I03 ) A provisional appropriation of printer - speciﬁc settings , especially if it is not a DIY - printer , is difﬁcult as there are only a few speciﬁcations that you have to set ( I04 ) . The real problem is then to experiment with the speciﬁcation values for the different materials , to ﬁnd the optimum value , look at how fast you can let the extruder run , because less speed leads to more precision and if you have a large model , then the printer runs perhaps the whole day , which you might want to avoid . ( I04 ) All interviewees share an opinion concerning the appropriation of a 3D printer or similar hardware , which is that the concept “learning by doing” , is very important . Hence , it is seen as necessary that in the run - up to 3D printing , the tendency for things to be broken through misuse must be reduced ( I04 ) . Every mistake you make , if it does not result in the device being damaged is not a big problem . It’s a bit like programming . If it is not working , then it is simply not working . It can be canceled very easily at any time if you tested anything . ( I03 ) In contrast to the “The proof is in the pudding”—concept for the actual printing of a model , during the creation process of 3D models , signiﬁcantly more research into the documentation ( and other literature ) is done , but it is still a mix of testing and research . I have already clicked through bulletin boards for a long time , because ﬁrst you have to know how to create a ﬁle , what should I take care of in order to build these STLs [ Surface Tessellation Language ] . It has taken almost two or three months until I got the results I had imagined or rather that I could imagine what the end result would be . ( I06 ) ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 3D Printers as Sociable Technologies 17 : 9 In addition to special community forums , of course Google is used as a primary source for ﬁnding information . To allow for easier introduction to the modeling , HCI - ART provides a basic seminar for their students on this topic ( I05 ) , in which participants are trained to design simple 3D models and avoid 3D printing related modeling problems . 4 . 2 . Context - Dependent Problem Recognition is a Problem It is unavoidable that problems occur during the entire 3D printing process consisting , as it does , of a string of activities from the prior modeling , the printing itself and the necessary post - processing . However , such problems trigger meta - problems in that identiﬁcation , understanding and locating the issue pose big challenges : I think problems actually mean starting with ﬁnding out what the problem is and of course , you can then google it with keywords like “it [ material ] jerks through the printer somehow” or something . But ﬁrst you have to ﬁgure out that for example you need a new plunger or that the problem is connected to this plunger . ( I02 ) If you print with 3D printers , which are a construct consisting of hardware as well as software components , a problem cannot always be traced directly to one of these compo - nents and possibly arises only through speciﬁc , situated interactions or constellations of both components : The issue is always of course that the problem is deeply embedded in its own speciﬁc context . So maybe it is the particular model , maybe it is a software error in this instance . ( I01 ) In addition to software and hardware as possible error sources , the success or failure of a 3D print has to do with the surrounding ecology . Hence , the physical conditions and environmental context play an important role . For example , while trying to solve a different problem , a user encountered a situation by accident such that an open window causes the material to cool too fast and thus warp : It just takes a long time to ﬁgure out something like this . At ﬁrst , it takes some prints and eventually someone notices by accident that it happens whenever we have the window open . A lot of luck is involved in noticing this . ( I01 ) Besides the breeze from the open windows , which result in uneven cooling of the print , the general temperature of the room is an example for another important envi - ronmental context factor with a similar effect on the print : So , temperature is always a problem for the plastic printer . Whether it is winter now and inside the room there are 20 degrees or because the heating is on or the sun shines directly on the model and you print in black ABS plastic . That makes a big difference . ( I02 ) Hence , a problem cannot always be easily identiﬁed and speciﬁed , because of a number of other factors that often are not obvious and consequently not considered . In this , 3D printing differs , e . g . , from writing program code and the speciﬁc exceptions thrown by a compiler . However , to report and discuss a problem , it is essential to capture all those possibly inﬂuential factors in order to frame the problem in accordance with its overall context ( I02 ) . It would not help the people when I say : “I wanted to print something today and had the following error message” . This won’t help anyone . I would have to say to them , I printed with the powder printer [ Zprinter ] and maybe there were such and such ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 17 : 10 T . Ludwig et al . speciﬁcs in the model or something . All those things like that . . . All that could be im - portant to solve the problem , but you often do not know exactly what it could be . ( I01 ) If a problem is identiﬁed , it can still be very difﬁcult to ﬁnd a solution for it or even to search for it because the difﬁculty of capturing and phrasing a question in a context - oriented manner is mentioned as a major problem ( I02 ) . A further problem akin to this one is that in the hacker and maker community a domain - speciﬁc culture with a corresponding and evolved terminology and vocabulary is prevalent : There are certain keywords like the “raising” , where everybody is talking of warp - ing . Then you search for “warping” , “Replicator2” and other keywords . Anyway , you need the device and then those keywords every time . ( I03 ) 4 . 3 . The Process toward a Problem Solution is At Least as Important as the Solution Itself Both the Community of the Chair as well as the Academy of Media Arts does not use their printers very frequently , so problems with routine and the retention of experience arise . I don’t use [ the printer ] very often and I forget a lot again , so you have to appropriate it to a certain extent all over again . ( I02 ) Printer - speciﬁc settings , in particular , are forgotten repeatedly ( I04 ) that makes it necessary to preserve such data . To facilitate the ﬁrst steps into 3D printing and the use of the printer , some measures have been already taken . A poster was printed and hung up close to the printer , which visualizes important information about the printing process . It was a poster for presenting some best practices and providing an introduction to those people that might be interested in 3D printing : Especially the basic settings and tips . How can I start with the modeling of 3D models and what is Thingiverse and so on . ( I04 ) A problem with this , however , is that there is not one single standard process to achieve the printing goal . The many contextual print - or model - speciﬁc problems cannot be anticipated in advance and thus externalized . It is not that easy to devise a standard process and document it somehow that a person who has no idea may reproduce it easily because the machine is in my opinion bit too complicated . ( I02 ) For this reason , it is important to register how a user achieves a result . The steps and processes to a ﬁnished 3D print and its problems that have emerged must be described comprehensively and documentation cannot only focus on and present the ﬁnal result . Otherwise , the whole process cannot adequately be reproduced . It would be nice to get an understanding of the whole learning process . This means not only getting the ﬁnal results without all the discussions and developments that have resulted in it . ( I04 ) To foster collaborative learning processes , group 1 has set up a special blog where users can document and discuss experiences and issues regarding the 3D printer itself , the process of printing , as well as problems , obstacles , and opportunities ( I03 ) . The blog is , however , very rarely used , because its content has to be written after doing a print when the necessary speciﬁcations and settings are often already forgotten . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 3D Printers as Sociable Technologies 17 : 11 The platform [ blog ] is not really appropriate for that because you have a model in front of you right away and run into an error or functionality does not work and you really want to solve the speciﬁc problem on time and then print the model . I do not want to write something on the blog in this situation somehow . ( I01 ) A wiki is considered as critical as well , because it affords the possibility to have discussion on the process , to ask what exactly a context looked like , to know exactly what the issue was and to be able to coordinate later when you need it ( I04 ) . When errors occur , right away the user is often left alone during the usage . If colleagues are near the printer , they are often addressed directly via the grapevine ( I02 ) . However , the appropriate personnel are not constantly available in working environment as heterogeneous and temporally ﬂexible as a university . It would help the users to have more precise information about the actual printing process in order to understand better their own way of working with the machine : I think there is a lot that could happen with the software for 3D printers , at least with those we work with , so we could better see where support [ note : printed structures to prop up overhangs ] is needed and how the printing process is actually executed . ( I05 ) 4 . 4 . Problems with Sharing of Knowledge and Experiences In respect of knowledge sharing , ﬁrst the domain of knowledge must be deﬁned pre - cisely , because relevant knowledge can have to do with the modeling , the actual printing or the entire process . Normally we are just speaking about the print itself , not about the modeling ; this is at least my experience . The reason is that in the ﬁeld of modeling hardly any cooperation exists . [ . . . ] This is always an individual problem . The problems you encounter during printing concern everyone who prints . Therefore there are plenty more intersections to talk to each other . ( I03 ) Internally , printer - speciﬁc settings , problems , and practices are shared rather than modeling or process concerns . For aspects of modeling , external services are primarily used . Solutions such as Thingiverse offer good opportunities to see other models or to disseminate its own model , but also to have it examined externally : At some point , I signed up for a Thingiverse account and placed just a few models that I have designed myself online [ . . . ] I think it is actually quite a nice feature of Thingiverse that you get a bit of feedback , that someone likes it or includes it into his Things - to - Make - Collection or writes a comment or something . ( I02 ) An interesting thing about platforms such as Thingiverse is that in addition to the models that are printable directly , various settings and best practices regarding the printing process can also be listed and discussed : For each model you want to upload , there is a description . Then there is the model itself , which you can even look at a 3D model viewer and turn . There are photos that can be set , perhaps from a ﬁnished print or any exported images from the CAD software . But you can also write some text to it and say “this is that part and that is like this and that can be use like this” . Then there is a second tab which is labeled Introductions . I think that’s very helpful , the parameters are always relative to the individual printing . ( I03 ) This is , however , not mandatory in any way and if it is listed , it is done so in quite dissimilar ways as there is no real standardization in place . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 17 : 12 T . Ludwig et al . So you often get a lot of information about how they printed it - sometimes not . But often they write additional stuff where little instructions are located , what temperature is needed and how to position the part in the build envelope [ . . . ] and often you get hints , with which material on which printer it was printed and so on . I think it is important to get some hints , especially at the beginning . ( I02 ) It has to be said that the validation or examination on Thingiverse does not always correspond to rigorous standards and that there is no technical failsafe or screening for corrupt models like non - manifold ones , i . e . , models with errors in their outer shell resulting in misprints , even if the errors cannot be spotted by the unaided eye . First , it looks very nice , but then you produce a lot of garbage , because after you have printed it , you realize—especially for functional objects—that they are designed badly or that they will not yet work as you thought . ( I05 ) 4 . 5 . Summary of the Pre - Study The empirical study demonstrates that both groups started 3D printing mostly moti - vated through private and / or playful interests . A main take away message for us was the fact that most of the practices users reported were highly socially embedded in the sense that the appropriation of the machinery was strongly enabled by cooperative informal learning and coordination in the context of playful experimentation . Such motivations are scarcely unique or new . A variety of material practices around hobbies in particular , such as working with wood or baking pastries , can show similar creative aspects . During those ludic moments in 3D printing , much experimenting is done , con - siderably in excess of perusal of the literature , which only seems to happen occasionally . This is why the understanding of the printers is mostly limited to operational handling . Those difﬁculties in understanding are compounded by the identifying , locating , and ﬁxing problems encountered in the printing process , e . g . , matching them conceptually to hardware , software , or external factors . Solutions are sought both internally and ex - ternally . Internally , face - to - face conversations with colleagues are preferred . Attempts at preserving the knowledge resulted in a collaborative blog in HCI - UNI , which is maintained and read very irregularly . This is because the entries have to be made by hand after a print and entail a post - hoc overhead . In HCI - ART , a basic seminar was established to provide students with a practical introduction to the 3D printing process . In addition to the internal practices , users often search for problem solutions in bulletin boards and follow discussions on the web . This search , however , poses a problem in itself , concerning domain - speciﬁc slang and wording . On platforms such as Thingiverse or similar websites , 3D models themselves are central rather than solution processes , or how to print a model or best practices . This helps the users at times , but it does not support the appropriation of 3D printers and its entire process—they are faced with similar problems during subsequent prints and have to try to identify the problems de novo . 5 . DESIGN CHALLENGES FOR SUPPORTING 3D PRINTING PRACTICES Based on the ﬁndings of our empirical study , Table II shows the emergent design chal - lenges from which we derived technical implications for supporting infrastructuring activities with the speciﬁc aim of making 3D printers more integrated into a community structure , to make them , put simply , more sociable . The concepts of IT infrastructures and appropriation served us as a sensitizing lens for discovering the intricate social relations that mediated the use practices and EUD - related infrastructuring activities in this context . In general , our ﬁndings support the relevance of ﬁndings from the ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 3D Printers as Sociable Technologies 17 : 13 Table III . Empirical - Based Design Challenges No . Empirical ﬁndings Proposed design implications Current practices and usage behaviors during 3D printing ( 1 ) The 3D printer itself is a black box for the users and lacks in methods to see and grasp how it really works Sensor based capturing and visualizing of context and printer information to support a better understanding of the machine ( 2 ) General orientation of learning - by - doing and experimenting instead of an extensive literature research Context - related ambient learning through software - and sensor - based hints / tutorials / best practices ( 3 ) Identifying and locating problems is an itself due to the high context - dependence of those problems Sensor based capturing of environmental variables and mapping them to possible printing problems . ( 4 ) The entire 3D printing process is very time - consuming because the users must always be close to the printer Providing web - based and in - situ options for monitoring and managing the printer as well as communicating with it remotely ( 5 ) The printer settings with regard to the model , material and individual print are forgotten regularly Integrated print history with printer settings , material data , and so on . Recommendations for current prints based on the history Documentation and knowledge sharing ( 6 ) Individual documentation and sharing of 3D printing experiences is very cumbersome and involves multiple systems that keeps users from doing it Print history from ( 5 ) should be presented to the user together with easy to use tools to add more information ( 7 ) Difﬁculties in asking for help because often not enough contextual information can be provided . Data from design issue ( 5 ) and ( 6 ) should easily be postable to 3D Printing communities and social networks ( 8 ) Knowledge , tips and hints in sharing communities are scattered and not really searchable / indexed Establishing an orderly , searchable data structure ( format ) for the data from the previous design issue ( 9 ) Community - speciﬁc terminology hampers appropriation Community - maintained dictionary and automated “translator” ( 10 ) Technical validation ( manifoldness , etc . ) has to be done manually by the users and is not standardized . Integrated validation tool checking model speciﬁcations and matching them to the printer’s characteristics . literature regarding the design of sociable technologies more generally [ Barraqand 2012 ] and previously identiﬁed challenges in designing appropriation infrastructures [ Stevens et al . 2009 ] . In the following sections , we present an overview on the practices evolved in 3D printing - related contexts to develop our concept of “sociable technologies . ” We focused in our analysis on appropriation and usage practices that , as we pointed out above , were highly dependent on social support in the form of informal learning and coordination . For our purposes , these aspects were especially informative for identifying design im - plications for supportive appropriation infrastructures . The numbers in the discussion correspond to the numbering in Table III . 5 . 1 . Practices and Usage Behaviors in 3D Printing Design Implication # 1 : Sensor - Based Capturing and Visualization of Context . A serious shortcoming that became apparent is that the 3D printer itself is a kind of black box for users and lacks in the provision of methods or descriptions of functionality that might help the user to visualize how it works . In order to overcome this issue , we sug - gest providing users with more details about the current printing process . Providing ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 17 : 14 T . Ludwig et al . the right kind of information that allows them to get a deeper understanding of how the machine works and the users can become more aware of what happens when and where . By adding new sensors into the machine itself and leveraging the ones built in , new ways of capturing and monitoring the status of the machinery and providing detailed information about the printing process can be made available . Our study in - dicates , for example , that users could beneﬁt from being provided with current printer data such as temperatures ( e . g . , print bed and the printed object itself ) and their devel - opment over time , extruder movement , and acceleration or more detailed simulations and progress information of a print . A visualization dashboard could be web - based and should be available in situ , integrated into the machine , e . g . , on a big , high - resolution display as opposed to the currently used small LCD screens that cannot display enough information , nor be viewed at a distance . Design Implication # 2 : Context - Related Ambient Learning . The general orientation of learning - by - doing and experimenting outweighed extensive reading of user manuals or background literature . Users therefore often just have a vague understanding of the printer’s capabilities , functionalities , and of the various kinds of problem that can arise—especially at the beginning of their printing career . We suggest that users could be provided with context - related ambient learning options for mixing their attitude toward experimenting with more profound understanding of the functionalities . For a better support of this mix of experimenting and formal learning , integrated soft - ware as well as sensor - based hints , best practice examples , and on - hand tutorials for each printing step could be provided . As an example the calibration of a printer could not only be treated in short , concise instructions ( as is often the case today ) but back - ground information for the reasons behind the process as well as its implications might be provided in situ ( again , possibly on a big , integrated display ) . Design Implication # 3 : Sensor - Based Capturing of Environmental Variables . If a problem arises , the issue is complicated not only by the missing theoretical background , but also by the users’ concrete understanding and location of the issue : Due to the strong dependence of the entire printing process on its environment ( e . g . , uneven cooling and hence warping of a print resulting from a breeze through an open window ) , we suggest the user should be provided with much more detailed information about these variables to get a better understanding of their inﬂuence . By adding new sensors to the environment such as measuring room temperature and ventilation as well as mapping to the available printing materials , one might help alleviate those issues . This information can be displayed , again , with the option for more in - depth explanation . Design Implication # 4 : Web - Based and In - Situ Options for Monitoring the 3D Printer . Time - consumption and convenience are issues because in most cases , only the printer or the computer to which it is connected controls the printing process , which means that the user has to stay close in order to monitor or intervene in the process . Remote monitoring ( video feed and status updates from the printer itself ) and especially control functionalities ( possibly web - based and tied in to the dashboard mentioned above ) could be appropriate to address this issue . Some of the very latest 3D printers ( not available at the time of our study ) already incorporate some of those features . Design Implication # 5 : Integrated Print History . Print settings with regard to the char - acteristics of a speciﬁc model and the material are quickly forgotten after printing . To overcome this obstacle , we propose the printer could integrate functionalities for saving a print history that includes all relevant data ( model , size , material , printer settings , etc . ) that are captured automatically . When a new user creates a new project , the 3D printer could then compare the user’s project with stored printing speciﬁcations and offer in - situ settings advice . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 3D Printers as Sociable Technologies 17 : 15 5 . 2 . Documentation and Knowledge Sharing Design Implication # 6 : Presenting Print History In Situ . Closely related to the fact that printer speciﬁcations and settings are often forgotten , our study showed that the doc - umentation and sharing of the printing experiences is very cumbersome right now , because it is decontextualized and temporally displaced . The printer settings ( ﬁnding # 5 ) should hence be made available to the user directly after and possibly even dur - ing the print and s / he should be given the opportunity to enhance and deepen it with his / her own experiences ( in textual or visual form ) . To map the data to the user , a log - in mechanism ( possibly integrated into the printer via NFC or similar technologies ) would be needed . Design Implication # 7 : Sharing Print History via 3D Printing Communities . Documentation and sharing is also important for asking for help under provision of all relevant con - textual information , getting support , and to distribute knowledge and experience to other 3D printer operators ( hence , also for community building ) . Accordingly , we sug - gest that the printer settings ( ﬁnding # 5 ) and the documentation ( ﬁnding # 6 ) should be easy to send or post to social networks and communities ( Thingiverse , Facebook , etc . ) where they can reach the appropriate audience and discourse and help can be initiated . One might think of this process as distantly related to that of bug tracking tools . A corresponding Application Programming Interface ( API ) to receive the information on those platforms would be needed . Design Implication # 8 : Orderly Searchable Data Structure . To address the asking for help based on contextual information ( ﬁnding # 7 ) in a structured manner , we argue for the need of a standardized , indexed , and especially searchable data structure for the enriched information that can then be used in the printer , the dashboard , and the APIs in the social networks and communities . This structure needs to provide space for the inclusion of ( automated ) sensor data like temperature or print timelines and also needs to place equal importance on the inclusion of “soft” data like individual experiences or workarounds that are invaluable for learning , but very hard to share or ﬁnd right now . Design Implication # 9 : Community - Maintained Dictionary . Not only the missing struc - turing of data impedes the searching process for help and the sharing , but the highly community - speciﬁc terminology ( e . g . , warping ) also hampers this process . A community - maintained open “dictionary , ” as well as automated translator matching errors to this dictionary could help alleviate this problem . Design Implication # 10 : Integrated Validation Tool . Certain speciﬁcations like ( un - ) broken surfaces of models or overhangs can inﬂuence the print quality or the print - ability of a model itself . Those aspects currently are not checked or validated in 3D printers , printing software , or the online sharing communities . This has to be done manually by the user that hampers appropriation , confuses users , and has negative consequences for sharing and documentation . An automated validation system , built into the printer ( or , more realistically into the controlling computer due to available computing power ) could signiﬁcantly improve those problems . 6 . CONCEPT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF SOCIABLE TECHNOLOGIES To establish appropriation infrastructures integrated directly into the machinery it - self and therefore to initiate the overall goal of deploying sociable technologies , we focus on enabling end - users of 3D printers to understand the machinery as well as its functionality and behavior with regard to its three types of context and to communi - cate printer - speciﬁc information with other end users ( Figure 1 ) . Those three types of context consist of following points . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 17 : 16 T . Ludwig et al . Fig . 1 . Dimensions of a 3D printer . ( 1 ) The internal context of a 3D printer , which means that the users must be provided with detailed information about the inner workings of the machinery , its current state and how the complex component structure works . ( 2 ) The spatial - material context of a 3D print , which means that the users must be provided with detailed information about the location of a 3D printer and its sur - roundings to derive potential relationships between the internal context of a 3D printer , the print itself , and the environmental context , like room temperature or brightness . ( 3 ) The task - and process - related context of an entire 3D print , which means that the users must be provided with detailed information about the workﬂows and technologies used to build and prepare the printable models , and about how other users operate their 3D printers as well as the purpose and goal of machine usage . Our technological concept of sociable technologies for 3D printers encompasses three different areas ( Figure 2 ) ( 1 ) gathering information about the surrounding as well as the 3D printer itself , ( 2 ) real - time visualization of all relevant context data about the printer including printing details for the end users while operating the machinery as well as ( 3 ) storing and sharing of details about 3D printing processes afterward with other end users . 6 . 1 . Gathering of Surrounding Data as well as 3D Printer A serious shortcoming that became apparent in the study of how users operate their 3D printer is that the 3D printer itself is effectively a kind of black box for end users and lacks descriptions of method and functionality . That is , users have no overall picture of how it actually works . This became especially crucial when errors during the printing process occurred and the users often were not able to identify or locate problems due to the high context dependency of those issues ( e . g . , the impact of sunlight to black printing material ) . To address this issue , our aim was to gather as much contextual and environmental data as possible and to gather detailed information about the behavior ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 3D Printers as Sociable Technologies 17 : 17 Fig . 2 . Sociable technologies—architecture . of the 3D printer itself that goes far beyond the kind of information provided by the machinery’s manufacturer . To get insight into the printer’s state , we implemented a ReplicatorG plugin that sniffs all data during the printing process , for instance , the extruder temperature , the platform temperature , all the extruder movements , or the 3D model itself in STL format . To gather further information about the socio - material context , we set up an Arduino board with different sensors for measuring , e . g . , the temperature , brightness , humidity , and vibration . We have integrated the Arduino directly into the 3D printer itself ( Figure 3 , circle ) . By adding these sensors , we are able to measure all environmental parameters every 10 milliseconds . We further integrated a webcam that gives visual details about the progress and state of the print artifact . With this webcam , we want to enable the user to check the current status of the printing process remotely . We ran this webcam on a Raspberry Pi and connected it to a speciﬁc Skype Account , which answers automatically when called ( Figure 4 , circle ) . The webcam further automatically takes pictures for a later storing . By adding both types of data gathering options , we were able to get detailed information about the ( potentially signiﬁcant ) parameters of a 3D printer’s surroundings . 6 . 2 . Real - Time Visualization of Relevant Context Information Based on the data gathered about the surroundings as well as the 3D printer itself , our aim was to provide the users with those details during the printing process . Pro - viding the right kind of information should allow them to get a deeper understanding of how the machine works and users should become more aware of what happens ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 17 : 18 T . Ludwig et al . Fig . 3 . Arduino for gathering socio - material context . Fig . 4 . Webcam on Raspberry Pi . when , where , and hopefully why outcomes occur . All the gathered data about the socio - material as well as the internal context of the 3D printer were therefore visualized in real time on a web - based dashboard ( Figure 5 ) . After authentication the users can access the dashboard and see all sensor values , the live stream of the webcam and the progress / remaining time of the entire print , based on the sniffed data by our Plugin . Via this dashboard , the users also have the option to stop a print process if an error occurs and we have implemented an Arduino - based hardware button for interrupting the power supply . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 3D Printers as Sociable Technologies 17 : 19 Fig . 5 . Dashboard for real - time print assessment . An important aspect of the dashboards was to inform the users if critical situations occur . It was therefore possible to deﬁne in advance different thresholds for the different types of sensor values . For example , if the vibration sensor recognizes a heavy tremor of the printer , it notiﬁes the users . 6 . 3 . Storing and Sharing of 3D Printing Process Details All sensor data as well as the sniffed printer information are captured and after a successful or unsuccessful printing process , details about the entire process including all sensor data , the conﬁgurations as well as 3D models and webcam pictures are stored in a print history . We implemented the print history as part of StatusNet ( Figure 6 ) , which is open source microblogging software like Twitter . Within StatusNet , all end - users have a proﬁle where their prints can be saved and published . We also gave the 3D printer a StatusNet proﬁle . Here , the 3D printer publishes mes - sages including the print history—if the printing process was not declared as private— each time after a print process is completed , including all the relevant details about it . Those details include the model , the user , the modeling software , the printing material , pictures of the print , and the sensor data . All users following that user or , respectively , the 3D printer itself , get information about the printing history to gain insight into how other users conﬁgure the 3D printer based on the model . Users can comment on the different print processes or discuss issues with other users . In this way , it is possible to ask for help , to identify other users , and to get support from and to disseminate knowledge and experience to other 3D printer operators . Accordingly , the print histories can be sent or posted via Twit - ter , where they can reach the appropriate audience . We further implemented a print repository , where all prints of all users in their work group can be assessed . Within this repository , not only the prints , but also conﬁgurations , pictures , and comments can be found in order to foster discussions about printing . The repository is intended to support end users in exploring the work of other colleagues and therefore to examine other types of conﬁguration or modeling . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 17 : 20 T . Ludwig et al . Fig . 6 . Print history within StatusNet . 7 . EVALUATION 7 . 1 . Additional Context Sensors Valuable for High - Expertise Users The newly gathered sensor values offered a completely new approach to users during a printing process . The participants mentioned that within the big communities like Thingiverse , users sometimes discuss , for example , the effects of humidity on print materials and how important they consider such matters to be , and how useful it would be to observe impacts ( E01 , E02 , E06 ) . From an experimental point of view , I think that it is very interesting to watch the sensor values [ . . . ] there is perhaps a relationship between humidity and print quality , because some people claim about that in forums and in the community [ . . . ] . They even build boxes where all the dry granulate can pre - dry . ( E01 ) For misprints especially , those sensor values could be of importance : ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 3D Printers as Sociable Technologies 17 : 21 So I think these new sensors that you have brought here like vibration , humidity , brightness are deﬁnitely exciting [ . . . ] . I think the idea with the vibration sensor and the humidity is of special interest . We must now somehow really experiment with real data and see what happens if there is a corrupt print and whether you can assume something based on the values . ( E02 ) But one issue during the deployment of sensors , which aimed at capturing the spatial - technical surrounding of the 3D printer , is the problem of making sense of a sensor’s value : For example with the value of the vibration I just have no experience gathered so far [ . . . ] . I could not judge whether this is a good or a bad value , for example , because I have simply no feeling for that at the moment [ . . . ] . It is the same with humidity . ( E02 ) Although I ﬁnd the sensor values very interesting , I have for example no idea what a luminance value of 158 means . There are several units in which one can measure brightness . Humidity is interesting as well , but I do not know what a normal humidity level is . ( E03 ) The problem is that a certain basic knowledge is needed to analyze the relationship between the visualized sensor values and the 3D print and whether a threshold value is exceeded and has led to a misprint . The fact that some prior knowledge is required for the effective use of dashboards means that the presentation of detailed sensor values only seems to be suitable for experienced users . It is perfect for me , because I know how to deal with those things . I do not know exactly know whether the detailed values presented by their own would have an impact for any newcomer . ( E03 ) I think you really have to know what you do that you can correctly interpret this dashboard . [ . . . ] So I think for someone who already has printed a bit makes that deﬁnitely more sense than for a new user . ( E05 ) We can say , based on the evidence available , that knowledge of sensor values has an immediate beneﬁt for expert users . But users also felt that these values add to the strength of descriptions of framing conditions / problems and promise to give structure to the related discussions that in the end may provide an improved learning context for less qualiﬁed users . 7 . 2 . Webcam Livestream Useful when Problems Occur The webcam livestream and the later photos are welcomed by all participants . Espe - cially for novices , the webcam photos can be useful when problems occur . Based on the photos they can see the detailed timestamp , which shows exactly when the printing process became faulty . The Webcam photos will be automatically generated [ . . . ] I think that deﬁnitely makes sense that they be made in automatic intervals during printing photos . That is very exciting . ( E01 ) Assuming the build process fails and I do now look at the printing process ret - rospectively , I have the pictures and could see relatively well whether something there went already wrong . Currently it is very difﬁcult to ﬁnd such errors due to the enormous effort and time . ( E06 ) ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 17 : 22 T . Ludwig et al . All in all , the real - time dashboard for visualizing the context - sensitive sensor data of 3D printers as well as its surrounding is seen as very useful . First , it can be used for monitoring purposes and second for the analysis of misprinting . In this regard , the participants made it clear that the implemented approach is very promising for use in the entire work group and overall community . So , when I sit somewhere in my ofﬁce , I would set up a second monitor and have a constant look on the print . I ﬁnd that very useful for remote monitoring . ( E07 ) As another use case , one participant told us that , based on webcam pictures , he could help students during their 3D printing processes : I think that is deﬁnitely great [ . . . ] For example you have seen that two students that came into the room and just make their ﬁrst prints [ . . . ] based on the webcam pictures and the sensor values , I now might see of course what happened , because something obviously did not work , and maybe I could have already seen that they conﬁgured something wrong or something like that . ( E02 ) 7 . 3 . Conﬁgurations of Other End - Users as Input for Own Prints According to the participants , the print history allows for an assessment of the in - formation needed to describe the necessary user activities and printer conﬁgurations before the printing process . And if any aspect is missing , it could be noted through the ﬁeld for “Additional Comment . ” I think the most important things are in any case already captured here . I think an extra ﬁeld , could be things like the speeds or the number of shells [ . . . ] . But the time will show whether someone want that kind of information or not . ( E03 ) One user noted that in the tab “Before Printing” the information did not have to be entered manually . Information about the pre - adjustment and the conﬁguration of the printer could directly be captured before the print via the printer interface ( E01 ) . The interactive 3D representation of the model has been highlighted as important since the model is fundamental for a successful print . Many of the problems that arise during the print process can already be identiﬁed based on the visualization of the model . In the area “Before Printing” I can see the model in 3D . It is interactive ; it can also rotate and move . I ﬁnd this very exciting , because that allows you to see who actually build similar things [ . . . ] so , if someone’s printing process goes wrong , and then you could see it here in hindsight . If I had taken a look at model , I might have had a clue that it could be problematic . That is why I think it is actually quite nice to get a printing overview in advance . ( E03 ) 7 . 4 . Print Repository as Inspiration and Validation The use of the repository was basically found helpful . The fact that the representation of each print overview could be compared to their representation in the timeline of StatusNet was viewed positively ( E07 ) . It would be useful , as it was suggested , to link the printing overview with other enriched identifying information , which increases the orientation between the various printing overviews ( E02 ) . The setup of a printer always needs some time , in which it heats something up . Then I would check out the “All Prints” and would look at what my colleagues made lately and , if I ﬁnd something interesting , I would also ask them . Hence , the functionality of a repository will foster awareness in the work group . I would look at with what kinds of temperature they have printed and so on . ( E03 ) ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 3D Printers as Sociable Technologies 17 : 23 Throughout the entire evaluation process , we have observed that some users al - ready have experienced situations in which the printing overview and especially the repository would have been useful : We actually had such a situation , where I have designed something and have printed it a few times . And I have also created and printed a version for Adam [ name changed ] and broke it . And then I told him : “You have such a kind of printer at your house , and then please print it by your own . ” If he now had seen my recent prints including all the values , that would deﬁnitely have helped him and we would then be able to document more easily back and forth on the platform , if it was successful or not and what you should not do with the thing and so on . ( E02 ) 7 . 5 . End - User Comments as Enabler for Knowledge Sharing By using the comment function , knowledge sharing between users can take place . All participants said they will use the comment functionality to ask questions or offer solutions . I always ﬁnd comments very useful , because some kind of open dialogue can take place , provided that the comments are public , so everyone can ask questions to the model , or to the print , and not just me . ( E05 ) Through comments , the knowledge sharing between experts and novices could be possible : Or the printing process goes wrong somehow in the last third , and then you can say : “It is the extruder , because the temperature went down and the printing material got stuck . ” This is for someone who does not have much experience , a really good thing . ( E02 ) If then , for example , anybody comments that he had somehow totally ridiculous bubbles in the last third of his print , I can – as someone who makes a bit more 3D printing – say : “You have moist material . Look that you get your material dried . ” ( E02 ) 8 . DISCUSSION Unexpected errors and breakdowns as well as complex conﬁgurations often lead to difﬁculties in understanding and appropriating new technologies such as 3D printers . Interestingly , many of the features and problems we identiﬁed can be compared on a generic level with photocopier repair and the solutions proposed for expertise shar - ing and problem solving in that context . It will be remembered that it was Suchman who identiﬁed the way in which fault tracing in photocopiers was extremely difﬁcult for non - experts and experts alike because information provided was decontextualized . Similarly , Orr [ 1996 ] identiﬁed the way in which solutions were often dependent on an informal knowledge base generated ( in that case ) by ad hoc face - to - face meetings . Building on these insights , Whalen [ 1995a , 1995b ] has identiﬁed the mismatches be - tween caller categories and those embedded in a computer database and subsequently a computerized knowledge base was designed that assisted photocopier repairmen to recover contextualized and linguistic appropriate information [ Bobrow and Whalen 2002 ] . Here , we were able to uncover different problems and practices that resonate with that early work . As with photocopiers , material elements exist alongside the digital . The lack of contextual and environmental information in that case as well as this was seen as critical . Informal ways of sharing information were the main means by ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 17 : 24 T . Ludwig et al . which knowledge grew , and computerized knowledge bases were and are required to reﬂect that contextuality . Nevertheless , the world has moved on . New technologies with much enhanced communicative capacities and with new possibilities afforded by sophisticated sensors mean that there is an opportunity ( and need ) to re - evaluate those original insights . Here , the need is to cope with the speciﬁc challenges of appropriating 3D printers in two semi - professional communities . Unlike traditional “plug - and - play” - printers from the “2D world , ” there is a few previous practice users can relate to . Unexpected errors and breakdowns as well as complex conﬁgurations lead to difﬁculties in understanding and appropriating these machines for existing practices of “making” and art production . Building on the notion of IT infrastructures and appropriation as sensitizing lens on user practices , we have pointed out some design ideas for functionalities supporting these infrastructuring activities . Our suggestions are based on previous work [ Draxler et al . 2012 ; Draxler and Stevens 2011 ; Preece 2001 ; Stevens et al . 2009 ; Yetim et al . 2012 ; Pipek and Wulf 2009 ] , but had to be further developed and adapted due to the physical / material conditions in relation to machine , printing material , and artifacts . In particular , our study revealed potential in enhancing those concepts with addi - tional sensors and visualizations of printing processes , printers’ environments , and tasks / structures / workﬂows that the printing is embedded in , as well as by incorporat - ing in situ and remote tools for those purposes . Within our empirical study , we have found evidence for EUD - related infrastructuring activities in the sense that the end - users modiﬁed their machines ( e . g . , installation of cameras ) in ways the manufacturers did not plan for , but could be incorporated in future generations of their machines . Most of the EUD - related infrastructuring activities were communicative or collaborative activities involving not only technology manipulations and combinations of various kinds , but also articulations of usages or breakdowns that referred to the technologies at hand and their context . Studies on these kinds of communications are not new ( most notable example cf . Wellman and Orr [ 1997 ] ) , but current practices repay a second look as the practices of communication change with the communication infrastructure users evolving alongside developments in miniaturization , mobile , and ubiquitous computing . The step we argue for now is to use this ubiquitous interconnectedness of devices to make more technologies “sociable , ” meaning that the support that users currently ﬁnd outside the technology itself , at hand in internet searches , in community forums , or in neighboring ofﬁces should be integrated into the technologies . Conceptually , these activities have been described as “appropriation activities” if they consist of user – user interactions , or as “infrastructuring” activities if they also relate to other actors of technology production and use or the further development of technologies and their foundations . A functionality to support all these practices within the existing infrastructure needs to address not only interoperability issues , e . g . , by deﬁning standardized interfaces between different infrastructural layers , but also it needs to allow for and actively support the negotiation of socio - material aspects of emerging new practices connected to these technologies . Here , the concept of “sociable technologies” aims to provide a secondary layer of interaction functionalities ( that go beyond the primary functionality ) that can help the collaborative sense making and use making processes around new technologies . 9 . CONCLUSION Our design case study shows that the ability to articulate and discuss use and conﬁguration issues of 3D printers would beneﬁt from “sociable technologies” that describe themselves on three context levels , potentially using additional sensors , and providing visualizations and tools in three dimensions ( 1 ) Internal context : Providing ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 3D Printers as Sociable Technologies 17 : 25 information about their inner workings about their current state as well as about their component and behavioral structure , ( 2 ) Socio - material context : e . g . , location and surroundings , environmental data like room temperature , maintenance or user / usage data ) , and ( 3 ) Task / process context : e . g . , technologies used to build / prepare printed models , position in a production chain or process , purpose , and goal of machine usage . Our implementation encompasses three different dimensions ( 1 ) the gathering of information about the surrounding spatial - material context as well as the 3D printer itself , ( 2 ) the real - time visualization of all relevant context data about the printer in - cluding printing details for the end users while operating the machinery , and ( 3 ) the storing as well as sharing of details about 3D printing processes afterward with other end users . The qualitative / in - use evaluations used in our approach showed its potential and suggested possible concrete improvements . We outline four lessons learnt when designing approaches that deal with supporting hardware - oriented appropriation ac - tivities : ( 1 ) Role - speciﬁc visualization of sensor values : Based on the end - user’s experience in the 3D printing and the knowledge about different relationships between the surrounding and the print itself , the visualization should be adaptable . We presume that is sufﬁcient enough for novices or non - experienced user to get warnings or alerts when a pre - deﬁned threshold is exceeded or undershot . ( 2 ) Visual support to facilitate all other appropriation activities : Based on the visu - alizations as well as the photos and videos of the working machinery , it is easier for the participants to get an understanding about the relationship between the sensor data and the “behavior” of the 3D printer . We presume that based on the vi - sualization the appropriation will be enormously supported , which could be further extended by VR / AR - technologies in future . ( 3 ) Print history as a bridge for mentor and mentee relations : Based on the print history as well as the visual support with pictures , an expert can assess the previ - ous prints of novices and support with advice about printer conﬁgurations , model speciﬁcations , or surrounding parameters . We presume such a mentor and mentee relation will help with the teaching and will help to prevent errors during the printing process . ( 4 ) Comments enable knowledge sharing : A comments feature for the print history and especially the print repository allows for questions , answers , and chats and therefore fosters knowledge sharing among the end users . Experienced users also want to take a look at the prints as well as conﬁgurations of their colleagues . We presume comments based on print histories as well as repositories help distributing knowledge . Misinterpretations remain a problem , even with our prototype . Although our prototype does not make all critical situations or misprints more comprehensible , it is appropriate for supporting end users in appropriating complex technologies . It also remains difﬁcult to integrate our secondary technologies into the machinery itself ; it remains an add - on because we had no means to integrate it physically into the casing of the 3D printer . However , as the sensors and boards , like the Arduino , are getting smaller and more ubiquitous , it will become easier over time to arrive at a fully integrated version of sociable technologies . Taking a step back , our experiences conﬁrm and extend earlier research to provide appropriation support for collaborative software technologies . While we have always described appropriation as social activity , the hardware - related aspects add additional dimensions to the problem of understanding and communicating use options among end users , which will presumably increase with the IoT . 3D printing technologies proved to be a particularly interesting arena to experiment with in this context as the market ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 17 : 26 T . Ludwig et al . of ideas , approaches , and devices remains volatile , and the potential ascribed to this technology indicates that a high societal impact is possible . Furthermore , many of the current IoT technologies are not as sociable as they could be . Our study is hence meant to make designers and software engineers building IoT more sensitive about the social context of physical systems , and more aware about affordances for making their IoT products more sociable . Implementing our approach to sociable technologies into the era of IoT at this early stage of maturity may also support future generations of users to “infrastructure” these new ﬁelds of economy . The design issues and implementation described here contribute to the discussion on how the social dimension of EUD of IoT technologies , in particular with regard to alleviating the necessary articulation , communication and cooperation for mastering the complex future settings “Cyber - Physical Systems” will confront the users with . It becomes obvious that considering IoT on a purely technological basis misses important points practitioners will have to consider for further developing and / or re - inventing their practices based on emerging new technological opportunities ( infrastructuring ) . In consequence , the creative activities users perform to make these technologies work for them can be an important asset to further develop interfaces as well as architec - tural concepts in a way that we lift the discourses around these technologies from a perspective of an Internet of ( connected ) Things to an Internet of ( connected ) Practices , and further , to an IoT we use . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank our students Artur Brumm , Sebastian H¨orstmann as well as Kai Schenkelberg for their valuable support in the phase of the prototype’s conceptualization and implementation , as well as the participants of our study who remain anonymous in this article . REFERENCES Gabriela Avram , Alexander Boden , Irene Posch , and Gunnar Stevens . 2013 . Do - it - yourself sustainable living : Opportunities andchallengesforDIYcommunities . SIGCHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputing Systems . CHI 2013 Sustainability Community Workshop , Post - Sustainability , Position paper . Ellen Balka and Ina Wagner . 2006 . Making things work : Dimensions of conﬁgurability as appropriation work . In Proceedings of the 20th Anniversary Conference on Computer supported Cooperative Work . ACM , New York , 229 – 238 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1180875 . 1180912 R´emi Barraqand . 2012 . Designing Sociable Technologies . Universtiy of Grenoble . Amaury Belin and Yannick Pri´e . 2012 . DIAM : Towards a model for describing appropriation processes through the evolution of digital artifacts . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference . ACM , New York , 645 – 654 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2318053 Daniel G . Bobrow and Jack Whalen . 2002 . Community knowledge sharing in practice : The Eureka story . Reﬂect . SoL J . 4 , 2 ( 2002 ) , 47 – 59 . Wim Bouman , Bolke de Bruin , Tim Hoogenboom , Ard Huizing , and Rene Jansen . 2007 . The realm of sociality : Notes on the design of social software . In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Information Systems ( ICIS’07 ) . 1 – 14 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / jp053220d Nick Dalton , Gordon MacKay , and Simon Holland . 2012 . Kolab : Appropriation & improvisation in mobile tan - gible collaborative interaction . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS’12 ) . ACM , New York , 21 – 24 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2317960 Dale Dougherty . 2013 . The maker mindset . In Design , Make , Play : Growing The Next Generation of STEM Innovators . M . Honey and D . E . Kanter ( Eds . ) , Routledge , 7 – 12 . Paul Dourish . 2003 . The appropriation of interactive technologies : Some lessons from placeless documents . J . Comput . Support . Coop . Work 12 , 4 ( 2003 ) , 465 – 490 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A : 1026149119426 Sebastian Draxler , Adrian Jung , Alexander Boden , and Gunnar Stevens . 2011 . Workplace warriors : Iden - tifying team practices of appropriation in software ecosystems . In Proceeding of the 4th International Workshop on Cooperative And Human Aspects of Software Engineering ( CHASE’11 ) . ACM Press , New York , 57 . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 3D Printers as Sociable Technologies 17 : 27 Sebastian Draxler and Gunnar Stevens . 2011 . Supporting the collaborative appropriation of an open software ecosystem . J . Comput . Support . Coop . Work 20 , 4 – 5 ( 2011 ) , 403 – 448 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 011 - 9148 - 9 Sebastian Draxler , Gunnar Stevens , Martin Stein , Alexander Boden , and David Randall . 2012 . Supporting the social context of technology appropriation : On a synthesis of sharing tools and tool knowledge . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , 2835 – 2844 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208687 Pelle Ehn . 2008 . Participation in design things . In Proceedings of the 10th Anniversary Conference on Partic - ipatory Design . Indiana University Indianapolis , Bloomington , Indiana , 92 – 101 . Michelle Gantt and Bonnie A . Nardi . 1992 . Gardeners and gurus : Patterns of cooperation among CAD users . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , 107 – 117 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 142750 . 142767 Clifford Geertz . 1973 . The Interpretations of Cultures : Selected Essays . Basic Books Inc . Neil Gershenfeld . 2012 . How to make almost anything the digital fabrication revolution . Foreign Aff . 91 ( 2012 ) , 42 – 57 . Helena Karasti and Anna - Liisa Syrj¨anen . 2004 . Artful infrastructuring in two cases of community PD . In Proceedings of the 8th Conference on Participatory Design : Artful Integration : Interweaving Media , Materials and Practices . ACM , New York , 20 – 30 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1011870 . 1011874 Stacey Kuznetsov and Eric Paulos . 2010 . Rise of the expert amateur : DIY projects , communities , and cultures . In Proceedings of the 6th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Extending Boundaries . ACM , New York , 295 – 304 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1868914 . 1868950 Stacey Kuznetsov , Alex S . Taylor , Tim Regan , Nicolas Villar , and Eric Paulos . 2012 . At the seams : DIYbio and opportunities for HCI . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS’12 ) , Newcastle , UK . ACM , New York , 258 – 267 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2317997 Jonathan Lazar and Jennifer Preece . 2002 . Social considerations in online communities : Usability , sociability , and success factors . In Proceedings of the Cognition in the Digital World , Herre Van Oostendorp ( Ed . ) . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc . Publishers , 1 – 46 . Henry Lieberman , Fabio Patern ` o , and Volker Wulf . 2006 . End User Development . Henry Lieberman , Fabio Patern ` o , and Volker Wulf ( Eds . ) , Springer , Netherlands . Thomas Ludwig , Oliver Stickel , Alexander Boden , and Volkmar Pipek . 2015 . Appropriating digital fab - rication technologies – A comparative study of two 3D printing communities . In Proceedings of the iConference . Thomas Ludwig , Oliver Stickel , Alexander Boden , and Volkmar Pipek . 2014 . Towards sociable technologies : An empirical study on designing appropriation infrastructures for 3D printing . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems . 835 – 844 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2598510 . 2598528 Wendy E . Mackay . 1990 . Patterns of sharing customizable software . In Proceedings of the ACM Confer - ence on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work . ACM , New York , 209 – 221 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 99332 . 99356 Wendy March , Margot Jacobs , and Tony Salvador . 2005 . Designing technology for community appropriation . In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI’05 ) . ACM , New York , 2126 – 2127 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1056808 . 1057120 David A . Mellis and Leah Buechley . 2012 . Case studies in the personal fabrication of electronic prod - ucts . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference . ACM , New York , 268 – 277 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2317998 Catarina Mota . 2011 . The rise of personal fabrication . In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Creativity and Cognition . ACM Press , 279 – 288 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2069618 . 2069665 Jakob Nielsen . 1993 . Usability Engineering , J . Nielsen ( Ed . ) , Morgan Kaufmann . Donald A . Norman . 2008 . Sociable design . Retrieved November 1 , 2016 , from http : / / www . jnd . org / ms / 1 . 1 Sociable Design . pdf . Julian E . Orr . 1996 . Talking About Machines : An Ethnography of a Modern Job . Cornell University Press . Volkmar Pipek . 2005 . From Tailoring to Appropriation Support : Negotiating Groupware Usage . University of Oulu . Volkmar Pipek and Helge Kahler . 2006 . Supporting collaborative tailoring . In End - User Development . Springer , 315 – 345 . Volkmar Pipek and Anna - Liisa Syrj¨anen . 2006 . Infrastructuring as capturing in - situ design . In Proceedings of the 7th Mediterranean Conference on Information Systems . Venice , Italy . Volkmar Pipek and Volker Wulf . 2009 . Infrastructuring : Towards an integrated perspective on the design and use of information technology . J . Assoc . Inf . Syst . 10 , 5 ( 2009 ) , 447 – 473 . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 . 17 : 28 T . Ludwig et al . Jennifer Preece and Ben Shneiderman . 2009 . The reader - to - leader framework : Motivating technology - mediated social participation . AIS Trans . Hum . - Comput . Interact . 1 , 1 ( 2009 ) , 13 – 32 . Jenny Preece . 2001 . Sociability and usability in online communities : Determining and measuring success . Behav . Inf . Technol . 20 , 5 ( 2001 ) , 347 – 356 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01449290110084683 Matt Ratto and Robert Ree . 2012 . Materializing information : 3D printing and social change . First Monday 17 , 7 ( 2012 ) . Byron Reeves and Clifford Nass . 1996 . The Media Equation : How People Treat Computers , Television , and New Media Like Real People and Places . Cambridge University Press , New York , NY . G . Ryle . 1949 . The Concept of Mind . Hutchinson’s University . John Stanislav Sadar and Gyungju Chyon . 2011 . 3D Scanning and printing as a new medium for creativity in product design . In Procedings of the Second Conference on Creativity and Innovation in Design ( DESIRE’11 ) , ACM , New York , 15 – 20 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2079216 . 2079218 Susan Lee Star and Karen Ruhleder . 1996 . Steps toward an ecology of infrastructure : Design and access for large information spaces . Inf . Syst . Res . 7 ( 1996 ) , 111 – 134 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / isre . 7 . 1 . 111 Gunnar Stevens , Volkmar Pipek , and Volker Wulf . 2009 . Appropriation infrastructure : Supporting the de - sign of usages . In Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on End - User Development . 50 – 69 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 00427 - 8 _ 4 Gunnar Stevens , Volkmar Pipek , and Vwulf Wulf . 2010 . Appropriation infrastructure : Mediating appropria - tion and production work . J . Organ . End User Comput . 22 , 2 ( 2010 ) , 58 – 81 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4018 / 978 - 1 - 4666 - 0140 - 6 . ch012 Joshua G . Tanenbaum , Amanda M . Williams , Audrey Desjardins , and Karen Tanenbaum . 2013 . Democ - ratizing technology : Pleasure , utility and expressiveness in { DIY } and maker practice . In Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2603 – 2612 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2481360 Michael Twidale , David Randall , and Richard Bentley . 1994 . Situated evaluation for cooperative systems . In Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) . ACM New York , NY , USA , 441 – 452 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 192844 . 193066 David Wellman and Julian E . Orr . 1997 . Talking about machines : An ethnography of a modern job . Contemp . Sociol . 26 , 5 ( 1997 ) , 626 . Jack Whalen . 1995a . A technology of order production : Computer - aided dispatch in public safety communica - tions . In Situated Order : Studies in the Social Organization of Talk and Embodied Activities . University Press of America , 187 – 230 . Jack Whalen . 1995b . Expert systems versus systems for experts : Computer - aided dispatch as a support system in real - world environments . In The Social and Interactional Dimensions of Human - Computer Interfaces . Peter J . Thomas ( Ed . ) , Cambridge University Press , New York , NY , 161 – 183 . Amanda Williams , Alicia Gibb , and David Weekly . 2012 . Research with a hacker ethos : What DIY means for tangible interaction research . Interactions 19 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 14 – 19 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2090150 . 2090156 B . T . Wittbrodt et al . 2013 . Life - cycle economic analysis of distributed manufacturing with open - source 3 - D printers . Mechatronics 23 ( 2013 ) , 713 – 726 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . mechatronics . 2013 . 06 . 002 Volker Wulf , Claudia M¨uller , Volkmar Pipek , David Randall , Markus Rohde , and Gunnar Stevens . 2015 . Practice - based computing : Empirically grounded conceptualizations derived from design case studies . In Designing Socially Embedded Technologies in the Real - World . Volker Wulf , Kjeld Schmidt , and David Randall ( Eds . ) , Springer - Verlag , London , 111 – 150 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4471 - 6720 - 4 Fahri Yetim , Sebastian Draxler , Gunnar Stevens , and Volker Wulf . 2012 . Fostering continuous user par - ticipation by embedding a communication support tool in user interfaces . AIS Trans . Hum . - Comput . Interact . 4 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 153 – 168 . Received April 2016 ; revised September 2016 ; accepted October 2016 ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , Article 17 , Publication date : April 2017 .