A UTO TRIZ : A RTIFICIAL I DEATION WITH TRIZ AND L ARGE L ANGUGAE M ODELS Shuo Jiang ∗ Singapore University of Technology and Design 8 Somapah Road , Singapore , 487372 shuo _ jiang @ sutd . edu . sg Jianxi Luo Department of Systems Engineering City University of Hong Kong , Hong Kong jianxi . luo @ cityu . edu . hk A Preprint , Version : Mar 12 , 2024 A BSTRACT Researchers and innovators have made enormous efforts in developing ideation methods , such as morphological analysis and design - by - analogy , to aid engineering design ideation for problem solving and innovation . Among these , TRIZ stands out as the most well - known approach , widely applied for systematic innovation . However , the complexity of TRIZ resources and concepts , coupled with its reliance on users’ knowledge , experience , and reasoning capabilities , limits its practicability . This paper proposes AutoTRIZ , an artificial ideation tool that leverages large language models ( LLMs ) to automate and enhance the TRIZ methodology . By leveraging the broad knowledge and advanced reasoning capabilities of LLMs , AutoTRIZ offers a novel approach to design automation and interpretable ideation with artificial intelligence . We demonstrate and evaluate the effectiveness of AutoTRIZ through consistency experiments in contradiction detection and comparative studies with cases collected from TRIZ textbooks . Moreover , the proposed LLM - based framework holds the potential for extension to automate other knowledge - based ideation methods , including SCAMPER , Design Heuristics , and Design - by - Analogy , paving the way for a new era of artificial ideation for design and innovation . Keywords Innovation · Design Ideation · Problem Solving · TRIZ · Large Language Models · Artificial Intelligence 1 Introduction Intuitive or structured ideation methods such as brainstorming , morphological analysis , and mind - mapping [ 1 , 2 , 3 ] have been used to aid creative ideation of human designers for concept generation . Among these , the Theory of Inventive Problem Solving ( TRIZ ) [ 4 ] stands out as the most well - known approach , widely applied for systematic innovation . TRIZ is a knowledge - based ideation methodology that provides a structured framework for engineering problem solving by identifying and overcoming technical contradictions using inventive principles derived from a large - scale patent database . However , the complexity of TRIZ resources and concepts poses significant cognitive challenges to effectively learning and applying it . In addition , the problem - solving process in TRIZ is highly dependent on the reasoning capabilities of human users . While some researchers have employed natural language processing [ 5 , 6 , 7 ] , the effectiveness still heavily depends on the users’ proficiency with TRIZ . Large Language Models ( LLMs ) such as OpenAI’s GPT [ 8 ] and Meta’s Llama [ 9 ] have not only acquired broad knowledge but also developed emergent abilities such as in - context learning , following instructions , and step - by - step reasoning [ 10 ] . These capabilities have been applied across various domains , including medicine [ 11 ] , chemistry [ 12 ] , and mathematics [ 13 ] . Recently , researchers have evaluated the capabilities of LLMs in engineering - related tasks [ 14 , 15 ] and reported the extensive engineering knowledge within these models and their wide applicability in engineering design and manufacturing . In terms of engineering problem solving and idea generation , there has been preliminary exploration using LLMs [ 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 ] . However , the lack of transparency and limited control over ∗ Comments are welcome : shuo _ jiang @ sutd . edu . sg a r X i v : 2403 . 13002v1 [ c s . H C ] 13 M a r 2024 A RTIFICIAL I DEATION WITH TRIZ AND L ARGE L ANGUGAE M ODELS reasoning steps during ideation often lead to divergent results , requiring multiple heuristic attempts by users to achieve desired outcomes . Besides , the interpretability of generated concepts remains challenging , as users obtain only the final results without understanding the ideation reasoning process . In this work , we aim to leverage the broad knowledge and advanced reasoning capability of LLMs to automate the TRIZ method , showcasing the potential of LLMs in design automation and interpretable innovation . We have developed an LLM - based intelligent tool , AutoTRIZ , capable of artificial ideation for problem solving with TRIZ - based interpretability . AutoTRIZ begins with a problem statement from the user and automatically generates a solution report , strictly following the TRIZ thinking flow and reasoning process . In this paper , we also evaluate the effectiveness and performance of AutoTRIZ through quantitative and comparative experiments , as well as case studies involving human uses of TRIZ from TRIZ textbooks . 2 Related Work 2 . 1 TRIZ TRIZ is a knowledge - based systematic approach of inventive problem solving , developed in the 1960s by Genrich S . Altshuller and his colleagues [ 4 ] . Through a thorough analysis of over 40 , 000 patents , Altshuller and his collaborators identified repeated patterns of innovation and underlying innovative principles within these documents . By inductively analyzing these patterns , they proposed a comprehensive problem - solving framework , applying selected inventive principles for ideation . Since then , the TRIZ has been developed continually and some modern TRIZ databases rely on analysis of over 2 million patents . It has been widely applied in industries , research , and education with notable influence in many fields , such as energy , electrical , automotive industries , and mechanical engineering [ 20 ] . The TRIZ toolkit contains a series of theories and tools that cover all aspects of problem understanding and solving , including trimming method , evolution trends , and 76 standard solutions [ 4 ] . In this paper , we focus on the best - known tool , the Method of Inventive Principles , which represents the basic reasoning logic in TRIZ . Figure 1 shows the overview of its framework ( adapted from [ 21 ] ) , which contains four steps : ( 1 ) Identify the specific problem . ( 2 ) Transform the specific problem into a general problem by identifying physical contradictions . The contradic - tions involve an improving feature and a worsening feature . These features are from Altshuller’s 39 engineering parameters . ( 3 ) Search for selected inventive principles from the contradiction matrix using identified contradictions . The contradiction matrix is organized in the form of 39 - improving features and 39 - worsening features ( a 39 by 39 matrix ) with each cell entry giving the most often used principles ( from TRIZ 40 inventive principles ) that may be used to solve the problem . ( 4 ) Use the selected principles to generate solutions to the problem . Figure 1 : Four steps for problem solving using TRIZ 2 A RTIFICIAL I DEATION WITH TRIZ AND L ARGE L ANGUGAE M ODELS Although TRIZ has demonstrated its effectiveness , it still suffers drawbacks that hinder its practical applications . For instance , the complexity of TRIZ resources and concepts poses cognitive challenges to effectively learning and applying it , particularly for non - experts . Additionally , the efficacy of TRIZ is heavily constrained by the users’ reasoning capabilities and prior knowledge acquired . Recent advancements in machine learning and natural language processing , have been applied in conjunction with TRIZ [ 5 , 7 , 22 ] . These efforts aim to intellectualize the TRIZ reasoning process , thereby reducing the difficulty of use . For instance , Cascini and Russo [ 5 ] developed the PAT - ANALYZER system which can analyze patent texts and automatically extract the contradictory information underlying the innovation for the use of TRIZ . Similarly , Guarino et al . [ 7 ] proposed the PaTRIZ , combining the Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers ( BERT ) and Conditional Random Field ( CRF ) for word - level patent analysis and TRIZ contradiction mining . Li et al . [ 22 ] proposed an approach that leverages natural language processing techniques to assess patent innovations according to the level of invention as defined in TRIZ . Berdyugina and Cavallucci [ 23 ] proposed a methodology for the automatic extraction of inventive information from texts for formulating an inventive problem into TRIZ engineering parameters . Their method combined a series of text - mining techniques , including topic modeling , word embedding , and clustering . Hall et al . [ 6 ] proposed an approach that uses topic modeling and unsupervised machine learning to map TRIZ inventive principles to individual patents and detect the novelty . However , most of these works focus on utilizing algorithms to improve specific steps of the TRIZ process . They still require innovators to dedicate much time and effort to extensive reasoning . Employing these methods does not directly assist users throughout the entire process from analyzing a problem to creating practical solutions . In this paper , we aim to harness LLMs to automate the entire TRIZ reasoning process and minimize the cognitive requirements of users during its application . 2 . 2 Large Language Models for Design and Innovation Over the past years , many data - driven approaches have utilized machine learning and deep learning techniques to augment design and innovation [ 24 , 25 ] . Rooted in deep learning , LLMs represent a class of transformer - based algorithms designed for processing and generating natural language text . They are trained on extremely large - scale corpora , enabling them to acquire a wide range of knowledge and capabilities , including understanding context , generating coherent text , and step - by - step reasoning [ 10 ] . Some research has already explored the application of LLMs in engineering design and innovation within specific fields , including microfluidic devices [ 26 ] , robotics [ 27 ] and the user interface of webpages [ 28 ] . However , most of these early efforts primarily utilize conversational interactions , such as those facilitated by ChatGPT , to engage in the innovation process . Meanwhile , with the development of LLMs , there has been an increase in efforts to create LLM - driven methods and tools to offer more generalized innovation assistance and directly support users in rapid ideation . For instance , several studies have harnessed LLMs for processing vast amounts of design documentation , representing designs in specific forms , and identifying user needs for product development [ 16 , 17 , 29 ] . Han et al . [ 17 ] introduced an LLM - based attribute - sentiment - guided summarization model to extract user needs from online product reviews . Qiu et al . [ 29 ] applied a transformer - based language model to distill design - related knowledge from extensive reports and documents . Moreover , Wang et al . [ 16 ] utilized LLMs to decompose conceptual design tasks into Function - Behavior - Structure ( FBS ) formats , assisting users in ideation across different aspects . Recent studies have developed tools and methodologies utilizing LLMs to aid the design process , enhance human - computer collaborative innovation , or directly produce innovative concepts for users [ 18 , 19 , 30 , 31 ] . Ding et al . [ 30 ] conducted a systematic exploration of LLMs’ potential to boost cross - domain analogical creativity . Huang et al . [ 31 ] proposed CausalMapper , a system that combines LLMs with causal mapping to reason about the connections between problems and solutions . Zhu and Luo [ 19 ] presented GPT - based models with domain - specific tuning and task - specific learning , to generate original and useful design concepts . Notably , they applied their approach to automating bio - inspired design concept generation [ 18 ] . Although these recent idea - generation methods directly leverage the reasoning capabilities of LLMs , the lack of control over LLMs may hinder their effectiveness when assisting ideation . These approaches often lead to solutions that are too divergent to meet specific needs . Managing the problem - solving process to ensure that solutions are both innovative and practical , as well as understanding the reasoning process behind generated innovative solutions , remains a challenge . In this study , we address this issue by integrating TRIZ with LLMs , presenting AutoTRIZ as a tool that follows the TRIZ reasoning steps to generate inventive solutions with interpretability . 3 A RTIFICIAL I DEATION WITH TRIZ AND L ARGE L ANGUGAE M ODELS 3 AutoTRIZ In this section , we introduce AutoTRIZ , an artificial ideation tool that automates TRIZ with LLMs . The architecture of AutoTRIZ is depicted in Figure 2 . At the core of AutoTRIZ is the utilization of LLMs to learn the reasoning process of the TRIZ methodology , which engineers often find it challenging to learn and excel in . Figure 2 : The framework of AutoTRIZ Overall , AutoTRIZ takes a problem statement prompt from the user as its initial input , and automatically generates a solution report after the reasoning process . The report includes detailed information about the reasoning process based on TRIZ and the resulting solutions to the problem . Within AutoTRIZ , we have defined a four - step reasoning flow based on the classic TRIZ workflow . The system includes an inner fixed knowledge base which consists of three segments related to TRIZ details , enabling controlled reasoning . It is noteworthy that our focus is on controlling the entire problem - solving reasoning process , while remaining open to the knowledge used in ideation . The problem - related knowledge applied during the problem - solving process is drawn from the knowledge base that the LLM has acquired through pre - training on the large - scale corpora . 3 . 1 Controlling the TRIZ Reasoning Flow To ensure that the system strictly follows the TRIZ thinking flow and reasoning process , we have configured AutoTRIZ with four modules , corresponding to the four steps in TRIZ . As depicted in Figure 2 , Modules 1 , 2 , and 4 , outlined by solid - line frames , are driven by LLMs , whereas Module 3 , outlined by a dashed - line frame , is controlled by pre - defined functions without using LLMs . Specifically , we exploit the instruction - following capabilities of LLMs for backend reasoning control . In each module that incorporates LLMs , relevant instructions are engineered into the input as system and assistant prompts . Specifically , in Module 1 , AutoTRIZ identifies the problem to be solved from user input and converts it into descriptive text . Ideally , we hope that the content entered by the user is a clear problem statement . However , user inputs may include additional information such as scenario descriptions , background details , and even some redundant information . Therefore , in this module , AutoTRIZ is designed to identify and extract information related to the problem and then reorganize it into clear and concise text . In Module 2 , AutoTRIZ receives the processed problem description and detects its engineering contradiction , which is represented by a space constructed from two out of the 39 engineering parameters . At this stage , AutoTRIZ learns all the engineering parameters based on the inner knowledge base . The outputs of this module are presented in a structured format ( i . e . , the indexes of the improving and worsening features ) . It is important to note that for the same problem statement , the identified contradiction may differ with each execution of this module . On the one hand , a single problem may encompass multiple contradictory pairs , yet our system is designed to identify only one contradiction . On the other hand , there is an inherent randomness in the content generation by LLMs . In the next section , we will conduct experimental investigations to examine the efficacy of contradiction identification and the consistency of the outputs . 4 A RTIFICIAL I DEATION WITH TRIZ AND L ARGE L ANGUGAE M ODELS Once the contradiction is identified , Module 3 searches the contradiction matrix to find the indexes of relevant inventive principles and returns their descriptions . Following this , Module 4 synthesizes the original problem description , the identified engineering contradiction , and the inventive principles recommended by the system through TRIZ , to generate the final solutions . LLMs can generate complex structured data , such as in HTML and L A TEXformats [ 32 ] . In AutoTRIZ , we harness this capability to integrate all generated content and directly produce a reader - friendly problem - solving report in a structured format . We have engineered the format template directly into module 4 , enabling it to output documents formatted in L A TEX . In practice , the template for the report generation can be adjusted as needed to suit specific requirements . 3 . 2 Learning from the Fixed Knowledge Base AutoTRIZ acquires the necessary information to learn the prior knowledge of TRIZ , enabling it to handle various types of problems . We have curated a static knowledge base , which interacts with the modules we described above , thereby empowering AutoTRIZ to master and apply the relevant knowledge . In AutoTRIZ , the internal fixed knowledge base includes three main components : ( 1 ) the TRIZ 39 Engineering Parameters [ 4 ] , ( 2 ) the TRIZ Contradiction Matrix [ 4 ] , and ( 3 ) the TRIZ 40 Inventive Principles [ 4 ] . Notably , the contradiction matrix here is identical to the traditional TRIZ contradiction matrix . The knowledge about engineering parameters and inventive principles includes titles and detailed descriptions for each entry . For example , for the first engineering parameter : [ INDEX ] 1 [ TITLE ] Weight of moving object [ DESCRIPTION ] The mass of the object in a gravitational field , essentially the force that the body exerts on its support or suspension . Similarly , for the first inventive principle : [ INDEX ] 1 [ TITLE ] Segmentation [ DESCRIPTION ] The Segmentation principle suggests contemplating the division of an object or system into smaller , independent parts . . . All engineering parameters are configured into Module 2 as assistant information . The backend LLMs learn instructions and the output parameter space through in - context learning , enabling zero - shot reasoning . Regarding inventive principles , only selected contents are delivered to the system based on the position in the contradiction matrix . This process is very similar to LLMs’ Retrieval Augmented Generation ( RAG ) . Whereas in our system , the problem - solving process involves precise searching augmented generation , effectively bridging the gap between the prior TRIZ knowledge from experts and the reasoning capabilities of LLMs derived from large - scale pre - training . Simultaneously , all solutions generated are interpretable because each solution is derived from the application of selected inventive principles . 3 . 3 System Implementation We developed a web - based tool for public users to test use AutoTRIZ , available at : https : / / www . autotriz . ai / . Figure 3 shows the user interface of the tool . Throughout the deployment of this tool and all experiments conducted in this study , we utilized GPT - 4 - Turbo ( Version : 20231106 ) as the backend LLM . However , it is important to note that since the proposed AutoTRIZ is a general framework , the backend LLM can be replaced with any other closed - source LLM ( e . g . , Claude ) or open - source LLM ( e . g . , Llama ) with minimal effort required for adapting the corresponding prompts . For the TRIZ knowledge base in AutoTRIZ , we adopt the TRIZ definitions and descriptions in an engineering design textbook [ 33 ] . Figure 3 : AutoTRIZ web - based tool 5 A RTIFICIAL I DEATION WITH TRIZ AND L ARGE L ANGUGAE M ODELS 4 Experimental Evaluation In this section , we evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed AutoTRIZ through quantitative experiments and com - parative studies . Specifically , we collected several case studies analyzed by human experts from TRIZ textbooks , constructing a case base . Then , we explored the consistency of the system in identifying engineering contradictions , as well as its overlap with human analysis . Finally , we selected a specific problem from the case base , and compared and discussed the solutions generated by AutoTRIZ against the results of human experts . 4 . 1 Constructing the TRIZ Case Base To evaluate the performance of AutoTRIZ , we first constructed a case base containing TRIZ problem - solving cases developed by human experts . Initially , we gathered several TRIZ - related textbooks , some of which are focused on general design innovation , while others are specifically about TRIZ . From 7 of these textbooks [ 4 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 21 , 37 ] , we collected 10 initial cases . The selection criteria include : ( 1 ) the content of the case contains all elements of the TRIZ reasoning process , including problem description , contradiction identification , inventive principle positioning , and solutions ; ( 2 ) the problem is defined clearly and comprehensively ; ( 3 ) the cases do not contain similar problems . All cases are stored in JSON format . The initial 10 cases cover various domains , including environmental engineering , transportation , manufacturing and material science , aerospace technology , and so on 2 . Beyond serving experimental purposes in this study , the curated case base can also store the results generated by users with AutoTRIZ . In the future , as the size of the base expands , we can explore the interaction between the reasoning module and the existing case base , enabling AutoTRIZ’s innovative capabilities to be scalable . 4 . 2 Assessing the Contradiction Identification Detecting contradictions is an essential step in the entire TRIZ problem - solving process . Accurate identification of the contradictions within a problem can effectively assist the system in recommending the appropriate inventive principles for the next step . Sometimes , LLMs may suffer from instability during inference . As a result , some LLM - based agents adopt self - consistency techniques that create several reasoning paths and then perform an ensemble on all generated answers , selecting the most consistent one through majority voting [ 38 ] . However , in our system , analyzing the same problem from different perspectives can yield different possible contradictions . Such inconsistency can sometimes increase diversity , thereby enhancing the novelty . Based on this , we retain the setting of producing a single contradiction in each entry . To assess the performance and consistency of this setting , we conducted the following experiments . For each given problem statement , we performed the analysis 100 times , resulting in 100 pairs of identified parameters ( contradictions ) . Then , we counted all results and calculated their respective proportions . In cases with high consistency , a particular contradiction could be dominant . In some cases , one parameter in the contradiction may have higher certainty than the other , leading to more dispersed results . Information entropy is utilized to assess the consistency of the results : H ( X ) = − n (cid:88) i = 1 P ( x i ) log 2 P ( x i ) where P ( x i ) represents the probability of occurrence of the outcome , and n is the number of different possible outcomes of X . Since the number of runs is 100 , the entropy value ranges from 0 to 6 . 64 , where a higher value indicates lower consistency . Furthermore , we examined the overlap between AutoTRIZ’s detection and the analysis results of human experts from textbooks , categorizing them into three scenarios : complete match , half match , and no match . It is important to note that since human expert analysis also includes subjectivity and bias , it cannot be considered a golden standard . The main purpose of this experiment is to showcase and quantitatively compare AutoTRIZ against human uses of TRIZ . Figure 4 shows the experimental results , where the bar chart of each case illustrates the top 3 detections by proportion . In the chart , green bars represent complete match , blue bars indicate half match , and yellow bars denote not match . The table in the bottom right corner shows the entropy of each case and whether the top 3 detections hit the reference from textbooks , with symbols ( ✓ , ✓ , ✗ ) indicating complete match , half match , and not match , respectively . Overall , 7 out of 10 cases match or half - match the textbook’s analysis within the top 3 detections , indicating that AutoTRIZ’s inference overlaps with the human experts’ results to a certain degree . A minority of the cases show 2 For further details on all collected cases , please refer to this GitHub repository : https : / / github . com / shuojiangcn / AutoTRIZ - DETC24 6 A RTIFICIAL I DEATION WITH TRIZ AND L ARGE L ANGUGAE M ODELS relatively higher consistency ( cases 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 ) , where the proportion of the top 1 detection is significantly higher than the other detections , including two complete match detections . For these cases , utilizing self - consistency may be beneficial to enhance performance . For other cases , the experimental results show greater diversity , indicated by higher information entropy . By examining the content of the top 3 detections of contradiction for each case , we observe that for almost all cases , one parameter is fixed while the other varies . Moreover , when using the textbook’s analysis as a reference , a pattern emerges across all cases where outputs with higher probabilities ( within the top 3 detections ) show a better match in alignment . These findings can serve as the initial benchmark for assessing the performance of AutoTRIZ’s contradiction identification . As the case base expands in the future , we can explore these patterns in a more fine - grained way with greater statistical significance . For example , we can examine the differences between various themes , leveraging techniques such as self - consistency reasoning in conjunction with the identified patterns to improve overall performance . Figure 4 : Experimental results about contradiction detection 4 . 3 Comparing AutoTRIZ and Human Expertise In this section , we select one of the collected cases ( case 7 ) to compare AutoTRIZ’s generated report with humans’ analysis results from the textbook . The reasons for choosing case 7 are two - fold : ( 1 ) This case exhibits relatively high 7 A RTIFICIAL I DEATION WITH TRIZ AND L ARGE L ANGUGAE M ODELS consistency in identifying engineering contradictions , with one dominant outcome ( refer to Figure 4 ) ; ( 2 ) The top 3 detections of contradiction are all half - match with the reference . This ensures a certain degree of reliability while allowing the distinction between the subsequent reasoning paths of AutoTRIZ and humans . The problem of case 7 is about the pneumatic transportation of metal shots through a system of plastic piping . Here is the original problem statement : We are faced with a challenge involving the pneumatic transportation of metal shots through a system of plastic piping originally intended for plastic pellets . The transition to metal shots , despite their advantages for production purposes , has led to significant wear and damage , particularly at the pipe’s elbows . This issue arises from the incompatibility between the metal shots and the existing plastic elbow design . The task is to identify and implement a solution that resolves this conflict , ensuring the system’s durability and effectiveness for transporting metal shots . In the textbook , the identified improving parameter is " speed " ( Parameter 9 ) , and the worsening parameter is " stability of the object’s composition " ( Parameter 13 ) . According to the contradiction matrix , the author selects " Mechanical Substitution " ( Principle 28 ) from the obtained inventive principles . Applying this principle , the author describes the solution as placing a magnet at the elbow to bind the metal shots to a plastic material , thereby creating a blanket of shots that absorb the energy . Figure 5 shows the problem - solving report generated by AutoTRIZ , containing the reasoning process and solutions . The same problem statement is used as the input . Firstly , we can see that AutoTRIZ simplifies the original problem statement , identifying the main issue that needs to be addressed . Regarding the identification of contradictions , AutoTRIZ diverges from human expertise . Both AutoTRIZ and the textbook’s analysis consistently recognize the " stability of the object’s composition " ( Parameter 13 ) as the worsening feature . However , concerning the improving feature , AutoTRIZ detects " Area of stationary object " ( Parameter 6 ) , while the textbook’s analysis considers it to be " speed " ( Parameter 9 ) . From the original problem statement , we understand that the key issue is to avoid wear on the plastic elbows by the metal shots to ensure durability , which clearly indicates that one of the contradictory parameters involves stability . Whereas the identification of the other parameter is not directly mentioned , leading to a variety of possible interpretations . AutoTRIZ reasons that the surface area needs improvement to withstand the impact and wear of the metal shot , while the expert asserts speed as the system’s top priority . These two analyses highlight different needs , thereby guiding subsequent innovative directions differently . In the textbook’s analysis , the author selected a single inventive principle ( 28 , ’Mechanical Substitution’ ) and created a solution by positioning a magnet at the piping’s elbow , which magnetically attaches metal shots to the plastic , forming an energy - absorbing layer . This approach represents a direct and effective innovation . However , based on the identified parameter pair , the contradiction matrix could yield four inventive principles ( i . e . , ( 28 , ’Mechanical substitution’ ) , ( 33 , ’Homogeneity’ ) , ( 1 , ’Segmentation’ ) , ( 18 , ’Mechanical vibration’ ) ) . Some principles may be challenging to apply , as the outcomes are directly influenced by the users’ reasoning ability , experience , and familiarity with TRIZ materials . This step also requires the most human effort in TRIZ . By comparison , AutoTRIZ can effectively overcome this issue . After identifying the contradiction ( Parameter 6 vs . Parameter 13 ) , AutoTRIZ identifies two inventive principles from the contradiction matrix ( i . e . , ( 2 , ’Extraction’ ) , ( 39 , ’Strong oxidants’ ) ) . For each principle , AutoTRIZ applies it and generates a corresponding solution . Both proposed solutions demonstrate feasibility and innovation . Solution 1 implements a physical alteration to prevent direct contact between the metal shots and the piping . Solution 2 , integrating ’Strong oxidants’ , involves a surface treatment to improve the piping’s durability against metal shots through a protective coating . In summary , both the textbook’s solution and the solutions automatically generated by AutoTRIZ are practical , originating from different inventive principles and leading to different approaches . It is important to note that these solutions are relatively preliminary and can serve as foundational directions for innovators to further develop and refine their designs . On this basis , we will continue to develop AutoTRIZ to produce more detailed solutions for the given problem . 8 A RTIFICIAL I DEATION WITH TRIZ AND L ARGE L ANGUGAE M ODELS Figure 5 : AutoTRIZ generated solution report for Case 7 5 Discussion By far , we have presented a new methodology that integrates LLMs and the systematic innovation method , TRIZ , to automatically generate inventive solutions for any given problem in an interpretable way . This methodology has been implemented into a web - based tool , AutoTRIZ . We have demonstrated its effectiveness and practicality through experiments and case studies . Prior studies [ 14 , 15 ] have assessed LLMs’ capabilities across a broad range of engineering - related tasks , revealing that these models ( especially GPT - series models ) hold extensive engineering knowledge , such as design and manufacturing . Therefore , in our framework , we only control the reasoning flow , without limiting the knowledge involved in the ideation process , to fully leverage the general knowledge and capabilities of LLMs . In this study , our case base of 10 problems spans multiple distinct domains , and AutoTRIZ has effectively generated inventive solutions in each case . The proposed method significantly reduces the entry barrier to TRIZ . AutoTRIZ can generate a multitude of solutions in a short period of time because it leverages the computational power and vast knowledge base of LLMs . This efficiency is further enhanced by its user - friendly interface , allowing for easy configuration and use , significantly reducing the time needed to ideate and refine problem - solving strategies . In contrast , mastering the traditional TRIZ method for professional use typically requires months of training and substantial intellectual and cognitive efforts [ 39 ] . 9 A RTIFICIAL I DEATION WITH TRIZ AND L ARGE L ANGUGAE M ODELS In the comparative study of case 7 , we observed that the problem statement contains information related to the desired direction of improvement , which is relevant to the contradiction . Such information aids in aligning AutoTRIZ’s detections with humans’ . Accordingly , as demonstrated in Figure 6 , we can incorporate multi - input configurations into the system , enabling AutoTRIZ to produce solutions that better meet user expectations . Figure 6 : The multi - input usages of AutoTRIZ Although this study focuses on automating the TRIZ reasoning process using LLMs , the proposed framework can be extended to automate other knowledge - based innovation methods . For instance , Yilmaz et al . [ 40 ] identified 77 design heuristics from over 3 , 000 design process outcomes , and suggested a subset of heuristics to designers to be selected at random has produced improved design outcomes [ 41 ] . By applying our framework to this research , one could treat the identified heuristics as an internal knowledge base for the LLM - based agent , determining how to utilize these heuristics at the backend . Moreover , to develop a more powerful tool , one could also integrate various knowledge - based idea generation methods into the reasoning modules behind LLMs , such as SCAMPER [ 42 ] , IDEO Method Cards [ 43 ] , Bio - inspired Design [ 44 ] , and Design - by - Analogy [ 45 , 46 , 47 ] . The proposed AutoTRIZ framework has several limitations . Firstly , the solutions generated by the LLMs may contain hallucinations or erroneous information . We plan to include fact - checking modules to ensure the accuracy of the solutions . Also , there is no objective mechanism to evaluate the effectiveness of generated solutions . Users must independently assess solution quality and rank them for practical use . Moreover , this study is demonstrated on a limited set of problem cases , providing only an initial insight into AutoTRIZ that might introduce some bias . In future research , we aim to apply this method to a broader and more diverse range of problems , systematically evaluating the AutoTRIZ’s performance . 6 Conclusion In this paper , we propose AutoTRIZ , an artificial ideation workflow and tool that leverages LLMs to automate the TRIZ methodology and enhance its applications . AutoTRIZ is constructed by 3 LLM - based reasoning modules and a pre - defined function module , interacting with the inner fixed knowledge base . It takes problem statements from users as initial inputs and automatically produces an interpretable solution report by following the step - by - step TRIZ reasoning process . The efficacy of this method is demonstrated and evaluated through quantitative and comparative experiments , as well as case studies involving human uses of TRIZ from TRIZ textbooks . Although this paper primarily focuses on integrating LLMs with TRIZ , the proposed framework holds the potential to be extended to other knowledge - based ideation methods , including SCAMPER , Design Heuristics , and Design - by - Analogy . Despite its current limitations , we invite interested innovators to test use AutoTRIZ at : https : / / www . autotriz . ai / . Disclosure statement No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author ( s ) . References [ 1 ] F Zwicky . The morphological approach to discovery , invention , research and construction . New Methods of Thought and Procedure , pages 273 – 297 , 1967 . 10 A RTIFICIAL I DEATION WITH TRIZ AND L ARGE L ANGUGAE M ODELS [ 2 ] Christina K White , Kristin L Wood , and Dan Jensen . From brainstorming to c - sketch to principles of historical innovators : ideation techniques to enhance student creativity . Journal of STEM Education : Innovations and Research , 13 , 2012 . [ 3 ] Bradley Camburn , Ryan Arlitt , David Anderson , Roozbeh Sanaei , Sujithra Raviselam , Daniel Jensen , and Kristin L Wood . Computer - aided mind map generation via crowdsourcing and machine learning . Research in Engineering Design , 31 : 383 – 409 , 2020 . [ 4 ] Genrikh Saulovich Altshuller . The innovation algorithm : TRIZ , systematic innovation and technical creativity . Technical innovation center Inc . , 1999 . [ 5 ] Gaetano Cascini and Davide Russo . Computer - aided analysis of patents and search for triz contradictions . International Journal of Product Development , 4 : 52 – 67 , 2007 . [ 6 ] Sawyer Hall , Calahan Mollan , Vijitashwa Pandey , and Zissimos Mourelatos . Triz mapping and novelty detection of engineering design patents using machine learning . International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference , 86267 : V006T06A044 , 2022 . [ 7 ] Guillaume Guarino , Ahmed Samet , and Denis Cavallucci . Patriz : A framework for mining triz contradictions in patents . Expert Systems with Applications , 207 : 117942 , 2022 . [ 8 ] Josh Achiam , Steven Adler , Sandhini Agarwal , Lama Ahmad , Ilge Akkaya , Florencia Leoni Aleman , Diogo Almeida , Janko Altenschmidt , Sam Altman , Shyamal Anadkat , et al . Gpt - 4 technical report . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2303 . 08774 , 2023 . [ 9 ] Hugo Touvron , Thibaut Lavril , Gautier Izacard , Xavier Martinet , Marie - Anne Lachaux , Timothée Lacroix , Baptiste Rozière , Naman Goyal , Eric Hambro , Faisal Azhar , et al . Llama : Open and efficient foundation language models . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2302 . 13971 , 2023 . [ 10 ] Jason Wei , Yi Tay , Rishi Bommasani , Colin Raffel , Barret Zoph , Sebastian Borgeaud , Dani Yogatama , Maarten Bosma , Denny Zhou , Donald Metzler , et al . Emergent abilities of large language models . Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2022 . [ 11 ] Karan Singhal , Shekoofeh Azizi , Tao Tu , S Sara Mahdavi , Jason Wei , Hyung Won Chung , Nathan Scales , Ajay Tanwani , Heather Cole - Lewis , Stephen Pfohl , et al . Large language models encode clinical knowledge . Nature , pages 1 – 9 , 2023 . [ 12 ] Daniil A Boiko , Robert MacKnight , Ben Kline , and Gabe Gomes . Autonomous chemical research with large language models . Nature , 624 : 570 – 578 , 2023 . [ 13 ] Bernardino Romera - Paredes , Mohammadamin Barekatain , Alexander Novikov , Matej Balog , M Pawan Kumar , Emilien Dupont , Francisco J R Ruiz , Jordan S Ellenberg , Pengming Wang , Omar Fawzi , et al . Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language models . Nature , 625 : 468 – 475 , 2024 . [ 14 ] Liane Makatura , Michael Foshey , Bohan Wang , Felix HähnLein , Pingchuan Ma , Bolei Deng , Megan Tjandra - suwita , Andrew Spielberg , Crystal Elaine Owens , Peter Yichen Chen , et al . How can large language models help humans in design and manufacturing ? arXiv preprint arXiv : 2307 . 14377 , 2023 . [ 15 ] Cyril Picard , Kristen M Edwards , Anna C Doris , Brandon Man , Giorgio Giannone , Md Ferdous Alam , and Faez Ahmed . From concept to manufacturing : Evaluating vision - language models for engineering design . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2311 . 12668 , 2023 . [ 16 ] Boheng Wang , Haoyu Zuo , Zebin Cai , Yuan Yin , Peter Childs , Lingyun Sun , and Liuqing Chen . A task - decomposed ai - aided approach for generative conceptual design . International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference , 87349 : V006T06A009 , 2023 . [ 17 ] Yi Han , Gaurav Nanda , and Mohsen Moghaddam . Attribute - sentiment - guided summarization of user opinions from online reviews . Journal of Mechanical Design , 145 : 41402 , 2023 . [ 18 ] Qihao Zhu , Xinyu Zhang , and Jianxi Luo . Biologically inspired design concept generation using generative pre - trained transformers . Journal of Mechanical Design , 145 : 41409 , 2023 . [ 19 ] Qihao Zhu and Jianxi Luo . Generative transformers for design concept generation . Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering , 23 : 41003 , 2023 . [ 20 ] Christian Spreafico and Davide Russo . Triz industrial case studies : a critical survey . Procedia Cirp , 39 : 51 – 56 , 2016 . [ 21 ] D Silverstein , N DeCarlo , and M Slocum . How to achieve competitive excellence using triz . NW : Taylor & Francis Group , 2008 . 11 A RTIFICIAL I DEATION WITH TRIZ AND L ARGE L ANGUGAE M ODELS [ 22 ] Zhen Li , Derrick Tate , Christopher Lane , and Christopher Adams . A framework for automatic triz level of invention estimation of patents using natural language processing , knowledge - transfer and patent citation metrics . Computer - aided design , 44 : 987 – 1010 , 2012 . [ 23 ] Daria Berdyugina and Denis Cavallucci . Automatic extraction of inventive information out of patent texts in support of manufacturing design studies using natural languages processing . Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing , 34 : 2495 – 2509 , 2023 . [ 24 ] Jianxi Luo . Data - driven innovation : What is it ? IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management , pages 1 – 19 , 2022 . [ 25 ] Shuo Jiang , Serhad Sarica , Binyang Song , Jie Hu , and Jianxi Luo . Patent data for engineering design : A critical review and future directions . Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering , 22 : 060902 , 2022 . [ 26 ] Matt D Nelson , Brady L Goenner , and Bruce K Gale . Utilizing chatgpt to assist cad design for microfluidic devices . Lab on a Chip , 23 : 3778 – 3784 , 2023 . [ 27 ] Francesco Stella , Cosimo Della Santina , and Josie Hughes . How can llms transform the robotic design process ? Nature Machine Intelligence , pages 1 – 4 , 2023 . [ 28 ] Amanda Li , Jason Wu , and Jeffrey P Bigham . Using llms to customize the ui of webpages . Adjunct Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , pages 1 – 3 , 2023 . [ 29 ] Yunjian Qiu and Yan Jin . Document understanding - based design support : Application of language model for design knowledge extraction . Journal of Mechanical Design , 145 : 121401 , 2023 . [ 30 ] Zijian Ding , Arvind Srinivasan , Stephen MacNeil , and Joel Chan . Fluid transformers and creative analogies : Exploring large language models’ capacity for augmenting cross - domain analogical creativity . Proceedings of the 15th Conference on Creativity and Cognition , pages 489 – 505 , 2023 . [ 31 ] Ziheng Huang , Kexin Quan , Joel Chan , and Stephen MacNeil . Causalmapper : Challenging designers to think in systems with causal maps and large language model . Proceedings of the 15th Conference on Creativity and Cognition , pages 325 – 329 , 2023 . [ 32 ] Xiangru Tang , Yiming Zong , Yilun Zhao , Arman Cohan , and Mark Gerstein . Struc - bench : Are large language models really good at generating complex structured data ? arXiv preprint arXiv : 2309 . 08963 , 2023 . [ 33 ] Peter Childs . Mechanical design engineering handbook . Butterworth - Heinemann , 2013 . [ 34 ] Michael A Orloff . Inventive thinking through TRIZ : a practical guide . Springer Berlin , Heidelberg , 2006 . [ 35 ] Michael A Orloff . Modern TRIZ : A practical course with easytriz technology . Springer Science & Business Media , 2012 . [ 36 ] Semyon D Savransky . Engineering of creativity : Introduction to TRIZ methodology of inventive problem solving . CRC press , 2000 . [ 37 ] Victor Fey and Eugene Rivin . Innovation on demand : new product development using TRIZ . Cambridge University Press , 2005 . [ 38 ] Xuezhi Wang , Jason Wei , Dale Schuurmans , Quoc Le , Ed Chi , Sharan Narang , Aakanksha Chowdhery , and Denny Zhou . Self - consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models . The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 5 2023 . [ 39 ] Imoh M Ilevbare , David Probert , and Robert Phaal . A review of triz , and its benefits and challenges in practice . Technovation , 33 : 30 – 37 , 2013 . [ 40 ] Seda Yilmaz , Shanna R . Daly , Colleen M . Seifert , and Richard Gonzalez . Evidence - based design heuristics for idea generation . Design Studies , 46 : 95 – 124 , 2016 . ISSN 0142694X . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2016 . 05 . 001 . [ 41 ] Shanna Daly , Seda Yilmaz , James L . Christian , Colleen M . Seifert , and Richard Gonzalez . Design heuristics in engineering concept generation . Journal of Engineering Education , 101 : 602 – 628 , 2012 . [ 42 ] Bob Eberle . Scamper on : Games for imagination development . Prufrock Press Inc . , 1996 . [ 43 ] IDEO . IDEO method cards : 51 ways to inspire design . William Stout , 2003 . [ 44 ] Katherine Fu , Diana Moreno , Maria Yang , and Kristin L Wood . Bio - inspired design : An overview investigating open questions from the broader field of design - by - analogy . ASME Journal of Mechanical Design , 136 : 111102 , 11 2014 . ISSN 1050 - 0472 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4028289 . [ 45 ] Shuo Jiang , Jie Hu , Kristin L Wood , and Jianxi Luo . Data - driven design - by - analogy : State - of - the - art and future directions . ASME Journal of Mechanical Design , 144 : 020801 , 2022 . 12 A RTIFICIAL I DEATION WITH TRIZ AND L ARGE L ANGUGAE M ODELS [ 46 ] Jeremy Murphy , Katherine Fu , Kevin Otto , Maria Yang , Dan Jensen , and Kristin Wood . Function based design - by - analogy : a functional vector approach to analogical search . ASME Journal of Mechanical Design , 136 ( 10 ) : 101102 , 2014 . [ 47 ] Jonathan Hey , Julie Linsey , Alice M Agogino , and Kristin L Wood . Analogies and metaphors in creative design . International Journal of Engineering Education , 24 ( 2 ) : 283 , 2008 . 13