Patent Mining - Discover y of Business Value from Patent Repositor ies Kas Kasravi , C . Mfg . E EDS kas . kasravi @ eds . com Maria Risov EDS maria . risov @ eds . com Abstract Thriving organizations are often driven by innovation and thought leadership . A patent is an instrument for recognizing innovation and protecting the interests of innovators . A substantial amount of patent data is freely and publicly available ; the compilation of this patent data forms a basis for patent mining . Effective patent mining requires patent valuation metrics , such as inventive value , improvement value , and market value . Patent mining can discover and extract knowledge from patent repositories . The discovered knowledge can provide early indications of new market trends , recognition of top inventors , identification of ideal patent law firms , and more . The knowledge gained from patent mining can be a basis for supporting critical business decisions . Disclaimer 1 - This paper references a number of topics related to intellectual property laws in the context of knowledge discovery . This paper does not provide legal advice in any form or fashion . The reader is encouraged to contact a patent attorney or appropriate legal counsel for legal advice . 2 - The analyses presented in this paper use publicly available data from the United States Patent and Trademark Office , including names of inventors , patent practitioners , and corporate assignees . The analyses discussed in this paper are limited in scope , and not intended to recommend , or degrade any individual or firm . 1 . Introduction The recent decade has seen an explosion in patent activities with more patents being filed , issued , and litigated . The US patent database , publicly available from the United States Patent and Trademark Office ( USPTO ) , contains over eight million issued and pending patents . Patents inherently involve inventions and reduction to practice . Such inventions are often at the core of new products and services , and a backbone of economic growth . In fact , the US Constitution recognized the impact of innovation on economic growth , allowing Congress to enact laws to promote the advancement of science and technology through a patent system . Patent repositories contain a substantial amount of information about the inventions , their inventors , assignees , etc . The massive amount of patent data that is freely available can be mined to extract useful knowledge and consequently make better business decisions . In order to realize such benefits , we recommend learning about the patent process , understanding the patent data schema , establishing metrics for patent valuation , and conducting analyses that can extract useful information from the patent data . Since most of the patent data is in textual form , we believe the applications of text mining are abundant . The knowledge hidden in the patent data can be extracted with data mining techniques . 2 . Patent Primer In order to mine patent data , it is essential to develop a basic understanding of the legal foundation for intellectual property , market trends , and the nature of the data that is collected about patents , and the patent process . Each country implements its own laws for managing their intellectual property . We provide a brief introduction to the patent laws in the United States . 2 . 1 Legal Foundation The roots of patents and their connection with economic growth are found in the US Constitution , where Article I , section 8 , clause 8 states : " To promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts , by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries " [ 1 ] . This clause in the first article of the Constitution recognized : 1 ) The necessity for advancements in science and technology . Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007 1 © 1530 - 1605 / 07 $ 20 . 00 2007 IEEE 2 ) The need to reward the inventors . 3 ) The need for the economy to benefit from the patented inventions . The result is a patent system that rewards the inventors with limited exclusive rights , requires the inventor to disclose all that is known about the invention , and allows the invention to enter the economy after a limited period of time . The US Congress developed 35 USC ( United States Code ) , which defines all statues relating to patents . The United States Patent and Trademark Office ( USPTO ) is charged with implementing the patent laws . 37 CFR ( Code of Federal Regulations ) and MPEP ( Manual of Patent Examination and Prosecution ) provide the rules and procedures to operate the patent system in the US . 2 . 2 Patents A patent for an invention is the grant of a property right to the inventor , issued by USPTO . Generally , the term of a new patent is 20 years from the date of filing , subject to the payment of maintenance fees . U . S . patent grants are effective only within the United States . Under certain circumstances , patent term extensions or adjustments may be available . The right conferred by the patent grant is “the right to exclude others from making , using , offering for sale , or selling” the invention in the United States or “importing” the invention into the United States . What is granted is not the right to make , use , offer for sale , sell or import , but the right to exclude others from making , using , offering for sale , selling or importing the invention . Patent is not an affirmative right , and therefore the patentee must enforce the patent without aid of the USPTO [ 2 ] . An invention is considered to be the conception of an idea , and its reduction to practice . Diligence in reducing an idea to practice is essential , and the dereliction of this duty may result in the loss of patent rights . There are three types of patents , 1 ) Design Patents , which only protect the ornamental aspects of an artifact , 2 ) Plant Patents , which protect new and distinct varieties of plants , and 3 ) Utility Patents , which protect new and useful processes , machines , article of manufactures , or compositions of matter , or any new and useful improvement thereof . In most cases , the word " patent " refers to a utility patent . The key patentability requirements are : (cid:120) Subject Matter ( 35 USC 101 ) : A process , machine , article of manufacture , or composition of matter may be patented . Subject matter has a very liberal definition in the US , and it essentially allows anything under the sun that is the result of human ingenuity to be patented . Non - patentable subject matter includes abstract ideas and mathematical formulae . (cid:120) Utility ( 35 USC 101 ) : A patent must be for an invention capable of achieving useful results . (cid:120) Novelty ( 35 USC 102 ) : An invention must be new and not previously disclosed . Various rules define novelty , such as the invention should not have been known or used in the US , or patented or published in any country , etc . (cid:120) Non - Obviousness ( 35 USC 103 ) : Trivial inventions won ' t do . A patent requires an invention that demonstrates a substantial level of ingenuity . (cid:120) Enablement ( 35 USC 112 ) : A patent is a bargained for exchange , where the government provides the inventor with limited exclusive rights , and in return the inventor must disclose all that is known about the invention and its best mode of creation and use . 2 . 3 Trade Secrets Trade secrets are not in the scope of this paper , but a very brief discussion is prudent . A trade secret is any secret formula or compilation of information used in an organization that provides competitive advantage . A trade secret is protected only to the extent that the secrecy is maintained . A trade secret can be legally discovered by an independent invention or reverse engineering . Therefore , trade secrets offer only minimal protection in cases where the competition can not independently develop the formula or process in question . 2 . 4 Market Trends A fairly substantial rise in patent activities has been observed during the past two decades . An unprecedented number of patents are being filed , many more patent infringement law suits are pursued , and the media discusses patents more than ever before . The USPTO data , as shown in Figure 1 , illustrates the rising number of patent filings and patent issuances during the past 20 years . It is also noteworthy that the flood of patent filings has led to a backlog in patent prosecution time , which now can be as high as 4 - 5 years . Patent litigation also exhibits a rising pattern that , not surprisingly , matches the overall trend in patent issuance . Figure 2 Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007 2 demonstrates the number of journal articles that discussed patents in the information technology industry from 1997 through 2004 . The target journals were CIO , ComputerWorld , eWeek , InformationWeek , Optimize , and Business 2 . 0 . The rapidly rising number of discussions about patent in this industry seems to match similar media discussions in other industries , and can appear to correlate with the patent filing and patent litigation trends . We conclude that : 1 ) organizations pursue patents more aggressively than ever before ; 2 ) patents play a more important role in the national economy ; and 3 ) analysis of patents can lead to useful business insights . 2 . 5 Patent Data Currently , the USPTO reports just over 7 million issued patents and about 1 . 5 million pending patents ( published and unpublished ) . As demonstrated above , market trends also indicate that patent activities are aggressively on the rise . USPTO ' s patent database is freely available to the general public . Each issued or pending patent is defined with a large number of fields in the database . Examples of such fields are Inventors and Assignees , Locations , Fields of inventions , National and International patent classes , Claims , Backward and Forward references , Dates , and Maintenance status . The full text of patents are stored in XML format including the abstracts , specifications , and claims and are machine - accessible . This large repository of issued and pending patent data holds critical information about technologies and innovations that drive the global economy . This database can serve as a valuable source for data mining and knowledge discovery , leading to facts , trends , and predictions that can support business decisions . 2 . 6 Patent Process The patent prosecution is a fairly complex process that spans multiple years . We present a highly simplified view of this process in Figure 3 to illustrate the opportunity for certain types of data mining . We must stress that the lifecycle of each patent and its prosecution are different , and Figure 3 only provides an example of such process . In general , an inventor creates an invention by first conceiving an idea , and subsequently reducing the idea to practice . In most cases , USPTO accepts a constructive reduction to practice , which is sufficient documentation and drawings to teach a person of ordinary skill in the art how to build the invention without undue experimentation . Therefore , a patent application can be filed soon after the inventor has fully documented the invention . The filing date is a critical date in the patent process , as it starts the clock and begins the 20 - years of protection . Generally , the patent application is published 18 months after the filing date . When published , the patent application is available to the general public via USPTO ' s web site . USPTO investigate prior art , evaluate the invention , communicates with the inventor , issues office actions , and eventually grants or denies the application . After the issue date , the inventor / assignee enjoy the full protection of law . After the filing date , an inventor / assignee can refer to the invention is having a patent pending , and may publicize the invention or offer it for sale . In most cases , commercialization efforts or infringement cases begin after a patent has been issued . It can be observed that the period of time between the publication date and the issuance date has an interesting property . During this time , the invention is fully disclosed to the public , but usually not commercialized . We call this the prediction window , a period of time that inventions can be used as a predictor in at least three modalities : 1 ) By studying the competitors ' patents , we can discover the products or services they may be planning to offer in the near future . 2 ) By studying our own patent portfolio , we can discover new marketing opportunities . 3 ) By studying patents from a certain market segment , we can discover the likely industry trends . In above cases , business managers gain insights into possible future states of their markets , and can base decisions on such knowledge . 3 . Patent Valuation Patent is a form of property , and inherently calls for valuation . Value may be tangible , in terms of money , or intangible , in terms of recognition and credibility . A patent can present multiple forms of value , and most types of patent analyses would benefit from some form of patent valuation . Can we analyze the USPTO ' s database and tell if an invention is brilliant or mundane ? Can we predict that a new technology is the next big thing ? And of course , what are the financial implications ? Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007 3 Questions about patent valuation have been investigated by many authors and researches , though , no definitive answer has been found yet . We will briefly refer to several main approaches for patent valuation , together with the challenges that researchers in the field are facing . Evaluating patents in a traditional property sense may help to justify corporate investments , predict the direction of technology development , evaluate individual company assets , and explore inventive landscape within any individual company , which in turn may lead to better business decisions . In case patents are considered for trading or commercialization , we should consider corporate cross - licensing opportunities , sales support , competitive advantage and the innovation profile of an organization . Arguably , patents could be perfect resources described by Barney’s [ 12 ] sustained competitive advantage concept . Patents are valuable if pertain to the firm’s service profile ; they may be rare if competition does not file in the same space ; and , patents protect the firm from identical services being provided by competition . Another factor , the probability of litigation , denotes a very important opportunity . A less traditional , but very important application would be validation of the Patent Office practices , as was suggested in [ 4 ] . Valuation can be performed on the individual patent , corporate portfolio , a specific industry , or the entire collection of patents . 3 . 1 Valuation Challenges A challenge in patent valuation is finding a set of patents that are proven to be valuable . For instance , patents disputed in court can be presumed valuable ; however , only 1 % of all patents have been litigated , which does not imply that the remaining 99 % has no value . Another indicator of market value would be tied to the rise and fall of a firm ' s stock in tandem with certain inventions being issued . However , to some degree , this is a circular problem . A stock may change based on an estimated value of a patent , but the value remains unknown . While the patent data is easy to obtain from public databases such as the USPTO , additional data , such as litigation history or past market trends , may not be as readily available . Another typical challenge is sorting patents by technological category . The conventional analysis has to resort to a category of patents more or less clearly defined by patent classes . The current patent classification by International and US classes is both complex and not suitable for general field identification . For instance , there are 158 , 276 US patent classes . An alternative approach is recoding the sample used in a study by technology , without relying on patent classes . Hall [ 5 ] reduced the number of patent classes in the sample from 400 classes to 36 human - defined categories , while Allison et al . [ 6 ] hand - coded the categories based on the patent content rather than class . And finally , Teichert and Mittermayer [ 3 ] outlined automated patent text categorization techniques using commercial tools such as IBM Intelligent Miner for Text and SAS Enterprise Miner . Contextual assessment and its extension , such as dynamic comparison of the patent in question to similar technology patents are used by at least two patent valuation firms , Ocean Tomo [ 7 ] and PatentCafe [ 8 ] . 3 . 2 Patent Value Indicators Several patent characteristics commonly tested for their correlation with patent value are the following : citations received from other patents ( forward citations ) ; citations made to other patents and non - patent literature ( backward citations ) ; family size that indicates filing in multiple countries ; generality denoting the number of classes the patent span ; , originality showing dispersion of citations made ; number of inventors ; number of international cooperations ; accelerated examination or publication request ; number of claims ; and , average number of words per claim . For entire portfolio valuations , such indexes as citation density ( average number of citations per patent ) are used , as well as simple and weighted patent counts [ 9 ] . 3 . 3 Patent Value Modalities Early on , it was evident that patent value may have more than one definition . Therefore , differentiation between technological quality and market value is quite common in the literature . Terminology used to describe these differences varies from author to author , for instance Social vs . Private Value or Invention Value vs . Patent Value [ 6 ] . Another major classification refers to an individual patent value [ 6 ] or a value of the entire firm portfolio [ 9 ] . We would like to extend this classification by distinguishing three modes : Inventive Value , Improvement Value and Market Value . Our present work is focused on the individual patent value . However , we propose company and industry assessments as extensions of this analysis . 3 . 3 . 1 Inventive Value - Inventive value is based on originality of the patented idea . In this case , a patent may be treated as any other scientific source and Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007 4 measured only in terms of its distance from any prior art , and at the same time inducing a flood of follow - up inventions . Therefore , by analogy with the scientific community , we propose that the most inventive patents accumulate large numbers of citations received , and in turn , lack extensive prior art citations . To refine the measure , citations from other assignees may play a more important role than self - citations as they indicate active recognition of the idea by the inventor community . Highly original ideas may give birth to a new technology . However , they may not be complete enough to be of economic significance , and require revisions and improvements that would make them commercially viable . The examples of patent mining provided in section 4 are limited to this form of valuation only . Based on the above discussion , we introduced a simple Inventive Patent Value index ( IPV ) and adjusted it for the fact that any publication has more chance to receive more references with age . Hence , IPV = ( ForwardRef + 1 ) / ( ( BackwardRef + 1 ) * ( 0 . 23 * Age + 0 . 3017 ) ) . The numeric IPV values were sorted into the High ( > = 0 . 5 ) , Medium ( > = 0 . 15 , < 0 . 5 ) , and Low ( < 0 . 15 ) bins in order to obtain meaningful results from the data mining . Both regression parameters and the bin borders depend on the specific data set and research questions . A detailed discussion of the value index deserves a separate discussion and is beyond the scope of this paper . 3 . 3 . 2 Improvement Value - Improvement value can be defined as the measure that converts a brilliant , albeit unusable idea into a commercially viable technology . According to [ 10 ] , citations that are close in technology tend to come relatively early in the patent life . Self - citations may also indicate a continuation of the idea development rather than a completely novel concept . 3 . 3 . 3 . Market Value - Market value is the assessed value of a patent at which it can be sold , litigated , or would bring indirect gains by stopping a competitor from occupying the same space . As [ 5 ] points out , an average increase of one forward citation per patent in an organization ' s patent portfolio results in three percent increase in the market value of the patent portfolio . In addition to citations received , [ 5 ] also points out that a cluster of self - citations provide a “closeness - to - market” measure , while the same measure can be also supported by accelerated examination requests . [ 11 ] points out that frequent citations right after an application indicate the market expectation of economic value . In general , market valuation remains the most important and the most elusive metric for patent valuation . 4 . Patent Mining Finding valuable , rare and non - repeatable assets of a firm is not the only goal of the patent analysis . Exploring competitive and customer trends , making wise human resource choices , as well as improving the patent prosecution process itself can be simplified with the various methods of patent analysis . In order to reach these goals , various data mining techniques can be involved , such as pattern recognition , link analysis , clustering , classification and GIS , to name a few . In all cases that patent classes were utilized as categorical values , labels obtained with text classification techniques , such as Naïve Bayes , Support Vector Machines ( SVM ) or Latent Semantic Analysis ( LSI ) , to name a few , would be of an equal or a greater value . In this section , we review some of our analyses and additional ideas for further investigation . First , we discuss the methodology used , and then present several different types of patent mining . It must be stressed that the analyses presented here are based on limited data and limited scope . The reader is encouraged to be inspired by these analyses , and if interested , conduct further investigation based on more realistic and relevant data . Further , the analyses presented in this section are only a few examples of a much broader range of patent mining analysis that is possible . The reader is also encouraged to explore other types of knowledge that can be extracted from patent databases . 4 . 1 Methodology Our analysis consisted of the following key steps : 1 ) Define the goals of analysis and sample reports . 2 ) Select tools ( database , data mining , text mining etc . ) . 3 ) Focus on an industry ( e . g . manufacturing ) . 4 ) Identify a set of organizations considered to be major players in the industry . 5 ) Download the patent data for the selected organizations . 6 ) Create a cleansed database of the patent data . 7 ) Adjust and modify the fields as needed . 8 ) Statistically and manually review the patent classes and select the patent classes most relevant to the industry . 9 ) If necessary , extract additional data from the text of patents , using text mining ( information Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007 5 extraction ) , and augment the database accordingly . 10 ) Compute IPV for each patent , and add to the database . 11 ) Conduct target analysis . 12 ) Use data mining for serendipitous discovery of additional knowledge . Our analysis considered two industries , manufacturing and information technology ( IT ) . The goals , outcome and further opportunities are discussed in the following sub - sections . For the manufacturing industry , we downloaded 424 patents belonging to the following corporations : Boston Scientific ; Cooper Industries ; Electrolux ; Exide ; Foamex ; International Paper ; Northstar Bluescope ; PGI ; Sun ; and Timken . We selected the following US patent classes for this industry : (cid:120) 075 - Specialized metallurgical processes , metal powder compositions , loose metal particulate mixtures (cid:120) 083 - Cutting (cid:120) 123 - Internal combustion engines (cid:120) 229 - Envelopes , wrappers , and paperboard boxes (cid:120) 384 - Bearings (cid:120) 428 - Stock material or miscellaneous articles (cid:120) 709 - Electrical computers and digital processing systems : multi - computer data transferring or plural processor synchronization For the IT industry , we conducted a larger study by downloaded 20517 patent belonging to one of the following corporations : Accenture . Avaya . BEA . BearingPoint ; Cosco ; Crossmark ; Dell ; Deloitte ; EDS ; EMC ; Exigen ; First Data ; HP ; I2 ; IBM ; Microsoft ; Oracle ; Perot Systems ; SAP ; Satyam Computer Services ; Sun Microsystems ; Tata ; Terradata ( NCR ) ; Tibco ; Towers Perrin ; Unisys ; and Xerox . We selected the following US patent classes for this industry : (cid:120) 380 - Cryptography (cid:120) 700 - Data processing : generic control systems , or specific applications (cid:120) 702 - Data processing : measuring , calibrating , or testing (cid:120) 703 - Data processing : structural design , modeling , simulation , and emulation (cid:120) 704 - Data processing : speech signal processing , linguistics , language translation , and audio compression / decompression (cid:120) 705 - Data processing : financial , business practice , management , or cost / price determination (cid:120) 706 - Data processing : artificial intelligence (cid:120) 707 - Data processing : database and file management or data structures (cid:120) 709 - Electrical computers and digital processing systems : multicomputer data transferring or plural processor synchronization (cid:120) 714 - Error detection / correction and fault detection / recovery (cid:120) 717 - Data processing : software development , installation , and management We used Microsoft SQL database and the PolyAnalyst tool by Megaputer for data and text mining . The sample analysis presented displays two types of charts , a line chart for pattern identification and a link chart for quick identification of highly correlated values of any categorical field pair . 4 . 2 Patent Issuance Perhaps the most basic form of patent analysis is simply reviewing patent issuance records . Figure 4 illustrates patent award records by patent class collectively for a group of manufacturing corporations from 1990 to 2005 . For example , it is clear from Figure 4 that inventions related to US patent class 229 ( envelopes , wrappers , and paperboard boxes ) are on a decline , but more inventions in US patent class 384 ( bearings ) are taking place . Of course , such conclusions are in the context of the corporations and patents used in the analysis . Similar analysis can be performed focusing on individual companies , allowing the assessment of a corporation ' s technical direction and intellectual assets in comparison with other corporations . 4 . 3 Recent Patent Filings Exploring recent patent filings can reveal the newest technological advances that have not been registered by the market . In a sense , recent patent filings are early indicators of what might be coming to the market soon . Figure 5 depicts the recent patent filing activities by a group of manufacturing corporations since 2001 . A simple review of such data can point out the industry ' s general R & D direction , and perhaps what products or services that are likely to be introduced in the near future . Such analysis can also be performed on individual Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007 6 corporations to help identify strengths , weaknesses , and opportunities . For example , Figure 6 is a comparative analysis of the patent filing activities by a target company ( name withheld ) and other manufacturing companies . This analysis illustrates that the target company has been substantially leading the market with inventions that deal with bearing ( US class 384 ) , but lag with inventions in the area of internal combustion engines ( US class 123 ) . The target company may use such information to create a portfolio of bearings and lead the market . The competition may use this information to increase R & D investments in bearings before it’s too late . The technique described above , depending on the target , may provide the means for an individual firm self - diagnostics or reveal the strengths or weaknesses of a close rival as was also suggested by [ 3 ] . Reviewing a customer’s patent portfolio in a similar manner may point to their interests and needs , which should help the vendor with positioning and development of services . 4 . 4 Inventor Analysis Each patent accurately records the inventor ( s ) . Therefore , patent databases can be mined to search for knowledge about the thought leaders in a particular industry , class of inventions , or geographic location . Figure 7 illustrates a link chart associating various information technology inventors with IPV ; that is , who are the inventors responsible for patents with high inventive values ( note : only high IPV inventors are presented in Figure 7 for illustrative purposes ) . Such knowledge may be used by corporations for recruiting purposes , retention purposes , and other business objectives dependent on the specialists . 4 . 5 Geographic Analysis Patent databases record the geographic information associated with inventors and assignees . Figure 8 shows the geographic distribution of a group of IT patents as a function of their inventive quality . In this case patents from inventors in California had the highest inventive value . Such analysis can also be performed on the location of assignees , patent classes etc . , and leading to better supporting decisions with a geographic component . 4 . 6 Law Firm Analysis Most corporations use the professional services of outside patent law firms to prosecute their patent applications . Patent databases record the patent law firms and / or the patent practitioners who prosecute patents . A novel strategy for selecting appropriate patent law firms can also be based on the industry patent analysis . By exploring correlations of law firm names and technological areas , patent professionals that specialize in particular technological areas may be identified . Such correlations may be based on a deeper expertise with that particular type of technology , so patents written by them would be of a higher quality . Such firms could be specifically selected to process patents that correspond to their expertise . Figure 9 illustrates a correlation among a number of patent practitioners and the inventive values of the patents they have prosecuted . As this result is very sensitive , we have anonymized the entity associated with the low value patents . Such results may be brought up by multiple factors , such close ties with a particular group of inventors , or special skills of the patent attorneys in understanding the importance of invention and drafting the patent claims in the most effective manner . Similarly , the correlation among patent practioners and US patent classes can be studied to identify the patent practitioners who consistently prosecute more patents of a particular class , presumably due to greater knowledge and expertise in those disciplines . In fairness , one must remember that the reality involves many factors not considered in this paper , and therefore no qualitative judgment must be drawn from the analysis presented here . Although the names of individuals and corporations used in this paper are a matter of public record , the analysis is only exemplary and not meant to be a recommendation for or against any individual or company . 4 . 7 Further Analysis Not every suggested technique has been described in detail . For instance , we presented patent categorization based on the standard USPTO classification . However , text classification techniques would be desirable in order to refine the results . Moreover , the entire new area of applications may be opened with concept - based patent retrieval . Besides improving relevancy of data sets obtained for competitive analysis , concept - based search is expected to help both new inventors and USPTO examiners identify proper prior art with more speed and accuracy when used in conjunction with the patent class and keyword search performed today . Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007 7 5 . Conclusion Patents represent innovation and are of critical value to forward looking organizations . Publicly available patent databases contain a substantial amount of patent data suitable for mining . Effective patent mining requires valid patent valuation metrics , including inventive value , improvement value , and market value . Upon compiling appropriate patent data and having a relevant patent evaluation metric at hand , it is possible to analyze patent data and extract knowledge and rules as a foundation for better business decision support . Examples of patent mining include patent trend analysis by industry , competition , clients , and discovery of possible future products and services ; identifying the innovators for recruiting and retention purposes ; analysis of geographic correlations with inventions ; and , identification of the specialties of patent law firms . The patent data is rich , and patent mining can extract many other forms of knowledge from patent repositories . 6 . References [ 1 ] United States Constitution - Article I . [ 2 ] United State Patent and Trademark Office web site , ( www . uspto . gov ) . [ 3 ] Teichert , Thorsten and Marc - André Mittermayer , “Text Mining for Technology Monitoring” , Proceedings of the 2002 IEEE International Engineering Management Conference IEMC - 2002 , Cambridge 2002 . [ 4 ] Dent , Chris . “Decision - Making and Quality in the Patent Examination Process : An Australian Exploration , ” IPRIA working papers 01 . 06 , Intellectual Property Research Institute of Australia , 2006 . [ 5 ] Hall , Bronwyn H . , Adam Jaffe , and Manuel Trajtenberg , " Market Value and Patent Citations : A First Look , " Economics Working Papers E00 - 277 , University of California at Berkeley , 2000 . [ 6 ] Allison , John R . , Mark A . Lemley , Kimberly A . Moore , and R . Derek Trunkey , " Valuable Patents , " Boalt Working Papers in Public Law . Paper 28 , 2003 . [ 7 ] Unspecified author , ”Scoring the Quality of Patents” , Ocean Tomo Patent Ratings , ( www . patentratings . com ) . [ 8 ] Gibbs , Andy , “Latent Semantic Analysis : New Intellectual Property Data Search Technology for Non - Obvious Licensing Opportunities , ” LES 2004 Workshops # 8 , Licensing Executives Society 2004 Winter Meeting , 2004 . [ 9 ] Trajtenberg , Manuel , “A Penny for Your Quotes : Patent Citations and the Value of Innovations , ” The RAND Journal of Economics , Vol . 21 , No . 1 . pp . 172 - 187 , 1990 . [ 10 ] Lanjouw , Jean O and Mark Schankerman , “The Quality of Ideas : Measuring Innovation with Multiple Indicators , ” NBER Working Papers 7345 , National Bureau of Economic Research , Inc . , 1999 . [ 11 ] Hall , Bronwyn H . , Adam Jaffe , and Manuel Trajtenberg , " The NBER Patent Citations Data File : Lessons , Insights and Methodological Tools , " NBER Working Papers 8498 , National Bureau of Economic Research , Inc . , 2001 . [ 12 ] Barney , Jay , “Firm Resources and Sustained Competitive Advantage” , Journal of Management , 17 ( 1 ) , pp . 99 - 120 . , 1991 . 7 . Figures Figure 1 . US Patent Trends , 1986 - 2005 Figure 2 . IT Patent Journal Articles Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007 8 Timeline ConceptionDate FilingDate PublicationDate IssueDate Prediction Window Commercialization 18 Months Timeline ConceptionDate FilingDate PublicationDate IssueDate Prediction Window Commercialization 18 Months Figure 3 . Patent Process Figure 4 Sample Patent Class Award Trends Figure 5 . Sample Patent Class Filing Trends Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007 9 Figure 6 . Sample Company Comparison Figure 7 . Sample Inventor Analysis Figure 8 . Sample Inventor Location Analysis Figure 9 . Sample Attorney Analysis Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2007 10