JfB ( 2005 ) 55 : 63 – 78 DOI 10 . 1007 / s11301 - 004 - 0002 - 8 STATE - OF - THE - ART - ARTIKEL Eric von Hippel Democratizing innovation : The evolving phenomenon of user innovation Received : 7 October 2004 / Accepted : 22 December 2004 © Eric von Hippel 2005 Abstract Almost 30 years ago , researchers began a systematic study of innovation by end users and user ﬁrms . At that time , the phenomenon was generally regarded as a minor oddity . Today , it is clear that user - centered innovation is a very powerful and general phenomenon . It is rapidly growing due to continuing advances in computing and communication technologies . It is becoming both an important rival to and an important feedstock for manufacturer - centered innovation in many ﬁelds . In this article , I provide an overview of what the international research community now understands about user - centered innovation . Keywords User innovation · product development JEL classiﬁcations O32 · O33 Zusammenfassung Die wissenschaftliche Forschung zu Nutzerinnovationen be - gann vor etwa 30 Jahren . Während das Phänomen anfangs noch als eher unbe - deutende Kuriosität abgetan wurde , steht seine allgemeine Bedeutung heute außer Frage . Bedingt durch Fortschritte in IT und Kommunikationstechnologien stellen Nutzerinnovationen in verschiedenen Feldern eine zunehmende Konkurrenz bzw . eine wertvolle Ergänzung für herstellerseitige Innovationsaktivitäten dar . In diesem Artikel wird eine Übersicht über den Stand der Forschung gegeben . Schlüsselwörter Nutzerinnovation · Produktentwicklung Readers interested in exploring the evolving phenomenon of democratizing innovation in more depth and detail may wish to read Eric von Hippel , Democratizing Innovation , MIT Press , April , 2005 . In addition to the printed version , an electronic version will be available for cost free download from the MIT Press website ( MITPress . mit . edu ) under a Creative Commons license . E . von Hippel ( B ) MIT Sloan School of Management , 50 Memorial Drive , E52 - 556 , Cambridge , MA 02139 , USA E - mail : evhippel @ mit . edu 64 E . von Hippel When researchers say that innovation is being democratized , we mean that users of products and services – both ﬁrms and individual consumers – are increasingly able to innovate for themselves . User - centered innovation processes offer great advantages over the manufacturer - centric innovation development systems that have been the mainstay of commerce for hundreds of years . Users that innovate can develop exactly what they want , rather than relying on manufacturers to act as their ( often very imperfect ) agents . Moreover , individual users do not have to develop everything they need on their own : they can beneﬁt from innovations developed and freely shared by others . User - centered innovation processes are very different from the traditional , manufacturer - centric model , in which products and services are developed by manufacturers in a closed way , with the manufacturers using patents , copyrights , andotherprotectionstopreventimitatorsfromfreeridingontheirinnovationinvest - ments . In the manufacturer - centric model , a user’s only role is to have needs , which manufacturers then identify and ﬁll by designing and producing new products . This traditional model does ﬁt some ﬁelds and conditions . However , a growing body of empirical work shows that users are the ﬁrst to develop many and perhaps most new industrial and consumer products . Further , there is good reason to believe that the importance of product and service development by users is increasing over time . The trend toward democratization of innovation applies to information products such as software and also to physical products , and is being driven by two related technical trends : ( 1 ) the steadily improving design capabilities ( innovation toolkits ) that advances in computer hardware and software make possible for users ; ( 2 ) the steadily improving ability of individual users to combine and coordinate their innovation - related efforts via new communication media such as the Internet . The ongoing shift of innovation to users has some very attractive qualities . It is becoming progressively easier for many users to get precisely what they want by designing it for themselves . Innovation by users also provides a very necessary complement to and feedstock for manufacturer innovation . And innovation by users appears to increase social welfare . At the same time , the ongoing shift of product - development activitiesfrom manufacturers to users is painful and difﬁcult for many manufacturers . Open , distributed innovation is “attacking” a major structure of the social division of labor . Many ﬁrms and industries must make fundamental changes to long - held business models in order to adapt . Further , governmental policy and legislation sometimes preferentially supports innovation by manufacturers . Con - siderations of social welfare suggest that this must change . The workings of the intellectual property system are of special concern . But despite the difﬁculties , a de - mocratized and user - centric system of innovation appears well worth striving for . Today a number of innovation process researchers are working to develop our understanding of user - centered innovation processes . In this paper , I offer a review of some collective learnings on this important topic to date . 1 Importance of innovation by users Users , as I use the term , are ﬁrms or individual consumers that expect to beneﬁt from using a product or a service . In contrast , manufacturers expect to beneﬁt from selling a product or a service . A ﬁrm or an individual can have different relation - ships to different products or innovations . For example , Boeing is a manufacturer of