Team Memory : Information Management For Business Teams Joline Morrison Department of Management Sciences College of Business Administratibn University of Iowa Iowa City , IA 52242 Abstract A need exists to organize , integrate , and annotate information generated by business teams . To investigate this domain , a prototype " Team Memory " system has been developed based on prior theory in the domains of team and organizational memory , similar systems with related features , and data gathered from a case study of four longitudinal workgroups supported by an electronic collaboration system . This prototype provides a platform for information support during and between team collaboration tasks by enabling team members to access items such as team membership and member information , past meeting documentation , team work - in - progress , and miscellaneous electronically - stored data related to team projects . It lays the groundwork for future research that can contribute to theory and knowledge in the domains of team and organizational memory . 1 . Introduction Existing group decision support systems such as Groupsystems and SAMM primarily support groups working in face - to - face environments on single tasks or groups of related tasks ( i . e . , agendas ) . Collaborative data integration systems such as Lotus Notes serve to integrate data items among group members , but do not specifically address the support of groups working on complex tasks involving ongoing collaboration and integration of data from multiple sources ( i . e . , projects ) . Such groups can be characterized as business teams : they are motivated to work together towards a common goal , and are usually addressing complex tasks that require ongoing collabora - tion . Team projects often consist of a series of team meetings over time , with individual or sub - team work occurring between meetings ( for examples , see [ 3 , 131 ) . Dimensions of team support within electronic collaboration environments can be illustrated by expanding Dennis et al . ' s [ 9 ] taxonomy of group support environments ( Figure 1 ) . They suggest that electronic collaboration environ - Figure 1 - Team Support Within Electronic Collaboration Environments ments enable groups to meet along two categories of Task Time Dispersion ( Same Time or Different TIme ) , two categories of Group Size ( Large and Small ) , and three categories of Group Proximity ( Multiple Individual Sites , One Group Site , or Multiple Group Sites ) . Each aggre - gation of blocks represents one meeting within this framework . A series of meetings and their associated be - tween - meeting activities over time can be thought to represent a Team Process . Since the term " meeting " often has a face - to - face connotation , meetings within an ongoing team context will hereafter be called collaborative tasks . At the present time , teams often manage their data either manually ( by sharing file folders and floppy disks ) or through organizational databases . Manual data management is often unsatisfactory because high volumes of data are often generated and used and may become disorganized or lost ; data stored in a single place may be inconvenient for some group members to access ; if multi - ple members are working on the same item , multiple 0 - 8186 - 1060 - 3425 / 93 $ 03 . 00 0 1993 IEEE 122 versions of data may exist ; links explaining relationships among data items may be unapparent to some team members or become obscured over time ; and work may be needlessly repeated because workers are unaware that projects similar to a current task have been done in the past . Organizational databases usually do not have the ability to integrate data created on the variety of different hardware or software platforms often found in team projects , and often do not provide facilities to manage data items within concurrent collaboration environments . A need exists to organize , integrate , filter , con - dense , and annotate collaborative data and other relevant information and place it in a common repository that is easily accessible by team members , managers , and other interested ( and authorized ) personnel . This concept is illustrated in Figure 2 , whereby the information generated within and between collaborative tasks is managed in a " Team Memory " that stores and processes relevant infor - mation to support both current and future team and organizational processes . Access to " public " information relevant to the project but not created by the project team and residing on external platforms such as organizational databases and files should be available as well . ' igure 2 - The Team Memory Concept The goal of this research is to investigate the domain of data management for ongoing team collabora - tion through development of a prototype Team Memory system . This prototype and the knowledge gained from its development can then be used to further investigate requirements and characteristics of ongoing team collabo - ration , and ultimately increase the quality and efficiency of organizational collaboration . The purpose of this paper is to present preliminary research results of this systems development effort . A brief review of background theoretical literature and descriptions of similar existing systems will be presented , and the research approach will be described . Preliminary system requirements based on case study data generated by four longitudinal groups working in an electronic collabo - ration support environment and integrated with theoretical literature will be outlined , and the system ' s architecture , design , and implementation will be described . Results of the initial system evaluation will be presented , and conclusions and future research areas will be identified . 2 . Background Literature : Organizational Memory Concepts and Similar Systems Existing literature suggests that organizational memory is a device for integrating organizational knowl - edge and providing information from the past that can potentially aid present decision making situations [ 18 , 431 . Team memory appears to be a subset of organizational memory , with many similar characteristics . Walsh and Ungson [ 43 ] propose that organizational groups have a " collective memory " in the sense that members help each other evoke remembrances , and that this collective memo - ry contributes to the organization ' s memory . Yates [ 47 ] defines an " active " organizational memory as a device that allows organizations " to store and retrieve knowledge of facts , processes or experiences . " March and Olsen [ 24 ] suggested that " past events , promis - es , goals , assumptions , and behaviors " are stored in organizational memory ; Argyris and Schon [ 4 ] assert that " learning agents ' discoveries , inventions , and evaluations must be embedded in organizational memory . " Hall ' s macro model of organizational policy making [ 151 propos - es that an organization ' s memory , termed the retained set , consists of standard procedures for reducing equivocality ; the current orientation or strategy used by the organization to engage its environment ; the present social architecture directing future demands on resources ; and , current maps of causality ( paths that lead from policy to achievement of goals ) . All of these sources imply that organizational memory embodies both " hard " data sources ( database records , standard operating policies , etc . ) as well as " soft " sources ( stories , artifacts , recollections of critical incidents and details behind strategic decisions , etc . ) . Walsh and Ungson [ 43 ] distinguish between decision information ( information to reduce equivocality between decision makers ) and memory ( stored information about a decision stimulus and its corresponding response ) . This suggests that a system to support organizational memory should support both the underlying information used to make a decision as well as the decision making process . Information retrieval processes have been charac - terized as a continuum ranging from automatic , whereby I23 information is recalled effortlessly and intuitively , to controlled , whereby information is retrieved purposefully and consciously [ 21 , 26 ) . This suggests the need for flexible retrieval mechanisms within team and organiza - tional memory systems . Organizational memory can be used to integrate information across organizational boundaries , and as an aid to organizational decision making [ 43 ] . Proponents of the organizational memory concept argue that the formalization of organizational experiences and procedures can decrease transactional costs and enable decisions to be implemented more efficiently [ 43 ] ; additionally , organizational memory may facilitate problem definition [ 26 ] , planning , and future strategy implementation [ 161 . Huber [ 181 suggests that an organizational memory is desirable because of the inade - quacies of human memory , personnel turnover , information loss due to non - anticipation of future events , and a lack of information sharing among organizational members . Weick [ 46 ] suggests that organizational memory is an essential component to the organizational learning process . Critics of organizational memory maintain that belief structures developed according to experiences in an information environment can blind decision makers to situational aspects that can ultimately compromise organi - zational effectiveness [ 42 ] . Some have gone so far as to suggest that memory is an enemy of organizations because it can reinforce a single - loop learning style and thus maintain the status quo [ 4 , 231 . These liabilities suggest that the use of organizational memory leads to a pro - grammed decision making style by using past decision making performances to guide present courses of action . To avoid such pitfalls , Ackoff [ 2 ] suggests that organiza - tional memory should primarily be used for monitoring and supporting decision processes rather than as a template for future unrelated situations . Existing computer - based systems with organiza - tional memory characteristics can be classified as systems primarily for ( 1 ) information integration or ( 2 ) decision support . Information integration systems include object - oriented databases such as CARAT [ 34 ] , which provides an environment for research workgroups to flexibly store , search , index , and retrieve data objects not conducive to traditional relational database tables ; and , the Worm Community Project [ 33 ] ) , which provides an electronic data repository for data generated within a community of molecular biologists working with a particular worm microorganism . Alternately , hypertext - based systems such as Notecards [ 39 ] and Open Hyperdocument System [ 121 integrate information from diverse sources and platforms . Another approach is illustrated by workgroup data integration systems such as Lotus Notes [ 8 ] and application integration systems such as Rhapsody [ 6 ] ) . These types of systems emphasize workgroup data integration support across a variety of applications . Additionally , coupled knowledge base / database systems such as Answer Garden [ 11 and ICEM [ 30 ] show promise for integrating database data with organizational knowledge . Data support for single - user decision support and executive information systems has mainly consisted of specially - formulated subsets of the organizational database where data is accessed and manipulated using algorithms or models . Little support has been seen for dynamic or ad - hoc information searches or for accessing non - tradition - a1 or non - structured data , although these approaches have been deemed desirable [ 35 ] . Popular group decision support and collaboration systems for the most part have provided limited dynamic access to outside data ( e . g . , gZBIS [ 7 ] , Groupsystems [ 29 ] , TEZES [ 40 ] , VisionQuest [ 171 ) . The multi - tasking environ - ment of MERMAID [ 44 ] provides a means for accessing and integrating current collaboration data , but does not seem to readily support information integration over time . The CGS Environment [ 22 ] and its associated " meeting memory " [ 32 ] provides both collaboration support and longitudinal data access at a meeting level , but does not seem to emphasize ongoing team project support . Team project data usually exists on a variety of user hardware and software platforms at widely - dispersed locations . While organizational database management systems address data integrity , concurrency , and security , issues involving distributed and heterogeneous data integration and handling are still being resolved . Present - ly , organizational databases often are not integrated with external user applications or with other databases , and may not have the flexibility to dynamically access and manage data on different data platforms and in multiple formats or protocols such as are generated from applications such as word processors , CAD / CAM applications , and numerical spreadsheets . 3 . Research Approach The fundamental goal of this research is to develop a computer - based team memory system based on theoretical concepts . This system can then be used both to evaluate the applicability of these concepts to computer - based systems , test the usability of the new technology , and potentially develop new theoretical concepts in this domain . An appropriate research approach is the systems development method , described by Nunamaker et al . [ 28 ] as a hierarchy of " sub - methodologies " that embody multiple research approaches . These sub - methodologies include : ( 1 ) ConceptuaUTheoreticaI Development , consisting of posing relevant research questions and studying relevant disciplines ; ( 2 ) Architecture Develop - ment , comprising the creation of a high - level , generaliz - 124 able system blueprint applicable to a variety of environ - ments and domains ; ( 3 ) System DesigdApplication Implementation , involving the actual system design and implementation process and its subsequent description ; and ( 4 ) System Evaluation , potentially involving case / field studies or experimental evaluations , and with the goal of developing new theories or confirming proposed theories in the system domain . The following sections will describe how this research approach has been applied to the domain of team memory in terms of prototype development and evaluation . 4 . Prototype Development The prototype development process will be des - cribed in terms of conceptual development and require - ments identification , architecture development , design , and implementation . 4 . 1 Conceptual Development and Requirements Identification This research addresses the following high - level research question : " What are the characteristics of a system to support Team Memory ? " Systems development conceptual aspects are developed by exploring the research domain from the perspective of multiple related disciplines using a literature - based approach [ 28 ] . Literature domains considered include team and organizational memory , group processes and tasks , databases , decision support and collab - oration systems , and related system implementations . Literature within these domains will be integrated with an analysis of data collected from a series of case studies on four longitudinal workgroups to identify initial system requirements . Four advisory committees were established at the University of Arizona to oversee the direction of Universi - ty computing and telecommunications policies [ 191 . Established at the beginning of the 1990 - 1991 academic year , members from each committee participated in an ongoing team process to develop guidelines for computing in each of the following areas : academic computing , instructional computing , research computing , and telecom - munications . The committees consisted of 10 - 20 members , and met approximately once per month . . Some gathered in a meeting site equipped with the Groupsystems elec - tronic collaboration support tools , while others used conventional meeting support facilities and approaches . These groups exhibited many of the typical group process - es and tasks encountered in the theoretical literature . They also were representative of many of the ongoing groups that use the electronic collaboration facilities at the University of Arizona . This study provides a starting point of raw data that can be used to develop a classification scheme that will then be integrated with conceptual literature to identify general team data management requirements . Figure 3 - Initial Team Memory Data Classification Based on this analysis , the following categories of team memory data have been identified ( Figure 3 ) : 1 . Project Context Data - information relating to the overall team and / or project goals . This information is usually generated between or during collaborative tasks by team leaders or other team members . Examples include group membership lists , project goal statements , longitudinal agendas , tentative schedules , standard operat - ing procedures , and rules . 2 . Project Working Data - information repre - senting ongoing collaborative documents within the context of a specific project , such as reports developed during one or more collaborative tasks and potentially supplemented by between - task work by individuals . 3 . Project Support Data - information relevant to the overall project originating from sources outside the team . Possible uses of this information may be providing evidence or background information supporting a particu - lar decision or course of action ; answering questions raised during the course of team activities ; or , providing a basis upon which to build a team document . Examples in the case study included : a sample of the New Mexico State Videotext system menu ; a description of the campus student - run computer center ; and , a memo answering questions raised during a collaborative activity . 4 . Task Data - information related to a specific collaborative task . In this study most of the teams met regularly in face - to - face meetings . Task Data can be further categorized as : Task Context Data ( " housekeep - ing " information such as agendas , attendance lists , and summaries ) ; Task Working Data ( information resulting from team collaboration , often in the form of outputs from collaborative tools ) ; and , Task Support Data ( outside - 125 generated information distributed to team members in the context of the particular task at hand ) . The dashed line connecting the Task Working Data and Project Working Data folders illustrates the idea that the same data item may exist as Task Working Data ( associated with a specific collaborative task ) and also as Project Working Data ( associated with the overall project effort ) . In other words , a task working data item may be a component of the overall project working data . A similar relationship exists among Project Support and Task Support items . The case study findings suggest three major components within team memory : Context Data , Working Data , and Support Data , considered at both the Project and Task levels . Context Data is defined as data items docu - menting a particular context , primarily for purposes of process communication and coordination . Literature examples include data describing individuals in contexts such as : teams ( as described by Starbuck ' s roles [ 36 ] and Walsh and Ungson ' s structures [ 43j ) ; projecdtask areas ( as in Watson ' s expertise database [ 45 ] ) ; projects / tasks / sessions within projects ( corresponding to Swanson and Zmud ' s situational context [ 37 ] ) ; or organizations ( likened to Hall ' s social architectures [ 15 ] , or El Sawy et al . ' s semantic memory component exemplified by personnel records [ lo ] ) . This classification can also describe a data item in a given context , such as project or task status ( as suggested by El Sawy et al . ' s question regarding " Where are we ? " [ lo ] ) , goals ( as defined by March and Olsen [ 24fi , or schedules ( as included in Walsh and Ungson ' s transformations [ 43 ] ) . Context data also includes process information ( as alluded to in Hall ' s maps of causality [ 151 and El Sawy et al . ' s " How did we come to be here ? " [ 101 . Contexts within team projects and activities have been supported in existing collaborative systems ( e . g . , Claremont GS Environment [ 22 ] , GROW [ 1 11 , MERMAID [ 44 ] ) with dynamic participation status during on - line , same time / different place meetings . Alternatively , gZBZS [ 7 ] provides authorship data , and TEIES [ 40 ] supports an on - line member directory . To support data in a given context , the Claremont system provides agenda and meeting context data . An example of process data is seen in Notecards ' [ 39 ] progress history data . Working Data is defined as data generated by a collaboration task ( as illustrated in Nunamaker ' s multiple types of " Meetings " information [ 27 ] ) . Working Data may include data generated in conjunction with group produc - tion , discussion , or problem - solving tasks [ 141 , in either draft or final form . This may include individual work - in - progress that will ultimately be contributed to the team effort ; individual work may have restricted access ( as sug - gested by El Sawy et al . ' s access restriction concerns [ lo ] ) . Several collaborative systems support the working data component . Many support access to current working data almost exclusively ( e . g . , Colab , GroupSystems ) ; some allow users to access data from a pre - defined set of archived data ( e . g . , Claremont GS Environment , gIBIS , VisionQuest ) ; some provide dynamic access to archival data ( e . g . , TEIES ) . Support Data is similar to Walsh and Ungson ' s decision information [ 43 ] , provided for the purpose of reducing equivocality among decision makers . However , for team memory purposes , its role must be expanded to include equivocality reduction among team members for non - decision - related tasks as well . This data category encompasses Walsh and Ungson ' s External Archives [ 43 ] , Schatz ' s published literature [ 33 ] , and Nunamaker ' s Databases and Information on Competition [ 27 ] . In the context of team memory , it is similar to the organizational data subsets such as EIS internal data sets or DSS data - bases . Support Data is seen in collaborative data integra - tion systems such as CARAT and Schatz ' s Worm Commu - nity . The Claremont " Meeting Memory " provides access to outside materials such as images or spreadsheets that may be attached to agenda items . Limited support data capability is available in systems such as Notecards , GroupSystems , and VisionQuest , which allow users to import data in specific formats . Both the conceptual literature as well as many of the existing systems suggest that decision related informa - tion is a central component of team and organizational memory . It is hypothesized that all of the previously - identified data components have decision - related aspects ; for example , Context Data involves goals and procedures ; Working Data may involve identification of potential alternatives and constraints ; and , Support Data may confirm or refute information about these alternatives or constraints . This suggests the existence of a " Decision Data " component consisting of items within the previous three components but specifically identified as relating to , documenting , or impacting a decision process . Conceptual literature suggests that within a team or organizational memory context , retrieval behavior may be directed ( based on known indexes or data keys such as used in traditional database systems ) , or " browsing , " ( based on associative search or navigational link follow - ing ) [ 33 , 43 ] . Additionally , information retrieval literature [ 5 ] suggests the desirability of abstracted documents for representation of the unformatted textual information such as likely to occur within team and organizational memory systems . 126 4 . 2 System Architecture Each of the previously - identified team memory data types presently exist on different computer platforms : context data items such as pre - meeting planning notes may be on individual workstation disks as word processor documents ; working data items may be in the form of electronically - supported collaboration documents on file servers ; and , support data items may be found in organiza - tional or external databases . Additionally , many data items will exist on non - computer - readable media . To avoid data replication and the resulting integrity problems , it is proposed that an architecture similar to the one seen in the gIBIS system be used whereby data already present on computer platforms external to the proposed system be accessed through application paths and filenames stored in a relational database . The associated concurrency and access control will be handled by the DBMS . Project data such as project structure information and context data ( such as team membership rosters and associated team member information ) will be maintained in the database and displayed to the user through the interface . Data external to the system ( e . g . , on local disks , file servers , and in organizational and external databases ) , will be identified through data application paths and file names maintained in the database . User requests will involve retrieving this location information from the database and then retrieving and displaying the data item in its proper application . 4 . 3 Prototype Design To this point , team memory requirements have been viewed from a single - project perspective . However , previous research ( e . g . , [ 25 , 31 , 411 ) as well as experience and observation indicates that teams and team members are often involved in multiple simultaneous projects . Further , complex projects may be divided into sub - projects involv - ing subsets of the original project team or different project teams . This suggests the need for team memory to support a hierarchical project structure for organizing the previous - ly - identified data components . Such a structure is illustrat - ed in Figure 4 using the System Entity Structure ( SES ) , a hierarchical decomposition representation scheme [ 48 ] whereby object classes , or entities ( uppercase items ) and corresponding decompositiondclassifications ( lowercase ) are represented hierarchically . Decompositions ( " has " relationships ) are represented using a single line ; classifi - cations ( " is " relationships ) are represented with a double line ; and multiple decompositions ( sets of multiple entities decomposed to a single entity instance ) are represented with a triple line . This representation suggests that multiple PRO - JECTS exist within the ORGANIZATION . A single ORGANIZATION h ! . PROJECTS ill PROJECT hbs I COLLAB ~ RATIVE SUB - P ' ROJECTS in SUB - PROJECT if TASKS I I I COUJiBORATNE h : m CONTEXT WORKING SUPPORT TASK h ! . hl . Ill . has I * DATA COLLABOR - SUB - AnVE PROJECTS TASKS DATA DATA DATA I Figure 4 - Hierarchical Project Structure PROJECT instance has associated DATA , COLLABO - RATIVE TASKS , and SUB - PROJECTS . DATA may be of the varieties CONTEXT , WORKING , or SUPPORT ; each of these has a DECISION DATA component . Each COLLABORATIVE TASK has associated DATA ( with implied context , working , and support sub - components ) . Each SUB - PROJECT also has associated DATA , COL - LABORATIVE TASKS , AND SUB - PROJECTS . This structure indicates that multiple levels of sub - projects may exist within a project . While this representation provides insight into the hierarchical relationships among projects , collaborative tasks , and data types , a network representation is needed to identify additional relationships and cardinalities of relationships among these entities . Additionally , entities not relevant to the hierarchical structure but previously identified within the conceptual development need to be represented . EER modelling techniques [ 38 ] have been used to develop the logical data model shown in Figure 5 . m Figure 5 - Team Memory Logical ( ak - l = F Data Model The following entities and their associated relationships have been identified : 127 . MEMBERS are an important contextual data item both for describing the context of the team process ( e . g . , who are we [ lo ] ) and for coordinating the process through roles ( e . g . , who is knowledgeable about a given area , how can I find himher [ 43 ] ) . MEMBERS collaborate together on multiple PROJECTS , SUB - PROJECTS , and COLLABO - RATIVE TASKS . Explicit relationships are shown between each of these entities because members participat - ing in a project may not always participate in all sub - projects or collaborative tasks . Additionally , collaborative tasks may exist that are just beginning and are not yet in the context of a project . Members may have associated TOPICS ( i . e . , areas of expertise ) that may influence the projects in which they participate . . PROJECTS support the hierarchical structure aspect of team and organizational memory [ 47 ] . They have associat - ed SUB - PROJECTS and COLLABORATIVE TASKS . The cardinality within this representation suggests that sub - projects and collaborative tasks may only belong to a single parent project , although situations may exist where a sub - project is relevant to multiple projects . PROJECTS may involve multiple DATA items , and may be associated with multiple TOPICS and MEMBERS . . SUB - PROJECTS are the same as PROJECTS except that they are contained within a parent PROJECT or SUB - PROJECT . Multiple levels of sub - projects may exist . . COLLABORATIVE TASKS represent a context for team member collaboration , which has been suggested as a component of organizational memory [ 43 ] . The bound - aries of a collaborative task ( as opposed to a series of tasks comprising a project or sub - project ) is probably a function of team characteristics such as goals , work styles , and processes . COLLABORATIVE TASKS may have an associated parent PROJECT or SUB - PROJECT , and associated DATA and TOPICS . . DATA represents a generalization hierarchy for the types of data already established within team and organizational memory ( i . e . , context , working , support ) . DATA may be associated with PROJECTS , SUB - PROJECTS , or COL - LABORATIVE TASKS , and may have related TOPICS . Each data type may have a DECISION - RELATED DATA component . . TOPICS . This object class represents topic keywords ( and their associated descriptions ) . TOPICS are associated with MEMBERS and PROJECTS , SUB - PROJECTS , and COLLABORATIVE TASKS to further define their con - texts . TOPICS are also associated with DATA to support the browsing retrieval operations previously described . 4 . 4 Prototype Implementation The initial system desktop ( based on a prototype described in [ 25 ] ) provides icons representing applications for collaboration support ( Projects ) , individual applications support ( Mail , Lotus 1 - 2 - 3 , Wordperfect ) , and organiza - tional information integration ( Team Memory ) . The Projects folder represents a collection of specific project folder icons as well as collaborative activity icons not yet attached to a project folder . When the Projects folder is " opened " , the user ' s current project folders are displayed . Additionally , users may access applications that create , retrieve , and manipulate data in the Team Memory Data - base as follows : - Create New Project , for creating new projects and their associated parameters ( e . g . , team members information , project stadcompletion dates , goals , etc . ) . At the present time , all system users may create new projects as they wish , however , in large organizations , some restrictions on this privilege may be necessary . . Create New Team Activity , for initializing activities by specifying the application type , participant membership , etc . ; * Team Memory , for viewing and searching for projects and accessing project information ( to be described in the next section ) ; * Update Folder Contents , for updating a project con - tents when changes occur as a result of collaborative activities by other team members . Specific project folders may contain icons repre - senting sub - project folders , project data items , or collabo - rative activities pertaining to the project . Additionally , users may access the following project - specific applica - tions : * Add / View / Edit Data , enabling project team members submit project context and support data items to the collaborative environment , edit item database parameters ( e . g . , name , description , file location , etc . ) , and access data items . Icons representing the same data item may appear in multiple folders , but each icon references the same data tile so data integrity is maintained and no redundancy exists ; Create New Sub - project , allowing users to create sub - projects within the current project instance ; . Milestones , allowing team members to view a summary list of important project events , and team leaders to create , edit , and delete milestone items ; . Status , providing users with an overview of project contextual data such as starting and ending dates , status ( not yet started , completed , etc . ) , goals , items left to be done , etc . , that can be edited by project leaders ; * Team Members , providing a list of current team mem - bers , with access to additional information about members ( address , phone number , interests , etc . ) , as well as the capability for project leaders to add or drop team members and edit leadership privileges ; 128 Update Folder Contents , as described above , for updat - ing the contents of the particular folder to reflect other project member activities . Within a team collaboration environment , all project team members have copies of their projecthub - project folder icons on their desktops . As updates are made to specific projects , associated team members are notified to run an application to update their environments . This is done through a background Windows application called the " Listener " that runs continually in the back - ground of the NewWave desktop . This strategy was required due to a limitation in the NewWave environment whereby external applications were unable to invoke NewWave tasks . This limitation has been eliminated in a subsequent version of NewWave . The Team Memory ViewlSearch application allows the user to searchhrowse : ( 1 ) ALL Organizational ProjectslActivities to which the user has access , i . e . , either through team membership or open project access ; ( 2 ) TEAM projectslactivities only ; ( 3 ) projects resulting from a search based on TOPICS ; and ( 4 ) projects resulting from a search based on project title TEXT STRINGS . Each search presents the user with a listing of all pro - jectslactivities meeting the search criteria ; from there , the user may access other project information ( e . g . , data , sub - projects , milestones , status , team members ) , or directly enter the project folder or collaborative activity . 5 . Prototype Evaluation A total of fifteen raters ( including electronic meeting system facilitators , researchers , software develop - ers , and case study group users ) were selected according to their interest and expertise in the area of electronic support for ongoing teams . The evaluation process was structured in a quasi - experimental pre - test , treatment , post - test fashion . Pretest measures included general attitudes about computers and graphic user interfaces , as well ratings about the usefulness of potential features for an ongoing team collaboration support system . The treatment consisted of ( 1 ) a short demonstration of the system , followed by ( 2 ) asking the raters to complete a representative series of system - supported tasks . Post - test measures included perceived usefulness and ease - of - use of the system for each of the given tasks , as well as non - structured written comments and verbal conversations about system perfor - mance and features . This approach was chosen over a more rigorous experimental approach because the primary goal of this initial evaluation was to assess the usability and usefulness of a system that was developed based on highly conceptual requirements . It was felt that richer feedback would be obtained from subjects who were highly interested in and motivated toward the subject area . Based on this feedback and the subsequent system revisions , future , more - rigorous evaluations aimed towards developing or confirming theoretical concepts will be conducted . Quantitative analysis of the post - test question - naires showed that overall the raters found the system applications easy to use and potentially useful in a real situation . Interesting results were obtained from observ - ing the users navigate through the system and through the unstructured written and verbal comments . Feedback ranged from concrete implementation suggestions ( e . g . , clarifying captions on pushbuttons , creating a checklist to guide the user through the new project creation process ) , to more conceptually - oriented suggestions such as provid - ing iconic access to entities within projects ( i . e . , people , data , topics ) , simplifying the project and activity creation process , providing " to - do " lists within projects , and enabling managers to generate status reports for projects . Several raters expressed concern that the Team Memory ViewlSearch application accessed projects rather than data items within projects . Overall , the raters were positive about the overall approach and functionality of the system , and provided many useful suggestions for enhancements and revisions . 6 . Conclusions and Future Work This research provides an initial concrete investi - gation into the development of an information manage - ment system to support ongoing team collaboration . Through integrating literature with case study data from longitudinal workgroups , a logical data model has been developed and then implemented into a prototype system . The present system provides a project integration environ - ment to support team members in organizing and tracking their collaborative data primarily between meetings . This research has also provided valuable insight into potential contents , structures , and operations of team and organiza - tional memory systems . The next step is to implement the revisions suggested by the evaluation process , and to integrate Team Memory with collaborative applications to provide dynam - ic access to data within collaborative activities . This is envisioned by providing : ( 1 ) hyperlinks between items , phrases , thoughts , etc . in collaborative documents and Team Memory data items ( or specific portions within data items ) ; and ( 2 ) access to Team Memory information within physically - dispersedcollaborative activities to provide cues about the status and activities of other team members . This will then provide an environment that can be used for empirical studies to investigate questions about the con - tents , structure , operations , and implications of team and organizational memory systems . 129 This and similar research efforts provide a means for improving the capabilities of GDSS and computer - supported collaboration systems . Such systems have the potential of increasing team collaboration , improving collaboration efficiency , and ultimately enhancing team and organizational productivity . 7 . References 1 . Ackerman , M . S . and Malone , T . W . Answer Garden : A Tool For Growing Organizational Memory . In Proc . ACM Con $ on Oflce Information Systems , Cambridge , MA , Apr . 25 - 27 , 1990 , 31 - 39 . 2 . Ackoff , R . L . Creating the Corporate Future . John Wiley 62 Sons , New York , 198 1 , pp . 130 - 1 3 1 . 3 . Ancona , D . G . and Caldwell , D . F . Information Technol - ogy and Work Groups : The Case of New Product Teams . In Intellectual Teamwork - Social and Technological Foundations ofCOoperative Work , J . Galagher , R . E . Kraut , and C . Egido , Eds . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Hills - dale , N . J . , 1990 . 4 . Argyris , C . and Schon , D . A . Organizational learning : A theory of action perspective . Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA , 1978 . 5 . Bartschi , M . An Overview of Information Retrieval Subjects . IEEE Computer 18 , 5 ( May 1985 ) , 67 - 84 . 6 . Benson , B . H . and Cohen , H . S . The AT & T Rhapsody Business Orchestration Solution . AT & T Technology 5 , 3 ( 1 990 ) . 7 . Conklin , J . and Begeman , M . L . gIBIS : A Hypertext Tool for Exploratory Policy Discussion . ACM Trans . on Ofice Information Systems 6 , 4 ( October 1988 ) , 303 - 33 1 . 8 . DeJean , S . B . Lotus Notes , Version 2 . 0 : Connectivity and New Pricing Broaden Its Appeal . PC Magazine 10 , lO ( May 28 , 1991 ) , 33 - 35 . 9 . Dennis , A . R . , George , J . F . , Jessup , L . M . , Nunamaker , J . F . Jr . , and Vogel , D . R . Information Technology to Support Electronic Meetings . MIS Quarterly 12 , 4 ( Decem - ber 1988 ) , 591 - 624 . 10 . El Sawy , O . W . , Gomes , G . M . , and Gonzalez , M . V . Preserving Institutional Memory : The Management of History as an Organizational Resource . Best Papers Proceedings 1986 , Academy of Management , Chicago , IL , 11 . Ellis , C . A . , Gibbs , S . J . and Rein , G . L . Groupware : Some Issues and Experiences . C . ACM 34 , l ( Jan . 1991 ) , 12 . Engelbart , D . C . Knowledge - Domain Interoperability and an Open Hyperdocument System . In CSCW ' 90 ( Proc . of the Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , Oct . 7 - 10 , 1990 , Los Angeles , CA ) , 143 - 156 . Aug . 13 - 16 , 1986 . 39 - 58 . 13 . Gersick , C . J . G . Time and Transition in Work Teams : Toward a New Model of Group Development . Academy ofMgmt . J . 31 , l ( January 1988 ) , 9 - 41 . 14 , Hackman , J . R . Effects of task characteristics on group products . J . Experimental Social Psychology 4 15 . Hall , R . I . The Natural Logic of Management Policy Making : Its Implications for the Survival of an Organiza - tion . Management Science 30 , 8 ( August 1984 ) , 905 - 927 . 16 . Hedberg , B . L . T . , Nystrom , P . C . and Starbuck , W . H . Camping on seesaws : Prescriptions for a self - designing organization . Admin . Sei . Quarterly 2 1 , 4 1 - 65 . 17 . Higgins , S . VisionQuest Reduces Time Spent in Meetings . PC Week 8 , 16 ( Apr . 22 , 1991 ) , p . 40 . 18 . Huber , G . A Theory of the Effects of Advanced Information Technologies on Organizational Design , Intelligence , and Decision Making . Academy of Manage - ment Review 15 , l ( January 1990 ) , 47 - 71 . 19 . Iacono , S . , Chudoba , K . , Dennis , A . R . , and Mittle - man , D . A Longitudinal Study of Four Strategic Planning Advisory Workgroups . Working Paper , MIS Department , University of Arizona , 1992 . 20 . Johansen , R . Groupware : Computer Support For Business Teams . The Free Press , New York , NY , 1988 . 2 1 . Kahneman , D . Attention and eflort . Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , New Jersey , 1973 . 22 . Mandviwalla , M . , Gray , P . , Olfman , L . and Satzinger , J . The Claremont GDSS Support Environment . In Proc . 24th HZCSS , Vol . 111 , Kauai , Hawaii , Jan . 8 - 1 1 , 1991 , pp . 23 . March , J . G . Model bias in social action . Review of Educational Research 44 , 413 - 429 . 24 . March , J . G . and Olsen , J . P . The uncertainty of the past : Organizational learning under ambiguity . European J . ofPolitica1 Research 3 ( 1975 ) , 147 - 171 . 25 . Momson , J . , Morrison , M . and Vogel , D . Software To Support Business Teams . Group Decision and Negoti - ation , forthcoming . 26 . Neustadt , R . E . and May , E . R . Thinking in time : The uses of history for decision makers . The Free Press , New York , 1986 . 27 . Nunamaker , J . F . Jr . Collaboration Technology : Challenge For Research And Practice . In DSS - 91 Pro - ceedings ( 11th Int . Conf . on Decision Support Systems , June 3 - 5 , 1991 , Manhattan Beach , CA ) , 204 - 219 . 28 . Nunamaker , J . F . , Chen , M . , and Purdin , T . D . M . Systems Development in Information Systems Research . Journal of MIS , Winter 1991 . 29 . Nunamaker , J . F . Jr . , Dennis , A . R . , Valacich , J . S . , Vogel , D . R . , and George , J . F . Electronic Meeting Systems to Support Group Work . C . ACM 34 , 7 ( July 1991 ) . 30 - 61 . 30 . Ram , S . , Hayne , S . , and Carlson , D . Integration of Information Systems Technologies to Support Consultation ( 1 968 ) , 162 - 1 87 . 600 - 607 . 130 in an Information Center . In Proc . 9th ICIS , Dec . 4 - 7 , 31 . Reder , S . and Schwab , R . G . The Communication Economy of the Workgroup : Multi - Channel Genres of Communication . In CSCW ' 88 ( Proceedings of the 1988 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ) , Portland , Oregon , September 1988 , pp . 354 - 368 . 32 . Sandoe , K . , Olfman , L . and Mandviwalla , M . Meet - ing in Time : Recording the Workgroup Conversation . In Proc . 12th ZCZS ( Dec . 16 - 18 , 1991 , New York ) , 261 - 271 . 33 . Schatz , B . R . Building An Electronic Scientific Community . In Proc . 24th HICSS , Vol . 111 , Kauai , Hawaii , Jan . 8 - 1 1 , 1991 , pp . 739 - 748 . 34 . Snyder , J . M . and Lynch , K . J . An Overview of CARAT : A Computer Assisted Research and Analysis Tool . In Proc . 24th HZCSS , Vol . 111 , Kauai , Hawaii , Jan . 35 . Sprague , R . H . Jr . A Framework for the Development of Decision Support Systems . MIS Quarterly 4 , 4 ( Decem - ber 1980 ) , 1 - 26 . 36 . Starbuck , W . and Hedberg , B . Saving an organization from a stagnating environment . In Strategy + structure = performance , H . Thorelli , Ed . , University Press , Blooming - ton , Indiana , 1977 . 37 . Swanson , E . B . and Zmud , R . W . Organizational Decision Support Systems : Conceptual Notions and Architectural Guidelines . Working paper prepared for the Information Systems and Decision Processes ( ISDP ) Workshop , Tucson , AZ , October 5 - 7 , 1989 . 38 . Teorey , T . J . , Yang , D . and Fry , J . P . A Logical Design Methodology for Relational Databases Using the Extended Entity - Relationship Model . ACM Computing Surveys 18 , 2 ( June 1986 ) , 197 - 222 . 39 . Trigg , R . H . Guided Tours and Tabletops : Tools for Communicating in a Hypertext Environment . ACM Trans . on Office Information Systems 6 , 4 ( October 1988 ) , 398 - 414 . 1989 , p . 67 - 77 . 8 - 11 , 1991 , pp . 343 - 353 . 40 . Turoff , M . , Foster , J . , Hiltz , S . R . , and K . Ng . The TEIES Design and Objectives : Computer Mediated Communications and Tailorability . In Proc . 22nd HZCSS , January 1989 , Kailua - Kona , Hawaii , 403 - 41 1 . 41 . Valacich , J . S . , Vogel , D . R . and Nunamaker , Jr . , J . F . Integrating Information Across Sessions and Between Groups in Group Decision Support Systems . In Proc . 22nd HICSS , January 1989 , Kailua - Kona , Hawaii , 240 - 246 . 42 . Walsh , J . P . and Fahey , L . The role of negotiated belief structures in strategy making . Journal of Manage - ment 12 ( 1986 ) , 325 - 338 . 43 . Walsh , J . P . and Ungson , G . R . Organizational Memo - ry . Academy ofManagement Review 16 , l ( January 1991 ) , 44 . Watabe , K . , Sakata , S . , Maeno , K . , Fukuoka , H . , and Ohmori , T . Distributed Multiparty Desktop Conferencing System : MERMAID . In CSCW ' 90 ( Proceedings of the Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , October 1990 , Los Angeles , CA ) , 27 - 38 . 45 . Watson , R . T . A Design for an Infrastructure to Support Organizational Decision - Making . In Proc . 23rd HZCSS , Vol . 111 , Jan . 2 - 5 , 1990 , Kailua - Kona , Hawaii , p . 46 . Weick , K . E . The social psychology of organizing . Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA , 1979 . 47 . Yates , J . For the Record : The Embodiment of Organizational Memory , 1850 - 1 920 . In Business and Economic History , Vol . 19 , 1990 . 48 . Zeigler , B . P . Object - Oriented Simulation with Hierarchical , Modular Models . Academic Press , Inc . , Boston , 1990 . 57 - 91 . 111 - 1 19 . 131