THE JOURNAL (cid:129) REVIEW (cid:129) www . fasebj . org Talin : a mechanosensitive molecule in health and disease Alexander W . M . Haining , Tyler J . Lieberthal , and Armando del R´ ı o Hern´andez 1 Department of Bioengineering , Imperial College London , London , United Kingdom ABSTRACT : Talin is a ubiquitous , large focal adhesion protein that links intracellular networks with the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) via itsconnectionwiththeactincytoskeletonandmembraneintegrins . Itisoneofahandfulmolecules that can expose new recognition sites when undergoing force - induced mechanical unfolding , and it can bind and recruit cytoskeletal proteins that are involved in mechanotransduction . Talin has attracted great interest in the field of mechanobiology because of its plasticity in undergoing conformational changes under force stimulation as well as its cellular localization that bridges the cytoskeleton with the ECM . In addition to these roles in healthy cells , the dysregulation of talin activators can lead to disease states in which aberrant integrin activation and mechano - transduction precipitate changesincellspreading , migration , and survival . New data have implicateda role for talin indiseasesthatare highly regulated by mechanicalcues . In this review , we presentthecurrentunderstandingoftalin structure , itsrelationshiptobindingpartners , anditsroleindiseasestates . — Haining , A . W . M . , Lieberthal , T . J . , delR´ ı o Hern´andez , A . Talin : a mechanosensitive molecule in health and disease . FASEB J . 30 , 000 – 000 ( 2016 ) . www . fasebj . org KEY WORDS : mechanobiology (cid:129) mechanotransduction (cid:129) cancer Biochemical signaling in cells is an active area of research ; however , our knowledge of how cells respond to physical stimuli lags well behind . If we are to understand that all cells are subjected to mechanical forces , it is clear that a holistic approach that integrates biochemical and bio - mechanical interactions is the only tool that will lead to a full understanding of cell behavior . Recent advances in the fields of microscopy and biophysical techniques have created new and exciting possibilities to investigate the influence of mechanical forces in cell biology , shap - ing the relatively young and emerging discipline of mechanobiology . Many hallmark works that established paradigms in mechanobiology have transcended its field and have had wide - ranging impact on other disciplines . For instance , a study that demonstrated that alterations in the physical environment of a cell , specifically the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) alone , could encourage a malignant phenotype in cancer cells ( 1 ) ; a second work demonstrated that similar alterations in the physical microenvironmentcould induce stem cells to differentiate into a range of cell types , from neuronstoosteoblasts ( 2 ) . Thesewerebynomeansthefirst papers to demonstrate the influence of the ECM on cell behavior , but by effectively tying the cell microenviron - ment to such broadly recognized areas as cancer and stem cell research , they served to capture the imagination of the scientific community at large . Cells communicate with their mechanical environment via integrin - mediated focal adhesion complexes ( 3 ) , which connect the cytoskeleton with the ECM . Talin , one of the main molecules of these complexes , was discovered in chicken gizzard smooth muscle and targeted to focal pla - quesandmembraneruffles ( 4 ) . Itwassubsequentlyshown to bind and activate integrin and to bind to F - actin ( 5 , 6 ) . Because talin binds to crucial components of the cell load - bearing apparatus , it has been investigated as a mecha - nosensitive molecule . This class of molecules has enjoyed recent popularity , although what constitutes a mechano - sensitive molecule can sometimes be unclear . As such , it is worth briefly discussing the definition as used here . All molecules , if exposed to sufficient mechanical force , will have their structure changed similar to the way in which thermal stresses denature proteins . These structural changes will often lead to alterations in the pattern in which a molecule interacts with its binding partners , as these interactions often depend on the tertiary structure of proteins disrupted by this mechanical ( or thermal ) stimuli . In order for a protein to be considered mecha - nosensitive , it must be exposed to mechanical forces in vivo that are capable of inducing these structural rearrangements . It is necessary to take stock of our current knowledge of the mechanosensitive talin molecule , and to highlight ABBREVIATIONS : DLC - 1 , deleted in liver cancer 1 ; ECM , extracellular matrix ; FAK , focal adhesion kinase ; FERM , 4 . 1 protein , ezrin , radixin , moesin ; LFA - 1 , lymphocyte function - associated antigen - 1 ; NHE - 1 , sodium / hydrogen exchanger 1 ; RIAM , Rap1 - GTP - interacting adapter molecule ; VBS , vinculin binding sites 1 Correspondence : Department of Bioengineering , Imperial College Lon - don , 308 Bessemer Building , South Kensington Campus , London SW7 2AZ , United Kingdom . E - mail : a . del - rio - hernandez @ imperial . ac . uk doi : 10 . 1096 / fj . 201500080R 0892 - 6638 / 16 / 0030 - 0001 © FASEB 1 The FASEB Journal article fj . 201500080R . Published online February 22 , 2016 . possible futureareas of study given the recent insightsinto its structural and functional roles and the numerous studies outlining its possible role in diseased pheno - types . Given the importance of structure and binding partners , these aspects of talin are discussed first . TALIN STRUCTURE ( AND BINDING PARTNERS ) In vertebrates , talin exists as two closely related isoforms that share 74 % aa sequence identity . Talin - 1 is the only form expressed by most hematopoietic and endothelial cells ( 7 ) , and talin - 2 is most highly expressed in cardiac muscle , skeletal muscle , and brain tissue ( 8 ) . As a result , the effect of talin - 2 knockdown / knockout is pronounced in muscle development ( 9 , 10 ) . The two isoforms are dif - ferentially localized in some cell types as homodimers and may have different functions ( 11 ) , and talin - 2 can com - pensateforlossoftalin - 1insomeconditions ( 12 ) ; however , talin - 1 appears to be the dominant isoform and the most well studied . Therefore , the term talin will hereafter refer specifically to the talin - 1 isoform in this review unless stated otherwise . The talin head Talin is a 270 - kDa , 2541 - aa membrane - associated protein consisting of two main regions : an N - terminal head and a C - terminal tail ( Fig . 1 ) . The head domain is globular and contains an unusual FERM ( 4 . 1 protein , ezrin , radixin , moesin ) domain : the three typical FERM subdomains , F1 – F3 , with an extra insertion in F1 . In addition to the extra insertion in F1 , it contains an additional subdomain at the beginning , F0 ( 13 ) . The most prominentfunction of the talin head is related to the binding and activation of surface - membrane integrins ( 5 , 14 ) , as well as with the binding of membranephospholipids ( 15 ) andtheotherwidelystudied focal adhesion protein , focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) ( 16 ) . Thus , talin is a crucial link in the integrin activation process as demonstrated by talin knockdown in various cell types . The F3 unit of the FERM domain binds to the cytoplasmic tail of b - integrins at the NPxY motif and re - sults in increased affinity of the integrin to its cognate li - gand in a process termed “ inside - out ” signaling ( 5 , 14 , 17 ) . Experimental and computational studies have demon - strated that the binding of talin to b - integrin is mediated by favorable membrane electrostatic interactions due to membrane phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate , which results in a rotation of the b - transmembrane domain , a weakening of the integrin inner and outer domain clasps , and separation of the a - and b - subunits ( 18 – 21 ) . A variety of pathways can precipitate inside - out signaling via GPCR signal transduction involving Rho and Rap family small GTPases ( 22 , 23 ) ; the specific mechanisms vary depending on cell type , GPCR , and integrin subtype . In Jurkat T cells , for example , T - cell receptor stimulation leads to the acti - vation of Rap1 , which plays a role in cell adhesion and spreading via actinpolymerizationaswellasitsinteraction with Rap1 - GTP – interacting adaptor molecule ( RIAM ) ( 24 ) ; RIAM is required for the Rap1 - mediated up - regulation of lymphocyte function - associated antigen 1 ( LFA - 1 ; a L b 2 ) affinity and the localization of Rap1 to the membrane in these cells ( 25 ) . RIAM influences integrin activation by binding to talin , and it has also been shown that the knockdown of talin or RIAM prevents the for - mation of a RIAM - talin - integrin complex and abrogates Rap1 - mediated adhesion through a IIb b 3 and a 5 b 1 ( 26 , 27 ) . However , RIAM is not essential for lower affinity a 4 b 1 - expressing cells ( 28 , 29 ) , and talin - 1 was not found to be required for GPCR - mediated a 4 b 1 activation , but it likely plays a role in subsequent focal adhesion events ( 29 ) . Re - cently , in vivo knockdown of RIAM in a mouse model unexpectedly did not alter platelet function , perhaps DLC - 1 RIAM Rap1 PIP2 Integrin F - actin Vinculin Moesin p130Cas Src Ponsin Vinexin Paxillin Synemin NHE - 1 RhoA Talin Structural Signaling Vinculin DLC - 1 RIAM Integrin R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 R7 R8 R9 R10 R11 R12 R13 Actin N - t e r m i na l head C - terminal tail Moesin Synemin B A Figure 1 . Talin structure and binding partners . A ) Relationship between talin and its signaling / structural partners . B ) Structure of the talin integrin - binding FERM domain head and mechanosensitive rod domain , with binding site locations . PIP2 , phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . 2 Vol . 30 June 2016 HAINING ET AL . The FASEB Journal x www . fasebj . org because of compensatory talin recruitment mechanisms , particularly for the a IIb b 3 integrin ( 30 ) . The contradictory role of talin and its adapters may be a result of individual differences among cell and integrin types . Inside - outsignalingandthesubsequentextensionofthe integrin ectodomain increases affinity , but only transiently . Without force application , which stabilizes the ECM - integrin - talin - actin axis in a process termed “ outside - in ” signaling , the integrin may return to a low affinity state ( 23 , 31 ) . [ For reviews on inside - out and outside - in signaling in leukocytes , see Alon and Feigelson ( 32 ) and Alon and Dustin ( 33 ) . ] Anchored ECM ligands induce allosteric changes in integrin conformations ( 34 , 35 ) , which leads to strengthening of the high - affinity state and propagation as a mechanical signal , that can lead to further downstream signaling ( 36 , 37 ) . Asacrucialbridgebetweenintegrinsand the cytoskeleton , talin has been implicated in outside - in shear stress – mediated adhesion of a 4 b 1 and LFA - 1 ( 38 , 39 ) . A picture of integrin affinity is therefore incomplete with - out the consideration of outside - in signals . This further demonstrates the importance of the physical microenvi - ronment in modulating cell function . The interaction with and activation of integrins is a well - studied role of talin , and contributes greatly to its observed function within cells . A recent review by Calderwood et al . ( 40 ) provides an excellent overview of this phenomenon . The talin rod The C - terminal talin tail comprises aa 487 – 2541 and , as such , is the larger of the twosections . The talin tail spans 63 amphipathic a - helixes arranged into 4 - or 5 - helix bundles ( 41 ) . These bundles are expected to form a linear chain , which leads to this section often being referred to as the talin rod . There are 13 of these bundles ( designated R1 – R13 ) in addition to a single helix at the C - terminal end that serves as the dimerization domain ( 42 , 43 ) . The pri - mary interaction of talin withF - actin is believed to occur at the C - terminal end , which requires both the dimerization domainandthefinalhelicalbundle ( R13 ) ( 42 ) . Thebinding of actin at the talin tail and of integrin at the talin head provides a connection between the cytoskeleton and the ECM along the rod , a connection in which talin serves as a load - bearing mechanical link . In addition to this structural role , the talin rod also con - tains a variety of binding sites that are involved in both the regulationofitsownactivityandthatofotherstructuralandsignalingproteins . The most relevant of these are the 11 identified vinculin binding sites ( VBSs ) . These VBSs are buried within helical bundles and it is currently unclear howmany , infact , everbindtovinculin invivo ( 44 ) . Thetalin rod also contains numerous other binding sites , including a second actin binding site ( 45 ) , an autoinhibition site that interacts with the talin head ( 46 ) , a second integrin binding site ( 43 ) , and binding sites for the intermediate filament protein , synemin ( 47 ) , RIAM ( 48 ) , andthetumorsuppressor protein , deleted in liver cancer 1 ( DLC - 1 ) ( 49 ) . The presence of a second actin binding site and a second integrin binding sitebringsmorecomplexitytothesimplemechanicalbridge of talin binding to integrin at its N - terminal and to actin at its C - terminal ; however , super - resolution microscopy has indicated that the C - terminal end of talin localizes to the membrane while the N terminus is displaced from the membrane , which supports the simpler model of force transmission along the rod ( 50 , 51 ) . This leaves open the question of what purpose , if any , the secondary binding sites serve , although recent research indicates that talin may exist in alternative configurations depending on the de - velopmental stage and the type of cell studied ( 52 ) . Mechanosensitivity of talin The evidence for a configuration in which the talin tail binds to the actin cytoskeleton and the talin head to integrins , and by extension to the ECM , suggests that talin isamechanosensitivemolecule . Themost - studiedaspectof this mechanosensitivity relates to the interaction of talin with vinculin , as the early structural studies indicated that this interaction requires the unfolding of the bundles that contain VBSs ( 53 , 54 ) . Steered molecular dynamics in - dicated that this unfolding could be precipitated by the application of mechanical force at either end of the bundles ( 55 ) , after which vinculin binds to previously buried VBSs ( Fig . 2 ) . The existence of such a mechanical force in vivo could occur in one of two ways : either by direct application offorcefromexternalsourcestotheintegrinsandthustalin , or indeed internally from the contractile nature of the ac - tomyosin network to which talin attaches through its tail . This hypothesized mechanical activation was demon - strated in vitro by using atomic force microscopy and magnetic tweezers , by which it was shown that the ap - plication of force to talin did indeed increase its binding affinity for vinculin ( Fig . 3 A , B ) ( 56 ) . The physiologic rel - evanceofthisunfoldingwasfurtherdemonstratedwhenitwasdemonstratedtooccuratforcesaslowas5pN , within therangeofforcesknown tobe appliedtosinglemolecules in focal adhesions ( 57 , 58 ) . These molecular studies are supported by cellular studies , in which it was shown that the length of the talin molecule varies in a cell from 60 nm ( the length of a structured talin molecule not under the application of force ) to as much as 350 – 400 nm ( Fig . 3 C ) ( 59 ) . Such extension of the molecule would require the unfolding of numerous bundles along the rod as the talin molecule is exposed to force derived from the rearward action of the actin cytoskeleton ( depending on the bundle , the disruption of a single bundle adds 30 – 50 nm of length to the rod ) . Therefore , it seems likely that , in focal adhe - sions , talin undergoes cycles of unfolding and that this unfolding is what allows it to bind to vinculin , an in - teraction that is hindered in its native state for most VBSs . Thus far , these molecular studies have focused on the R1 – R3 region of the talin rod , although detailed analysis of the structure of focal adhesions indicates that vinculin binds at other locations along the rod . Therefore , it is likely that other bundles are mechanically activated ( 51 ) . Focal adhesion stabilization It has been widely accepted in the field of mechano - transduction that the growth of focal adhesions is force TALIN IN HEALTH AND DISEASE 3 dependent : the greater the force applied to a contact , the greater the size and stability of the adhesion ( 60 – 62 ) . However , recent studies have reported a surprising dis - sociation between focal adhesion size and the applied force in mature adhesions , implying that mature focal adhesions that anchor stationary cells to their substrates maynotbemechanosensitive ( 63 ) . Althoughthereasonfor this insensitivity has yet to be determined , one possible explanation of this phenomenon is that as the focal adhe - sion grows and stabilizes , the force experienced by indi - vidual mechanosensitive components may be reduced , leading to a reduction in force response . The presence of vinculin assists in the process of focal adhesion stabilization , which is mediated through its in - teractions with talin and actin ( 64 ) . In in vitro systems composed only of substrate - bound talin and actomyosin , the isometric contraction of actin stress fibers exposes VBSs , increases vinculin association , and decreases talin refolding . The actin cross - linker , a - actinin , further promotes the stability of fibers and decreases vinculin dissociation ( Fig . 3 D ) ( 65 ) . This has also been demon - strated in vivo with fluorescence microscopy : actomyosin contraction stretches talin cyclically by several times its unbound length , and vinculin binding dampens the stretch – contraction cycles ( 59 ) . In addition , when actomy - osin contractionissuppressed , vinculin localization atfocal adhesions is reduced , but when the substrate under these compromised cells is stretched , vinculin recruitment re - covers , which highlights the importance of tension in focal adhesion maturation ( 66 ) . Recent works , however , have determined that vinculin was not required for proper focal adhesion complex organization ( 51 ) , but may instead be implicated largely in stabilization ( 67 ) . The talin – vinculin interaction provides structural sup - port to thelinkage between actin and the ECM . Indeed , the magnitude of this mechanical contribution has been in - vestigated with fluorescence resonance energy transfer microscopy to measure the tension between the vinculin molecule head that binds to talin and the vinculin tail that binds to actin . These forces are greatest in nascent adhe - sions , thenfallastheadhesionsmature , whichisconsistent with the idea that more vinculin molecules are recruited as adhesions grow , thus leading to a parallelization of sup - portandareductioninindividualtensions ( 68 ) . Thisisalso consistent with the proposed mechanism of mechano - transduction via talin , with high initial forces unfolding numerous binding sites on the talin rod to which vinculin binds , allowing for greater stabilization of the adhesion . In addition to a mechanical role supporting the bridge between integrins and the cellular cytoskeleton , vinculin also plays an important role in regulating cell behavior by recruiting other adhesion proteins via its numerous bind - ing domains . Vinculin natively occurs in an autoinhibited state through an interaction between its head and tail do - mains and by preventing or discouraging its binding af - finityforotherproteins . ThebindingofitsheadtotheVBSs on the talin rod is sufficientto break this state , thus making available the tail and hinge of vinculin for other interac - tions ( 69 ) . One such interaction is that between the hinge region of vinculin and p130Cas , a prominent Crk and Srk substrate . Disruption of this interaction reduces cell stiff - ness and the ability of a cell to produce traction forces ( 70 ) . Other proteins thought to be at least partially recruited via their interaction with these vinculin regions include vinexin , ponsin , and paxillin ( 71 , 72 ) . Vinculin may also servetoactivateotherregionsonthetalinroditself , notably the secondary actin binding site located in the middle of rod . Recent work suggests that the C - terminal actin bind - ing site engages talin first , leading to an activation through force of the VBSs in the R2 – R3 region . Subsequent binding ofvinculintothisregioninduceschangesthatallowactintobindtothesecondarybindingsite , providing another mechanism by which adhesion is stabilized ( 73 ) . Cellular mechanotransduction These experiments documenting the mechanosensitivity of talin with regard to vinculin provide an attractive framework for a possible mechanism of cellular mechanotransduction — the overall process by which cells interpret and respond to physical stimuli . In the first step , the magnitude and duration of any applied force deter - mines how many helical bundles are unfolded . The more R1 R2 R3 Inactive vinculin Active vinculin Figure 2 . Unfolding of talin exposes new VBSs . Without force applied to rod bundles R1 – R3 , vinculin remains in an auto - inhibited state , whereby the tail blocks binding at the vinculin head . When force is applied along the talin rod , the bundles unfold and expose up to 11 new VBSs , which breaks the interaction between the vinculin head and tail , allowing interaction with other proteins , such as actin . This process can occur modularly such that the magnitude of force determines the number of exposed VBSs and , therefore , the number of vinculin molecules that can bind and level of adhesion maturation . 4 Vol . 30 June 2016 HAINING ET AL . The FASEB Journal x www . fasebj . org helical bundles that are unfolded , the more VBSs become available ( 55 – 57 ) . A greater number of VBSs will lead to a greater activation of vinculin by disrupting its auto - inhibition ( 69 ) . This leads to both stabilization of the focal adhesion and an increase in the recruitment of proteins showntobecrucialtofocaladhesion signaling . Thismodel of focal adhesion strengthening via talin stretching is depicted in Fig . 4 . As elegant and as promising as this sounds as a vital mechanism for cell – ECM mechanotransduction , it re - mains to be definitively shown that this is indeed how cells sense their mechanical environment . Experimental evi - dence strongly supports the case for each individual step , but further comprehensive cellular work is required to settle the case for the whole process . Implications of other binding partners In performing these comprehensive studies we must an - swer the question that as yet has been unexplored in pre - vious experiments : how do other talin binding partners relate to its possible role in mechanotransduction ? Like vinculin , othertalinbindingpartnershaveprominentroles in signaling pathways associated with cell response , de - velopment , and survival . DLC - 1 is a tumor suppressor protein thatacts as a GTPase - activating protein whose loss is frequently associated with a variety of cancerous phe - notypes . As a GTPase - activating protein molecule , it down - regulates the activity of members of the Rho family , which are key regulators of the actin cytoskeleton ( 74 ) . For its activity to have an effect on cellular behavior , DLC - 1 requires a binding motif that binds to talin and aids in its localization to focal adhesions ( 49 ) . The DLC - 1bindingsite is located in a bundle midway along the talin rod and , as such , is likely to experience force application within the cell . Whether or not this force will affect the binding of DLC - 1 to talin is unknown , although it has been shown that DLC - 1 is more commonly found in mature adhesions than in nascent ones ( 75 ) , a phenomenon that may be explained by mechanotransduction . The effect of force on the interaction of talin with other binding partners may also operate differently than it does withvinculininwhichtheunfoldingofthebundleincreasesaffinity . It has been suggested , for example , that the same unfolding of bundles R1 – R3 that has been shown to in - creasetheaffinityforvinculincouldalsodisruptthebindingofRIAMtothesameregion , reducingratherthanincreasing affinity ( 41 ) . This switch in affinity , potentially force mod - ulated , from RIAM binding to vinculin is associated with a switch in the nature of the focal adhesions fromsites of actin polymerization at the leading edge of lamellipodium to Figure 3 . Experimental evidence demonstrating the mechanosensitive nature of talin . A ) Single - molecule atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) was used to reveal the unfolding pro ﬁ les of the C - terminal rod . B ) Magnetic tweezers and ﬂ uorescent microscopy were combined to examine the interaction of talin with vinculin under force - induced unfolding ( 56 ) . C ) Pseudo - focal adhesions were created by micropatterning talin molecules onto a substrate . When a contractile actomyosin network was layered onto these adhesions , the talin molecules unfolded and showed an increased af ﬁ nity for vinculin , as previously demonstrated by ﬂ uorescent microscopy ( 65 ) . D ) In vivo , talin can be stretched up to ; 8 times its unbound length , as measured by ﬂ uorescence microscopy . In contrast to in vitro data , cycles of actomyosin contractions alters the force – extension relationship of talin to vinculin ( 59 ) . EGFP , enhanced green ﬂ uorescent protein ; GFP , green ﬂ uorescent protein . TALIN IN HEALTH AND DISEASE 5 stable sites of adhesion that are able to transmit greater forces from the cytoskeleton to the ECM ( 76 ) . TALIN AND DISEASE Talin investigation in cancer The prominent role of talin , both in signaling pathways related to cell survival and in cell adhesion and migration , has led to extensive investigation into its possible role in cancerprogression . Earlystudieslocalizedthetalingeneto chromosome 9p , and it has been noted that this chromo - some frequently contains deletions or mutations in can - cerous phenotypes ( 77 , 78 ) . Talin has been shown to be significantly up - regulated in the metastatic tissue of hu - man prostate specimens compared with primary tumors , leading to greater adhesion , migration , and invasion ( 79 ) . In similar fashion , metastatic breast cancer cells require talin to degrade the ECM to assist in invasion ( 80 ) . Talin is also up - regulated in hepatocellular carcinoma , where it is associated with a shorter time to recurrence after resec - tions , in brain tumor glioblastoma multiforme , and in ovarian serous carcinoma ( 81 – 83 ) . In oral squamous cell carcinoma , its overexpression has been shown to correlate with overall invasiveness ( 84 ) . Talin regulation in cancers Because aberrant levels of talin are found in a variety of cancers , it is necessary to determine what regulates talin levels and how it affects cancerous phenotypes . One of the factors that influences the levels of protein transcrip - tion in cells is microRNA ( miRNA ) — short , noncoding sections of RNA that regulate gene expression at the post - transcriptional stage ( 85 ) . As a result of their effect on protein levels and their often aberrant expression in a va - riety of diseased phenotypes , including cancer , the in - vestigation of miRNA levels has become increasingly popular . For talin , at least 4 miRNAs have been implicated in its role in cancer : miR - 124 and miR - 132 are down - regulated in prostate cancer , with talin - 1 and talin - 2 as direct targets , respectively ( 86 , 87 ) ; miR - 9 , which targets talin - 1 , is down - regulated in ovarian serous carcinoma ( 81 ) ; and trastuzumab , a monoclonal antibody that has been used as an effective treatment for breast cancer ( 88 ) , has been shown to up - regulate miR - 194 , which , in turn , reduced levels of talin - 2 ( 89 ) . Although these miRNAs seem to specifically target one isoform or the other , it is currently unclear whether the relative expression levels of the two isoforms or the absolute levels of one isoform is relevant to cancer progression . Recent work hassuggested that the two isoforms might be tuned differently for mechanosensing , with talin - 1 requiring engagementof the actomyosin machinery to activate its vinculin binding sites , whereas talin - 2 appears to be able to partly bind to vinculin without the application of force ( 90 ) . As the dis - tinct roles of the two isoforms in mechanotransduction become clearer , why the specific targeting of one or the other isoform is important may be indicated . Besides the modulation of the overall expression levels of talin , it is also important to take note of the regulation of the protein itself and its activity . First , there is cathepsin H , aproteaseforwhichtalinisasubstrate . Thisproteaseisup - regulated in prostate cancer cell lines , and , owing to its action on talin , cathepsin H inhibition increases integrin affinity and reduces migration of cancer cells on fibro - nectin ( 91 ) . The apparent cleavage target of cathepsin H , the F0 subdomain of the talin head , does not bind directly totheintegrintailsbutisthoughttointeract , alongwithF1 , Actomyosincontraction Intermediatesubstrate B Actomyosincontraction Soft substrate C talin RIAM DLC - 1 Actomyosincontraction Vinculin ( active ) Vinculin ( inactive ) Integrin Stiff substrate β α A Figure 4 . Proposed model for the interaction of talin with its binding partners in substrates of different rigidities : stiff ( A ) , intermediate ( B ) , and soft ECM ( C ) substrates . The force applied to talin depends on both the force of actomyosin contraction and the rigidity of the underlying substrate . Very stiff ECM substrates promote ﬁ rm anchoring of the talin molecule to the cell membrane via integrin . Simultaneous actomyosin contraction concentrates tension along the talin rod , thereby unfolding it . This may decrease the af ﬁ nity with previously bound adaptor proteins , such as RIAM and DLC - 1 , which allows vinculin binding on newly opened VBSs . Vinculin binding to talin further stabilizes the focal adhesion and leads to focal adhesion maturation . In substrates of intermediate stiffness , fewer VBSs are opened , which results in a less - mature focal adhesion . In very soft substrates , the matrix deformation is such that the force talin is exposed to is reduced , which leads to an even lower number of exposed VBSs ; thus , RIAM and DLC - 1 remain bound to the structured rod . 6 Vol . 30 June 2016 HAINING ET AL . The FASEB Journal x www . fasebj . org with membrane phospholipids to enhance integrin acti - vation ( 13 ) . An equally important part of focal adhesion dynamics involves the action of calpain , another protease that acts on talin to cleave it at the linker region between the talin head and tail regions , leading to the disassembly and turnover of focal adhesions ( 92 ) . Calpain activity has been linked to the presence of common oncoproteins and has a subsequent effect on focal adhesion mechanics and cell migration , possibly through its cleavage of talin and , therefore , its regulation of adhesion turnover ( 93 ) . Talin and cancer treatment The importance of talin within pathways that are relevant to cancer and in the cancerous phenotypes themselves suggests that talin could be an attractive avenue of cancer treatment . Indeed , as discussed above with trastuzumab , it seems that cancer treatments that are already in use may act via a mechanism related to talin function . This , how - ever , isnottheonlyexampleofsuchaninvestigation . Talin expression in cells has been shown to affect the chemo - resistance of those cells to such cancer treatments as cis - platin , acommonchemotherapydrug , wherebyknockdown of talin confers chemoresistance to cisplatin treatment via NF - k B activity ( 94 , 95 ) . Conversely , a lower expression level of talin - 1 in a variety of breast cancer cell lines has been shown to increase their chemosensitivity to doce - taxel , a well - established chemotherapy drug used in metastatic breast cancer treatment ( 96 ) . Taking further the idea of the potential role of talin in chemotherapy pathways , it has been shown that , similar to trastuzumab , some established and putative cancer therapies act di - rectly on talin levels in cells . These therapies include reseveratrol , which has been studied extensively in pros - tate and colon cancers , and DZ - 50 , a novel doxazosin derivative , both of which have been shown to reduce levels of talin in cancer cells ( 97 , 98 ) . Possible mechanisms by which talin modulates cancer Although previous studies provide good evidence for the importance of talin in cancerous phenotypes , they do little to explain it . Given the multitude of talin binding inter - actions , there are a number of potential avenues that could provide an explanation . Its activation of integrins , and thus its control over adhesion , could be vital for migration and metastasis . Stable adhesions help to protect cancer cells from anoikis ( cell death caused by insufficient cell – ECMinteraction ) and also assistin migration byproviding the anchorage needed for cellular traction . Conversely stable adhesions can restrict cell migration by holding the cell in place , which is why the up - regulation of talin pro - teases and adhesion turnover , as discussed earlier , could be an important facet of cancer progression . Along with its role in migration , downstream signaling partners of talin have been shown to be important in cell cycle regulation . Thus , talin could influence cancer via these downstream pathways . Studies seem to indicate that it is in fact a combination of these factors . Several studies have indicated that talin - 1 is overex - pressedin cancer , particularlyinmetastaticcells ( 81 , 84 , 86 , 99 , 100 ) . Overexpression of talin - 1 in prostate cancer cells appears to activate b 1 - integrins , which increases sub - sequent adhesion , resistance to anoikis , and metastatic potential ( 101 ) . Thus , talin - 1 inactivation reduces cell ad - hesion and motility , likely through its relationship with integrins ( 82 ) . One study found that active b 1 - integrin in prostate cancer depends on the phosphorylation of talin - 1 at residue S425 and can be blocked with a non - phosphorylatable mutant talin - 1 or with the silencing of p53 - activated Cdk5 , which is responsible for S425 phosphorylation . Without phosphorylation or associa - tion with binding partners , talin is known to exist in an autoinhibited form and does not bind to integrins ( 102 ) . Active ( phosphorylated ) talin at S425 is also required for the activation of downstream effectors FAK , AKT , and Cas , which are involved in cell survival and migration ( 103 ) . Similarly , aberrant expression of talin binding partners that assist in the recruitment of talin or in the conformational change required to bind to the cyto - plasmic tail of integrins could potentially lead to a more cancerous phenotype through modulation of cell adhe - sion and migration . In addition , talin - 1 short hairpin RNA silencing in b 3 - expressing prostate cancer cells re - duced levels of Src and integrin - linked kinase 1 ( 79 ) . In vivo , short hairpin RNA knockdown of talin - 1 or ex - pression of nonphosphorylatable talin - 1 in metastatic prostate cells inhibited colonization to bone ( 103 ) . The level of talin - 1 expression has also been shown to scale with disease progression ( 79 , 86 ) . A summary of these interactions is shown in Fig . 5 . In addition to adhesion , another important aspect of migrationistheformationandstabilizationofinvadapodia , which are involved in the degradation of the ECM and metastasis . ECM degradation is mediated by the sodium / hydrogen exchanger 1 ( NHE - 1 ) , which acidifies the peri - invadipodial microenvinonment and promotes protease activity ( 104 – 106 ) . NHE - 1 has therefore been implicated in the metastasis of melanoma , breast cancer , and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma as a result of stromal remodeling and often in partnership with other membrane proteins ( 107 – 111 ) . NHE - 1 inhibition has also been shown to pro - mote chemotherapy - induced apoptosis in vitro ( 112 , 113 ) . Beaty et al . ( 80 ) determined that talin is required for invadapodia maturation and the recruitment of NHE - 1 with the shared binding partner , moesin , to focal adhe - sions . Surprisingly , the interaction between the talin head domain and b - integrin is not required for talin localization to invadapodia . Nevertheless , the silencing of talin pre - vents intracellular alkalinization at invadopodia , which is required for actin polymerization , motility , and metastasis in mammary adenocarcinoma cells ( 80 ) . The inhibition of NHE - 1 and cytosolic alkalinization may also affect downstream pathways that are related to cell proliferation and survival ( e . g . , RhoA , MAPK ) ( 114 ) . Thus , talin an - choring of NHE - 1 at invadapodia promotes neoplastic transformation both intracellularly and extracellularly . The function of talin in cancerous phenotypes is not limited just to its influence on adhesion and motility but , rather , also depends on its downstream signaling , as TALIN IN HEALTH AND DISEASE 7 emphasized by its overexpression in nonadherent cells . In suspension , cells do not receive the mechanical stim - ulation required for anchorage - dependent survival pathways ; however , overexpression of talin - 1 confers anoikis resistance via adhesion - independent phosphor - ylation of FAK , AKT , Src , and integrin - linked kinase 1 effector GSK3 b ( 79 ) . This multiplicity of mechanisms demonstrates that talin plays a prominent and varied role in cancerous phenotypes . What remains to be seen is how the role of talin as a key component of cellular mechanotransduction might impact its role in cancer progression . The effect of substrate stiff - ness on cancer metastasis is well documented ( 1 ) , as is the factthatfibroticenvironments ( e . g . , cirrhosis ) arefrequently associated with increased cancer development and pro - gression ( 115 ) . Similarly , other mechanical stimuli arising from interstitial or osmotic pressure of solid tumors , which may be a result of uncontrolled cell proliferation and vas - cular collapse , can also activate genes that are implicated in neoplastic transformation ( 116 ) . Because the forces gener - ated from ECM rigidity are transmitted through integrins ( 117 ) and , by extension , talin , the mechanosensitivity of talin could mediate cancerous phenotypes . If it is shown thattalinisthekeycomponentoftheabilityofacelltosense substrate rigidity via a method such as that outlined in Fig . 4 , that would go a long way to explaining the many links between talin activity and cancer that have been outlined above . It has already been shown that the increase in malignant progression on ECM relies on vinculin re - cruitment to focal adhesions in a force - dependent mechanism , highlighting the importance of this line of inquiry ( 118 ) . In addition , the role of DLC - 1 and its in - teraction with talin remains to be fully investigated with regard to cancer . Because DLC - 1 has been shown to be a potent tumor suppressor , and its loss can contribute to the development of cancers ( 119 ) , any alteration to its activity by its association with talin must be considered and investigated as a potential mechanism by which talin controls cancer progression . Therefore , a thorough understanding of all talin binding interactions and how they are modulated must be fully developed to construct a complete picture of its role as a metastatic mediator and its potential as a therapeutic target . Hematologic disorders As a result of the extensive list of talin binding partners , there are a number of potential pathologies in which it could be implicated . One of itsmost criticalfunctionsis the activation of integrin mediated by its head domain . This process is vital to the ability of cells to be able to adhere to substrates , which is crucial to platelet and neutrophil ac - tivation . These cells , usually suspended in fluid of either the cardiovascular or lymphatic systems , must adhere to the endothelium and transmigrate once they arrive at the siteofinjurywheretheyarerequiredtoact . Thisinitialfirm adhesion relies on the activation and engagement of integrins , which bind leukocytes to solid substrates under shearforces — thisactivation , inturn , reliesontalin . Talinis Extracellular matrix inactive talin - 1 Cdk5 p35 miRNA ILK - 1 PI3K / AKT ERK1 / 2 Actin polymerization Cell survival , adhesion , migration Resistance to anoikis Integrin activation PIP2 RIAM Rap1 P P PIPKI γ Tension active talin - 1 FAK Src NHE - 1 Moesin H + Na + Figure 5 . The role of talin in malignant pheno - types . Talin is activated by a conformational switch mediated by phosphorylation at residue S425 by Cdk5 , as well as recruitment factors , such as Rap1 - activated RIAM . Up - regulation of talin - activating proteins is often related to neoplastic transformation . Once at the mem - brane , phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP2 ; generated by PIPKI g ) further assists in conformational changes in both talin and the integrin cytoplasmic tail separation needed for integrin extension and activation . miRNAs may target talin expression levels to in ﬂ uence downstream focal adhesion formation . In the absence of such inhibitors , intermediate or high - af ﬁ nity integrins , generated by the talin head binding to the b - cytoplasmic tail , ligate with ECM components . If talin is dually anchored by rigid integrin – ECM and cortical actin , the focal adhesion complex can undergo force - induced maturation , which leads to en - hanced downstream signaling associated with a cancerous phenotype . Likewise , structural bi - ology and steered molecular dynamics have shown that force application activates integrins ( 35 ) . Tumors generate stiffer ECM , and cells are submitted to greater forces that may trigger the activation of integrin and down - stream partners , including talin . Membrane - localized talin also recruits the moesin / NHE - 1 complex at lamellipodia , which drives a pH gradient needed for ECM remodeling and actin polymerization . Adapted from ( 79 , 80 , 103 ) . ILK - 1 , integrin - linked kinase 1 8 Vol . 30 June 2016 HAINING ET AL . The FASEB Journal x www . fasebj . org required to induce the slow - rolling of neutrophils along substrates that precedes their arrest mediated by the integrin , LFA - 1 ( 120 ) . Similarly , in platelets , thelossoftalin reduces the activation of integrin affinity ( 121 ) . Further - more , knockdown of talin in platelets abrogates adhesion and spreading , which indicates impaired a IIb b 3 function and impaired b 1 integrins ( which cooperate with b 3 ) , and also disrupts proper aggregation and thrombus formation ( 122 ) . These mechanistic studies support the proteome analysis of patients with myelodysplastic syndromes , whose sufferers often experience bleeding complications , that present with lower levels of talin , which is likely to have a subsequent effect on integrin activation ( 123 ) . It is clear from many studies that talin is required for integrin activation in hematopoietic cells , and talin loss produces leukocyte adhesion deficiency . Kindlin , which cooperates with talin to increase integrin valency , is also associated with leukocyte adhesion deficiency - III . [ For a review on talin and kindlin interactions , see Ye et al . ( 124 ) . ] Although the presence of talin appears indispensable in most cases , recent evidence suggests that talin recruitment mecha - nisms are more nuanced in these cells : RIAM is a more potent talin recruitment factor for b 2 - integrins and this appears to account for the normal platelet phenotype in RIAM 2 / 2 mice , whereas b 2 - expressing neutrophils and T cells exhibit defects in adhesion and trafficking with the loss of RIAM ( 28 , 30 , 125 ) . Further work is required to determine the alternative pathways by which talin is recruited to b 1 - and b 3 - integrins to determine how plate - lets are protected from RIAM deletion . The mechanosensitivity of talin is evidenced , perhaps indirectly , by the distinct roles it plays in platelet function . Talin 2 / 2 plateletsexhibitdefectiveclotretractioneveninthe presence of integrin - activating exogenous manganese ; however , clot retraction in a talin mutant ( L325R ) in which talin retains binding partners without activating integrins can be rescued with manganese . This rescue can be blocked either by inhibiting actin polymerization or with extracel - lular integrin antagonists , indicating that clot retraction depends on the ability of talin both to activate integrins and to bridge ligand - bound integrins with actomyosin contractile machinery ( 121 ) . Similarly , talin can up - regulate a subset of high - affinity conformation a 4 b 1 in Jurkat T cells in shear stress – free conditions and can also contribute to adhesion and shear resistance , whereas paxillin is only in - volvedinthelatterprocess . TalinfurthermediatesCXCL12 - stimulated adhesion under shear , yet this chemokine does not alter integrin affinity in the presence of a soluble ligand ( shear - free conditions ) ( 39 ) . These studies demonstrate that the presence of talin is insufficient for proper cell function ; talin must be subjected to force , whether by cell contraction or by the application of shear stress . Exactly how hematologic pathologies link to talin - 1 levelsisunclear , althoughcluesareprovidedbyastudyon von Willebrand disease , another hematologic disorder . Type 2B of this disease involves gain - of - function muta - tions of the von Willebrand factor , which impairs the ac - tivity of Rap1 ( 126 ) . This GTPase is integral to the recruitment of talin to focal adhesions via its association with RIAM ( 48 ) . As in the above discussion with cancer , some have used these results to attempt to design therapies that use these pathways . For example , existing therapiesthatseektodecreaseplateletaggregationandthuseaseartherothromboticcomplicationsinvolveinhibitionoftheadenosinediphosphatereceptorP2Y12 ( 127 ) , which has been shown to cause the activation Rap1 . Indeed , putative therapies have been based on the targeting of alternative receptors that also induce the activation of Rap1 but with a different time - dependent profile , such as calcium and diacylglycerol - regulated guanine nucleotide exchange fac - tor 1 ( 128 ) . Given this evidence on both sides — on the one hand that the activation of vinculin by talin is vital for platelet aggregation , and on the other that diseases and therapies affect one of the primary regulators of talin , Rap1 — it is impossible to escape , once again , the impor - tance of the binding interactions of talin to the progression or treatment of diseased phenotypes . CONCLUSION Talin , ascanbeseeninthisreview , hasaprominentroleina number of cellular processes and signaling pathways that are vital to cell function , from its regulation of integrin ac - tivation to its apparent influence on Src / ERK pathways . It is also apparent that force restructures talin : its rod do - mains are able to be unfolded at forces , 30 pN , and this structural change has an impact on its binding to vinculin ( 56 , 57 ) . There remains , however , two avenues of in - vestigation that must be addressed to fully cement the role of talin as a mechanosensitive molecule . One track must be to establish that this modulation of binding affinity under force occurs natively in cells and not just in the carefully controlled setting of single - molecule setups by in - vestigating the mechanosensitivity of talin at the cellular level . Although some studies , such as that demonstrating the change in length of talin ( 59 ) , have been conducted in cells , there is still a lack of definitive evidence that this ex - tension is important for modulating binding affinities in a manner similar to that which has been shown at the single - molecule level . There are already indications that this would be the case . First , a study has shown that when force is applied by layered actin cytoskeleton to clusters of talin moleculesratherthanbyapiezocubeormagneticbead , this force does indeed increase the affinity of vinculin bind - ing to this pseudo - focal adhesion ( 65 ) . Second , cellular studies have shown that the force on a single integrin molecule peaks at 40 pN during initial adhesion ( 129 ) , and that individual talin molecules experience average forces in the 7 – 10 pN range , with a proportion experi - encing higher forces ( 90 ) . These levels of mechanical tension would be sufficient to unfold the R1 – R3 region ( 57 ) and other regions along the rod ( unpublished data ) . The second track will be to establish whether this un - folding affects the binding of other molecules to talin and their subsequent interactions . The emerging im - portance of the DLC - 1 protein and its localization to focal adhesions ( 49 ) , as well as the interactions with RIAM ( 41 ) and the downstream interactions of vinculin ( 70 , 72 ) , necessitate studies investigating the effect of force on all of the talin adapter proteins and the phenomena that they govern . TALIN IN HEALTH AND DISEASE 9 The importance of these future studies is highlighted by the disease states that seem to be affected by the expression and function of talin . Its role in both cancer and hematologic disorders is well documented but not necessarily explained , and inconsistencies are yet to be reconciled . It is likely that , given its wide range of influence , these are not the only disease pathologies to which talin contributes , nor are they the only situations for which possible therapies might be designed around its role . Recently the activation of integrin by talin has been shown to be critical to the function of podocytes in the kidney and that an increase in the pro - cessingoftalinbycalpaincleavagemayaggravatenephroticsyndromeinpatients ( 130 ) . There are sure to be more ex - amples given the well - appreciated importance of the cell – ECM interaction in a variety of areas from cell motility to survival , andfromcancertostemcelldifferentiation . Thus , it is important for us to gain a full understanding of the mol - eculethatseemstobeatthecenterofitalltofullyunderstanditspositionandharnessitsfullpotential . This work was supported by the European Research Council Grant 282051 ( to A . d . R . H . ) ; and by a Whitaker International Program and James Dyson Foundation Fellowship ( to T . J . L . ) . REFERENCES 1 . Paszek , M . J . , Zahir , N . , Johnson , K . R . , Lakins , J . N . , Rozenberg , G . I . , Gefen , A . , Reinhart - King , C . A . , Margulies , S . S . , Dembo , M . , Boettiger , D . , Hammer , D . A . , and Weaver , V . M . ( 2005 ) Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell 8 , 241 – 254 2 . Engler , A . J . , Sen , S . , Sweeney , H . L . , andDischer , D . E . ( 2006 ) Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage speci ﬁ cation . Cell 126 , 677 – 689 3 . Geiger , B . , Spatz , J . P . , and Bershadsky , A . D . ( 2009 ) Environmental sensing through focal adhesions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 21 – 33 4 . Burridge , K . , and Connell , L . ( 1983 ) A new protein of adhesion plaques and ruf ﬂ ing membranes . J . Cell Biol . 97 , 359 – 367 5 . Calderwood , D . A . , Zent , R . , Grant , R . , Rees , D . J . G . , Hynes , R . O . , and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 1999 ) The Talin head domain binds to integrin beta subunit cytoplasmic tails and regulates integrin activation . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 28071 – 28074 6 . Hemmings , L . , Rees , D . J . G . , Ohanian , V . , Bolton , S . J . , Gilmore , A . P . , Patel , B . , Priddle , H . , Trevithick , J . E . , Hynes , R . O . , and Critchley , D . R . ( 1996 ) Talin contains three actin - binding sites each of which is adjacent to a vinculin - binding site . J . Cell Sci . 109 , 2715 – 2726 7 . Kopp , P . M . , Bate , N . , Hansen , T . M . , Brindle , N . P . , Praekelt , U . , Debrand , E . , Coleman , S . , Mazzeo , D . , Goult , B . T . , Gingras , A . R . , Pritchard , C . A . , Critchley , D . R . , andMonkley , S . J . ( 2010 ) Studieson the morphology and spreading of human endothelial cells de ﬁ ne key inter - and intramolecular interactions for talin1 . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 89 , 661 – 673 8 . Monkley , S . J . , Pritchard , C . A . , andCritchley , D . R . ( 2001 ) Analysisof the mammalian talin2 gene TLN2 . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 286 , 880 – 885 9 . Conti , F . J . , Monkley , S . J . , Wood , M . R . , Critchley , D . R . , and M¨uller , U . ( 2009 ) Talin1and2arerequiredformyoblastfusion , sarcomere assembly and the maintenance of myotendinous junctions . Development 136 , 3597 – 3606 10 . Debrand , E . , Conti , F . J . , Bate , N . , Spence , L . , Mazzeo , D . , Pritchard , C . A . , Monkley , S . J . , and Critchley , D . R . ( 2012 ) Mice carrying a complete deletion of the talin2 coding sequence are viable and fertile . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 426 , 190 – 195 11 . Praekelt , U . , Kopp , P . M . , Rehm , K . , Linder , S . , Bate , N . , Patel , B . , Debrand , E . , Manso , A . M . , Ross , R . S . , Conti , F . , Zhang , M . Z . , Harris , R . C . , Zent , R . , Critchley , D . R . , and Monkley , S . J . ( 2012 ) New isoform - speci ﬁ c monoclonal antibodies reveal different sub - cellular localisations for talin1 and talin2 . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 91 , 180 – 191 12 . Zhang , X . , Jiang , G . , Cai , Y . , Monkley , S . J . , Critchley , D . R . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2008 ) Talin depletion revealsindependenceofinitial cellspreadingfromintegrinactivationandtraction . Nat . CellBiol . 10 , 1062 – 1068 13 . Goult , B . T . , Bouaouina , M . , Elliott , P . R . , Bate , N . , Patel , B . , Gingras , A . R . , Grossmann , J . G . , Roberts , G . C . K . , Calderwood , D . A . , Critchley , D . R . , and Barsukov , I . L . ( 2010 ) Structure of a double ubiquitin - like domain in the talin head : a role in integrin activation . EMBO J . 29 , 1069 – 1080 14 . Tadokoro , S . , Shattil , S . J . , Eto , K . , Tai , V . , Liddington , R . C . , de Pereda , J . M . , Ginsberg , M . H . , and Calderwood , D . A . ( 2003 ) Talin binding to integrin beta tails : a ﬁ nal common step in integrin activation . Science 302 , 103 – 106 15 . Martel , V . , Racaud - Sultan , C . , Dupe , S . , Marie , C . , Paulhe , F . , Galmiche , A . , Block , M . R . , and Albiges - Rizo , C . ( 2001 ) Conformation , localization , and integrin binding of talin depend on its interaction with phosphoinositides . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 21217 – 21227 16 . Chen , H . C . , Appeddu , P . A . , Parsons , J . T . , Hildebrand , J . D . , Schaller , M . D . , and Guan , J . L . ( 1995 ) Interaction of focaladhesion kinasewithcytoskeletalproteintalin . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 16995 – 16999 17 . Vinogradova , O . , Velyvis , A . , Velyviene , A . , Hu , B . , Haas , T . , Plow , E . , and Qin , J . ( 2002 ) A structural mechanism of integrin alpha ( IIb ) beta ( 3 ) “ inside - out ” activation as regulated by its cytoplasmic face . Cell 110 , 587 – 597 18 . Wegener , K . L . , Partridge , A . W . , Han , J . , Pickford , A . R . , Liddington , R . C . , Ginsberg , M . H . , andCampbell , I . D . ( 2007 ) Structuralbasisof integrin activation by talin . Cell 128 , 171 – 182 19 . Kim , C . , Ye , F . , Hu , X . , and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 2012 ) Talin activates integrins by altering the topology of the b transmembrane domain . J . Cell Biol . 197 , 605 – 611 20 . Kalli , A . C . , Campbell , I . D . , and Sansom , M . S . ( 2011 ) Multiscale simulations suggest a mechanism for integrin inside - out activation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 11890 – 11895 21 . Or ł owski , A . , Kukkurainen , S . , P¨oyry , A . , Rissanen , S . , Vattulainen , I . , Hyt¨onen , V . P . , and R´og , T . ( 2015 ) PIP2 and Talin Join Forces to Activate Integrin . J . Phys . Chem . B 119 , 12381 – 12389 22 . Montresor , A . , Toffali , L . , Constantin , G . , and Laudanna , C . ( 2012 ) Chemokines and the signaling modules regulating integrin af ﬁ nity . Front . Immunol . 3 , 127 23 . Alon , R . , and Ley , K . ( 2008 ) Cells on the run : shear - regulated integrin activation in leukocyte rolling and arrest on endothelial cells . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 20 , 525 – 532 24 . M´enasch´e , G . , Kliche , S . , Chen , E . J . , Stradal , T . E . , Schraven , B . , and Koretzky , G . ( 2007 ) RIAM links the ADAP / SKAP - 55 signaling module to Rap1 , facilitating T - cell - receptor - mediated integrin acti - vation . Mol . Cell . Biol . 27 , 4 070 – 4081 25 . Lafuente , E . M . , van Puijenbroek , A . A . , Krause , M . , Carman , C . V . , Freeman , G . J . , Berezovskaya , A . , Constantine , E . , Springer , T . A . , Gertler , F . B . , and Boussiotis , V . A . ( 2004 ) RIAM , an Ena / VASPand Pro ﬁ linligand , interactswithRap1 - GTPandmediatesRap1 - induced adhesion . Dev . Cell 7 , 585 – 595 26 . Han , J . , Lim , C . J . , Watanabe , N . , Soriani , A . , Ratnikov , B . , Calderwood , D . A . , Puzon - McLaughlin , W . , Lafuente , E . M . , Boussiotis , V . A . , Shattil , S . J . , and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 2006 ) Reconstructing and deconstructing agonist - induced activation of integrin alphaIIbbeta3 . Curr . Biol . 16 , 1796 – 1806 27 . Lagarrigue , F . , Vikas Anekal , P . , Lee , H . S . , Bachir , A . I . , Ablack , J . N . , Horwitz , A . F . , and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 2015 ) A RIAM / lamellipodin - talin - integrin complex forms the tip of sticky ﬁ n - gers that guide cell migration . Nat . Commun . 6 , 8492 28 . Klapproth , S . , Sperandio , M . , Pinheiro , E . M . , Pr¨unster , M . , Soehnlein , O . , Gertler , F . B . , F¨assler , R . , and Moser , M . ( 2015 ) Loss of the Rap1 effector RIAM results in leukocyte adhesion de ﬁ ciency due to impaired b 2 integrin function in mice . Blood 126 , 2704 – 2712 29 . Hyduk , S . J . , Rullo , J . , Cano , A . P . , Xiao , H . , Chen , M . , Moser , M . , and Cybulsky , M . I . ( 2011 ) Talin - 1 and kindlin - 3 regulate alpha4beta1 integrin - mediatedadhesionstabilization , butnotGprotein - coupled receptor - induced af ﬁ nity upregulation . J . Immunol . 187 , 4360 – 4368 30 . Stritt , S . , Wolf , K . , Lorenz , V . , V¨ogtle , T . , Gupta , S . , B¨osl , M . R . , and Nieswandt , B . ( 2015 ) Rap1 - GTP - interacting adaptor molecule ( RIAM ) isdispensableforplateletintegrinactivationandfunctionin mice . Blood 125 , 219 – 222 31 . Astrof , N . S . , Salas , A . , Shimaoka , M . , Chen , J . , and Springer , T . A . ( 2006 ) Importance of force linkage in mechanochemistry of adhesion receptors . Biochemistry 45 , 15020 – 15028 32 . Alon , R . , and Feigelson , S . W . ( 2012 ) Chemokine - triggered leuko - cyte arrest : force - regulated bi - directional integrin activation in quantal adhesive contacts . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 24 , 670 – 676 33 . Alon , R . , and Dustin , M . L . ( 2007 ) Force as a facilitator of integrin conformational changes during leukocyte arrest on blood vessels and antigen - presenting cells . Immunity 26 , 17 – 27 10 Vol . 30 June 2016 HAINING ET AL . The FASEB Journal x www . fasebj . org 34 . Shimaoka , M . , Xiao , T . , Liu , J . H . , Yang , Y . , Dong , Y . , Jun , C . D . , McCormack , A . , Zhang , R . , Joachimiak , A . , Takagi , J . , Wang , J . H . , andSpringer , T . A . ( 2003 ) StructuresofthealphaLIdomainandits complex with ICAM - 1 reveal a shape - shifting pathway for integrin regulation . Cell 112 , 99 – 111 35 . Zhu , J . , Luo , B . H . , Xiao , T . , Zhang , C . , Nishida , N . , and Springer , T . A . ( 2008 ) Structure of a complete integrin ectodomain in a physiologic resting state and activation and deactivation by applied forces . Mol . Cell 32 , 849 – 861 36 . Evans , E . A . , and Calderwood , D . A . ( 2007 ) Forces and bond dynamics in cell adhesion . Science 316 , 1148 – 1153 37 . Wozniak , M . A . , Modzelewska , K . , Kwong , L . , and Keely , P . J . ( 2004 ) Focal adhesion regulation of cell behavior . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1692 , 103 – 119 38 . Shamri , R . , Grabovsky , V . , Gauguet , J . M . , Feigelson , S . , Manevich , E . , Kolanus , W . , Robinson , M . K . , Staunton , D . E . , von Andrian , U . H . , and Alon , R . ( 2005 ) Lymphocyte arrest requires instantaneous induction of an extended LFA - 1 conformation mediated by endothelium - bound chemokines . Nat . Immunol . 6 , 497 – 506 39 . Manevich , E . , Grabovsky , V . , Feigelson , S . W . , and Alon , R . ( 2007 ) Talin 1 and paxillin facilitate distinct steps in rapid VLA - 4 - mediated adhesion strengtheningtovascular cell adhesion molecule 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 25338 – 25348 40 . Calderwood , D . A . , Campbell , I . D . , and Critchley , D . R . ( 2013 ) Talins and kindlins : partners in integrin - mediated adhesion . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 14 , 503 – 517 41 . Goult , B . T . , Zacharchenko , T . , Bate , N . , Tsang , R . , Hey , F . , Gingras , A . R . , Elliott , P . R . , Roberts , G . C . K . , Ballestrem , C . , Critchley , D . R . , and Barsukov , I . L . ( 2013 ) RIAM and vinculin binding to talin are mutually exclusive and regulate adhesion assembly and turnover . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 8238 – 8249 42 . Gingras , A . R . , Bate , N . , Goult , B . T . , Hazelwood , L . , Canestrelli , I . , Grossmann , J . G . , Liu , H . , Putz , N . S . M . , Roberts , G . C . K . , Volkmann , N . , Hanein , D . , Barsukov , I . L . , and Critchley , D . R . ( 2008 ) The structure of the C - terminal actin - binding domain of talin . EMBO J . 27 , 458 – 469 43 . Gingras , A . R . , Ziegler , W . H . , Bobkov , A . A . , Joyce , M . G . , Fasci , D . , Himmel , M . , Rothemund , S . , Ritter , A . , Grossmann , J . G . , Patel , B . , Bate , N . , Goult , B . T . , Emsley , J . , Barsukov , I . L . , Roberts , G . C . K . , Liddington , R . C . , Ginsberg , M . H . , and Critchley , D . R . ( 2009 ) Structural determinants of integrin binding to the talin rod . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 8866 – 8876 44 . Gingras , A . R . , Ziegler , W . H . , Frank , R . , Barsukov , I . L . , Roberts , G . C . K . , Critchley , D . R . , and Emsley , J . ( 2005 ) Mapping and consensussequenceidenti ﬁ cationformultiplevinculinbindingsites within the talin rod . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 37217 – 37224 45 . Gingras , A . R . , Bate , N . , Goult , B . T . , Patel , B . , Kopp , P . M . , Emsley , J . , Barsukov , I . L . , Roberts , G . C . K . , andCritchley , D . R . ( 2010 ) Central regionoftalinhasauniquefoldthatbindsvinculinandactin . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 29577 – 29587 46 . Goult , B . T . , Bate , N . , Anthis , N . J . , Wegener , K . L . , Gingras , A . R . , Patel , B . , Barsukov , I . L . , Campbell , I . D . , Roberts , G . C . K . , and Critchley , D . R . ( 2009 ) The structure of an interdomain complex that regulates talin activity . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 15097 – 15106 47 . Sun , N . , Critchley , D . R . , Paulin , D . , Li , Z . , and Robson , R . M . ( 2008 ) Identi ﬁ cation of a repeated domain within mammalian alpha - synemin that interacts directly with talin . Exp . Cell Res . 314 , 1839 – 1849 48 . Lee , H . S . , Lim , C . J . , Puzon - McLaughlin , W . , Shattil , S . J . , and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 2009 ) RIAMactivatesintegrinsby linkingtalin toras GTPase membrane - targeting sequences . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 5119 – 5127 49 . Li , G . , Du , X . , Vass , W . C . , Papageorge , A . G . , Lowy , D . R . , and Qian , X . ( 2011 ) Fullactivityofthe deleted in liver cancer 1 ( DLC1 ) tumor suppressor depends on an LD - like motif that binds talin and focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 17129 – 17134 50 . Kanchanawong , P . , Shtengel , G . , Pasapera , A . M . , Ramko , E . B . , Davidson , M . W . , Hess , H . F . , andWaterman , C . M . ( 2010 ) Nanoscale architecture of integrin - based cell adhesions . Nature 468 , 580 – 584 51 . Liu , J . , Wang , Y . , Goh , W . I . , Goh , H . , Baird , M . A . , Ruehland , S . , Teo , S . , Bate , N . , Critchley , D . R . , Davidson , M . W . , andKanchanawong , P . ( 2015 ) Talin determines the nanoscale architecture of focal adhesions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 112 , E4864 – E4873 52 . Klapholz , B . , Herbert , S . L . , Wellmann , J . , Johnson , R . , Parsons , M . , and Brown , N . H . ( 2015 ) Alternative mechanisms for talin to mediate integrin function . Curr . Biol . 25 , 847 – 857 53 . Papagrigoriou , E . , Gingras , A . R . , Barsukov , I . L . , Bate , N . , Fillingham , I . J . , Patel , B . , Frank , R . , Ziegler , W . H . , Roberts , G . C . K . , Critchley , D . R . , and Emsley , J . ( 2004 ) Activation of a vinculin - binding site in the talin rod involves rearrangement of a ﬁ ve - helix bundle . EMBO J . 23 , 2942 – 2951 54 . Fillingham , I . , Gingras , A . R . , Papagrigoriou , E . , Patel , B . , Emsley , J . , Critchley , D . R . , Roberts , G . C . K . , and Barsukov , I . L . ( 2005 ) A vinculin binding domain from the talin rod unfolds to form a complex with the vinculin head . Structure 13 , 65 – 74 55 . Hyt¨onen , V . P . , andVogel , V . ( 2008 ) Howforcemightactivatetalin ’ s vinculin binding sites : SMD reveals a structural mechanism . PLOS Comput . Biol . 4 , e24 56 . del Rio , A . , Perez - Jimenez , R . , Liu , R . , Roca - Cusachs , P . , Fernandez , J . M . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2009 ) Stretching single talin rodmolecules activates vinculin binding . Science 323 , 638 – 641 57 . Yao , M . , Goult , B . T . , Chen , H . , Cong , P . , Sheetz , M . P . , and Yan , J . ( 2014 ) Mechanical activation of vinculin binding to talin locks talin in an unfolded conformation . Sci . Rep . 4 , 4610 58 . Jiang , G . , Giannone , G . , Critchley , D . R . , Fukumoto , E . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2003 ) Two - piconewtonslipbondbetween ﬁ bronectinandthe cytoskeleton depends on talin . Nature 424 , 334 – 337 59 . Margadant , F . , Chew , L . L . , Hu , X . , Yu , H . , Bate , N . , Zhang , X . , and Sheetz , M . ( 2011 ) Mechanotransduction in vivo by repeated talin stretch - relaxationeventsdependsuponvinculin . PLoSBiol . 9 , e1001223 60 . Riveline , D . , Zamir , E . , Balaban , N . Q . , Schwarz , U . S . , Ishizaki , T . , Narumiya , S . , Kam , Z . , Geiger , B . , andBershadsky , A . D . ( 2001 ) Focal contacts as mechanosensors : externally applied local mechanical force induces growth of focal contacts by an mDia1 - dependent and ROCK - independent mechanism . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 1175 – 1186 61 . Choquet , D . , Felsenfeld , D . P . , andSheetz , M . P . ( 1997 ) Extracellular matrix rigidity causes strengthening of integrin - cytoskeleton link - ages . Cell 88 , 39 – 48 62 . Balaban , N . Q . , Schwarz , U . S . , Riveline , D . , Goichberg , P . , Tzur , G . , Sabanay , I . , Mahalu , D . , Safran , S . , Bershadsky , A . , Addadi , L . , and Geiger , B . ( 2001 ) Force and focal adhesion assembly : a close relationshipstudiedusingelasticmicropatternedsubstrates . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 466 – 472 63 . Stricker , J . , Aratyn - Schaus , Y . , Oakes , P . W . , andGardel , M . L . ( 2011 ) Spatiotemporal constraints on the force - dependent growth of focal adhesions . Biophys . J . 100 , 2883 – 2893 64 . Rodr´ ı guez Fern´andez , J . L . , Geiger , B . , Salomon , D . , andBen - Ze ’ ev , A . ( 1992 ) Overexpression of vinculin suppresses cell motility in BALB / c 3T3 cells . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 22 , 127 – 134 65 . Ciobanasu , C . , Faivre , B . , and Le Clainche , C . ( 2014 ) Actomyosin - dependent formation of the mechanosensitive talin - vinculin com - plex reinforces actin anchoring . Nat . Commun . 5 , 3095 66 . Hirata , H . , Tatsumi , H . , Lim , C . T . , and Sokabe , M . ( 2014 ) Force - dependent vinculin binding to talin in live cells : a crucial step in anchoring the actin cytoskeleton to focal adhesions . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 306 , C607 – C620 67 . Case , L . B . , Baird , M . A . , Shtengel , G . , Campbell , S . L . , Hess , H . F . , Davidson , M . W . , and Waterman , C . M . ( 2015 ) Molecular mechanism of vinculin activation and nanoscale spatial organization in focal adhesions . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 880 – 892 68 . Grashoff , C . , Hoffman , B . D . , Brenner , M . D . , Zhou , R . , Parsons , M . , Yang , M . T . , McLean , M . A . , Sligar , S . G . , Chen , C . S . , Ha , T . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2010 ) Measuringmechanicaltensionacrossvinculin reveals regulation of focal adhesion dynamics . Nature 466 , 263 – 266 69 . Bois , P . R . J . , O ’ Hara , B . P . , Nietlispach , D . , Kirkpatrick , J . , andIzard , T . ( 2006 ) The vinculin binding sites of talin and alpha - actinin are suf ﬁ cient to activate vinculin . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 7228 – 7236 70 . Jano ˇ stiak , R . , Br´abek , J . , Auernheimer , V . , Tat´arov´a , Z . , Lautscham , L . A . , Dey , T . , Gemperle , J . , Merkel , R . , Goldmann , W . H . , Fabry , B . , and R¨osel , D . ( 2014 ) CAS directly interacts with vinculin to control mechanosensing and focal adhesion dynamics . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 71 , 727 – 744 71 . Carisey , A . , Tsang , R . , Greiner , A . M . , Nijenhuis , N . , Heath , N . , Nazgiewicz , A . , Kemkemer , R . , Derby , B . , Spatz , J . , andBallestrem , C . ( 2013 ) Vinculin regulates the recruitment and release of core focal adhesion proteins in a force - dependent manner . Curr . Biol . 23 , 271 – 281 72 . Yamashita , H . , Ichikawa , T . , Matsuyama , D . , Kimura , Y . , Ueda , K . , Craig , S . W . , Harada , I . , and Kioka , N . ( 2014 ) The role of the interaction of the vinculin proline - rich linker region with vinexin a in sensing the stiffness of the extracellular matrix . J . Cell Sci . 127 , 1875 – 1886 73 . Atherton , P . , Stutchbury , B . , Wang , D . Y . , Jethwa , D . , Tsang , R . , Meiler - Rodriguez , E . , Wang , P . , Bate , N . , Zent , R . , Barsukov , I . L . , Goult , B . T . , Critchley , D . R . , and Ballestrem , C . ( 2015 ) Vinculin controls talin engagement with the actomyosin machinery . Nat . Commun . 6 , 10038 TALIN IN HEALTH AND DISEASE 11 74 . Durkin , M . E . , Yuan , B . Z . , Zhou , X . , Zimonjic , D . B . , Lowy , D . R . , Thorgeirsson , S . S . , andPopescu , N . C . ( 2007 ) DLC - 1 : aRhoGTPase - activating protein and tumour suppressor . J . Cell . Mol . Med . 11 , 1185 – 1207 75 . Kaushik , S . , Ravi , A . , Hameed , F . M . , and Low , B . C . ( 2014 ) Concerted modulation of paxillin dynamics at focal adhesions by DeletedinLiverCancer - 1andfocaladhesionkinaseduringearlycell spreading . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) 71 , 677 – 694 76 . Lee , H . S . , Anekal , P . , Lim , C . J . , Liu , C . C . , and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 2013 ) Two modes of integrin activation form a binary molecular switch in adhesion maturation . Mol . Biol . Cell 24 , 1354 – 1362 77 . Gilmore , A . P . , Ohanian , V . , Spurr , N . K . , andCritchley , D . R . ( 1995 ) Localisation of the human gene encoding the cytoskeletal protein talin to chromosome 9p . Hum . Genet . 96 , 221 – 224 78 . Kim , S . K . , Ro , J . Y . , Kemp , B . L . , Lee , J . S . , Kwon , T . J . , Fong , K . M . , Sekido , Y . , Minna , J . D . , Hong , W . K . , andMao , L . ( 1997 ) Identi ﬁ cation of three distinct tumor suppressor loci on the short arm of chromosome 9 in small cell lung cancer . Cancer Res . 57 , 400 – 403 79 . Sakamoto , S . , McCann , R . O . , Dhir , R . , and Kyprianou , N . ( 2010 ) Talin1 promotes tumor invasion and metastasis via focal adhesion signaling and anoikis resistance . Cancer Res . 70 , 1885 – 1895 80 . Beaty , B . T . , Wang , Y . , Bravo - Cordero , J . J . , Sharma , V . P . , Miskolci , V . , Hodgson , L . , andCondeelis , J . ( 2014 ) Talinregulatesmoesin - NHE - 1 recruitment to invadopodia and promotes mammary tumor me - tastasis . J . Cell Biol . 205 , 737 – 751 81 . Tang , H . , Yao , L . , Tao , X . , Yu , Y . , Chen , M . , Zhang , R . , and Xu , C . ( 2013 ) miR - 9 functions as a tumor suppressor in ovarian serous carcinoma by targeting TLN1 . Int . J . Mol . Med . 32 , 381 – 388 82 . Sen , S . , Ng , W . P . , and Kumar , S . ( 2012 ) Contributions of talin - 1 to glioma cell - matrix tensional homeostasis . J . R . Soc . Interface 9 , 1311 – 1317 83 . Kanamori , H . , Kawakami , T . , Effendi , K . , Yamazaki , K . , Mori , T . , Ebinuma , H . , Masugi , Y . , Du , W . , Nagasaka , K . , Ogiwara , A . , Kyono , Y . , Tanabe , M . , Saito , H . , Hibi , T . , and Sakamoto , M . ( 2011 ) Identi ﬁ cation by differential tissue proteome analysis of talin - 1 as a novelmolecularmarkerofprogressionofhepatocellularcarcinoma . Oncology 80 , 406 – 415 84 . Lai , M . T . , Hua , C . H . , Tsai , M . H . , Wan , L . , Lin , Y . J . , Chen , C . M . , Chiu , I . W . , Chan , C . , Tsai , F . J . , and Jinn - Chyuan Sheu , J . ( 2011 ) Talin - 1 overexpression de ﬁ nes high risk for aggressive oral squa - mous cell carcinoma and promotes cancer metastasis . J . Pathol . 224 , 367 – 376 85 . Ambros , V . ( 2001 ) microRNAs : tiny regulators with great potential . Cell 107 , 823 – 826 86 . Zhang , W . , Mao , Y . Q . , Wang , H . , Yin , W . J . , Zhu , S . X . , and Wang , W . C . ( 2015 ) MiR - 124 suppresses cell motility and adhesion by tar - geting talin 1 in prostate cancer cells . Cancer Cell Int . 15 , 49 87 . Formosa , A . , Lena , A . M . , Markert , E . K . , Cortelli , S . , Miano , R . , Mauriello , A . , Croce , N . , Vandesompele , J . , Mestdagh , P . , Finazzi - Agr ` o , E . , Levine , A . J . , Melino , G . , Bernardini , S . , and Candi , E . ( 2013 ) DNA methylation silences miR - 132 in prostate cancer . Oncogene 32 , 127 – 134 88 . Hudis , C . A . ( 2007 ) Trastuzumab – mechanism of action and use in clinical practice . N . Engl . J . Med . 357 , 39 – 51 89 . Le , X . F . , Almeida , M . I . , Mao , W . , Spizzo , R . , Rossi , S . , Nicoloso , M . S . , Zhang , S . , Wu , Y . , Calin , G . A . , and Bast , R . C . , Jr . ( 2012 ) Modulation of MicroRNA - 194 and cell migration by HER2 - targeting trastuzumab in breast cancer . PLoS One 7 , e41170 90 . Austen , K . , Ringer , P . , Mehlich , A . , Chrostek - Grashoff , A . , Kluger , C . , Klingner , C . , Sabass , B . , Zent , R . , Rief , M . , and Grashoff , C . ( 2015 ) Extracellular rigidity sensing by talin isoform - speci ﬁ c mechanical linkages . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 1597 – 1606 91 . Jevnikar , Z . , Rojnik , M . , Jamnik , P . , Doljak , B . , Fonovic , U . P . , and Kos , J . ( 2013 ) Cathepsin H mediates the processing of talin and regulates migration of prostate cancer cells . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 2201 – 2209 92 . Franco , S . J . , Rodgers , M . A . , Perrin , B . J . , Han , J . , Bennin , D . A . , Critchley , D . R . , and Huttenlocher , A . ( 2004 ) Calpain - mediated proteolysis of talin regulates adhesion dynamics . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 , 977 – 983 93 . Carragher , N . O . , Fonseca , B . D . , and Frame , M . C . ( 2004 ) Calpain activity is generally elevated during transformation but has oncogene - speci ﬁ c biological functions . Neoplasia 6 , 53 – 73 94 . Sansing , H . A . , Sarkeshik , A . , Yates , J . R . , Patel , V . , Gutkind , J . S . , Yamada , K . M . , and Berrier , A . L . ( 2011 ) Integrin ab 1 , a v b , a 6 b effectors p130Cas , Src and talin regulate carcinoma invasion and chemoresistance . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 406 , 171 – 176 95 . Eberle , K . E . , Sansing , H . A . , Szaniszlo , P . , Resto , V . A . , and Berrier , A . L . ( 2011 ) Carcinoma matrix controls resistance to cisplatin through talin regulation of NF - kB . PLoS One 6 , e21496 96 . Singel , S . M . , Cornelius , C . , Batten , K . , Fasciani , G . , Wright , W . E . , Lum , L . , andShay , J . W . ( 2013 ) AtargetedRNAiscreenofthebreast cancer genome identi ﬁ es KIF14 and TLN1 as genes that modulate docetaxel chemosensitivity in triple - negative breast cancer . Clin . Cancer Res . 19 , 2061 – 2070 97 . Vanamala , J . , Radhakrishnan , S . , Reddivari , L . , Bhat , V . B . , and Ptitsyn , A . ( 2011 ) Resveratrol suppresses human colon cancer cell proliferation and induces apoptosis via targeting the pentose phosphate and the talin - FAK signaling pathways - A proteomic ap - proach . Proteome Sci . 9 , 49 98 . Hensley , P . J . , Desiniotis , A . , Wang , C . , Stromberg , A . , Chen , C . S . , and Kyprianou , N . ( 2014 ) Novel pharmacologic targeting of tight junctions and focal adhesions in prostate cancer cells . PLoS One 9 , e86238 99 . Xu , Y . F . , Ren , X . Y . , Li , Y . Q . , He , Q . M . , Tang , X . R . , Sun , Y . , Shao , J . Y . , Jia , W . H . , Kang , T . B . , Zeng , M . S . , Liu , N . , and Ma , J . ( 2015 ) High expression of Talin - 1 is associated with poor prognosis in pa - tients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma . BMC Cancer 15 , 332 100 . Snijders , A . M . , Schmidt , B . L . , Fridlyand , J . , Dekker , N . , Pinkel , D . , Jordan , R . C . , andAlbertson , D . G . ( 2005 ) Rareampliconsimplicate frequent deregulation of cell fate speci ﬁ cation pathways in oral squamous cell carcinoma . Oncogene 24 , 4232 – 4242 101 . Lee , Y . C . , Jin , J . K . , Cheng , C . J . , Huang , C . F . , Song , J . H . , Huang , M . , Brown , W . S . , Zhang , S . , Yu - Lee , L . Y . , Yeh , E . T . , McIntyre , B . W . , Logothetis , C . J . , Gallick , G . E . , and Lin , S . H . ( 2013 ) Targeting constitutively activated b 1 integrins inhibits prostate cancer metastasis . Mol . Cancer Res . 11 , 405 – 417 102 . Goult , B . T . , Xu , X . P . , Gingras , A . R . , Swift , M . , Patel , B . , Bate , N . , Kopp , P . M . , Barsukov , I . L . , Critchley , D . R . , Volkmann , N . , and Hanein , D . ( 2013 ) Structural studies on full - length talin1 reveal a compact auto - inhibited dimer : implications for talin activation . J . Struct . Biol . 184 , 21 – 32 103 . Jin , J . K . , Tien , P . C . , Cheng , C . J . , Song , J . H . , Huang , C . , Lin , S . H . , and Gallick , G . E . ( 2015 ) Talin1 phosphorylation activates b 1 integrins : a novel mechanism to promote prostate cancer bone metastasis . Oncogene 34 , 1811 – 1821 104 . Busco , G . , Cardone , R . A . , Greco , M . R . , Bellizzi , A . , Colella , M . , Antelmi , E . , Mancini , M . T . , Dell ’ Aquila , M . E . , Casavola , V . , Paradiso , A . , andReshkin , S . J . ( 2010 ) NHE1promotesinvadopodial ECM proteolysis through acidi ﬁ cation of the peri - invadopodial space . FASEB J . 24 , 3903 – 3915 105 . Greco , M . R . , Antelmi , E . , Busco , G . , Guerra , L . , Rubino , R . , Casavola , V . , Reshkin , S . J . , and Cardone , R . A . ( 2014 ) Protease activity at invadopodial focal digestiveareas is dependent on NHE1 - driven acidic pHe . Oncol . Rep . 31 , 940 – 946 106 . Andersen , A . P . , Moreira , J . M . , and Pedersen , S . F . ( 2014 ) Interactions of ion transporters and channels with cancer cell metabolismandthetumourmicroenvironment . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 369 , 20130098 107 . Vahle , A . K . , Domikowsky , B . , Schw¨oppe , C . , Kr¨ahling , H . , Mally , S . , Sch¨afers , M . , Hermann , S . , Shahin , V . , Haier , J . , Schwab , A . , and Stock , C . ( 2014 ) ExtracellularmatrixcompositionandinterstitialpH modulate NHE1 - mediated melanoma cell motility . Int . J . Oncol . 44 , 78 – 90 108 . Amith , S . R . , Wilkinson , J . M . , Baksh , S . , and Fliegel , L . ( 2015 ) The Na ⁺ / H ⁺ exchanger ( NHE1 ) as a novel co - adjuvant target in pacli - taxel therapy of triple - negative breast cancer cells . Oncotarget 6 , 1262 – 1275 109 . St¨uwe , L . , M¨uller , M . , Fabian , A . , Waning , J . , Mally , S . , No¨el , J . , Schwab , A . , and Stock , C . ( 2007 ) pH dependence of melanoma cell migration : protonsextrudedbyNHE1dominateprotonsofthebulk solution . J . Physiol . 585 , 351 – 360 110 . Bourguignon , L . Y . W . , Singleton , P . A . , Diedrich , F . , Stern , R . , and Gilad , E . ( 2004 ) CD44 interaction with Na + - H + exchanger ( NHE1 ) creates acidic microenvironments leading to hyaluronidase - 2 and cathepsin B activation and breast tumor cell invasion . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 26991 – 27007 111 . Cardone , R . A . , Greco , M . R . , Zeeberg , K . , Zaccagnino , A . , Saccomano , M . , Bellizzi , A . , Bruns , P . , Menga , M . , Pilarsky , C . , Schwab , A . , Alves , F . , Kalthoff , H . , Casavola , V . , and Reshkin , S . J . ( 2015 ) A novel NHE1 - centered signaling cassette drives epidermal growth factor receptor - dependent pancreatic tumor metastasis and is a target for combination therapy . Neoplasia 17 , 155 – 166 112 . Lauritzen , G . , Jensen , M . B . , Boedtkjer , E . , Dybboe , R . , Aalkjaer , C . , Nylandsted , J . , and Pedersen , S . F . ( 2010 ) NBCn1 and NHE1 12 Vol . 30 June 2016 HAINING ET AL . The FASEB Journal x www . fasebj . org expression and activity in DeltaNErbB2 receptor - expressing MCF - 7 breast cancer cells : contributions to pHi regulation and chemo - therapy resistance . Exp . Cell Res . 316 , 2538 – 2553 113 . Reshkin , S . J . , Bellizzi , A . , Cardone , R . A . , Tommasino , M . , Casavola , V . , and Paradiso , A . ( 2003 ) Paclitaxel induces apoptosis via protein kinase A - and p38 mitogen - activated protein - dependent inhibition of the Na + / H + exchanger ( NHE ) NHE isoform 1 in human breast cancer cells . Clin . Cancer Res . 9 , 2366 – 2373 114 . Cardone , R . A . , Casavola , V . , and Reshkin , S . J . ( 2005 ) The role of disturbed pH dynamics and the Na + / H + exchanger in metastasis . Nat . Rev . Cancer 5 , 786 – 795 115 . Goldacre , M . J . , Wotton , C . J . , Yeates , D . , Seagroatt , V . , and Collier , J . ( 2008 ) Liver cirrhosis , other liver diseases , pancreatitis and subsequentcancer : record linkagestudy . Eur . J . Gastroenterol . Hepatol . 20 , 384 – 392 116 . Fern´andez - S´anchez , M . E . , Barbier , S . , Whitehead , J . , B´ealle , G . , Michel , A . , Latorre - Ossa , H . , Rey , C . , Fouassier , L . , Claperon , A . , Brull´e , L . , Girard , E . , Servant , N . , Rio - Frio , T . , Marie , H . , Lesieur , S . , Housset , C . , Gennisson , J . L . , Tanter , M . , M´enager , C . , Fre , S . , Robine , S . , and Farge , E . ( 2015 ) Mechanical induction of the tumorigenic b - catenin pathway by tumour growth pressure . Nature 523 , 92 – 95 117 . Levental , K . R . , Yu , H . , Kass , L . , Lakins , J . N . , Egeblad , M . , Erler , J . T . , Fong , S . F . , Csiszar , K . , Giaccia , A . , Weninger , W . , Yamauchi , M . , Gasser , D . L . , and Weaver , V . M . ( 2009 ) Matrix crosslinking forces tumor progression by enhancing integrin signaling . Cell 139 , 891 – 906 118 . Rubashkin , M . G . , Cassereau , L . , Bainer , R . , DuFort , C . C . , Yui , Y . , Ou , G . , Paszek , M . J . , Davidson , M . W . , Chen , Y . Y . , and Weaver , V . M . ( 2014 ) Force engages vinculin and promotes tumor progression by enhancing PI3K activation of phosphatidylinositol ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) - triphosphate . Cancer Res . 74 , 4597 – 4611 119 . Xue , W . , Krasnitz , A . , Lucito , R . , Sordella , R . , Vanaelst , L . , Cordon - Cardo , C . , Singer , S . , Kuehnel , F . , Wigler , M . , Powers , S . , Zender , L . , andLowe , S . W . ( 2008 ) DLC1isachromosome8ptumor suppressor whose loss promotes hepatocellular carcinoma . Genes Dev . 22 , 1439 – 1444 120 . Lefort , C . T . , Rossaint , J . , Moser , M . , Petrich , B . G . , Zarbock , A . , Monkley , S . J . , Critchley , D . R . , Ginsberg , M . H . , F¨assler , R . , andLey , K . ( 2012 ) Distinct roles for talin - 1 and kindlin - 3 in LFA - 1 extension and af ﬁ nity regulation . Blood 119 , 4275 – 4282 121 . Haling , J . R . , Monkley , S . J . , Critchley , D . R . , andPetrich , B . G . ( 2011 ) Talin - dependent integrin activation is required for ﬁ brin clot re - traction by platelets . Blood 117 , 1719 – 1722 122 . Nieswandt , B . , Moser , M . , Pleines , I . , Varga - Szabo , D . , Monkley , S . , Critchley , D . , and F¨assler , R . ( 2007 ) Loss of talin1 in platelets abrogates integrin activation , platelet aggregation , and thrombus formation in vitro and in vivo . J . Exp . Med . 204 , 3113 – 3118 123 . Fr¨obel , J . , Cadeddu , R . P . , Hartwig , S . , Bruns , I . , Wilk , C . M . , K¨undgen , A . , Fischer , J . C . , Schroeder , T . , Steidl , U . G . , Germing , U . , Lehr , S . , Haas , R . , and Czibere , A . ( 2013 ) Platelet proteome analysis reveals integrin - dependent aggregation defects in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes . Mol . Cell . Proteomics 12 , 1272 – 1280 124 . Ye , F . , Snider , A . K . , and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 2014 ) Talin and kindlin : the one - two punch in integrin activation . Front . Med . 8 , 6 – 16 125 . Su , W . , Wynne , J . , Pinheiro , E . M . , Strazza , M . , Mor , A . , Montenont , E . , Berger , J . , Paul , D . S . , Bergmeier , W . , Gertler , F . B . , and Philips , M . R . ( 2015 ) Rap1anditseffectorRIAMarerequiredforlymphocyte traf ﬁ cking . Blood 126 , 2695 – 2703 126 . Casari , C . , Berrou , E . , Lebret , M . , Adam , F . , Kauskot , A . , Bobe , R . , Desconclois , C . , Fressinaud , E . , Christophe , O . D . , Lenting , P . J . , Rosa , J . P . , Denis , C . V . , and Bryckaert , M . ( 2013 ) von Willebrand factor mutation promotes thrombocytopathy by inhibiting integrin a IIb b 3 . J . Clin . Invest . 123 , 5071 – 5081 127 . Michelson , A . D . ( 2010 ) Antiplatelet therapies for the treatment of cardiovascular disease . Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 9 , 154 – 169 128 . Stolla , M . , Stefanini , L . , Roden , R . C . , Chavez , M . , Hirsch , J . , Greene , T . , Ouellette , T . D . , Maloney , S . F . , Diamond , S . L . , Poncz , M . , Woulfe , D . S . , and Bergmeier , W . ( 2011 ) The kinetics of a IIb b 3 activation determines the size and stability of thrombi in mice : implications for antiplatelet therapy . Blood 117 , 1005 – 1013 129 . Wang , X . , and Ha , T . ( 2013 ) De ﬁ ning single molecular forces required to activate integrin and notch signaling . Science 340 , 991 – 994 130 . Tian , X . , Kim , J . J . , Monkley , S . M . , Gotoh , N . , Nandez , R . , Soda , K . , Inoue , K . , Balkin , D . M . , Hassan , H . , Son , S . H . , Lee , Y . , Moeckel , G . , Calderwood , D . A . , Holzman , L . B . , Critchley , D . R . , Zent , R . , Reiser , J . , and Ishibe , S . ( 2014 ) Podocyte - associated talin1 is critical for glomerular ﬁ ltration barrier maintenance . J . Clin . Invest . 124 , 1098 – 1113 Received for publication December 11 , 2015 . Accepted for publication February 9 , 2016 . TALIN IN HEALTH AND DISEASE 13