Concept combination , emergence and abduction P . D . Bruza ∗ , K . Kitto , B . J . Ramm Queensland University of Technology Australia L . Sitbon † National ICT Centre Australia D . Song Robert Gordon University Scotland May 20 , 2009 Abstract Humans frequently produce emergent properties or associates when com - bining concepts in new ways . This presentation will examine the manner in which concept combination can generate emergent properties suggest - ing that the process is abductive in nature . A tensor based approach is used to model concept combinations which allows such combinations to be viewed as interactions in a quantum - like way . Free association norm data is used to motivate the underlying basis of the dimensional space . Concept combinations will be viewed in a spectrum according to the degree of non - separability of the corresponding tensor representations . It is conjectured that non - separable tensors correspond to conceptual combinations with the propensity to yield emergent property . 1 Introduction Consider the concept combination “beach bike” . Human subjects readily ascribe the property “thick tire” to this combination when it is not a property ascribed to “beach” , or “bike” in isolation . In other words , the property can be condidered emergent . How concept combination can generate emergent properties and how this may relate to abduction is the subject of this presentation . ∗ Corresponding author : p . bruza @ qut . edu . au † Also at Queensland University of Technology 1 Concept combination is still largely an open question within cognitive science . Broadly speaking there are two approaches . Schema - based theories of conceptual combination ( e . g . , [ 17 , 20 ] ) propose that the head noun is a schema - structure made up of various dimensions ( e . g . , colour , size , shape etc ) . These dimensions form slots which can be altered or ﬁlled by the modiﬁer noun . Murphys [ 17 ] specialisation model extends the schema - model to account for noun - noun combinations by in - cluding slots in the header that represent relations , and secondary elaboration process . Thus the concept “dog” , as well as containing slots such as colour , size , and shape , may also include relational dimensions such as functions , behaviours and habitat [ 17 ] . In the combination “beach bike , “beach would ﬁll a relational slot such as “for riding on . Elaboration processes would then infer based upon the properties of sand and tires , that typical tires would sink in sand , and thus need to be thicker than usual , with deep tread , etc . According to Wisniewski ( 1997 ) this elaborative process involves the construction of a plausible scenario , including the role that each constituent plays in the scenario . Thus a “bike” plays the role of transport and “beach” the role of surface while the scenario may be recreation , racing etc . The structure mapping theory of conceptual combination holds that similarity judgments and analogical reasoning depends upon a process of aligning shared dimensions , and ﬁnding alignable diﬀerences between the concepts [ 11 , 12 , 16 ] . Wisniewski [ 20 ] proposed that there were three types of conceptual combination : 1 . Relation linking in which constituents are linked via a relation ( e . g . , “ladder box” can be interpreted as a box for storing ladders ) . 2 . Property mapping in which one or more properties of the modiﬁer are mapped onto the header , but not the entire representation ( e . g . , a “zebra crossing” as a painted stripes on the road ) . 3 . Hybridization in which the object is either a conjunction of the two con - stituents or shares multiple properties of each of them ( e . g . , a “clock radio” for example has the dual - function of clock and radio ) . Wisniewski [ 20 ] proposed that property - mapping and hybridization are based upon aligning the dimensions of concepts , and ﬁnding alignable diﬀerences . Results showed that the degree of similarity aﬀected the type of interpretation . Highly similar combinations tended to be interpreted via property - mapping , e . g . , “whiskey beer” as whiskey ﬂavoured beer . Highly dissimilar combinations were more often interpreted via relation - linking , such as “whiskey newspaper” as a newspaper used to conceal a whiskey bottle . Wisniewski thus concluded that a comparison process is an important step in interpreting conceptual combinations . Wilkenfeld and Ward [ 19 ] tested the hypothesis that the similarity of individual concepts inﬂuences 2 the production of emergent properties for the combination . Similarity is also an indication of alignability of concepts , in that similar concepts ( e . g . , guitar and harp ) share many of the same dimensions ( e . g . , both have strings , and can be played ) and dissimilar concepts ( e . g . , helicopter and blanket ) do not share many dimensions . Wilkenfeld and Ward predicted that low similarity concepts would require more reasoning processes to resolve conﬂicts , which should result in more emergent properties . Our hypothesis is that abductive reasoning is involved . Evidence for this can be found when one considers that such reasoning is “ignorance preserving” , which has been convincingly argued as being a hallmark of abduction [ 8 ] . For example , consider “helicopter blanket” . Despite the interpretation we settle on , we are ulti - mately ignorant whether it is referring to a tarpaulin for draping over a helicopter , or a baby’s blanket with a helicopter motif . Furthermore , relation linking would appear to show some similarities with abductive reasoning in literature - based dis - covery [ 4 ] . 2 Concept combination in Conceptual Space : non - separability , abduction and quantum theory We are strongly aligned with the view that concept combination should be mod - elled below the symbolic level of cognition . By this we mean dimensional spaces should be employed . In addition , we agree that a cognitive perspective should be applied in attempts to understand abduction . [ 6 , 7 ] . G¨ardenfors [ 10 ] clariﬁes how schema - based theories of concept combination relate to his geometrically framed model of the conceptual level of cognition . In this article we also adopt a dimensional approach whereby concept combination is modelled by use of tensors . This approach is inspired by the matrix model of memory [ 13 ] . The appealing intuition here is that the words being combined can be considered as “interacting” , and as we shall see , this opens the door to the intriguing question of whether such interactions can be modelled in a quantum - like way . By way of illustration , the matrix model of memory would represent the inter - action between “beach” and “bicycle” as a dyadic ( outer ) product of the respective vectors representing the individual words . The result is a rank 2 tensor ( a matrix ) . This matrix representation is sensitive to the basis of the underlying vector space . Rather than representing words as random vectors in a canonical basis , we pro - pose using actual free association data gleaned from human subjects to prime the respective bases corresponding to each word in the combination [ 18 ] . For example , when used as a cue in a free association experiment , “beach” produces associates 3 with the following probabilities : “sand” ( 0 . 39 ) , “sun” ( 0 . 14 ) , “ocean” ( 0 . 07 ) , etc . when normed over a number of subjects . Similarly , “bicycle” produces free asso - ciates : “ride” ( 0 . 23 ) , “wheel” ( 0 . 12 ) , “tire” ( 0 . 12 ) , etc . . The choice of deﬁning the vector representation of a word in terms of its free associates is deliberate . In free association experiments , no context is served with the cue , consequently the free associates provide a context insensitive spectrum which can be used to model the cue as a vector space [ 5 ] . The hope this the context insensitivity will provide a stable and robust basis for the tensor employed to model concept combinations . When modelling the concept combination “beach bicycle” as a rank 2 tensor , the corresponding basis involves free associate pairs ; the ﬁrst of the pair coming from “beach” and the second from “bicycle” . For example , “sand - ride” , “sand - wheel” , “sand - tire” . What is more , the magnitudes of these particular pairings will be signiﬁcantly higher than other pairs dues to “sand” having such a high free association probability . These pairs are illustrative : Can they be considered as the primordial triggers for the emergent property “thick tire” , for example , as probes to memory to aid the construction of a plausible scenario . This presentation will aim to address this question in detail . In addition , the pairing due to tensor formation provides a natural foundation to investigate the notion of alignment in conceptual combination described above in terms of how strongly pairs are instantiated . Finally , there is a growing body of literature describing quantum - like models of the conceptual level of cognition , for example , [ 2 , 1 , 9 , 3 ] . Indeed , quantum entanglement has been proposed as a useful way in which to model concept com - binations , especially for the case of emergent properties . The important question is the nature of the realtionship between non - separability and emergent properties , or emergent associates . The literature cited in the previ - ous section suggests that when there is little alignment in the combination , more reasoning ( abduction ) is involved and hence more emergent properties are pro - duced . The tensor framework just described oﬀers a basis to empirically investi - gate the separability of concept combinations in terms of the interacting systems . ( Each word in a concept combination is akin to a simple quantum system known as a qubit ) . Tensor spaces are used in quantum theory to model interacting quan - tum systems . Such systems may become non - separable ( entangled ) . With respect to concept combination , one can imagine a spectrum of eﬀects . Starting from alignable concepts whose properties can be successfully extracted from the combi - nation ( i . e . , the tensor is factorizable , hence separable ) , we gradually move through concepts that are less and less alignable . We hypothesize the corresponding tensor representations of the conceptual combinations to be increasingly non - separable yielding emergent properties ( as they could not be generated by considering the two concepts in isolation ) . This presentation will aim to shed detailed light on this non - separability spectrum and lay the theoretical basis for large scale empirical 4 studies of concept combinations and abduction . More generally , this presentation may be considered within the thought provoking hypothesis that quantum theory can be regarded as a theory of emergence . [ 15 , 14 ] . Acknowledgements This project was supported in part by the Australian Research Council Discovery grant DP0773341 . NICTA is funded by the Australian Government as represented by the Department of Broadband , Communications and the Digital Economy and the Australian Research Council through the ICT Centre of Excellence program . References [ 1 ] D . Aerts and L . Gabora . A Theory of Concepts and Their Combina - tions II : A Hilbert Space Representation . Kybernetes , 34 : 176 – 205 , 2005 . http : / / uk . arxiv . org / abs / quant - ph / 0402205 . [ 2 ] P . Bruza and R . Cole . Quantum Logic of Semantic Space : An Exploratory Investigation of Context Eﬀects in Practical Reasoning . In S . Artemov , H . Barringer , A . S . d’Avila Garcez , L . C . Lamb , and J . Woods , editors , We Will Show Them : Essays in Honour of Dov Gabbay , volume 1 , pages 339 – 361 . London : College Publications , arxiv : quant - ph / 0612178 edition , 2005 . [ 3 ] P . Bruza , D . Widdows , and J . Woods . A Quantum Logic of Down Below . In K . Engesser , D . Gabbay , and D . Lehmann , editors , Handbook of Quan - tum Logic and Quantum Structures , volume 2 , pages 625 – 660 . Elsevier , 2009 . arXiv : quant - ph / 0612051 . [ 4 ] P . D . Bruza , R . J . Cole , Z . Abdul Bari , and D . Song . Towards operational abduction from a cognitive perspective . Logic Journal of the IGPL , 14 ( 2 ) : 161 – 177 , 2006 . [ 5 ] P . D . Bruza , K . Kitto , D . Nelson , and C . L . McEvoy . Is there something quantum - like in the human mental lexicon ? Journal of Mathematical Psy - chology , ( In press ) . [ 6 ] D . Gabbay and J . Woods . Agenda Relevance : A Study in Formal Pragmatics , volume 1 of A Practical Logic of Cognitive Systems . Elsevier , 2003 . [ 7 ] D . Gabbay and J . Woods . The Reach of Abduction : Insight and Trial , vol - ume 2 of A Practical Logic of Cognitive Systems . Elsevier , 2005 . 5 [ 8 ] D . Gabbay and J . Woods . Advice on abductive logic . Logic Journal of the IGPL , 14 ( 2 ) : 189 – 219 , 2006 . [ 9 ] L . Gabora , E . Rosch , and D . Aerts . Toward an ecological theory of concepts . Ecological Psychology , 20 : 84 – 116 , 2008 . [ 10 ] P . G¨ardenfors . Conceptual Spaces : The Geometry of Thought . MIT Press , 2000 . [ 11 ] D . Gentner . The mechanisms of analogical learning . In S . Vosniadou and A . Ortony , editors , Similarity , analogy and thought , pages 199 – 241 . Cam - bridge University Press , 1989 . [ 12 ] D . Gentner and A . B . Markman . Structural alignment in comparison : No diﬀerence without similarity . Pschological Science , 5 : 152 – 158 , 1994 . [ 13 ] M . S . Humphreys , R . Pike , J . D . Bain , and G . Tehan . Global matching : A comparison of the siam , minerva ii , matrix and todam models . Journal of Mathematical Psychology , 33 : 36 – 67 , 1989 . [ 14 ] K . Kitto . High end complexity . International Journal of General Systems , 37 ( 6 ) : 689 – 714 , 2008 . [ 15 ] F . M . Kronz and J . T . Tiehen . Emergence and quantum mechanics . Philosophy of Science , 69 : 324 – 347 , 2002 . [ 16 ] A . B . Markman and D . Gentner . Structural alignment during similarity com - parisons . Cognitive Psychology , 23 : 431 – 467 , 1993 . [ 17 ] G . L . Murphy . Comprehending complex concepts . Cognitive Science , 12 : 529 – 562 , 1988 . [ 18 ] D . Nelson , C . L . McEvoy , and T . Schreiber . The university of south ﬂorida , word association , rhyme and word fragment norms . Behavior Research Meth - ods , Instruments & Computers , 36 : 408 – 420 , 2004 . [ 19 ] M . J . Wilkenfeld and T . B . Ward . Similarity and emergence in conceptual combination . Journal of Memory and Language , 45 : 21 – 38 , 2001 . [ 20 ] E . J . Wisniewski . Construal and similarity in conceptual combination . Journal of Memory and Language , 35 ( 3 ) : 435 – 453 , 1996 . 6