Towards a New set of Ideals : Consequences of the Practice Turn in Tangible Interaction Ylva Fernaeus Department of Computer and Systems Sciences , Stockholm University Forum 100 , 164 40 Kista , Sweden ylva @ dsv . su . se Jakob Tholander & Martin Jonsson Media Technology Södertörns Högskola Marinens väg 30 , 136 40 Haninge , Sweden jakob . tholander @ sh . se , martin . jonsson @ sh . se ABSTRACT The practice - oriented turn in social sciences has implied a series of fundamental consequences and design challenges for HCI in general , and particularly in tangible interaction research . This could be interpreted as a move away from scientific ideals based on a modernist tradition , reflected in four contemporary themes in tangible interaction research . The first theme concerns a shift from an information centric to an action centric perspective on interaction . The second concerns a broadened focus from studying properties of the system , to instead aim at supporting qualities of the activity of using a system . The third concerns the general shift towards supporting sharable use , rather than primarily individual use settings . The last theme concerns the shift towards multiple and subjective interpretation of how to use new technological artefacts . We discuss how these themes are grounded in theoretical as well as more concrete technical developments in the area of tangible computing . Author Keywords Tangible interaction , practice turn , theoretical foundations . ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION The research area of tangible user interfaces is not only constantly generating novel and intriguing design solutions , these are often also found to theoretically challenge how we describe and what we value in people’s interaction with technology . In particular , several examples have been shown to raise questions concerning conventional notions such as the divide between digital and material , input and output , and the relationship between the context and the interactive system . Since Lucy Suchman’s [ 37 ] critical analysis of some of the basic assumptions of how the concept of interaction was applied in HCI and AI , a practice - oriented perspective have become increasingly applied , more recently illustrated through e . g . Dourish’s [ 6 ] work on embodied interaction and Jaccuchi’s work on the concept of performance [ 16 ] . This relates to a general development in contemporary social and cognitive sciences of the so called ‘practice turn’ in which embodied and social aspects of human activity are put to the fore [ 31 ] . Central to all these conceptions are that they seek to avoid simplified , dualistic perspectives on human action , such as distinguishing bodily actions from cognitive ones , or regarding interaction as a simple matter of ‘input’ and ‘output’ . A common theme is also to emphasise how knowledge , sense - making , and creativity occurs through its embedding in , and dependence upon our social and material environment [ 12 , 27 ] . In a broader sense , this theoretical development can be taken as a fundamental move away from the modernist legacy in science , as has been broadly discussed in twentieth century philosophy . Central to the modernist ideals was for instance a strive towards the ‘objectively good’ , a tendency to ‘machinise’ nature and the human mind , and to favour rule - based and plan - driven action sequences , and the appraisal of individual thinking . Whereas these ideals have been strongly criticised within sociology and psychology , there is now an increased interest towards how modern and postmodern attitudes are reflected within the computer science disciplines [ e . g . 20 , 28 , 34 ] . In HCI research , this is illustrated for instance in work that emphasises ‘user interpretation’ before ‘objective values’ [ 35 ] , models of interaction that rejects dualist perspectives of mind - body relationships , and theories that emphasise user action as essentially physically and socially situated [ 6 , 37 ] . Yet , this philosophically grounded perspective has been most influential in empirical analyses of interaction with new technology . The impact of these theories for designers still leaves issues open for exploration . In this paper we discuss some of the consequences that these foundations may have for what we design , as well as how we regard people’s interaction with the technology that we build . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . TEI 2008 , February 18 – 2 0 , 2008 , Bonn , Germany . Copyright 2008 ACM 978 - 1 - 60558 - 004 - 3 / 08 / 02 . . . $ 5 . 00 . Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction ( TEI ' 08 ) , Feb 18 - 20 2008 , Bonn , Germany 223 As a starting point we begin by reviewing our understanding of what we see as the theoretical foundations of the ‘practice turn’ in HCI , and how it is reflected in the area of tangible and ubiquitous computing . Further we provide some examples to illustrate how such a stance is manifested in concrete design practice . THE ‘PRACTICE TURN’ IN TANGIBLE COMPUTING The ‘practice turn’ that we discuss is based primarily on two key trends in current HCI research . First , they draw on theories of phenomenology [ 11 ] pragmatism [ 25 ] , and ethnomethodology [ 6 ] wherein a fundamental aim is to overcome the dualist conceptions of knowledge and action . Secondly , they draw upon the trend towards conceptualizing HCI as a design oriented field of study [ 4 , 23 , 41 ] , with attempts to overcome some of the engineering and cognitive psychology legacy of the field . In the area of tangible user interface design , notions of social and physical context have been addressed already from the start . For instance , the notion of information processing , and how to effectively share data among users and devices , is a topic that has been commonly problematized . Ullmer and Ishii [ 38 ] did for instance conceptualise tangibles as devices that may simultaneously work as ‘input’ and ‘output’ to a computational system . At other places the tangibles are considered merely as specialised ‘input devices’ . Sometimes confusion has followed since the physical parts , even when they are used offline , may come to replace objects that would otherwise be displayed on a screen , and also that arrangements in the physical space may be the only way that the system shows its ‘state’ [ 9 ] . What should be considered as ‘input’ , ‘output’ and ‘data’ then becomes blurred . Moreover , when studying how tangibles are actually used , much of the interaction does not fit naturally within the machine metaphor of transmitting information between users and computer systems . The dualist conceptions criticized by practice - oriented perspectives have continued to dominate HCI for a long time . This dualism brings along a number of metaphors that make a difficult fit within the practice - oriented perspective . One of these is the ‘machine metaphor’ , which has been a popular way of describing and understanding the modern world , reflected for instance in Le Corbusier’s notion of the house as a “machine for living” , as well as in cognitive theories such as the “human information processor” , as strongly influencing the early computer sciences . The machine metaphor has also been generally applied to social structures such as organisations and educational systems , and includes a general tendency to favour rule - and plan based processes [ 33 ] , theory before practice , and in its more extreme form , “rigor before relevance” [ 32 ] . A central dimension in practice - oriented perspectives is the rejection of separating mind from body , the inner from the outer , practice from theory , knowledge from knowing and instead , as put by Jean Lave [ 21 ] ' Cognition ' observed in everyday practice is distributed - - stretched over , not divided among - - mind , body , activity and culturally organised settings ( which include other actors ) ( p . 1 ) . This perspective also includes aspects of how perception becomes intertwined with interaction , with the world and the artefacts within it . According to Merleau - Ponty’s [ 26 ] phenomenology , technology can be seen as extensions of our bodies through which we can for instance perceive and understand the world . This becomes relevant to tangible interaction since much argumentation in this area has concerned sensory experiences of manual actions such as pulling , shaking , and squeezing , and how these are computationally manifested . Lucy Suchman [ 37 ] was one of the first scholars to bring the practice turn perspectives to the study of interactive artefacts . Much of her analysis draws upon how the machine metaphors of human thinking collapsed when applied to the design and study of people’s actual use of interactive artefacts . Her analysis showed that the designer of interactive artefacts faced a design problem stemming from the inevitable asymmetry of access to contextual resources between humans and machines : “Because of the asymmetry of user and machine , interface design is less a project of simulating human communication than of engineering alternatives to interaction’s situated properties . ” [ p . 185 ] . In essence , this could be read as a critique of the modernist legacy that dominated AI and HCI at the time . Although this analysis was concerned with so - called intelligent interactive machines , it is yet highly relevant as we still are facing essentially the same problems of effectively supporting interaction between people and machines . However , the settings of interaction are now expanded to include multiple users in complex social and physical settings . Brought to the fore by the ’practice turn’ is the strong ambition towards a participants’ perspective on action and interaction with technology . The participant’s perspective emphasises that designers and analysts should attempt to understand how an activity is viewed by the participants - not to search for evidence that may serve to label the activity based on pre - imposed categories of what is wished for or expected . Instead , it is argued that analyses should attempt to document how the participants go about doing and organizing the activity , e . g . what aspects of the technology they are oriented towards , what they make central and peripheral , and how they make the activity meaningful for themselves and their peers [ 13 ] . The participants’ perspective has in our research area primarily been viewed as a concern for ethnographically oriented evaluations . However , seeking a participants’ perspective is of equal importance for designers in order to avoid being directed too strongly towards fulfilling goals that are not inline with their users’ . From a designer’s perspective this suggests that one often should be able to look beyond the usage of a particular technology and instead focus on the Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction ( TEI ' 08 ) , Feb 18 - 20 2008 , Bonn , Germany 224 processes of meaning making and social interaction , and how the technology plays a part in such processes . A last aspect that characterises the discourse of modernist culture and which is questioned by the practice turn , is the ambition to define the ‘objectively good’ . This has been an essential part in the area of HCI , e . g . in the strive to develop objectively valid measures for successful designs , stretching from aspects of general usability such as the GOMS model , towards qualities that deal with more experiential dimensions , such as game play and flow . However , these objective qualities appear to be in constant flux due to for example cultural diversity and appropriation of new technology . Especially in the field of tangible and ubiquitous computing , a focus has increasingly been on the development of technology for specific settings , where the use qualities are not expected to be generally applicable . A NEW SET OF IDEALS The following sections aim at compiling the general attitude towards interaction as outlined above , into a set of ‘shifting ideals’ for tangible interfaces that follows from these theoretical movements . The notion of ideal should here be understood as directions or goals that are strived towards and argued for when designing tangible interactive systems . The conceptual shift is discussed within four separate areas : (cid:120) Information - centric to action - centric (cid:120) From properties - of - system to interaction - in - context (cid:120) From individual to sharable (cid:120) From objective to subjective interpretation Information - centric to action - centric The first aspect that we would like to emphasise is a move from a data - centric view of interaction , to a view focusing on representational forms as resources for action . Through such a perspective , it is not ‘information’ or ‘data’ that is considered to be moved between people and devices . Instead the physical artefacts are understood as having deeper social and personal purposes in a shared , collaborative space of physical and bodily activity that users engage in . This emphasises the need of balancing the use of the specific properties of the physical and digital resources , and not just treat the tangible resources as input / output channels that can be analysed and understood on their own . Benford et al [ 1 ] conceptualises this problem in terms of a demarcation between sensing and sense - making that stems to a large extent from a phenomenological perspective of perception and human action . Several authors have also emphasised how the form of interactive resources shapes the meaning of symbolic and computational manipulation . A common way of framing the challenge of design of tangibles is through the notion of coupling , where the ideal situation is to mimic how people interact with everyday objects . This is also what often is claimed to be the most promising use of tangibles for interaction [ 10 ] . However , the suitability for such arguments need to be reconsidered when viewed from a practice - oriented perspective through which the relations between people and artefacts is a matter of constant reconfiguration , as emphasised within the discourses of ethnomethodology [ 6 ] , pragmatics [ 25 ] , and design - practice [ 3 ] . This ideal suggests that the initial definitions of TUIs are now becoming accompanied with conceptualisations that focus on human action , rather than on representation and transformation of information [ 6 , 13 ] . Instead of focusing on the transmission and sharing of data , the action - centric perspective is looking for solutions that emphasise user control , creativity , and social action with interactive tools . From properties - of - system to interaction - in - context TUI research extensively emphasises how tangible interaction may blend into people’s everyday activities and thereby more naturally become a part of their ordinary interaction patterns . The ideals do in this respect stretch beyond properties of the system per se , to also include qualities of the whole interactive setting . However , in order for this to effectively come into play we need to develop design approaches that help us understand the complexity of social interaction and artefact use . As have been pointed out by for example Höök [ 15 ] the usages of applications in ubiquitous computing environments become increasingly interweaved with our everyday social life . Mobile artefacts and applications are for example carried around and used in Figure 1 . From information - centric to action - centric . Figure 2 . From properties - of - system to interaction - in - context . Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction ( TEI ' 08 ) , Feb 18 - 20 2008 , Bonn , Germany 225 several different social contexts such as various work situations and settings that include family or friends . Ethnographic and ethnomethodological studies in a range of different settings have pointed in these directions . Typical is for instance a large amount of spontaneous , situated action , social improvisations , and a constant flow of setting up and reconfiguring ways of participating in and contributing to the activity , and the general situatedness in a specific context . An aspect that has been highlighted for instance in Dourish’s work on embodied interaction [ 6 ] concerns how some of the most important aspects of an activity may lie outside of the actual interaction with the system . The expanded space for using technology provided by the physical and social context includes many important issues that are central to everyday interactions , such as ownership , attachment and personalisation . The general focus is then shifted from looking solely at system functionality , to instead emphasise what users will be able to do in the setting in which the interactive system plays a part . A consequence is that further emphasis get placed onto how the systems – both in hardware and software – have been designed to support users to act with the resources towards the system , as well as to account for ones actions in a group , to negotiate interaction , and to act socially around the resources [ 6 ] . This suggests that we need to consider both interaction with the system and interaction between participants around a system in our design efforts . Conversation analysis suggests that the study of language should focus on the talk - in - interaction as a way of including the embededness of talk within conversational , social , and material circumstances [ 25 ] . In a similar fashion , we suggest the notion of interaction - in - context as a perspective in the design of tangible artefacts . From Individual to Shareable A dominating theme within the practice - oriented perspective in HCI is the present concern of designing for collaboration , sharing and social interaction , which is generally viewed as a new and difficult step to take from previously individually - oriented design perspectives . The dominance of the individual perspectives is illustrated for instance by the sole existence of research fields such as CSCW and CSCL that specifically address collaborative and social dimensions of design and use , rather than viewing these as central to HCI in general . The ideals for interaction are shifted from studying and designing interfaces for individual activity , to focus on systems that can be interacted with by several users simultaneously . Collaborative aspects are central in most argumentations for tangible user interface design . However , when looking at some of the often quoted systems , ( e . g . the marble answering machine ) , they primarily address the needs of individual users , emphasising sensory experience of touch , and the cognitive benefits from working hands on with physical objects [ 29 ] . An increasing number of researchers have however emphasised the qualities of tangibles in terms of social , affective and collaborative activity [ 6 , 10 , 14 , 19 ] . This view of social and shareable use as a new and more difficult design problem ( than individual use ) is fundamentally based on its positioning within the theoretical legacy of individually designed user interfaces . If we look at many of the everyday artefacts that we have around us , collaborative , social and casual use is seldom a problem or something that occurs only occasionally . On the contrary , such usages are often the natural mode of being with artefacts . A central dimension in a reformulation of the design space thereby emphasises how social and collaborative aspects are not viewed as extraordinary use situations . From Objective to Subjective Interpretation A common argument in the area of tangible computing is that physical manifestations potentially allow users to make use of experiences from interaction with other everyday objects , allowing the resources to blend into existing activities in a natural way . An interactive tabletop surface may for instance be usable as ordinary tables to put physical things on , a classic PC keyboard sometimes get used by several users at a same time , and ordinary physical artefacts are constantly appropriated and used in a range of unintended ways . This is the case with any technology use , but may be especially prominent in the case of tangible interfaces . This aspect of tangibles draws attention to their quality of being possible to use also for other “non - intended” kinds of interactions . Figure 3 . From individual to shareable control . Figure 4 . From objective to subjective interpretation . Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction ( TEI ' 08 ) , Feb 18 - 20 2008 , Bonn , Germany 226 From a design - oriented perspective , Sengers and Gaver [ 35 ] have conceptualized this challenge as “staying open to interpretation” , thereby suggesting that designers should not have only one preferred interpretation in mind of how their system should be taken into use . Instead users should be allowed to engage in multiple possible interpretations of a technology . Such openness puts the designer in a new position in the design process in terms of how to set up goals for their work and also how they orient themselves towards these goals . The same goes for evaluation . What should be evaluated and what is a successful design becomes less clear - cut when there is no appropriate user interpretation to search for . Moreover , the issue of subjective experience is fundamental in phenomenological perspectives . For instance as pointed out by Merleau - Ponty [ 26 ] , human perception is not a process of passive registrations of properties in the world . Instead it should be understood as an activity where we actively examine the world around us by directing our perception to entities in the world . We choose to direct our eyes towards certain objects and when we examine an object with our hands we do not only touch it but turn it around in our hands and stroke it with our fingers . A representation thereby only becomes meaningful for a person through the way it manifests itself to that person . As an effect of the practice turn , and phenomenological foundations in particular , the subjective interpretations of users have become one of the major obstacles and matters of debate within context aware applications [ 7 ] . With respect to this theme , a focus in design and evaluation is not primarily to postulate what characterises a ‘good’ or usable system , but to understand how users make meaning through the interaction , and what aspects they orient themselves towards and use in their specific interactional practices . DISCUSSION In the previous section contemporary theories on human interaction were used to identify a number of themes in terms of what aspects and goals that we propose should be considered when designing tangible and ubiquitous computing systems . It may however not be obvious how or if these ideals could be effectively targeted in practical design efforts . In the following section we will give some examples to illustrate how aspects related to the ideals above has been reflected in actual design practice . Designing for shared control The ‘practice turn’ in tangible interfaces points in a direction that suggests an action - centric perspective , rather than a information - centric perspective . As stated by e . g . Jorda et al [ 18 ] , this conception partly goes against some of the original arguments for TUI’s , which were concerned with physical representations of information in order to effectively share data among users . In comparison a key characteristic of most non - computational artefacts that we have around us , such as a piano or a white board with felt pens , in a quite effortless fashion allow for the sharing of control , while the sharing of ‘data’ is also present . This view is well reflected in the design of Reactable [ 18 ] , a collaborative digital music instrument designed to be played by a varying number of users simultaneously . The system consists of a tabletop interactive surface on which physical blocks representing different “sounds” are placed and different actions can be performed to manipulate and combine the sounds . A key dimension of the Reactable is how it supports the sharing of control over computational actions , rather than the sharing of data among users . This is very similar to the analysis of the Patcher [ 9 ] system , a set of tangible resources for children’s collaborative construction of screen - based systems . The system consists of a physical mat , a screen display , and a set of computationally enhanced cards representing objects and actions performed by objects . Also here it is emphasised how the tangible artefacts become most appropriately understood as resources for shared activity rather than as representations of shared information . The physical space is in this case used for providing a shared set of resources for building a computational system , similar to how Reactable provides a set of tools for making music . Viewing the design of tangibles for shared activity through the notion of ‘boundary objects’ [ 22 ] may be one way to support designers in focusing their efforts on aspects such as these . Boundary objects have generally been used to describe the social mechanism involved in the accomplishment of coordinative work between communities of practice , especially in CSCW research [ 2 , 40 ] , mostly as a conceptual tool for analysts to understand the role played by artefacts in such processes . The notion of boundary objects can be thought of in two ways . Firstly , for understanding the micro - level interactions that participants engage in with artefacts in moving between different aspects of an activity . Secondly , the concept of boundary object can used as a concept for designers of artefacts for shared collaborative activity . Thus , boundary objects could possibly be used as a concept also for characterizing design problems in tangible interaction , especially if the goal is to design resources for shared activity . ‘Representations’ as resources for action The dualism between objective and subjective interpretations has becomes especially apparent within the field of context - aware applications , which attempt to adapt their behaviour based on inferences made from available contextual sensor data . Most such systems contain internal representations and assumptions about the situations of users as well as about various preferences , assuming that the designer of the system , and the user make the same interpretation of the sensor data . However , from a phenomenological perspective , all interpretations must be understood through users’ bodily experiences of being in the world . For instance a temperature reading from a Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction ( TEI ' 08 ) , Feb 18 - 20 2008 , Bonn , Germany 227 thermometer used to determine the warmth of water before taking a bath becomes meaningful because we have been able to interact with the device over time and thus been able to create mappings between numbers on the thermometer with our bodily experiences from touching the water . When acknowledging sense - making as a subjective phenomenon , we need to address how experience and knowledge is practically shared between people . For example , it is not obvious how individual experiences of touch can be shared and thus how to address interaction as a socially shared phenomenon . Schutz [ 32 ] provides an explanation to our ability to share understanding based on the fact that we share a common life world . We can thus assume that other persons have got similar experiences as ourselves , and thus will make sense of certain phenomena in a similar way as we do . Inter - subjective sense making is also an activity that takes place over time . By interacting with each other and sharing a common environment we create common experiences that makes it easier for us to communicate and agree on the meaning of symbols and language that is meant to describe properties of the world . From this line of reasoning follows that any representation should be seen as a social agreement . The existence of different temperature representations ( Celsius , Kelvin and Farenheit ) has for example to be understood in relation to the activities and social settings in which they have been developed and maintained . Relating this to the example of context aware applications outlined above implies that information received from sensors can not be rendered immediately meaningful or useful using some predefined context model . There are however currently several examples of systems that give more control to the user with respect to how meaning is extracted from sensor information . Examples include the commotion [ 24 ] system that uses GPS positioning , focusing on discovering places of importance to the user , Reno [ 36 ] using GSM positioning focusing on social aspects of sharing location information , and GeoNotes [ 8 ] where information could be tied to location . Especially the GeoNotes study emphasises the advantages of allowing users to share and reuse semantic descriptions of locations to allow the emergence of shared ontologies amongst the users . In the Spots system [ 17 ] this problem is targeted using a user controlled labelling approach , where users share information about their current whereabouts by tagging places with names that are meaningful to their current practices . Users can be part of different communities within the system , where specific naming conventions may evolve . A sensor reading that is thrown when a person enters his office might for example be displayed as “at work” in the community that consists of the persons family , and “in room 1352” in the community of her colleagues . What is characteristic in the development of all these systems is that the sensor readings themselves should not be understood to contain any pre - imposed meaning . The process of rendering the sensor data meaningful instead have to involve users’ interactions with the system . This suggests that even at lower level data representation , such as sensor information in this case , has an instrumental rather than representational function , i . e . focusing on what users can do with information rather than what the information “objectively” stands for . Aspects of information processing are of course still relevant in describing how a system is implemented . However , what may be accomplished through the manipulations is by the practice turn given a more fundamental position than the question of representation of data . Acknowledging offline interaction Systems designed for social and collaborative activity requires a fundamental move towards new ways of looking at ‘interfaces’ in relation to computational and interactional processes . This is especially since the physical and material manifestation of tangible interfaces may allow for expanded social and bodily engagement with and around technology . Shared activity around computational systems always entails social interaction outside of the immediate context of interacting with the system . An implication of physical interaction means that many of the interface actions become ‘offline’ and directed to the social and physical setting , rather than to the software on the computer . Computationally enhanced physical cards may for instance be organised in a pile for later use , get held up , hidden , or handed between users as a means in the negotiation . When looking at how tangible systems are actually used , it seems that these forms of interaction are essential in the activity , both for collaborative purposes , and for planning and thinking about ideas before and along with letting them take effect in ‘the system’ . While such offline and parallel activities have been noted as important qualities of user’s interaction with technology [ see e . g . 1 , 5 , 30 ] , they do not fit naturally with the idea of systems as designed only for responding to user input . This also implies that issues such as the separation between the locus of interaction and feedback [ discussed extensively in e . g . 39 ] becomes less of an issue . Instead , reasons for giving interactive resources a tangible form get directed more towards people’s possibility to act individually as well as collectively , to arrange and to hand over physical resources to one another , to draw someone’s attention to something through physically relocating oneself , and to account for ones actions in a group . Thus , tight coupling of physical and virtual actions may be desired only at certain points in the interaction . A consequence of this is that the ‘gap’ between the physical and the virtual could be understood as a way of supporting the activity , for instance by making a clearer distinction between what has been achieved , and what are the available resources . The goal is then shifted towards combining important qualities of Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction ( TEI ' 08 ) , Feb 18 - 20 2008 , Bonn , Germany 228 physical and digital in design , rather than simply making digital information tangible . Importantly , designing ‘resources for action’ then includes action directed towards the computer as well as ‘offline’ socially oriented action . Focus is then shifted towards an integrated view of interaction - in - context , where offline activities are regarded to play as much part in the ‘user interaction’ as do actions with more immediate effects on the computational system . This development is well reflected by the current interest and incorporation of physical design and performance as part of the development of interactive systems . CONCLUDING REMARKS In many descriptions of tangible systems there is a focus on the user actions that a system should react to , emphasising the distinction between input and output as basic properties of computer systems . This perspective then governs how design work is approached and how design problems are framed . To avoid such dualism , the ‘practice turn’ in social sciences could be taken as a fundamental reformulation of the design space so that dualist notions and accompanying problems are avoided . Based on these perspectives we have presented some consequences that follow , concerning how we view tangible technologies in people’s everyday social practices . At a conceptual level , this includes many of the central concepts often discussed in tangible user interfaces including the notions of “coupling” , “manipulation” , “input” and “output” , and physical artefacts as representations of digital information . The first theme that we propose concerns a shift from an “information centric” to an “action centric” perspective on interaction . With this , we argue for a view on tangibles as resources for action instead of only as alternative forms of data representation . We specifically would like to emphasise the relation between physical manipulation and digital representation , and how to make efficient use of these two in combination . The second theme concerns a broadened focus from studying properties of “the system” to instead aim at supporting qualities of “the context” of using a system . This includes an increased interest towards explicitly designing for , and also evaluating , aspects that concerns ‘offline’ interaction with the resources . The third theme concerns the general shift towards supporting sharable use , rather than primarily individual use settings . This means that the artefacts we design must provide a flexibility and robustness that make it possible for them to blend in to the range of social practices that users engage in . Our last theme concerns the shift towards multiple and subjective interpretation of how to use new technological artefacts . This means that artefacts not only should meet the requirements of a particular situation of use , but also that users may manipulate them according with the changing circumstances of their everyday practice . Hence , addressing the challenge of designing technology that acknowledges users’ subjective and personal ways of participating and contribute to an activity . The shift suggested by the practice turn that we have outlined here should be viewed as more than merely incorporating notions of contexts , subjective interpretations and embodied action within our design efforts . Rather , by shifting focus we redefine the basic goals and purposes of our design efforts . Through such a perspective we acknowledge an ontological and ideological shift within our discipline . A shift that redefines what we consider to be the essential elements and the fundamental values of tangible interaction . REFERENCES 1 . Benford , S . , et al . , Sensible , sensable and desirable : a framework for designing physical interfaces . 2003 , School of Computer Science & IT , Nottingham University . 2 . Bowker , G . C . and S . L . Star , Sorting Things Out : Classification and its consequences . 2000 , London , England : The MIT Press . 3 . Buur , J . , M . V . Jensen , and T . Djajadiningrat . Please touch tangible UIs : Hands - only scenarios and video action walls : novel methods for tangible user interaction design . in DIS . 2004 : ACM Press . 4 . Bødker , S . When second wave HCI meets third wave challenges . in NordiCHI 2006 . 2006 . Oslo , Norway : ACM . 5 . Cohen , J . , M . Withgott , and P . Piernot . Logjam : a tangible multi - person interface for video logging . in CHI ' 99 . 1999 . Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , United States . 6 . Dourish , P . , Where the Action Is : the foundations of Embodied Interaction . 2001 , Cambridge : Massachusetts Institute of Technology . 7 . Dourish , P . , What we talk about when we talk about context . Personal Ubiquitous Comput . , 2004 . 8 ( 1 ) : p . 19 - 30 . 8 . Espinoza , et al . GeoNotes : Social and Navigational Aspects of Location - Based Information Systems . in Ubicomp 2001 . 2001 . Atlanda , Georgia : Springer . 9 . Fernaeus , Y . and J . Tholander . Finding Design Qualities in a Tangible programming space . in CHI 2006 . 2006 . Montreal . 10 . Fishkin , K . P . , A Taxonomy for and analysis of tangible interfaces . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing , 2004 . 8 : p . 247 - 358 . 11 . Fällman , D . , In Romance with the Materials of Mobile Interaction : A Phenomenological Approach to the Design of Mobile Information Technology , in Informatics . 2004 , Umeå . 12 . Goodwin , C . , The Body in Action , in In Discourse , the Body and Identity , J . C . a . R . Gwyn , Editor . 2003 , Palgrave / Macmillan : New York . p . 19 - 42 . 13 . Heath , C . and P . Luff , Technology in Action . 2000 : Cambridge University Press . Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction ( TEI ' 08 ) , Feb 18 - 20 2008 , Bonn , Germany 229 14 . Hornecker , E . and J . Buur . Getting a Grip on Tangible Interaction : A Framework on Physical Space and Social Interaction . in CHI 2006 . 2006 . Montreal , Canada : ACM Press . 15 . Höök , K . Designing familiar open surfaces . in NordiCHI ' 2006 . 2006 : ACM . 16 . Jacucci , G . , Interaction as performance Cases of configuring physical interfaces in mixed media , in Faculty of Science , Department of Information Processing Science . 2004 , University of Oulu : Oulu , Finland . 17 . Jonsson , M . Using a folksonomy approach for location tagging in community based presence systems . in MCISME Workshop in conjunction with the MDM ' 07 Conference . 2007 . Mannheim , Germany . 18 . Jordà , S . , et al . The reacTable : exploring the synergy between live music performance and tabletop tangible interfaces . in TEI 2007 . 2007 . 19 . Klemmer , S . R . , B . Hartmann , and L . Takayama . How bodies matter : five themes for interaction design . in DIS ' 06 . 2006 : ACM Press . 20 . Knoespel , K . J . and J . Zhu , Continuous Materiality : Through a Hierarchy of Computational Codes . 2007 . 21 . Lave , J . , Cognition in Practice . Mind , mathematics and culture in everyday life . 1988 : Cambridge University Press . 22 . Lutters , W . G . and M . S . Ackerman , Beyond Boundary Objects : Collaborative Reuse in Aircraft Technical Support . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 2006 . 23 . Löwgren , J . and E . Stolterman , Thoughtful Interaction Design . 2004 : MIT Press . 24 . Marmasse , N . and C . Schmandt . Location aware information delivery with commotion . in HUC 2000 . 2000 : Springer - Verlag . 25 . McCarthy , J . and P . Wright , Technology as Experience . 2004 : MIT Press . 26 . Merleau - Ponty , M . , Phenomenology of Perception . 1962 : ( New York : Humanities Press , 1962 and London : Routledge & Kegan Paul , 1962 . Translation revised by Forrest Williams , 1981 ; reprinted , 2002 ) . 27 . Murphy , K . M . , Collaborative imagining : The interactive use of gestures , talk , and graphic representation in architectural practice . Semiotica , 2005 . 156 ( 1 / 4 ) : p . 113 - 145 . 28 . Noble , J . and R . Biddle , Notes on Post - Modern Programming . 2002 , School of Mathematical and Computing Sciences , Victoria University : Wellington , New Zealand . 29 . Patten , J . , L . Griffith , and H . Ishii . A Tangible Interface for Controlling Robotic Toys . in CHI . 2000 . Sunrotary : ACM . 30 . Patten , J . and H . Ishii . A comparison of spatial organization strategies in graphical and tangible user interfaces . in DARE 2000 . 2000 . Elsinore , Denmark : ACM Press . 31 . Schatzki , T . , K . D . Knorr - Cetina , and E . v . Savigny , eds . The Practice Turn in Contemporary Theory . 2001 , Routledge : London . 32 . Schön , D . A . , The Reflective Practitioner : How Professionals Think in Action . 1983 : Basic Books . 33 . Seely Brown , J . and P . Duguid , The Social Life of Information . 2000 : Harvard University Press . 34 . Sengers , P . , et al . Reflective Design . in Critical computing : between sense and sensibility . 2005 . Aarhus , Denmark : ACM . 35 . Sengers , P . and W . Gaver . Staying Open to interpretation : Engaging multiple meanings in design and evaluation . in DIS 2006 . 2006 . 36 . Smith , et al . Social Disclosure of Place : From Location Technology to Communication Practises . in Pervasive 2005 . 2005 . Munich , Germany : Springer - Verlag . 37 . Suchman , L . , Plans and Situated Actions . 1987 : Cambridge University Press . 38 . Ullmer , B . and H . Ishii , Emerging Frameworks for Tangible User Interfaces , in Human - Computer Interaction in the New Millenium , J . M . Carrol , Editor . 2001 , Addison - Wesley . p . 579 - 601 . 39 . Ullmer , B . , H . Ishii , and R . J . K . Jacob , Token + constraint systems for tangible interaction with digital information . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , 2005 . 12 ( 1 ) : p . 81 - 118 . 40 . Wenger , E . , Communities of Practice . Learning , Meaning , and Identity . 1998 : Cambridge University Press . 41 . Vetting Wolf , T . , et al . Dispelling design as the ' black art ' of CHI . in CHI2006 . 2006 . Montreal , Canada : ACM Press . Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction ( TEI ' 08 ) , Feb 18 - 20 2008 , Bonn , Germany 230