Overcoming design fixation : Design by analogy studies and nonintuitive findings DIANA P . MORENO , 1 LUCIE¨NNE T . BLESSING , 1 MARIA C . YANG , 2 ALBERTO A . HERNA´NDEZ , 3 AND KRISTIN L . WOOD 4 1 Research Unit in Engineering Science , Faculty of Science , Technology and Communication , University of Luxembourg , Luxembourg 2 Department of Mechanical Engineering , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , Massachusetts , USA 3 Engineering and Sciences School , Instituto Tecnolo´gico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey , Me´xico City , Me´xico 4 Engineering and Product Development Pillar , Singapore University of Technology and Design , Singapore ( R ECEIVED April 1 , 2015 ; A CCEPTED August 18 , 2015 ) Abstract Design fixation is a phenomenon with important significance to many fields of design due to the potential negative impacts it may have in design outcomes , especially during the ideation stage of the design process . The present studyaimsto provide a framework for understanding , or at least probing , design fixation by presenting a review of existing defixation approaches , as well as metrics that have been employed to understand and account for design fixation . This study also describes the results of two design by analogy ( DbA ) methods , WordTree and SCAMPER , to overcome design fixation in an experiment that involved 97 knowledge - domain experts . The study outcomes are at least twofold : a common framework of metrics and approaches to overcome design fixation in a wide range of design problems and nonintuitive results for DbA approaches in design fixation and other related creativity metrics . The application of WordTree and SCAMPER shows that both methods yield increased novelty compared to a control , where the SCAMPER results are significantly higher than WordTree . It is also found that WordTree mitigates design fixation whereas SCAMPER appears to be ineffective for this purpose but effective to generate an increased quantity of novel ideas . These results demonstrate that both DbA methods provide de - fixation capabilities and enhance designers’ creativity during idea generation . Keywords : Creativity ; Design by Analogy ; Design Cognition ; Design Fixation ; Design Methods 1 . INTRODUCTION Creativity is defined as the ability to develop concepts or ideas , or produce works ( solutions ) that are both novel and valuable ( useful and appropriated ; Sternberg & Lubart , 1999 ; Sarkar & Chakrabarti , 2007 ) . The creative design pro - cess may be inhibited by a focus on existing , standard solu - tions or variants of existing solutions , that is , by becoming fixated . Fixation can be triggered by diverse causes , such as a designer’s unfamiliarity with or limited knowledge of anal - ogous fields of study , cognitive blocks , difficulty in identify - ing new applications and functions , and familiarity with existing , feasible , and known sets of solutions . Fixation is a phenomenon that is perceived as unwanted due to its conceptual conflicts with creativity and design . Fixation and its effects in the design process across knowl - edge domains have been a subject of study from a research and practical viewpoint . Such research has attempted to un - derstand and avoid the negative impact that design fixation may have in the early stage of ideation , for example , limiting design space exploration , and thereby narrowing the range or divergent possibilities of solutions . A number of methods have been developed to tackle design fixation . Oneclassofsuch methodsisdesignbyanalogy ( DbA ) , which has proven to be effective in generating novel and high - quality ideas , as well as in reducing design fixation ( Linsey et al . , 2007 , 2012 ; Moreno , Hernandez , et al . , 2014 ; Moreno , Yang , Blessing , et al . , 2014 ) . A cognitive model for ideation considers ideas to emanate from one of three sources or pro - cesses : serendipity , discovery , and analogy ( Markman & Wood , 2009 ) . Analogy or analogical transfer appears to support design - ers in identifying and reaching distant domains that enable the exploration of innovative or disruptive solutions based on experience or external sources of inspiration and knowledge . Despite being a critical topic and investigated from diverse perspectives , design fixation remains a relatively unexplored and intriguing area of research and exploration , especially in knowledge domains such as engineering . There is still Reprint requests to : Diana P . Moreno , Research Unit in Engineering Science , Faculty of Science , Technology and Communication , University of Luxembourg , 6 Rue Richard Coudenhouve Kalergi , Luxembourg . E - mail : diana . moreno @ uni . lu Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing ( 2016 ) , 30 , 185 – 199 . # Cambridge University Press 2016 0890 - 0604 / 16 doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060416000068 185 much to learn about the capabilities and success factors of de - fixation approaches , as well as , more generally , the extent to which design fixation can limit or benefit the design process . Based on the discussion above , the present study expands previous work presented in the Design Computer and Cogni - tion Conference ( DCC’14 ; Moreno , Yang , Hernandez , et al . , 2014 ) and addresses the following research questions related to fixation in the context of ideation methods . First , what are the dimensions of de - fixation approaches and to what extent has a cumulative understanding of these approaches been de - veloped ? Second , are design fixation metrics comprehensive ? Do they capture fixation’s concept and extent ? Third , consid - ering analogy as a relevant source of ideas and an approach to overcome design fixation , what are the results of applying two different DbA methods ( WordTree and SCAMPER ) for overcoming design fixation ? Are there differences in the crea - tivity and fixation metrics after applying the methods ? 2 . BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT 2 . 1 . Design fixation Various definitions of fixation can be found in literature with different characteristics depending on its context or field of knowledge . Examples of fixation include memory fixation , problem - solving fixation ( Luchins & Luchins , 1959 ) , cog - nitive fixation ( Smith & Blankenship , 1991 ) , conceptual fixa - tion , knowledge fixation ( Youmans & Arciszewski , 2012 ) , operational fixation , functional fixation ( Purcell & Gero , 1996 ) , and design fixation ( Jansson & Smith , 1991 ; German & Barrett , 2005 ) . Design fixation is described as the inability on the part of designers to solve design problems , or the persistent commit - ment to a limited exploration of alternatives by self - imposing constraints ( Youmans , 2007 ) , employing a familiar method ignoring diverse opportunities , or limiting the space of solu - tions by means of developing variants ( Luchins & Luchins , 1959 , 1970 ; Jansson & Smith , 1991 ) . Jansson & Smith ( 1991 ) provided one of the first operational definitions of de - sign fixation as “a counterproductive effect of prior experi - ence on the generation of creative designs aimed at solving a realistic problem . ” These studies indicate that design fixa - tion has a negative connotation , which may explain the re - search related to fixation and concerted efforts to avoid it when solving design problems . A number of causes can contribute to design fixation : exper - tise ( Linsey et al . , 2010 ) , unfamiliarity with principles of a dis - cipline or domain knowledge ( Purcell & Gero , 1996 ; Cross , 2004 ) , personality types ( Toh et al . , 2012 ; Choo et al . , 2014 ) , a lack of awareness of technological advances , or con - formity due to proficiency in the methods and supporting tech - nologies of an existing solution ( Luchins & Luchins , 1959 ) . During the design process , design fixation can emerge when example solutions are presented ( Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ; Tseng et al . , 2008 ; Jensen , 2010 ; Linsey et al . , 2010 ; Agogue´ et al . , 2011 ; Smith & Linsey , 2011 ) , when a considerable quantity of resources are invested in a potential solution ( Vis - wanathan & Linsey , 2011 ) , when there are weak or ill - defined problem connections either internally ( within elements of the problem ) or externally ( between the problem and other prob - lem domains ; MacCrimmon & Wagner , 1994 ) , and when there are more vertical ( refined version of same idea ) than lat - eral transformations ( moving from one idea to another ; Goel , 1995 ) . Design fixation research is critical due to both its impact on design outcomes and the potential , if mitigated , to improve designers’ abilities to generate innovative solutions . Studies from diverse design disciplines , engineering , and cognitive science provide findings across a number of fields , as de - scribed below . 2 . 2 . Ideation approaches to overcome fixation Design process success has been linked with ideation stage results ( Andersson , 1994 ; Perttula & Sipila¨ , 2007 ) . Extensive studies have focused on the formulation of metrics to evaluate ideation process and their outcomes : quality , quantity ( flu - ency ) , novelty ( originality ) , workability ( usefulness ) , rele - vance , thoroughness ( feasibility ) , variety , and breadth ( Mac - Crimmon & Wagner , 1994 ; Shah et al . , 2000 ; McAdams & Wood , 2002 ; Shah et al . , 2003 ; Srivathsavai et al . , 2010 ; Gir - otra et al . , 2010 ; Linsey et al . , 2011 , 2012 ; Oman et al . , 2013 ; Moreno , Hernandez , et al . , 2014 ) . Some studies have consid - ered design fixation directly measurable in a quantitative way , and others as a qualitative finding or measured indirectly through other ideation metrics . Based on recent ideation studies we developed the frame - work shown in Figure 1 to characterize the existing ap - proaches that have shown some effectiveness in overcoming design fixation . This framework is composed of quadrants that are defined by means of two dimensions : † trigger or source provided by a method , which is divided into intrinsic and extrinsic and † implementation method corresponding to the number of designers involved , either individual or as a team . Some methods can be found at the intersection of the dimen - sions presented ; for example , functional analysis is an extrin - sic method that can be applied individually or as a team . The next sections describe the modalities and cognitive pro - cesses behind each of the intrinsic and extrinsic approaches . 2 . 2 . 1 . Intrinsic approaches Intrinsic approaches are based on the generation of ideas from intuition or previous experience . Table 1 presents the approaches and related literature for the two quadrants of the intrinsic dimension of Figure 1 . At the individual level , problem rerepresentation or refram - ing increases retrieval cues for analogical inspiration or ex - pands design space exploration ( Andersson , 1994 ; McKerlie & MacLean , 1994 ; Linsey et al . , 2010 ; Zahner et al . , 2010 ) . D . P . Moreno et al . 186 Incubation encourages the disconnection from a problem by taking a break or performing a nonrelated task , and by doing that , the individual may access other critical information where insightful ideas may emerge , enabling the develop - ment of novel or original solutions ( Smith & Blankenship , 1989 , 1991 ; Smith , 1995 b ; Christensen & Schunn , 2005 ; Kohn & Smith , 2009 ; Vargas - Hernandez et al . , 2010 ; Smith & Linsey , 2011 ; Youmans & Arciszewski , 2012 ) . At the team level , diversify personality type relates to the way people prefer to interact with others . This approach has been found to have a positive impact on design activities . For example , extroverted persons have a preference to partici - pate in dissection activities that have the potential to increase creativity ( Linsey et al . , 2010 ; Toh et al . , 2012 ) . 2 . 2 . 2 . Extrinsic approaches Extrinsic approaches make use of heuristics , stimuli / assis - tance , or prompts external to the designer to promote the de - velopment of ideas ( see Table 2 ) . At the individual level , abstract formulation of a problem is proposed to promote divergent thinking processes and gen - eration of original ideas ( Zahner et al . , 2010 ) . Approaches that make use of examples to increase the number of original ideas generated are concept – knowledge expansive examples to allow interrelated exploration of the concept and knowledge spaces ( Agogue´ et al . , 2011 ) , pictor - ial examples to allow designers to consider additional design information without over constraining the design ( Christiaans & Van Andel , 1993 ; Purcell & Gero , 1996 ; Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ; Tseng et al . , 2008 ; Yang , 2009 ) , and audiore - corded examples to foster retrieval of long - term memory con - cepts and concepts distantly associated ( Dugosh et al . , 2000 ; Dugosh & Paulus , 2005 ) . Two approaches make use of analogies . The first provides analogies assists in restructuring a problem and triggers new clues to developed solutions ( Chrysikou & Weisberg , 2005 ; Smith & Linsey , 2011 ) . The second provides analogies with open design goals that may ( due to the openness ) influence cognitive processes in filtering information that will be then incorporated in the concept solutions , thereby increasing originality ( Moss , Cagan , et al . , 2007 ; Moss , Kotovsky , et al . , 2007 ) . Design heuristics promote divergent thinking by providing multiple sequential and / or systematic ways to approach a prob - lem and generate novel and original solutions ( Yilmaz et al . , Fig . 1 . Approaches to overcome fixation . Table 1 . Intrinsic approaches to overcome fixation according to Moreno et al . 2014 Trigger or Source Implementation Method Method , Technique , or Approach Reference Intrinsic Individual level Problem rerepresentation / reframing Andersson ( 1994 ) , Linsey et al . ( 2010 ) , McKerlie & MacLean ( 1994 ) , Zahner et al . ( 2010 ) Enabling incubation Smith & Blankenship ( 1989 , 1991 ) , Smith ( 1995 a , 1995 b ) , Christensen & Schunn ( 2005 ) , Kohn & Smith ( 2009 ) , Vargas - Hernandez et al . ( 2010 ) , Smith & Linsey ( 2011 ) , Youmans & Arciszewski ( 2012 ) Team level Diversify personality type Linsey et al . ( 2010 ) , Toh et al . ( 2012 ) Design by analogy studies and nonintuitive findings 187 2010 ) . Idea generation enabled by computational tools allows a designer or design team to alternate among types of problem representation and provides semantic or visual stimulus that will generate more productive ideas ( MacCrimmon & Wagner , 1994 ; Linsey et al . , 2010 ; Dong & Sarkar , 2011 ) . Graphical representations offer a cognitive structure by means of external representation that highlights design complexity , condenses in - formation , and enables lateral transformations ( Rodgers et al . , 2000 ; Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ; Yang , 2009 ) . Case - based reasoning ( CBR ) and case - based design , which is the application of CBR to design , have roots in analogical reasoning by learning from experience ( Purcell & Gero , 1996 ; Heylighen & Neuckermans , 2003 ; Yan et al . , 2013 ) . CBR is used to contrast existing experi - ences / solutions / cases with new unsolved problems to find similarities and extend existing solutions to those new problems . Word graphs ( Segers et al . , 2005 ) and Word trees ( Dugosh & Paulus , 2005 ; Linsey , Markman , et al . , 2008 ; Linsey , Wood , et al . , 2008 ) provide a synergic com - bination of analogies , semantic and graphical information , computational tools , and graphical representations to gener - ate ideas . At the Team level , electronic brainstorming enables interac - tion between members by a computer interface that prompts sets of ideas for overcoming production blocking ( Dugosh et al . , 2000 ; Dugosh & Paulus , 2005 ) . 6 - 3 - 5 / C - Sketch com - bines “use of examples , ” “use of design heuristics , ” and “use of graphical representations” that provide a sequential structure with visual and textual information ( Genco et al . , 2012 ; Wea - ver et al . , 2009 ; Vargas - Hernandez et al . , 2010 ) . 2 . 2 . 3 . Approaches at the dimension’s intersections Figure 1 shows approaches that lay at the intersection of the quadrants determined by the categorization dimensions . Table 3 lists such approaches . Level of expertise or domain knowledge can be found at the intersection of individual and team levels . Expertise emerges with a designer’s immediate knowledge , and can be expanded when working in teams , by using distant and / or different do - main knowledge due to interactions with others ( Purcell & Gero , 1996 ; Ball et al . , 2004 ; Cross , 2004 ; Youmans & Arcis - zewski , 2012 ) . However , some results indicate that novice de - signers generate more original concepts ( Genco et al . , 2012 ) , while others show that experts consider details in their solu - tions due to a more evident association between problem and previous knowledge ( Bjo¨rklund , 2013 ) . Due to prior exposure to a wide range of problems , situations , and solutions ( Purcell & Gero , 1996 ) , experts have the ability to frame and break down a problem into more manageable parts ( Ball et al . , 2004 ; Cross , 2004 ) , to work with in - complete or ill - defined problems ( Kolodner , 1997 ) , and to identify relevant informa - tion , patterns , and principles in complex design problems ( Cross , 2004 ) . There are six approaches at the intersection of individual and team levels : providing de - fixation instructions makes de - signers aware of features / elements that should be avoided , overcoming repeating ideas and , instead , producing novel ideas ( Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ) . Development of physi - cal artifacts deals with design complexity ( mental load ) . These models represent mental concepts as well as identify and manage fixation features ( Yang , 2004 ; Christensen & Table 2 . Extrinsic approaches to overcome fixation according to Moreno et al . 2014 Triggeror Source ImplementationMethod Method , Technique , or Approach Reference Extrinsic Individual level Abstract formulation of the problem Zahner et al . ( 2010 ) Use of concept – knowledge expansive examples Agogue´ et al . ( 2011 ) Pictorial examples Christiaans & Van Andel ( 1993 ) , Purcell & Gero ( 1996 ) , Christensen & Schunn ( 2007 ) , Tseng et al . ( 2008 ) , Yang ( 2009 ) Audiorecorded examples Dugosh et al . ( 2000 ) , Dugosh & Paulus ( 2005 ) Provide analogies Chrysikou & Weisberg ( 2005 ) , Smith & Linsey ( 2011 ) Provide analogies with open design goals Moss , Cagan , & Kotovsky ( 2007 ) ; Moss , Kotovsky , & Cagan ( 2007 ) ; Tseng et al . ( 2008 ) Use of design heuristics Yilmaz et al . ( 2010 ) Idea generation enabled with computational tools MacCrimmon & Wagner ( 1994 ) , Linsey et al . ( 2010 ) , Dong & Sarkar ( 2011 ) Graphical representations Rodgers et al . ( 2000 ) , Christensen & Schunn ( 2007 ) , Yang ( 2009 ) Case - based reasoning and case - based design Purcell & Gero ( 1996 ) , Heylighen & Neuckermans ( 2003 ) , Yan et al . ( 2013 ) Use word graphs Segers et al . ( 2005 ) Word trees Dugosh & Paulus ( 2005 ) , Linsey et al . ( 2008 ) Team level Electronic brainstorming Dugosh et al . ( 2000 ) , Dugosh & Paulus ( 2005 ) 6 - 3 - 5 / C - Sketch Weaver et al . ( 2009 ) , Vargas - Hernandez et al . ( 2010 ) , Genco et al . ( 2012 ) D . P . Moreno et al . 188 Schunn , 2007 ; Youmans , 2010 ; Viswanathan & Linsey , 2011 ) . Introducing critical feedback during concept genera - tion with prototyping may increase design fixation ( Kershaw et al . , 2011 ) . SCAMPER is a set of seven brainstorming op - erator categories that allow problem reframing and increase creativity through the use of analogies and metaphors that ex - pand the design space ( Blosiu , 1999 ; Vargas - Hernandez et al . , 2010 ; Youmans & Arciszewski , 2012 ) . A creative de - sign environment is considered an approach to overcome fixation because designers may be motivated by a nurturing and encouraging environment ( Youmans & Arciszewski , 2012 ; Chakrabarti , 2013 ) . Product dissection allows “exami - nation , study , capture , and modification of existing products . ” The method improves form and function understanding to de - velop new and different ideas ( Grantham et al . , 2010 ) . Func - tional modeling enables functionality representation , to ex - plore alternative means to link customer needs with product function , thus generating novel solution approaches ( Little et al . , 1997 ; Linsey et al . , 2010 ) . Two sets of methods are at the intersection implementa - tion . At the team level , Linkography translates a design process into graphs that represent the designers’ cognitive ac - tivities ( Kan & Gero , 2008 ) . At the intersection of implemen - tation , TRIZ and morphological analysis are found . TRIZ fa - cilitates solutions by matching contradictions in design problems to generalized design parameters and design princi - ples ( meta - analogies ; Altshuller , 1999 ) . A study comparing graphical representations ( sketching ) , control , and TRIZ showed that TRIZ was best in enhancing novelty ( Otto & Wood , 1998 ; Keller et al . , 2009 ) . Morphological analysis en - ables generation of new solutions by combining different elements recorded in a matrix of functions versus solution principles per function . Concept solutions may be generated combinatorically based on the synthesis of solution principles per function ( Otto & Wood , 1998 ) . The cumulative information presented above provides a better understanding of current approaches as well as implicit opportunities for integration to evaluate possible applica - tions . The presented dimensional classification implies typol - ogy of new approaches and possible benefits or outcomes of these approaches . 2 . 3 . Existing design fixation metrics This section investigates existing metrics that have been de - veloped and applied to assess fixation , considering their com - prehensiveness and the way they capture fixation , which cov - ers the broad spectrum of design problems domains from service to products . From the literature reviewed , two distinc - tive main categories are identified : direct and indirect metrics . 2 . 3 . 1 . Direct metrics These metrics inform a designer when fixation occurs and provide a crisp range of understanding for the concept of fixa - tion . Table 4 shows a classification for direct metrics found in the literature . The metric definitions are coincident to the fixa - tion definition in Section 2 . 1 and enable fixation identifica - tion and accountability . 2 . 3 . 2 . Indirect metrics Indirect metrics estimate fixation through indicators , but are not explicitly measured ( Table 5 ) . These indicators gauge if a designer is fixated , but do not provide additional information to validate the result . Two main classes are identified : personal and experimental . The personal class of indirect metrics are ex - tracted from the designer ( s ) and their design processes . The ex - perimental class corresponds to predetermined experimental attributes or responses that are contrasted before and after an experiment . Table 3 . Approaches to overcome fixation at the intersection of categorization dimensions according to Moreno et al . 2014 Trigger or Source Implementation Method Method , Technique , or Approach Reference Intrinsic Individual > team Level of expertise or domain knowledge Purcell & Gero ( 1996 ) , Kolodner ( 1997 ) , Ball et al . ( 2004 ) , Cross ( 2004 ) , Bjo¨rklund ( 2012 ) , Genco et al . ( 2012 ) , Youmans & Arciszewski ( 2012 ) Extrinsic Individual > team Provide defixation instructions Christensen & Schunn ( 2007 ) Develop physical artifacts ( prototyping ) Yang ( 2004 ) , Christensen & Schunn ( 2007 ) , Youmans ( 2010 ) , Kershaw et al . ( 2011 ) , Viswanathan & Linsey ( 2011 ) SCAMPER Blosiu ( 1999 ) , Vargas - Hernandez et al . ( 2010 ) , Youmans & Arciszewski ( 2012 ) Provide a creative design environment Youmans & Arciszewski ( 2012 ) , Chakrabarti ( 2013 ) Perform product dissection Grantham et al . ( 2010 ) Develop functional modeling Little et al . ( 1997 ) , Linsey et al . , 2010 Intrinsic > extrinsic Team level Translating the design process into a linkography Kan & Gero ( 2008 ) Intrinsic > extrinsic Individual > team TRIZ Altshuller ( 1999 ) Conduct a morphological analysis Otto & Wood ( 1998 ) Design by analogy studies and nonintuitive findings 189 2 . 4 . Service and product design problems Design problems or opportunities can arise from a variety of situations . Some of these may have an intangible nature , such as obtaining a degree ( education service ) , requesting credit ( financial service ) , or sending a document or object to a recipient ( transporting service ) . Other situations relate to a clear physical product or artifact associated with a solution like using a coffee maker to make coffee ( electromechan - ical appliance ) . Product design results in tangible artifacts , while service design corresponds to virtual systems of an in - tangible nature . Shostack ( 1982 ) defines services as acts that only exist in time . Vermeulen ( 2001 ) notes features that differ - entiate services from products : intangibility , simultaneity of production and consumption , heterogeneity , and perishabil - ity . Services and products can be found interconnected to vary - ing degrees ( e . g . , logistics ) and may be considered as part of a continuum . This interconnection implies the potential of tools and methods for conceptual design from engineering , architecture , and other domains to be transferred to transac - tional fields to assist idea generation and overcome design fixation ( Moreno , Hernandez , et al . , 2014 ; Moreno , Yang , et al . , 2014 ) . It has been opined that the early stage of devel - opment for services is no different than for physical products and that it is at the detailed design phase where the methods diverge ( Cagan & Vogel , 2013 ) . This viewpoint supports the transferability of design methods between domains at least in the idea generation ( ideation ) stage . 2 . 5 . DbA selected methods We explore a DbA approach to overcome fixation due to its relevance , effectiveness , and its potential to have synergic results when integrated with other approaches . There is evi - dence that design solutions can be developed or adapted from preexisting systems or solutions from other domains ( Otto & Wood , 1998 ; Keller et al . , 2009 ; Fu et al . , 2014 ) . For example , astronauts’ vortex cooling systems were later adapted as a means to mold and cool glass bottles ( Herna´n - dez - Luna & Ca´rdenas - Franco , 1988 ) . Inspiration from anal - ogous domains can be achieved by associations among shared characteristics , attributes , properties , functions , or purposes ( Gentner & Markman , 1997 ; Hey et al . , 2007 ) . Once an association between a design problem and a solution in another domain is established , a solution to the design problem can be developed ( Bonnardel , 2000 ; Ball et al . , 2004 ; Linsey et al . , 2007 ; Linsey , Wood , et al . , 2008 ; Mark - man et al . , 2009 ) . Table 4 . Direct metrics classification according to Moreno et al . 2014 Class Metric ( s ) Reference Repeatedfeatures Calculation of fixation percentage ; lower values indicate nonfixated designs : % Fixation : # of similar features numberof questionsrated bythecodersfor eachdesign Toh et al . ( 2012 ) Comparison of the number and percentage of features included in a solution to a provided example Purcell & Gero ( 1996 ) , Linsey et al . ( 2010 ) Obtaining low values for both variety and novelty metrics : Novelty = 1 − frequency = 1 − number of ideasinabin totalnumber of ideas Variety = number of binsaparticipant’sideaoccupy totalnumber of bins Jansson & Smith ( 1991 ) ; Shah , Kulkarni , & Vargas - Hernandez ( 2000 ) ; Shah , Smith , & Vargas - Hernandez ( 2003 ) ; Viswanathan & Linsey ( 2011 ) Measurement of functional fixation through dependent measures : ( 1 ) frequency of a given functional category at participant level , ( 2 ) number of functionally distinct designs , and ( 3 ) novelty * that measures solution uniqueness ∗ Novelty = 1 − # of functionallysimilar designsgeneratedbyother subjects total # of designsfor allsubjects Tseng et al . ( 2008 ) Originality score ( at feature level ) and technical feasibility of solutions from a score table ; originality evaluated after comparing features in designs with standard elements ; higher design feasibility corresponds to higher fixation . Genco et al . ( 2012 ) Evaluation of similarity between design brief of the project and the proposed solutions Kershaw et al . ( 2011 ) Nonredundantideas Correlation of the number of nonredundant ideas generated with the total number of unique ideas generated Dugosh & Paulus ( 2005 ) Presence of both low quantity and originality in generated solution ; originality is defined as statistical infrequency of a particular solution , which is a percentage from 0 to 1 Agogue´ et al . ( 2011 ) D . P . Moreno et al . 190 Two methods , WordTree and SCAMPER , were selected to investigate a DbA approach to overcome fixation for a service design problem . Though other DbA methods exist , many are meant to be applied to design problems in the physical domain . WordTree and SCAMPER methods were selected considering that their semantic transformations and directives do not assume a design has a physical embodiment that may be more appropriate to service design problems and solutions . 2 . 5 . 1 . WordTree WordTree ( Linsey , Markman , et al . , 2008 ; Linsey , Wood , et al . , 2008 ) is based on semantic transformation of textual representations of design problems by means of Princeton’s WordNet or VisualThesaurus , which is a visual display of the WordNet database . WordTree enables rerepresentation of the problem and expansion of solution space due to new semantic associations , finding and exploring potential analo - gies and analogous domains ( Segers & De Vries , 2003 ; Segers et al . , 2005 ; Linsey , Markman , et al . , 2008 ; Linsey , Wood , et al . , 2008 ; Smith & Linsey , 2011 ; Verhaegen et al . , 2011 ) . Using the WordTree method , a designer constructs a diagram of “key problem descriptors , ” focusing on key functions and customer needs of the given design problem ( Linsey , Mark - man , et al . , 2008 ) . Key problem descriptors are then placed inatree diagram and semantically rerepresented by hypernyms and troponyms selected from WordNet . The WordTree Dia - gram facilitates associations ; therefore , analogies and / or anal - ogous domains can be identified . All analogies , analogous domains , and new problem statements can then be used to enrich group or individual idea generation . 2 . 5 . 2 . SCAMPER This method is based in directive transformations that en - able a systematic search for solutions ( Harris , 1973 ; Yilmaz et al . , 2010 ) . Each of the seven letters from SCAMPER’s name correspond to a specific operator category with a set of questions that , when attempt to be answered , redirects an - alogical search to solve a problem . The operator categories are as follow : substitute ( S ) , combine ( C ) , adapt ( A ) , mod - ify / magnify / minimize ( M ) , put to other uses ( P ) , eliminate ( E ) , and reverse / rearrange ( R ; Eberle , 1996 ) . When applying the method , the designer may start with any of the operator categories at random , reflecting on the design problem from the category perspective and through the posed questions , which may enable the identification of analogous solutions or domains where a solution may be extracted . The designer can then proceed with exploring more questions of the same operator or move to another operator and repeat the procedure . 3 . EXPERIMENTAL METHOD Ninety - seven transactional process experts were recruited from professional development programs in Mexico and Singapore . Participants came from a variety of disciplines and involved 25 product and 29 service companies . Domain knowledge exper - tise was based on professional background and work role . A service design problem was adopted from a previous study from the banking sector ( Moreno , Hernandez , et al . , 2014 ; Moreno , Yang , et al . , 2014 ) : “Reduce overdue ac - counts / unpaid credits . ” The experiment included control and experimental treat - ments , and it was conducted in two phases ( Table 6 ) . The Table 5 . Indirect metrics classification according to Moreno et al . 2014 Class Type Metric ( s ) Authors Personal Self - assessment Commitment to an idea via self - assessment ; surveys ask about perception of fixation reduction , generation of unexpected ideas , and workflow improvement Segers et al . ( 2005 ) Degrees of freedom Linkography and Shannon’s entropy principle : analyze all possible moves on graph and , when moves are interconnected , the ideas are convergent and might be a sign of fixation . Kan & Gero ( 2008 ) Goel’s type of transformations : vertical and lateral ; if more lateral than vertical , fixation can be prevented . Goel ( 1995 ) , Rodgers et al . ( 2000 ) Experimental Response improvement Calculation of fixation effects for Remote Associates Test , subtracting the number of problems solved correctly between fixating and nonfixating stimuli conditions Smith & Blankenship ( 1991 ) , Moss et al . ( 2007 ) Negative features Assigning of a discrete value that ranged from 0 to 10 that corresponds to the number of neutral and negative fixation features that were found at given check - in periods Youmans ( 2010 ) Fixation identification as a focus in external features ( form ) and lower variety Grantham et al . ( 2010 ) Design by analogy studies and nonintuitive findings 191 control treatment did not specify a method [ no technique ( NT ) ] for either phase . Phase I of the Experimental treatments were NT , whereas phase II included two DbA methods : WordTree ( WT ) and SCAMPER ( SCA ) . Phase I and phase II were held with 2 days in between , with the same design problem in both . Groups were distributed by background , gender , and other demographics . The experimental phases and treatments enabled the dis - tinction of results . The inclusion of a 2 - day separation in be - tween the two experimental phases enables evaluation of in - cubation effects for the same set of participants . The purpose of having a control ( NT ) Phase I is to verify that there are no statistical differences between participants . This verification is critical to be able to contrast the results of a control treat - ment to those of the DbA treatment groups , isolating personal or other factors that may influence the outcomes , that is , comparing prolific participants who may have randomly been assigned to a control ( NT ) treatment against “average performer” participants assigned to WordTree or SCAMPER treatments . In all phases , participants were asked to individually create as many solutions for the design problem as possible , record - ing solutions as text and / or sketches / diagrams . In phase I , all participants were given 15 min to generate solutions using in - tuition alone ( Fig . 2 ) . For Phase II , participants were divided into three groups , NT , WT , and SCA , and directed to separate rooms . NT partic - ipants were asked to continue generating solutions without a specific method for 15 min . WT participants were given a 15 - min tutorial of the WordTree DbA method ( Linsey , Mark - man , et al . , 2012 ) and WordTree software ( Thinkmap’s Vis - ualthesaurus # ) . Each WT participant was provided with a computer with Thinkmap’s Visualthesaurus # . Relevant in - formation and graphical associations between words were displayed by the software . SCA participants were also given a 15 - min tutorial of the SCAMPER method . Each SCA par - ticipant was provided with a printed template with the opera - tor and corresponding triggering questions . Participants from WT and SCA were then asked to generate solutions to the transactional design problem using the method and software tools for 15 min . During Phase II , WT participants were asked to select words that rerepresented the design problem , and / or indicated particu - lar solutions or solution domains . The goal was to understand semantic retrieval from the participants’ long - term memories that allowed them to switch domains while developing analo - gous problem statements . Participants were required to list all alternative solutions they developed after extracting useful in - formation from the provided software tool . Similarly , SCA par - ticipants were asked to record ideas under the operator category that enabled its generation , to understand how the analogical search and redirection was performed . At the end of both phases , all listed ideas were collected , coded , sorted by affinity by two domain knowledge expert raters , and analyzed . Participants were also asked to complete a questionnaire after completing each phase to collect their self - perception about the session and their individual perfor - mance . The results of these questionnaires are explained in detail in another publication ( Moreno et al . , 2015 ) . 4 . ANALYSIS One of the research questions for this study relates to analogy as a relevant source of ideas and approach to overcome design fixation . The results of applying two different DbA methods are evaluated and compared , followed by a discussion of references and connections to the comprehensive framework of approaches to overcome fixation ( Section 2 . 2 ) as well as fixation’s existent metrics ( Section 2 . 3 ) . The collected set of ideas was sorted into bins of similar ideas ( affinity ) . Examples of bins are “negotiation , ” “reward systems , ” and “role swap . ” The sorting process was performed by two independent and domain knowledge raters who sepa - rately sorted the total 1 , 788 ideas recorded by the participants , where a Cohen k interrater agreement was calculated resulting in a Cohen k ( Von Eye & Mun , 2005 ) of 0 . 78 , which is con - sidered an “excellent” level ( Robson , 2002 ) . All disagree - ments were resolved through discussion , resulting in a final total of 134 bins . Table 6 . Experiment phases and treatments Treatment Phase I Phase II SampleSize Gender ( Female / Male ) Control NT NT 36 11 / 25 WordTree NT WT 37 12 / 25 SCAMPER NT SCA 24 11 / 13 Fig . 2 . Experimental execution diagram . D . P . Moreno et al . 192 4 . 1 . Quantity of ideas Three representations are defined : quantity of total ideas gen - erated ( Q Total ) ; quantity of repeated ideas ( Q R ) , where a re - peated idea occurs when a participant develops a slight variation of a previous idea ; and quantity of nonrepeated ideas ( Q NR ) , which corresponds to the remaining number of Q Total once re - peated ideas have been removed . Q Total ¼ X all ideasgenerated ¼ Q R þ Q NR ( 1 ) Equation 1 shows that Q Total can be expressed as the summa - tion of all ideas generated at different levels such as by phase ( I , II ) , experimental group ( WT , NT ) , and participant . Alter - natively , Q Total can be defined as the addition of its two sub - components : Q NR and Q R . Considering that the experiment was designed and exe - cuted in two phases , two sources for repeated ideas ( Q R ) are possible : † Repeated ideas within a phase ( R W ) : all repeated ideas across all participants for which frequency ( F ) is greater than 1 [ Eq . ( 2 ) ] . R W i ¼ X b j ¼ 1 X n k ¼ 1 F ijk (cid:2) 1 8 F ijk . 1 , ( 2 ) where F ijk is the frequency of repeated ideas for the i th phase , j th bin , and k th participant , respectively ; i is the phase number ( 1 , 2 ) ; b is the number of bins ( 134 ) ; and n is the number of participants . A unit is subtracted from F ijk to maintain the accountability of the total ideas generated . † Repeated ideas between phases ( R B ) : all ideas that were generated in Phase I that reappear in Phase II at bin and participant levels [ Eq . ( 3 ) ] . R B ¼ X b j ¼ 1 X n k ¼ 1 F 2 jk 8 F 1 jk . 1 AND F 2 jk . 0 , ( 3 ) where F ijk is the frequency of repeated ideas for the i th phase , j th bin , and k th participant , respectively ; i is the phase number ( 1 , 2 ) ; b is the number of bins ( 134 ) ; and n is the number of participants The previous definitions provide identification of the mo - ment where the repeated ideas occur , shedding light on the critical moment where a method can be more effective to overcome the design fixation effect . 4 . 2 . Evaluating fixation Design fixation was assessed using the procedure outlined by Linsey et al . ( 2010 ) and Viswanathan and Linsey ( 2012 ) and follows the definitions provided in Section 4 . 1 . The proposed metric elaborates what a repeated idea is for the study and , in - stead of reporting an absolute value , contrasts or normalizes this value against the total number of ideas developed . This approach provides a sense of the intensity of design fixation . A design fixation definition is implemented as shown in Eq . ( 4 ) : Fixation ¼ Total # of repeated ideas Total # of generated ideas ¼ Q R Q Total ¼ R W þ R B Q Total : ( 4 ) 4 . 3 . Novelty Following the definitions of Jansson and Smith ( 1991 ) and Chan ( 2011 a ) , we define novelty as the total quantity of non - repeated ideas ( Q NR ) . In this experimental design , Phase I is considered the design space baseline . Novelty corresponds to the design space composed of all ideas ( not bins ) generated by a participant in Phase II that were not generated by any par - ticipant in Phase I , over the participant’s total Phase II ideas [ Eq . ( 5 ) ] . Novelty k , l ¼ X bj ¼ 1 F 2 jkl 8 F 1 jkl ¼ 0 AND F 2 jkl . 0 X bj ¼ 1 F 2 jkl , ( 5 ) where F ijkl is the frequency of ideas for the ith phase , jth bin , kth participant , and lth group , respectively ; i is the phase number ( 1 , 2 ) ; k is the participant number ( 1 , . . . , 97 ) ; l is the group ( WT , SCA , NT ) ; and b is the number of bins ( 134 ) . 5 . RESULTS 5 . 1 . Statistical data validation A retrospective power study was performed to validate power of statistical tests and assumptions . For ANOVA and two tailed t tests , power factors were as follows : significance level a ¼ 0 . 05 ; variability and minimum difference depending on the metric being evaluated ; and actual sample sizes of the study ( NT ¼ 36 , WT ¼ 37 , SCA ¼ 24 ) . All power values were greater than 92 % for evaluated metrics , corresponding to a suitable power to perform statistical analysis . The nor - mality of the data was tested and verified using Anderson Darling’s Normality Test . 5 . 2 . Quantity of ideation To calculate fixation ( Section 4 . 1 ) , we first determined Q Total , Q R and Q NR . Table 7 presents the quantity of ideas across phases and group levels . Here , Q Total corresponds to 1 , 788 ideas distributed as 1 , 230 Q NR ideas and 558 Q R ideas . Table 7 includes t and p values from paired t tests compar - ing Q Total of Phase I and II for the three experimental condi - tions . It was found that NT has no statistically significant dif - ference ( which is expected because Phase II is also nonassisted ) , which in the case of WT there is a statistically significant difference , consistent with previous cognitive studies where intervention scenarios add significant load be - cause of the cognitive processing ( Tseng , Moss , Cagan , & Design by analogy studies and nonintuitive findings 193 Kotovsky , 2008 ; Chan et al . , 2011 a , 2011 b ) . In the case of SCA , there was no statistically significant difference . For Q NR , t and p values from paired t tests compare Phase I and II for the three experimental conditions . The results show statistically significant differences in the quantity of ideas for NT and WT . There was no statistically significant difference for SCA in the quantity of nonrepeated ideas between both phases . An ANOVA showed that the means of the three experi - mental conditions in both phases and all Q Total , Q R , and Q NR have statistically significant differences ( Table 8 ) . Using Tukey pairwise comparisons , we found that in Phase I for both Q Total and Q R , SCA is significantly different ( greater ) than the other two conditions ; and for Q NR SCA is only dif - ferent than WT ( greater ) . In Phase II for Q Total the three con - ditions are significantly different from each other ; for Q NR , WT is significantly different than the other two ( smaller ) , and SCA is significantly different ( greater ) than the other two conditions . Table 7 shows that only WT presents a reduction in Q Total from Phase I to Phase II . After removing repeated ideas , all three conditions resulted in a reduction in the number of ideas generated in Phase II from Phase I . SCA produced more Q NR in Phase II compared to the other two conditions . Table 9 summarizes the quantity of repeated ideas by source as defined in Section 4 . 2 . In the case of repeated ideas between phases ( R B ) , “Impose penalty” is an example of an idea stated in Phase I and then repeated in Phase II by the same person . Likewise , for repeated ideas within phases ( R W ) , “Make credit performance public” was an idea stated by a participant more than once during a single phase . For the NT group , the quantity of R W is almost the same for both phases , and there is a large quantity of R B ; that is , partic - ipants repeated ideas they created in Phase I . The WT group reduced the number of repeated ideas within Phase II . The quantity of R W and R B for WT in Phase II is almost the same . SCA had the largest amount of R W in both phases . Paired t tests for Q R contrasting Phase I and II results in the three experimental conditions show that NT exhibits a statisti - cally significant difference ( t ¼ 6 . 63 , p ¼ 0 . 000 ) in quantity of ideas of the control group ( NT ) , which is consistent with lit - eratureshowingthatdesignfixationintheformofrepeatedideas can be higher if no method is employed ( Dugosh & Paulus , 2005 ; Toh et al . , 2012 ; Viswanathan & Linsey , 2012 ) . There is no statistically significant difference in the case of WT ( t ¼ 0 . 26 , p ¼ 0 . 799 ) , which appears to indicate that the use of WT did not change the quantity of repeated ideas between phases , buttherelikewisewasno significantincreaseinrepeated ideasthatdiddramaticallyoccurfortheNTandSCAconditions . Finally , there is also a statistically significant difference ( t ¼ 3 . 22 , p ¼ 0 . 004 ) in SCA results , which was not expected . 5 . 3 . Fixation Table 10 presents the calculated fixation metric as defined in Section 4 . 1 . ANOVA analysis for fixation results for all experimental conditions in Phase I shows a statistical signif - icant difference ( F ¼ 5 . 26 , p ¼ 0 . 007 ) . Tukey pairwise com - parisons show that there is a statistically significant difference between the SCA condition and the other two conditions . Comparing Phase I with Phase II , statistically significant dif - ferences are shown across conditions ( SCA : F ¼ 1 3 . 41 , p ¼ 0 . 001 ; WT : F ¼ 5 . 81 , p ¼ 0 . 019 ; NT : F ¼ 95 . 34 , p ¼ 0 . 000 ) . Table 7 . Quantity of generated ideas and nonrepeated ideas NT ( n ¼ 36 ) WT ( n ¼ 37 ) SCA ( n ¼ 24 ) Total ( N ¼ 97 ) Ph I Ph II t , p Ph I Ph II t , p Ph I Ph II t , p Ph I Ph II D % Q Total 327 330 0 . 12 , 0 . 908 296 193 2 3 . 54 , 0 . 001 318 324 0 . 18 , 0 . 856 941 847 0 . 10 Q NR 282 158 2 5 . 01 , 0 . 000 247 141 2 4 . 37 , 0 . 000 224 178 2 1 . 66 , 0 . 110 753 477 0 . 37 Q NR Avg 7 . 8 4 . 4 6 . 7 3 . 8 9 . 3 7 . 4 7 . 8 4 . 9 0 . 37 Table 8 . Analysis of variance results for Q Total , Q R , and Q NR Phase Q Total Q R Q NR I t ¼ 7 . 46 , p ¼ 0 . 001 t ¼ 8 . 83 , p ¼ 0 . 000 t ¼ 3 . 50 , p ¼ 0 . 034 II t ¼ 22 . 31 , p ¼ 0 . 000 t ¼ 16 . 19 , p ¼ 0 . 000 t ¼ 13 . 90 , p ¼ 0 . 000 Table 9 . Repeated ideas by group , source , and phase NT ( n ¼ 36 ) WT ( n ¼ 37 ) SCA ( n ¼ 24 ) Ph I Ph II Ph I Ph II Ph I Ph II R W 45 40 49 24 94 79 R B 0 132 0 28 0 67 Q R 45 172 49 52 94 146 Q R Avg 1 . 3 4 . 8 1 . 3 1 . 4 3 . 9 6 . 1 D . P . Moreno et al . 194 Phase II results for experimental conditions showed a statisti - cally significant difference ( F ¼ 10 . 99 , p ¼ 0 . 000 ) , and applying Tukey pairwise comparisons , it is found that WT is statistically significantly different than the other two conditions . These results imply that all conditions resulted in fixation , but what is interesting is that a distinctly lower level was achieved with the WT condition . The participants who used the SCAMPER method exhibited a very similar fixation level as the control condition . 5 . 4 . Novelty Following the definition given in Section 4 . 3 , a total of 15 bins were uniquely generated in Phase II , with the following distribution : NT ¼ 1 , WT ¼ 5 , and SCA ¼ 9 . These 15 bins contained a total of 21 nonrepeated ideas uniquely generated in Phase II ( novel ideas ) . Table 11 presents the distribution of novel ideas for all experimental conditions as well as their cal - culated novelty values as defined by Eq . ( 5 ) . After performing an ANOVA for novel ideas , a statistically significant difference among all the experimental conditions is found ( F ¼ 8 . 06 , p ¼ 0 . 001 ) . Tukey pairwise comparisons showed that the SCA condition is statistically different ( greater ) than the other two conditions . An ANOVA analysis is calculated for novelty values across experimental conditions ( F ¼ 4 . 65 , p ¼ 0 . 012 ) . Both DbA conditions , SCA and WT , have statistically significant higher novelty percentages when compared to NT . The SCA condi - tion , however , appears to have the most significant contribu - tion of total novel ideas . 6 . DISCUSSION To address the research questions related to the existing de - sign defixation approaches , the literature review shows that a holistic and cumulative understanding of design defixation approaches has been investigated across different domains such as cognitive science , architecture , and engineering . These approaches have been developed to avoid the negative impact that design fixation may have in the design process at the idea - generation stage . In particular , much of the literature focuses on external approaches such as the use of heuristics , prompts , or external support to the designer that promote the development of ideas but may also be effective for overcom - ing design fixation . Although there are few expert studies with sample sizes that can provide sufficient statistical power to support the re - sults found for overcoming design fixation , the findings from literature review shed some light on interesting directions such as analogy - based approaches ( TRIZ , SCAMPER , WordTree , Word Graph , providing analogies and in addition having open goals ) and visual stimuli ( providing inspira - tional pictures , sketching , and 6 - 3 - 5 ) . The literature review also led to additional questions . Should design defixation approaches be used together , inte - grated or synthesized ? Are there dominant or more attractive approaches ? Should a suite of methods be developed , tested , and implemented ? With respect to the research question related to design fixation metrics , a broad range of ways to account for design fixation was identified and classified . These results may in - dicate that fixation can manifest in multiple forms that range from personal perception to tangible results of the cognitive process ( ideas developed ) . All metrics capture manifesta - tions of design fixation at different levels . The metrics could be applied together or synthesized to provide a better under - standing about the way that different factors impact design fixation . The literature offers several overlapping metrics and indi - cators for fixation . Direct and indirect dimensions for the de - sign fixation metrics were developed in an attempt to unify metric criteria . A fixation metric is proposed building on pre - vious work to include service design problems . The proposed metric for measuring design fixation captures the intangibles of service problems , and takes into consideration the pre - dominantly semantic nature of service design . The proposed metric can also be applied in the product domain . The results of a study for a service design problem are comparable with the ones obtained in engineering and architecture , allowing possible generalization of conclusions . Finally , addressing the research questions related to the ap - plication of DbA methods to overcome design fixation with a service design problem , it is found that analogies enable gen - eration of increased novel ideas and that DbA methods are transferable across design problem domains ( product to ser - vice ) in the idea - generation stage of the design process . In our study , there was a reduction in the total quantity of ideas generated by the WordTree participants , which is believed to be a reflection of the cognitive load that the method adds and that is consistent with previous cognitive study findings ( Tseng et al . , 2008 ; Chan et al . , 2011 a , 2011 b ) . The control ( no technique ) and SCAMPER groups Table 10 . Fixation by group and phase NT ( n ¼ 36 ) WT ( n ¼ 37 ) SCA ( n ¼ 24 ) Ph I Ph II Ph I Ph II Ph I Ph II Fixation 13 . 8 % 52 . 1 % 16 . 6 % 26 . 9 % 29 . 6 % 45 . 1 % Table 11 . Novel ideas and novelty NT WT SCAMPER NovelIdeas Novelty ( % ) NovelIdeas Novelty ( % ) NovelIdeas Novelty ( % ) 2 1 . 0 6 3 . 5 13 7 . 1 Design by analogy studies and nonintuitive findings 195 had similar results for the total quantity of ideas generated , which was not expected , and nonintuitive , and may be an in - dicator that SCAMPER shares some similarities with nonas - sisted scenarios . When contrasting these findings with the fixation results , it can be seen that the levels of fixation exhib - ited by the two experimental groups show no statistical differ - ence , which confirms our hypothesis . It appears , however , that the SCAMPER method also enables fixation in certain cases , which is unexpected . While the SCAMPER method led to increased novelty compared to the control group , which is an indicator of defixation , the use of the SCAMPER method also demonstrated a high number of repeated ideas between phases . It thus appears that as the SCAMPER repre - sentation questions were being implemented by designers , they would become fixated in certain regions of the design space , but then new operator questions would result in de - fixation , allowing designers to navigate to other regions of the space . The quantity of nonrepeated ideas was reduced in Phase II for the three experimental conditions , but the reduction com - pared with their respective Phase I was not statistically signif - icant for SCAMPER , which was not expected and may indi - cate that the method overcomes the cognitive load of learning a new method and provide means to increase the quantity of ideas generated . This result indicates that the SCAMPER method is different from nonassisted scenarios , and it can be seen that it performed better than control when comparing the average number of nonrepeated ideas for the two experi - mental conditions , which was greater for SCAMPER . The quantity of nonrepeated ideas in phase II shows interesting re - sults because Wordtree had the lowest quantity and SCA the largest ; however , contrasting this result to the one obtained for novelty , where both DbA methods yield more novelty than control , demonstrates the effectiveness of DbA methods to support designers during idea generation . One conjectural explanation for the different performance of WordTree com - pared to SCAMPER could be that WordTree requires more nonintuitive work from the users , and in contrast , the ques - tion - guided approach of SCAMPER may better reflect our natural process of semantically linking concepts in long - term memory . This , however , requires further exploration . The quantity of repeated ideas shows that the WordTree DbA method helped overcome fixation to predeveloped solu - tions as compared to a control . SCAMPER and control con - ditions exhibited similar numbers of total repeated ideas , which was not expected , and they both increased in Phase II the baseline of repeated ideas determined in Phase I , which would be an indicator that SCAMPER is not an effective ap - proach to overcome the presence design fixation , at least dur - ing certain times as ideas are being offered . However , consid - ering the results obtained for novelty , where SCAMPER yielded the largest quantity of novel ideas , it appears that SCAMPER is a method that provides , unexpectantly , both fixation and defixation means during idea generation . As stated above , fixation results indicate a similar level of fixation for control and SCAMPER treatments , at least in terms of repeated ideas , while WordTree appears to mitigate fixation much more effectively . However , novelty results show that both SCAMPER and WordTree yielded higher novelty than control , but SCAMPER had the highest number of novel ideas . Previous studies have shown that fixation will typically distract from novelty ; therefore , the results presented here are not only counterintuitive but also open new questions about the benefits that fixation may offer for improvement and refinement of ideas . One possible explanation for this counterintuitive result may be the modality of representation for the selected DbA methods of the study . SCAMPER poses active questions that guide the designer into developing a response , while WordTree is enabled by designer - driven semantic rerepresen - tation of key elements ( customer needs , functional require - ments , user activities , clarifying descriptions of the design problem , etc . ) of a design problem . The results of the study show that the rerepresentation of the design problem is a shared feature for both methods and enables a divergent mindset ( analogy ) when developing solutions for a transac - tional design problem , which is shown in the improved nov - elty metrics for both methods when compared to a nonas - sisted condition . In contrast , following a list of active ques - tions of a given SCAMPER category may trigger in the de - signer the need to rework or complement previously developed ideas , hence promoting fixation . SCAMPER’s fixation within a given category or question may be overcome when the de - signer is required to switch to another category or active ques - tion from the method . Quantity values were used to calculate fixation percentages , revealing that there is a base level of fixation for nonassisted sce - narios . Contrasting Phase II with Phase I , all experimental con - ditions result in fixation ; however , comparing the statistical re - sults of the three experimental conditions in Phase II , it is found that the lowest level of fixation is achieved with the Word - Tree method . These results highlight the efficiency of the Word - Tree method in mitigating design fixation . From the study , there is evidence that in a nonassisted sce - nario ( control ) , a significant portion of the allotted time was devoted to the development of solutions that are not distinc - tive from each other ( quantity of repeated idea was greater than quantity of nonrepeated ideas ) . It also appears , at least from the number of repeated ideas , that the analogical transfer provided by the WordTree method enables problem rerepre - sentation , exploration of divergent words , and effective space solution exploration to solve the problem . The fixation level exhibited by SCAMPER was in the form of idea refinement , while the WordTree and control conditions corresponded to minimal variations or rewording of ideas . This unexpected finding leaves open the question of a “desirable” fixation level that enables refinement and improvement of ideas . The DbA methods used in this paper combine some of the previous approaches that were found and presented in the pro - posed framework to overcome design fixation , which may ex - plain its performance . From Figure 1 , the studied DbA methods incorporate elements from different categories . It includes re - D . P . Moreno et al . 196 framing , by characterizing the problem and problem rerepresen - tation . The 2 - day break between phases served as an incubation period . It considers expertise that allowed working with incom - plete information , framing the problem , identifying relevant information , and developing more solutions . It provides and enables analogical exploration . It uses software tools that provide visual representation of the semantic cognitive process , allowing problem and solution representation . It makes use of heuristics or directives that guide and redirect analogical search . The results obtained from the experiment also align with reported results in the field of psychology . Leynes et al . ( 2008 ) found that fixation can be overcome in two ways : first with an incubation period of around 72 h , and second ( and closely related to our approach ) by presenting alternative se - mantic information to participants . They found that block and unblock effects occur in different parts of the brain . The re - sults of the present study align with this result because after the semantic stimulation and analogical exploration , the par - ticipants were able to overcome design fixation . 7 . CONCLUSIONS In the quest to enhance creativity , avoid design fixation , and better support designers , different factors and methods have been developed with diverse results . The work presented here is critical because it provides for the first time a state - of - the - art review and framework for ideation approaches to overcome design fixation . It also presents the existing ways to account for fixation and proposes a fixation metric that builds on existing literature and that can be implemented across product and service design problems . The findings from the literature review highlight a promising area to overcome design fixation in the direction of analogy - based approaches . Some DbA approaches were further ex - plored in this article and extended to include service design problems , an area of application that has not been extensively studied . The results presented here are robust and supported in a large sample size that involves service domain experts that are not frequent in literature . The experimental results obtained are encouraging and exciting not only for innovation and idea generation but also to effectively support the spectrum from product to service design . However , there is still much to learn about analogical reasoning behind DbA approaches and the factors that may influence creative performance . The intention of this study is to promote a critical reflection about the potential of the available suite of techniques , their modalities , and the associated cognitive processes behind them . The complexity of real - life problems requires the use of approaches with solid cognitive foundations and mecha - nisms that make them suitable for a broad range of design problems and opportunities . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors acknowledge the support and sponsorship of the Uni - versity of Luxembourg and Fonds National de la Recherche ( Na - tional Research Fund ) to conduct this work . The authors are also thankful for the support provided by the Singapore University of Technology and Design – MIT International Design Centre and the ITESM - BMGI Lean Six Sigma Program . Any opinions , findings , or recommendations are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the sponsors . REFERENCES Agogue´ , M . , Kazakc¸i , A . , Weil , B . , & Cassotti , M . ( 2011 ) . The impacts of examples on creative design : explaining fixation and stimulation effects . 18 th Int . Conf . Engineering Design . Copenhagen : ICED . Altshuller , G . ( 1999 ) . The Innovation Algorithm : TRIZ , Systematic Innova - tion , and Technical Creativity . Worchester , MA : Technical Innovation Center . Andersson , P . ( 1994 ) . Early design phases and their role in designing for quality . Journal of Engeering Design 5 ( 4 ) , 283 – 298 . Ball , L . , Ormerod , T . , & Morley , N . ( 2004 ) . Spontaneous analogizing in en - gineering design : a comparative analysis of experts and novices . Design Studies 25 ( 5 ) , 495 – 508 . Bjo¨rklund , T . ( 2013 ) . Initial mental representations of design problems : dif - ferences between experts and novices . Design Studies 34 ( 2 ) , 135 – 160 . Blosiu , J . ( 1999 ) . Use of synectics as an idea seeding technique to enhance design creativity . Proc . IEEE SMC ‘99 Conf . 1999 : IEEE Int . Conf . Sys - tems , Man , and Cybernetics , Vol . 3 , pp . 1001 – 1006 . Tokyo : IEEE . Bonnardel , N . ( 2000 ) . Towards understanding and supporting creativity in design : analogies in a constrained cognitive environment . Knowledge - Based Systems 13 ( 7 ) , 505 – 513 . Cagan , J . , & Vogel , C . ( 2013 ) . Creating Breakthrough Products , 2nd ed . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Pearson Education . Chakrabarti , A . ( 2013 ) . Understanding influences on engineering creativity and innovation : a biographical study of 12 outstanding engineering de - signers and innovators . International Journal of Design Creativity and Innovation 1 ( 1 ) , 56 – 68 . Chan , J . , Fu , K . , Schunn , C . , Cagan , J . , Wood , K . , & Kotovsky , K . ( 2011 a ) . On the benefits and pitfalls of analogies for innovative design : ideation performance based on analogical distance , commonness , and modality of examples . ASME Journal of Mechanical Design 133 ( 8 ) . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4004396 Chan , J . , Fu , K . , Schunn , C . , Cagan , J . , Wood , K . , & Kotovsky , K . ( 2011 b ) . On the effective use of design - by - analogy : influences of analogical dis - tance and commonness of analogous design on ideation performance . 18th Int . Conf . Engineering Design . Copenhagen : ICED . Choo , P . , Lou , Z . , Camburn , B . K . , Wood , K . , & Grey , F . ( 2014 ) . Ideation methods : a first study on measured outcomes with personality type . ASME 2014 Int . Design Engineering Conf . / Computers and Information in Engineering Conf . , IDETC / CIE 2014 , Paper No . DETC2014 - 34953 . Buffalo , NY : ASME . Christensen , B . , & Schunn , C . ( 2005 ) . Spontaneous access and analogical in - cubation effects . Creativity Research Journal 17 ( 1 – 2 ) , 207 – 220 . Christensen , B . , & Schunn , C . ( 2007 ) . The relationshipof analogicaldistance to analogical function and pre - inventive structures : the case of engineer - ing design . Memory and Cognition 35 ( 1 ) , 29 – 38 . Christiaans , H . , & VanAndel , J . ( 1993 ) . Theeffectsofexamplesontheuseof knowledge in a student design activity : the case of the “flying Dutch - man . ” Design Studies 14 ( 1 ) , 58 – 74 . Chrysikou , E . , & Weisberg , R . ( 2005 ) . Following the wrong footsteps : fixa - tion effects of pictorial examples in a design problem - solving task . Jour - nal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition 31 ( 5 ) , 1134 – 1148 . Cross , N . ( 2004 ) . Expertise in design : an overview . Design Studies 25 ( 5 ) , 427 – 441 . Dong , A . , & Sarkar , S . ( 2011 ) . Unfixing design fixation : from cause to com - puter simulation . Journal of Creative Behavior 45 ( 2 ) , 147 – 159 . Dugosh , K . , & Paulus , P . ( 2005 ) . Cognitive and social comparison processes in brainstorming . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 41 ( 3 ) , 313 – 320 . Dugosh , K . , Paulus , P . , Roland , E . , & Yang , H . ( 2000 ) . Cognitive stimulation in brainstorming . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 79 ( 5 ) , 722 – 735 . Eberle , B . ( 1996 ) . Scamper : Games for Imagination Development . Waco , TX : Prufrock Press . Design by analogy studies and nonintuitive findings 197 Fu , K . , Moreno , D . , Yang , M . , & Wood , K . ( 2014 ) . Bio - inspired design : an overview investigating open questions from the broader field of design - by - analogy . ASME Journal of Mechanical Design 136 ( 11 ) , 111102 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4028289 Genco , N . , Ho¨ltta¨ - Otto , K . , & Seepersad , C . ( 2012 ) . An experimental inves - tigation of the innovation capabilities of undergraduate engineering stu - dents . Journal of Engineering Education 101 ( 1 ) , 60 – 81 . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . ( 1997 ) . Structure mapping in analogyand simi - larity . American Psychologist 52 ( 1 ) , 45 – 56 . German , T . , & Barrett , H . ( 2005 ) . Functional fixedness in a technologically sparse culture . Psychological Science 16 ( 1 ) , 1 – 5 . Girotra , K . , Terwiesch , C . , & Ulrich , K . ( 2010 ) . Idea generation and the qual - ity of the best idea . Management Science 56 ( 4 ) , 591 – 605 . Goel , V . ( 1995 ) . SketchesofThought . Cambridge , MA : Bradford – MITPress . Grantham , K . , Okudan , G . , Simpson , T . W . , & Ashour , O . ( 2010 ) . A studyon situated cognition : product dissection’s effect on redesign activities . Proc . Int . Design Engineering . Montreal : ASME . Harris , B . ( 1973 ) . Heuristics and design . Papers in Regional Science 31 ( 1 ) , 3 – 14 . Herna´ndez - Luna , A . , & Ca´rdenas - Franco , L . ( 1988 ) . Optimal design of glass molds using CAD / CAE and response surface methodology techniques . Computers & Graphics 12 ( 3 ) , 391 – 399 . Hey , J . , Linsey , J . , Agogino , A . , & Wood , K . ( 2007 ) . Analogies and meta - phors in creative design . Proc . Mudd Design Workshop VI , Claremont , CA , May 23 – 25 . Heylighen , A . , & Neuckermans , H . ( 2003 ) . Learning from experience ? Promises , problems and side - effects of case - based reasoning in architec - tural design . International Journal of Architectural Computing 1 ( 1 ) , 60 – 70 . Jansson , D . , & Smith , S . ( 1991 ) . Designfixation . DesignStudies12 ( 1 ) , 3 – 11 . Jensen , D . ( 2010 ) . Effects of an early prototyping experience : can design fixation be avoided ? Proc . Annual Conf . Exposition . Louisville , KY : American Society for Engineering Education . Kan , J . , & Gero , J . ( 2008 ) . Acquiring information from linkography in pro - tocol studies of designing . Design Studies 29 ( 4 ) , 315 – 337 . Keller , R . , Eckert , C . , & Clarkson , P . ( 2009 ) . Using an engineering change methodology to support conceptual design . Journal of Engineering Design 20 ( 6 ) , 571 – 587 . Kershaw , T . , Ho¨ltta¨ - Otto , K . , & Lee , Y . ( 2011 ) . The effect of prototypingand critical feedback on fixation in engineering design . Proc . 33rd Annual Conf . Cognitive Science Society , CogSci’11 . Boston , July 20 – 23 . Kohn , N . , & Smith , S . ( 2009 ) . Partly vs . completely out of your mind : effects of incubation and distraction on resolving fixation . Journal of Creative Behavior 43 ( 2 ) , 102 – 118 . Kolodner , J . ( 1997 ) . Educational implications of analogy : a view from case - based reasoning . American Psychology 52 ( 1 ) , 57 – 66 . Leynes , P . , Rass , O . , & Landau , J . ( 2008 ) . Eliminating the memory blocking effect . Memory 16 ( 8 ) , 852 – 872 . Linsey , J . , Clauss , E . , Kortoglu , T . , Murphy , J . , Wood , K . , & Markman , A . ( 2011 ) . An experimental study of group idea generation techniques : un - derstanding the roles of idea representation and viewing methods . ASME Journal of Mechanical Design 133 ( 3 ) , 031008 – 031015 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4003498 Linsey , J . , Clauss , E . , Wood , K . , Laux , J . , & Markman , A . ( 2007 ) . Increasing innovation : atrilogyofexperimentstowardsadesign - byanalogymethod . Proc . ASME 2007 Int . Design Engineering Technical Conf . / Computers and Information in Engineering Conf . , IDETC / CIE 2007 . Las Vegas , NV : ASME . Linsey , J . , Markman , A . , & Wood , K . ( 2008 ) . WordTrees : a method for de - sign - by - analogy . Proc . ASEE Annual Conf . Pittsburgh , PA : ASEE . Linsey , J . , Markman , A . , & Wood , K . ( 2012 ) . Design by analogy : a study of the WordTree method for problem re - representation . ASME Journal of Mechanical Design 134 ( 4 ) , 041009 . Linsey , J . , Tseng , I . , Fu , K . , Cagan , J . , Wood , K . , & Schunn , C . ( 2010 ) . A study of design fixation , its mitigation and perception in engineering de - sign faculty . ASME Journal of Mechanical Design 132 ( 4 ) , 041003 . Linsey , J . , Wood , K . , & Markman , A . ( 2008 ) . Increasing innovation : presen - tation and evaluation of the WordTree design - by - analogy method . Proc . ASME Design Theory and Methodology Conf . , DETC2008 . New York : ASME . Little , A . , Wood , K . , & McAdams , D . ( 1997 ) . Functional analysis : a funda - mental empirical study for reverse engineering , benchmarking and rede - sign . Proc . Design Engineering Technical Conf . ’97 . Sacramento , CA : ASME . Luchins , A . , & Luchins , E . ( 1959 ) . Rigidity of Behaviour : A Variational Ap - proachtotheEffectofEinstellung . Eugene , OR : UniversityofOregonBooks . Luchins , A . , & Luchins , E . ( 1970 ) . Wertheimer’s Seminars Revisited : Prob - lem Solving and Thinking , Vol . 1 . Albany , NY : State University of New York at Albany Press . MacCrimmon , K . , & Wagner , C . ( 1994 ) . Stimulating ideasthrough creativity software . Management Science 40 ( 11 ) , 1514 – 1532 . Markman , A . , & Wood , K . ( 2009 ) . Tools for Innovation , Vol . 5 . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Markman , A . , Wood , K . , Linsey , J . , Murphy , J . , & Laux , J . ( 2009 ) . Support - ing innovation by promoting analogical reasoning . In Tools for Innova - tion ( Markman , A . B . , & Wood , K . L . , Eds . ) , pp . 85 – 103 . Oxford : Oxford University Press . McAdams , D . , & Wood , K . ( 2002 ) . A quantitative similarity metric for de - sign by analogy . ASME Journal of Mechanical Design 24 ( 2 ) , 173 – 182 . McKerlie , D . , & MacLean , A . ( 1994 ) . Reasoning with design rationale : practi - cal experience with design space analysis . Design Studies 15 ( 2 ) , 214 – 226 . Moreno , D . , Blessing , L . , Wood , K . , Vo¨gele , C . , & Hernandez , A . ( 2015 ) . Crea - tivitypredictors : findingsfromdesign - by - analogyideationmethods’learning andperformance . Proc . Int . DesignEngineeringTechnicalConf . Computers and Information in Engineering Conf . , IDETC / DTM 2015 . Boston : ASME . Moreno , D . , Yang , M . , Blessing , L . , & Wood , K . ( 2014 ) . Analogies to suc - ceed : application to a service design problem . Proc . NordDesign 2014 . Espoo , Finland : Design Society . Moreno , D . , Yang , M . , Hernandez , A . , Linsey , J . , & Wood , K . ( 2014 ) . A step beyond to overcome design fixation : a design - by - analogy approach . Proc . Design Computing and Cognition DCC , ‘14 , pp . 661 – 680 . Lon - don : Springer . Moreno , D . P . , Hernandez , A . A . , Yang , M . C . , Otto , K . N . , Ho¨ltta¨ - Otto , K . , Linsey , J . S . , & Linden , A . ( 2014 ) . Fundamental studies in design - by - analogy : a focus on domain - knowledge experts and applications to trans - actional design problems . Design Studies 35 ( 3 ) , 232 – 272 . Moss , J . , Cagan , J . , & Kotovsky , K . ( 2007 ) . Design ideas and impasses : the role of open goals . 16th Int . Conf . Engineering Design ( ICED07 ) . Paris : ICED . Moss , J . , Kotovsky , K . , & Cagan , J . ( 2007 ) . The influence of open goals on the acquisition of problem relevant information . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition 33 ( 5 ) , 876 – 891 . Oman , S . , Tumer , I . , Wood , K . , & Seepersad , C . ( 2013 ) . A comparison of creativity and innovation metrics and sample validation through in - class design projects . Journal of Research in Engineering Design 24 ( 1 ) , 65 – 92 . Otto , K . , & Wood , K . ( 1998 ) . Product evolution : a reverse engineering and redesign methodology . Research in Engineering Design 10 ( 4 ) , 226 – 243 . Perttula , M . , & Sipila¨ , P . ( 2007 ) . The idea exposure paradigm in design idea generation . Journal of Engineering Design 18 ( 1 ) , 93 – 102 . Purcell , A . , & Gero , J . ( 1996 ) . Design and other types of fixation . Design Studies 17 ( 4 ) , 363 – 383 . Robson , C . ( 2002 ) . Real World Research : A Resource for Social Scientists and Practitioner - Researchers , 2nd ed . Oxford : Blackwell . Rodgers , P . , Green , G . , & McGown , A . ( 2000 ) . Using concept sketches to track design progress . Design Studies 21 ( 5 ) , 451 – 464 . Sarkar , P . , & Chakrabarti , A . ( 2007 ) . Development of a method for assessing design creativity . Proc . Int . Conf . Engineering Design ( ICED07 ) . Paris , August 28 – 31 . Segers , N . , & De Vries , B . ( 2003 ) . The idea space system : words as handles to a comprehensive data structure . Proc . 10th Int . Conf . Computer Aided Architectural Design Futures , pp . 31 – 40 . Dordrecht : Digital Design Re - search and Practice . Segers , N . , De Vries , B . , & Achten , H . ( 2005 ) . Do word graphs stimulate de - sign ? Design Studies 26 ( 6 ) , 625 – 647 . Shah , J . , Kulkarni , S . , & Vargas - Hernandez , N . ( 2000 ) . Evaluation of idea generation methods for conceptual design : effectiveness metrics and de - sign of experiments . Journal of Mechanical Design 122 ( 4 ) , 377 – 384 . Shah , J . , Smith , S . , & Vargas - Hernandez , N . ( 2003 ) . Metrics for measuring ideation effectiveness . Design Studies 24 , 111 – 134 . Shostack , G . ( 1982 ) . How to design a service . European Journal of Market - ing 16 ( 1 ) , 49 – 61 . Smith , S . ( 1995 a ) . Creative cognition : demystifying creativity . In The Mind at Work in the Classroom : Literacy & Thinking ( Hedley , C . , Antonacci , P . , & Rabinowitz , M . , Eds . ) , pp . 31 – 46 . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Smith , S . ( 1995 b ) . Getting into and out of mental ruts : a theory of fixation , incubation , andinsight . In The Natureof Insight ( Sternberg , R . , & David - son , J . E . , Eds . ) , pp . 229 – 250 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Smith , S . , & Blankenship , S . ( 1989 ) . Incubation effects . Bulletin of the Psy - chonomic Society 27 ( 4 ) , 311 – 314 . D . P . Moreno et al . 198 Smith , S . , & Blankenship , S . ( 1991 ) . Incubation and the persistence of fixa - tion in problem solving . American Journal of Psychology 104 ( 1 ) , 61 – 87 . Smith , S . , & Linsey , J . ( 2011 ) . A three - pronged approach for overcoming de - sign fixation . Journal of Creative Behavior 45 ( 2 ) , 83 – 91 . Srivathsavai , R . , Genco , N . , Ho¨ltta¨ - Otto , K . , & Seepersad , C . ( 2010 ) . Study of existing metrics used in measurement of ideation effectiveness . Proc . ASME IDETC Design Theory and Methodology Conf . Montreal : ASME . Sternberg , R . , & Lubart , T . ( 1999 ) . The concept of creativity : prospects and paradigms . In Handbook of Creativity ( Sternberg , R . , Ed . ) , pp . 3 – 15 . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Toh , C . , Miller , S . , & Kremer , G . ( 2012 ) . Increasing novelty through product dissection activities in engineering design . Proc . Int . Design Engineering Technical Conf . ( IDETC ) . Chicago : ASME . Tseng , I . , Moss , J . , Cagan , J . , & Kotovsky , K . ( 2008 ) . Overcoming blocks in conceptual design : the effects of open goals and analogical similarity on idea generation . Proc . Int . Design Engineering Technical Conf . / Compu - ters and Information in Engineering . Brooklyn , NY : ASME . Vargas - Hernandez , N . , Shah , J . , & Smith , S . ( 2010 ) . Understanding design ideation mechanisms through multilevel aligned empirical studies . Design Studies 31 ( 4 ) , 382 – 410 . Vermeulen , P . ( 2001 ) . Organizing Product Innovation in Financial Services . Nijmegen : Nijmegen University Press . Verhaegen , P . , D’hondt , J . , Vandevenne , D . , Dewulf , S . , & Duflou , J . ( 2011 ) . Identifying candidates for design - by - analogy . Computers in Industry 62 ( 4 ) , 446 – 459 . Viswanathan , V . , & Linsey , J . ( 2011 ) . Design fixation in physical modeling : an investigation on the role of sunk cost . Proc . Int . Conf . Design Theory and Methodology . Washington , DC , August 28 – 31 . Viswanathan , V . , & Linsey , J . ( 2012 ) . A study on the role of expertise in de - sign fixation and its mitigation . Proc . ASME Int . Design Engineering Technical Conf . / Computers and Information in Engineering Conf . , IDETC / CIE . Chicago : ASME . Von Eye , A . , & Mun , E . ( 2005 ) . Analyzing Rater Agreement : Manifest Vari - able Methods . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Weaver , J . , Kuhr , R . , Wang , D . , Crawford , R . , Wood , K . , & Jensen , D . ( 2009 ) . Increasing innovation in multi - function systems : evaluation and experimentation of two ideation methods for design . Int . Design Engi - neering Conf . / Computers and Information in Engineering , IDETC / CIE . San Diego , CA : ASME . Yan , W . , Zanni - Merk , C . , Rousselot , F . , & Cavallucci , D . ( 2013 ) . Ontology matching for facilitating inventive de - sign based on semantic similarity and case - based reasoning . International Journal of Knowledge - Based and Intelligent Engineering Systems 17 ( 3 ) , 243 – 256 . Yang , M . ( 2004 ) . An examination of prototyping and design outcome . Proc . DesignEngineeringTechnicalConf . ( DETC ) , pp . 1 – 6 . New York : ASME . Yang , M . ( 2009 ) . Observations on concept generation and sketching in engi - neering design . Research in Engineering Design 20 ( 1 ) , 1 – 11 . Yilmaz , S . , Seifert , C . , & Gonzalez , R . ( 2010 ) . Cognitiveheuristicsindesign : instructional strategies to increase creativity in idea generation . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 24 ( 3 ) , 335 – 355 . Youmans , R . ( 2007 ) . Reducing the Effects of Fixation in Creative Design . Ann Arbor , MI : ProQuest . Youmans , R . ( 2010 ) . The effects of physical prototyping and groupwork on the reduction of design fixation . Design Studies 32 ( 2 ) , 115 – 138 . Youmans , R . , & Arciszewski , T . ( 2012 ) . Design fixation : a cloak of many colors . Proc . Design Computing and Cognition , DCC’12 , Texas A & M University , College Station , TX , June 6 – 12 . Zahner , D . , Nickerson , J . , Tversky , B . , Corter , J . , & Ma , J . ( 2010 ) . A fix for fixation ? Rerepresenting and abstracting as creative processes in the design of information systems . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 24 ( 2 ) , 231 – 244 . Diana Moreno is a Postdoctoral Researcher at the University of Luxembourg . She received her BS degree in industrial en - gineering from Pontificia Universidad Javeriana in Colombia and two MS degrees , one in quality systems and productivity from Tecnolo´gico de Monterrey and one in technology and management of energy companies ( from a joint program be - tween Instituto Superior de la Energı´a and Universidad de Navarra’s Business School ) . Dr . Moreno completed her PhD studies in engineering sciences at Tecnolo´gico de Mon - terrey , where she was coadvised with the University of Texas at Austin . Lucie¨nne Blessing is a Professor at the University of Luxem - bourg and the Director of the University of the Greater Re - gion . She obtained her MS in industrial design engineering in Delft and her PhD at the University of Twente . She worked in the Engineering Design Centre of the University of Cam - bridge as a Senior Research Associate and as Assistant Direc - tor . She was appointed to Professor in 2000 at the University of Technology Berlin . Dr . Blessing became Vice - President for Research at the University of Luxembourg in 2007 . She received an honorary doctorate from the Swedish Ma¨lardalen University in 2013 . Maria C . Yang is an Associate Professor of mechanical en - gineering and engineering systems at MIT . She earned her SB in mechanical engineering from MIT and her MS and PhD from Stanford University’s Mechanical Engineering De - partment , Design Division . She joined the MIT faculty in 2007 . Her industrial experience includes serving as Director of Design at Reactivity , Inc . ( now part of Cisco Systems ) . She has performed research into collaborative design tools at Apple Computer and Lockheed . In addition , Dr . Yang has explored the user interaction issues for software design , as well as ergonomics issues of force - feedback devices for Immersion Corporation . Alberto A . Herna´ndez is a Professor at the Instituto Tecno - lo´gico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey ( ITESM ) . He received his BS in electrical engineering from ITESM , his MS in mechanical engineering from the University of Wis - consin – Madison , and his PhD in mechanical engineering from the University of Texas at Austin . Dr . Herna´ndez was the Director of the Product Design and Innovation Center , the Quality and Manufacturing Center , and a leader for the manufacturing master program at ITESM . He holds an inter - national certification as Lean Six Sigma Master Black Belt and is the Director of the Six Sigma program at ITESM . Kristin L . Wood is the Head of Pillar of Engineering Product Development at Singapore University of Technology and De - sign and the Codirector of the International Design Center . Dr . Wood received his BS in engineering science from Colo - rado State University and obtained his MS and PhD in me - chanical engineering ( AT & T Bell Laboratories PhD Scholar ) from the California Institute of Technology . He was previously a Professor of mechanical engineering in the Design & Manu - facturing Division at the University of Texas at Austin . Design by analogy studies and nonintuitive findings 199