www . hbr . org HBR S POTLIGHT Disruptive Innovation for Social Change by Clayton M . Christensen , Heiner Baumann , Rudy Ruggles , and Thomas M . Sadtler • In the social sector , too much attention is devoted to providing more of the same to narrow populations that are already served . It’s time for a fundamentally different approach . Reprint R0612E HBR S POTLIGHT Disruptive Innovation for Social Change by Clayton M . Christensen , Heiner Baumann , Rudy Ruggles , and Thomas M . Sadtler harvard business review • hbr . org • december 2006 page 1 C O P Y R I G H T © 2006 H A R V A R D B U S I N E SS S C H OO L P U B L I S H I N G C O R P O R A T I O N . A LL R I G H T S R E S E R V E D . In the social sector , too much attention is devoted to providing more of the same to narrow populations that are already served . It’s time for a fundamentally different approach . The United States spends more money per capita on health care than any other nation , and it offers some of the most sophisticated care in the world . Yet it lags behind many less afﬂuent countries on basic health indicators such as infant mortality and life expectancy rates . Similarly , the United States ranks second only to Norway among OECD countries in per - student spending on education , yet it comes in 24th out of 29 on the OECD’s Programme for International Student Assessment mathemati - cal literacy test . This pattern of aggressive spending and disappointing returns in the so - cial sector isn’t limited to the United States , of course . Throughout the world , afﬂuent na - tions , institutions , and individuals generously fund social services that fail to fully deliver on their promise . What accounts for this poor showing ? It’s not a lack of solutions but rather misdirected investment . Too much of the money available to address social needs is used to maintain the status quo , because it is given to organizations that are wedded to their current solutions , de - livery models , and recipients . Many provide relatively speciﬁc , sometimes sophisticated of - ferings to a narrow range of people . While they may do a good and important job serving those people , and while their services may steadily improve , these organizations are unlikely ever to reach the far broader populations that are in need—and that would be satisﬁed by simpler offerings if only they were available . What’s required is expanded support for or - ganizations that are approaching social - sector problems in a fundamentally new way and cre - ating scalable , sustainable , systems - changing solutions . Their method , which we call “cata - lytic innovation , ” shares principal features with Clayton Christensen’s disruptive - innovation model . Like disruptive innovations , which challenge industry incumbents by offering simpler , good - enough alternatives to an under - served group of customers , catalytic innova - tions can surpass the status quo by providing good - enough solutions to inadequately ad - dressed social problems . Catalytic innovations are a subset of disruptive innovations , distin - Disruptive Innovation for Social Change • • • HBR S POTLIGHT harvard business review • hbr . org • december 2006 page 2 guished by their primary focus on social change , often on a national scale . To understand this argument , it’s useful to review the disruptive - innovation model ﬁrst put forward in Christensen and Joseph L . Bower’s HBR article “Disruptive Technolo - gies : Catching the Wave” ( January – February 1995 ) . The authors divide innovations into two categories : sustaining and disruptive . Most product and service innovations are sustaining . They provide better quality or additional func - tionality for an organization’s most demand - ing customers . Some sustaining innovations are incremental improvements ; others are breakthrough or leapfrog products or services . By contrast , disruptive innovations don’t , by traditional measures , meet existing custom - ers’ needs as well as currently available prod - ucts or services . They may lack certain features or capabilities of the established goods , for ex - ample . However , they are typically simpler , more convenient , and less expensive , so they appeal to new or less - demanding customers . Southwest Airlines’ low - cost , no - frills ﬂights were a disruptive service innovation that initially attracted leisure travelers whose alter - natives were to pay through the nose or not to ﬂy at all . The company rapidly stole market share from established carriers while also bringing new customers to air travel . Personal computers were a disruptive product inno - vation because , while they were less power - ful than mainframes , they quickly found a huge unserved market for their affordable , if limited , capabilities . Disruptive innovations have had a major im - pact on industry structures , from travel to com - puter retailing to communications , and have often given rise to social change in the process . But the social changes caused by disruptive in - novations are largely unintended ; they are sim - ply the by - products of pursuing a business op - portunity . With catalytic innovations , however , social change is the primary objective . Thinking Catalytically The existing players in any sector have re - sources , processes , partners , and business models designed to support the status quo . This makes it difﬁcult and unappealing for them to challenge the prevailing way of doing things . Organizations are set up to support their existing business models . Because imple - menting a simpler , less expensive , more acces - sible product or service could sabotage their current offerings , it’s almost impossible for them to disrupt themselves . Therefore , the catalytic innovations that will bring new bene - ﬁts to the most people are likely to come from outside the ranks of the established players . It’s fairly easy to grasp the disruptive - innovation model when it’s applied to commercial products and services . But how , exactly , does the model work in the social sector ? Catalytic innovators share ﬁve qualities : 1 . They create systemic social change through scaling and replication . 2 . They meet a need that is either overserved ( because the existing solution is more complex than many people require ) or not served at all . 3 . They offer products and services that are simpler and less costly than existing alterna - tives and may be perceived as having a lower level of performance , but users consider them to be good enough . 4 . They generate resources , such as donations , grants , volunteer manpower , or intellectual capital , in ways that are initially unattractive to incumbent competitors . 5 . They are often ignored , disparaged , or even encouraged by existing players for whom the business model is unproﬁtable or other - wise unattractive and who therefore avoid or retreat from the market segment . The following examples in health care , edu - cation , and economic development show the catalytic innovation strategy in action at both nonproﬁt and for - proﬁt organizations . People often equate an organization’s tax status with its ability to generate positive social change . But , as we’ll show , organizations can create cat - alytic innovations regardless of their owner - ship structure . Investing in Health Care In health care , investments in sustaining inno - vations enable organizations to treat their challenging patients with the most advanced technologies and therapies . An investment in catalytic innovation , meanwhile , yields sim - pler products and services that are affordable to a broader population . Cutting - edge care . Several years ago , a major teaching hospital in Boston received a large donation to further its mission to provide the highest - quality health care , serve regional pa - tients , and pioneer practices for global dissem - ination . Stakeholders submitted diverse pro - Clayton M . Christensen ( cchristensen @ hbs . edu ) is the Robert and Jane Cizik Professor of Business Administration at Harvard Business School in Boston . Heiner Baumann ( heiner _ baumann @ newprofit . com ) is the chief knowledge officer and a partner at New Profit , a Cambridge , Massachusetts – based venture philanthropy fund that pro - vides financial and strategic support for social entrepreneurs . Rudy Ruggles ( rudy . ruggles @ comcast . net ) is the pres - ident of Weston , Massachusetts – based Collaborative Innovation Services , a consulting firm that works with organi - zations to create solutions to social and environmental challenges . Thomas M . Sadtler ( tom . sadtler @ post . harvard . edu ) is the vice president of profession - al services marketing at CA , a manage - ment software company based in Islandia , New York , and a New Profit thought partner . Disruptive Innovation for Social Change • • • HBR S POTLIGHT harvard business review • hbr . org • december 2006 page 3 posals for the use of the funds , and two of those ideas made it through the vetting pro - cess to reach the board for ﬁnal consideration . One proposal recommended that the hospital move beyond its current tertiary care status to become a “quaternary” care provider , combin - ing its tertiary care and research capabilities to extend the boundaries of its clinical excellence . The other proposal recommended funding a nursing fellowship and broadening treatment responsibilities for the best nurses . The quaternary care proposal promised ser - vice innovation that would advance the elite hospital’s evolution by offering enhanced treat - ment capabilities for patients with compli - cated problems . The nursing fellowship would also promote service innovation , but in a dif - ferent way . It would train nurses to begin of - fering care that doctors formerly had provided , but at a lower cost . As disruptive - innovation theory would predict , the hospital board de - cided not to disturb the status quo . It turned down the proposal to train nurses in provid - ing more sophisticated care and used the do - nation to fuel the hospital’s current model : pushing the envelope on providing cutting - edge care to a relatively small population of the sickest patients . It chose sustaining over disruptive innovation . Walk - in clinics . By contrast , Minneapolis - based MinuteClinic is a catalytic innovator . The for - proﬁt company’s 87 clinics are located in ten states in CVS stores and other retail lo - cations and provide fast , affordable walk - in di - agnosis and treatment for common health problems , as well as vaccinations . Minute - Clinic employs nurse practitioners armed with software - based protocols and applies strict rules that help ensure consistent service . If a patient has a complaint that’s not on the list of health issues the clinic treats or has symptoms that indicate a serious problem , he or she is re - ferred to a doctor or an emergency room . Be - cause MinuteClinics are less expensive for many uninsured people than a visit to a doc - tor’s ofﬁce and are often more convenient for the insured , the model has the potential to bring basic health care to many whose access is otherwise limited . MinuteClinics may offer “lesser” health ser - vices than a doctor’s ofﬁce would , but this re - duced scope amounts to a good - enough service that’s attractive to a large , underserved popula - tion . ( In fact , MinuteClinic’s surveys of more than 350 , 000 patients indicated a 99 % satisfac - tion level . ) MinuteClinics also provide services that many incumbent health providers resist offering because the services generate limited proﬁts and result in little professional satisfac - tion . As a result , the growth of MinuteClinic ( which was recently acquired by CVS ) and other health care – related catalytic innovators , such as RediClinics , Take Care Health Systems , and Wal - Mart’s in - store clinics , will come at the expense of the full - service organizations that allow them to thrive . Affordable insurance . The nonproﬁt labor organization Freelancers Union is another cat - alytic innovator in the health care ﬁeld , pro - viding low - cost health insurance and other services to independently employed contrac - tors , consultants , part - timers , temps , and other workers in the New York area who wouldn’t otherwise be able to afford insur - ance . By handling individual policyholders as if they belonged to a group working for a large employer , Freelancers Union can offer compre - hensive health insurance at prices that are 30 % to 40 % lower than those charged by in - cumbent insurers for individual plans that provide comparable coverage . Freelancers Union’s actuarial analysis of claims has shown that the workers it covers are not a high - risk demographic , as many incumbents have as - sumed . With the growing scale of its coverage and the detail of its analysis , Freelancers Union has gained bargaining power with its insurance carrier , allowing the nonproﬁt to continue to lower its insurance premiums . Because incumbent insurance companies have aligned their processes , cost structures , and marketing to focus on corporate clients , they have little incentive to try to compete The Five Qualities of Catalytic Innovators 1 . They create systemic social change through scaling and replication . 2 . They meet a need that is either over - served ( because the existing solution is more complex than many people require ) or not served at all . 3 . They offer products and services that are simpler and less costly than exist - ing alternatives and may be perceived as having a lower level of performance , but users consider them to be good enough . 4 . They generate resources , such as donations , grants , volunteer man - power , or intellectual capital , in ways that are initially unattractive to incum - bent competitors . 5 . They are often ignored , disparaged , or even encouraged by existing players for whom the business model is un - proﬁtable or otherwise unattractive and who therefore avoid or retreat from the market segment . Disruptive Innovation for Social Change • • • HBR S POTLIGHT harvard business review • hbr . org • december 2006 page 4 for Freelancers Union’s niche business . The catalytic - innovation model , in which the orga - nization acts as a marketer and broker while partnering with an established insurance car - rier , is replicable , and Freelancers Union is now expanding to other states . Investing in Education Just as catalytic innovations in health care ex - pand the reach of good - enough care , catalytic innovations in secondary schools can make a broader range of good , affordable courses available to people who otherwise would have limited or no access to certain types of course content or degree opportunities . Online classes . Online learning is an exam - ple of one such innovation . Because of tight budgets , many public high schools have ceased to offer classes that cater to small groups of students—classes in certain languages , for in - stance , and advanced placement courses that count for college credit . Other small or poorer schools have never had the budgets to offer these types of courses . For - proﬁt Apex Learn - ing and nonproﬁts Virtual High School and Florida Virtual School , among others , have provided these specialized classes to thou - sands of students through their online learn - ing curricula . They allow school systems to offer good - enough AP and other courses at a fraction of what a live course would cost the school to provide and give students options that would otherwise be unavailable to them . According to the U . S . Department of Educa - tion , as of 2005 , there were 40 , 000 to 50 , 000 secondary school students in 37 states partici - pating in online courses , through approxi - mately 2 , 400 online charter schools and state and district virtual schools . Student attrition is higher in online courses than in live ones , both because participation can be technically challenging and because sticking with an online course requires strong self - motivation . However , in the absence of al - ternatives , online courses remain an adequate option for an underserved population . What’s more , they’re based on a proﬁtable , disruptive business model—affordable , widely accessible learning—that the incumbent schools are not structured to pursue . Community colleges . Though it may at ﬁrst seem counterintuitive , the community college model is a catalytic innovation—one that is dra - matically changing the shape of higher educa - tion in the United States by expanding access to and redeﬁning the goals for advanced study . Community colleges offer a lower - cost alter - native to four - year universities and measure quality not by the selectiveness of admissions or the earning power of graduates but rather by factors such as job placement rates and the convenience of access to classes . This has made community colleges an acceptable and even desirable choice for students’ ﬁrst two years . In fact , these schools now enroll some 44 % of all undergraduates in the United States . They pro - vide a good - enough alternative for prospective undergraduates who regard the traditional four - year incumbents as overpriced for their initial needs , and they provide a viable option for the unserved : aspiring undergraduates for whom traditional colleges , for a variety of rea - sons , are out of reach . Some state colleges and universities have helped create this shift by explicitly pointing prospective students toward community col - leges for their ﬁrst two years . Having freshmen and sophomores attend community colleges eases housing shortages at four - year schools and allows their faculties to teach fewer intro - ductory courses , freeing instructors up to teach more intellectually challenging upper - level courses and seminars . True to the model of disruption , many community colleges are of - fering upper - division courses as well but with - out the signiﬁcant cost burdens of research - oriented faculty . Community colleges serve as feeder schools for the four - year institutions , which in turn have made transfer arrange - ments more straightforward . Investing in Economic Development Historically , organizations such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund have promoted economic advancement by ap - plying resources at a scale and scope unmatch - able by developing economies . However , during the past several decades , microﬁnance organi - zations have taken a different approach , mak - ing small loans available to latent entrepre - neurs who otherwise would have little or no access to capital . Microlending . Conventional banks are typi - cally unwilling to lend to people without as - sets , forcing those customers to seek informal loans , often at interest rates of 300 % to 3 , 000 % ( if they can be obtained at all ) . Microﬁnance organizations have stepped in by offering While incumbent organizations may do a good job serving a particular group , they are unlikely ever to reach the far broader populations that would be satisfied by simpler offerings . Disruptive Innovation for Social Change • • • HBR S POTLIGHT harvard business review • hbr . org • december 2006 page 5 these clients small loans at relatively low inter - est rates and requiring little or no collateral . In many countries , microlenders ( combined ) have had a far greater impact than the World Bank , IMF , and conventional banks in rais - ing signiﬁcant segments of the population from poverty . One of the best - known microﬁnance organi - zations is Grameen Bank . At the end of 2005 , it had 5 . 6 million borrowers in nearly 60 , 000 villages throughout Bangladesh . Since its in - ception in 1976 , it has lent more than $ 5 . 2 billion with a recovery rate of more than 98 % . Owned 93 % by its borrowers , 5 % by the Bangladeshi government , and 2 % by other private Bang - ladeshi banks , it has been proﬁtable in every year but three since it was founded . Proﬁts from the bank are used to increase the loan fund . In 2005 , the entire $ 15 . 21 million proﬁt was transferred to a disaster relief fund , called the Rehabilitation Fund . Accion International , another proﬁtable microﬁnance organization , reports that between 1996 and 2005 , its afﬁli - ated programs issued $ 9 . 4 billion in loans in varying amounts to 3 . 97 million people . More than 97 % of those loans have been paid back . According to the Microcredit Summit Cam - paign , which collects outreach information from nearly 3 , 000 microﬁnance organizations , about 80 million people worldwide are receiv - ing credit through this approach . Rural clinics . While microﬁnance itself is a catalytic innovation , it is uniquely powerful in its ability to enable other catalytic innovations to ﬂourish as well . Consider the HealthStore Foundation , which has established what might be thought of as the MinuteClinics of Kenya . The Kenyan health care system is hierarchical and has a complex administrative structure and an urban bias . Roughly 80 % of Kenya’s doctors and dentists live in Nairobi and other urban areas , while 70 % of the population lives in rural areas . A 1998 study indicated that more than half the population did not visit government - run health facilities because those institutions lacked the needed drugs , were too far away , or were too expensive . With the help of microloans , the Health - Store Foundation has begun to address these problems by training local residents to pro - vide basic health care and helping them buy and operate their own clinics . These residents turned clinic owners often have experience as nurses or other types of health practitioners , but they lack the formal education and licens - ing of physicians . The clinics offer essential drugs , health products , and basic health care and health education at affordable prices , and they provide the owners with enough income to ensure the sustainability of the model . Strict standards and regular inspections by the HealthStore Foundation guarantee that the clinics offer uniform quality and prices . The combined buying power of the network is used to obtain medicines at the lowest possible rate , which helps drive the access cost toward a goal of 50 cents per person per visit , com - pared with roughly $ 3 per outpatient visit in government - run hospitals . With their higher capital and personnel costs , government hospi - tals would have trouble competing on price . As with MinuteClinics in the United States , the Kenyan clinics’ growth will probably come at the expense of the full - service incumbent orga - nizations that currently ignore , disparage , or encourage them . Capital equipment . KickStart is another business that creates catalytic innovations in Africa . The nonproﬁt develops and sells low - cost capital equipment to poor entrepreneurs in Kenya , Tanzania , and Mali ; develops re - lated supply chains ; creates initial markets for the equipment ; and adapts the equipment according to market feedback . One of its inno - vations is the MoneyMaker foot - operated irri - gation pump , which dramatically increases the productivity of farmland . The pumps cost between $ 38 and $ 90 and can increase an aver - age farmer’s annual income tenfold , from about $ 100 to more than $ 1 , 000 , allowing families to send their children to school and make other investments in their futures . The farmer’s initial expense is sometimes advanced by a microlender and can usually be paid back in three to six months . Like other catalytic innovations , KickStart’s products may seem to perform less well than competing goods . Compared with motorized pumps , for example , KickStart’s pumps are labor - intensive and low capacity . But motor - ized pumps are more expensive and require electricity or fuel , and labor is a plentiful asset for Kenyan farmers . KickStart provides a good - enough solution that has transformed the lives of thousands of farmers . Since 1993 , KickStart has helped generate 41 , 000 proﬁtable new businesses . Creating new businesses at the rate of 800 per month , KickStart’s clients today The community college model is a catalytic innovation that is dramatically changing the shape of higher education . Disruptive Innovation for Social Change • • • HBR S POTLIGHT harvard business review • hbr . org • december 2006 page 6 generate $ 47 million in annual proﬁts and wages , which is equivalent to more than 0 . 5 % of Kenya’s GDP and 0 . 2 % of Tanzania’s GDP . The success of the HealthStore Foundation , KickStart , and other such organizations de - pends on the availability of microlenders . In turn , microlending helps sustain borrowers who are paying back loans and creates an eco - nomic environment that attracts other lenders looking to start new businesses . Economic de - velopment arises as a result of these organiza - tions’ catalytic innovation business models , not solely because of their resources . Identifying Catalytic Innovations Many mainstream organizations could use ad - ditional resources to grow , reﬁne , and revital - ize their current valuable offerings , and in - vesting in sustaining innovations can certainly advance social goals . However , when the ob - jective is to get a system unstuck and to create new change models , it is time to go in search of catalytic innovations . While there are many guides to smart investing and philanthropy that focus on identifying traditional sustaining innovations to support , investors seeking cata - lytic innovations have few sources to rely on . Here are some guidelines they can use . Look for signs of disruption in processes . Once an investor or organization has chosen a particular social challenge to address , the ﬁrst step is to look for preexisting catalytic innova - tors . Because of their nontraditional models and technologies , these organizations may not show up in mainstream news articles , watch lists , or trade magazines . Instead , it is often easiest to detect their presence by noting the patterns of catalytic innovation activity that arise in the sector overall . Dynamics to watch for include the following : • A relatively new entrant is providing a lower - cost , less - functional alternative to a cus - tomer segment that is overserved or not served at all by the dominant provider . • The dominant provider is moving away from the new entrant’s offerings and toward a more proﬁtable segment of the market . • The new entrant is continuing to improve its offering , expanding its market reach as the dominant player retreats , while others copying its model are beginning to emerge . These sorts of ripples occurred after Minute - Clinic’s appearance in 2000 ( as QuickMedx ) and rapid expansion in the following years . Al - though MinuteClinic’s outlets were initially located only in the Minneapolis – St . Paul area , the social and economic forces that gave rise to it were not location speciﬁc . The environmen - tal factors that produced it in Minneapolis – St . Paul created sectorwide opportunities for inexpensive , good - enough care . Not all sectors are ripe for the rapid growth of catalytic innovations . In the federal govern - ment , the judicial system , child welfare ser - vices , and other arenas that are heavily regu - lated or are controlled by politics and other forces outside the market , the innovation pro - cess may be slowed down . Still , we have yet to ﬁnd a social sector that is impervious to disrup - tion by catalytic innovation . Identify speciﬁc catalytic innovations . When sector dynamics indicate that some sort of innovation is starting to come about , do - nors or social investors should evaluate it against the ﬁve qualities ( is the innovation de - signed to create systemic social change , does it meet an overserved or unserved need , and so on ) to determine whether the development is in fact a catalytic innovation . At the identiﬁcation stage , note that the in - novations , not the organizations , are being considered . In the case of MinuteClinic , for example , the innovation is low - cost , walk - in clinics in high - trafﬁc areas such as drug stores and shopping malls and not the MinuteClinic brand itself . It is easy to confuse the two , but a search for catalytic innovations needs to focus on the solution ﬁrst and then look at how it is , or could be , implemented . Assess the business models . Just because an organization has come up with a good idea for systemic social change doesn’t mean that it will succeed in implementing that change . At this third stage in the evaluation of a potential cata - lytic innovation , assess whether the group’s business model can allow it not only to effec - tively introduce the innovation but also to scale it up and sustain it . Organizations that have aligned their resources , processes , and values according to the ﬁve catalytic - innovation crite - ria to support their innovations are most likely to succeed . That means investors or donors should look for organizations whose work in one location is transferable to other locations and that have produced the same results else - where , for example . It also means investors should seek candidates that turn down funders that would require them to alter their models Many mainstream organizations could use additional resources to revitalize their current offerings . But when the objective is to get a system unstuck , it is time to go in search of catalytic innovations . Disruptive Innovation for Social Change • • • HBR S POTLIGHT harvard business review • hbr . org • december 2006 page 7 in ways that are incompatible with catalytic - innovation principles . Keep in mind that tax classiﬁcation—for proﬁt versus nonproﬁt—is not a useful crite - rion for identifying catalytic innovators . While the business models for the two types may differ , neither has an automatic advan - tage in addressing social challenges . EBay founder Pierre Omidyar recognized this fact when he and his wife , Pam , restructured their grant - making organization , the Omidyar Foun - dation , as the Omidyar Network so that it could make gifts in support of both for - proﬁt and nonproﬁt organizations that focus on social change . Catalyzing Business Models The screening approach described here can help investors identify groups that have a good chance of creating scalable , sustainable innova - tions in social change . Using the method won’t always be straightforward . Most reporting and marketing materials and funding requests have been developed with speciﬁc programs in mind , since that is usually how donors and phil - anthropic investors want them presented . It is much easier for donors and investors to ﬁnd re - quests for resources and process assistance than to ﬁnd organizations—especially nonproﬁts— that tout their business models . It is also difﬁ - cult to compare strengths and weaknesses across many different types of organizations and to identify those that are most likely to be effective catalysts . If social investors are frustrated with current solutions , they should seek out and support catalytic innovations . Not only will this have an immediate social impact , but it will also help establish the model and inspire more so - cial entrepreneurs to think catalytically . Reprint R0612E Harvard Business Review OnPoint 1683 To order , see the next page or call 800 - 988 - 0886 or 617 - 783 - 7500 or go to www . hbr . org Further Reading To Order For reprints , Harvard Business Review OnPoint orders , and subscriptions to Harvard Business Review : Call 800 - 988 - 0886 or 617 - 783 - 7500 . Go to www . hbr . org For customized and quantity orders of reprints and Harvard Business Review OnPoint products : Call Rich Gravelin at 617 - 783 - 7626 , or e - mail him at rgravelin @ hbsp . harvard . edu Harvard Business Review OnPoint articles enhance the full - text article with a summary of its key points and a selection of its company examples to help you quickly absorb and apply the concepts . Harvard Business Review OnPoint collections include three OnPoint articles and an overview comparing the various perspectives on a specific topic . page 8 This article is also available in an enhanced Harvard Business Review OnPoint edition , ( Product no . 1683 ) , which includes a summary of its key points and company examples to help you put the ideas to work . The OnPoint edition also includes the following suggestions for further reading : Will Disruptive Innovations Cure Health Care ? Clayton M . Christensen , Richard Bohmer , and John Kenagy Harvard Business Review June 2004 Product no . 6972 From Spare Change to Real Change : The Social Sector as Beta Site for Business Innovation Rosabeth Moss Kanter Harvard Business Review May 1999 Product no . 99306