Validation of a new live cell strain system : characterization of plasma membrane stress failure RANDOLPH W . STROETZ , 1 , 2 NICHOLAS E . VLAHAKIS , 1 BRUCE J . WALTERS , 1 MARK A . SCHROEDER , 1 AND ROLF D . HUBMAYR 1 , 3 1 Thoracic Diseases Research Unit , Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine , Department of Internal Medicine , 2 Division of Respiratory Therapy , Department of Anesthesiology , and 3 Department of Physiology and Biophysics , Mayo Clinic and Foundation , Rochester , Minnesota 55905 Received 25 July 2000 ; accepted in ﬁnal form 3 January 2001 Stroetz , Randolph W . , Nicholas E . Vlahakis , Bruce J . Walters , Mark A . Schroeder , and Rolf D . Hubmayr . Validation of a new live cell strain system : characterization of plasma membrane stress failure . J Appl Physiol 90 : 2361 – 2370 , 2001 . —Motivated by our interest in lung defor - mation injury , we report on the validation of a new live cell strain system . We showed that the system maintains a cell culture environment equivalent to that provided by conven - tional incubators and that its strain ouput was uniform and reproducible . With this system , we deﬁned cell deformation dose ( i . e . , membrane strain amplitude ) - cell injury response relationships in alveolar epithelial cultures and studied the effects of temperature on them . Deformation injury occurred in the form of reversible , nonlethal plasma membrane stress failure events and was quantiﬁed as the fraction of cells with uptake and retention of ﬂuorescein - labeled dextran ( FITC - Dx ) . The undeformed control population showed virtually no FITC - Dx uptake at any temperature , which was also true for cells strained by 3 % . However , when the membrane strain was increased to 18 % , ; 5 % of cells experienced deformation injury at a temperature of 37°C . Moreover , at that strain , a reduction in temperature to 4°C resulted in a threefold in - crease in the number of cells with plasma membrane breaks ( from 4 . 8 to 15 . 9 % ; P , 0 . 05 ) . Cooling of cells to 4°C also lowered the strain threshold at which deformation injury was ﬁrst seen . That is , at a 9 % substratum strain , cooling to 4°C resulted in a 10 - fold increase in the number of cells with FITC - Dx staining ( 0 . 7 vs . 7 . 5 % , P , 0 . 05 ) . At that tempera - ture , A549 cells offered a 50 % higher resistance to shape change ( magnetic twisting cytometry measurements ) than at 37°C . We conclude that the strain - injury threshold of A549 cells is reduced at low temperatures , and we consider tem - perature effects on plasma - membrane ﬂuidity , cytoskeletal stiffness , and lipid trafﬁcking as responsible mechanisms . biomechanics ; cell physiology ; alveolar epithelial cells ; venti - lator - induced lung injury MECHANICAL VENTILATION is the cornerstone of treatment for patients with the acute respiratory distress syn - drome . However , ventilator settings required to sus - tain life can at times injure the lungs by overdistending them ( 9 , 42 ) . To date , two studies have shown that mechanical ventilation with large tidal volumes ( 12 ml / kg ) is associated with greater patient mortality than mechanical ventilation with low tidal volumes ( 6 ml / kg ) ( 2 , 33 ) . Similar observations had been made in animal models of ventilator - induced lung injury , in which lung damage can be prevented or reversed by reducing tidal volume ( 9 , 23 , 34 , 41 ) . Damage is char - acterized by edema , hemorrhage , the presence of in - ﬂammatory cells , and changes in the ultrastructure of alveolar lining cells ( 5 , 9 , 16 ) . Such changes consist typically of epithelial and endothelial membrane blebs and breaks and are presumably the sequelae of inter - mittent plasma membrane - wounding events ( 21 , 32 , 37 ) . However , the micromechanics of the alveolar space and the deformation of its cellular constituents during breathing are incompletely understood ( 22 , 45 ) . As lung volume increases from functional residual capac - ity , the alveolar septa are thought to mostly unfold , accompanied by only minor deformations of their cel - lular constituents ( 4 , 22 , 36 ) . However , at high lung volumes , the septa must withstand a stretch to accom - modate the volume - dependent change in alveolar sur - face area . Therefore , both basement membrane and its adherent cells are placed under a potentially injurious stress ( 5 ) . Because classic morphometric techniques require tissue dehydration and ﬁxation ( 3 ) , different in vitro devices have been developed to simulate mechanical ventilation and to study the relationship between base - ment membrane strain and deformation responses in living cells ( 19 , 24 , 38 ) . Such devices usually incorpo - rate a deformable elastic membrane ( in vitro equiva - lent of the alveolar basement membrane ) capable of supporting lung cell growth , and some make provisions for cell imaging under more or less physiological envi - ronmental conditions . Most devices , however , have shortcomings , including nonuniform and / or poorly characterized membrane strain ﬁelds , the inability to precisely and independently control strain rate and Address for reprint requests and other correspondence : R . W . Stroetz or R . D . Hubmayr , Rm . 4 – 411 Alfred Bldg . , Mayo Clinic , 200 First St . SW , Rochester , MN 55905 ( E - mail : stroetz . randolph @ mayo . edu or rhubmayr @ mayo . edu ) . The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges . The article must therefore be hereby marked ‘‘ advertisement ’’ in accordance with 18 U . S . C . Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . J Appl Physiol 90 : 2361 – 2370 , 2001 . 8750 - 7587 / 01 $ 5 . 00 Copyright © 2001 the American Physiological Society http : / / www . jap . org 2361 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 4 on S ep t e m be r 22 , 2017 h tt p : / / j ap . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m strain amplitude , and restricted imaging capabilities and / or a lack of environmental controls essential for live cell microscopy ( 6 , 19 ) . In this communication , we present our validation of a prototype cell deformation system that overcomes these limitations . By placing optical position sensors in a closed feedback loop with linear actuators , mem - brane strains are continuously monitored and adjusted to produce precise strain rates and amplitudes . Fur - thermore , cells were maintained in an environment equivalent to that of an incubator , thus making long - term deformation response studies feasible . We used this device to characterize the relationship between substratum deformation and plasma membrane stress failure ( wounding ) in alveolar epithelial cells . With a different system , we had previously shown that large deformations ( peak membrane strain ’ 25 % ) cause plasma membrane breaks in these cells ( 37 ) but be - cause of device limitations could not further deﬁne the “deformation dose - cell wounding response” relation - ship . We now show that . 98 % of A549 cells ( a human alveolar epithelial cell line ) withstand a single 90 - s stretch of 9 % ( equivalent to a basement membrane area increase of ’ 18 % ) without undergoing plasma membrane injury , but that larger deformations greatly increase their probability of plasma membrane stress failure . Finally , we show that temperature has impor - tant effects on the mechanical properties of cells and on their probability of experiencing plasma membrane stress failure . The biological implications of these ob - servations are discussed . METHODS Design of Strain Device Conceptually , the straining system is similar to others presented previously ( 14 , 17 , 28 , 35 ) , and its basic principle is commonly used in vacuum , hydraulic , and pneumatic devices found in industry . Two concentric cylinders and an elastic membrane function as diaphragm and piston . An elastic membrane ( i . e . , the diaphragm ) covers one end of the large cylinder much like the head of a drum . When the large cylinder descends over the smaller inner cylinder , its mem - brane ( the diaphragm ) gets radially stretched ( strained ) in direct proportion to the vertical displacement . This is illus - trated schematically in the relaxed ( Fig . 1 A ) and strained ( Fig . 1 B ) conﬁgurations . The diaphragm appears as a circu - lar ﬁxture that clamps the elastic membrane . The membrane becomes strained ( Fig . 1 B ) over the piston when vertical displacement of the diaphragm occurs via two stepper motor - driven rack and pinion gear mechanisms . The portion of the diaphragm residing over the piston remains in the same plane as mechanical straining occurs , and the motion hard - ware is located to the sides of the mechanism . This arrange - ment allows unobscured microscopic imaging over the radi - ally strained portion of the membrane . In the actual prototype , the diaphragm and piston are inserted as subcom - ponents or modules into upper ( vertically movable ) and lower ( vertically stationary ) rigid aluminum frames . This modular arrangement allows ﬂexibility in the choice of subcompo - nents , facilitating the development of new prototype biomem - branes and cell culture systems concurrent with real - time imaging . Design of Motion Control System Mechanically , vertical displacement of the diaphragm as - sembly is accomplished via two linear actuators ( stepper motor - driven ball bearing - loaded leadscrews , Ultra - Motion , Mattituck , NY ) . The linear actuators are driven by inte - grated microstepping controllers ( IMS model 483IE2 , Intel - ligent Motion Systems , Marlborough , CT ) . Optical encoders that continuously output motor position are incorporated in a closed feedback loop , indexing initial motor position and automatically correcting errors . User control of the system is provided by in - house - developed software ( Labview , National Instruments , Austin , TX ) , a PC ( Pionex , Somerset , NJ ) , and serial communication with the stepper motor drive systems . The user interface provides control in a similar fashion to mechanical ventilation , allowing manipulation of the cycling frequency , duty cycle , strain amplitude ( analogous to tidal volume ) , strain rate ( analogous to mean inspiratory ﬂow ) , and a prestrain ( analogous to positive end - expiratory pres - sure ) . Design of Cell Growth Chamber The prototype’s upper frame houses the biologically active diaphragm module and is ﬁtted with an opaque plastic en - closure that functions as an incubator ( Fig . 2 ) . Gas is circu - lated through the plastic enclosure after being ﬁltered ( HME 15 – 22 , Pall Biomedical , Fajardo , PR ) , heated , and humidiﬁed by a humidiﬁcation system commonly used with mechanical ventilation ( Bird Products , Palm Springs , CA ) . This system uses a remote thermistor temperature probe in a closed feedback control system with the heating element to provide precise temperature control remotely to the heating source . Air and CO 2 ﬂows at 5 . 0 and 0 . 5 l / min , respectively , are blended with calibrated ﬂowmeters ( Ohmeda , Columbia , MD , and Dwyer Instruments , Michigan City , IN ) and intro - duced to the heater / humidiﬁer . At these ﬂows , CO 2 tension measured with an infrared capnostat ( Novametrix model 1260 , Wallingford , CT ) is 37 mmHg . The straining system is housed within a bio - hood ( AirClean 600 , Air Clean Systems , Raleigh NC ) that has been extensively modiﬁed to allow Fig . 1 . Schematic cross - sectional representation of the strain system in relaxed ( A ) and strained ( B ) conﬁgurations . Diaphragm assembly is displaced vertically by twin computer - controlled stepper motors and contains an elastic membrane to which cells are adherent . Membrane is strained radially ( B ) by the lubricated Teﬂon piston proportionally to the vertical displacement of the diaphragm . 2362 LIVE CELL STRAIN SYSTEM b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 4 on S ep t e m be r 22 , 2017 h tt p : / / j ap . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m microscopic imaging and routine cell culture procedures . The interior of the bio - hood is heated to minimize condensation within the growth chamber . Validation of Strain Performance The prototype’s lower frame was ﬁtted with six Teﬂon pistons of 25 mm OD and 22 mm ID , with 1 - mm radius between the top and side surfaces . The piston surfaces that contact the membrane were coated with a lubricant ( Bray - cote 804 , Castrol , Commerce , CA ) to reduce friction . A six - well culture plate ( Bioﬂex , Flexcell International , McKees - port , PA ) was inserted into the upper frame . The relationship between displacement amplitude and membrane strain in a piston - diaphragm system is well established ( 6 , 14 , 28 ) , and our validation procedure is essentially the same as that described by Tschumperlin and Margulies ( 35 ) . In short , real - time motion of ﬁve ﬁducial markers on the membrane’s surface was recorded with a charge - coupled device video camera ( Sony CCD F40 , Tokyo , Japan ) during programmed displacements of the linear actuator ( Fig . 3 ) . A video frame grabber and software developed in our laboratory were uti - lized to digitize and compute the distance between each pair of ﬁducial markers over the full range of actuator positions ( 13 , 20 ) . Strain was deﬁned as the fractional length change of the line elements between marker pairs . Analysis of variance was used to test whether the orientation of individual marker pairs had an effect on the strain - actuator position relation - ship . This analysis served to test whether the strain ﬁeld was uniform in the radial direction . To describe the dependence of membrane strain on actuator position under static conditions ( actuator held in position for several seconds ) , the mean data from all pairs were ﬁt to a fourth - order polynomial . The dependence of membrane deformation on the rate of actuator displacement was deﬁned in a similar manner . Cell Culture Human A549 cells ( American Type Culture Collection , Rockville , MD ) were grown on six - well culture plates ( Bioﬂex , Flexcell International ) in either a standard cell culture incu - bator ( model 3226 , Forma Scientiﬁc , Marietta , OH ) or the strain device . The base of these culture plates consists of a ﬂexible , collagen I - impregnated silicoelastic membrane with a surface area of 9 . 6 cm 2 . Ham’s F - 12K containing L - glu - tamine ( 2 mM ) , FCS ( 10 % ) , and penicillin - streptomycin - am - photericin B ( 100 U / ml , 100 m g / ml , and 25 m g / ml , respec - tively ; Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) was used as a growth medium . A549 cells were passaged and seeded at a density of 20 , 800 cells / cm 2 ( 200 , 000 cells / well ) 48 h before each experiment . Characterization of Cell Culture Viability The following indexes of cell viability and function were compared between culture environments : cell number , pH ( using a Beckman model 10 pH meter ; Beckman Instru - ments , Fullerton , CA ) , and osmolality of the supernatant ; proportion of cells with trypan blue staining ; 51 Cr release assay ; and propidium iodide ( PI ) labeling . Trypan blue exclusion assay . Cells were trypsinized , and 0 . 5 ml of 0 . 4 % trypan blue ( Sigma Chemical ) was added to a 0 . 5 - ml cell suspension and allowed to stand for 5 – 7 min . A 100 - m m - deep hemacytometer ( Hausser Scientiﬁc , Horsham , PA ) was used to count both the total number and number of trypan blue positive cells from either the incubator or strain device ( six separate experiments , i . e . , 30 wells ) . 51 Cr release assay . Cells were incubated for 2 h with 20 m l of 51 Cr ( 1 m Ci / m l ) added to the growth medium ( six separate experiments ) . The 51 Cr - containing medium was then dis - carded , the cells were washed , and the medium was replaced with unlabeled medium . The amount of 51 Cr released into the supernatant over the ensuing 2 h was measured using a gamma counter ( Ludlum Measurements , Sweetwater , TX ) and expressed as a fraction of the radioactivity in the cell lysate ( 1 % Triton ; Sigma Chemical ) . Flow cytometry and PI labeling . In three separate experi - ments ( 36 wells in each group ) , the cells were trypsinized and diluted into ice - cold phosphate - buffered solution . After 7 . 5 m g / ml of PI were added , the cells were maintained on ice until ﬂow analysis was performed . Cells were analyzed on a FAC - SCalibur ( Becton - Dickinson , San Jose , CA ) ﬂow cytometer . Argon ion laser light ( l 5 488 nm ) was used to excite PI , and emission ﬂuorescence was detected with a 585 6 21 - nm ﬁlter . Forward - angle scatter , side scatter , and geometric mean ﬂu - orescent intensities were recorded from 10 , 000 – 20 , 000 cells and analyzed using Cell Quest ﬂow cytometry software ( Bec - ton - Dickinson ) . Only cells above a forward - angle scatter threshold , distinguishing cells that could be evaluated , were analyzed . Characterization of Radial Cell Growth Rate Only in areas of the membrane that overlie the piston in the displaced state is substratum strain uniform and deﬁned Fig . 3 . Photograph of diaphragm and piston in relaxed and strained conﬁgurations . Ink dots seen on membrane were used for validation of strain amplitude . Fig . 2 . Photograph of the integrated strain system for live cell culture and imaging . System is mounted in a ﬂuorescent microscope , all of which is enclosed within a temperature - controlled bio - hood . Computer control system ( bottom left ) , stepper motor drive , and bio - hood environmental control electronic subcomponents ( top left ) can be seen . 2363 LIVE CELL STRAIN SYSTEM b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 4 on S ep t e m be r 22 , 2017 h tt p : / / j ap . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m by actuator position . For this reason , it is important to restrict initial cell attachment to the center portion of the membrane and also to ascertain that the subsequent radial growth remains conﬁned to the part of the membrane with a uniform strain ﬁeld . The area over which this condition is met is a circle with the radius r crit25 . This critical radius varies with actuator displacement and is 9 . 2 mm at strain settings of 25 % . Cells were seeded inside a Teﬂon ring with an inner radius of 7 . 5 mm . After 48 h , the Teﬂon ring was removed , and cell growth and spreading were measured over the ensuing 70 h . The distance of the most peripheral cells relative to r crit25 was measured at four points ( 0° , 90° , 180° , and 270° ) in each of six wells at seven time points over a 72 - h period by use of a calibrated scale within the imaging path of a light microscope . Determination of Deformation - Induced Plasma Membrane Breaks To determine whether cellular deformation was associated with breaks in the plasma membrane , cells were incubated with ﬂuorescein - labeled dextran ( FITC - Dx , Fluka , Milwau - kee , WI ; molecular mass 5 70 kDa ) for 10 min and then deformed ( 21 ) . A single stretch of 1 . 5 min was applied to cells maintained at 37°C , room temperature ( 21°C ) , or 4°C . Cells with homogenous intracellular distribution of FITC - Dx were counted in ﬁve low - power ( 3 40 water immersion objective lens , numerical aperature 5 0 . 75 ; Carl Zeiss , Thornwood , NY ) microscope ﬁelds in each culture well for each experi - ment and were tabulated as a percentage of the total number of cells counted ( between 200 and 300 cells in total ) . Four separate experiments were performed for each combination of strain amplitude and temperature . Within each six - pack of culture wells , three wells were strained and three were not strained , serving as a control cell population . Magnetic Twisting Cytometry Magnetic twisting cytometry ( MTC ) was used to measure the temperature dependence of apparent cell stiffness ( 12 , 40 ) . Ferromagnetic ( Fe 3 O 4 ) microbeads ( 4 . 5 - m m diameter ) were coated with a synthetic RGD peptide ( RGD Peptide , Telios Pharmaceuticals , San Diego , CA ) at a concentration of 50 m g / ml and allowed to associate with the cells ( 1 – 2 beads / cell ) for 20 min . Cell wells were then placed into the magnetic twisting cytometer at an initial temperature of either 37 or 4°C , chosen in random order . A 10 - m s 1 , 000 - G homogeneous magnetic pulse was then applied to magnetize the beads in the horizontal direction . A ﬂuxgate magnetometer ( Foerster , Reutlingen , Germany ) was used to measure the remnant magnetic ﬁeld of the beads in the horizontal direction . A magnetic “twisting” ﬁeld ( , 80 G ) , H , was applied in the vertical direction to twist the beads upward . Cell mechanical properties were derived from twisting torque and angular bead rotation , as previously described ( 12 , 40 ) . Statistical Analysis All measurements are presented as means 6 SD . Statisti - cal comparisons between experimental conditions were made using the Student t - test for paired or unpaired observations , as appropriate . Statistical signiﬁcance was assumed at P , 0 . 05 with respect to a two - tailed probability distribution . Analysis of variance was used to determine membrane strain uniformity and to test for temperature effects on the cell strain - plasma membrane wounding relationships . RESULTS Characterization of the Actuator Displacement - Membrane Strain Relationship Figure 4 shows several actuator displacement - mem - brane strain relationships measured over the operat - ing range ( 100 % displacement ) of the device under both static and dynamic conditions . The dashed line through open circles is the fourth - order polynomial ﬁt to the static data . Accordingly , a maximal actuator displacement , when held for several seconds , gener - ated a 28 % membrane strain . The actuator returned to the default position between each displacement step , and individual strains were referenced to the preceding membrane state ( i . e . , the 0 strain position ) . In all cases , the variability in strain estimates between dif - ferent marker pairs was , 1 % . The variance about each strain estimate is quite small and reﬂects local differ - ences in membrane elastance attributable to variations in membrane thickness and prestress as well as track - ing measurement errors . The distance between indi - vidual marker pairs at the default position varied by less than 6 2 % . ANOVA revealed no signiﬁcant differ - ences in strains computed from marker pairs with different orientations ( P . 0 . 3 ) , indicating relative uniformity in strain ﬁeld over the piston - opposed mem - brane . During dynamic testing , the strains at any given actuator position were less than in the static case . This is not surprising given frictional losses between mem - brane and piston . Interestingly , these losses were more or less frequency independent , i . e . , the differences in membrane strain between static and dynamic runs did not vary with actuator displacement rate . The shapes of the curves reﬂect membrane stiction ( during the initial 10 % of actuator displacement ) and membrane Fig . 4 . Plot of membrane strain as a function of actuator displace - ment . Data are means of strain estimates of all dot pair combinations shown in Fig . 3 . Actuator displacement - membrane strain relation - ships measured over the operating range ( 100 % displacement ) of the device are shown under both static and dynamic conditions . The dashed line through open circles is a 4th - order polynomial ﬁt to the static data ( equation shown ) . The membrane strain at any actuator position is less under dynamic conditions . See text for more details . 2364 LIVE CELL STRAIN SYSTEM b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 4 on S ep t e m be r 22 , 2017 h tt p : / / j ap . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m creep at the end of the actuator downstroke ( between 80 and 85 % in this example ) . The four actuator dis - placement rates tested produced average membrane strain rates of 41 , 21 , 7 , and 2 % per second . Cells are Viable and Function the Same as They Would in a Conventional Incubator Several measures of cell viability were compared between cells grown in the strain system and cells grown in a conventional incubator ( Fig . 5 ) . In six sep - arate experiments , each covering a time span of 48 h , we found no signiﬁcant difference in the cell growth rates ( cell number 1 . 63 6 0 . 45 vs . 1 . 60 6 0 . 49 3 10 6 , P . 0 . 6 ; Fig . 5 A ) or the percentage of cells that took up trypan blue ( 5 . 4 6 1 . 9 vs . 6 . 4 6 3 . 6 % , P . 0 . 3 ; Fig . 5 B , left ) . Similarly , the pH of the supernatants of both cell populations measured 48 h after incubation on six separate occasions in six wells were each similar , i . e . , 7 . 37 6 0 . 07 and 7 . 34 6 0 . 05 ( P . 0 . 4 ) . In a single comparison between 12 wells each , the osmolality of the supernatants was 342 6 4 . 6 mosmol / kg in the strain system compared with 338 6 1 mosmol / kg in the incubator ( P , 0 . 01 ) . In three separate experiments on six wells each , cells maintained either in the prototype cell strain system or the incubator showed no signiﬁcant difference in PI uptake ( 4 . 8 6 0 . 5 vs . 5 . 4 6 1 . 4 % , P . 0 . 5 ; Fig . 5 B , right ) . A similar comparison of the 2 - h 51 Cr release data likewise revealed comparable viability results ( Fig . 5 C ) . However , a paired analysis of the data from six separate experiments shows a small , yet statisti - cally signiﬁcant trend in favor of the conventional culture environment ( 51 Cr release : 11 . 3 6 2 . 4 vs . 9 . 9 6 1 . 7 % , P , 0 . 05 ) . Cell Growth Relative to the Membrane Area With Uniform Strain Characteristics To ensure that A549 cells adhered only to those portions of the membrane with deﬁned uniform strain characteristics , the monolayer was imaged , and its radial growth was deﬁned relative to r crit25 . Recall that r crit25 deﬁnes the circular membrane area with uniform strain characteristics at a 25 % strain setting . Data in Fig . 6 from two representative experiments ( 4 mea - surements per time point per well , 6 wells per experi - ment ) show that , over a 70 - h period , none of the A549 cells spread or crawled beyond r crit25 . Plasma Membrane Injury is Strain Amplitude , Strain Rate , and Temperature Dependent Figure 7 shows deformation dose ( strain ) - plasma membrane injury response ( % cells with FITC - Dx up - take ) relationships at three temperatures , namely 37 , 21 , and 4°C at maximal actuator displacement rate settings . The undeformed control population showed virtually no FITC - Dx uptake at any temperature , which was also true for cells strained by 3 % . However , when the membrane strain was increased to 18 % , ; 5 % of cells experienced deformation injury at a tempera - ture of 37°C . Moreover , at that strain rate and ampli - tude , a reduction in temperature to 4°C resulted in a threefold increase in the number of cells with plasma membrane breaks ( from 4 . 8 to 15 . 9 % ; P , 0 . 05 ) . Cool - ing of cells to 4°C also lowered the strain threshold at which deformation injury was ﬁrst seen . That is , at a 9 % substratum strain , cooling to 4°C resulted in a Fig . 5 . Comparisons of proliferation rate , cell viability , and function between cell populations grown for 48 h in either a conventional incubator or the strain system . Data from individual experiments and their overall means 6 SD are shown for the no . of adherent cells ( A ) , the cell fraction with trypan blue uptake ( B , left ) , propidium iodide uptake ( B , right ) , and % 51 Cr release ( C ) . * P , 0 . 05 . 2365 LIVE CELL STRAIN SYSTEM b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 4 on S ep t e m be r 22 , 2017 h tt p : / / j ap . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 7 . 5 - fold increase in the number of cells with FITC - Dx staining ( 0 . 7 vs . 7 . 5 % , P , 0 . 05 ) . Not shown in Fig . 7 are the independent effects of membrane strain rate on FITC - Dx uptake , which were tested in cells maintained at a temperature of 37°C and at strain amplitude settings of 18 % . Lowering the strain rate from 41 to 21 % / s resulted in a . 50 % reduc - tion in the number of FITC - Dx - positive cells . Strain rates of 2 and 7 % / s produced no plasma membrane injury under these experimental conditions . Cooling Increases A549 Cell Stiffness Figure 8 shows the individual and mean effects of temperature on A549 cell stiffness . The 12 paired ob - servations reﬂect stiffness measurements from six wells at two applied stress levels ( corresponding to 40 - G and 80 - G twisting ﬁelds ) . Cooling caused a large and consistent increase in apparent cell stiffness , rais - ing it from 141 to 210 dyn / cm 2 at the lower stress ( P , 0 . 05 ) and from 162 to 274 dyn / cm 2 at the higher stress ( P , 0 . 05 ) . DISCUSSION Motivated by our interest in lung deformation injury , we have introduced and validated a prototype live cell strain system . We have shown that the system main - tains a cell culture environment equivalent to that provided by conventional incubators and that the strain output is accurate and reproducible within the resolution limits of our bench validation instruments . The system allowed us to deﬁne cell deformation dose ( i . e . , membrane strain amplitude ) - cell injury response relationships in alveolar epithelial cultures and to study the effects of temperature on them . Conse - quently , we have demonstrated that the strain - injury threshold of A549 cells is reduced at low temperatures , an observation that is consistent with temperature effects on plasma - membrane ﬂuidity , cytoskeletal stiff - ness , and deformation - induced lipid trafﬁcking . Basic Design and System Validation The system deforms the base ( membrane ) of com - mercially available culture plates ( Bioﬂex , Flexcell In - ternational ) by using the diaphragm - piston mecha - nism depicted in Fig . 1 . This mechanism is driven with linear actuators rather than intermittent pressure , because stepper motors offer greater precision and better response times than pneumatic controls . In our hands , driving pressures in excess of 50 kPa ( 375 mmHg ) were required to strain membranes over 2 . 0 - cm - diameter loading posts by . 15 % in a pneumatic conﬁguration . Commercially available systems with pneumatic controls , therefore , might not generate high enough pressures to mimic the full range of alveolar basement membrane strains that are thought to occur during injurious mechanical ventilation in vivo ( 4 , 22 , 26 , 36 ) . They also tend to be more susceptible to fric - tional losses because of the much larger contact area between the membrane and the solid piston under - neath . When used without a piston , the application of a transmural pressure produces a spherical deforma - tion with a very nonuniform strain ﬁeld ( 6 , 28 ) . This greatly complicates the interpretation of deformation dose - cell response data . As predicted , on theoretical grounds , strain was uniform over the part of the mem - Fig . 6 . Radial growth and spreading of the cell monolayer after removal of a mechanical growth barrier . Data shown are means 6 SD of 48 microscopic measurements of cell culture boundaries ( 4 quadrants / well ) at 7 time points in 2 separate experiments . r crit25 is the radius of the circular membrane area with uniform strain char - acteristics . Fig . 7 . Effect of substratum strain amplitude and temperature on alveolar epithelial cell plasma membrane injury . Injury is deﬁned by the cell fraction with cytosolic dextran ( FITC - Dx ) ﬂuorescence . Data are means 6 SD of 4 experiments ( 3 wells / experiment ) , each refer - enced to its own “static , ” i . e . , 0 strain , control . * P , 0 . 05 . Fig . 8 . Effects of temperature on the apparent stiffness of A549 cells . Measurements were made on 6 wells at 2 external stress settings ( corresponding to 40 - and 80 - G ﬁelds ) . Individual and mean data ( 6 SD ) are shown . * P , 0 . 05 . 2366 LIVE CELL STRAIN SYSTEM b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 4 on S ep t e m be r 22 , 2017 h tt p : / / j ap . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m brane that remained opposed to the “piston” during actuator displacement . To test this hypothesis , we used a video camera and an operator - interactive tracking system that we had validated previously for other applications ( 13 , 20 ) . The variability in membrane strain estimates for a given actuator displacement was generally , 1 % over the operating range of the device . Maintenance of a Physiological Culture Environment To deﬁne physiological responses of live cells to de - formation , it is essential to control temperature , hu - midity , and gas tensions under all experimental condi - tions . Therefore , we tested the responsible components in an integrated conﬁguration at the bench ( data not shown ) and subsequently measured several indexes of viability and function in cells maintained for 48 h in either the strain system or a conventional incubator . The osmolality of the supernatant , a test of the humid - iﬁcation system , was 4 mosmol / kg higher in the strain unit than in the incubator . This difference was statis - tically signiﬁcant ( P , 0 . 01 ) but likely of negligible biological consequence . Supernatant pH , a measure of the adequacy of CO 2 supplementation , was similar in the two culture environments , as were measures of cell growth and membrane integrity . We have no explana - tion for the small but consistent difference in 2 - h 51 Cr release between strain unit and incubator . Again , this difference falls well below our biological tolerance limits . Effects of Deformation on Plasma Membrane Stress Failure When alveoli of overventilated lungs are imaged , one is struck by the presence of numerous breaks between and within alveolar epithelial cells ( 9 , 10 , 43 ) . This observation suggests that , under conditions of high tidal volume ventilation , the area change of the alveo - lar basement membrane is too large to be accommo - dated by adherent epithelial cells . Using the prototype live cell strain system , we sought to simulate this event and establish a relationship between substratum strain and an index of cell wounding . To date , work on plasma membrane “wounding” has focused primarily on stress injury / adaptive responses in heart and skel - etal muscles ( 1 , 7 , 11 , 21 ) . However , it is becoming increasingly clear that plasma membrane wounding occurs in many different cells under both physiological and pathological conditions . Unless membrane defects are very large , cells rapidly repair wounds by site - directed calcium - regulated exocytosis ( 30 ) . In the con - text of ventilator - induced lung injury , it is tempting to link proinﬂammatory signaling responses by deformed alveolar epithelium to wounding - related cytosolic cal - cium oscillations . The calcium inﬂux associated with an occasional plasma membrane tear might well be sufﬁcient to keep the nuclear transcription factor - k B activated without necessarily compromising cell viabil - ity ( 8 , 44 ) . Because in A549 cells Dx uptake via pinocytosis is time dependent ( 37 ) , we were able to use cytosolic Dx ﬂuorescence as a marker of transient plasma mem - brane stress failure ( 21 ) . At body temperature ( 37°C ) , such stress failure was observed only after large sub - stratum deformations applied at high rates . This ob - servation raises three important questions : 1 ) what deformations do alveolar epithelial cells experience during mechanical ventilation at injurious settings ; 2 ) what are the limitations of A549 cells as a culture model of the alveolar space ; and 3 ) what are the mech - anisms of force transfer among basement membrane , cytoskeleton ( CSK ) , and plasma membrane ? Alveolar microstrains in situ . Envisioning the lung as a homogeneous isotropic elastic solid , one predicts that the length of any element must change with vol - ume to the one - third power . Because lung volume more than doubles during an inspiratory capacity maneuver , the corresponding strains could be as high as 30 % . Because in patients with lung injury the amount of recruitable lung is often quite reduced , every ventila - tor - delivered breath might represent an inspiratory capacity maneuver ( 27 ) . In recumbent normal dogs , in situ parenchymal strain measurements yielded values as high as 40 % during inspiratory capacity inﬂations ( 26 ) . In these studies , the parenchymal marker tech - nique ( 13 ) was used so that strains could be computed for tissue volumes as small as 1 cm 3 . It is uncertain , however , that the continuum mechanics assumptions that were used in these calculations are valid on a scale of a few micrometers , i . e . , the scale of a single cell . Classic morphometric studies on excised , perfusion - ﬁxed rabbit lungs emphasize the importance of volume history and the delicate interplay among surface ten - sion , surface area , tissue properties , and capillary pressure on alveolar geometry ( 4 , 22 , 36 ) . Although the free alveolar surface area as much as doubles when the lungs are inﬂated from 40 to 100 % total lung capacity , some of the area change reﬂects unfolding of alveolar septal “pleats” as opposed to extension of elastic cell and tissue elements ( 4 ) . Consequently , the epithelial basement membrane area might increase by only 50 % , corresponding to a strain of 22 % . All in all , currently available data on the micromechanics of the lung , al - though not deﬁnitive , place the degree and distribu - tions of strains that we have examined in vitro within the range of strains that one might reasonably expect during mechanical ventilation in vivo . Limitations of A549 cells as a culture model of the alveolar space . A549 cells , derived from a transformed alveolar epithelial cell line , have lamellar bodylike structures ( 18 ) , possess functioning proinﬂammatory signaling pathways ( 38 ) , are cheap and easy to main - tain in culture , and are , therefore , a popular culture model of the alveolar space . However , these cells do not form polarized monolayers and probably do not com - municate with each other through gap junctions . When probed with MTC , A549 cells appear much stiffer than virtually any other cell type studied to date , including primary rat type II alveolar epithelial cells ( 12 ) . This might explain why Tschumperlin and Margulies ( 35 ) found freshly harvested primary rat alveolar type II epithelial cells to be more “deformation injury prone” 2367 LIVE CELL STRAIN SYSTEM b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 4 on S ep t e m be r 22 , 2017 h tt p : / / j ap . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m than our observations on conﬂuent A549 cells would suggest . No matter which cell culture model one uses , in vitro determined strain injury thresholds need not ( and probably do not ) reﬂect the strain sensitivity of alveolar epithelium in a living organism . Nevertheless , ex vivo measurements are extremely helpful in char - acterizing effects of co - interventions , such as tempera - ture , and in delineating their mechanisms of action . The mechanics of adherent cells stressed through their attachment sites with the basement membrane . Adherent cells form focal adhesion complexes ( FAC ) with matrix proteins of the basement membrane and are in a sense “spot welded” to it . These sites are biologically active and are thought to play an impor - tant role in mechanosensing and signal transduction ( 15 ) . When the basement membrane area increases during lung inﬂation , the distance between FACs must change . The strain on the FACs causes a realignment of cytoskeletal elements and ultimately produces a change in overall cell shape . The resulting nonuniform deformation ( the cell ﬂattens ) mandates an increase in the apparent cell surface - to - volume ratio ( 39 ) , which requires cytoskeletal remodeling and / or unfolding of plasma membrane invaginations . Except for bending phenomena , such as interleaﬂet shear in the lipid bi - layer , the unfolding itself leaves the plasma membrane essentially unstressed until the lipid reservoir for un - folding is exhausted ( 25 , 29 ) . However , at that point , plasma membrane stress failure must be imminent because the critical tension of the plasma membrane is thought to be in the neighborhood of 5 dyn / cm 2 . This means that the plasma membrane can sustain strains of only 2 – 3 % ( in the plane of the membrane ) before it breaks . Effects of temperature on plasma membrane stress and stress failure . In a previous study , we showed that A549 cells respond to deformation by transporting lip - ids to the plasma membrane , and we speculated that lipid trafﬁcking represented an important cytoprotec - tive mechanism against lung deformation injury ( 39 ) . This hypothesis is consistent with ﬁndings on human ﬁbroblasts in which plasma membrane tethers can be pulled to ever - increasing lengths so long as they are being pulled slowly ( 29 ) . This in turn is consistent with the dependence of plasma membrane stress failure on the substratum strain rate that was observed in the present study . Because vesicular and nonvesicular lipid transport is greatly suppressed at low tempera - tures , we anticipated that cooling would lower the deformation injury threshold of A549 cells as well . This is exactly what was observed ( Fig . 7 ) . However , in this context a few comments about cytosolic FITC - Dx as a marker of deformation - related plasma membrane in - jury are in order . For the large molecule Dx to gain access to the cytosol , it must enter the cell either via pinocytosis or through a plasma membrane wound . In the latter instance , the molecule will be retained by the cell only if its wound heals and Dx gets trapped . More - over , the size of the membrane wound and the time to resealing determine cytosolic Dx concentration . When we consider the effects of temperature on lipid trafﬁck - ing and vesicular fusion , cells that were strained at 4°C probably had longer membrane open times than cells that were strained at 37°C . Finally , the percentage of adherent FITC - positive cells underestimates the ex - tent of injury , because cells that lose adherence during strain and those that fail to repair the membrane defect are not taken into account . Temperature not only modiﬁes lipid transport but also has profound effects on other cell biological func - tions . Of these , two are of note in the context of our study : cytoskeletal mechanics and membrane ﬂuidity . The MTC measurements of Fig . 8 provide strong evi - dence that cooling causes a substantial increase in the cells’ resistance to shape change . This holds true not only for A549 cells but indeed for primary rat type II alveolar epithelial cells as well ( data not shown ) . The molecular mechanisms responsible for the low temper - ature - induced cell stiffening remain unclear , and a discussion of this topic must be preceded by consider - ations about MTC itself . What does MTC measure ? There is ample evidence that MTC probes the CSK , inasmuch as beads that are not associated with the CSK offer little resistance to rotational shear ( 12 , 40 ) . What remains more uncertain , however , is the sensi - tivity of the probe to local bead coupling phenomena as opposed to global changes in CSK prestress and orga - nization . In a typical MTC experiment , strain recovery is only ’ 50 % , meaning that the beads do not fully “recoil” to their original position after the twisting ﬁeld is turned off . In other words , cells display plastoelastic behavior . The molecular mechanisms underlying cell plasticity are also incompletely understood but more than likely involve a number of CSK - associated sever - ing , cross - linking , and annealing proteins ( 31 ) . To the extent to which temperature alters afﬁnity states and chemical reaction rates of these proteins , cold - induced stiffening might be viewed like the rigor state of an ATP - depleted muscle . Is a stiff cell that is being strained via its FACs more or less likely to undergo plasma membrane injury ? The answer to this question requires some idea about how CSK and plasma membrane interact and load each other during a basement membrane deformation . Un - fortunately , there are few experimental data to guide us . We know from this and from the work of Tschump - erlin and Margulies ( 35 ) that primary type II epithelial cells are more deformable and more injury prone than the relatively stiff A549 cells ( 35 ) . However , there are undoubtedly additional factors besides CSK stiffness that determine the probability of plasma membrane stress failure . These are the “strength” and composi - tion of the plasma membrane itself , its mechanical coupling with the subcortical CSK , and the size of the membrane reservoir that is recruited during a shape change and keeps membrane tension below injury threshold as the surface area of the cell increases . Concluding Remarks We have reported on the testing and validation of a new live cell strain system and have applied it to the 2368 LIVE CELL STRAIN SYSTEM b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 4 on S ep t e m be r 22 , 2017 h tt p : / / j ap . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m study of plasma membrane stress failure . Guided by images of injured lungs with epithelial gaps and breaks ( 5 , 9 , 10 ) , we postulate that plasma membrane stress failure is an important , if not the key , event in the pathogenesis of ventilator - induced lung injury . In con - trast to work on cardiac and skeletal muscle , relatively little attention has been given to this problem in the lung ﬁeld . Future studies should , therefore , focus on two questions of fundamental importance : 1 ) how does an alveolar epithelial cell deform during breathing , and 2 ) what determines the stress distribution be - tween CSK and the plasma membrane in alveolar epithelial cells ? The authors thank the Section of Engineering , Division of Medical Sciences , especially P . E . Caskey , J . R . Craighead , W . N . Lenz , and A . E . Wussow , for fabrication of the system , and L . L . Oeltjenbruns for preparing the manuscript . This work was supported by National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute Grant HL - 63178 and a Glaxo Wellcome Pulmonary Fellow - ship Research Grant ( to N . E . Vlahakis ) . REFERENCES 1 . Akinlaja J and Sachs F . The breakdown of cell membranes by electrical and mechanical stress . Biophys J 75 : 247 – 254 , 1998 . 2 . Amato MB , Barbas CS , Medeiros DM , Magaldi RB , Schet - tino GP , Lorenzi - Filho G , Kairalla RA , Deheinzelin D , Munoz C , Oliveira R , Takagaki TY , and Carvalho CR . Effect of a protective - ventilation strategy on mortality in the acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med 338 : 347 – 354 , 1998 . 3 . Bachofen H , Ammann A , Wangensteen D , and Weibel ER . Perfusion ﬁxation of lungs for structure - function analysis : cred - its and limitations . J Appl Physiol 53 : 528 – 533 , 1982 . 4 . Bachofen H , Schurch S , Urbinelli M , and Weibel ER . Rela - tions among alveolar surface tension , surface area , volume , and recoil pressure . J Appl Physiol 62 : 1878 – 1887 , 1987 . 5 . Berg JT , Fu Z , Breen EC , Tran HC , Mathieu - Costello O , and West JB . High lung inﬂation increases mRNA levels of ECM components and growth factors in lung parenchyma . J Appl Physiol 83 : 120 – 128 , 1997 . 6 . Brown TD , Bottland M , Pedersen PR , and Banes AJ . Load - ing paradigms—intentional and unintentional—for cell culture mechanostimulus . Am J Med Sci 316 : 162 – 168 , 1998 . 7 . Clarke MSF , Caldwell RW , Miyake K , and McNeil PL . Contraction - induced cell wounding and release of ﬁbroblast growth factor in heart . Circ Res 76 : 927 – 934 , 1995 . 8 . Dolmetsch RE , Xu K , and Lewis RS . Calcium oscillations increase the efﬁciency and speciﬁcity of gene expression . Nature 392 : 933 – 936 , 1998 . 9 . Dreyfuss D and Saumon G . Ventilator - induced lung injury : lessons from experimental studies . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 157 : 294 – 323 , 1998 . 10 . Fu Z , Costello ML , Tsukimoto K , Prediletto R , Elliott AR , Mathieu - Costello O , and West JB . High lung volume in - creases stress failure in pulmonary capillaries . J Appl Physiol 73 : 123 – 133 , 1992 . 11 . Ho SY and Mittal GS . Electroporation of cell membranes : a review . Crit Rev Biotechnol 16 : 349 – 362 , 1996 . 12 . Hubmayr RD and Schroeder MA . Cytoskeletal mechanics of rate type II alveolar epithelial cells in culture ( Abstract ) . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 161 : A162 , 2000 . 13 . Hubmayr RD , Walters BJ , Chevalier PA , Rodarte JR , and Olson LE . Topographical distribution of regional lung volume in anesthetized dogs . J Appl Physiol 54 : 1048 – 1056 , 1983 . 14 . Hung CT and Williams JL . A method for inducing equi - biaxial and uniform strains in elastomeric membranes used as cell substrates . J Biomech 27 : 227 – 232 , 1994 . 15 . Ingber DE . Opposing views on tensegrity as a structural frame - work for understanding cell mechanics . J Appl Physiol 89 : 1663 – 1670 , 2000 . 16 . John E , McDevitt M , Wilborn W , and Cassady G . Ultra - structure of the lung after ventilation . Br J Exp Pathol 63 : 401 – 407 , 1982 . 17 . Lee AA , Delhaas T , Waldman LK , MacKenna DA , Villar - real FJ , and McCulloch AD . An equibiaxial strain system for cultured cells . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 271 : C1400 – C1408 , 1996 . 18 . Lieber M , Smith B , Szakal A , Nelson - Rees W , and Todaro G . A continuous tumor - cell line from a human lung carcinoma with properties of Type II alveolar epithelial cells . Int J Cancer 17 : 62 – 70 , 1976 . 19 . Liu M , Tanswell AK , and Post M . Mechanical force - induced signal transduction in lung cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 277 : L667 – L683 , 1999 . 20 . Martynowicz MA , Minor TA , Walters BJ , and Hubmayr RD . Regional expansion of oleic acid - injured lungs . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 160 : 250 – 258 , 1999 . 21 . McNeil PL and Steinhardt RA . Loss , restoration and main - tenance of plasma membrane integrity . J Cell Biol 137 : 1 – 4 , 1997 . 22 . Mercer RR , Laco JM , and Crapo JD . Three - dimensional reconstruction of alveoli in the rat lung for pressure - volume relationships . J Appl Physiol 62 : 1480 – 1487 , 1987 . 23 . Parker JC , Hernandez LA , and Peevy KJ . Mechanisms of ventilator - induced lung injury . Crit Care Med 21 : 131 – 143 , 1993 . 24 . Pugin J , Dunn I , Jolliet P , Tassaux D , Magnenat JL , Nicod LP , and Chevrolet JC . Activation of human macrophages by mechanical ventilation in vitro . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 275 : L1040 – L1050 , 1998 . 25 . Raucher D and Sheetz MP . Characteristics of a membrane reservoir buffering membrane tension . Biophys J 77 : 1992 – 2002 , 1999 . 26 . Rodarte JR , Hubmayr RD , Stamenovic D , and Walters BJ . Regional lung strain in dogs during deﬂation from total lung capacity . J Appl Physiol 58 : 164 – 172 , 1985 . 27 . Roupie E , Dambrosio M , Servillo G , Mentec H , el Atrous S , Beydon L , Brun - Buisson C , Lemaire F , and Brochard L . Titration of tidal volume and induced hypercapnia in acute respiratory distress syndrome . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 152 : 121 – 128 , 1995 . 28 . Schaffer JL , Rizen M , L’Italien GJ , Benbrahim A , Meger - man J , Gerstenfeld LC , and Gray ML . Device for the appli - cation of a dynamic biaxially uniform and isotropic strain to a ﬂexible cell culture membrane . J Orthopaed Res 12 : 709 – 719 , 1994 . 29 . Sheetz MP and Dai J . Modulation of membrane dynamics and cell motility by membrane tension . Trends Cell Biol 6 : 85 – 89 , 1996 . 30 . Steinhardt RA , Bi GQ , and Alderton JM . Cell membrane resealing by a vesicular mechanism similar to neurotransmitter release . Science 263 : 390 – 393 , 1994 . 31 . Stossel TP . On the crawling of animal cells . Science 260 : 1086 – 1094 , 1993 . 32 . Terasaki M , Miyake K , and McNeil PL . Large plasma mem - brane disruptions are rapidly resealed by Ca 2 1 - dependent vesi - cle - vesicle fusion events . J Cell Biol 139 : 63 – 74 , 1997 . 33 . The Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network 2000 . Ventilation with lower tidal volumes compared with traditional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med 342 : 1301 – 1308 , 2000 . 34 . Tremblay L , Valenza F , Ribeiro SP , Li J , and Slutsky AS . Injurious ventilatory strategies increase cytokines and c - fos m - RNA expression in an isolated rat lung model . J Clin Invest 99 : 944 – 952 , 1997 . 35 . Tschumperlin DJ and Margulies SS . Equibiaxial deforma - tion - induced injury of alveolar epithelial cells in vitro . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 275 : L1173 – L1183 , 1998 . 36 . Tschumperlin DJ and Margulies SS . Alveolar epithelial sur - face area - volume relationship in isolated rat lungs . J Appl Physiol 86 : 2026 – 2033 , 1999 . 37 . Vlahakis NE , Schroeder MA , and Hubmayr RD . Lipid traf - ﬁcking after deformation - induced breaks in alveolar epithelial plasma membranes ( Abstract ) . FASEB J 14A : 100 , 2000 . 2369 LIVE CELL STRAIN SYSTEM b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 4 on S ep t e m be r 22 , 2017 h tt p : / / j ap . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 38 . Vlahakis NE , Schroeder MA , Limper AH , and Hubmayr RD . Stretch induces cytokine release by alveolar epithelial cells in vitro . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 277 : L167 – L173 , 1999 . 39 . Vlahakis NE , Schroeder MA , Pagano RE , and Hubmayr RD . Deformation - induced lipid trafﬁcking in alveolar epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 280 : L938 – L946 , 2001 . 40 . Wang N , Butler JP , and Ingber DE . Mechanotransduction across the cell surface and through the cytoskeleton . Science 260 : 1124 – 1127 , 1993 . 41 . Webb HH and Tierney DF . Experimental pulmonary edema due to intermittent positive pressure ventilation with high in - ﬂation pressures : protection by positive end - expiratory pressure . Am Rev Respir Dis 110 : 556 – 565 , 1974 . 42 . Weg JG , Anzueto A , Balk RA , Wiedemann HP , Pattishall EN , Schork MA , and Wagner LA . The relation of pneumotho - rax and other air leaks to mortality in the acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med 338 : 341 – 346 , 1998 . 43 . West JB , Tsukimoto K , Mathieu - Costello O , and Prediletto R . Stress failure in pulmonary capillaries . J Appl Physiol 70 : 1731 – 1742 , 1991 . 44 . Wilson L , Butcher CJ , and Kellie S . Calcium ionophore A23187 induces interleuken - 8 gene expression and protein se - cretion in human monocytic cells . FEBS Lett 325 : 295 – 298 , 1993 . 45 . Wilson TA and Bachofen H . A model for mechanical structure of the alveolar duct . J Appl Physiol 52 : 1064 – 1070 , 1982 . 2370 LIVE CELL STRAIN SYSTEM b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 4 on S ep t e m be r 22 , 2017 h tt p : / / j ap . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m