Int’l Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natural Intelligence , 3 ( 3 ) , 1 - 11 , July - September 2009 1 Copyright © 2009 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . AbSTrACT It is recognized that the internal mechanisms for visual information processing are based on semantic inferences where visual information is represented and processed as visual semantic objects rather than direct images or episode pictures in the long - term memory . This article presents a cognitive informatics theory of visual information and knowledge processing in the brain . A set of cognitive principles of visual perception is reviewed particularly the classic gestalt principles , the cognitive informatics principles , and the hypercolumn theory . A visual frame theory is developed to explain the visual information processing mechanisms of human vision , where the size of a unit visual frame is tested and calibrated based on vision experiments . The framework of human visual information processing is established in order to elaborate mechanisms of visual information processing and the compatibility of internal representations between visual and abstract information and knowledge in the brain . [ Article copies are available for purchase from InfoSci - on - Demand . com ] Keywords : AI ; The Basic Visual Frame ; The Brain ; Cognitive Informatics ; Cognitive Models ; Cogni - tive Principles ; Computational Intelligence ; Gestalt Principles ; Hierarchical Abstraction Model ; Hypercolumns ; Visual Frame ; Visual Information Processing ; Visual Invariance INTrODUCTION It is recognized that , although over 90 % infor - mation receptors of the brain are in the visual form , the internal processing mechanisms for the visual information are based on semantic or symbolic inferences rather than graphical rea - soning ( Hubel and Wiesel , 1959 ; Matlin , 1998 ; Payne and Wenger , 1998 ; Pinel , 1997 ; , Westen , 1999 ; Wilson , 2001 ) . In other words , the brain carries out thinking , reasoning , and inference on visual stimuli and image information in an abstract approach , and all visual information is represented and processed as visual semantic objects rather than direct images or episode pictures in long - term memory . A fundamental question about the mecha - nisms of the brain is what the form of internal The Cognitive Informatics Theory and Mathematical Models of Visual Information Processing in the brain Yingxu Wang , University of Calgary , Canada IGI PUBLISHING This paper appears in the publication , International Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natural Intelligence , Volume 3 , Issue 3 edited by Yingxu Wang © 2009 , IGI Global 701 E . Chocolate Avenue , Hershey PA 17033 - 1240 , USA Tel : 717 / 533 - 8845 ; Fax 717 / 533 - 8661 ; URL - http : / / www . igi - global . com ITJ 5087 2 Int’l Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natural Intelligence , 3 ( 3 ) , 1 - 11 , July - September 2009 Copyright © 2009 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . representations of visual information is in long - term memory ( Glickstein , 1988 ; Goldstein , 1999 ; Wang , 2009b ; Wang and Wang , 2006 ) . Early studies perceived that visual informa - tion is stored as pictures and the eyes work as cameras ( Gray , 1994 ; Smith , 1993 ) . Contem - porary studies reveal that it may be true only in Sensory Buffer Memory ( SBM ) and Short - Term Memory ( STM ) , but images retained and recognized in LTM are in the form of abstract visual semantics or symbolic concepts ( Coaen et al . , 1994 ; Hubel and Wiesel , 1959 ; Wang , 2009b ) . Therefore , the mechanisms of visual knowledge processing are based on abstract semantic analyses and syntheses . This article presents the cognitive informat - ics foundations of visual information processing in the brain and their applications in knowledge engineering and computational intelligence . In the remainder of this article , fundamental prin - ciples of visual perceptions such as the gestalt principles , the cognitive informatics principles , and the hypercolumn theory , are described . The visual information processing mechanisms are explained by the visual frame theory and the calibration of the size of a unit visual frame . The framework of human visual information processing is developed to elaborate the fun - damental mechanisms of visual information processing in the brain for visual knowledge representation and manipulation . COGNITIVE FOUNDATIONS OF VISUAL INFOrMATION PrOCESSING The mechanisms of visual information repre - sentation , processing , recognition , and compre - hension , as well as their relationships to those of abstract information processing , are a set of fundamental questions in explaining the nature of human vision . This section presents the clas - sic gestalt ( holistic ) principles and the cognitive informatics principles of visual information processing . Hubel and Wiesel’s hypercolumn theory for visual information processing in the visual cortex is introduced , which reveals the important mechanism of internal image information representation , interpretation , and processing . The Holistic Principles The classic gestalt principles of visual percep - tion are developed in Germany based on experi - ments conducted in the 1920s and 1930s , where the term gestalt means an organized whole that is related to the philosophical doctrine of holism ( Gray , 1994 ; Westen , 1999 ) . The gestalt or ho - listic philosophy states that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts , which is inherited by modern system science . In system algebra ( Wang , 2008b ) , Wang creates a mathematical model of the holistic system principle that reveals the mechanism of abstract systems gains known as incremental union . Definition 1 . An incremental union of two sets of relations R 1 and R 2 , denoted by  , are a union of R 1 and R 2 plus a newly generated incremental set of relations ∆ R 12 , i . e . : R 1  R 2  R 1  R 2  R 12 ( 1 ) where ∆ R 12  R 1 ∧ ∆ R 12  R 2 and ∆ R 12 = 2 ( # C 1 • # C 2 ) ⊆ R 1  R 2 . The incremental union operation on abstract systems is a new denotational math - ematical structure , which provides a generic mathematical model for revealing the fusion principle and system gains during system unions and compositions . Six gestalt principles for visual object and pattern perception are identified ( Kanizsa , 1979 ) such as similarity , proximity , good continuation , simplicity , closure , and background contrast , as summarized in Table 1 . 9 more pages are available in the full version of this document , which may be purchased using the " Add to Cart " button on the product ' s webpage : www . igi - global . com / article / cognitive - informatics - theory - mathematical - models / 3888 ? camid = 4v1 This title is available in InfoSci - Journals , InfoSci - Journal Disciplines Computer Science , Security , and Information Technology , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Artificial Intelligence and Smart Computing eJournal Collection , InfoSci - Journal Disciplines Engineering , Natural , and Physical Science , InfoSci - Select . Recommend this product to your librarian : www . igi - global . com / e - resources / library - recommendation / ? id = 2 Related Content The T - Sat1 Nanosatellite Design and Implementation Through a Team of Teams Witold Kinsner , Dario Schor , Reza Fazel - Darbandi , Brendan Cade , Kane Anderson , Cody Friesen , Scott McKay , Diane Kotelko and Philip Ferguson ( 2013 ) . International Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natural Intelligence ( pp . 32 - 57 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / the - t - sat1 - nanosatellite - design - and - implementation - through - a - team - of - teams / 87175 ? camid = 4v1a The Cognitive Load Affects the Interaction Pattern of Emotion and Working Memory Xuebing Li , Zhengzheng Ouyang and Yue - Jia Luo ( 2012 ) . International Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natural Intelligence ( pp . 68 - 81 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / cognitive - load - affects - interaction - pattern / 70576 ? camid = 4v1a Biological Information as Natural Computation Gordana Dodig - Crnkovic ( 2010 ) . Thinking Machines and the Philosophy of Computer Science : Concepts and Principles ( pp . 36 - 52 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / biological - information - natural - computation / 43689 ? camid = 4v1a Foundations of Nonconventional Neural Units and their Classification Ivo Bukovsky , Zeng - Guang Hou , Jiri Bila and Madan M . Gupta ( 2008 ) . International Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natural Intelligence ( pp . 29 - 43 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / foundations - nonconventional - neural - units - their / 1573 ? camid = 4v1a