1 SKIing with DOLCE : toward a Science Knowledge Infrastructure for e - Science Boyan Brodaric 1 , Femke Reitsma 2 , Yi Qiang 2 1 Geolological Survey of Canada , Ottawa , brodaric @ nrcan . gc . ca 2 UK National e - Science Center , University of Edinburgh , femke . reitsma @ ed . ac . uk , yi _ qiang @ hotmail . com Abstract We develop a general ontology of science knowledge for use in e - Science Knowledge Infrastructures ( SKIo ) , to advance use of digitally represented scientific theories in these environments . SKIo extends the DOLCE foundational ontology with science knowledge primitives , such as science theories , models , and data . These are arranged to reflect the complex knowledge structures used in science , such as scientific ideas playing different roles within and between theories . SKIo is illustrated in UML , encoded in OWL - DL , uses the Descriptions and Situations extension , and provides defining conditions for its primitives to enable an extensible and rigorous bridge between a foundational ontology and domain science ontologies . Testing with several environmental theories confirms the suitability of its representation . 1 . Introduction Infrastructures in support of cyber - aided scientific activity , or e - Science , are being developed in many scientific domains ( Hey & Trefethen , 2005 ) . This is leading to significant scientific and societal benefits , in that larger and faster computations are occurring over more data , and the resultant predictive models are providing larger and more accurate scenarios about situations affecting human well - being . Although these early e - Science achievements are laudable and significant , they do fall short of a broader e - Science vision in which scientists not only operate over more observed data to make better predictive models , but also directly use e - Science infrastructures to find , generate and test scientific theories ( i . e . networks of scientific abstractions , associated implications , and certainties ) . The broader vision of e - Science requires a Scientific Knowledge Infrastructure ( SKI ; Hars , 2001 ) that enables the capture , representation and use of the full spectrum of scientific knowledge for e - Science . Using SKIs , scientists should be able to annotate existing resources , such as observed data , predicted models , and ancillary products , with respect to relevant and potentially competing scientific theories , in order to enable knowledge search , knowledge evaluation , and reproduction of experimental results . The present focus on a partial set of science knowledge primitives has some negative consequences as it deters full scientific discovery and reproducibility in e - Science infrastructures—because only some knowledge is explicitly represented in the infrastructure , while other knowledge is implicit and buried in scientists‘ heads and in ancillary resources such as textbooks , papers , reports and maps . An initial challenge then is the development of a formal and computable representation of a wide segment of science knowledge primitives . Foundational ontologies in particular are good candidate for representing such knowledge , not only due to their 2 formality , rigor and commitment to internal coherence , but also due to their generality in that , like scientific knowledge primitives , the contents of foundational ontologies are intended to be re - used across many ( all ) science domains . This contrasts with the numerous ontologies being developed for specific science domains , and is aligned with the few that are being developed as a general upper superstructure , but these latter general efforts are addressing only a subset of science knowledge primitives or they do not extend an existing foundational ontology , which limits their breadth of application . In this paper we extend the DOLCE foundational ontology in support of e - Science with basic science knowledge primitives , such as scientific models , theories , data , and test the resultant SKI ontology ( SKIo ) by representing several environmental theories . Section 2 describes a typical use - case scenario in the environmental sciences ; Section 3 discusses related work ; Section 4 discusses our general approach based on computationally inspired renditions of the science knowledge cycle , Section 5 describes SKIo ; the results of using SKIo to represent environmental theories and models is outlined in Section 6 . Section 7 relays some limitations of SKIo , and Section 8 concludes with a brief summary . 2 . An Environmental Modeling Use - Case Scenario Problem Scenario : Jane is a scientist working on extending a global climate model . She wants to integrate a terrestrial Carbon exchange model into her larger global climate model . Present Day Solution : Jane begins searching for carbon exchange models using a few keywords in Google as well as in her University library database . She comes up with a huge number of hits and begins the long process of sifting through these , many of which are irrelevant . After much work she has a large collection of papers that seem relevant but cannot be easily differentiated , largely because they use polysemous terminology . For example the key term ―model‖ is used in several senses in the Carbon exchange literature , of which the first two are relevant to her : 1 . model = a system of equations to support calculations that generate simulations ( Adams , et al . , 2004 ) 2 . model = a theory which might include equations as well as scientific implications ( Baldocchi , et al . , 2000 ) 3 . model = a simulation software that utilizes a system of equations and implications ( Phillips , et al . , 2006 ) 4 . model = the results of a simulation run , or other modelling process , in which some climatic situation ( in a geographical area ) is represented ( Phillips , et al . , 2006 ) Proposed Solution : Jane logs on to a web - based SKI and begins searching for a relevant ―model‖ by using a number of concepts she is familiar with in Carbon modelling ; she expects these concepts to be used as variables in equations . Because the different senses of ―model‖ are well demarcated by the SKI ontology , and because the SKI‘s contents are annotated by this ontology , she is able to find entities corresponding to senses 1 and 2 that contain the concepts of interest . She soon finds a few candidates , each linked to a set of digital resources . After integrating the newly found model , and running her experiment , she creates a web page documenting this process 3 and containing a publication draft . She then annotates this resource in the SKI , making it available to other researchers . Additional Requirements : In addition to aiding Jane as described above , SKIs should also help scientists resolve questions and tasks such as : given problem p , has anyone else solved that problem , or a similar problem in another domain ? Who is working in the same research field ? I want to test a new theory x 2 by replacing existing theory x 1 against a configuration of data y as originally written about in journal paper z . What other data configurations satisfy theory x 1 ? What other theories are satisfied by y , in which papers , and how do these differ from x 1 ? How was x 1 derived—what observed data , line of reasoning , and verification procedures were used , in which papers ? What other theories is x 1 part of , and what is its role in those theories ? What theories have been derived from x 1 ? What theories could be derived from x 1 that satisfy y ? 3 . Related Work Although ongoing work on scientific ontologies is vast , and growing , at present a general ontology for science knowledge does not exist . Existing initiatives emphasize the computational representation of the science knowledge cycle or the development of ontologies that span aspects of all sciences , are limited to one science domain , or which incorporate foundational ontologies . The Science Knowledge Cycle : Several accounts of the scientific knowledge cycle begin to distil the numerous and complex philosophical approaches into representations amenable to computation . The focus is on identification of the key elements in the cycle ( Langley , 2000 ; Shrager & Langley , 1990 ; Sowa , 2000 ; 2006 ; Thagard , 1988 ) , in some cases for schema representation ( Hars , 2001 ; 2003 ) , or for integrating the steps using formal reasoning systems ( Ray , 2005 ) , but without adopting ontologies as a formal representation framework . Ontologies of Science : by science ontologies we mean a conceptualization of general science knowledge primitives that can be applied in many ( all ) science domains and which are represented , and well defined , in some formal language such First Order Logic or OWL ( Antoniou & Van Harmelen , 2003 ) . Existing science ontologies meet this definition only in part because they focus on a fragment of the key knowledge primitives such as scientific experiments ( Soldatova & King , 2006 ) or publications ( Benjamins , et al . , 1998 ) , and omit other key aspects such as theories and models , or they do posses broader contents but without formal representation ( Rijgersberg , et al . , 2008 ) . Domain Science Ontologies : ontologies are being developed in numerous science domains , such as biosciences , geosciences , environmental and earth sciences ( McCray , 2003 ; Natale , et al . , 2007 ; Raskin & Pan , 2005 ) . These ontologies cannot serve as a superstructure for science knowledge because the abstractions are not sufficiently general , They are largely being used to facilitate data interoperability and workflow operation ( Ludäscher , et al . , 2006 ; McGuinness , et al . , 2006 ) , rather than to annotate and test new scientific ideas . Many are organized bottom - up from existing vocabularies ( Raskin & Pan , 2005 ) and not around systematic ontological principles such as those utilized by most foundational ontologies , resulting in diverse ontological assumptions that are not easily recognized nor reconciled . 4 Foundational Ontologies and Science Knowledge : foundational ontologies provide a superstructure containing the most general abstractions , that can be extended to general science ontologies and domain ontologies , e . g . DOLCE , BFO , GFO , SUMO ( Grenon & Smith , 2004 ; Herre , et al . , 2006 ; Masolo , et al . , 2003 ; Pease , A . 2006 ) . An ideal arrangement of ontologies would then position a general ontology of science as a layer between foundational ontologies and domain science ontologies ( Soldatova & King , 2006 ) , as shown in Figure 1 . With the exception of the ontology of experiments ( Soldatova & King , 2006 ) , this intermediary layer is at present missing , in that domain science ontologies directly extend from existing foundational ontologies or related foundational theories ( Bittner , 2007 ; Gangemi , et al . , 2004 ; Grenon et al . , 2004 ) . Figure 1 : a general science ontology extends a foundational ontology and is extended by domain science ontologies ( after Soldatova & King , 2006 ) . 4 . Approach SKIo extends the DOLCE foundational ontology with a modest number of science knowledge primitives synthesized from computational accounts of the science knowledge cycle ( Hars , 2003 ; Sowa , 2006 ) . SKIo is first represented in UML ( Brodaric , 2008 ) , and then in OWL - DL . Following OWL terminology conventions , the primitives consist of classes and properties : classes refer to abstractions that can be instantiated in one more individuals , and properties refer to relations between two classes ; individuals are single entities that instantiate a class , i . e . instances . Both class and property names will be presented in italics henceforth . The SKIo extension process involves adding general science classes and properties to the DOLCE hierarchy of classes and properties , using the subclassOf and subpropertyOf OWL constructs ( for subsumption ) , such that the additions form leaves in these hierarchies , and the original hierarchical structure remains unchanged . This also involves leaving the contents of DOLCE classes largely untouched , i . e . axioms were added to only two existing DOLCE classes . Such modularization enables SKIo to exist as an independent OWL - DL file ( with a separate namespace ) , that can be imported alongside DOLCE as needed . Several other principles in addition to the modularity principle were to be followed in the design of SKIo ( after Gruber 1995 ) :  Semantic Grounding : SKIo is to be founded on recognized accounts of the science knowledge cycle that can be formalized for representation purposes . Foundational Ontology Ontology of Science Domain Science Ontologies 5  Semantic Coverage : the breadth of the science knowledge cycle is to be encompassed such that SKIo could be extended with both general science and domain extensions .  Semantic Precision : sufficient depth is to be attained to enable annotation of scientific documents through instantiation of SKIo primitives , with a focus on science roles .  Extensibility : grounding in solid principles of the scientific knowledge cycle is to provide a rigorous and coherent basis for general and domain specific extensions .  Coherence : these same principles are to be formalized to enhance definition ( and consequently understanding ) of SKIo components . 5 . The SKI ontology 5 . 1 The Science Knowledge Cycle Figure 1 shows some parts of the science knowledge cycle incorporated into SKIo . In this cycle : ( 1 ) empirical regularities are induced from observed data , ( 2 ) theoretical propositions are abduced from all prior knowledge , ( 3 ) predictions about the real world are deduced from empirical patterns or theoretical statements , and ( 4 ) predictions are verified through further interaction with the world , which involves activities such as data collection , problem finding , and building models of the world . Figure 1 : the knowledge cycle in SKI ( after Sowa , 2000 ; 2006 ) . Fact ( Data ) Problem Induction Action Abduction Deduction World Proposition Regularity Law Prediction Observation Verification Problem Finding Modeling Particular Theory Model 6 5 . 2 SKIing with DOLCE The DOLCE 2 . 1 ( OWL 397 ) ontology consists of four core classes which categorize particulars ( individual entities in the world ) : endurant , perdurant , quality , and abstract . An endurant is an object - like entity that is wholly present at any point in time it exists , but whose characteristics can change over time ( rock body , building , country ) ; a perdurant is a process - like entity that is not wholly present at any point in time it exists , such as a process , event , or state ( San Andreas faulting , San Francisco earthquake , being seismically active ) ; a quality is a dependent characteristic inherent in an endurant , perdurant , or abstract , such that an endurant inheres physical qualities ( geospatial position , size , shape , color ) , an perdurant inheres temporal qualities ( duration , age ) , and an abstract or non - physical - endurant inheres abstract qualities ( the value of the Canadian dollar ) ; an abstract is an entity that does not posses physical or temporal qualities , and is often the value of a quality or a space containing those values ( the number 2 , the munsell color space , red ) . SKIo extends the perdurant and endurant DOLCE classes with formalized versions of components of the science knowledge cycle : it extends the activity subclass of perdurant to include various scientific activities such as those for reasoning , observation , and verification ; and it extends some physical and social subclasses of endurant ( description , situation , concept , information - object , physical - endurant ) to include scientific artifacts . Importantly , in order to foster reproducibility , each SKIo endurant is defined according to the scientific activity that produces it . Descriptions and Situations : DOLCE‘s descriptions and situations are initially designed to represent intensional socially constructed contexts and the related extensional states - of - affairs interpreted by those contexts , respectively ( Gangemi & Mika , 2003 ) . Although descriptions and situations have been used to model specific scientific domain theories and models ( Gangemi et al . , 2004 ) , they are extended by SKIo into general abstractions for science theory , science model , data , and concept definition , as shown in Figure 3 , to provide scientific constraints on their meaning . Descriptions are thus viewed as scientific ideas that are syntactically expressed by DOLCE information - objects , such as text , tables , figures , reports , papers and web sites ; information - objects are in turn externally and physically manifested in forms such as hardcopy or computer memories . A science theory is then a scientific idea comprised of one or more coherent descriptions that describe the structure or behavior of some aspect of reality in sufficient generality to satisfy , and be used to predict , a wide number of real - world particulars and the science models that contain them ( Hars , 2003 ) . In SKIo , a ScienceModel contains particulars which satisfy ( are scientifically deducible from ) some ScienceTheory , a science theory contains descriptions which are satisfied by ( can be used to scientifically deduce ) the particulars in the science model , and a description contains concepts that classify the particulars in a model . This intent is stated in A1 and implemented in SKIo as a deducible - by property on a particular , which takes as its range a Prediction indicating the particular is forecast by the prediction . ( A1 ) ScienceTheory ( T ) ScienceModel ( M ) satisfies ( T , M )  ( a M ) b ( Deduction ( T , b , a ) particular ( a ) particular ( b ) ) 7 class SKI Science Statements Diagram Definition + defines : Concept + prototype : Particular [ 0 . . * ] Theory Non - Agentive - Social - Object Situation + setting - for : particular [ 1 . . * ] Non - Agentive - Social - Object Description + d - uses : Concept [ 1 . . * ] + internally - represented - in : Agentive - Physical - Object [ 1 . . * ] Method ScienceTheory + part : Description [ 0 . . * ] + part - of : Description [ 0 . . * ] + satisfied - by : ScienceModel [ 0 . . * ] + plays : ScienceRole [ 0 . . * ] + component : ScienceRole [ 0 . . * ] ScienceModel + product - of : ScienceModeling + satisfies : ScienceTheory [ 1 . . * ] + setting - for : ( discovered - by Fact OR Prediction ) AND ( deducible - by Prediction ) [ 1 . . * ] GeoScienceModel + satisfies : GeoScienceTheory [ 1 . . * ] + setting - for : GeoScienceEndurant AND Perdurant [ 1 . . * ] GeoScienceTheory + satisfied - by : GeoScienceModel [ 0 . . * ] Data + product - of : Activity + observed - quality : Quality + expressed - by : Dataset [ 1 . . * ] + part : Data [ 0 . . * ] Observ edData + product - of : Observation + observed - quality : PhysicalQuality OR TemporalQuality + part : ObservedData [ 0 . . * ] + satisfied - by 0 . . * + satisfies 1 . . * Figure 3 : SKIo science model and theory ( white ) and DOLCE description and situation ( grey ) . In SKIo , Data is also an intensional scientific idea , one that results from the observation or inference of some quality , for some purpose , by some agent in whom the description is internally represented , e . g . in an instrument . Underlying this conceptualization is the assumption that only physical and temporal qualities are observable , and that the inhering physical - endurants and perdurants are then inferred from the observed qualities as part of the science knowledge cycle . Data about abstract qualities are also typically inferred in SKIo , while descriptions about the physical or temporal qualities of some physical - endurant or perdurant , respectively , are obtained via observation ( including measurement ) and are called ObservedData . The syntactic expression of some data is a DataSet . SKIo also provides some specializations mainly for convenience : a GeoscienceModel contains geoscience endurants and perdurants , and is satisfied by GeoscienceTheories ; and a Definition is a canonical idea included for sake of being explicit—DOLCE descriptions are implicitly definitions . Concepts : the DOLCE concept class is an intensional entity used to classify a particular within a situation to enable it to satisfy a description . DOLCE provides three types of concepts : role , course , and parameter , for classifying endurants , perdurants and quality regions , respectively . Concepts are typically related to descriptions in three ways in SKIo : ( 1 ) an atomic description ( e . g . a theory part ) d - uses concepts in its body to describe the idea , ( 2 ) atomic descriptions can 8 play a certain description - role concept within aggregate descriptions ( e . g . within the theory as a whole ) , and ( 3 ) a description can maintain an index of the component concepts that classify situation members or description parts . For example , the theory of special relativity has as a part the idea e = mc 2 that : ( 1 ) uses parameter concepts energy ( e ) , mass ( m ) , constant speed of light ( c ) , ( 2 ) plays the role concept of Proposition within the theory , and ( 3 ) the role and parameter concepts are indexed as components of the theory . In subsequent theories the same idea can play the role of an Assumption and a ScienceProblem ( Kaku , 2004 ) . Figure 4 illustrates the complex relationships between scientific ideas , scientific statements , theories , and roles . Figure 4 : a SKI scenario for relationships between instances of a scientific idea ( description D 1 ) , two science statements ( S 1 , S 2 ) that express the idea in different papers , two theories ( T 1 , T 2 ) that contain the idea , and the three roles ( R 1 , R 2 , R 3 ) played by the idea in the theories . Because the natural language terms for science roles are highly polysemous , SKIo also provides defining conditions in its OWL encoding for six of the seven science roles shown in Figure 5 .  Assumption : is defined by an originating Assertion , and is considered to be a primitive such that it is not empirically supported nor inferred .  ScienceProblem : is defined by an originating ProblemIdentification activity operating over a theory part that is disconfirmed by observation or inconsistent with other theory .  Fact : is the incorporation of some Data into some theory . Because facts can only be played by data within some theory , they are always ‗theory - laden‘ . Facts also support specification of the scientific discovery of a particular , insofar as a fact can indicate that some data has lead to identification of the particular , e . g . a rock body .  EmpiricalRegularity : is defined as an empirical pattern produced by Induction , one that is situational but not universal . Situational refers to the case where the regularity is satisfied by only a subset of the possibly valid science models . For example , if the regularity is expressed as a relation amongst concepts , then the relation is present only in some situations in which particulars classified by the concepts are jointly present , and not in all situations where they are jointly present . The regularity might not be present D 1 R 1 R 2 R 3 T 1 T 1 S 2 S 1 9 universally because of insufficient verification or because the pattern is dependent on certain historical conditions that are temporary and change in time . This is implemented in SKIo by requiring the regularity‘s existence to be dependent on one or more endurants or perdurants , likely some subset of those involved in its original induction .  ScienceLaw : is defined as an universal empirical pattern produced by Induction , i . e . its existence is not dependent on any specific endurants or perdurants . Empirical regularities and science laws can evolve toward each other as a consequence of the logic of induction : a pattern might be scoped as situational but more data might suggest it to be universal , and conversely more data might contradict a science law and demonstrate it to be situational .  Prediction : is defined as a conjecture about individuals produced via Deduction , which can be empirically verified . Because only physical and temporal qualities are observable , it follows only these qualities are predictable . SKIo does not impose this constraint , as it is sometimes convenient as a shorthand to predict individuals as well as qualities .  Proposition : is a best - guess conjecture produced via Abduction from prior theory or data , and which can be situational or universal . Scientific propositions are analogous to logical propositions in that scientific propositions are eventually verifiable ( are testable against the world ) while logical propositions are eventually resolvable to True or False ( are testable against a logical system ) . 10 class SKI Science Statements Diagram ScienceRole + played - by : Description + defined - by : Definition + component - of : ScienceThroey [ 1 . . * ] + discovered - by [ 0 ] Prediction + product - of : Deduction ScienceLaw + product - of : Induction + confirmed - by : Verification [ 1 . . * ] + existentially - dependent - on : NOT Endurant OR Perdurant Proposition + product - of : Abduction + existentially - dependent - on : Endurant OR Perduant [ 0 . . * ] Fact + played - by : Data + verified - by : Verification [ 0 . . * ] + discovery : particular [ 0 . . * ] ScienceProblem + product - of : ProblemIdentification + problem - in : Fact OR InferredRole [ 1 . . * ] InferredRole + product - of : Inference + verified - by : Verification [ 0 . . * ] + discovery : particular [ 0 . . * ] Assumption + product - of : Assertion EmpiricalRegularity + product - of : Induction + confirmed - by : Verification [ 1 . . * ] + existentially - dependent - on : Endurant OR Perdurant [ 1 . . * ] Description - Role + played - by : Description [ 0 . . * ] Non - Agentive - Social - Object Concept + defined - by : Description [ 1 . . * ] Role Figure 5 : SKIo science roles ( white ) and DOLCE concepts ( grey ) . Activities : DOLCE activities are non - atomic perdurants that follow some plan , sequence some tasks , can produce some endurants , and are performed by some agents . In SKI the plan is likely some research project containing tasks performed by scientists . DOLCE activities are extended by SKIo through the addition of properties for the agents‘ motivation and for the entities upon which the activity is being performed . SKIo includes activities for observation , inference , assertion , verification , problem finding , science modeling , and doing research . These activities are important 11 because their products are key SKIo elements , such as science models , science roles , and science statements , as shown in Figure 6 . class SKI Core Diagram Observation + product : ObservedData [ 1 . . * ] + instrument : ObservationInstrument + performed - on : Physical - Endurant OR Perdurant [ 0 . . * ] Activity + generically - dependent - on : Plan [ 1 . . * ] + part : Action [ 1 . . * ] + sequenced - by : Task [ 1 . . * ] + performed - by : Agent [ 0 . . * ] + instrument : Physical - Object [ 0 . . * ] + has - method : Method [ 0 . . * ] + product : Endurant [ 0 . . * ] + result : Perdurant [ 0 . . * ] + motivated - by : Cognitive - Modal - Description + performed - on : Endurant OR Perdurant [ 0 . . * ] Induction + product : EmpiricalRegularity OR ScienceLaw + performed - on : Data [ 1 . . * ] Deduction + product : Prediction + performed - on : ( Fact OR Prediction ) AND ( Proposition OR EmpiricalRegularity OR ScienceLaw ) Abduction + product : Proposition + performed - on : ScienceRole [ 1 . . * ] Inference + product : InferredRole + performed - on : Data OR ScienceRole [ 1 . . * ] Verification + performed - on : ScienceRole [ 1 . . * ] ProblemIdentification + product : ScienceProblem + performed - on : ScienceRole [ 1 . . * ] Assertion + product : Assumption + performed - on : ScienceRole [ 0 . . * ] Research + product : Description OR Information - Object OR ScienceModel [ 0 . . * ] + funded - by : Agent [ 0 . . * ] PredictionTesting + performed - on : Fact AND Prediction ScienceModeling + product : ScienceModel Figure 6 : SKIo scientific activities ( white ) , and the DOLCE activity class ( grey ) . Of particular importance are the Inference activities because they bind together much of the knowledge cycle ( after Sowa 2000 ; 2006 ) :  Induction : involves finding a pattern in data ( logical induction ) , or dis / confirming a pattern via data collection ( pragmatic induction ) . In logical induction : given data { ( a 1 , b 1 ) , ( a 2 , b 2 ) , ( a 3 , b 3 ) } then infer f ( A , B ) , where f is some relation over concepts A , B , and a i and b i are their respective instances . In pragmatic induction , given f ( A , B ) , note in data { ( a 1 , b 1 ) , ( a 2 , b 2 ) , ( a 3 , b 3 ) } and infer f ( A , B ) ╞ TRUE or FALSE , possibly with the aid of intermediary predictions . SKIo Induction refers to logical induction , while Verification encompasses pragmatic induction and can operate on any science role .  Deduction : involves generating a Prediction about the world using existing theory and data . Logically , given theory T : A  B ( A and B are concepts ) and instance a 1 ( of A ) , then b 1 ( of B ) is deduced : T ^ a1 ├ b1 .  Abduction : involves generating a Proposition to enable coherence of discordant scientific 12 knowledge elements . In SKIo , Abduction encompasses both logical and pragmatic abduction . Logical abduction is reverse deduction : in a deduction of the form T : A  B , where T is a theory and A and B are concepts , given data b 1 ( instance of B ) and some or none of T and a 1 ( an instance of A ) , then guess the missing T and / or a 1 . Pragmatic abduction , on the other hand , is more concerned with the mechanism of guessing missing theories and data from prior knowledge ( often via analogy ~ ) : given C  D , and A ~ C B ~ D , then T : A  B . 6 . Application of SKIo to Environmental Theories Adams et al . ( 2004 ) summarizes and compares the mathematical formulation of ten ―models‖ ( ScienceTheories in SKIo ) of terrestrial net primary production ( NPP ) . The theories are expressed primarily as systems of equations containing ( 1 ) input variables and ( 2 ) fixed values divided into general constants ( e . g . atmospheric pressure ) and specific parameters ( e . g . photosynthesis co - limitation ) . The theories can be categorized into biogeographic or biochemical , where the former are empirically inferred from data , and the latter are derived from existing theories and express biochemical processes more explicitly . Some of these theories share a few ancillary theories which were obtained from other sources such as books or web pages . SKIo representation of all these elements involves the following instances of SKIo classes :  Each paper , book , and web site that expresses the theories is represented as an instance of SciencePublication containing ScienceStatements .  Each equation , or other theory part such as a table or figure , is expressed as a distinct instance of ScienceStatement .  The intensional description of each theory is represented as a whole ScienceTheory instance , and is expressed by the relevant SciencePublication instances .  The intensional description of each equation , or other theory part , is represented as a ScienceTheory part instance , and is expressed by the relevant ScienceStatement instances .  The variables and fixed values in each equation are represented as DOLCE parameter classes , an instance of each is d - used by each equation with a value in a region instance .  Each part of each empirically inferred theory is represented as an EmpiricalRegularity instance , because these are largely induced from empirical data and are local to Earth situations ( the fixed values are calibrated to the Earth environment ) .  The parts of the theories that were derived from other theories play a Proposition science role , because these are theoretically postulated ( hence via abduction ) .  Some theories share common parts which , however , play different roles amongst the theories . For example , a theory developed by King et al . ( 1995 ) adopts a Proposition from Polglase and Wang ( 1992 ) as an Assumption .  Many of the theories , such as the Miami Model ( Leith , 1975 ) , are satisfied by well known ScienceModel instances which are either based on empirical data ( contain particulars generated from observed facts ) or predictions ( contain particulars created as a result of deduction using the theory and observed input data ) .  The activities and data which led to the origin of each theory , or theory part , are not represented in this exercise , mainly because that information was not readily available amongst our sources . 13 Figure 7a and 7b show how the BIOME3 model , one of the 10 NPP models , can be represented in SKIo . Figure 7a : an example representation of part of a environmental theory and model in SKIo . 14 object SKI Instance Example BIOME3 : ScienceTheory BIOME3 NPP Equation : ScienceTheory BIOME3 NPP : NPP BIOME3 PhotosynthesisRate : PhotosynthesisRate BIOME3 EmpiricalRegularity # 1 : EmpiricalRegularity BIOME3 # 1 Model : ScienceModel BIOME3 # 2 Object : GeoScienceObject BIOM3 # 4 PhotosynthesisRate : Quality BIOME3 # 3 NPP : Quality Rate # 2 : RateRegion : : RateRegion + value : double = 300 . 3 Haxeltine & Prentice , 1996 : SciencePublication BIOME3 Induction # 2 : Induction Rate # 1 : RateRegion : : RateRegion + value : double = 100 . 1 + part + plays + d - uses + component + satisfied - by + satisfies + setting - for + has _ quality + q _ location + has _ quality + q _ location + valued - by + valued - by + expressed - by + product + product - of + d - uses Figure 7b : an example representation of part of an environmental theory and model in SKIo ; in the box labels the text before the colon denotes the instance name , and the text after the colon denotes the SKIo class name . 7 . Discussion Achievements : The SKIo ontology meets the representation requirements outlined in the introduction and in the environmental use - case scenario . It clearly and formally distinguishes between general scientific knowledge primitives , such as models and theories , and is shown to adequately represent environmental knowledge as documented in peer reviewed papers . As a result , when SKIo is coupled to a fully operational and semantically - enabled SKI , it should facilitate the search , retrieval and use of the basic science knowledge primitives . For example , knowledge about NPP could then be obtained by searching for the science theories that use the NPP concept . If the user is interested in the correlation between annual average temperature and NPP , then the Miami Model and the theory of King et al . ( 1997 ) could be retrieved , including a predicted model of world NPP . Evaluation : SKIo is evaluated according to the principles outlined in Section 4 . Formality and modularity are achieved through its extension of DOLCE and the independent OWL encoding , respectively . It is grounded in reasoning accounts of the science knowledge cycle , and includes science knowledge primitives of sufficient coverage and precision to enable at least environmental theories , and we suppose other science theories , to be adequately represented . Ontological 15 representation of the principles behind the knowledge cycle were shown to help disambiguate the polysemous use of natural language terms , e . g . ―model‖ . Implementation : implementation of SKIo for full support of e - Science is a future activity . Immediate prospects include incorporation of SKIo into existing e - Science infrastructures that use ontologies to enable information discovery , retrieval and workflow operation . Future prospects include use of SKIo - enabled science resource to create and test science knowledge in SKI . This might include using SKIo to support web services for operating over science models as sketched in Figure 8 . Figure 8 : using SKIo in an environmental modeling SKI Limitations : several limitations were encountered during design and application of SKIo :  completeness : SKIo is incomplete in several areas , most notably in representing common science methods , instruments , activities , information objects and science metadata .  change : representing scientific knowledge change , such as theory change , using existing constructs such as perdurants is largely uncharted territory that needs more exploration .  grounding : DOLCE does not provide adequate guidelines for distinguishing between the ground ontology ( non - social classes ) and social classes ( contextualized entities ) . For example , should atmospheric pressure be a ground quality or a social parameter , or both ? If so , why ? Although SKIo provides a mechanism for representing the migration of a scientific idea from conjecture ( social artifact ? ) to accepted dogma ( ground artifact ? ) —i . e . the epistemology—the design choice for extending from a social or ground class needs more rigorous attention .  instantiation : mechanisms are required to limit instantiation of unwanted but mandatory DOLCE classes triggered by SKIo instantiations . 8 . Conclusions 16 SKIo is an ontology of science that bridges the gap between a general foundational ontology and specific domain science ontologies . It accomplishes this by extending the DOLCE foundational ontology with general science primitives common to all science domains , such as theories , models and data , derived from computational accounts of the science knowledge cycle . Initial testing , involving representation of several environmental theories , confirms the effectiveness of SKIo‘s overall scope and design , and lends support for the notion that such representations will advance next - generation e - Science by facilitating not only search , retrieval , integration and workflow operations in e - Science infrastructures , but also the discovery and testing of scientific artefacts . Next steps include further testing with a variety of science knowledge from various domains , integrating with existing domain science ontologies , and incorporation into functioning e - Science infrastructures . Acknowledgements The authors gratefully acknowledge support of the U . K . e - Science Institute under theme 4 ―Spatial Semantics for Automating Geographical Information Processes‖ . Valuable comments that improved the paper were provided by Florian Probst and Mark Gahegan . References Adams , B . , A . White , and T . M . Lenton . ( 2004 ) . An analysis of some diverse approaches to modelling terrestrial net primary productivity . Ecological Modelling 177 ( 3 - 4 ) : 353 - 391 . Antoniou , G . , Van Harmelen , F . ( 2003 ) . Web ontology language : OWL . In : S . Staab , R . Studer ( Eds . ) , Handbook on Ontologies , Springer : Berlin , pp . 67 - 92 . Baldocchi , D . , Finnigan , J . , Wilson K . , Paw U K . T . , Falge E . ( 2000 ) . On Measuring Net Ecosystem Carbon Exchange Over Tall Vegetation on Complex Terrain . Boundary - Layer Meteorology , 96 ( 1 - 2 ) , August 2000 , pp . 257 - 291 ( 35 ) . Benjamins , V . R . Fensel , D . , Gómez Pérez , A . ( 1998 ) . Knowledge Management through Ontologies . In Proceedings , Knowledge Engineering : Principles and Methods , PAKM - 98 , pp . 5 . 1 - 5 . 12 , 1998 . Bittner , T . ( 2007 ) . From top - level to domain ontologies : Ecosystem classifications as a case study . In M . Duckham , B . Kuipers , L . Kulik , and S . Winter , editors , Spatial Information Theory . Cognitive and Computational Foundations of Geographic Information Science . International Conference , COSIT 2007 , 61 - 77 . Brodaric , B . ( 2008 ) . Science Knowledge Infrastructure ( SKI ) Ontology , version 3 . 0 . e - Science Institute Technical Report , available from http : / / . . . Gangemi , A . , Catenacci , C . , Battaglia , M . ( 2004 ) . Inflammation Ontology Design Pattern : an Exercise in Building a Core Biomedical Ontology with Descriptions and Situations . In D . M . Pisanelli ( ed . ) Ontolgies in Medicine , IOS Press , Amsterdam , Berlin , 2004 , pp . 64 - 80 . Gangemi , A . , Guarino , N . , Masolo C . , Oltramari , A . ( 2003 ) . Sweetening WordNet with DOLCE , AI Magazine , 24 ( 3 ) : 13 - 24 . Gangemi , A . , Mika , P . ( 2003 ) . Understanding the Semantic Web through Descriptions and Situations . In : Meersman R , et al . ( eds . ) , International Conference on Ontologies , Databases and Applications of Semantics ( ODBASE 2003 ) , Catania , ( Italy ) , November 3 - 7 , 2003 . 17 Gardenfors , P . ( 2000 ) . Conceptual spaces—the geometry of thought . Cambridge : MIT Press . Grenon , G . , Smith , B . , Goldberg , L . ( 2004 ) . Biodynamic Ontology : Applying BFO in the Biomedical Domain . In : Pisanelli , D . M . ( ed . ) , Ontologies in Medicine , Amsterdam : IOS Press , 2004 , 20 – 38 . Grenon , P . , Smith , B . ( 2004 ) . SNAP and SPAN : Towards Dynamic Spatial Ontology . Spatial Cognition and Computation , 4 ( 1 ) . Gruber , T . R . ( 1995 ) . Toward Principles for the Design of Ontologies Used for Knowledge Sharing . International Journal Human - Computer Studies . 43 ( 5 - 6 ) : 907 - 928 . Hars , A . ( 2001 ) . Designing Scientific Knowledge Infrastructures : The Contribution of Epistemology . Information Systems Frontiers , 3 ( 1 ) : 63 - 73 . Hars , A . ( 2003 ) . From Publishing to Knowledge Networks : Reinventing Online Knowledge Infrastructures . Spring , Berlin , 211 p . Herre , H . , Heller , B . , Burek , P . , Hoehndorf , R . Loebe , F . , Michalek , H . ( 2006 ) . General formal ontology ( GFO ) – part I : Basic principles . Technical Report 8 , Onto - Med , University of Leipzig , 2006 . Hey , T . , Trefethen , A . E . ( 2005 ) . Cyberinfrastructure for e - Science . Science 308 ( 5723 ) : 817 - 821 . Kaku , M . ( 2004 ) . Einstein ' s Cosmos : How Albert Einstein ' s Vision Transformed Our Understanding of Space and Time . Norton , New York . King , A . W . , W . R . William , and W . M . Post . ( 1995 ) . In search of missing carbon sink : a model of terrestrial biospheric response to land - use charge and atmosphere CO2 . Tellus . Series B 47 : 501 - 519 . Langley , P . ( 2000 ) . The computational support of scientific discovery . Int . Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 53 : 393 - 410 . Leith , H . ( 1975 ) Modeling the primary productivity of the world . In Primary Productivity of the Biosphere , ed . H . Leith , Whittaker , R . H . New York : Springer - Verlag . Ludäscher , B . , K . Lin , S . Bowers , E . Jaeger - Frank , B . Brodaric , C . Baru , C . ( 2006 ) . Managing scientific data : From data integration to scientific workflows . In : Sinha , A . K . ( Ed . ) Geoinformatics : Data to Knowledge , GSA Special Paper 397 , 109 - 130 . Masolo , C . , Borgo , S . , Gangemi , A . , Guarino , N . , Oltramari , A . ( 2003 ) . WonderWeb DeliverableD18 , Ontology Library ( final ) . Laboratory For Applied Ontology , http : / / www . loa - cnr . it / Papers / D18 . pdf . McCray , A . ( 2003 ) . An upper - level ontology for the biomedical domain . Comparative and Functional Genomics , 4 : 80 – 84 . McGuinness , D . L . , Fox , P . , Cinquini , L . , West , P . , Garcia , J . , Benedict , J . L . , Middleton , D . ( 2006 ) . Enabling Scientific Research using an Interdisciplinary Virtual Observatory : The Virtual Solar - Terrestrial Observatory Example . AI Magazine , Natale , D . A . , Arighi , C . , Barker , W . C . , Blake , J . , Chang , T . , Hu , Z . , Liu , H . , Smith , B . , Wu , C . H . , Framework for a Protein Ontology . BMC Bioinformatics 2007 , 8 ( Suppl 9 ) : S1 . Pease , A . , ( 2006 ) . Formal representation of concepts : The Suggested Upper Merged Ontology and its use in linguistics . In : Schalley , A . C . , Zaefferer , D . ( Eds . ) , Ontolinguistics . How Ontological Status Shapes the Linguistic Coding of Concepts . Vorbereitung Berlin : New York ( Mouton de Gruyter ) . Phillips , T . J . , AchutaRao , K . , Bader , D . , Covey , C . , Doutriaux , C . M . , Fiorino , M . , Gleckler , 18 P . J . , Sperber , K . R . , Taylor , K . E . ( 2006 ) . Coupled climate model appraisal , a benchmark for future studies . EOS Trans . AGU 87 ( 19 ) : 185 . Polglase , P . J . , and Y . P . Wang . ( 1992 ) . Potential CO2 - enhanced carbon storage by the terrestrial biosphere . Australian Journal of Botany 40 ( 641 - 656 ) . Raskin , R . G . , Pan , M . J . ( 2005 ) . Knowledge representation in the Semantic Web for Earth and Environmental Terminology ( SWEET ) . Computers and Geosciences , 31 ( 9 ) : 1119 - 1125 . Rijgersberg , H . , Top , J . , Meinders , M . ( 2008 ) . Use of a Quantitative Research Ontoloy in e - Science . In : McGuinness , D . L . , Fox , P . , Brodaric , B . ( Eds . ) , Semantic Scientific Knowledge Integration , AAAI Spring Symposium , Technical Report SS - 08 - 05 , AAAI Press , Menlo Park , CA , 87 - 92 . Shrager , J . , Langley , P . ( 1990 ) . Computational Models of Scientific Discovery and Theory Formation . Morgan Kaufman , San Mateo . Soldatova , L . N . , King , R . D . ( 2006 ) . An ontology of scientific experiments . Journal of the Royal Society Interface , 3 ( 100 ) : 795 - 803 . Sowa , J . F . ( 2000 ) . Knowledge Representation : Logical , Philosophical , and Computational Foundations . Brooks / Cole : New York . Sowa , J . F . ( 2006 ) . The Challenge of Knowledge Soup . In : J . Ramadas , S . Chunawala , ( Eds . ) , Research Trends in Science , Technology and Mathematics Education , Homi Bhabha Centre , Mumbai , 2006 , pp . 55 - 90 . Thagard , P . ( 1988 ) . Computational philosophy of science . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA .