University of Massachusetts Medical School eScholarship @ UMMS Open Access Articles Open Access Publications by UMMS Authors 4 - 10 - 1999 High resolution detection of mechanical forces exerted by locomoting fibroblasts on the substrate Robert J . Pelham Yu - Li Wang University of Massachusetts Medical School Follow this and additional works at : http : / / escholarship . umassmed . edu / oapubs Part of the Life Sciences Commons , and the Medicine and Health Sciences Commons This material is brought to you by eScholarship @ UMMS . It has been accepted for inclusion in Open Access Articles by an authorized administrator of eScholarship @ UMMS . For more information , please contact Lisa . Palmer @ umassmed . edu . Repository Citation Pelham , Robert J . and Wang , Yu - Li , " High resolution detection of mechanical forces exerted by locomoting fibroblasts on the substrate " ( 1999 ) . Open Access Articles . 1402 . http : / / escholarship . umassmed . edu / oapubs / 1402 Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 10 , 935 – 945 , April 1999 High Resolution Detection of Mechanical Forces Exerted by Locomoting Fibroblasts on the Substrate Robert J . Pelham , Jr . , * and Yu - li Wang † Department of Physiology , University of Massachusetts Medical School , Worcester , Massachusetts 01605 Submitted August 3 , 1998 ; Accepted January 29 , 1999 Monitoring Editor : James A . Spudich We have developed a new approach to detect mechanical forces exerted by locomoting ﬁbroblasts on the substrate . Cells were cultured on elastic , collagen - coated polyacryl - amide sheets embedded with 0 . 2 - m m ﬂuorescent beads . Forces exerted by the cell cause deformation of the substrate and displacement of the beads . By recording the position of beads during cell locomotion and after cell removal , we discovered that most forces were radially distributed , switching direction in the anterior region . Deformations near the leading edge were strong , transient , and variable in magnitude , consistent with active local contractions , whereas those in the posterior region were weaker , more stable , and more uniform , consistent with passive resistance . Treatment of cells with cytochalasin D or myosin II inhibitors caused relaxation of the forces , suggesting that they are generated primarily via actin – myosin II interactions ; treatment with nocodazole caused no imme - diate effect on forces . Immunoﬂuorescence indicated that the frontal region of strong deformation contained many vinculin plaques but no apparent concentration of actin or myosin II ﬁlaments . Strong mechanical forces in the anterior region , generated by locally activated myosin II and transmitted through vinculin - rich structures , likely play a major role in cell locomotion and in mechanical signaling with the surrounding environment . INTRODUCTION Interactions between cells and their environment in - volve not only chemical signals but also mechanical forces . The latter is believed to provide the driving force for cell locomotion ; to move forward , cells must adhere to the substrate and exert rearward traction forces ( Oliver et al . , 1994 ; Lauffenburger and Horwitz , 1996 ) . In addition , there is strong evidence that me - chanical interactions can modulate a wide spectrum of cellular processes from locomotion to differentiation ( Ingber , 1993 ) . Our recent observations with substrates of different ﬂexibility further suggest that such mod - ulation involves not only responses to external forces but active probing of the mechanical properties of the environment ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ) . Despite rapid advances in the characterization of motor and adhesion molecules , little is known about the nature of mechanical forces exerted by the cell and the mechanism for translating them into downstream events such as coordinated cell movement . The ﬁrst successful attempt in detecting mechanical forces was reported by Harris et al . ( 1980 ) , using a thin ﬁlm of silicone rubber as the culturing substrate . The ﬁlm covers a layer of silicone ﬂuid and wrinkles upon the exertion of forces much like the response of a water bed . Using this method , Harris et al . ( 1980 ) discovered signiﬁcant compressive forces exerted by locomoting ﬁbroblasts . However , despite recent improvement of the material ( Burton and Taylor , 1997 ) , the approach suffers from a limited spatial resolution and complex relationship between wrinkles and forces . Two approaches have been developed toward a more direct characterization of cellular traction forces . The ﬁrst involves the use of nonwrinkling silicone polymers embedded with particles as indicators of deformation ( Lee et al . , 1994 ) . This approach has yielded detailed vectorial maps of mechanical forces under ﬁsh keratocytes ( Oliver et al . , 1995 ; Dembo et al . , 1996 ) . Although it represents a signiﬁcant improve - ment over the wrinkling method , there are potential * Present address : Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology , Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons , New York , NY 10032 . † Corresponding author . E - mail address : yu - li . wang @ ummed . edu . © 1999 by The American Society for Cell Biology 935 limitations that could affect its application to cultured ﬁbroblasts . First , the viscous component of the mate - rial could lead to irreversible deformation when ex - erted with forces over a prolonged period of time by slow - moving cells such as ﬁbroblasts ( Lee et al . , 1994 ) . In addition , uncoated silicone sheets are poorly adhe - sive for ﬁbroblasts and may affect the generation of traction forces ( Harris , 1988 ) . A related method in - volves the use of collagen matrices embedded with beads ( Roy et al . , 1997 ) . Although the chemical prop - erty of the substrate was optimized for cell adhesion , the study was limited by the optical resolution and by the irreversible deformation of the substrate . A second approach uses microfabricated silicon substrates that contain islands of miniature pads connected to ﬂexible cantilevers . Forces are measured on the basis of the movement of these pads ( Galbraith and Sheetz , 1997 ) . Fluctuating forces , which switch the direction from rearward to forward under the nucleus , were detected under locomoting chick embryonic ﬁbroblasts . Al - though this method allows measurements of forces in isolated regions , it has a limited spatial resolution and provides little information on the direction of forces . In the present study we seek to complement these studies by using a different approach , based on a ﬂexible polyacrylamide substrate embedded with ﬂu - orescent latex beads . The approach is similar to that used by Lee et al . ( 1994 ) ; however the substrate is easy to prepare , has a controllable and nearly ideal elastic property ( see RESULTS ) , and , when covalently coated with extracellular matrix proteins , provides a more physiological environment for cell adhesion . More - over , the clarity and stability of the material allowed us to examine the distribution of vinculin , actin , and myosin by immunoﬂuorescence in relation to exerted mechanical forces . As a ﬁrst step we have focused on qualitative aspects of the forces exerted by moving 3T3 ﬁbroblasts and the corresponding cytoskeleton orga - nization . Quantitative analysis of the forces by com - puter modeling will be presented in a separate report ( Dembo and Wang , 1999 ) . MATERIALS AND METHODS Polyacrylamide Substrate The polyacrylamide substrate was prepared essentially as described previously ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ; Wang and Pelham , 1998 ) . The only modiﬁcations were the reduction in concentration of Sulfo - SANPAH ( Pierce Chemical , Rockford , IL ) to 1 mM and of HEPES to 50 mM and the addition of sonicated ﬂuorescent latex beads ( 0 . 2 - m m FluoSpheres , carboxylate - modiﬁed ; Cat . No . F - 8821 , Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) at 1 : 125 dilution to the acrylamide mixture containing 10 % acrylamide and 0 . 03 % bis - acrylamide . The ﬂexibility of the substrate was characterized by deforming sheets with known weights and with a microneedle . Brieﬂy , 18 . 5 g of weight was applied to a 14 3 14 3 0 . 7 - mm sheet of polyacrylamide , and the change in thickness was measured with the microscope - focusing mechanism . Young’s modulus was calculated according to the equation : Y 5 ( F ’ / A ) / ( D l / l ) , where l is the original thickness of the sheet , D l is the change in thickness , and A is the cross - sectional area . The response of the substrate to prolonged deformation was as - sessed by submerging gel strips 70 mm 3 30 mm 3 1 mm in a tank ﬁlled with PBS at room temperature and stretching some of them for 17 . 5 h with 10 g of weight . The extent of recovery was determined by comparing the length of a stretched strip with that of an un - stretched strip submerged for the same period of time . Deformation with microneedles was performed as described by Lee et al . ( 1994 ) . Measurements of Substrate Deformation Deformation of the substrate by cell - generated forces was detected via the displacement of embedded beads . Images of beads near the surface of the substrate ( described in Fixation , Fluorescent Staining , and Microscopy ) were recorded before and after the detachment of cells ( and relaxation of forces ) with 0 . 05 % trypsin . The pair of images was registered on the basis of beads located far away from the cell . The coordinates of each bead before and after trypsin treatment were determined using custom written software and were plotted as a vectorial map . Substrate deformation during cell move - ment was detected by illuminating cells simultaneously for phase and ﬂuorescence optics . Tracks of bead movement were generated by importing the coordinates into Microsoft ( Redmond , WA ) Excel . Cell Culture and Drug Treatments Swiss 3T3 cells ( American Type Culture Collection , Rockville , MD ) were cultured in DMEM ( Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) , supplemented with 10 % donor calf serum ( JRH Biosciences , Lenexa , KS ) , 2 mM l - glutamine , 50 m g / ml streptomycin , 50 U / ml penicillin , and 250 ng / ml amphotericin B ( Life Technologies , Gaithersburg , MD ) . KT5926 ( Calbiochem , San Diego , CA ) , nocodazole ( Sigma ) , and cytochalasin D ( Sigma ) were each dissolved in DMSO to obtain stock solutions of 2 , 33 , and 2 mM , respectively . Immediately before drug treatments , aliquots of stock solutions were diluted into se - rum - containing media to obtain a ﬁnal concentration of 20 m M for KT5926 , 1 m M for nocodazole , and 2 m M for cytochalasin D . 2 , 3 - Butanedione monoxime ( BDM ; Sigma ) was dissolved directly in culture medium to generate a working solution at a ﬁnal concen - tration of 20 mM . Fixation , Fluorescent Staining , and Microscopy For ﬂuorescent staining of vinculin and myosin , cells were washed with 37°C PBS and then simultaneously ﬁxed and extracted with 4 % formaldehyde and 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 ( Boehringer Mannheim , Mannheim , Germany ) in PBS at 37°C for 10 min as described previously ( Pelham et al . , 1996 ) . Immunoﬂuorescence staining was performed using monoclonal antibodies against vinculin ( clone VIN - 11 - 5 , Sigma ) or polyclonal antibodies against platelet myosin II ( generously provided by Dr . Keigi Fujiwara , National Cardiovascu - lar Center Research Institute , Osaka , Japan ) , each at a dilution of 1 : 100 . Rhodamine - and ﬂuorescein - conjugated secondary antibodies were obtained from Sigma . For ﬂuorescent staining of actin , cells were ﬁxed and permeabil - ized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 and 0 . 5 % glutaraldehyde ( Polysciences , Warrington , PA ) in cytoskeleton buffer [ 137 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCl , 1 . 1 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 0 . 4 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 2 mM EGTA , 5 mM piperazine - N , N 9 - bis ( 2 - ethanesulfonic acid ) , and 5 . 5 mM glu - cose , pH 6 . 1 ( Small , 1981 ) ] at 37°C for 1 min and then post - ﬁxed with 1 % glutaraldehyde in 37°C cytoskeleton buffer for 15 min . After treatment with 0 . 5 mg / ml NaBH 4 for 5 min to quench autoﬂuorescence , cells were stained with rhodamine – phalloidin ( Molecular Probes ) at a concentration of 6 . 6 nM . Phase images of the cell and ﬂuorescence of substrate - embedded beads were recorded simultaneously with a Zeiss 40 3 , numerical aperture 0 . 65 Achromat phase objective on a Zeiss ( Thornwood , NY ) IM - 35 microscope . The depth of ﬁeld was ; 5 m m ; thus most beads recorded were located within the top 2 . 5 m m of the substrate . R . J . Pelham and Y . - l . Wang Molecular Biology of the Cell 936 A Nikon ( Garden City , NY ) 60 3 , numerical aperture 1 . 2 PlanApo water immersion objective was used in conjunction with a Zeiss Axiovert microscope for the observation of immunoﬂuorescence staining of cells . All images were recorded with a cooled charge - coupled device camera ( TE / CCD - 576EM , Princeton Instruments , Trenton , NJ , or CH250 , Photometrics , Tucson , AZ ) and processed for background subtraction with custom software . RESULTS Characterization of Polyacrylamide Substrate Mechanical forces exerted by locomoting 3T3 ﬁbro - blasts were detected by culturing cells on a highly ﬂexible substrate and measuring deformation of the substrate . The substrate was prepared by incorporat - ing 0 . 2 - m m ﬂuorescent latex beads into thin polyacryl - amide sheets of 10 % acrylamide and 0 . 03 % bis - acryl - amide , followed by covalent coating of the surface with type I collagen to promote cell adhesion ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ; Wang and Pelham , 1998 ) . As re - ported recently ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ) , 3T3 cells adhere well on these substrates and migrate at an accelerated rate of 0 . 55 m m / min . Mechanical properties of the substrate were charac - terized both macroscopically and microscopically ( Lee et al . , 1994 ) . The substrate responded to applied forces with a Young’s modulus of 6000 N / m 2 and recovered within 1 / 30 s ( one video frame ) upon the release of forces . When probed with a calibrated microneedle , the response remained proportional to the force when the substrate was deformed by up to ; 20 m m , with no apparent heterogeneity in elasticity . In addition , the recovery was complete ( . 98 % ) even when the sub - strate was stretched by ; 90 % for . 17 h . Because of the propagation of deformations across the surface , exact values of forces cannot be obtained without compli - cated computer modeling ( Dembo et al . , 1996 ; Dembo and Wang , 1999 ) . However qualitative characteristics of cell - generated mechanical forces become clear as one examines the pattern of deformations . Computer modeling indicates that this approach provides a spa - tial resolution of ; 5 m m ( Dembo and Wang , 1999 ) . Distribution of Mechanical Forces under Locomoting Cells We ﬁrst examined the overall pattern of deformation exerted by locomoting 3T3 cells . Isolated cells and beads in the vicinity were observed for 30 min with time - lapse recording to determine the rate and direc - tion of locomotion . The dish was then treated with trypsin to detach the cells and relax the forces gener - ated by the cell . Cell - induced displacements of ﬂuo - rescent beads were then used to construct a vectorial map of substrate deformation , which provides a qual - itative indication of the distribution of forces ( Lee et al . , 1994 ) . In all cells observed , substrate deformation showed a radial pattern ( Figure 1B ; n 5 31 ) , even Figure 1 . Distribution of substrate deformation caused by a motile 3T3 cell . ( A ) The dotted line represents the cell boundary at t 5 0 min , and the solid line represents the cell boundary at t 5 30 min . Arrows show changes in the position of substrate - embedded beads as the cell migrated forward during this period of time . ( B ) At t 5 30 min , the cell was detached from the substrate with trypsin . Arrows were constructed from the bead positions after cell detachment to those before detachment and reﬂect the net forces exerted by the cell . To facilitate plotting , the scale of the arrows was ampliﬁed twice relative to the scale of the cell ( this also applies to all subsequent ﬁgures ) . The arrows show a radial pattern converging in a region just in front of the nucleus . Bar , 20 m m . Forces Exerted by Cultured Cells Vol . 10 , April 1999 937 when cells were moving along a ﬁxed direction . In addition , all cells showed a switch in deformation from a direction opposite of cell locomotion to a direction along cell locomotion in the anterior la - mella region . Thus most forces near the leading edge were directed rearward , whereas those under the posterior region were directed forward . The strongest deformations were always detected within 5 – 15 m m of active rufﬂing and were heterogeneous in magnitude and direction ( Figure 1B ) , suggesting Figure 2 . Changes in substrate de - formation in the anterior region of motile cells . ( A ) The movement of substrate - embedded beads under the anterior portion of a motile cell was recorded at the time ( in min - utes ) indicated in the top left cor - ner . Small arrows indicate the posi - tions of the several beads relative to their neutral positions at t 5 0 . The direction of cell movement is indi - cated by a large arrow at t 5 0 . The boundary of the cell is indicated by a dotted line at t 5 20 and 30 min . The position of the nucleus is indi - cated by a dashed circle at t 5 45 min . Strong deformation developed in a region ; 5 – 10 m m from the ac - tive leading edge and dissipated as the nucleus moved over the beads . Bar , 10 m m . ( B ) The magnitude of substrate deformation is plotted as a function of time for three beads from three different locomoting cells . The deformation reached its maximum in ; 25 min and then dis - sipated over the next ; 30 min without showing a measurable pla - teau . ( C ) The track of a bead mov - ing under the anterior region of a cell follows a smooth course , with no detectable ﬂuctuation in direc - tion . Bar , 1 m m . R . J . Pelham and Y . - l . Wang Molecular Biology of the Cell 938 that forces in this region are highly variable over short distances . Moreover , strong deformations were present in only some active areas and thus did not seem to be a prerequisite for cell protrusion . The maximal deformation was ; 5 m m . Deformations in the posterior region were in general smaller and more uniform in magnitude ( Figure 1B ) . A small number of cells showed a localized increase in deformation at the very tail , possibly reﬂecting tran - sient tail contraction before the retraction of the cell ( Chen , 1979 ) . However tail retractions are rarely cap - tured directly with live 3T3 ﬁbroblasts . Dynamics of Mechanical Forces Generated by Locomoting Cells The dynamics of mechanical forces generated by loco - moting 3T3 cells were investigated by time - lapse record - ing of beads embedded in the substrate ( Figure 1A ) . Unlike the previous experiment , translocation of beads reﬂects temporal changes in substrate deformation ( thus changes in the magnitude or direction of forces exerted by the cell ) rather than net mechanical forces . As the leading edge of a cell approached a bead , strong rearward movement of beads developed ( Fig - Figure 3 . Changes in substrate de - formation in the posterior region of motile cells . ( A ) The movement of sub - strate - embedded beads under the pos - terior portion of a motile cell was re - corded at the time ( in minutes ) indicated in the top left corner . Small arrows indicate the positions of the several beads relative to their posi - tions at t 5 0 . The direction of cell movement is indicated by a large ar - row at t 5 0 . Weak deformation devel - oped in the tail region and was main - tained until the cell migrated away from the beads . Bar , 10 m m . ( B ) The magnitude of substrate deformation is plotted as a function of time for three beads from three different locomoting cells . The deformation reached its pla - teau in ; 20 min and was maintained at a low , constant level for 50 – 60 min until the cell moved beyond the beads . Forces Exerted by Cultured Cells Vol . 10 , April 1999 939 Figure 4 . Effects of drugs on mechanical forces generated by the cell . ( A ) A cell and beads in the underlying substrate were observed in the presence of 2 m M cytochalasin D for 30 min . The cell stopped forward movement and retracted its boundary ( from dotted to solid line ) , while all the beads moved away from the center of the cell , suggesting the relaxation of forces throughout the cell . ( B ) The cell was then detached by trypsin to detect any residual deformation at steady state . No bead movement was detected . The dots represent the stationary positions of the beads . ( C – F ) Similar experiments were performed with 20 m M KT5926 ( C and D ) and 1 m M nocodazole ( E and F ) . A fraction of the R . J . Pelham and Y . - l . Wang Molecular Biology of the Cell 940 ures 1A and 2 , A and B ) . The deformation increased with time and reached a maximum in ; 30 min ( Figure 2B ) and then dissipated over the next ; 30 min during which the anterior region of the cell migrated over the bead . These observations suggest that new forces are continuously generated at the leading edge . Although the magnitude of deformation changed continuously , the movement of the beads followed a smooth course ( Figure 2C ) , indicating that there is no rapid ﬂuctua - tion of forces as a function of time . As the nucleus passed over the bead , a slow net forward translocation of the bead started , as if the beads were dragged by the cell in the direction of locomotion ( Figures 1A and 3A ) . Unlike deformations in the anterior region , deformations in the posterior region remained at a weak constant value for an ex - tended period of time ( Figure 3B ) , indicating that me - chanical forces were relatively stable and uniform . After the tail passed the bead , contact between the cell and substrate was lost , and the bead returned to its basal position ( Figure 3A ) . Role of the Cytoskeleton in Generating Mechanical Forces To probe the role of cytoskeletal structures in gener - ating mechanical forces , we applied various agents to disrupt actin , myosin , or microtubules . Cells ( and un - derlying beads ) were observed in the presence of these inhibitors for 30 min to determine drug - induced changes in deformation and then were trypsinized to construct a vectorial map of substrate deformation at steady state . Dramatic effects were observed after the treatment with 2 m M cytochalasin D . The beads moved immedi - ately away from the nucleus toward their neutral po - sitions ( Figure 4A ; n 5 5 ) , such that no substrate deformation was detectable upon trypsinization ( Fig - ure 4B ) . KT5926 , an inhibitor of myosin light chain kinase ( Nakanishi et al . , 1990 ) , also caused a dramatic , but less complete ( 80 – 90 % ) , reduction in both rear - ward and forward forces ( Figure 4 , C and D ; n 5 6 ) . Interestingly , both lamellipodial protrusion and for - ward movement of the cell persisted during the period of observation in KT5926 , whereas the rate of nuclear movement decreased by ; 74 % . Treatment with myo - sin inhibitor BDM ( Higuchi and Takemori , 1989 ) had similar , although weaker , effects ( our unpublished re - sults ) . The role of microtubules in generating and / or directing motile forces was investigated by treating cells with the microtubule - depolymerizing drug nocoda - zole ( Figure 4 , E and F ; n 5 6 ) . The treatment caused no apparent change in the overall pattern of substrate de - formation over 30 min , when most or all microtubules depolymerized as judged by immunoﬂuorescence . Immunoﬂuorescence staining was performed to deter - mine whether there is any speciﬁc structure of actin , myosin , or vinculin in the region of new strong forces . No prominent concentration of actin and myosin was detected in these regions ( Figure 5 ) , although they often contained converging actin ﬁlament bundles . In addi - tion , vinculin immunoﬂuorescence showed many elon - gated adhesion structures in these regions ( Figure 6 ) . DISCUSSION We have used a new approach to detect mechanical forces generated by locomoting ﬁbroblasts . Our method , based on particle movement within an elastic substrate , has several important advantages . First , the approach allows for the global mapping of substrate deformations resulting from cell - generated traction forces . Although complex computation and modeling are required to obtain exact force values ( Dembo et al . , 1996 ; Dembo and Wang , 1999 ) , the combination of time - lapse recording and cell trypsinization provides a rapid glimpse into the qualitative characteristics of cell - generated mechanical forces . Second , the poly - acrylamide material has a nearly ideal elastic property that can be adjusted by changing the concentrations of acrylamide and bis - acrylamide ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ; Wang and Pelham , 1998 ) . This allows us to match the sensitivity of the substrate with the strength of forces generated by different cell types . Third , the substrate , which is typically , 70 m m in thickness , has an excellent optical quality and allows ﬂuorescence microscopy at a high magniﬁcation . The chemical property can also be varied via the conjugation of different extracellular matrix molecules to mimic the physiological environment . Characteristics of Cell - generated Mechanical Forces Mechanical forces exerted by locomoting 3T3 ﬁbro - blasts show several interesting characteristics . First , the forces are radially distributed , shifting directions in a region in front of the nucleus . In addition , strong traction forces are present in some but not all regions of active protrusion . Thus the pattern of forces seems to be closely related to the shape of the cell and the direction of cell movement , but not necessarily cou - pled to cell protrusion at lamellipodia . The radial pat - tern may also be related to the predominantly lateral orientation of forces in ﬁsh keratocytes , which have a Figure 4 ( cont ) . beads moved away from the center of the cell upon treatment with KT5926 , as shown by arrows ( C ) , while others maintained their positions , as shown by dots . No newly developed inward force was detected . The rate of forward movement of the nucleus was reduced by 75 % ( from dotted to solid line ) , while the protrusion of the leading edge appeared similar to that in control cells . The forces maintained a radial pattern as in control cells but with an average magnitude reduced by 80 – 90 % ( D ) . Nocodazole had no apparent effect on the overall pattern of forces as compared with that in control cells ( E and F ) . Bar , 20 m m . Forces Exerted by Cultured Cells Vol . 10 , April 1999 941 fan shape with the long axis lying perpendicular to the direction of locomotion ( Lee et al . , 1994 ) . As in the present case , the strongest forces were found near the ends of the long dimension and pointed toward the nucleus . Second , the strongest deformation was always de - tected near the leading edge , consistent with obser - vations made with wrinkling substrates ( Harris et al . , 1980 ) . Our results are however contrary to those obtained with microfabricated silicon pads con - nected to ﬂexible cantilevers ( Galbraith and Sheetz , 1997 ) , which detected opposite forces in the front and tail regions but with stronger forces located near the tail . However , the pads detect forces only along one direction , with a resolution limited by the dimension and distance of the pads ( 2 3 2 - to 5 3 5 - m m 2 area and 60 - m m center - to - center distance be - tween neighboring pads ) . Moreover , the unique to - pographical feature of the surface , with adhesive pads surrounded by regions of nonadhesive space , may also elicit unique cellular responses ( Chen et al . , 1997 ) . Figure 5 . Distribution of actin ﬁlaments and myosin II in relation to strong substrate deformations in the anterior region . ( A and C ) Cells and beads in the underlying substrate were observed for 20 min . Movements of the beads are indicated by arrows . Dotted and solid lines indicate the starting and ending positions , respectively , of the cell boundary and nucleus . ( B and D ) The cells were then ﬁxed and stained with rhodamine – phalloidin ( B ) or antibodies against myosin II ( D ) to determine the relationship between actin – myosin II organization and mechanical forces . Actin ﬁlaments are distributed similarly in areas of large and small substrate deformations ( A and B , rectangles ) . Fine actin bundles are present throughout most regions of the cell . In addition , the concentration of myosin II was similar in regions of strong and weak forces ( C and D , rectangles ) . Bars , 20 m m . R . J . Pelham and Y . - l . Wang Molecular Biology of the Cell 942 Third , rearward bead displacements near the leading edge are strong , transient , and heteroge - neous over a short distance , suggesting that the forces involved are generated by an active mecha - nism that varies in magnitude or direction over a short distance . In contract , forward bead displace - ments in the posterior region are weak , stable , and more uniform . They become apparent upon the pas - sage of the nucleus and stay at a low level until the cell moves away from the substrate . This pattern is consistent with a passive , forward drag generated over broad areas of the surface during cell move - ment ( Oliver et al . , 1994 , and references within ; Cramer et al . , 1997 ) . Mechanisms for the Generation of Mechanical Forces Our immunoﬂuorescence localization of vinculin showed clusters of elongated adhesion sites in the region of strong rearward forces . Most likely these forces are transmitted to the substrate at or near vinculin - rich adhesion structures . In addition , the forces are likely generated by actin – myosin II con - tractions , as indicated by their sensitivity to cy - tochalasin D , BDM , and KT5926 . Using computer modeling , we found that the forces have a maximal magnitude of 10 nN / m m 2 ( Dembo and Wang , 1999 ) , or ; 10 4 active myosin heads per square micrometer , assuming that each myosin head generates ; 1 pN of force ( Ishijima et al . , 1991 ; Oliver et al . , 1995 ; Dembo et al . , 1996 ) . The lack of apparent concentration of myosin II at the site of strong substrate deformation suggests that these forces may be generated over large regions of the cell and focused into discrete sites of adhesion or may involve additional mecha - nisms . In addition , forces may be maintained by a latch mechanism without the continuous interac - tions of actin and myosin . The leading edge is also known for a continuous assembly and backward ﬂux of actin subunits ( Wang , 1985 ) . Traction forces may be generated via mechanical linkage of these actin ﬁlaments to the adhesion sites . On the basis of the radial pattern of the forces , which converge in a region occupied by the micro - tubule - organizing center , we speculate that the forces may involve either contributions from micro - tubule motors or guidance by the microtubule net - work . However , direct involvement of microtubules and microtubule motors is unlikely because of the lack of immediate effects after the depolymerization of microtubules by nocodazole , although it is pos - sible that forces may be affected after a longer pe - riod of microtubule depolymerization . Unlike pre - vious studies , cells cultured under our condition showed no apparent increase in stress ﬁbers upon the depolymerization of microtubules ( Danowski , 1989 ; Bershadsky et al . , 1996 ) . Functional Role of Cell - generated Mechanical Forces To effect forward locomotion , cell – substrate adhe - sions may function either as passive sites of anchor - age , to keep cells from slipping backward during Figure 6 . Distribution of vinculin in relation to large substrate deformations in the anterior region . ( A ) A cell and beads in the underlying substrate were observed for 12 min . Movements of the beads are indicated by arrows . Solid and dotted lines indicate the starting and ending positions , respectively , of the cell boundary and nucleus . ( B ) The cell was then ﬁxed and immunoﬂuorescence stained for vinculin to determine the relationship between vinculin organization and mechanical forces . Vinculin is concentrated at elongated plaque structures in the region of strong mechanical forces ( B ; arrow ) . Bar , 20 m m . Forces Exerted by Cultured Cells Vol . 10 , April 1999 943 the forward thrust of the leading edge , or as active sites of propulsion , where motor molecules drive the forward movement of the cortex and / or intra - cellular contents . The active characteristics of rear - ward forces , as discussed above , are more consistent with the latter model . In addition , the distribution of substrate deformation suggests that such traction forces are concentrated near the leading edge of the cell . Because of the propagation of deformation , the actual boundary of strong traction forces is likely to be located closer to the front than what is shown in the present map ( Dembo and Wang , 1999 ) . To - gether , these results indicate that ﬁbroblasts migrate by a frontal contraction mechanism , which exerts traction forces near the leading edge . Contraction at the tail is probably responsible for maintaining the integrity of the cell but not directly for the forward movement . However , although strong rearward forces are al - ways located near an active leading edge ( Figure 1 ) , there are regions of lamellipodial extension without apparent strong forces . The radial pattern of these forces also does not support a direct role in forward thrust of the cell . In addition , the magnitude of such forces appears many orders of magnitude stronger than what is required to overcome the ﬂuid and surface resistance during steady cell locomotion ( Harris et al . , 1981 ; Oliver et al . , 1994 ) , consistent with the continuous movement of the cell when most forces were inhibited by KT5926 . An alterna - tive role for the rearward forces is to drive large intracellular structures , such as the nucleus and the microtubule / intermediate ﬁlament networks . The forward positioning of the nucleus and the micro - tubule - organizing center in locomoting cells sug - gests that these structures move by an active mech - anism rather than by ﬂoating passively in a bag of cytoplasm . Although it is difﬁcult to estimate the magnitude , it is conceivable that active movement of such extensive structures may require signiﬁcant forces . This idea is also supported by the inhibition of nuclear movement upon the treatment with KT5926 . Finally , mechanical forces may play an important role in signal transduction . There is strong evidence that cells can respond to both chemical signals and mechanical forces . In addition , as shown by Harris et al . ( 1981 ) , cells can exert mechanical forces on sub - strates and neighboring cells to elicit long - range re - sponses . Conversely , as recently observed with cells cultured on polyacrylamide substrates of different ri - gidity , mechanical forces may be used as a means to probe the property of the environment and to modu - late cellular motile properties ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ) . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Dr . Keigi Fujiwara for the generous contribution of anti - bodies against platelet myosin . This study was funded by National Institutes of Health grant GM - 32476 . REFERENCES Bershadsky , A . , Chausovsky , A . , Becker , E . , Lyubimova , A . , and Geiger , B . ( 1996 ) . Involvement of microtubules in the control of adhesion - dependent signal transduction . Curr . Biol . 6 , 1279 – 1289 . Burton , K . , and Taylor , D . L . ( 1997 ) . Traction forces of cytokinesis measured with optically modiﬁed elastic substrata . Nature 385 , 450 – 454 . Chen , C . S . , Mrksich , M . , Huang , S . , Whitesides , G . M . , and Ingber , D . E . ( 1997 ) . Geometric control of cell life and death . Science 276 , 1425 – 1428 . Chen , W . - T . ( 1979 ) . Induction of spreading during ﬁbroblast move - ment . J . Cell Biol . 81 , 684 – 691 . Cramer , L . P . , Siebert , M . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1997 ) . Identiﬁcation of novel graded polarity actin ﬁlament bundles in locomoting heart ﬁbroblasts : implications for the generation of motile force . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 1287 – 1305 . Danowski , B . A . ( 1989 ) . Fibroblast contractility and actin organi - zation are stimulated by microtubule inhibitors . J . Cell Sci . 93 , 255 – 266 . Dembo , M . , Oliver , T . , Ishihara , A . , and Jacobson , K . ( 1996 ) . Imaging the traction stresses exerted by locomoting cells with the elastic substratum method . Biophys . J . 70 , 2008 – 2022 . Dembo , M . , and Wang , Y . - L . ( 1999 ) . Stresses at the cell - to - substrate interface during locomotion of ﬁbroblasts . Biophys . J . ( in press ) . Galbraith , C . G . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1997 ) . A micromachined device provides a new bend on ﬁbroblast traction forces . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 9114 – 9118 . Harris , A . K . ( 1988 ) . Fibroblasts and myoﬁbroblasts . Methods Enzy - mol . 163 , 623 – 642 . Harris , A . K . , Stopak , D . , and Wild , P . ( 1981 ) . Fibroblast traction as a mechanism for collagen morphogenesis . Nature 290 , 249 – 251 . Harris , A . K . , Wild , P . , and Stopak , D . ( 1980 ) . Silicone rubber sub - strata : a new wrinkle in the study of cell locomotion . Science 208 , 177 – 179 . Higuchi , H . , and Takemori , S . ( 1989 ) . Butanedione monoxime sup - presses contraction and ATPase activity of rabbit skeletal muscle . J . Biochem . 105 , 638 – 643 . Ingber , D . E . ( 1993 ) . Cellular tensegrity : deﬁning new rules of biological design that govern the cytoskeleton . J . Cell Sci . 104 , 613 – 627 . Ishijima , A . , Doi , T . , Sakurada , K . , and Yanagida , T . ( 1991 ) . Subpicone - wton force ﬂuctuations of actomyosin in vitro . Nature 352 , 301 – 306 . Lauffenburger , D . A . , and Horwitz , A . F . ( 1996 ) . Cell migration : a physically integrated molecular process . Cell 84 , 359 – 369 . Lee , J . , Leonard , M . , Oliver , T . , Ishihara , A . , and Jacobson , K . ( 1994 ) . Traction forces generated by locomoting keratocytes . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 1957 – 1964 . Nakanishi , S . , Yamada , K . , Iwanashi , K . , Kuroda , K . , and Kase , K . ( 1990 ) . KT5926 , a potent and selective inhibitor of myosin light chain kinase . Mol . Pharmacol . 37 , 482 – 488 . Oliver , T . , Dembo , M . , and Jacobson , K . ( 1995 ) . Traction forces in locomoting cells . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 31 , 225 – 240 . R . J . Pelham and Y . - l . Wang Molecular Biology of the Cell 944 Oliver , T . , Lee , J . , and Jacobson , K . ( 1994 ) . Forces exerted by loco - moting cells . Semin . Cell Biol . 5 , 139 – 147 . Pelham , R . J . , Jr . , Lin , J . J . - C . , and Wang , Y . - l . ( 1996 ) . A high molecular mass tropomyosin isoform stimulates retrograde organelle trans - port . J . Cell Sci . 109 , 981 – 989 . Pelham , R . J . , Jr . , and Wang , Y . - l . ( 1997 ) . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate ﬂexibility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 13661 – 13665 . Roy , P . , Petroll , W . M . , Cavanagh , H . D . , Chuong , C . J . , and Jester , J . V . ( 1997 ) . An in vitro force measurement assay to study the early mechanical interaction between corneal ﬁbroblasts and collagen matrix . Exp . Cell Res . 232 , 106 – 117 . Small , J . V . ( 1981 ) . Organization of actin in the leading edge of cultured cells : inﬂuence of osmium tetroxide and dehydration on the ultrastruc - ture of actin meshworks . J . Cell Biol . 91 , 695 – 705 . Wang , Y . - l . ( 1985 ) . Exchangeofactinsubunitsattheleadingedgeofliving ﬁbroblasts : possible roles in treadmilling . J . Cell Biol . 101 , 597 – 602 . Wang , Y . - l . , and Pelham , R . J . , Jr . ( 1998 ) . Preparation of a ﬂexible , porous polyacrylamide substrate for mechanical studies of cultured cells . Methods Enzymol . 298 , 489 – 496 . Forces Exerted by Cultured Cells Vol . 10 , April 1999 945