44 International Journal of e - Collaboration , 10 ( 3 ) , 44 - 62 , July - September 2014 Copyright © 2014 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . ABSTRACT While the potential value of Virtual World Technologies ( VWTs ) lies in their promise to facilitate communica - tion through new and novel forms of collaboration , there is a lack of prior research that examines how VWTs compare to other types of information and communication technologies ( ICT ) commonly used to support collaborative work . This study investigates the effects of VWTs on group ideation outcomes ; specifically , it compares the use of Second Life to a chat environment for idea generation tasks . As hypothesized , groups using VWTs for an idea generation task generated significantly more unique ideas and enjoyed using the environment more than the chat environment . Contrary to our predictions , no significant difference between the two environments was observed for satisfaction , group cohesion , and social presence . Exploring the Use of Virtual World Technology for Idea - Generation Tasks Jennifer A . Nicholson , Rohrer College of Business , Rowan University , Glassboro , NJ , USA Darren B . Nicholson , Rohrer College of Business , Rowan University , Glassboro , NJ , USA Patrick Coyle , Department of Psychology , Virginia Tech , Blacksburg , VA , USA Andrew Hardin , Lee Business School , University of Nevada , Las Vegas , Las Vegas , NV , USA Anjala S . Krishen , Lee Business School , University of Nevada , Las Vegas , Las Vegas , NV , USA Keywords : Communication , Cohesion , Satisfaction , Second Life , Virtual Groups INTRODUCTION Virtual worlds are three - dimensional , ( 3D ) computer - based , simulated environments where individuals , represented by avatars , can interact and communicate synchronously in a shared space that mimics the real world . Virtual world technologies ( VWTs ) , such as Second Life ( by Linden Labs ) , have surfaced as a placeless space of immense opportunity . Virtual worlds have attracted the attention of businesses and researchers as a promising alternative environ - ment in which to communicate , collaborate and organize economic activities ( Davis , Murphy , Owens , Khazanchi & Zigurs , 2009 ; Kock , 2008 ; Wasko , Teigland , Leidner & Jarvenpaa , 2011 ) . Researchers have even predicted that , by 2018 , virtual worlds will be the principal platform for DOI : 10 . 4018 / ijec . 2014070103 Copyright © 2014 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . International Journal of e - Collaboration , 10 ( 3 ) , 44 - 62 , July - September 2014 45 business applications and opportunities ( Ives & Jungles , 2008 ) . Many organizations such as Toyota , IBM , Reuters , and Wells Fargo have purchased land and other resources in virtual worlds with the hope of both exerting their presence ( i . e . , brand awareness ) and providing their stakeholders with a virtual space to interact ( Kock , 2008 ; Liu & Burn , 2009 ) . Unfortunately , many organizations have grown impatient wait - ing to see a return on investment from their VWT projects and , in some cases , have even terminated such projects ( e . g . Google’s Lively and Oracle’s Darkstar ) due to insufficient evi - dence of the value of VWTs . While the potential value of VWTs lies in their promise to help facilitate communication through new and novel forms of collaboration , little is known about the value of adopting and employing these emergent , virtual platforms as new work spaces and places for organiza - tional groups and teams ( Boughzala , Vreede & Limayem , 2012 ; Sivunen & Hakonen , 2011 ) . One of the perceived advantages of VWTs over traditional communication technologies ( e . g . , e - mail , chat ) is that they provide media capabilities that can enhance verbal , visual , and spatial cues ( Davis et al . , 2009 ) that may result in a richer , more immersive experience . Without specific metrics , however , the value that can be created by simply transferring exist - ing business practices and processes from one medium to another remains unclear ( Duranti & de Almeida , 2012 ; Ross , Recker & West , 2011 ; Sivunen & Hakonen , 2011 ) . In order to determine if VWTs provide more value than other mediums used for col - laboration purposes , a direct comparison of mediums must be performed . Few studies , how - ever , have empirically examined how virtual worlds compare to other types of information and communication technologies ( ICT ) com - monly used by organizations to support group work processes , such as ideation ( e . g . , Hoyt & Blascovich , 2003 ; Siau , et al . , 2010 ) . To date , virtual world studies have primar - ily centered on a medium’s effectiveness for enhancing learning outcomes , commerce activi - ties , work - flow outcomes , general collabora - tion , and , more recently , enriching creativity ( Davis et al . , 2009 ; Siau , Nah , Mennecke , & Schiller , 2010 ) . A recent study by Venkatesh & Windeler ( 2012 ) compared two collaborative technology systems , one of which was a virtual world system , and found that the relationship between team technology use and team cohe - sion was stronger over time for teams using a VW system , which positively influenced team performance . In the Venkatesh & Windeler ( 2012 ) study , team performance was a self - reported measure of how the team felt about the quality of their work and the effectiveness of their team . The current study examines whether VWTs can enhance outcomes for groups working on an idea generation task . An empirical study comparing two different types of computer - mediated settings ( i . e . , a chat room and a VWT ) was conducted to see if VWTs facilitate rela - tive , measurable value as compared to other techniques that have been examined in the extant ideation , group decision support , and computer - mediated collaboration literature . Consistent with prior ideation research ( e . g . , Dennis & Reinicke , 2004 ; Valacich , Dennis , & Connolly , 1994 ) , this study does not oper - ate under the assumption that every single idea formulated is contributory to better group performance , or that idea quantity and quality are the only important dependent variables in ideation research . Rather , we recognize many additional dependent variables in the broader context of collaboration activities that holisti - cally embody the study of socio - technical phenomena in the context of group - supported work in organizations . Hence , we also measure satisfaction , enjoyment , social presence , and cohesiveness . LITERATURE REVIEW Many organizations have adopted some form of computer - mediated communication ( CMC ) , particularly chat - type programs , to support com - munication and collaboration tasks performed by teams whose members reside in geographi - 17 more pages are available in the full version of this document , which may be purchased using the " Add to Cart " button on the product ' s webpage : www . igi - global . com / article / exploring - the - use - of - virtual - world - technology - for - idea - generation - tasks / 118233 ? camid = 4v1 This title is available in InfoSci - Journals , InfoSci - Journal Disciplines Communications and Social Science , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Communications , Online Engagement , and Media eJournal Collection , InfoSci - Journal Disciplines Business , Administration , and Management . Recommend this product to your librarian : www . igi - global . com / e - resources / library - recommendation / ? id = 2 Related Content Internet Based Collaboration Tools Lori Wahl and Allen Kitchel ( 2016 ) . International Journal of e - Collaboration ( pp . 27 - 43 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / internet - based - collaboration - tools / 143888 ? camid = 4v1a A Case Study of Web - Based Collaborative Decision Support at NASA Irma Becerra - Fernandez , Martha Del Alto and Helen Stewart ( 2006 ) . International Journal of e - Collaboration ( pp . 50 - 64 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / case - study - web - based - collaborative / 1946 ? camid = 4v1a Guidelines to Innovate Organizations by Knowledge Management via Communities of Practice Roberta Salgado Gonçalves da Silva and Edson Walmir Cazarini ( 2016 ) . Cultural , Behavioral , and Social Considerations in Electronic Collaboration ( pp . 293 - 308 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / guidelines - to - innovate - organizations - by - knowledge - management - via - communities - of - practice / 140715 ? camid = 4v1a Semantic + + Electronic Commerce Architecture and Models in Cloud Guigang Zhang , Chao Li , Yong Zhang , Chunxiao Xing , Sixin Xue and Yuenan Liu ( 2015 ) . Strategic E - Commerce Systems and Tools for Competing in the Digital Marketplace ( pp . 1 - 25 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / semantic - electronic - commerce - architecture - and - models - in - cloud / 125539 ? camid = 4v1a