ALTERNATIVESCRITICAL2015 5 DECENNIAL AARHUS CONFERENCE TH Workshops and Demos VOLUME II Critical Alternatives Workshops and Demos Proceedings of The Fifth Decennial Aarhus Conference 17 - 21 August 2015 , Aarhus , Denmark i Workshops Shifting Borderland of Technoscience : Tracing Trajectories of Critical Practice Silvia Lindtner , Marisa Leavitt Cohn , Lucian Leahu , Hr¨onn B Holmer & Carl DiSalvo 1 Unfolding Participation . What do we mean by participation – conceptually and in practice Joanna Saad - Sulonen , Kim Halskov , Liesbeth Huybrechts , John Vines , Eva Eriksson & Helena Karasti 5 Charting the Next Decade for Value Sensitive Design Batya Friedman , David G . Hendry , Jeroen van den Hoven , Alina Huldtgren , Catholijn Jonker & Aimee van Wynsberghe 9 Critical and participatory development of people centered smart learning ecosys - tems and territories Carlo Giovannella & Matthias Rehm 13 Making “World Machines” : Discourse , Design and Global Technologies for Greater - than - self Issues Ann Light , Jeff Bardzell , Shaowen Bardzell , Geoff Cox , Jonas Fritsch & Lone Koefoed Hansen 15 Residents’ Democratic engagement in public housing and urban areas – struc - tures , formalities and technologies Olav W . Bertelsen , Henrik Korsgaard , Konrad Tolmar , Yngve Sundblad , Carolin Schr¨oder & Ingrid Kuhn 19 Researching for Change in a Globalising Asymmetric World Edwin Blake , Ineke B¨uskens & Andy Dearden 23 “I’ve had it ! ” Group therapy for interdisciplinary researchers Marko Jurmu , Johanna Ylipulli & Anna Luusua 27 The Future of Making : Where Industrial and Personal Fabrication Meet Verena Fuchsberger , Martin Murer , Manfred Tscheligi , Silvia Lindtner , Andreas Reiter , Shaowen Bardzell , Jeffrey Bardzell & Pernille Bjørn 31 Inviting Participation through IoT : Experiments and Performances in Public Spaces Sarah Fox , Kathi R . Kitner , Margaret Morris & Daniela K . Rosner 35 Embodying Embodied Design Research Techniques Danielle Wilde , Oscar Tomico , Andr´es Lucero , Kristina H¨o¨ok & Jacob Buur 39 Multi - Lifespan Information System Design Batya Friedman , Lisa P . Nathan & Daisy Yoo 43 Criticism – for computational alternatives Søren Bro Pold , Olav W . Bertelsen , Lone Koefoed Hansen , Christian Ulrik Andersen , Shaowen Bardzell , Jeffrey Bardzell & Mark Blythe 47 ii Demos Light is Loud : A Sound Driven LED Suit Artur Aguiar , Bryan Malyn , Evan Lobeto & Steve Harrison 49 AmBird : Mediating Intimacy for Long Distance Relationships through an Ambient Awareness System Sine Jespersen , Rasmus Stounbjerg & Nervo Verdezoto 51 Legere : A Visualizer for Spoken Audio Alex Lamar , Timmy Meyer , Loran Steinberger & Steve Harrison 53 OPENKI : The platform for open education Urban Sand , Stephan Balmer , Luca Obert¨ufer & Emre Sarigol 55 The Messaging Kettle : It’s IoTea time Alessandro Soro , Margot Brereton & Paul Roe 57 Tilting \ Plate and Bending \ Arches : Shape - Changing Interfaces as Expressive Forms Morten Winther 59 iii Shifting Borderland of Technoscience : Tracing Trajectories of Critical Practice Silvia Lindtner University of Michigan Ann Arbor , MI 48109 , USA lindtner @ umich . edu Marisa Leavitt Cohn IT - Universitetet i København 2300 København S , DK marisa @ itu . dk Lucian Leahu IT - Universitetet i København 2300 København S , DK lucian @ itu . dk Hrönn B Holmer Cornell University Ithaca , NY 14853 , USA hb47 @ cornell . edu Carl DiSalvo Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta , GA 30308 , USA carl . disalvo @ lm . gatech . edu ABSTRACT Since the publication of Phil Agre’s [ 1 ] seminal work on critical technical practice , the sites of intersection between computation and society have multiplied , and so too have the sociotechnical borderlands we inhabit . Critical methodologies such as “critical design” [ 8 , 6 , 5 ] , “reflective design” [ 3 , 4 , 7 , 9 , 15 , 12 ] , “critical making” [ 11 , 6 , 7 ] , “located accountability” [ 13 , 14 ] , “feminist HCI” [ 2 ] , and “postcolonial computing” [ 10 ] have proliferated and are being taken up in increasingly diverse political , cultural and social contexts . As the sites of critical praxis have multiplied , new regimes like big data and social computing pose new challenges . Given the fluidity of the landscape it is important for us to articulate the specificities of our scholarly borderlands . By bringing together junior and senior scholars we aim to provide a forum for researchers in this area to learn from each other how to navigate changing terrains of technology research and design . To maximize in - depth collaboration between junior and senior scholars , we propose a format that includes in - depth mentoring sessions , panel presentations from junior and senior participants , group activities , and working sessions for steps forward . The goal of the proposed workshop is to foster cohesion and build mentoring relationships within the community by creating a space for open and honest dialogue about the challenges of conducting critical research and design practice . Outcomes from this workshop will be a shared knowledge base about praxis , tracing the trajectories , continuities , traversals and inheritances of critical sociotechnical research over the past decade , as well as strengthening of the critical technical practice community by way of establishing lasting mentorship relations . Author Keywords Critical technical practice ; critical making ; critical design ; critical computing ; social computing ; reflective design ; located accountability ; feminist HCI ; research community ; sociotechnical studies ; interdisciplinarity . ACM Classification Keywords K . 2 . Computing Milieux : History of Computing - People . INTRODUCTION TOPIC AND RATIONALE The Århus Decennial conference offers a unique space to gather together junior and senior scholars whose research sits at the intersection of social , technical , and critical scholarship . Straddling multiple worlds , this kind of research involves distinctive opportunities and challenges . As Phil Agre wrote in his seminal piece on critical technical praxis such research means keeping “one foot planted in the craft work of design and the other foot in the reflective work of critique . ” Since Agre’s work was published , the sites of intersection between computation and society have multiplied , and so too have the sociotechnical borderlands we inhabit . Critical methodologies such as “critical design” [ 8 , 6 , 5 ] , “reflective design” [ 3 , 4 , 7 , 9 , 15 , 12 ] , “critical making” [ 11 , 7 , 6 ] , “located accountability” [ 13 , 14 ] , “feminist HCI” [ 2 ] , and “postcolonial computing” [ 10 ] . These critical methodologies have been taken up into increasingly diverse political , cultural and social contexts bringing critical practice to the worlds of policy and consulting work , to design and engineering , to start - ups and maker culture , to the politics of machine learning , and so on . As the sites of critical praxis have multiplied , new regimes for performing critical praxis have appeared . While today it might still be possible to engage in critical work in ways similar to Agre’s – (cid:1) e . g . , in an academic AI lab – (cid:1) the trajectories of computational systems and infrastructures of the past decade increasingly challenge this mode of performing critical technical work . For example , computational endeavors such as big data and social computing often locate technical as well as financial Copyright© 2015 is held by the author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to Aarhus University and ACM 5th Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives August 17 – 21 , 2015 , Aarhus Denmark DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21471 1 resources with corporate actors . To obtain access to data and other resources , academic practitioners interested in critical work in these domains must partner with relevant ( e . g . , corporate ) entities . In other words , to critically intervene in these domains one must be located either within the structures governing these resources or must enter into partnership with them . Given these constantly changing landscapes it is important for us to articulate the specificities of our scholarly borderlands : where are we now and how did we get here ? How has the terrain shifted over the past 10 years ? Where might we be headed ? What have we resolved and what are challenges for critical scholarship today ? How can we introduce and train junior scholars amidst these shifting terrains ? This workshop aims to provide a forum for researchers in this area to learn from each other how to navigate changing terrains of technology research and design . By articulating and sharing our own trajectories , we hope to build cohesion and foster mentorship relations within the community . WORKSHOP GOALS AND THEMES The goal of the workshop is to foster cohesion and build mentoring relationships within the community of critical sociotechnical research by creating a space for open and honest dialogue about the challenges of conducting critical research and design practice . In particular , we want to use the unique occasion of the Århus Decennial conference to foster engagement between junior and senior scholars in the field , with the hopes that sharing knowledge , strategies , and tactics across generations will foster new opportunities for mentorship and collaboration . We aim to use the workshop to trace out trajectories of critical praxis as encountered by the workshop participants over the duration of their careers , to help articulate the conditions and stakes of the shifting sites of critical technical research and practice , and to help scholars just entering the field to navigate their own sites and encounters . As such , our aims are three fold : Create a space for sharing knowledge about praxis . Taking inspiration from Agre’s piece on critical technical practice , we will ask scholars to articulate the sociotechnical borderlands they have inhabited and how these have shifted over time . Agre’s piece exemplifies situated knowledges that do not often make it to publication . Therefore we aim to create a forum for discussing the practical empirical and theoretical work that goes into crafting these multi - faceted sites / encounters between the critical and the technical . We will particularly encourage experienced scholars in the field to contribute based on their long - term engagements . Trace the trajectories , continuities , traversals , inheritances of critical sociotechnical research over the past decade . Lucy Suchman once reflected that she began to truly appreciate her interdisciplinary encounters during the 1980s only many years later [ 13 ] . Understanding these encounters can be a career - long pursuit , as we do not often understand their nature immediately . For this reason , we aim to open up a space to reflect on individual and collective trajectories rooted in our earlier sociotechnical encounters . We ask : what can be learned from looking back and reflecting upon the conditions / sites of critical technical work a decade ago , and how can we use this to help makes sense of where they are today ? Build cohesion and lasting mentorship relations . One attribute of critical technical work is that it tends to renew itself continually to keep up with the pace of new technologies and the flux of a shifting landscape . An emphasis on praxis helps to cut across these domains to build cohesion and to strengthen the critical technical practice community . Each researcher may be active in different fields ( healthcare , media , big data , hacking , etc . ) with their respective sociotechnical entanglements - yet we believe there are challenges of praxis that resonate across these various sites , which can serve to build cohesion and lasting mentor relations . In order to generate discussion , we pose the following thematic questions : 1 . In what political , cultural , economic , and institutional borderlands do we as researchers , scholars , students , mentors , teachers , and practitioners of technology operate today ? How have these shifted since the last Århus conference took place in 2005 ? 2 . How do we situate ourselves critically within these borderlands ? In what sites do we locate possibilities for criticality ? What is at stake in the particular boundaries we work with or translate across – disciplinary or institutional ? 3 . How do we critically craft these borderlands in the current research landscape , through “worldings , ” encounters and partnerships ? Through what kinds of partnerships within and outside academia do we forge sites of critical praxis ? 4 . How do we navigate the multiple accountabilities of our research engagements and commitments within current structures of academic publishing , funding , and teaching ? By exploring these questions during the workshop , we aim to build up shared knowledge by tracing the trajectories of critical technical research over the past decade and to foster engagements between junior and senior scholars . Our underlying goal is to understand how the borderlands of our scholarship and wider practices and cultures in which we each locate our work have shifted or remained the same . While the space for critical scholarship in technical 2 research , computing and design has opened , other challenges remain . For instance , funding avenues are increasingly diminishing across the EU and in the United States , pressures on individual productivity is increasing , and the corporatization of universities is in full swing At the same time , critical practice is proliferating way beyond academia . For instance , both the corporate sphere and government agencies are increasingly sites for critical engagement . How does the opening of new sites shift the borders of practice , and what are the implications for research and pedagogy ? Put directly , what is stake in the encounters of the social and the technical today , and how does this relate to the borderlands encountered in earlier decades ? Have fractures been smoothed over , shifted to new locales , been renewed , or put to rest ? A sign of increasing legitimacy can be seen when the students emerging from these interdisciplinary spaces embark on careers . But with these successes come new questions of how to navigate the infrastructures of funding , teaching , and writing . What are the emergent forms of accountability to which we must articulate our research ? Are there new challenges or possibilities emerging within the reconfigured constellations of research , teaching and funding ? Agenda 8 : 30 - 9 : 00 Intro : themes , goals , critical questions , ice breakers 9 : 00 - 10 : 00 Panel – (cid:1) current streams of CrHCI 10 : 00 - 10 : 15 Coffee break 10 : 15 - 11 : 00 Small group discussion 11 : 00 - 12 : 00 Mentoring session 1 12 : 00 - 1 : 00 Lunch 1 : 00 - 2 : 00 Panel – (cid:1) Emerging Challenges 3 : 00 - 3 : 45 Small group work 3 : 45 - 4 : 00 Coffee Break 4 : 00 - 5 : 00 Mentoring session 3 5 : 00 - 6 : 00 Group discussion 7 : 00 - end Adjourn , Workshop dinner WORKSHOP RECRUITMENT STRATEGY We hope to attract 20 - 25 participants who are currently working in the context of critical computing . We will aim for a ratio of 2 - 3 junior participants for each experienced participant to facilitate mentoring . We will encourage submissions from people working in areas such as anthropology , media studies , information science , sociology , design and making , and science and technology studies as these areas all have contributed to critical approaches to computing . The organizers straddle these areas and therefore have access to necessary channels to circulate the call , elicit submissions and access both senior and junior scholars in this domain of work . We will set up a workshop website where we will post workshop information , call for papers , prospective agenda and workshop papers . We will also create a Google group to foster discussion prior to the workshop . OUTCOMES Results from the workshop will be written up , documented and archived on a custom website , dedicated to the workshop . Beyond the conference , we aim to foster a nascent community of scholars concerned with critical computing scholarship and practice and we will use the occasion of the workshop to do so . We will also establish an email list for conversations to begin prior to the conference and plan to continue this list post - conference . We will coordinate a series of post - workshop activities such as a special issue and a handbook on critical computing . Through the Google group connection , we hope to provide the tools and connections to develop this community . ORGANIZERS Silvia Lindtner is an Assistant Professor at the University of Michigan in the School of Information . Her research investigates the role digital technologies play in global processes of innovation , work and labor , as sites of expressions of selfhood and collectivity , and in relation to political , social and economic processes of urban redesign . She explores these themes through a contemporary research project ; maker and hacker culture , with a particular focus on its intersections with manufacturing and innovation discourse in China . She has published in various disciplines such as HCI , STS , and China studies , and has organized numerous workshops at Ubicomp and CHI as well as international workshops on making cultures . Marisa Cohn is an Assistant Professor at the IT University of Copenhagen , in the Technologies in Practice and Interaction Design research groups . Her research draws on anthropology , STS , and information studies to understand software as a cultural artifact , focusing on sociotemporal entanglements in long - lived science infrastructure . She has organized workshops and panels on ethnographic and interdisciplinary methods , code studies , and design authority at venues such as 4S , DIS , CalIT2 , and Art Center for Design . 3 Lucian Leahu is an Assistant Professor at the IT University of Copenhagen , in the Interaction Design and Technologies in Practice research groups . His research draws on computer and information science , design , and STS to explore novel ways of relating to technology made possible by the vast and varied kinds of data available today and by computational approaches such as machine learning and big data . Hrönn Brynjarsdóttir Holmer is a PhD candidate in the department of Information Science at Cornell University . Her research focuses on the politics of information , creation of data and data modeling as it pertains to natural resource management in the Icelandic fishery . To that end she has engaged in ethnographic fieldwork since 2009 , interviewing a wide range of stakeholders in the fishery , observing and participating in work on board freezer trawlers and danish seine vessels as well as conducting historical archival research . Carl DiSalvo is an Associate Professor in the Digital Media Program in the School of Literature , Communication , and Culture at the Georgia Institute of Technology . His research draws together the humanities , science and technology studies , and design to increase public engagement with technology and analyze the social and political uses of digital media . REFERENCES 1 . Agre , P . , 1997 . Toward a Critical Technical Practice : Lessons Learned in Trying to Reform Al . Social science , technical systems , and cooperative work : Beyond the Great Divide , p . 131 . 2 . Bardzell , S . , 2010 . Feminist HCI : taking stock and outlining an agenda for design . In Proceedings of the 28th international conference on Human factors in computing systems . pp . 1301 – 1310 . 3 . Bødker , S . , 2006 . When second wave HCI meets third wave challenges . In Proceedings of the 4th Nordic conference on Human - computer interaction : changing roles . pp . 1 – 8 . 4 . Coleman , G . 2012 . Anonymous and I [ Guest contributor ] post on ethnography matters . http : / / ethnographymatters . net , last accessed October , 2012 . 5 . DiSalvo , C . , Nourbakhsh , I . , & Holstius , D . ( 2008 ) . The neighborhood networks project : A case study of critical engagement and creative expression through participatory design . 6 . Dunne , A . and Raby , R . 2001 . Design Noir : The Secret Life of Electronic Objects , Springer . 7 . Leahu , L . , Thom - Santelli , J . , Pederson , C . , Sengers , P . 2004 . Taming the Situationist Beast . In Proceedings of the 7 th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ) , 203 - 211 . 8 . Light , A . ( 2011 ) Democratising Technology : Inspiring Transformation with Design , Performance and Props , In Proc . of the 2011 ACM Conference on Human Factors of Computing . 9 . Lindtner , S . , Anderson , K . , Dourish , P . 2012 . Cultural Appropriation : Information Technologies as Sites of Transnational Imagination . Proc . of the ACM Conference on CSCW , Seattle , Washington . 10 . Philip , K . , Irani , L . & Dourish , P . , 2012 . Postcolonial Computing A Tactical Survey . Science , Technology & Human Values , 37 ( 1 ) , pp . 3 – 29 . 11 . Ratto , M . , 2011 . Critical Making : conceptual and material studies in technology and social life . The Information Society , 27 ( 4 ) , pp . 252 – 260 . 12 . Sengers , P . et al . , 2005 . Reflective design . In Proceedings of the 4th decennial conference on Critical computing : between sense and sensibility . pp . 49 – 58 . 13 . Suchman , L . , 2002 . Located accountabilities in technology production . Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems , 14 ( 2 ) , pp . 91 – 106 . 14 . Taylor , A . 2011 . Out There . In Proc . of the 2011 ACM Conference on Human Factors of Computing , 685 - 694 . 15 . Williams , A . , Brewer , J . , Gibb , A . , Wilhelm , E . , Forrest , H . 2012 . Indy R & R : Doing HCI Research Off the Beaten Path , Juried Panel at CHI 2012 , Austin , TX . 4 Unfolding Participation . What do we mean by participation – conceptually and in practice Joanna Saad - Sulonen Centre for Participatory IT Aarhus University , Denmark + 45 871 56212 jss @ cs . au . dk John Vines Digital Interaction Group Culture Lab Newcastle University , UK john . vines @ newcastle . ac . uk Kim Halskov Centre for Participatory IT Aarhus University , Denmark + 45 871 61982 halskov @ cavi . au . dk Eva Eriksson Department of Applied IT Chalmers University of Technology , Sweden eva . eriksson @ chalmers . se Liesbeth Huybrechts Faculty of Architecture and Art University of Hasselt , Belgium + 32 486158840 liesbeth . huybrechts @ uhasselt . be Helena Karasti Information Systems Luleå University of Technology Luleå , Sweden helena . karasti @ ltu . se ABSTRACT The aim of the Unfolding Participation workshop is to outline an agenda for the next 10 years of participatory design ( PD ) and participatory human computer interaction ( HCI ) research . We will do that through a double strategy : 1 ) by critically interrogating the concept of participation ( unfolding the concept itself ) , while at the same time , 2 ) reflecting on the way that participation unfolds across different participatory configurations . We invite researchers and practitioners from PD and HCI and fields in which information technology mediated participation is embedded ( e . g . in political studies , urban planning , participatory arts , business , science and technology studies ) to bring a plurality of perspectives and expertise related to participation . Author Keywords Participation ; participatory design ; design events ; information technology ; IT - mediated participation ; democracy ACM Classification Keywords H5 [ Information interfaces and presentation ] : User interfaces - user - centered design . DESCRIPTION OF THE WORKSHOP The last few years have witnessed attempts from various research communities interested in participatory approaches to information technology ( IT ) to define what they mean by participation . Whereas much of the conceptual and ideological grounding for participation in IT comes from the field of Participatory Design ( PD ) , even there , the definitions of participation are varied and often not explicitly articulated [ 2 ] . A recent report by CHI community members also highlights the need for mapping the various definitions of the term participation used in the field as well as identifying the ways these definitions are shaped by interaction with other discourses [ 6 ] . Clearly , it is time for us as a community of participatory designers and researchers to question what we exactly mean when we say “participation” and how it is reflected in our practice . PD has always been motivated by a concern for improving the quality of life and work situations by designing critical alternatives with a more or less pronounced utopian agenda . These designed alternatives come in the form of products , coupled with an engagement in politics that was especially key in shaping the original Scandinavian PD approach . Participatory design takes place by involving people in the design process , in increasingly varying contexts . Participatory methods are deployed during participatory design events staged by designers in order to make this involvement possible . ( See Figure 1 ; [ 2 ] ) . Participation in PD research has had a strong focus on exploratory design projects and so far has often taken place through single design events ( e . g . an ethnographic field study or a workshop ) , where issues such as ‘involving users’ , including the users point of view , and participation as a matter of mutual learning have been in the foreground . Copyright© 2015 is held by the author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to Aarhus University and ACM 5th Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives August 17 – 21 , 2015 , Aarhus Denmark DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21471 5 Figure 1 : The five fundamental aspects of PD Today , we witness many different other types of participations that also combine IT and politics . For example , participation related to decision - making , dialogue and debate around matters of concern are increasingly occurring online , mediated by IT during use time . It happens at the grassroots level through participatory IT ( Web 2 . 0 ) , or is set up by authorities or other actors engaged in triggering participation . If this current trend continues , what will be the role of the staged participatory design event , which is based on in - person engagement with others ? What kind of new participatory configurations can emerge ? In what ways can they support the original values of PD around democracy , quality of working life and politics ? The aim of the Unfolding Participation workshop is to outline an agenda for the next 10 years of participatory design and participatory HCI research . We will do that through a double strategy : 1 ) by critically interrogating the concept of participation ( unfolding the concept itself ) , while at the same time 2 ) reflecting on the way that participation unfolds across different participatory configurations . We will build upon the discussion started by [ 2 ] and [ 6 ] and ask : What counts as participation in IT - related fields ? How does participation unfold over time and across different participatory configurations ? These questions are timely and open up a space for challenging the way participation often takes place in the fields of PD and participatory HCI . Initiating this discussion would benefit from the face - to - face type of interaction and debate that a workshop format brings . We invite researchers and practitioners from PD and HCI and fields in which IT - mediated participation is embedded ( e . g . in political studies , urban planning , participatory arts , business , science and technology studies ) to reflect together on : i ) how participation has unfolded in projects or case studies in which they have been involved ( during and in - between design events ) , ii ) how has it connected to types of participations other than design events , and iii ) how does their own participatory practice relate to IT - mediated participation and participatory IT specifically ? Contributions to the workshop may expand one or more of the following key issues : • How can we map , analyse and reflect on how participation is unfolding over time and in different configurations ? • How does participation during and in - between design events link to other forms of participation , such as what is increasingly being referred to as infrastructuring [ 4 ] ? • What do participatory IT and IT mediated participation mean during and in - between design events ? • What are current democratic drivers for participation ? • What are possible combinations of different types of participation ( design of IT + others ) [ 5 ] ? • When we talk about participation , do we mean the same thing in different fields [ 3 ] ? How to engage in exchange and collaboration with other fields that also deal with participation , but also with all those involved in practice ? • What are the challenges for participation in large - scale configurations [ 1 ] ? The workshop will cover one full day ( 09 : 00 - 16 : 30 on 17 th of August 2015 ) . The optimal number of participants would be approximately 15 . Groups will be pre - formed by the organisers around themes identified in the position papers . The planned activities for the day are as follows : 1 ) introduction to the day’s programme by the organisers and division of the participants in groups ; 2 ) quick pitches by the participants in their group and group discussions around the key topics ; 3 ) identifying key challenges through group work ; 4 ) from challenges to sketching an agenda for the next 10 years ( collaborative ideation session resulting in a DIY poster to be displayed during the conference ) ; 5 ) planning for publishing a join workshop summary report and other possible further publications . The workshop organizers all share an interest in participation but approach it from different angles : Kim Halskov is professor in interaction design at The Department of Aesthetics and Communication at Aarhus University , Denmark where he in addition to being director of Centre for Advanced Visualization and Interaction , see CAVI . au . dk , also is co - director of the Centre for Participatory IT , see PIT . au . dk . From a background in participatory design Kim Halskov’s research areas includes innovation processes , design processes , and experience design . Joanna Saad - Sulonen is a postdoctoral researcher at the Centre for Participatory IT at Aarhus University . She has a background in architecture , new media and digital design . She recently defended her PhD on the topic of Combining Participations where she claims that participatory approaches to the design of IT can be combined with participatory approaches in urban planning . 6 Eva Eriksson is a lecturer in Interaction design at the Department of Applied IT , Chalmers University of Technology , in Gothenburg , Sweden , where she is also responsible for the IXDCTH design labs . She has experience from large - scale participation , PD in digital fabrication in schools , and is one of the founders of IDAC - Gothenburg Working Group for Interaction Design and Children ( IDAC . se ) - a research group focused on designing interaction for and with children . Liesbeth Huybrechts is a Postdoctoral researcher in the area of participatory design , media , architecture and planning in the research group Arck ( University of Hasselt ) . Moreover , she is involved in the masters Social Design in Design Academy of Eindhoven . She was co - founder of the research group Social Spaces ( KULeuven ) , exploring the social meanings , uses and applications of design and art . She is currently involved in the research project Traders ( FP7 , Marie Curie ) , dealing with the exploration of definitions and practices of Participatory Design and Art in Public Space ( www . tr - aders . eu ) and WeforWork Genk , researching contemporary workspaces and forms in participatory ways . John Vines is Lecturer in Interaction Design Methods , based within the Digital Interaction Group at Culture Lab , Newcastle University . His research concerns the study and development of methods and techniques for involving people in design processes , and has a particular interest in the role of digital technology in supporting wider citizen engagement in matters of local concern , including neighborhood services and planning , social care and civic engagement . He also has ongoing research exploring what the term ' participation ' means in the field of HCI , especially in a period where boundaries between disciplines engaging in participatory activity are increasingly blurred . Helena Karasti , professor in information systems at Luleå University of Technology , Sweden , has a long - term research interest in the integrations of participatory design and ethnography . She has studied participatory design in settings where no professional designers were involved , thus giving rise to different understandings of participation ( s ) . Driven with interest in ethnography and critical research traditions she has addressed the notions and practices of participation from the vantage point of reflexivity . She has contributed to research on infrastructuring where the issues of participation are revisited due to the complexities and extended scopes involved . CALL FOR PARTICIPATION The aim of the Unfolding Participation workshop is to outline an agenda for the next 10 years of participatory design and participatory HCI research . We will do that through a double strategy : 1 ) by critically interrogating the concept of participation ( unfolding the concept itself ) , while at the same time , 2 ) by reflecting on the way that participation unfolds across different participatory configurations . We will continue the discussion started by [ 2 ] and [ 6 ] related to the current fuzziness in defining participation in participatory design and participatory HCI research , and ask : What counts as participation in IT - related fields ? How does participation unfold over time and across different participatory configurations ? PD research has a strong history in participation for democratic goals and has brought forward the need to consider these goals while at the same time opening up participation in the design of IT . So far , participation in PD research has often taken place through exploratory design projects and single design events ( e . g . an ethnographic field study or a workshop ) , where issues such as ‘involving users’ , including the users point of view , and participation as a matter of mutual learning have been in the foreground . Today , we witness many different other types of participations that also combine IT and politics , but not in the traditional PD manner . For example , participation related to decision - making , dialogue and debate around matters of concern are increasingly occurring online , mediated by IT during use time . What does this mean for PD ? There is a pressing need to explore how staged participation unfolds over time and design events and how it might link to other forms of participation . The workshop will kick start joint reflection on shaping a research agenda around participation for the next ten years by identifying challenges that PD and participatory HCI would need to debate . Given that the issues invoked here cross many disciplinary boundaries , we invite submissions from researchers and practitioners from a myriad of fields and disciplines to bring a plurality of perspectives and expertise related to participation . We therefore invite work from not just those situated in participatory design and human - computer interaction but also from fields such as political studies , urban planning , participatory arts , business , and science and technology studies , among others . Potential participants are asked to reflect on the following : i ) How has participation unfolded in projects or case studies in which they have been involved ( during and in - between design events ) ? ii ) How has it connected to types of participations other than design events ? iii ) How does their own participatory practice relate to IT - mediated participation and participatory IT specifically ? The workshop aims to bring forward the need for a contemporary take on participation and how it relates to democracy , and IT . Where do these concerns stand now when focus has for a while been more on the staging of participation through design events , but also when IT is increasingly mediating other forms of participation ? The key issues to address include ( but are not limited to ) : • How can we map , analyse and reflect on how participation is unfolding over time and participatory configurations ? 7 • How does participation during and in - between design events link to other forms of participation , such as what is increasingly being referred to as infrastructuring ? • What do participatory IT and IT mediated participation mean during and in - between design events ? • What are current democratic drivers for participation ? • What are possible combinations of different types of participation ( design of IT + others ) ? • When we talk about participation , do we mean the same thing in different fields ? How to engage in exchange and collaboration with other fields that also deal with participation , but also with all those involved in practice ? • What are the challenges for participation in large - scale configurations ? The above mentioned key issues can be addressed and expanded by reflecting on these more general challenges related to participation and how they unfold in the particular context of participation with and for IT : • The shaping and unfolding of the participatory processes over time : What are the conditions that shape participation ? What are the dynamics of participations ? How and when can participation be sustained , and why ? What is the role of IT ? • The boundaries of participation : When does participation begin and end ? • Scandinavia is the historical home of PD , but also the place where a certain type of democracy has been and is being practiced . How does this shape our practice of participation ? What does it mean when we are at the same time part of a wider global reality where different modes of production and sharing are shaping new cultures of participation ? We invite submissions of positions papers as 2 - 4 pages PDF documents following the SIGCHI publications template ( http : / / www . sigchi . org / publications / chipubform ) . Submissions need to address the main topic of the workshop as well as one or more of the key issues . The optimal number of participants is around 15 . Selection will be based on the relevance of the position papers with regards to the theme and key issues of the workshop . The selected position papers will be published on the workshop website : http : / / pit . au . dk / unfoldingparticipation . The main outcomes of the workshop will be summarized into a co - authored joint workshop report / publication . RECRUITMENT STRATEGY The call for participation will be distributed from mid March to mid May 2015 . The workshop coordinators will use their connections with key research centers in HCI , design , architecture , urban planning , and science and technology studies , to distribute the call for participation . They will be able to reach significant PD , participatory HCI , as well participatory planning audiences worldwide . The call will also be distributed through key mailing lists including CHI announcement , NordiCHI announcement , Design Research Society and PD mailing lists . We will also be using social media as a means for engaging with potential workshop participants , supplemented by a frequently updated workshop website hosted on the Aarhus University servers . All submissions will be peer reviewed by the workshop organizers . The review and selection process will aim to ensure that the papers address the theme and key issues outlines in the call for papers : Does the paper address the theme of participation in ( or with ) IT ? Does the paper provide critical reflection on what counts as participation ? Does the paper address one or more of the following key themes : 1 ) The unfolding of participation over time and participatory configurations 2 ) Different types of participations : design events , infrastructuring , IT - mediated participation and possible relationships between them 3 ) Contemporary democratic drivers of participation 4 ) The need for a coming of age of research on participation and the need for trans - disciplinary approaches We will inform authors of decisions and of any requested changes to their papers approximately three weeks after the submission deadline . We will use the workshop website , along with email , as a way of frequently updating accepted participants . The participants will be given the opportunity to read each other’s work before the workshop . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Dalsgaard P . , Eriksson E . Large - Scale participation : A case study of a Participatory Approach to Developing a New Public Library . In proceedings of CHI . Paris , France , ( 2013 ) . ACM press , New York . [ 2 ] Halskov , K . & Hansen , N . B . The diversity of participatory design research practice at PDC 2002 - 2012 . In International Journal of Human - Computer Studies . ( 2014 ) . [ 3 ] Huybrechts , L . ( ed . ) Participation is Risky . Approaches to Joint Creative Processes . Amsterdam : Valiz . 2014 . [ 4 ] Karasti , H . Infrastructuring in participatory design . In Proc . of PDC’14 . ( 2014 ) . ACM Press [ 5 ] Saad - Sulonen , J . Combining Participations . Doctoral dissertation . Helsinki : Aalto University . 2014 . [ 6 ] Vines , J . , Clarke , R . , Wright , P . , McCarthy , J . , Olivier , P . Summary Report on CHI 2012 invited SIG : Participation and HCI : Why Involve People in Design ? ( 2012 ) . 8 Charting the Next Decade for Value Sensitive Design Batya Friedman University of Washington Seattle , WA , USA 98195 - 2840 batya @ uw . edu David G . Hendry University of Washington Seattle , WA , USA 98195 - 2840 dhendry @ uw . edu Alina Huldtgren Eindhoven University of Technology 5600 MB Eindhoven , Netherlands a . huldtgren @ tue . nl Catholijn Jonker Delft University of Technology 2628 CD Delft , Netherlands C . M . Jonker @ tudelft . nl Jeroen van den Hoven Delft University of Technology 2628 BX Delft , Netherlands M . J . vandenHoven @ tudelft . nl Aimee van Wynsberghe University of Twente Enschede , Netherlands , 7500AE a . l . vanwynsberghe @ utwente . nl ABSTRACT In the 2010’s it is widely recognized by computer and information scientists , social scientists , designers , and philosophers of technology that the design of information systems is not value neutral [ 5 - 8 , 11 ] . Rather , such systems are value laden in part because societal values are major factors in shaping systems , and at the same time the design of the technology reinforces , restructures or uproots societal value structures . Of the many theories and methods to design for this phenomenon one continues to gain traction for its systematic and overarching consideration of values in the design process : Value Sensitive Design ( VSD ) [ 5 - 7 ] . The aim of this multidisciplinary workshop is to bring together scholars and practitioners interested in ways values can be made to bear upon design and to help continue to build a community by sharing experiences , insights , and criticism . Author Keywords Value Sensitive Design , Human Computer Interaction , Technology and Human Values , Applied Ethics . ACM Classification Keywords K . 4 . 1 [ Computers and society ] : Public policy issues - Ethics . WORKSHOP OBJECTIVES The literature and projects dedicated to and exploring both methodological and theoretical issues of value sensitive design ( VSD ) have grown exponentially in recent years . Despite the wide - scale uptake of the VSD approach , however , as one would expect for an approach that touches such basic human questions and continues to evolve , methodological and theoretical questions and controversies remain [ 1 ] . To that end , a forum is needed to bring researchers and designers together to grow a cohesive community and chart next steps for broadening the scope , methods , and application of VSD . This workshop builds on previous work by the organizers and others to achieve the following objectives : • Critically discuss experiences and case studies of VSD with a multidisciplinary group of researchers . • Explore differences in VSD methods for short versus long - term projects . • Discuss and critique various adaptations and appropriations of VSD . • Identify open questions and grand challenges for the next decade of research and design work in VSD . • Build a network of support among both novice and expert researchers and designers in VSD . • Discuss future directions , obstacles and opportunities for collaboration among the international community . SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WORKSHOP There are many reasons why a workshop organized around charting future directions for value sensitive deign is timely and significant . For one , VSD has been a vibrant and developing approach for 20 years with an extensive body of work [ 1 , 3 , 5 - 8 , 10 , 13 , 14 ] : the ACM Digital Library shows an increase in papers that mention “human values” from 20 in 2000 to 113 in 2010 [ 1 ] . Despite this increase in interest and scholarly productivity , the community of scholars , designers , and researchers working with VSD is rather dispersed ; in fact , many of the researchers engaging with this approach have not met the others in person . It is time to bring these individuals together to develop a common research agenda and repository that novice and experts can access and build upon . This workshop will be the first event of its kind devoted to the analysis , development and critique of VSD as a theory , methods , and approach to design . In addition , this workshop will facilitate a proactive meeting in which researchers can engage in the relationship between VSD and emerging technologies . Society is on the cusp of a radical change in computing , from personal computing to large - scale networked computing ( e . g . the Copyright© 2015 is held by the author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to Aarhus University and ACM 5th Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives August 17 – 21 , 2015 , Aarhus Denmark DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21619 9 Internet of Things , ubiquitous computing , etc . ) , at work , at home and in public spaces . Robotics [ 13 ] , multi - lifespan information systems [ 6 ] , and big data science [ 2 ] are but three areas in which researchers have targeted the significant impact that VSD can have on the design process , not only to ensure value sensitive functionality , but also to inform policy makers and to increase the adoption of technologies with positive potential . Although VSD has been identified as a constructive tool for the future design of these and other technologies , there are still pressing questions that must be addressed to further this work . Now is a crucial moment for establishing a network of researchers for assistance , support , feedback and collaboration . Perhaps the most compelling reason for a workshop to further a value sensitive design approach has to do with the speed at which emerging technologies are developing and the complexity of addressing related societal and ethical issues [ 4 , 8 , 10 - 13 ] . VSD shows great novelty and scope in that it allows for an approach to design that invites contributions and reflections from philosophers and ethicists alongside those of social scientists , behavioral scientists , computer scientists , and designers . VSD resists the tendency to only retrospectively assess or evaluate technologies , and instead invites proactive value analyses in conjunction with technology design and development . Rarely have multiple disciplines been engaged in such a collaborative feat . We believe that given this spirit of partnership , spanning multiple disciplines and contexts of research , researchers ought to have the opportunity to come together to meet , discuss and pave the way forward for VSD . Several Research Councils in Europe have embraced the conception of designing for moral values as a way of doing applied ethics of technology . For example , the Dutch Research Council initiated a research program entitled Responsible Innovation in 2007 that made the VSD paradigm central to its approach to ethics of technology . In turn , the European Commission – inspired by this approach – has made designing for values part of its large new 80 billion Euro R & D framework Horizon 2020 [ 9 ] . BENEFITS OF THE WORKSHOP In addressing the aims and objectives listed above , this workshop has many benefits including but not limited to : • Building an international , multidisciplinary community of VSD researchers involving novice and expert scholars from a variety of disciplines ( e . g . artificial intelligence , computer science and engineering , design , ethics , human - computer interaction , information science , philosophy , sociology ) • Helping disseminate and further evolve VSD method , including methods for : discovering , articulating and communicating values and value considerations ; engaging with emergent values ; addressing value tensions ; evaluating resulting technologies ; and selecting among and combining diverse methods • Revealing areas and opportunities for future directions • Paving the way for large - scale applications of VSD across institutions and countries . OVERVIEW OF THE WORKSHOP Participants and recruitment strategy The intended workshop size is 15 - 20 people to ensure a fruitful discussion and to develop a thoughtful action plan for bringing VSD to a larger scale that can begin to account for identified challenges of the emerging networked society . We aim for a multidisciplinary group of workshop participants to shed light on the coming challenges from different perspectives . In particular , we welcome researchers in artificial intelligence , computer science and related engineering fields , data science , design , e - social sciences , ethics , human - computer interaction , intelligent systems , philosophy , and sociology . Recruitment will be carried out through our personal network of VSD scholars as well as by disseminating the call for participation via mailing lists and relevant websites ( see 3 . 2 ) . Workshop Planning Pre - workshop : An outline of the workshop’s topic , goals , and a call for participation will be disseminated via various mailing lists ( e . g . CHI - ANNOUNCEMENTS @ listserv . acm . org ; announcements . eu . nordichi @ maillist . au . dk ; valuesindesign @ tudelft . nl ; anthrodesign @ yahoogroups . com ; and others ) ; websites ( www . vsdesign . org ; ethicsandtechnology . eu and others ) ; and social outlets via a workshop’s Twitter account . Prospective participants are invited to submit short papers including design case studies , critical reflections , and visionary perspectives on VSD . At least one author of each accepted paper or project will be required to attend the workshop . Submissions will undergo juried review by the workshop organizers and international experts in the field . Authors will have an opportunity for revision based on the reviews . Revised papers will be shared with all participants in advance of the workshop to familiarize everyone with the case studies and diverse views on the topic . One - day Workshop : Agenda and Discussion Topics ( 0 . 5 hour ) Welcome and plan for the day . ( 0 . 5 hour ) Introductions . ( 2 . 0 hours ) Morning Session on sharing VSD projects , challenges and best practices with focus on the variety of uses and adaptations and the particular goals of this workshop . Key questions : What does VSD mean to different disciplines ? How has VSD been used to date ? What are some of the paradigmatic case studies that illustrate that utility and benefits of VSD ? What are some of the key methods or methodological commitments ? What 10 common issues arise across the cases ? What are the characteristics of successful case studies ? What are the characteristics of less successful case studies ? How do the cases help us to better understand the strengths and weaknesses of the VSD approach ? ( 1 . 5 hours ) Lunch Break . ( 1 hour ) Brainstorming session on Grand Challenges for VSD . Key questions : Looking forward , what contexts of study might be most relevant to pursue ? What problems should VSD target ? What types of technology should VSD target ? What kinds of researchers might act as part of the VSD team or as a values advocate ? What would be a good set of the important questions or grand challenges for value sensitive design to take up in the coming decade ? ( 30 min . ) Synthesizing grand challenges for VSD from brainstorming . ( 30 min . ) Brainstorming community activities ( e . g . , special journal issue , edited volumes , VSD online bibliography , VSD pedagogy ) . ( 30 min . ) Practical next steps . Discuss dissemination of workshop results , next activities , and future directions . Key questions : How can workshop participants make use of the workshop results in their own work ? How can workshop participants spread their knowledge of VSD ? At which conferences and forums might the participants try to reconvene ? Post - workshop : Papers and projects presented at the workshops , as well additional resources identified and created through workshop discussion and group activities will be collected and made available online through a wiki - based website / VSD repository . After the workshop , participants will be invited to submit extended versions of their work for inclusion in a special issue of the Journal of Ethics and Information Technology . We will also maintain a VSD mailing list to allow for future workshops or a VSD conference series to be organized . WORKSHOP ORGANIZERS Batya Friedman , PhD , is a Professor in the Information School , Adjunct Professor in the Department of Computer Science , and Adjunct Professor in the Department of Human - Centered Design and Engineering at the University of Washington where she co - directs the Value Sensitive Design Research Lab . She pioneered value sensitive design and continues to explore new theory and methods as well as open questions within this approach . David G . Hendry , PhD . is an Associate Professor in the Information School at the University of Washington where he co - directs the Value Sensitive Design Research Lab . He has applied and extended value sensitive design in a variety of domains and populations including working with homeless young people and with bringing value sensitive design thinking into technical education at the undergraduate and graduate level . Alina Huldtgren , PhD , is an Assistant Professor of Human - Computer Interaction at the School of Innovation Sciences at Eindhoven University of Technology . Her research concentrates on user - centered and value sensitive design of human - technology interfaces for healthcare , aging well and digital augmentation of public spaces . She has previously organized two workshops on values in design at the INTERACT and CHI conferences . Catholijn Jonker , PhD , is head of the Design Engineering department of the Faculty of Industrial Design and member of the Interactive Intelligence Group of the INSY department of the Faculty of EEMCS . Her work addresses cognitive processes and concepts such as trust , negotiation , teamwork and the dynamics of individual agents and organizations . In her research she adopted a value - sensitive approach , in particular , towards intelligent agents that can interact with their users in value - conflicting situations when meta - values no longer solve the situation . Jeroen van den Hoven , PhD , is full professor of Ethics at Delft University of Technology . He is Head of Department of the Department of Values , Technology and Innovation . His research is concerned with ethical issues in new technology . He is Editor in Chief of Ethics and Information Technology ( Springer ) and has advised Dutch government and EU in different roles concerning ethics of information and communication technology and responsible innovation . Aimee van Wynsberghe , PhD , is an Assistant Professor in Ethics of Technology at the University of Twente , the Netherlands . With a background in applied ethics , her research concentrates on the normative foundations for value sensitive design and its application to robotics , healthcare technologies and other ICT . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Alan Borning who provided comments on this workshop proposal . REFERENCES 1 . Borning , A . , and Muller , M . 2012 . Next steps for value sensitive design . In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) , 1125 - 1134 . 2 . boyd , d . and Crawford , K . 2011 . Six provocations for big data . A decade in Internet time : Symposium on the Dynamics of the Internet and Society . Available at SSRN : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2139 / ssrn . 1926431 3 . Davis , J . , and Nathan , L . P . 2014 . Value Sensitive Design : Applications , adaptations , and critiques . In Handbook of Ethics , Values , and Technological Design 2014 , Springer , pp 1 - 26 . 11 4 . Detweiler , C . A . , Dechesne , F . , Hindriks , K . V . , and Jonker , C . M . 2012 . Ambient intelligence implies responsibility . In Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments , Ebook . Volume 12 : Agents and Ambient Intelligence , 33 – 61 . 5 . Friedman , B . , Kahn , P . H . , Borning , A . , and Huldtgren , A . 2013 . Value Sensitive Design and information systems . Early engagement and new technologies : In Opening up the Laboratory . Doorn , N . , Schuurbiers , D . , van de Poel , I . , Gorman , M . E . ( Eds . ) . Springer Netherlands , 55 - 95 . ( Reprinted from Friedman , B . , Kahn , P . H . , Jr . , and Borning , A . ( 2006 ) . Value Sensitive Design and Information Systems . In P . Zhang and D . Galletta ( eds . ) , Human - computer interaction in management information systems : Foundations ( pp . 348 - 372 ) . Armonk , NY : M . E . Sharpe . ) . 6 . Friedman , B . and Nathan , L . P . 2010 . Multi - lifespan information system design : a research initiative for the HCI community . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2243 - 2246 . 7 . Friedman , B . . 1996 . Value - sensitive design . Interactions 3 ( 6 ) , 16 - 23 . 8 . Hoven van den , J . , Van de Poel , I . , and Vermaas , P . E . Handbook of ethics , values and technological design . Available at Springer Link : http : / / link . springer . com / referencework / 10 . 1007 % 2F978 - 94 - 007 - 6994 - 6 . 9 . Hoven van den , J . 2012 . Brussels . Available at : http : / / ec . europa . eu / research / science - society / document _ library / pdf _ 06 / options - for - strengthening _ en . pdf . 10 . Hoven van den , J . , Helbing , D . , Pedreschi , D . , Domingo - Ferrer , J . , Gianotti , F . , and Christen , M . ( 2012 ) . FuturICT - The road towards ethical ICT . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1210 . 8181 . 11 . Mander - Huits , N . , and Zimmer , M . . 2009 . Values and pragmatic action : The challenges of introducing ethical intelligence in technical design communities . International Review of Information Ethics 10 ( 2 ) , 37 - 45 . 12 . Stahl , B . C . , Heersmink , R . , Goujon , P . , Flick , C . , van den Hoven , J . , Wakunuma , K . , and Rader , M . ( 2010 ) . Issues , concepts and methods relating to the identification of the ethics of emerging ICTs . Available at : http : / / www . academia . edu / 432392 / Issues _ Concepts _ an d _ Methods _ Relating _ to _ the _ Identification _ of _ the _ Eth ics _ of _ Emerging _ ICTs . 13 . van Wynsberghe , A . . 2013 . Designing robots for care : Care centered value - sensitive design . Science and engineering ethics 19 ( 2 ) , 407 - 433 . 14 . Yoo , D . Huldtgren , H . , Woelfer , J . P . , Hendry , D . G . , and Friedman , B . . 2013 . A Value Sensitive Action - Reflection Model : Evolving a co - design space with stakeholder and designer prompts . In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) , 419 - 428 . 12 A critical approach to ICT to support participatory development of people centered smart learning ecosystems and territories Carlo Giovannella STF Dept . Tor Vergata University of Rome and Creative Industries - CRR giovannella @ scuolaiad . it Matthias Rehm Dept . of Architecture , Design & Media Technology Aalborg UNiversity matthias @ create . aau . dk ABSTRACT This contribution aims at fostering a collaborative effort by relevant stakeholders - policy makers , entrepreneurs , researchers , teachers , students , etc . – to critically explore the role of ICT in supporting a participatory development of people - centered " smart " learning ecosystems , able to produce social capital and to drive social innovation and territorial development . All this assuming that : a ) it can help in identifying the driving factors that in the past have produced time and space singularities ( eg . Renaissance , Belle Epoque , Big Deal , etc . ) capable to attract people to experience a collective state of " flow” ; b ) the smartness of a learning ecosystems is strongly correlated with that of its region of reference ; c ) smartness is an emergent property of any entity that interacts with ICT infrastructures but is not fully determined by this latter . Unavoidably , all this also implies a reflection on the interplay between globality and locality and , as well , virtuality and physicality . Author Keywords People Centered Smart Cities ; Techno - ecosystem for smart communities ; Smart Learning ecosystems ; flow state ; system smartness ; social capital ACM Classification Keywords H . m Information Systems : Miscellaneous ; INTRODUCTING THE THEME Since 2005 we are assisting to a rush to transform cities into smart cities . At present , however , still doesn’t exist a fully shared definition of smart city : in the understanding of the majority a smart city is a sort of dream - city , i . e . a complex and optimized environment , or eco - system , where it could be desirable to live . Basically because this latter promises to maintain , and even improve the wellbeing of the society , exploiting information and communication technologies ( ICT ) as an infrastructural backbone capable to positively influence key factors like mobility , environment , people , quality of life and governance [ 1 , 2 ] . However , going beyond the most popular top - down functionalist approach a new vision of regional and city smartness driven by a ‘people in place centered design’ approach is emerging . Not by chance , recently we have assisted to a shift of the meaning ascribed to the adjective ‘smart’ to incorporate a higher consideration for the centrality of individuals , their characteristics , expectations , quality of the experiences and well - being and , as well , for the characteristics of the contexts in which they work and live , to include also its preservation . Not by chance if one takes into account the opinions of individuals / citizens on what a city should become in order to get smarter [ 3 ] , one comes to the conclusion that traditional economy - although considered a booster of opportunities - does not represent a primary goal for people . In fact - beside the satisfaction of basic needs , the optimization of mobility and personal time , the circulation of information and a better support to culture and education - individuals consider the environment and the economic activities related to its preservation , together with a careful consumption of resources , the leading key - factors capable to sustain the territorial ‘smartness’ . Both territorial development and technology penetration are expected to be harbinger of a positive tension , perceived not only as an enabling factor but even as a driving force capable to foster creativity and innovation . All this supports the idea that the attractiveness of an eco - systems is determined by its state of flow [ 4 ] . By transliterating from a person to a context ( schools , university , city , etc . ) , we can state that a smart context is a context where the human capital ( and more in general each individual ) owns not only a high level of skills , but is also strongly motivated by continuous and adequate challenges , while its primary needs are reasonably satisfied [ 5 ] . In this framework the interaction with the environment is moving from the metaphor “being able to use” towards the metaphor “actively influence and critical build” ; individuals transformed from consumers into “digital enactive” and produce an increasingly amount of “traces” and “artifacts” that actively contribute to the re - definition of places and spaces . Accordingly , learning cannot be considered any longer only a way to adequately train the human capital but should be considered as one of the driving forces of the “smartness” and if the well being of a Copyright© 2015 is held by the author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to Aarhus University and ACM 5th Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives August 17 – 21 , 2015 , Aarhus Denmark DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21325 13 community . The potential development of a smart eco - system , in fact , was found to be strongly related to the high - skill level of its inhabitants and , as well , to the possibility to attract and / or locally produce high - skilled people . For example in the case study discussed by Glaeser and Berry [ 6 ] the presence of a high density of high - skilled people in a given area turned out to be the driving factor of the economic development of that area . As an additional example , recently for the case of Italy , it was possible [ 7 ] to highlight the close relationship existing between smart cities / territories benchmarking and those of the corresponding universities . A similar study is under way for schools . Overall , the picture that emerges from such and other findings is not very different from what in all historical periods marked the refulgence of specific geographical areas . Let ' s consider , for example , the Renaissance in Tuscany . It was characterized by the concentration of high - skilled people : among them artists , artisans , traders , bankers and administrators . Knowledge and skills were acquired in a very diffuse and active manner , for example into workshops , and the most renowned artists were attracted not only by the highest reward but also by prestige and visibility of the proposed commitments i . e . by level of the challenges . Coming back to the present , it is quite evident that schools , universities , and less formal leaning systems compose a learning ecosystems which value and potentialities are determined by the ability to produce social capital that , as well known , includes trust and sharing of meanings and goals and that cannot be achieved without intercepting individuals’ expectations . In this context ICT , rather than acting as a tech backbone aimed at optimizing the consumption of goods ( contents and time included ) , are expected to play a mediation and facilitation role to amplify the number of meaningful relationships , to disclose cultural models , symbols and codes . Learning , in fact , in a relational perspective [ 8 ] , cannot be confined any longer neither in the minds of the students nor in restricted physical places , like those of classrooms or labs . This is especially true nowadays since by now the web represents the playground , although virtual one , where a new set of “quasi” self - directed activities take place and counterbalance the heterodirected ones usually proposed / organized by parents and formal learning environments . In terms of game theory we may say that the web represents the Paidia and counterbalances the Ludus . The main problem is that , due to its pervasive characteristic , the web embraces at the same time the meso - , eso , and macro - dimensionsalities [ 12 ] of the relationships among individuals and bodies . Such system of relationships , not necessarily identifiable as social capital , is usually very robust and may represent a veritable danger . Individuals , in fact - in particular the youngest ones - do not own always do not own always a sufficiently developed critical apparatus , able to disclose all characteristics of the environment and thus to activate the mechanism that leads to the free decision to accept or remodel it , and that is at the basis of the individual , and more in general , human development . In other words this means that the individual have to acquire the competences needed to tame the complexity of the present techno - systems and the mediation role of ICT to : • foster awareness about complexity and its government ( orchestration ) • support the acquisition of appropriate behaviors , skills & competencies • promote open access to space , tools , services , practices , content / data , people / skills • tame discontinuities ( time - space / place - technological - process - learning practices ) • identify the driving factors of the smartness including those from the characteristics of local cultures and contexts • support policy and decision making • promote social innovation & learning , capacity building and a sustainable economy • develop adequate monitoring and benchmarking approaches • tame privacy , data control , security and safety Just to list some of the hot topics for the close future . Topics that are in the agenda of the Observatory for Smart City Learning : http : / / www . mifav . uniroma2 . it / inevent / events / sclo / index . php REFERENCES 1 . R . Giffinger and H . Gudrun . 2010 . Smart cities ranking : an effective instrument for the positioning of cities ? , ACE : Architecture , City & Environ . 4 ( 12 ) , 7 – 25 . 2 . R . G . Hollands . 2008 . Will the real smart city please stand up , City 12 ( 3 ) , 303 - 320 . 3 . C . Giovannella . 2014 . Smart Territory Analytics : toward a shared vision . SIS 2014 , CUEC . 4 . M . Czisikszentmihalyi . 1990 . Flow - The Psychology of Optimal Experience . Harper & Row . 5 . C . Giovannella . 2014 . Smart Learning Eco - systems : " fashion " or " beef " ? Journal of E - Learning and Knowledge Society 10 ( 3 ) , 13 - 21 . 6 . E . L . Glaeser and C . R . Berry . 2006 . Why are smart places getting smarter ? , Taubman Cente Policy Brief ( Cambridge MA : Taubman Centre ) . 7 . C . Giovannella . 2014 . Where ' s the smartness of learning in smart territories ? , IxD & A Journal , 22 , 59 - 67 . 8 . J . Lave and E . Wenger . 1991 . Situated learning : legitimate peripheral participation , Cambridge University Press . 9 . U . Bronfenbrenner . 1979 , The ecology of human development : Experiments by nature and design , Harvard University Press . 14 Making “World Machines” : Discourse , Design and Global Technologies for Greater - than - self Issues Ann Light University of Sussex Falmer , UK ann . light @ sussex . ac . uk Jeff Bardzell Indiana University Bloomington , USA jbardzel @ indiana . edu Shaowen Bardzell Indiana University Bloomington , USA selu @ indiana . edu Geoff Cox Aarhus University Aarhus , Denmark gcox @ dac . au . dk Jonas Fritsch IT University , Copenhagen Copenhagen , Denmark Frit @ itu . dk Lone Koefoed Hansen Aarhus University Aarhus , Denmark koefoed @ cavi . au . dk ABSTRACT The world machine is a new archetype for a socio - technical system drawing together a group of tools that combine computational powers with a social agenda of cross - world collaboration in resistance to dominant market rhetoric . Specifically , we look at how powers to connect , sense and infer can be combined and turned to crowd - sourcing public engagement with shared world issues - as an alternative to business - as - usual in the context of developing and deploying networked technology . We combine theoretical aspects of world machines , such as what a political entity of this kind might seek to do , and practical exercises that focus on design , with a view to exploring viability and examining what a related research agenda might involve . Author Keywords Sharing ; ecological ; environment ; sensing ; inference ; networks ; neoliberalism ; politics ; archetypes ; values . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION This workshop builds on the concept of the world machine - a new archetype for socio - technical systems designed to draw together tools that combine computational powers with a social agenda of cross - world collaboration in resistance to dominant market rhetoric . New powers of computation offer the potential , in combination , to herald new relations and new ways to think about our world as a series of relations . But this requires particular social and technical choices – otherwise , we have just another giant surveillance or marketing system . We intend to explore what characteristics make this class of system radical , drawing on traditional critical theory , the notion of care [ 9 , 17 , 18 ] and the ecological politics of Morton [ 15 ] and Bennett [ 3 ] . Specifically , we look at how our powers to connect , sense and infer can be combined and turned to crowdsourcing public engagement with shared world issues as an alternative to business - as - usual . The workshop will use the idea of world machines as a thought experiment to generate critical alternatives to our current global politics , suggesting that such a concept can be ‘explanatory , practical , and normative’ in Horkheimer’s sense of critical theory , ie : ‘it must explain what is wrong with current social reality , identify the actors to change it , and provide both clear norms for criticism and achievable practical goals for social transformation’ [ 5 ] . It is an opportunity to allow ‘the inherited forms of solidarity and struggle to morph , hybridize or even completely dissolve in the process of encountering and appropriating the new toolkits , conceptual frames and spatial imaginaries of the present’ [ 11 ] . To play with this opportunity , we juxtapose the shared interests of a world citizenry ( with custodianship for the rest of the planet ) and the rhetoric of sharing now appearing in the sharing economy , which is delivering new markets and commercializing formerly free practices [ 14 ] . BACKGROUND Light wrote in 2011 [ 13 ] : ‘If we combine the potential of connected groups with that of connected data , the mix could make a powerful force for informed change . ’ New tools give us a new ability to trace actions and manage attribution . Connected data points to cause , effect and correlations more powerfully , showing the impact of activity taking place in one situation in terms of social , environmental or economic change elsewhere . We can use computation to infer patterns from sensor - compiled datasets , with ‘social networks’ as a platform for generating , sharing and acting on global data . Systems that articulate these relations , as well as engender them , can be seen as a class of political action related to maker / making movements , with a particular ecological vision that resists current notions of progress and economic good ( and the huge environmental footprint these are generating ) . Copyright© 2015 is held by the author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to Aarhus University and ACM 5th Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives August 17 – 21 , 2015 , Aarhus Denmark DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21326 15 In the workshop , we will not be focusing on technical specifications ( though these are developing rapidly ) , but the uses to which such socio - technical systems can be put and how the introduction of a specific way of thinking about the potential of networks might contribute to a new way of thinking about global relations . A world machine , then , is a tool that can equip members of world society [ 3 ] with access to the means to sample , test and report on their circumstances and what they see ( or can sense with tools ) , as well as to find each other , analyze the meaning of the data and link up for action upon what is found . This has certain preconditions , such as the potential to scale ( see [ 8 ] ) ; the blend of local and global and / or the prioritization of local indigenous perspectives to resist ( or problematize ) universalizing perspectives ( eg [ 19 ] ) ; the sharing of tools and outcomes ; and freedom from imposed incentives . It may also specifically embed a rhetoric of shared or greater - then - self issues . We can point to examples , of data - gathering as public collaboration like searching for extra - terrestrial life ( www . seti . org ) , Wikipedia ( www . wikipedia . org ) , the Personal Genome Project ( www . personalgenomes . org ) , or the global water quality project ( www . worldwatermuseum . com ) . And we can note that closed , market - driven crowd - sourcing tools , like Mechanical Turk ( www . mturk . com ) critiqued here [ 12 ] , and Taskrabbit ( www . taskrabbit . com ) , that source and share out cheap labor , fail the criteria . Aoiki et al [ 1 ] and DiSalvo et al [ 6 ] elaborate on what happens in practice when citizens come together to do environmental monitoring . The organisers recognise that all socio - technical systems are prone to social politics and management issues , and world - spanning tools bring cultural concerns too ( eg [ 13 ] ) . This does not negate the adoption of archetypes that help us see how design and politics relate , but forms part of the context . We will consider these practical concerns as part of the workshop . As well as practical concerns , there are different ways of discussing the political challenges theoretically and we will see how these apply . For instance , Guattari offers a concept of machinism , developed with Deleuze , to designate ‘every system that cuts off fluxes going beyond both the mechanics of technology and the organization of the organism , whether it be in nature , society , or man’ ( Deleuze in Guattari 2007 ) . Deleuze and Guattari call for the development of a ‘humanist antimachinism’ , an ecological approach to counter dominant state machines , much in line with the call for world machines in this workshop . Similarly , it is interesting to think about the current processes of subsumption , where collective forms are being commodified through social media , crowdsourcing , and processes of datafication , and societies are being constantly re - organised ( since the 1970s and the rise of neoliberalism ) to best serve the world financial markets at the expense of solidarity and human and planetary well - being . And the question arises as to how far a ‘world society’ [ 3 ] , idealistic as such a notion may be , can avoid losing distinctions of culture and place , and protect the local , indigenous perspective from a world - historical logic of world - making , with its colonial undercurrents . ORGANISATION OF WORKSHOP The morning will focus on the theoretical aspects of world machines . As well as considering uses , the theoretical section will touch on what a political entity of this kind might seek to do , thus including : a ) a critique of neoliberal discourses in interaction design and technology production ; b ) an examination of other utopian ecological design visions , starting with Bateson [ 2 ] , Buckminster Fuller [ 6 ] and Papanek [ 16 ] ; c ) a discussion of how discourses surrounding technology become normalized and how we can resist this trend . The afternoon will involve a practical exercise to focus on design and deployment , followed by a review of learning from our work together . We will make models of the world machines we would like to see ( however improbable ) , labelling them with opportunities and barriers , leading to a discussion of viability and what an ensuing research agenda might involve . The annotated models will be available for show at the rest of the conference , if practicable ( both in terms of the output and the conference facilities ) . Participants will be expected to engage in both parts of the day , though may submit a position paper that emphasises one or other approach , and selection processes will reflect this . Since world machines already exist , we will encourage anyone who is building or maintaining one to join in , but the workshop will be open to anyone who has an interest in designing globally and thinking locally and the politics of these interactions , especially if they are alive to the rhetoric involved in the making of technology and the impact of design choices in socio - technical terms . ORGANISERS Ann Light is Professor of Creative Technology at the University of Sussex and was principal investigator on the UK Digital Economy ' s Design for Sharing research project and research director on Fair Tracing – global research into providing producer - generated provenance information to support ethical buying decisions – as well as several Connected Communities projects looking at how we dwell together in the highly mediated and mediatized world of the 21st century . She is particularly concerned by patterns of inclusion and the politics of design . Jeffrey Bardzell is an Associate Professor in the School of Informatics and Computing at Indiana University - Bloomington . His research focuses on critical design , research through design , and design criticism , as well as studies of social computing , including maker communities in the United States and Asia , intimate interaction , and online creative communities . Throughout his work he 16 leverages aesthetic philosophy and criticism to understand how concepts , materials , ideologies , and experiential qualities achieve coherence in design objects . He is co - editor of Critical Theory and Interaction Design ( MIT Press ) and co - author of Humanistic HCI ( Synthesis Lectures in Human - Centered Informatics ) . Shaowen Bardzell is an Associate Professor of Informatics at Indiana University’s School of Informatics and Computing . Known for her work in feminist HCI , Bardzell’s research centers on a network of concepts of interest to both feminists and HCI , including scientifically rigorous and socially just research methodologies , emancipatory and participatory social science , human sexuality , marginality , collective creativity , and everyday aesthetics . Recent work has focused on exploring the intersections between HCI’s rising interest in social change and feminist social science , care ethics , research through design and critical design , material interactions , and maker cultures in Asia . Geoff Cox is Associate Professor in the Dept . of Aesthetics and Communication , and Participatory IT Research Centre , Aarhus University ( DK ) , and Adjunct faculty Transart Institute ( DE / US ) . He is also an occasional artist / curator , as part of the self - institution Museum of Ordure that concerns itself with human waste . With Alex McLean , he wrote Speaking Code : coding as aesthetic and political expression ( MIT Press 2013 ) , and amongst other things is currently working on a multi authored book project about live coding that will explore the ‘operative’ dimension of just - in - time coding and what it means to be ‘radically present’ in the world . Jonas Fritsch is Associate Professor in Interaction Design at the IT University of Copenhagen . He works on a creative thinking of interaction design and affect theory through practical design experiments . He has published around relational and ecological concerns in Participatory Design processes and has extensive experience in addressing experiential qualities in the design of a variety of interactive machines for listening ( Ekkomaten ) and literary interaction ( INK ) . He is associate partner in the 7 - year Canadian SSHRC research project IMMEDIATIONS : Media , Art , Event and associate partner in the EU - project METABODY . Lone Koefoed Hansen is an associate professor in digital design and aesthetics at Aarhus University , working to integrate interaction design , critical theory , computational culture , and art . Also a senior researcher in PIT , Center for Participatory IT , she spends much of her time in an interdisciplinary environment . Latest publications have dealt with feminist design , fabrication and making as a critical practice , creativity discourses , emojis as literature , and the theoretical underpinnings of RtD ( research through design ) . REFERENCES 1 . Aoki , P . , Honicky , R . , Mainwaring , A . , Myers , C . Paulos , E . , Subramanian , S . and Woodruff , A . A Vehicle for Research : Using Street Sweepers to Explore the Landscape of Environmental Community Action , Proc . CHI’09 ( 2009 ) 375 - 384 . 2 . Bateson , G . Steps to an Ecology of Mind . Jason Aronson Inc . Northvale , New Jersey London , 1972 3 . Beck , U . What is Globalization ? Polity Press , 2000 4 . Bennett , J . The Enchantment of Modern Life . Princeton University Press , 2001 5 . Bohman , J . Critical Theory , 2005 : http : / / plato . stanford . edu / entries / critical - theory 6 . Buckminster Fuller , R . Operating manual for spaceship earth , Southern Illinois University Press , IL ( 1969 ) 7 . DiSalvo , C . , Nourbakhsh , I . , Holstius , D . , Akin , A and Louw , M . , The Neighborhood Networks Project . Proc . PDC 2008 8 . Dourish , P . HCI and environmental sustainability : the politics of design and the design of politics . DIS’10 9 . Guattari , F . Chaosophy - Texts and Interviews 1972 - 1977 . SEMIOTEXT ( E ) Foreign Agents Series . 2007 10 . Held , V . The Ethics of Care : Personal , Political , and Global . Oxford , 2006 11 . Holmes , B . Escape the Overcode : Activist Art in the Control Society , vanAbbemuseum , 2009 : https : / / brianholmes . wordpress . com / 2010 / 07 / 16 / this - book - could - be - yours / 12 . Irani , L . and M . S . Silberman . Turkopticon : Interrupting Worker Invisibility in Amazon Mechanical Turk” Proc . CHI’13 , 2013 13 . Light , A . ( 2011 ) Digital interdependence and how to design for it , interactions , 18 ( 2 ) , March + April 2011 , ACM , New York , NY 14 . Light , A . and Miskelly , C . Design for Sharing , Sustainable Society Network + Working Paper : https : / / designforsharingdotcom . files . wordpress . com / 20 14 / 09 / design - for - sharing - webversion . pdf 15 . Morton , T . The Ecological Thought . Harvard University Press , 2010 16 . Papanek , V . J . Design for the real world : human ecology and social change ( 2nd edn ) , Academy , Chicago ( 1985 ) 17 . Puig de la Bellacasa , M . Nothing comes without its world : thinking with care . Sociological Review , 2012 , 60 ( 2 ) : 197 - 216 . 18 . Robinson , F . Globalizing Care : Ethics , Feminist Theory , and International Relations . Westview Press , 1999 19 . Warren , K . Ecofeminist Philosophy . Roman & Littlefield Publishers , Inc . , 2000 17 18 Residents’ Democratic engagement in public housing and urban areas – structures , formalities and technologies Olav W . Bertelsen Aarhus University Denmark olavb @ cs . au . dk Henrik Korsgaard Aarhus University Denmark korsgaard @ cs . au . dk Ingrid Kuhn Liquid Democracy Germany ingrid . kuhn @ liqd . de Carolin Schröder TU - Berlin Germany c . schroeder @ ztg . tu - berlin . de Yngve Sundblad Royal Institute of Technology Sweden y @ kth . se Konrad Tollmar Royal Institute of Technology Sweden konrad @ kth . se ABSTRACT The workshop gathers people from various sectors inside and outside academia to discuss the current state of , and the prospects for IT in the support of residents’ democratic engagement in , and around , public housing . ACM Classification Keywords K . 4 . m . % Computers % and % Society : % Miscellaneous % Author Keywords Public % housing ; % decision = making ; % residents’ % democracy % SHORT DESCRIPTION OF THE WORKSHOP The workshop brings together perspectives on residents’ engagement and influence in the development of their housing estates and housing areas , and will explore experiences and potentials for the use of ICT in this context . The workshop builds on earlier workshops on similar issues [ e . g . 4 ] . Public housing around the world is organized very differently , and in particular the models for residents influence have radically different forms . In Denmark residents are at the same time landlords and tenants , but do not own anything and are subject to strong legal and municipal regulation . In Sweden residents are organized in a strong union of tenants and have acquired wide rights to be consulted in important cases . It is unclear where residents have the strongest influence . In many other countries , residents in public housing projects have no influence at all , unless they organize themselves . Residents’ engagement depends on a lot of different circumstances , cultures , and conditions . If residents live in an estate because they did not have any other options their engagement may be weaker than it would be if they made a free choice . We do not expect that any engagement is fundamentally different through social media than in everyday face - to - face encounters , but we find it interesting to explore how – and to what extent - ICT can break barriers , constitute new forms of engagement or contribute to local democratic structures for different groups of people or mobilise for political influence locally and nationally . New media create new opportunities by allowing residents to organize and express themselves and bridges across time and space as well as competency gaps . While recognizing this and the potential in ICT , the workshop will take a critical stance to technology in relation to residents’ engagement in their housing estates or neighbourhoods and political influence on decisions . ICT may , on the one hand , indeed keep people away from social engagement in their housing estate and may limit their will to influence decisions just as much as the opposite – on the other hand , ICT may increase participation by offering user - friendly tool and thus support the inclusion of the citizens , independent living and networking for different groups of people . Just as in any other area of society , the so - called digital divide influences who can and will participate and how ( see e . g . [ 1 ] ) , both when organizations are increasingly using web - portals and online services as an entry point and when part of the day to day encounters and communication moves into social networks . Here it is relevant to ask what form of social or political participation social networks offer : Are they indeed the great liberators , do they play a more pacifying role , or do they change nothing at all ? Does connectivity by itself ensure participation ( see e . g . [ 9 ] ) ? What about accessibility and usability ? New media offer new possibilities but how can you create the best conditions for ICT to really make a difference ? A similar question is whether the services and mediated participation offered by a given housing organizations website question the role technology plays in democratic representation [ 2 ] . Finally , Copyright© 2015 is held by the author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to Aarhus University and ACM 5th Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives August 17 – 21 , 2015 , Aarhus Denmark DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21391 19 it is also clear that software and ICT is playing a role in shaping neighbourhoods and urban areas [ 8 ] . This discussion requires an initial exploration of different structures for residents’ involvement , together with current issues that residents’ engagement faces around the world . Here , we seek to focus on the interplay between the existing structures ( legal , economic , organizational , political etc . ) , ( degree of ) formalities and level / form of participation [ 1 ] , and existing technologies , in influencing democratic engagement and participation . The focus of the workshop is on democratic engagement in public housing and residential areas , but we also aim to use this as a basis for broader scientific discourse on democratic engagement in relation to , and supported through technology . KEY TOPICS In the workshop a number of issues identified in the original call as well as in the submissions will be explored . Framing public housing Public housing constitutes a specific thematic and political area for implementation of ICT . As public housing is organized differently around the world , one of the potential tasks for the workshop is to gain a shared and basic understanding of the characteristics of the public housing sector , how it is organized and regulated within the different countries , and which socio - cultural as well as economic aspects shape the conception of public housing . This will help us understand the landscapes , particularities and differences in order to identify scopes for using ICT in that context . One focus of the workshop is to relate ICT to different age and gender groups and their specific ideas of public housing , residency , communities , neighbourhood or place - bound organizations . [ 3 ] Challenges and potentials in ICT The workshop participants will , based on the contributions and the characterizations , discuss both the challenges and potential of new media and information technology within the frame of public housing and democratic engagement . Just as the public housing organizations are different , so are the local uptake of and particular collection of technologies already in use by residents and public housing organizations . While some technologies are well - known , e . g . social media and global commercial tools , others are tailor - made and locally adopted . This creates a mix of challenges and potentials that will be discussed at the workshop . How do we work with the existing platforms and practices ? What role should / could new ( novel ) technologies play ? How do we avoid repeating the mistakes and focus on the under - developed areas and challenges left behind by commercial industry and the past [ 2 ] ? Examples of ICT based support for residents engagement From our point of view , and examples from the position papers , it seems to be necessary to differentiate between the following activities and participation with ICT support . a ) integrating ICT in the public housing context ( i . e . different degrees of participation ) : e . g . for information , interaction , data collection , consultation , collaboration , planning of common facilities and decision - making . b ) different groups of participants and users . c ) social and political participation : ICT may be of good use for senior citizens when sustaining independent ( smart ) living , but ICT may also be useful for young people in a large housing estate for social networking and ICT may be helpful for special interest groups ( families , singles , wheelchair users ) to organize collective action – in all three cases ICT would be structured and used completely different . ICT , e . g . through social media , may also be a tool for political action to improve conditions for public housing . And there are many more to be found . Role of the research community in public housing The topics of the workshop indicate a renewed research interest in public housing and democratic engagement , which in turn may lead to research projects and collaboration . At the workshop we will discuss potential roles for the research community in public housing in the future . How do we approach the research area and with what agenda ? What do we need to do inter - and transdisciplinary research in that context ? Do we engage in partnerships or smaller projects ? How do we ensure some degree of sustainability , both in terms of the potential technologies researchers introduce ( new and old ) and the challenges arising from our engagement ? These questions are related to accountability and commitment [ 12 ] , ( socio - technical ) sustainability [ 11 ] and moving from ( hit and run ) projects to more long - term engagement [ 6 ] and different models of collaboration ( e . g . living labs [ 5 ] ) . Does the topic and area of research merit a specific approach , e . g . action research , participatory design or ethnomethodology ? Revisiting previous discourse The idea that democratic engagement can be empowered through the application of technology is not new . Historically , the printing press has been used to distribute bulletins to residents , channelling debate and information about activities . Today , most public housing organisations in Denmark and the tenants’ organisations in Sweden have a printed magazine distributed to their tenants . Over the years local TV , TeleText and various portal solutions have been seen as a road to popular engagement . Hampton [ 9 ] argues , based on a large scale community networking project , that ICT has potentials to facilitate community participation , but also points simple asynchronous solutions to be more promising than advanced multimedia . In the age of mobile app’s it seems tempting to try to solve issues such as residents’ opportunity apathy and the receding popular engagement in local decision - making by smart phone based solutions . The workshop will take a critical perspective on the history in order not to fall into 20 naïve techno - optimism . What has changed in terms of technology and maturity ? Did the previous efforts release the potential ? What challenges are left behind ? Are there lessons from other technology and democracy studies with ICT support , in workplace , leisure and domestic settings [ 7 , 10 , 13 ] that can be carried over to the housing sector ? STATUS AND OUTLOOK The workshop includes 11 submissions from a broad range of participants . The position papers raged from descriptions of the state of residents’ democratic engagement in specific countries , over reports on specific design experiments and studies of democratic engagement , to introductions of systems to support residents’ engagement . Participants had backgrounds in non - profit organisations , housing organisations as well as in academia . The workshop attendance demonstrates a growing interest and research in the area of computer support for residents’ democratic engagement . This could hopefully lead to the establishment of formal research collaboration around the topic , e . g . through European research funding . Follow - up from the workshop including more detailed accounts on the contributions to the workshop will be published in the Aarhus Series on Human Centred Computing . 1 ABOUT THE ORGANIZERS Olav W . Bertelsen is an associate professor with the Department of Computer Science at Aarhus University , his research interests include human - computer interaction and user involvement . He has been engaged in the Danish public housing sector for more than two decades , as chairman for a housing organization , board member and activist . Henrik Korsgaard , is a PhD - candidate with the Department of Computer Science and the Centre for Participatory IT at Aarhus University . His research interests include urban computing and place - specific computing . He has previously worked with media architecture , urban interaction design and Public Sector Information ( open data ) . Ingrid Kuhn works as a project manager at the non - profit association Liquid Democracy , based in Berlin . The main project , which Ingrid Kuhn manages relates to the development of a central participation platform for the city of Berlin , called mein . berlin . de , which bundles different types of participation processes such as the one related to the urban land use planning . Carolin Schröder is Head of the Participation Research Unit at the Centre for Technology and Society , Technische Universität Berlin . Her research interests are sustainable urban development , urban governance and democracy , co - operatives as well as inter - and transdisciplinary research . 1 http : / / ojs . statsbiblioteket . dk / index . php / ashcc / Carolin has been engaged in bottom - up neighborhood development and co - operative housing in Berlin for many years . One of her current projects is : FlashPoll – Developing a municipal decision - making App , www . Flashpoll . eu . Yngve Sundblad Yngve Sundblad is professor emeritus in Computer Science / Human - Computer Interaction at KTH in Stockholm . His research interests include human - computer Interaction and user participation . He has been active in Hyresgästföreningen ( Swedish Union of Tenants ) for more than 40 years with experience in local organization , tenants’ influence and negotiations with landlords , especially in community - owned public housing . Konrad Tollmar is a professor of computer science at the Royal Institute of Technology specialized in human computer interaction and interaction design . REFERENCES 1 . Arnstein , Sherry R . " A ladder of citizen participation . " Journal of the American Institute of planners 35 . 4 ( 1969 ) : 216 - 224 . 2 . Aurigi , A . 2006 . New technologies , same dilemmas : policy and design issues for the augmented city . Journal of urban technology , 13 ( 3 ) , 5 - 28 . 3 . Bertelsen , O . W . ( 2014 ) . Overcoming Residents Opportunity Apathy in Danish Social Housing Democracy . International Reports on Socio - Informatics , 11 ( 1 ) , 45 - 54 . 4 . Bertelsen , O . W . , Bødker , S . , de Cindio , F . , Pipek , V . ( 2014 ) . Proceedings of the COOP 2014 Workshop on Collaborative Technologies in Democratic Processes . International Reports on Socio - Informatics 11 ( 1 ) . International Institute for Socio - Informatics , ISSN 1861 - 4280 . 5 . Björgvinsson , E . , Ehn , P . , & Hillgren , P . A . ( 2010 , November ) . Participatory design and democratizing innovation . In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference ( pp . 41 - 50 ) . ACM . 6 . Botero , A . , & Hyysalo , S . ( 2013 ) . Ageing together : Steps towards evolutionary co - design in everyday practices . CoDesign , 9 ( 1 ) , 37 - 54 . 7 . Bødker , S . , Sundblad , Y . ( 2008 ) . Usability and Interaction Design - new challenges for the Scandinavian tradition . Behaviour and Information Technology . ) , vol . 27 , no . 4 , pp 293 - 300 . 8 . Dutton , W . H . , Kraemer , K . L . , and Blumler , J . G . 1987 : Continuity and Change in conceptions of the Wired City , in Dutton , W . H . , Kraemer , K . L . , and Blumler , J . G . ( Ed . ) ( 1987 ) . Wired cities : Shaping the future of communications . pp . 3 - 26 , Macmillan Publishing Co . , Inc . . 9 . Hampton , Keith N . “Grieving for a Lost Network : Collective Action in a Wired Suburb” The Information Society , Vol . 19 pp . 417 – 428 , 2003 21 10 . Lindquist , S . , Westerlund , B . , Mackay W . and Y . Sundblad . ( 2007 ) . Co - designing communication technology with and for families – methods , experience , results and impact for the future . In The Disappearing Computer Heidelberg : Springer - Verlag . 11 . Merkel , C . B . , Xiao , L . , Farooq , U . , Ganoe , C . H . , Lee , R . , Carroll , J . M . , & Rosson , M . B . ( 2004 , July ) . Participatory design in community computing contexts : Tales from the field . In Proceedings of the eighth conference on Participatory design : Artful integration : interweaving media , materials and practices - Volume 1 ( pp . 1 - 10 ) . ACM . 12 . Suchman , L . ( 2002 ) . Located accountabilities in technology production . Scandinavian % journal % of % information % systems , 14 ( 2 ) , 7 . 13 . Westerlund , B . and Sundblad , Y . ( 2015 ) . Design as Democratic Process – and Implications for Innovation . Ch . 2 in Action Research for Democracy : New Ideas and Perspectives from Scandinavia , Routledge 22 Researching for Change in a Globalising Asymmetric World Edwin Blake University of Cape Town , South Africa edwin @ cs . uct . ac . za Ineke Büskens Research for the Future Grabouw , Western Cape , South Africa ineke @ researchforthefuture . com Andy Dearden Sheffield Hallam University , Sheffield , UK a . m . dearden @ shu . ac . uk ABSTRACT The field of research on Information and Communication Technology ( ICT ) in the service of social development ( ICTD ) is ripe for reframing . The asymmetries of the world are currently mirrored in the aims , practice and outcomes of too much ICTD research . The consequence is that people who might benefit from creative use of current and emerging technologies all over the world are excluded from the social processes and benefits of innovation and knowledge production . The ICTD research community’s widespread dissatisfaction with this situation haunts ICTD gatherings . In this workshop we want to explore critical alternatives to the current practice . We intend drafting and articulating critical alternatives for future research that is emancipatory , inclusive and oriented towards globally sustainable futures . To achieve this we first want to acknowledge and expose the vastly different knowledge interests and agendas of the various stakeholders . By examining a series of questions we shall then strive for a responsive reformulation of our approaches in a way that will not easily settle into a new orthodoxy . This will mean that we need to examine not only research and action agendas , transformation , inclusiveness , and power relations , but also our own personal growth and care for ourselves as actors in transformation . It is fortuitous that the 5 th decennial Aarhus conference comes on the target date for the achievement of the United Nations Millennium Development Goals . What next ? We want to ensure that after 2015 , the research approaches that are adopted and promoted in ICTD are actually structured in the service of development . An ICT that is for Development cannot be realised by blindly replicating global asymmetries where aims and approaches are defined by the powerful and imposed on those at the margins . Author Keywords ICT for Development , Emancipation , Power . ACM Classification Keywords K . 4 . m . Computers and Society : Miscellaneous OVERVIEW This workshop aims to develop a framework of critical alternatives for research that seeks to apply Information and Communication Technology ( ICT ) in the service of social development ( ICTD ) in a globalising asymmetric world . ICTD research aims to improve lives for billions of people , but vast divides ( culturally , geographically and financially ) make mutual understanding and shared purpose difficult to accomplish in practice . Research actors , including research participants , researchers , funders and other stakeholders have vastly different knowledge interests and are often unaware of how different their agendas are . As a consequence , people who might benefit from creative use of current and emerging technologies ( both in the North and the South ) are often absent or excluded from the social processes of innovation and knowledge production . Questions of how research in ICTD can be organised and practiced , and how innovation can be stimulated towards more promising futures , need to address the interplay between power , knowledge interests , technology creation and quality of life . Questions include : • How can research agendas and questions be framed in ways that include the voices that are currently marginalised ; • How can research be designed , structured and practiced to create the kind of knowledge that instigates and supports emancipatory social change ; • How do responsive and transformatory research processes allow for participation in , and gain recognition in , the various discourses of answerability , accountability and research quality ; • How can the intentionalities and aspirations of all the research actors ( including researchers , research participants , funders , and other stakeholders ) be made transparent , shared and negotiated with justice ; • How can radically different knowledge perspectives be integrated in the research ecosystem ; • How can researchers and practitioners position themselves in relation to manifestly unequal power relations ( ethnicity , gender , religion , age , sexuality etc . ) in contexts where we are working ; Copyright© 2015 is held by the author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to Aarhus University and ACM 5th Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives August 17 – 21 , 2015 , Aarhus Denmark DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21392 23 • How do we become aware of the issues in ourselves and our environments that need to be seen and addressed in order to design for or work towards better quality of life on a personal and a global scale ; • How can practices of self - care and self - knowledge support researchers in dealing with the challenges and stresses the research process will present them with ; • How can researchers’ processes of personal change contribute to research quality and impact . This workshop will bring together researchers and practitioners working at the nexus of ICT and development for social change with the aim of drafting and articulating critical alternatives for future research that is sufficiently emancipatory , inclusive and oriented towards globally sustainable futures as to be described as ICT for Development . SIGNIFICANCE The Aarhus decennial conferences stand for human centred systems development . The global spread of digital ICT requires us to recognise that human centeredness extends to the whole of humanity . The early years of the 21st Century have seen great interest in the potential of Information and Communication Technologies in addressing social and economic challenges in areas such as healthcare , education , poverty reduction , governance , social inclusion etc . , both in the global South and in so called ' developed ' , or ' WIERD ' countries ( Western , Industrial , Educated , Rich and Democratic ) . The United Nations set 2015 as their target date for the Millenium Development Goals ( MDGs ) and state that “After 2015 efforts to achieve a world of prosperity , equity , freedom , dignity and peace will continue unabated . ” Innovative application and usage of Information & Communication Technologies ( ICTs ) are playing an important role in addressing many of these challenges . ICT and Development ( ICTD ) or ICT ‘for Development’ ( ICT4D ) is a growing field of research in many places . However , the Aarhus conference series has not yet examined this domain in detail . Critical discourses in ICTD have highlighted how choices about building , implementing and promoting particular technological responses to challenges in particular localities may be tightly aligned with the interests of powerful political and economic actors in ways that can be characterised in terms of colonialism [ 1 ] . Van der Velden [ 2 ] offers a critique of systems for producing and curating knowledge and how these reflect global power structures and exclude the knowledge of those at the margins . Brown [ 3 ] draws attention to the existence of multiple knowledges that tend to attract different weight in the specific power constellation of the development context . A major impediment to collective learning is thus the power hierarchy among the contributing knowledge interests . Researchers from the global South are under - represented in journals and conferences exploring ICTD [ 4 ] , and even when researchers from the South are involved , the overall framings of research agendas may already be grounded in corporate and academic Northern knowledge interests . In this setting , authentic concerns and aspirations from the South have become invisible , and knowledge systems that differ from dominant ( Northern ) discourses may be silenced . It is therefore no surprise that so much ICTD research can be characterised as failing [ 5 ] and why Fail Fairs have become so popular at ICTD events . We contend that the problems in ICTD arise from flawed models of the concept of research for change . In these models , researchers claim to be able to discover what will benefit ‘disadvantaged’ groups and populations , whilst overlooking their own position of privilege and failing to analyse how their own knowledge interests ( and those of other actors ) will influence the conduct and outcomes of the research . External researchers flying in and flying out in what Mary Brydon Miller has described as ‘bungee research’ 1 will exacerbate problems and miss opportunities for emancipatory social change . Currently dominant models deny our shared humanity and mutual respect but also involve an immoral waste of scarce human resources on a global level . If it is to be true to its stated purpose of development , ICTD is clearly in need of some critical alternatives . Aarhus 2015 offers a unique and timely opportunity to bring together the traditions of critical computing and ICTD to set out alternative frames of reference for future research that could earn the title ICT for Development . STRUCTURE OF THE WORKSHOP Since the purpose of the workshop is to draft a frame of reference for future ICT4D research we invite applicants to submit a short statement describing their experience in this area , set out their ideas about components that should form part of this framework and make a written commitment to the other participants in the workshop that they will have read their submissions before they will turn up on the day . We will share these submissions online , prior to the workshop and read each other’s work . The opening session of the day will provide an opportunity for participants to introduce themselves , set out their concerns and aspirations regarding future ICT4D research and address queries towards other participants regarding the online submissions . During the second session we will start an appreciative inquiry into the concepts and practices that participants 1 Keynote address to the 2013 Connected Communities Showcase and Summit , Edinburgh . http : / / www . ahrc . ac . uk / News - and - Events / Watch - and - Listen / Documents / Connected _ Communties _ Podcast _ Trans cript . pdf 24 have used or experienced that might suggest directions for critical alternatives . After lunch , we will conclude this first inquiry cycle and review the learning . The last session will be a planning session about a communication strategy and the next steps . Because many participants may not be able to attend the Aarhus 2015 conference , we will organise the possibility of remote participation on the basis that participants attend for the whole workshop and engage in all the activities . ORGANISERS BIOGRAPHIES Edwin Blake Edwin is Professor of Computer Science and director of the ICT4D research centre at the University of Cape Town . He is recognised as one of the pioneers of applying HCI principles to development challenges through his work on Cybertracker in the 1990s , and he is currently working with action research approaches to support communities in representing , retaining and communicating their own indigenous knowledge using digital IT . Ineke Büskens Ineke is a cultural anthropologist and research methodologist . Having been the head of the centre for research methodology of the South African Human Sciences Research Council for 5 years , she now works as an independent research , gender and facilitation consultant . Since 2004 she has been the leader of the GRACE ( Gender Research in Africa and the Middle East into ICT for Empowerment ) Network involving 28 teams of researchers in 18 countries operating at the intersection between civil society social action and emancipatory action research . Andy Dearden Andy is Professor of Interactive Systems Design at Sheffield Hallam University . He has been involved in ICTD research for 10 years and was the founding chair of IFIP’s special interest group on Interaction Design and International Development . He has written extensively about the methods , approaches and ethics in ICTD research . REFERENCES 1 . Lilly Irani , Janet Vertesi , Paul Dourish , Kavita Philip , and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2010 . Postcolonial Computing : A Lens on Design and Development . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI 2010 ) , 1311 – 20 . 2 . Maja van der Velden . 2005 . Programming for cognitive justice : Towards an ethical framework for democratic code . Interacting with Computers , 17 ( 1 ) , 105 – 120 . 2005 . 3 . Valerie A Brown , 2010 Multiple Knowledges , Multiple Languages : Are the Limits of My Language the Limits of My World ? Knowledge Management for Development Journal 6 ( 2 ) 120 – 31 . 4 . Shikoh Gitau , Paul Plantinga , and Kathleen Diga . 2010 . ICTD research by Africans : Origins , interests , and impact . In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development ICTD . 2010 . 5 . Leslie Dodson , S . Revi Sterling , and John K . Bennett . 2013 . Considering Failure : Eight Years of ITID Research . Information Technologies & International Development . 9 ( 2 ) , 19 - 34 . 25 26 “I’ve had it ! ” Group therapy for interdisciplinary researchers Marko Jurmu , Johanna Ylipulli , Anna Luusua University of Oulu , Finland [ firstname . lastname ] @ ee . oulu . fi ABSTRACT In this workshop , we reflect on and share the fun and frustrations of working in interdisciplinary research . We ask participants to openly reflect on their experiences of interdisciplinarity . What approaches have worked and what have failed ? In addition to identifying phenomena , we aim to sketch out the next decade of interdisciplinary research in computing , especially in HCI . The third paradigm of Human - Computer Interaction focuses on the qualitative aspects of use experience and the situatedness of technologies . This new orientation has drawn in researchers from various other research and arts backgrounds and traditions , including the social sciences , architecture and industrial design among others . Therefore , we consider this third paradigm to be inherently interdisciplinary . Through workshop participants’ reflection of their own experiences , we strive to identify the common problems and pitfalls of interdisciplinary research , and to celebrate successes , as well as share best practices . Author Keywords Multidisciplinarity ; transdisciplinarity ; collaboration ; experience ; methodology ; epistemology ; research practice . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 2 . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Theory and methods ; K . 4 . 0 . Computers and society : General . INTRODUCTION The field of HCI has strong post - positivist roots [ 1 ] . However , in the past decade , calls for real - world research [ 4 ] and experiential [ 3 ] computing research and practice have surfaced , calling into question the positivist tradition’s sufficiency in tackling the problems that the situated , qualitative and holistic nature of this third paradigm inherently entails [ 5 ] . This third paradigm of Human - Computer Interaction [ 1 ] focuses on the qualitative aspects of use experience and the situatedness of technologies . This new orientation has drawn in researchers from various other research and arts backgrounds and traditions , including the social sciences , architecture and industrial design among others . These other fields , in turn , necessarily bear their own philosophical underpinnings ; ontological , epistemological , methodological , and ethical traditions and conceptions that inform the way research questions are formulated , and knowledge is produced , communicated and valued . In our experience , if these fundamental aspects are not addressed , the day - to - day functioning of interdisciplinary work has little chance of succeeding . Thus , recognizing these diverse backgrounds is a fundamental premise for conducting any interdisciplinary research . However , we deem it important to reflect on not only the challenges but also the possibilities offered by interdisciplinarity : the novel viewpoints , useful methods , and personal revelations it can produce . Through workshop participants’ reflection of their own experiences , we strive to identify the common problems and pitfalls of interdisciplinary research , and to celebrate successes as well as share best practices . Specifically , we strive towards identifying different , sometimes opposing , disciplinary traditions and approaches within third - paradigm HCI . These might include , but are not limited to : • Pragmatists and theorists • Design traditions and engineering traditions • Fundamental research traditions and applied research traditions • Different theoretical traditions Secondly , we aim to foster fruitful conversations and connections between these . The content of these conversations is not preordained in any way , but suggested topics for exploration might include : • What kind of practical obstacles have you faced in everyday interdisciplinary research discourse ? • What are the ontological and epistemological underpinnings of your research , and what kind of conflicting standpoints have you encountered or grappled with ? • Have differing epistemological conceptions caused problems on the level of everyday research work - for example , have you been negotiating about different writing traditions ? Copyright© 2015 is held by the author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to Aarhus University and ACM 5th Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives August 17 – 21 , 2015 , Aarhus Denmark DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21393 27 • What kind of methodological approaches have you utilized in your research and why ? Have you borrowed and / or appropriated methodologies from other fields and has it caused any conflicts - or perhaps fruitful outcomes ? • What role do ethics play for your field’s research and design practices or theoretical traditions ? • Are there any existing but underexplored disciplinary connections that might benefit the research of Human - Computer Interaction ? • Are there any intradisciplinary divides within your field of origin ? How have you surmounted possible obstacles , or benefited from colleagues’ expertise ? The immediate goal of this workshop is to begin charting out a roadmap for next decade of interdisciplinary explorations in third paradigm HCI . The larger aim is to launch a series of workshops in which a community of interdisciplinary researchers would regularly explore the past , present and future of interdisciplinary research in third paradigm HCI . Furthermore , we will strive towards negotiating a publishing agreement for a book or a special issue with a leading scientific publisher . Within this workshop , we will focus on elaborating the themes connected to interdisciplinarity by working in small groups . The topics addressed by each group will be grounded on the interests of workshop participants and decided after we have received the papers . We encourage participants from any design or research background to apply in order to create a space for genuine interdisciplinary dialogue . SCHEDULE OF PLANNED ACTIVITIES We start with an informal meet - and - greet over refreshments before we settle into the first ‘group therapy’ session . These first groups or pairs are thematically formed by us on the basis of participant contributions , and they will receive an assignment suitable for the group’s / pairs’ mutual interests and experiences . The groups’ will present the results of their work an hour later , as well as introduce themselves to the rest of the workshop . Instructors will briefly discuss the results of the first group , and present the workshop with their lunch - time task : form new groups according to your own interests , and think of a topic that you would like to explore together . Groups can come up with their own topics , or use the ones we have pre - formulated . Coming back from lunch , we will take stock of the new groups and their members . Groups will work for an hour , after which they will present , and we will have a closing discussion . All workshop participants are invited for dinner afterwards . Instructors will reserve the table , but all participants will pay for their own meals . Over dinner , we will discuss possible plans for the future - e . g . concerning the publication - that might have arisen over the course of the workshop . 9 am Arrival and coffee / tea 9 . 30 - 10 . 30 am Thematic group or pair work : Experiences of interdisciplinarity 10 . 30 - 12 . 00 am Group presentations , lunch task : form new groups or pairs ! 12 . 00 - 1 pm Lunch 1 pm - 2 pm Future oriented group or pair work : Making interdisciplinarity work 2pm - 3pm Group presentations Optional : Dinner at nearby restaurant , plans for the future WORKSHOP ORGANIZERS Dr . Tech . Marko Jurmu received his M . Sc . ( hons ) and Ph . D . degrees of computer science from the University of Oulu in 2007 and 2014 , respectively . Marko has over a decade of work experience from ubiquitous computing projects . During his Ph . D . research , Marko worked with UBI - displays - interactive , multipurpose public displays - in a real city center environment through a longitudinal deployment started in 2009 . At the moment , Marko is also looking into the fields of digital health and so - called ‘hybrid spaces’ , which are an evolutionary step from virtual worlds such as Second Life . Marko became involved in transdisciplinary research in 2013 through collaboration with Johanna Ylipulli and Anna Luusua . The first academic milestone of this collaboration is a full - length conference publication titled “Evaluation Probes” , appearing in CHI 2015 . Dr . , cultural anthropologist Johanna Ylipulli ’s major research interests focus on ICT , everyday life practices and “smart cities” . She has had the ups and downs of interdisciplinary work , as for the last five years she has been involved in interdisciplinary research projects exploring ubiquitous computing technologies in Northern urban environments . Johanna has been scrutinizing the design process of new urban technology as well as its use and adoption in the light of empirical research material . Methodologically , Johanna’s focus is on qualitative research ; she has been using conventional ethnographic methods , such as thematic interviews , alongside visually oriented , creative methods , inspired by e . g . cultural probes . She is driven by the firm belief that ethnography and anthropology provide tools , which can help people to create more sustainable , versatile and socially inclusive futures . Furthermore , she is interested in investigating how critically oriented anthropological thinking , with its capability to challenge normative structures and self - evident “truths” can be combined and successfully utilized with applied research . 28 M . Sc . Architect Anna Luusua ’s work revolves around the theme of digital augmentation in public urban places from an experiential point of view , and what this means both for designing urban spaces and the systems that we use to augment them . Thus , her research interests span from the fields of architecture and urban design to urban computing and interaction design . Supplying designers with knowledge and tools for making people’s voices heard in the design of the lived environment is Anna’s major motivation for doing research . Thus , on the level of methodology , she is interested in both ethnographically inspired methods as well as methods originated in various design fields . She strives to both apply these methods to formulate design theory and to develop these methods further . She has collaborated with researchers from various disciplines within the projects she has been involved with in the past four years , including the close interdisciplinary collaboration with Marko and Johanna . RECRUITMENT STRATEGY We will construct a website and a Facebook page for the workshop , containing the call for participation as well as our personal profiles . Additionally , we will advertise the workshop through our networks of colleagues via email . Importantly , we will advertise this workshop at CHI’15 in Seoul , South Korea , on April 18 - 23 , 2015 , by producing brochures for distribution . CALL FOR PARTICIPATION DRAFT About the workshop In this workshop , we reflect on and share the fun and frustrations of working in interdisciplinary research . We ask participants to openly reflect on their experiences of interdisciplinarity . What approaches have worked and what have failed ? In addition to identifying phenomena , we aim to sketch out the next decade of interdisciplinary research in computing , especially in HCI . The third paradigm of Human - Computer Interaction focuses on the qualitative aspects of use experience and the situatedness of technologies . This new orientation has drawn in researchers from various other research and arts backgrounds and traditions , including the social sciences , architecture and industrial design among others . Therefore , we consider this third paradigm to be inherently interdisciplinary . Through workshop participants’ reflection of their own experiences , we strive to identify the common problems and pitfalls of interdisciplinary research , and to celebrate successes as well as share best practices . We encourage participants from any design or research background to apply in order to create a space for genuine interdisciplinary dialogue . Important dates Deadline for position papers : 15 May . Notification to workshop participants : 15 June ( early registration 30 June ) . Workshop Days : One - day session on 18 August , 2015 . Submissions We invite interested authors to submit a 3 - 4 - page position paper in the ACM SIGCHI Extended Abstract format , together with a 50 - word biography , to interdisciplinary . ws2015 @ virtues . fi . The organizing committee will select up to 25 submissions based on relevance , quality , and diversity of inputs . Papers will be published online on the workshop site . Furthermore , we will strive towards negotiating a publishing agreement for a book or a special issue with a leading scientific publisher . Workshop website : http : / / interdisciplinary . ws2015 . virtues . fi / REFERENCES 1 . Jeffrey Bardzell and Shaowen Bardzell . 2014 . “A great and troubling beauty” : cognitive speculation and ubiquitous computing . Personal Ubiquitous Comput . 18 , 4 ( April 2014 ) , 779 - 794 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 013 - 0677 - 8 2 . Steve Harrison , Phoebe Sengers , and Deborah Tatar . 2011 . Making epistemological trouble : Third - paradigm HCI as successor science . Interacting with Computers 23 , 5 ( September 2011 ) , 385 - 392 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . intcom . 2011 . 03 . 005 3 . Yvonne Rogers . 2006 . Moving on from weiser’s vision of calm computing : Engaging ubicomp experiences . In Proceedings of the 8 th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing ( UbiComp ' 06 ) , 404 - 421 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 11853565 _ 24 4 . Yvonne Rogers . 2011 . Interaction design gone wild : striving for wild theory . Interactions 18 , 4 ( July / August 2011 ) , 58 - 62 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978822 . 1978834 5 . Abigail Sellen , Yvonne Rogers , Richard Harper , and Tom Rodden . 2009 . Reflecting human values in the digital age . Communications of the ACM 52 , 3 ( March 2009 ) , 58 - 66 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1467247 . 1467265 29 30 The Future of Making : Where Industrial and Personal Fabrication Meet Verena Fuchsberger Martin Murer Manfred Tscheligi Center for HCI University of Salzburg , Austria { ﬁrstname . lastname } @ sbg . ac . at Silvia Lindtner University of Michigan , School of Information Ann Arbor , USA lindtner @ umich . edu Andreas Reiter Mixed Reality Laboratory , School of Computer Science , University of Nottingham Nottingham , UK andreas . reiter @ nottingham . ac . uk Shaowen Bardzell Jeffrey Bardzell Indiana University Bloomington , USA [ selu ; jbardzel ] @ indiana . edu Pernille Bjørn University of Copenhagen Copenhagen , Denmark pernille . bjorn @ diku . dk ABSTRACT This one - day workshop seeks to reﬂect on the notion of fab - rication in both personal and industrial contexts . Although these contexts are very distinct in their economical and polit - ical vision , they share important characteristics ( e . g . , users interacting with speciﬁc fabrication equipment and tools ) . The workshop topic spans from personal fabrication to ( au - tomated ) production , from applied to theoretical considera - tions , from user requirements to design as a crafting practice . We will address changes in production that affect humans , e . g . , from mass production to Do - It - Yourself ( DIY ) produc - tion , in order to discuss ﬁndings and lessons learned for in - dividual and collective production workplaces of the future . We aim to explore the intersections between different dimen - sions and processes of production ranging all the way from hobbyist to professional making . Furthermore , the workshop will critically reﬂect on current developments and their conse - quences on personal , societal , and economical levels includ - ing questions of the reorganization of work and labor , inno - vation cultures , and politics of participation . ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . m . Information Interfaces and Presentation ( e . g . HCI ) : Miscellaneous Author Keywords Personal fabrication ; industrial fabrication ; production ; manufacturing ; DIY . Copyright 2015 is held by the author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to Aarhus University and ACM . 5th Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives August 17 21 , 2015 , Aarhus Denmark DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21394 INTRODUCTION In the production of goods , tremendous changes are on their way that affect how and where they are manufactured , and who is producing them , introducing critical alternatives to the ﬁeld of fabrication . First , lowering costs of previously unaf - fordable manufacturing hardware have been accompanied by a rise of the so - called DIY maker movement – hardware en - thusiasts committed to creating their own products , tools and machines ( rather than purchasing them ) ( e . g . , [ 1 , 5 , 6 , 17 ] ) . Much of the scholarly discourse on makers argues that this will lead to a democratization of manufacturing and personal fabrication ( e . g . , [ 4 , 6 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 ] ) . These Do - It - Yourself ( DIY ) and maker cultures ( e . g . , [ 9 , 18 ] ) are currently much debated in the broader HCI and CSCW communities , as evident through CHI 2014 hosting a panel on “Making Cul - tures : Empowerment , Participation , and Democracy or Not ? ” [ 1 ] , which aimed at unpacking the overly euphoric visions and promises of making as a “third industrial revolution” . At CSCW 2014 , a similar panel investigated “Making Cultures : Building Things & Building Communities” [ 17 ] . While maker cultures have garnered signiﬁcant attention , re - cent changes in industrial fabrication are yet to be explored in HCI research . These transformations are driven by a de - sire to integrate smart computation into production facilities . For instance , in German speaking countries , “Industry 4 . 0” ( e . g . , [ 3 ] ) has been coined as the term that indicates the efforts to computerize traditional manufacturing industries , also of - ten called a “fourth industrial revolution” [ 3 ] . Adaptability , ﬂexibility , and resource efﬁciency are anticipated to rise with the introduction of smart computation in production facilities . Furthermore , there are endeavors to individualize production in order to provide customized goods within mass production . Closely intertwined with these attempts are efforts around the “Internet of Things ( IoT ) ” , trying to turn visions of ubiquitous computing [ 20 ] into products [ 2 ] and standards [ 16 ] . 31 Personal and industrial fabrication certainly differ in terms of political and strategic aims . While advocates of personal fab - rication are envisioning a democratization of technology pro - duction ( e . g . , [ 17 , 18 ] ) , those in industrial fabrication tend to make use of the economical potential that comes with individ - ualized goods . However , this distinction is blurring , as per - sonal fabrication is becoming an economic sector on its own , as visible in the rise of maker entrepreneurship [ 9 ] . Making , indeed , is envisioned as a return to the “made in America” brand [ 9 ] and the revamp of manufacturing in China as new site of innovation [ 7 ] . In this workshop , we seek to focus on characteristics that in - dustrial and personal fabrication share . Fabrication – despite all automation efforts in production facilities – relies strongly on human labor and skills . Makers are envisioning to rework traditional processes of use and labor , enabling others to be - come producers not just of products , but also of new eco - nomic and political arrangements . In ( western ) factories , the humans’ role turns from executors of tasks to coordinators and decision makers in order to account for customized goods and automated production [ 3 ] . In manufacturing in Southern China , on the other hand , we witness the rise of agile and rapid innovation processes rooted in an open source culture applied to industrial production [ 8 ] . These ﬁndings challenge traditional binaries that inherently associate western maker culture with creativity and innovation , and industrial produc - tion ( in the so - called developing world ) as numb execution . Taken together , both forces , grassroots making and industrial production , are continuing to drastically remake societal , eco - nomic , and political processes ( see e . g . , [ 19 ] ) , which inﬂu - ences how work force , innovation , and power are distributed . Many promises are associated with maker movements , DIY and personal fabrication , such as a democratization of tech - nology and increasing possibilities of participation . By the same token , industrial fabrication is anticipated to have a sig - niﬁcant upturn enabled by increased automation and the pro - duction of individualized goods . Both augur paradigmatic changes in computing , one by focusing on making , the other one by upholding automation . However , are these euphoric visions of how fabrication changes desirable ? If yes , how can they become reality ? How can we , as a research community , help to achieve and sustain the potentials while being critical about undesirable conse - quences ? How can we cross the boundaries between mak - ing and automation in order to facilitate collaboration and knowledge exchange ? With this workshop , we aim to discuss these questions by re - ﬂecting on processes around hobbyist and professional pro - duction , their intersections as well as their social , economic , and technological consequences . These consequences are likely to affect humans and their quality of life in the next decades , in professional environments ( e . g . , factory workers ) , hobbyist settings ( e . g . , makers ) , or both . In line with the con - ference’s scope , we attempt to establish a discourse that con - nects working life with civic life , which is nurtured by recent developments , changes , and promises in fabrication . By focusing on intersections of personal and industrial fab - rication , we aim to explore the opportunities and politics of the recent rise in smart computation , IoT , and maker en - trepreneurship . Few efforts have investigated how processes of personal or industrial fabrication relate . We aim to discuss diverse perspectives , seeking to critically unpack who ben - eﬁts from these changes in production , who gets to partici - pate , and what sites of making , craftsmanship and production might be rendered invisible . In doing so , we question overly euphoric visions of individual empowerment and democrati - zation of production . Overview of the Workshop The workshop will kick off by having the organizers pro - vide an introduction to the topic , including their own per - spectives , research and other engagements with personal and industrial fabrication . Participants will be invited to present their positions or projects on the topic , their experiences and reﬂections . We anticipate around 15 participants from diverse backgrounds ( personal fabrication , industrial fabrication , or both ) . In advance to the workshop , the organizers will group the par - ticipants for the break - out sessions to create heterogeneous subgroups in terms of backgrounds and experiences . The participants will be asked to bring artifacts with them that characterize their research contexts , for instance , objects that would contemporarily be difﬁcult or impossible to fabricate in other realms ( e . g . , artifacts resulting from a maker , hacker , or DIY project , factory - made goods , etc . ) . In the break - out sessions , the subgroups will explore these artifacts and dis - cuss whether , how , or why a speciﬁc artifact is characteristic to current industrial or personal fabrication in order to iden - tify underlying dynamics and practices . Time Activity 09 : 00 - 09 : 30 Welcome and introduction to the workshop 09 : 30 - 10 : 30 Participants’ statements 10 : 30 - 11 : 00 Break 11 : 00 - 12 : 30 Break - out session : Subgroups discussing objects they brought along ( e . g . , their characteristics , dynamics , and fabrication practices ) 12 : 30 - 13 : 30 Lunch 13 : 30 - 15 : 00 Plenum session : Presentations of break - out sessions outcome and discussion 15 : 00 - 15 : 30 Break 15 : 30 - 17 : 00 Development of an ( critical ) agenda concerning the potential future interplay of personal and industrial fabrication Table 1 . Workshop Schedule . 32 Afterwards , we will reﬂect on how fabrication changed and changes , and how this will inﬂuence the future of fabrica - tion and humans as innovators , workers , activists , etc . In particular , we will critically engage with larger social im - plications for workers , tech and venture labor [ 15 ] . Finally , our goal is to develop an agenda for how to shape the ex - change between research on personal and industrial fabrica - tion ( e . g . , the format of an ongoing discourse ) , while sustain - ing a critical perspective on consequences that these devel - opments bring along . The organizers will actively participate in all sessions to foster discussions and reﬂection . Table 1 illustrates the overall schedule for the workshop . Prior to the workshop , the participants’ contributions will be posted on the website in order to allow preparation . We will take the workshop as an opportunity to explore future collab - oration , e . g . , a special issue , a mailing list , or collaborative research projects . Part of our goal is to build a community of scholars and practitioners concerned with both hobbyists and professional making cultures , as well as intersections thereof . Organizers’ Biographies Verena Fuchsberger is postdoctoral research fellow at the Center for Human - Computer Interaction ( University of Salzburg ) . She has done master degrees in Educational Sci - ences and Psychology and recently ﬁnished her PhD in HCI . In her research , she focuses on the agency of human and non - human actors in HCI and Interaction Design . In particu - lar , she is interested in the materiality of interactions , which she investigated also in industrial contexts , such as a semi - conductor factory . She co - organized workshops , for instance , at IDC2011 or NordiCHI2012 . Martin Murer is interaction designer and researcher at the Center for Human - Computer Interaction ( University of Salzburg ) , focusing on craft and technology . His research at the intersection of industrial and personal fabrication is con - cerned with the tangible practices that are relevant in both contexts , as even highly automated manufacturing processes are heavily depending on all sorts of embodied practices , me - chanical skills and tacit knowledge . He co - organized work - shops , for instance , at TEI ( 2014 , 2015 ) . Manfred Tscheligi is professor for HCI & Usability at the University of Salzburg . He further is head of the business unit Technology Experience at the Austrian Institute of Technol - ogy . He leads a variety of research projects that investigate human - computer interaction in industry , e . g . , the Christian - Doppler Laboratory on “Contextual Interfaces” , a seven years industry - research cooperation . He was involved in a range of conference activities ( e . g . , co - chairing CHI2004 in Vienna , ACE 2007 or AUI 2011 in Salzburg ) and co - organized sev - eral workshops and SIGs ( CHI , Mobile HCI , AUI , CSCW ) . Silvia Lindtner is an assistant professor at the University of Michigan in the School of Information . Her research inves - tigates the role digital technologies play in global processes of innovation , work and labor , as sites of expressions of self - hood and collectivity , and in relation to political , social and economic processes of urban redesign . She explores these themes through a contemporary research project ; DIY maker and hacker culture , with a particular focus on its intersections with manufacturing and creative industry development in China . She has published in various disciplines such as HCI , CSCW , STS , and China studies , and has organized workshops at Ubicomp and CHI in 2009 , 2010 and 2011 as well as in - ternational workshops and conferences on making and manu - facturing cultures 2011 - 2014 ( see : www . hackedmatter . com ) . Andreas Reiter is an early - stage PhD Student in the Mixed Reality Laboratory of the School of Computer Science and Horizon CDT at the University of Nottingham , UK . His re - search investigates the social organization of work practice within UK Hacker - / Maker Communities , with the intent of creating design to augment and facilitate innovation . He is one of the founding members of the OTELO Open Technol - ogy Laboratories ( www . otelo . or . at ) in Vorchdorf ( Austria ) , which aims at enabling citizens with public and free access to rapid prototyping tools in rural Austria . He organized a RCUK Digital Economy Network Makers Workshop around MakerFaireUK 2014 . Shaowen Bardzell is an Associate Professor in the School of Informatics and Computing and the Afﬁliated Faculty of the Kinsey Institute at Indiana University . Bardzell leverages her background in the humanities to study technology in use , with an emphasis on participatory , intimate , and embodied experiences . One thread of her recent work has focused on how making and criticality intersect , especially in the context of national and cultural identity , local material resources , and community activism . Jeffrey Bardzell is an Associate Professor of HCI / Design at Indiana University . He brings a humanist perspective to HCI and is best known for bringing critical perspectives into HCI , e . g . , in his research on interaction criticism , aesthetics , and critical design . His interest in maker culture extends his prior research on the co - emergence of tools , communities of prac - tice , and aesthetic vocabularies in amateur creative commu - nities , ranging from traditional craft communities to online multimedia authoring communities . Pernille Bjørn is Professor in CSCW at the Computer Sci - ence Department at University of Copenhagen , Denmark . She specializes in conceptualizing collaborative work ar - rangements and is mostly known for her CSCW work in healthcare and global software development . Currently , she is interested in unpacking the ways in which Makers engage and collaborate – shared knowledge and ideas – as prominent aspects of their work . In particular she is interested in explor - ing the opportunities for new born global companies arising out of the Maker communities , and how best practices for dis - tributed work practices can be created based upon previous research on global software development , however particular adjusted to ﬁt nature of the Maker communities . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The ﬁnancial support for the work on the topic by the Aus - trian Federal Ministry of Science , Research and Economy and the National Foundation for Research , Technology and Development is gratefully acknowledged ( Christian Doppler Laboratory for “Contextual Interfaces” ) . 33 REFERENCES 1 . Morgan G . Ames , Jeffrey Bardzell , Shaowen Bardzell , Silvia Lindtner , David A . Mellis , and Daniela K . Rosner . 2014 . Making Cultures : Empowerment , Participation , and Democracy - or Not ? . In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the 32Nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1087 – 1092 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2559206 . 2579405 2 . Kevin Ashton . 2009 . That ‘internet of things’ thing . RFiD Journal 22 , 7 ( 2009 ) , 97 – 114 . 3 . Malte Brettel , Niklas Friederichsen , Michael Keller , and Marius Rosenberg . 2014 . How virtualization , decentralization and network building change the manufacturing landscape : An Industry 4 . 0 Perspective . International Journal of Mechanical , Industrial Science and Engineering 8 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 37 – 44 . 4 . Amber Ferger , Wai Fai Lau , Philipp Ross , Wyman Zhao , Hiroki Sayama , and Steen Rasmussen . 2013 . Impact of Personal Fabrication Technology on Social Structure and Wealth Distribution : An Agent - Based Simulation Study . In Advances in Artiﬁcial Life , ECAL , Vol . 12 . 521 – 522 . 5 . Neil Gershenfeld . 2008 . Fab : the coming revolution on your desktop – from personal computers to personal fabrication . Basic Books . 6 . Scott E . Hudson . 2014 . Printing Teddy Bears : A Technique for 3D Printing of Soft Interactive Objects . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 459 – 468 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557338 7 . Silvia Lindtner . 2012 . Cultivating Creative China : Making and Remaking Cities , Citizens , Work and Innovation . University of California , Irvine . 8 . Silvia Lindtner , Anna Greenspan , and David Li . 2014a . Shanzhai : China’s Collaborative Electronics - Design Ecosystem . ( 2014 ) . http : / / www . theatlantic . com / technology / archive / 2014 / 05 / chinas - mass - production - system / 370898 / 9 . Silvia Lindtner , Garnet D . Hertz , and Paul Dourish . 2014b . Emerging Sites of HCI Innovation : Hackerspaces , Hardware Startups & Incubators . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 439 – 448 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557132 10 . Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman . 2010 . Factory @ home : The emerging economy of personal fabrication . A report commissioned by the US Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy ( 2010 ) . 11 . David A . Mellis and Leah Buechley . 2012 . Case Studies in the Personal Fabrication of Electronic Products . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 268 – 277 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2317998 12 . Catarina Mota . 2011 . The Rise of Personal Fabrication . In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Creativity and Cognition ( C & C ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 279 – 288 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2069618 . 2069665 13 . Stefanie Mueller , Pedro Lopes , and Patrick Baudisch . 2012 . Interactive Construction : Interactive Fabrication of Functional Mechanical Devices . In Proceedings of the 25th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 599 – 606 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2380116 . 2380191 14 . Stefanie Mueller , Tobias Mohr , Kerstin Guenther , Johannes Frohnhofen , and Patrick Baudisch . 2014 . faBrickation : Fast 3D Printing of Functional Objects by Integrating Construction Kit Building Blocks . In CHI ’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 187 – 188 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2559206 . 2582209 15 . Gina Neff . 2012 . Venture labor : Work and the burden of risk in innovative industries . MIT Press . 16 . Huansheng Ning and Ziou Wang . 2011 . Future Internet of things architecture : like mankind neural system or social organization framework ? Communications Letters , IEEE 15 , 4 ( 2011 ) , 461 – 463 . 17 . Daniela K . Rosner , Silvia Lindtner , Ingrid Erickson , Laura Forlano , Steven J . Jackson , and Beth Kolko . 2014 . Making Cultures : Building Things & Building Communities . In Proceedings of the Companion Publication of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW Companion ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 113 – 116 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556420 . 2556852 18 . Joshua G . Tanenbaum , Amanda M . Williams , Audrey Desjardins , and Karen Tanenbaum . 2013 . Democratizing Technology : Pleasure , Utility and Expressiveness in DIY and Maker Practice . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2603 – 2612 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2481360 19 . Peter - Paul Verbeek . 2011 . Moralizing technology : Understanding and designing the morality of things . University of Chicago Press . 20 . Mark Weiser . 1993 . Some Computer Science Issues in Ubiquitous Computing . Commun . ACM 36 , 7 ( July 1993 ) , 75 – 84 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 159544 . 159617 34 Inviting Participation through IoT : Experiments and Performances in Public Spaces Sarah Fox , Daniela K . Rosner Human Centered Design & Engineering University of Washington , USA { sefox , dkrosner } @ uw . edu Margaret E . Morris , Kathi R . Kitner Intel Corporation Hillsboro , OR , USA { margaret . morris , kathi . r . kitner } @ intel . com ABSTRACT This paper proposes a workshop on the Internet of Things ( IoT ) for participation in public life . We will bring together artists , designers , practitioners , and academics interested in site - specific projects involving lighting and other ambient technologies intended to serve community interests such as representation and safety . The authors share their current inquiry on stairwells as an example . Discussion of this project and others will help us locate , trace , and develop networked environments . Author Keywords IoT , public design , participation , cities . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION This paper proposes a workshop on the Internet of Things ( IoT ) for participation in public life . The Internet of Things is widely understood as a system of networked objects ( e . g . toasters or thermostats ) that sense and communicate aspects of their environment . They can then share this information with users or manufacturers . Many common examples of IoT exist within the home for tracking and conserving energy . The Nest thermostat , for example , adapts itself to its owner’s schedule , turning on when someone is present [ 3 ] . This off - loads the burden of adjusting the temperature to the device . It also corrects for some human error ( i . e . forgetting to turn the thermostat off when exiting the home ) . Current examples of Public IoT include mobile air quality sensors , networked traffic lights that respond to movement and trashcans that signal when they need to be emptied [ 4 ] . The focus in public IoT , as with home IoT , has been largely on efficiency . Our intent is to expand the discussion of IoT from efficiency and automation to participation . In this workshop , we propose to gather artists , designers , practitioners , and academics who share an interest in IoT for participation in public life . We use the term participation to include concerns for expressivity , safety , and presence . We specifically ground our proposal in a discussion of networked installations and performances in the urban environment ( e . g . , lighting and other ambient cues ) to imagine the future of public IoT . To explore the potentials of IoT for participation , we must consider the limitations of what currently exists . Simple motion - activated streetlamps have been put in a number of cities such as Barcelona and Oslo [ 1 , 2 ] . Such implementations are straightforward in a sense and may help people traversing the space . For some , changing poor lighting conditions in public staircases , underground walkways or other passages could enable nighttime and early morning movement — augmenting visibility and ultimately safety . But who and what else will be affected by this increase in visibility ? Certainly other people ( or animals or things ) might make use of the space for inhabitance at different lengths of time . How might their ability to move through this space be affected with this illumination ? Would the added light create visibility where some would prefer it to remain out of sight ? One can imagine that skateboarders , for instance , might not want to be constantly exposed by light for fear of being removed from the area . There are also maintenance and city workers whose job it might be to keep eye on the area . What would it do to their own feelings of autonomy knowing that they were always being sensed ? Would the expectations of thoroughness of their work be increased with the addition of ‘smart’ lighting ? The tensions between seeing and being seen should be considered in any public IoT intervention . Recent experiments in design and art highlight the myriad influences on our sensory experiences in public life . In Future City Lab’s Lightweave proposal for the NOMA Underpass Design Competition , ambient sounds from above cars and trains overhead are transformed into wave patterns of light that brighten the path [ 5 ] . In this environment , both the sound and light that fill the underpass are now dictated by the automobiles that have moved pedestrians underground . The power in this situation is not with the people afoot , but with the machines above . In our research , we are examining stairwells in Seattle , Copyright© 2015 is held by the author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to Aarhus University and ACM 5th Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives August 17 – 21 , 2015 , Aarhus Denmark DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21395 35 Washington to investigate how light can reveal and cultivate belonging and participation . The premise of this work is that IoT implementations can constructively transform public spaces , supporting their practical and social value . WORKSHOP ORGANIZATION The one - day workshop will involve three discussion periods broken up by brief walking exercises . Before the workshop , participants will document a memorable walk through public space and bring that documentation to the workshop : a trace of a particular route ( e . g . using paper maps or online mapping software such as open street maps ) . During the workshop , participants receive simple probes such as flashlights and mini - drums for their walking exercises . The discussion topics will include : 1 ) Participation through Public IoT 2 ) Critical Alternatives to Public IoT , and 3 ) Designing for Public Engagement . The proposed topics and exercises are subject to change based on the position papers submitted by participants . Discussion 1 : Participation through Public IoT What counts as public IoT design ? What are emerging examples of participation through public IoT ? How is participation shaped by IoT design and the forms of infrastructure that underlie it ? Walking Exercise 1 : Follow a GIS Route from another site Participants will break into groups of two . Each person will show their partner the memorable walk they brought to the workshop . Together , they will then choose one walk through Aarhaus . Along the way , they will reflect on their journey in relation to the previously travelled path . Upon return , all workshop participants will discuss the forms of public participation this juxtaposition enables . This exploration is meant to lead into the following discussion of Critical Alternatives . Discussion 2 : Critical Alternatives to Public IoT What constitutes a critical alternative to public IoT ? In what ways are IoT objects imagined as participatory ? How might the introduction of IoT help us negotiate varying interests , priorities and concerns ? How might IoT enable pedestrians to occupy a space , to demand its safety ? How could this occupancy be signaled to those far away ( drivers on an overpass ) ? How could IoT reflect occupancy ( e . g . , light up when a critical mass of people are in a space rendering it safe ) or try to create safety ( e . g . , through lighting in advance of occupancy ) ? Walking Exercise 2 : Follow a GIS Route from another site In small groups , participants will take a walk to the endpoint of their prior journey and document the sociotechnical infrastructures they encounter along the way ( e . g . , sketching , photography , mapping ) . They will share their observations with another group upon return and discuss the kinds of public participation this infrastructure makes possible . Discussion 3 : Designing for Public Engagement What kind of design interventions might invite occupancy of a space ? What kind of infrastructural elements ( e . g . , lighting ) might aid engagement without increasing the vulnerability of pedestrians ? How might it provide refuge and vista ? TOPICS OF INTEREST We invite contributions on topics including but not limited to : • Public participation • IoT and public life • Public performances and interventions to invite participation • Politics of public IoT • Histories of interventions for participation OUTCOMES We intend to incorporate discussions from this workshop in an NSF workshop proposal on the topic of IoT and public space . Workshop discussions and materials will be documented and posted to the workshop blog . The website will be maintained after the workshop , allowing for participants to continue conversations and collaborations supporting future discussion of public IoT . ORGANIZERS Sarah Fox is a PhD student working in the Tactile and Tactical ( TAT ) Design Lab at the University of Washington , where she conducts a broad range of design research , ethnographic study , and speculative design . She holds a Master ' s degree in Digital Media from the Georgia Institute of Technology , where she was a part of the Intel Science and Technology Center for Social Computing . She has interned with Microsoft Research in Cambridge , UK and the Interaction and Experience Research group at Intel Labs in Santa Clara , CA , USA . Daniela K . Rosner is an Assistant Professor of Human - Centered Design & Engineering ( HCDE ) at the University of Washington where she co - directs the Tactile and Tactical Design Lab ( TAT lab ) and seeks to understand emerging sites of digital production , from hobbyist fixer groups to feminist hacker collectives . She holds a Ph . D . from UC Berkeley ' s School of Information , a M . S . in Computer Science from the University of Chicago , and a B . F . A . in Graphic Design from the Rhode Island School of Design . Daniela has been a regular columnist for Interactions Magazine , a bimonthly publication of ACM SIGCHI , and now serves as an editor for a forum called Design as Inquiry . 36 Margaret Morris is a clinical psychologist and senior research scientist at Intel focusing on technology and emotional communication . Prior to joining Intel , she was an experience Modeler at Sapient . Margaret received her BA from Haverford College , her PhD from the University of New Mexico , and completed her postdoctoral fellowship from Stanford University . For talks and publications : margiemem . com . Kathi R . Kitner is a cultural anthropologist and Senior Research Scientist with Intel Labs’ since 2006 , is currently studying how increasing instrumentation / digitization ( the Internet of Things ) might help to enhance cultural resilience in the face of climate change in both wild and urban environments . Previous to working at Intel Corporation , she focused social impact assessments in United States and Caribbean fishing communities . Kitner holds a Ph . D . in Anthropology and Latin American Studies from the University of Florida . CALL FOR PROJECTS AND PERFORMANCES We invite work submitted in the following forms : 1 . A brief description of a project or performance ( 500 to 1000 words ) . This can be a work in progress or a project authors have completed . Those submitting will be encouraged to provide external links or videos that further illustrate the work . 2 . A critique of a project orchestrated by other individuals , a governing body , or corporation ( 500 to 1000 words ) . 3 . A speculative proposal for public IoT that incorporates concerns for power , participation , and agency . Site specificity is encouraged . Authors are free to submit image or video based proposals . A brief supplementary text description of the proposal is encouraged ( 250 to 500 words ) . We will recruit participants via social media and email lists around the fields of science and technology studies , design , and information systems . Participants will be selected based on the potential of their projects to investigate concerns for belongingness and participation or the thoughtfulness of their critiques . REFERENCES 1 . Cisco . IoE - Driven Smart City Barcelona Initiative Cuts Water Bills , Boosts Parking Revenues , Creates Jobs & More . Cisco Systems Inc . , 2014 . 2 . Nordic Council of Ministers . Nordic Solutions for Sustainable Cities . Nordic Council of Ministers , 2012 . 3 . Nest . Nest . https : / / nest . com / . 4 . Bigbelly – The Smart Waste & Recycling System . http : / / bigbelly . com / . 5 . Lightweave . Future Cities Lab . http : / / www . future - cities - lab . net / lightweave / . 37 38 Embodying Embodied Design Research Techniques Danielle Wilde ¹ , Oscar Tomico ² , Andrés Lucero ¹ , Kristina Höök ³ , Jacob Buur ¹ ¹ University of Southern Denmark ² Eindhoven University of Technology , Netherlands ³ KTH , Sweden { wilde , lucero , buur } @ sdu . dk , o . tomico @ tue . nl , khook @ kth . se ABSTRACT The value of engaging the full gamut of sensory motor skills in the design and use of smart objects and systems is recognized . Yet methods for arriving at robust and reliable outcomes for their development are not fully understood , nor are they easily reported or transferred through typical conference presentations and paper submissions . New forms of knowledge transfer , such as pictorials ( e . g . , DIS and RTD conferences ) , and video are enabling enhanced , image - enriched reporting of outcomes . Yet appropriate transfer of embodied research methods remains elusive . In this workshop we propose to investigate how embodied research techniques may be used as direct and unmediated vehicles for their own reporting . Rather than engaging in oral presentations , participants will lead other participants through a proven embodied method or approach . Small groups will create mash - ups of techniques , exploring ways that the new approaches might coherently be reported . Participants will be encouraged to experiment with different recording techniques , including body - mounted sensing and recording devices , as well as less conventional approaches . The intention is to find appropriate ways of reporting embodied experiments , so that intangible elements are not lost . Participants will be supported to reflect on unfolding discoveries , to share impressions , as well as outcomes , including documentation experiments that aim to tangibly capture and communicate the processes undertaken . Embodied ideation , communication and collaboration techniques enable enhanced creative engagement and assist creativity [ 2 ] . By applying such methods to the problem of their reporting , we hope to deepen understanding of how to move towards enriched , nuanced and repeatable methods for embodied design and knowledge transfer . Crucially , our intention is not simply to find the next form of research reporting . Rather , this workshop will engage participants in an experimental enquiry , so that embodied design research may become an active area of inquiry moving forward . Author Keywords Embodied design ; embodied ideation ; embodied interaction ; research processes ; reporting methods ; wearable technology ; video capture ; quantified self ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION Embodied interaction continues to gain currency . Yet reporting of methods and techniques used in embodied research generation remains a challenge . Conferences ( e . g . , TEI 1 ) , special journal issues ( e . g . , [ 15 , 23 ] ) and doctoral theses ( e . g . , [ 14 , 13 , 25 ] ) are devoted to the subject . Yet embodied methods are not readily communicated through the written or spoken word . New forms of knowledge transfer , such as pictorials ( e . g . , at DIS 2014 2 and RTD 2015 3 conferences ) , and video are enabling enhanced , image - enriched reporting of outcomes . Yet appropriate transfer of embodied research methods remains elusive . Our workshop is an experiment with how to engage , reflect on , document and report embodied design research methods and techniques , to find new opportunities for development , cross - fertilization , collaboration and effective knowledge transfer as interaction techniques and methods develop . Our intention is not simply to find the next form of research reporting . Rather , we recognize that over the coming decennial radical changes to how research is undertaken may occur . By laying the foundation for coherent and rich exchange of embodied ideation methods , we hope to simultaneously contribute to understanding of how to effectively share them , and to the evolution of these methods . By engaging participants in an experimental enquiry into embodied research reporting , we intend this area to become an active area of inquiry moving forward . A Panoply of Approaches Embodied interaction plays out in many different ways , bringing together and bridging different disciplines and approaches . Some researchers use the body and movement as material . Wilde , Thecla Schiphorst and Sietske Klooster , for example , meld performing arts and interaction 1 http : / / www . tei - conf . org 2 http : / / dis2014 . iat . sfu . ca / index . php / pictorials / 3 http : / / www . researchthroughdesign . org / submissions / Copyright© 2015 is held by the author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to Aarhus University and ACM 5th Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives August 17 – 21 , 2015 , Aarhus Denmark DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21620 39 Figure 1 : ( a + b ) Close to the Body , IAAC Research Studio http : / / www . iaac . net / interaction / program - 2researchstudios . html ; ( c ) Thinking - though - making OWL Circle : http : / / daniellewilde . com / body - tech - poetics / circles / techniques in design choreographies to develop portable and wearable outcomes [ 26 ] . Höök and colleagues at Mobile Life , SICS and KTH use Mindfulness and Somaesthetics [ 20 ] to develop theories and practices around core mechanics and experiential artefacts ( e . g . , [ 22 ] ) . Susan Kozel develops improvisational methods using dance and phenomenology to design for intimacy [ 6 , 11 , 12 ] ; Kristina Andersen [ 18 ] , and Greg Corness [ 3 ] , with Schiphorst , have used performance - based methods and performer technique to bring focus to the knowing body . Buur and colleagues engage the body through Object Theatre and improvisation [ 2 ] , and use a range of video documentation and editing techniques to capture and communicate emerging research outcomes in the wild [ 27 ] . Johan Stjernholm [ 19 ] looks at relations between the processes of creating , performing , and perceiving aesthetic embodied practices with digital media . David Kirsh [ 10 ] explores the question of physical thinking , using the body as an instrument of cognition , and Phillip Ross [ 16 ] uses aesthetic experience as a core mechanism for design . Other researchers focus on developing movement skills . Caroline Hummels , Kees Overbeeke and Klooster [ 7 ] , for example , have long championed the need for the designer as movement expert , foregrounding the expressive power of gesture . Tom Djajadiningrat , Ben Matthews and Marcelle Stienstra [ 4 ] stress the importance of skilled action when designing interaction , bringing focus to the experience of use . Yet others focus on designing representations of movement , evaluating the user experience , mapping interactions , or exploring sensing technologies [ 13 ] . For example ; Seçil U ğ ur [ 24 ] designed garments that can communicate the emotions of the wearer as dynamic tangible interfaces and extensions of the human body ; and Eunjeong Jeon , with Touch Me , Feel Me , Play with Me [ 8 ] , created dynamic tactile experiences that invite participants to interact for comfort . Despite , or perhaps because of this breadth and diversity of practice , a major challenge remains : coherency of communication . Typical avenues for reporting do not readily encompass the multiplicity of perspectives or the embodied nature of relevant research methods and techniques . Workshops provide an important , yet ephemeral forum through which to share methodologies ( e . g . , MOCO 4 , [ 19 ] ) . Yet the conundrum of how to tangibly and robustly transfer knowledge , over time , in ways coherent with the richness of embodied methods and experiences , remains unsolved . As embodied methods are increasingly leveraged in research , this challenge will only become more pressing . In a call to the community to recognize and respond through action to this shared challenge , this workshop will bring together concerned participants , in the hope that together we may move towards coherent solutions . WORKSHOP PLAN Over a single day we will engage up to 15 participants in an embodied interrogation of the key issues related to knowledge transfer and reporting of embodied research methods and techniques . During the first half of the day , each participant will lead others in an embodied experience of a proven research method or technique – enabling the participants to experience by doing , thus allowing for direct embodied experience of methodologies . The second half of the day will focus on actively shifting and merging the methods and techniques experienced in the morning session , and experimenting with novel approaches to documenting and reporting . This will be done by combining approaches / mixing / melding / mashing up in small groups , and making use of novel capture methods . To facilitate documentation and capture , we will provide a number of capture and sensing devices . We will also request participants come prepared with material , equipment or approaches they feel may contribute to the experiment . Groups will be fluid – participants able to leave or join a new group at any time . This will enable ideas to merge and groups to form in an instinctive and discretionary manner . The structure of this part of the workshop will draw on the strengths of improvisation in contributing to idea generation and development [ 9 ] . In musical improvisation , for example , knowing where to go next becomes a series of small decisions made in a hyper aware state of flow in which the musician “knows” both the minds and desires of his or her fellow musicians , and also holds the experience of the audience as an almost physical 4 http : / / moco . ircam . fr , http : / / moco . iat . sfu . ca 40 Figure 2 : Dancers imagining yet - to - be - imagined technologies From the OWL interviews : http : / / ow . ly / QaKde “thing” which can be examined , turned , changed , and at some point is “done” [ 17 ] . Turning this approach onto the challenge of sharing and documenting embodied design research techniques , will enable us to use the techniques themselves as a anchors , or guides . This approach has been leveraged previously in embodied idea generation [ 25 ] , and is well suited to the challenge we are confronting . Participants will be encouraged to experiment with different recording techniques , throughout , including body - mounted sensing and recording devices , as well as less conventional approaches . The intention will be to find appropriate ways of capturing and reporting embodied experiences and experiments , so that the intangible elements are not lost . At the end of the day , the workshop participants will regroup to reflect on what happened and share impressions , as well as outcomes , including documentation experiments that aim to tangibly capture and communicate the processes undertaken . In the spirit of an ongoing conversation , we are not looking for definitive answers . Rather we recognize that over the coming decennial radical changes to how research is undertaken may occur . By laying the foundation for coherent exchange of embodied ideation methods , we hope to simultaneously contribute to understanding of how to Alternate methods for sharing will be discussed during the workshop and actioned accordingly effectively share them , and the evolution of those methods . Outcomes will be posted on the workshop website . ORGANISERS Danielle Wilde is associate professor of Research at the University of Southern Denmark , Kolding . Her research focuses on embodied creativity , wearable futures and convergence – drawing on textile crafts , the performing arts , embodied interaction and scientific innovation to investigate the future of wearable and worn technologies . Oscar Tomico is assistant professor in the Designing Quality in Interaction Research Group , and Wearable Figure 3 : using the body , materials and movement to develop interfaces that invite and respond to embodied interactions . From Close to the Body : http : / / ow . ly / QaR1O Senses at Eindhoven University of Technology . Projects focus on the textile industry , involving stakeholders during the design process to foster cooperation and reflective practices between participants , frame the design space , collaboration space and reformulate the design opportunity . Andrés Lucero , is associate professor of interaction design at the University of Southern Denmark , Kolding . His focus is on the design and evaluation of novel interaction techniques for wearables . He recently co - organized workshops on ‘Interactive City Lighting’ and ‘Organic Experiences’ at CHI ’13 ; ‘Embarrassing Interactions’ and ‘Mobile Collocated Interactions’ at CHI ’15 . Kristina Höök is professor in Interaction Design at KTH Royal Institute of Technology , SICS , Swedish Institute of Computer Science , and director of the Mobile Life centre . She is known for her work on social navigation , seamfulness , mobile services , affective interaction and designing for bodily engagement in interaction through somaesthetics . Her competence lies in interaction design and user studies helping to form design . Jacob Buur – is professor of Design Innovation in the Mads Clausen Institute for Product Innovation , and head of research at the University of Southern Denmark ( SDU ) ’s Design Initiative in Kolding . He is an internationally acknowledged pioneer on working with video for user - centered design purposes , with experience in academia and industry . Before joining SDU he was manager of the Danfoss User Centered Design group . RECRUITMENT STRATEGY The call is open to parties with an interest in the design and application of embodied research processes , as well as those with expertise in analysis and recording , and strong ideas about how they might contribute to the capture and knowledge transfer of embodied research ideation techniques . By drawing together practitioners with varying experience and expertise , we aim to develop a robust and rich community of practitioners . Criteria for selection will include quality and uniqueness of the research approach , as well as creativity of thinking around how to extend current capture , and reporting of embodied research techniques . By searching for diversity and extremes , we aim to arrive at a vital representation of this emerging , radical and dynamic field , and also to disrupt currently held assumptions . 41 Figure 4 : video stills of movement | sound coupling experiments for real - time embodied composition and performance [ 1 ] REFERENCES 1 . Bencina , R . , Wilde , D . , Langley , S . Gesture ≈ Sound Experiments : Process and Mappings Proc . NIME 2008 , ACM Press ( 2008 ) . 2 . Buur , J . , Torguet , R . Ethnographic Findings in the Organizational Theatre . Proc . EPIC 2013 . 3 . Corness , G . & Schiphorst , T . Performing with a system ' s intention : embodied cues in performer - system interaction . Proc . C & C 2013 , ACM ( 2013 ) , 156 - 164 4 . Djajadiningrat , T . , Matthews , B . , and Stienstra , M . Easy doesn’t do it : skill and expression in tangible aesthetics . Pers . & Ubiq . 11 , 8 ( 2007 ) , 657 - 676 . 5 . Gallagher , S . How The Body Shapes the Mind . Clarendon Press , Oxford , UK , 2005 6 . Hansen , L . K . & Kozel , S . Embodied imagination : a hybrid method of designing for intimacy . Digital Creativity , 18 ( 4 ) ( 2007 ) , 207 - 220 . 7 . Hummels , C . , Overbeeke , C . J . and Klooster , S . Move to get moved : a search for methods , tools and knowledge to design for expressive and rich movement - based interaction . Pers . & Ubiq . 11 , 8 ( 2007 ) , 677 - 690 . 8 . Jeon , E . ‘Enriched Aesthetic Interaction’ through sense from haptic visuality . Proc . IDA Congress Education Conference ( 2011 ) , 28 - 35 . 9 . Johnstone , K . , Impro : Improvisation and the Theatre . Routledge , 1987 10 . Kirsh , D . Thinking with the Body . Proc . Cognitive Science Society ( 2010 ) , 2864 - 2869 . 11 . Kozel , S . Closer : Performance , Technologies , Phenomenology . Cambridge : MIT Press , 2008 12 . Kozel , S . The virtual and the physical : A phenomenological approach to performance research . In M . Biggs and H . Karlsson ( Eds . ) The Routledge Companion in Research in the Arts , 2010 . 13 . Loke , L . , Robertson , T . Moving and making strange . ToCHI 20 ( 1 ) , Article 7 , 2013 14 . Moen , J . Kinaesthetic Movement Interaction . PhD diss . , KTH Royal Institute of Technology , Sweden , 2006 . 15 . Personal & Ubiquitous Computing Special issue on movement - based interaction 11 ( 8 ) , Springer , 2007 . 16 . Ross , P . , & Wensveen , S . ( 2010 ) . Designing aesthetics of behavior in interaction : Using aesthetic experience as a mechanism for design . IJD , 4 ( 2 ) , 3 - 13 , 2010 . 17 . Ryan , J . Knowing When , in The Vibrancy Effect ed . Chris Salter . Rotterdam : V2 _ Publishing , 2011 . 18 . Schiphorst , T . Andersen , K . Between bodies : Using experience modeling to create gestural protocols for physiological data transfer . Proc . CHI 2004 Fringe Papers . ACM Press , 2004 . 19 . Schiphorst , T . , Sheppard , R . , Loke , L . , Lin , C . ( 2013 ) Beautiful Dance Moves . Proc . C & C 2013 . ACM Press , 2013 . 20 . Shusterman , R . Body Consciousness : A Philosophy of Mindfulness and Somaesthetics . Cambridge University Press , 2008 . 21 . Stjernholm , J . Moving through the virtual : A dramaturgy of choreographic practice and perception . Dance Dramaturgy : Catalyst , Perspective and Memory . Proc . Society of Dance History Scholars Conference , SDSH , 2011 . 22 . Sundström , P . , Vaara , E . , Solsona , J . , Wirström , N . , Lundén , M . , Laaksolhati , J . , Waern , A . , Höök , K . ( 2011 ) Experiential Artifacts as a Design Method for Somaesthetic Service Development . Proc . 2011 ACM symposium on The role of design in UbiComp research & practice . Ubicomp 2011 , 33 - 36 ACM Press , 2011 . 23 . ToCHI Transactions on Computer Human Interaction Special issue on the theory and practice of embodied interaction . ToCHI 20 ( 1 ) , ACM Press , 2013 . 24 . U ğ ur , S . Wearing Embodied Emotions , A Practice Based Design Research on Wearable Technology . Springer , 2013 . 25 . Wilde , D . Swing That Thing : Moving to move . PhD Diss . , Monash University & CSIRO , Australia , 2012 . 26 . Wilde , D . Schiphorst , T . Klooster , S . Move to Design • Design to Move : a conversation about designing for the body . Interactions 18 ( 4 ) ACM Press , 2011 . 27 . Ylirisku , S . P . , Buur , J . Designing with Video . Springer Verlag . 2007 . 42 Multi - Lifespan Information System Design Batya Friedman Information School University of Washington Seattle , United States batya @ uw . edu Lisa P . Nathan School of Library , Archival and Info Studies University of British Columbia Vancouver , Canada lisa . nathan @ ubc . ca Daisy Yoo Information School University of Washington Seattle , United States dyoo @ uw . edu ABSTRACT Contemporary information ecosystems evolve at lightening speed . Last year’s cutting edge innovations are this year’s standard fare and next year’s relics . An information innovation can be implemented , made available through the Internet , and appropriated within 24 hours . Yet , significant societal problems engage much longer timeframes . In 2010 Friedman and Nathan pointed to a fundamental disconnect between mainstream design thinking and these longer - term problems . To address this disconnect , they proposed a multi - lifespan information system design framing . This workshop builds on previous work by the organizers and others to : ( 1 ) elaborate and identify new opportunities and challenges in taking up multi - lifespan information system design problems , and ( 2 ) generate critical and constructive discussions for further development of multi - lifespan information system design thinking . Author Keywords Multi - lifespan information system design , design methods , design research , design theory , design thinking . ACM Classification Keywords K . 4 . 2 [ Computing Milieux ] : Computers and Society - - - Social Issues ; H . 5 . 2 [ Information Interfaces and Presentation ] : User Interfaces - - - theory and methods . 1 . DESCRIPTION Contemporary information ecosystems evolve at lightening speed . Last year’s cutting edge innovations are this year’s standard fare and next year’s relics . An information innovation can be implemented , made available through the Internet , and appropriated within 24 hours . Yet , as Friedman and Nathan observed in 2010 , some significant societal problems are on much longer timeframes . They wrote : “ Genocide . HIV / AIDS . Famine . Deforestation . Habitat destruction . Species extinction . Forced exodus . These problems share some commonalities . In one way or another , they entail widespread losses to human beings , to other sentient beings , or to the natural world ; moreover , those losses are not likely to be made up within the time frame of a single human lifespan ( if ever ) ” ( [ 3 ] , p . 2243 ) . Specifically , they identified three categories of multi - lifespan problems as follows . Category 1 : Limitations of the Human Psyche There are some harms that human beings commit against each other that are so profound that while one hopes for healing to occur within a single lifespan , given the human psyche that seems unrealistic . Consider the harms that result from civil war , genocide , and other forms of extreme conflict . When neighbors have killed neighbors , when parents have watched their children die , it may be impossible for persons who have survived to fully heal and forgive those whom they believe guilty of atrocities . Category 2 : Tears in the Social Fabric Societies are comprised of complex social structures with deep , intertwined interdependencies – what one might refer to as the “social fabric” through which people care for themselves and each other , pass along generational knowledge , and sustain human life . Certain events – of either a natural or human origin – can cause severe tears in the social fabric . Rebuilding societal structures around such widespread changes in population distribution requires time for both the changes to stabilize and the population to regenerate itself . Category 3 : Natural Time - scales that Move More Slowly Than a Single Human Lifespan Some natural processes can take hundreds of years , for instance the re - establishment of an old growth forest or the revival of an endangered species with long gestation periods and few young . Many environmental crises may benefit from information intensive tools ( e . g . , climate change simulations ) as the solutions unfold over longer time frames . Friedman and Nathan further pointed to a fundamental disconnect between mainstream design thinking and engaging information system design in support of these classes of longer - term problems . To address this disconnect , they proposed a multi - lifespan information system design framing , calling for an alternative approach to design . At that time , five multi - lifespan information Copyright© 2015 is held by the author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to Aarhus University and ACM 5th Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives August 17 – 21 , 2015 , Aarhus Denmark DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21396 43 system design opportunities were identified including ( i ) preserving knowledge , ( ii ) supporting social structure and processes , ( iii ) remembering and forgetting , ( iv ) trust , security , and privacy , and ( v ) inclusivity and access ; and three challenges including the challenge of ( i ) shifting conditions , ( ii ) passing the baton across generations , and ( iii ) morale . The initial framing of multi - lifespan information system design was brief , suggestive and untried . Yet even in this abbreviated form , the framing has begun to have an impact . For example , as of this writing the ACM Digital Library reports over 45 citations to the framing . Some of the citations pertain to the disruption of society as can be found in Tomlinson et al . ’s [ 11 ] work on collapse informatics and Liu , Palen and Giaccardi’s [ 7 ] work on legacies of crisis events . Some pertain to considerations of environmental sustainability broadly conceived , as can be found in Jacob et al . ’s [ 6 ] work on environmental time scales , Nathan’s [ 10 ] work on sustainable information practices , and Heaney’s [ 5 ] work on the ‘forever problem’ of nuclear waste as information . Others pertain to the preservation of digital heritage writ large as can be found in Duranti’s [ 2 ] work on cultural heritage , Bainbridge’s [ 1 ] work on the demise of digital worlds , and Garaba’s [ 4 ] work on preserving liberation struggle heritage . And still others pertain to an individual’s end - of - life , as with Odom et al . ’s [ 13 ] work on digital inheritance , and Moncur and Kirk’s [ 12 ] work on digital memorials . We also note the organizers’ [ 8 , 9 , 14 ] work on information systems in support of transitional justice . That the multi - lifespan information system design framing has hit a chord with the computing and information research community is evident from both the number of researchers who draw on this framing as well as the diversity of domains and ways in which they do so . At the same time , they bring to light numerous open questions , new opportunities and challenges to further the multi - lifespan information system design endeavor . This workshop builds on previous work by the organizers and others . In the workshop , we will draw on the organizers’ background and participants’ experiences to : ( 1 ) elaborate and identify new opportunities and challenges in taking up multi - lifespan information system design problems , and ( 2 ) generate critical and constructive discussions for further development of the multi - lifespan information system design thinking . 2 . WORKSHOP GOALS Toward developing a multi - lifespan information system design approach , the workshop has four goals as follows : • To explore the distinct attributes of multi - lifespan problems . • To provide a forum ( opportunity ) for articulating issues of engaging “ ( very long ) time” frames in designing computer and information systems which have arisen from the participants’ own experiences . • To identify : ( a ) opportunities and challenges in taking up multi - lifespan information system design problems , and ( b ) methods that facilitate multi - lifespan design thinking . • To generate constructive and critical discussions for further development of the multi - lifespan information system design framing and approach . 3 . WORKSHOP FORMAT 3 . 1 . Workshop Plan Note : Prior to the workshop , participants will have suggested multi - lifespan information system design case studies . Participants’ case studies will form the basis of the group discussion after the morning break . We propose a preliminary agenda and schedule for the 1 full - day workshop as follows : Welcome and Participant Introductions . ( 30 min . ) Participants are welcomed to the workshop . Participants state why they have chosen to participate in the workshop and what they hope to gain from the workshop experience . Multi - lifespan Information System Design Concepts and Examples . ( 1 hour ) Explicate and discuss the framing of multi - lifespan information system design , and the particular nature of multi - lifespan problems . Provide illustrative examples . Key questions : What are key attributes across the diversity of multi - lifespan problems ? How do we know a multi - lifespan problem when we see one ? How does a multi - lifespan problem differ from problems that suggest shorter - term solutions ? Break . ( 30 min . ) Group Discussion . ( 1 . 5 hour ) Break out session into groups of 4 - 5 participants . Discuss the design cases relevant to multi - lifespan information system design prepared by participants prior to the workshop . Elaborate on those cases . Begin to identify common threads on three dimensions : opportunities , challenges , and methods . Reconvene , with brief reports from each group back to the whole . Key questions : What common opportunities and challenges arise from the cases ? What are the characteristics of successful methods employed in the cases that are relevant to long ( er ) - term design thinking ? What are the characteristics of less successful methods ? How do the cases help us to better understand multi - lifespan information system design ? Lunch . ( 1 hour ) Informal discussion continues . Critique . ( 1 . 5 hours ) Expand on the morning’s discussion of key characteristics of multi - lifespan problems , common opportunities and challenges , and design methods . Generate constructive and critical discussions for further development of the multi - lifespan information system design framing and approach . Key questions : What design 44 principles ( if any ) can we extract from the examples and cases we have studied ? What can be done in our design practice to become more responsive to multi - lifespan problems ? Break . ( 30 min . ) Consolidation . ( 45 min . ) Consolidate discussions . Wrap - up . ( 45 min . ) Discuss dissemination of the workshop results and future directions . Key questions : How might workshop participants make use of the workshop results in their own work ? How might we communicate the results of the workshops to others ( e . g . , blog , publication in other newsletters ) ? 3 . 2 . Method of Interaction Based on the organizers’ past experience with leading ACM conference workshops ( e . g . , CHI , DIS , CSCW ) , high participant engagement emerges when participants feel welcomed , intellectually challenged , and their contributions are valued . The workshop organizers’ role is largely of facilitator—ensuring participants have access to the conversation , curbing dominant participants should there be any , and keeping the discussion on track . Participants will be encouraged to lead some of the discussions , to act as scribes , and to otherwise help manage the flow of discussion . 3 . 3 . Pre - Workshop Activity As noted above , participants will be asked to provide brief case studies of multi - lifespan information system design based on their research or personal experiences . Descriptions of these case studies may be distributed to all participants prior to the workshop . Through this reflective process , participants will be well positioned to begin the workshop discussions . Past experience indicates that for complex topics such as the one proposed here , initial work is best achieved through face - to - face interactions . 3 . 4 . Dissemination of Results The first dissemination goal will be to help participants take meaningful results back to their research teams and organizations as well as to encourage participants to discuss the workshop with colleagues . During the course of the workshop , participants and workshop organizers will co - construct the best ways to achieve this dissemination goal . Secondly and more formally , workshop results will be disseminated through a report published in the Aarhus 2015 Proceedings vol 2 . Additional means of dissemination will be solicited and encouraged from workshop participants ( e . g . , special issue of TOCHI , edited volume ) . 4 . ORGANIZERS ' BACKGROUNDS Batya Friedman is a professor in the Information School , adjunct professor in the Department of Computer Science , and adjunct professor in the Department of Human - Centered Design and Engineering at the University of Washington where she co - directs the Value Sensitive Design Research Lab and co - directs the UW Tech Policy Lab . Dr . Friedman pioneered value sensitive design ( VSD ) , an approach to account for human values in the design of information systems . First developed in human - computer interaction , VSD has since been used in information management , human - robotic interaction , computer security , civil engineering , applied philosophy , and land use and transportation . Dr . Friedman is currently working on multi - lifespan information system design and on methods for envisioning – imagining new ideas for leveraging information systems to shape our futures . Voices from the Rwanda Tribunal is an early project in this multi - lifespan information system design program . In 2012 Batya Friedman received the ACM - SIGCHI Social Impact Award and the University Faculty Lecturer award at the University of Washington . She received both her B . A . and Ph . D . from the University of California at Berkeley . Lisa P . Nathan is an Assistant Professor and Coordinator of the First Nations Curriculum Concentration at the University of British Columbia’s iSchool in Vancouver , Canada . Dr . Nathan directs the Sustaining Information Practice Research and Design Studio . Through a series of projects her team is developing the concept of sustaining information practices , ways of managing information that help diverse peoples address longer - term challenges ( e . g . , environmental adaptation , decolonization , social justice ) . Her work has been supported by numerous funders , including the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada ( SSHRC ) and the U . S . National Science Foundation ( NSF ) . She is currently the chair of the ACM - SIGCHI HCI & Sustainability Community . Dr . Nathan completed her Ph . D . at the University of Washington , USA . Daisy Yoo is PhD candidate in the Information School and a member of the Value Sensitive Design Research Lab at the University of Washington . From 2011 to present , Ms . Yoo continues to work as the lead PhD student on the Voices from the Rwanda Tribunal project to investigate multi - lifespan information system design . Her work spans the fields of interaction design , human - computer interaction , and information science . Prior to University of Washington , she received her Master’s in Interaction Design from Carnegie Mellon University . 5 . A CALL FOR PARTICIPANTS – DRAFT Genocide . HIV / AIDS . Famine . Deforestation . Forced exodus . These problems share some commonalities . In one way or another , they entail widespread losses to human beings , to other sentient beings , or to the natural world ; moreover , those losses are not likely to be made up within the time frame of a single human lifespan ( if ever ) . It is also the case that information and the interactive processes around information may have much to contribute to the solutions of these problems . How then might we explicitly address this class of problems through information system design ? What unique opportunities exist for interactive information systems ? What rigorous design knowledge and methods are needed to make progress ? In a field known for cutting edge innovation , where devices over five years old 45 are regarded as legacy , how can we consider processes and solutions that likely extend beyond a single human lifespan ? These questions lay out critical considerations for multi - lifespan information system design . In this workshop we draw on the organizers’ background and participants’ research and personal experiences in encountering significant societal issues that will unfold over very long periods of time . Our aims are twofold : ( 1 ) to elaborate and identify new opportunities and challenges for taking up multi - lifespan information system design problems , and ( 2 ) to generate critical and constructive discussions for further development of multi - lifespan information system design thinking . . Who should attend ? Participants with diverse backgrounds are desired including researchers , practitioners , designers , and educators . Interested individuals should submit a 1 - 3 page position paper by May 15 , 2015 describing her or his ( 1 ) interest in the topic ; ( 2 ) one or two cases in which she or he encountered issues of “ ( very long ) time” with regard to information , either as a designer or based on her or his personal experience ; and ( 3 ) short bio . 6 . PARTICIPANT SOLICITATION AND SELECTION We expect 15 - 25 participants in this workshop . In addition to putting up a website for the workshop , we will also distribute a call for participation on relevant mailing lists ( e . g . , ACM - SIGCHI mailing and discussion lists ) . Interested individuals will be asked to submit a position paper that states her or his interest in the topic , one or two relevant cases , and a short bio ( see participant call above for details ) . In the position paper , individuals will be asked to submit descriptions of one or two cases in which she or he encountered issues of “ ( very long ) time” with regard to information , either as a designer or as a person . Each case should discuss the context of the multi - lifespan problem , the information at stake , and the design opportunities and challenges that arose or are anticipated to arise . Participants with diverse backgrounds and design experiences are desired including researchers , practitioners , designers , and educators . Participants will be selected to include a diversity of perspectives in the group as a whole . REFERENCES 1 . Bainbridge , W . S . ( 2014 ) . Death of digital worlds . In Digital Death : Mortality and Beyond in the Digital Age , C . M . Moreman and A . D . Lewis Eds . ( pp . 215 - 232 ) . Praeger , Santa Barbara . 2 . Duranti , L . ( 2012 ) . Records in the cloud : Towards InterPARES - Trust . Available at : http : / / 93 . 63 . 166 . 138 : 8080 / dspace / handle / 2012 / 97 3 . Friedman , B . , and Nathan , L . P . ( 2010 ) . Multi - lifespan information system design : A research initiative for the HCI community . In Proceedings of CHI 2010 , ACM Press ( 2010 ) , 2243 - 2246 . 4 . Garaba , F . ( 2012 ) . Availing the liberation struggle heritage to the public : some reflections on the use of Web 2 . 0 technologies in archives within the East and Southern Africa Regional Branch of the International Council on Archives ( ESARBICA ) . Information Development 28 ( 1 ) , 22 - 31 . 5 . Heaney , C . ( 2013 ) . The ‘forever problem’ : Nuclear waste as information . In Proceedings of iConference 2013 , ACM Press ( 2013 ) , 659 - 661 . 6 . Jacobs , R . , Benford , S . , Selby , M . , Golembewski , M . , Price , D . , and Gianniaci , G . ( 2013 ) . A conversation between trees : what data feels like in the forest . In Proceedings of CHI 2013 , ACM Press ( 2013 ) , 129 - 138 . 7 . Liu , S . , Palen , L . , and Giaccardi , E . ( 2011 ) . Heritage matters in crisis informatics : how information and communication technologies can support legacies of crisis events ( pp . 65 - 86 ) . In Crisis Information Management : Communication and Technologies , C . Hagar , Ed . Oxford , England , Chandos Publishing . 8 . Nathan , L . P . , and Friedman , B . Interacting with policy in a political world : reflections from the Voices from the Rwanda Tribunal project . interactions 17 , 5 ( 2010 ) , 56 - 59 . 9 . Nathan , L . P . , Grey , N . C . , Lake , M . , Nilsen , T . , Utter , E . , Utter , R . F . , Ring , M . , Kahn , Z . , and Friedman , B . Multilifespan information system design : investigating a new design approach in Rwanda . In Proc . iConference 2011 , ACM Press ( 2011 ) , 591 - 597 . 10 . Nathan , L . P . ( 2012 ) . Sustainable information practice : an ethnographic investigation . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology 63 ( 11 ) , 2254 - 2268 . 11 . Tomlinson , B . , Blevis , E . , Nardi , B . , Patterson , D . J . , Silberman , M . S . , and Pan , Y . ( 2013 ) . Collapse informatics and practice : theory , method , and design . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 20 ( 4 ) : Article 24 . 12 . Moncur , W . and Kirk , D . ( 2014 ) . An emergent framework for digital memorials . In Proceedings of DIS 2014 , ACM Press ( 2014 ) , 965 - 974 . 13 . Odom , W . , Banks , R . , Kirk , D . , Harper , R . , Lindley , S . , and Sellen , A . ( 2012 ) . Technology heirlooms ? : considerations for passing down and inheriting digital materials . In Proceedings of CHI 2012 , ACM Press ( 2012 ) , 337 - 346 . 14 . Yoo , D . , Lake , M . , Nilsen , T . , Utter , M . E . , Alsdorf , R . , Bizimana , T . , Nathan , L . P . , Ring , M . , Utter , E . J . , Utter , R . F . , and Friedman , B . Envisioning across generations : A multi - lifespan information system for international justice in Rwanda . In Proc . CHI 2013 , ACM Press ( 2013 ) , 2527 - 2536 . 46 Criticism – for Computational Alternatives Søren Bro Pold , Olav W . Bertelsen , Lone Koefoed Hansen & Christian Ulrik Andersen Participatory Information Technology Aarhus University { pold , olavb , koefoed , cua } @ cs . au . dk Shaowen Bardzell , Jeffrey Bardzell The Cultural Research in Technology ( CRIT ) Group , Indiana University – Bloomington , USA { selu , jbardzel } @ indiana . edu ABSTRACT Criticism is a reflection on the dialectical relation between content and technology , a relation that is often political , tied to Marxist dialectics or to other concepts of criticism from aesthetic and literary theory . This workshop will ask how we can bridge between criticism of technology and design . If we are to envision and design critical alternatives , how can critical approaches to technology help ? What do we need to take from criticism , which concepts of criticism and how can they be applied ? Author Keywords Criticism ; Theory ; Interfaces ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 2 : User Interfaces Evaluation / methodology , User - centered design ; H . 1 . 2 : User / Machine Systems , Human factors ; D . 2 . 2 : User interfaces . DESCRIPTION OF THE WORKSHOP The last ten years have seen several attempts to introduce criticism into HCI / computing . We have seen notions from the field of new media , literary theory , pragmatism , marxist critical theory , etc . This workshop is meant to discuss and compare these critical perspectives in order to explore the purposes and potentials of criticism in computing . Criticism is an activity that has developed in a close relation to aesthetics , e . g . via Kant’s notion of critical judgment , John Dewey’s concept of perception and experience or Walter Benjamin’s understanding of art’s relation to technical reproduction ( 1 , 2 , 3 ) . Whereas Kant basically categorizes our experience into three categories helping us to distinguish between pure reason , practical reason and aesthetic judgment , both Dewey and Benjamin develop modern notions of experience taking their starting point in the idea that our experience has become impoverished or alienated in modern society , and that we need art to correct this . Both Dewey’s pragmatism and Benjamin’s critical theory furthermore distinguish themselves from other notions of experience , that experience is material and active , which can be seen as reasons why both Dewey and Benjamin are relevant to practice based design thinking and critical design . However , for Benjamin , it is equally important to develop a critical , dialectic perspective on media and technologies . In this way , the criticism is not only a question of content or use , but also a question of media and technology – or to be more precise : Criticism is a reflection on the dialectical relation between content and technology , a relation that is also political and tied to Marxist dialectics . Starting from our different concepts of criticism , this workshop will ask how we can bridge between criticism of technology and design . If we are to envision and design critical alternatives , how can critical approaches to technology help ? What do we need to take from criticism , which concepts of criticism and how can they be applied . In a situation where IT is increasingly part of political processes and spaces – including management , institutional and organizational software , communication software , learning , physical spaces , smart cities , innovation culture and the arts – and where IT is even an integrated part of envisioning the future like we see in relation to the wide spread of concepts such as ‘open’ , ‘sharing’ and ‘networked’ , we need new theories to understand our role as HCI professionals and designers . The benefits of this workshop aims to be a discussion of how critical theory can contribute to envisioning and making critical alternatives . Including a clarification of when and how to apply critical theory . STRUCTURE OF THE DAY The workshop will start with short presentations of position papers that will be grouped according to theoretical underpinnings . After this 3 design cases will be presented and we will conduct group discussions of how , when and why to apply criticism to these cases . The workshop will be concluded by producing a common document in the form of a manifesto , a heuristics or posters on why , how and when to include criticism within design . REFERENCES 1 . Benjamin , Walter , Gesammelte Schriften . Edited by R . Tiedemann and H . Schweppenhäuser . Werkausgabe . ed . 12 vols . ( Frankfurt am Main : Suhrkamp , 1980 ) , Copyright© 2015 is held by the author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to Aarhus University and ACM 5th Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives August 17 – 21 , 2015 , Aarhus Denmark DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21621 47 2 . Dewey , John , Art as experience . ( New York : Perigee , 2005 ) , 3 . Kant , Immanuel , Critique of judgment . ( Mineola , N . Y . : Dover ; Newton Abbot : David & Charles , 2005 ) . 48 Light is Loud A Sound Driven LED Suit Artur Aguiar Virginia Tech Blacksburg , VA , USA arturma @ vt . edu Bryan Malyn Virginia Tech Blacksburg , VA , USA bmalyn @ vt . edu Evan Lobeto Virginia Tech Blacksburg , VA , USA elobeto @ vt . edu Steve Harrison Virginia Tech Blacksburg , VA , USA srh @ cs . vt . edu ABSTRACT We approach performance as fundamentally a hybrid situ - ation : that performer and technology are united in a post - phenomenological embrace . Light is Loud takes this as a starting point : the form of the performer is subsumed into an array of lights that takes the temporal shape of a self - referential text . The loss of the human form in the piece be - comes a critical statement on the ambiguity of hybridity . In a completely darkened space , a ﬁgure with some strips of LEDs speaks a short poem overtly on the nature of “loud” . While the title of the piece , Light is Loud , suggests “daz - zling” , the effect is a meditation on the nature of quiet . ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords A . 0 GENERAL : Conference proceedings ; H . 5 . 1 Multimedia Information Systems : Audio input / output ; H . 5 . 2 User Inter - faces : Auditory ( non - speech ) feedback Author Keywords Audio Processing ; Synesthesia in Art ; Spoken Word Performance ; Demos INTRODUCTION Our LED suit is made up of strips of LEDs which crisscross the body ( see Figure 1 ) . Unlike other LED suits on the market ours reacts dynamically to the the sounds in the environment . The LED strips are powered by 4 AA batteries , and controlled by an Arduino Mega ( see Figure 2 ) . There are two push - buttons which allow us to move , forwards and backwards , through the three modes that we have . The ﬁrst mode stores the value of accumulated amplitudes above a threshold , while the second and third modes use the average frequency from a 8 bit Fixed Fast Fourier Transform ( FFT ) [ ? ] . These charac - teristics are mapped to a temperature from 1 . 000 K to 15 . 000 K , from which the colour temperature is then calculated [ ? ] . Copyright 2015 is held by the author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to Aarhus University and ACM . 5th Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives August 17 21 , 2015 , Aarhus Denmark DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21320 Figure 1 . LED Suit The ﬁrst mode starts off with all of the lights being set to a dim red . When the amplitude rises above the speciﬁed thresh - old the lights get brighter and move towards a blue hue . In the second mode , when the amplitude of sound is above the threshold , LEDs at the shoulders turn on and then ﬂow down the entire body . The third mode works like an equalizer , mir - rored around the waist , with the amplitude of sound control - ling how many of the LEDs are on . TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS For our demo we need a dark room , a wireless microphone ( preferably hands - free ) , and an 3 . 5mm auxiliary connection so that we can play sounds over the speakers in the room . VIDEO http : / / youtu . be / ZNu3zdZL3wE 49 Figure 2 . LED Suit Schematic SYNESTHESIA IN ART There is a wide spectrum of synesthesia in art , both by synes - thetes , based off of what they experience as synesthetes ; and by non - synesthetes , which aim at giving a general audience a synesthetic - like experience . This project falls into the latter camp . The overall effect of the LED suit is a simulation of sound - colour synesthesia , or chromesthesia ; a type of synesthesia in which heard sounds automatically and involuntarily evoke an experience of colour [ ? ] . Individuals with sound - colour synesthesia are consciously aware of their synesthetic colour associations / perceptions in daily life . That is , the synesthetic colour experience supplements , but does not obscure real , modality - speciﬁc perceptions . [ ? ] Our project uses a sound to colour model based on the heat of the sound in the environment . The three modes are designed to take the same information , the sound in the environment , and give different visual representations of that data : the ﬁrst mode is a visualisation of the build up of sound ; the second mode gives the sound the appearance of being a ﬂuid , pouring down the body ; and the third mode shows the amplitude of sound , as though the wearer were an equalizer . “LIGHT IS MY ADDICTION” Light is Loud is a spoken word performance based on two poems : Endless Noise by Nandita Das and The Duality Of Darkness And Light by Tim Vallie . The LED technology ( see Figure 1 ) is symmetrically arranged on the limbs of the per - former . The design emphasizes the spatiality , rather than the human form underneath . That is , the human disappears into the bands of light . The performer’s motions are direct , but un - expectedly , not rhythmic or easily interpreted as expressive . The effect is intentionally ambiguous . The poem is in the ﬁrst - person , heightening the ambiguity : is it the person or the technology that is speaking ? We see the on - going shift of our general relation to technol - ogy – that is , from hybridity to the organization of human ac - tivity – echoing in the performance . The performer becomes a kind of “hybrid” , bound by the lights . Alternatively , the arrangements of lights become a replacement for the human form . The canonical human relation to media technology is a kind of entangled embodied experience : whether it is exercising to pop music with a set of headphones or loosing oneself in a video game , bodily interaction is in some sense externally synced to the technology . Light is Loud takes a critical stance by inverting that relation , while remaining entangled and em - bodied : the motion of the LED strips is tied to bodily motion and the expression of the light pattern tied to the utterances of the wearer . Many may see the piece initially as a caricature of a tore - ador’s “suite of lights” . Indeed , the performer moves about as though strutting amongst the bulls in the ring . But that is a misleading reading since the toreador is responding to a dan - gerous “other” , where the performer here is forming space through the moving LED strips , around the stage . CONCLUSION This work can be appreciated from many different perspec - tives , such as synesthesia in art or as a futuristic , Tron - like , article of clothing . The concepts used in this project could be used to map attributes of the person wearing the suit or the environment around them . An example of this could be to use the motion of the wearer’s limbs to glow different colours based off of orientation and / or the speed at which they are moving . The number of possible combinations of inputs and their associated impacts makes the mind boggle . 50 AmBird : Mediating Intimacy for Long Distance Relationships through an Ambient Awareness System Sine Jespersen , Rasmus Stounbjerg , Nervo Verdezoto Department of Computer Science , Aarhus University Aabogade 34 D , 8200 Aarhus N , Denmark { sine90 , rbks , nervo } @ cs . au . dk ABSTRACT This paper introduces the AmBird concept that explores how to provide alternatives for mediating intimacy for people that are living apart . The initial design and implementation of the AmBird concept is described as well as a preliminary concept validation . Based on the lessons learned , we highlight the opportunities of AmBird to support multiple intimate acts and our future work . Author Keywords Ambient Awareness ; Intimacy ; Communication ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION Nowadays , there are several tools such as Skype , Facebook , and text messages that provide people with various channels of communication . Although these technologies support people’s communication needs in a more synchronous and explicit way , they require dedicated user attention and might not be sufficient to support the communication within intimate relationships [ 8 ] . Couples , friends or relatives living apart rarely share the same physical space [ 1 , 8 ] , and therefore they often do not get the opportunity to engage , and perform intimate acts [ 8 ] . Rather than using screen - based interaction [ 4 ] , ambient information systems ( AIS ) [ 7 ] and physical interaction [ 9 ] can provide people with a sense of intimacy while supporting social and peripheral awareness ( e . g . , presence , activity , etc . ) through the augmentation of everyday artifacts or dynamic changes in physical spaces [ 1 , 6 , 9 ] , that better fit everyday settings [ 9 ] . However , most of these systems have been designed to support minimal communication ( a discrete change in the physical artifact [ 9 ] ) or used a screen - based display to send simple messages [ 1 ] . As such , there is a critical need to support long distance relationships with more asymmetric [ 1 ] , simple , and implicit alternatives for sending intimate messages with a higher bandwidth ( more content ) [ 9 ] through physical interaction . Rather than using a dedicated display [ 1 ] , this paper explores how the physicality of an AIS can provide alternatives to perform multiple intimate acts , while sending color messages to promote active reinterpretation [ 4 ] . THE AMBIRD : CONCEPT AND ITERATIVE DESIGN The AmBird concept is designed to support multiple intimate acts between couples , friends or relatives living apart to increase their interpersonal awareness [ 9 ] . Initially , we identified the main requirements as having to be aesthetically pleasing for the home and be able to send intimate messages in an unobtrusive manner ( ambient , tangible , and implicit [ 7 ] ) . It should support secrecy , reciprocity , and expressiveness [ 8 ] in a more pleasurable way [ 2 ] . Our iterative design process moved back and forth from brainstorming sessions using low fidelity prototypes to a more physical computing design process to support discussions and get early feedback [ 3 ] . AmBird is an augmented , wall - mounted , plywood bird that could be placed anywhere at home , but preferably in the bedroom ( see Figure 1 ) . AmBird is inspired by the associated communication properties of carrier pigeons . To support reciprocity [ 8 ] , AmBird is wirelessly connected in pairs and used to send color messages as intimate acts back and forth between two people . Although we have defined a fixed set of colors , the undefined semantic can enable people to create their own interpretations [ 4 ] regarding the feelings associated with them to provide a playful experience [ 2 ] . To support expressiveness [ 2 ] , AmBird changes the color according to the user’s hand position and sends a color by whistling to it . Regarding secrecy , AmBird balances the distinction between public / private spaces so that a couple can engage in intimate acts in public without being noticed [ 8 ] e . g . , in case of visitors , they might perceive the color without understanding its meaning . SYSTEM DESCRIPTION AmBird consists of two physical computing modules – one per bird ( laser cut ) . Each module has an Arduino Yún for managing input and output sensors . An infrared sensor is used to change the colors according to the position and Copyright© 2015 is held by the author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to Aarhus University and ACM 5th Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives August 17 – 21 , 2015 , Aarhus Denmark DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21321 Figure 1 . AmBird placed over a bed 51 distance of the hand on top of each bird . The primary outputs are RGB LEDs , which illuminate the back of each bird . It is possible to choose from six distinct colors by moving the hand up and down above the bird . When a color is selected , the user holds his / her hand above the bird and whistles into a microphone placed in the bird’s beak to send a color message . After the color is sent , the RGB LEDs on the back flash three times in the selected color to confirm that the message has been sent . When the associated AmBird ( the pair ) has received the message , it lights up in the received color and stays lit in the background , until the user waves his / her hand above to turn it off . The contacted person can choose not to turn its light off if the user wishes to have the received message visible for a longer time . All electronic components are placed in a box on the back of each bird and powered by a USB cable . CONCEPT VALIDATION We have performed a preliminary concept validation with a couple ( aged 25 and 22 ) who has been in a relationship for 18 months and has recently moved in together . Although our couple is not living apart , we used AmBird as a trigger [ 5 ] to receive early feedback on the concept and facilitate discussions . After introducing AmBird , we performed a focus group and asked them to perform a semantic task 1 based on their communication habits . We did not require the couple to show us the result of the task as this would have been obtrusive regarding their privacy . After the task , they proceeded to evaluate AmBird in separate rooms , sending color messages by themselves . In total , the couple interacted with the two modules for ten minutes , and then shared their experiences with us . Overall , the participants found the semantic task amusing , and they often glanced upon each other and laughed when checking their picked sentences . Furthermore , the couple found the color - coding very nuanced as pointed out by the female participant : “ colors seem more real than reading a text . ” She also explained that she never pays much attention to her texts messages . Both participants found AmBird easy to use and agreed that having a device that did not demand immediate attention and a response , like a phone , would be beneficial to communicate intimate messages . We also found that six colors were sufficient to cover the messages that the couple wanted to communicate . Although both participants liked the AmBird’s physical interaction , the male participant was concerned about the possibility of losing messages as the latest color overrides the previous one . Also he reported that changing between colors was a bit unsmooth . The female participant thought it would be nice to get a sound notification when receiving a message . About the overall concept , the female participant expressed “ You can better feel something wholeheartedly with colors 1 “ Pick ten sentences that you would like to say to your partner throughout the day , write them on a piece of paper , and do not show each other . Then , assess which sentences are most important . Read each other ' s sentences , and try to reach a common list of sentences . If possible , assign these sentences distinct colors . ” than with SMS” , and the male stated , “When you get a text message , everything is spelled out for you , but you interpret the underlying tone yourself . When you get a color you think more about the feeling of the message . ” CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK Our participants were positive about the concept and they were able to interact and send colors with AmBird . Although our preliminary evaluation provides us with positive early feedback , future work should consider that not all couples would necessarily have the same experience or be able to create their own semantics , so future studies are needed in more distant settings . As Kaye et al . [ 4 ] demonstrate , one bit communication could provide a valid communication channel for couples , and our findings highlight that extending one bit communication using color as an alternative is possible without making the interaction too demanding . In the next iteration , AmBird will be tested for a longer period with people living apart to acquire a better understanding of its capabilities and user experience . REFERENCES 1 . Brereton , M . , Soro , A . , Vaisutis , K . and Roe , P . The Messaging Kettle : Prototyping Connection over a Distance between Adult Children and Older Parents . In Proc . CHI ( 2015 ) , 713 - 716 . 2 . Costello , B . and Edmonds , E . A study in play , pleasure and interaction design . In Proc . DPPI ( 2007 ) , 76 - 91 . 3 . Hallgrimssom , B . Prototyping and modelmaking for product design . Laurence King Publ . , 2012 . 4 . Kaye , J . J . , Levitt , M . K . , Nevins , J . , Golden , J . and Schmidt , V . Communicating intimacy one bit at a time . In Proc . CHI ' 05 Extended Abstracts ( 2005 ) . 5 . Mogensen , P . and Trigg , R . H . Using artifacts as triggers for participatory analysis . In Proc . PDC ( 1992 ) , 55 - 62 . 6 . Park , J . - Y . and Nam , T . - J . Dynamic design elements for the peripheral interaction of ambient media . In Proc . CHI ' 08 Extended Abstracts ( 2008 ) , 3717 - 3722 . 7 . Pousman , Z . and Stasko , J . A taxonomy of ambient information systems : four patterns of design . In Proc . AVI ( 2006 ) , 67 - 74 . 8 . Vetere , F . , Gibbs , M . R . , Kjeldskov , J . , Howard , S . , Mueller , F . F . , Pedell , S . , Mecoles , K . and Bunyan , M . Mediating intimacy : designing technologies to support strong - tie relationships . In Proc . CHI ( 2005 ) , 471 - 480 . 9 . Visser , T . , Vastenburg , M . H . and Keyson , D . V . Designing to support social connectedness : The case of SnowGlobe . International Journal of Design , 5 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 129 - 142 . 52 Legere : A Visualizer for Spoken Audio Alex Lamar Virginia Tech Blacksburg , VA , USA alawi @ vt . edu Timmy Meyer Virginia Tech Blacksburg , VA , USA tmeyer15 @ vt . edu Loran Steinberger Virginia Tech Blacksburg , VA loran3e16 @ gmail . com Steve Harrison Virginia Tech Blacksburg , VA , USA srh @ cs . vt . edu ABSTRACT Legere is a work of critical technology - art that examines the intersection between novels and visual media as two different forms of entertainment . It is set to mimic television - - the program , displayed on an old television set , has a set number of channels that the user can flip through with a remote . Each channel concurrently plays a long - running audiobook , and using speech - recognition , the program flashes the book ' s text at the user in sync with the narration . The exhibit is meant to mock a living room atmosphere by adding a couch , coffee table , and other peripherals like a rug , to the project space . Author Keywords HCI demo ; speech recognition ; audiovisual demo . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION Legere is a piece of technology - art that examines the intersection between novels and visual media as two different forms of entertainment . In today’s world , the two are quite separated from one another – on one hand , books and novels as a medium are almost exclusively consumed by one individual in a private context ( that is , the interaction is private between a single person and the book , others do not and cannot participate because the medium does not lend itself well to group consumption ) . On the other hand , visual media such as television or movies lend themselves much more towards group consumption – whether it’s in a movie theater or a living room , it is easy for a group of people to sit around and watch , much more so than it would be for a group to huddle around and read To Kill a Mockingbird . The purpose of Legere is to break down the barrier - to - entry inherent with books as an entertainment medium – to make books easy to pick up and enjoy in any context . In doing so , we can show a piece that critically examines how the result fits in with modern entertainment mediums as we know them . SYSTEM At its heart , Legere is a computer visualization program that takes in an arbitrary audio input along with a transcription , and , after some processing , outputs a time - stamped reading of the transcription in sync with the original track . The result is a program that adds a visual medium to the spoken audio in the form of text flashing on the screen as the audio progresses . This creates an experience that is actually quite different from simply listening to an audio track . The text on the screen , although only a seemingly slight addition to the audio , creates an important effect where the audience’s attention is forced onto a single point in the room . Because of this , it is much harder to get distracted by anything other than the program , as is often the case when listening to pure audio . The visual component encourages the audience to sit down and watch , which is key to creating any engaging medium . Legere also has the capability to switch between audio tracks with a handheld remote , giving it the loose appearance of a television set that can switch between T . V . channels . It is in this context that the program is used as an exhibit . Audio Books The format of the program was designed with audiobooks in mind . The program requires two items to function : a source of audio , and a transcription of that audio . Any unabridged audiobook is guaranteed to have those two things , one being the . mp3 or . wav track , and the other being the original text of the book . The length of the input does not matter , so the program can handle long - running audiobooks in excess of 10 hours . EXHIBIT As an exhibit , Legere does two things : it creates an environment intimately familiar to the audience ( we set up a mock - living room ) , while displaying an instance of the Legere program that teeters between the line of familiarity and strangeness ( it is set to play classic novels that most people have at least some familiarity with , but the format , being visual , is inherently unfamiliar to the audience ) . The program is meant to be engaging first and foremost , but because of its slight unfamiliarity , it also causes the audience to think critically about what exactly they are looking at . Copyright© 2015 is held by the author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to Aarhus University and ACM 5th Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives August 17 – 21 , 2015 , Aarhus Denmark DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21470 53 The purpose of the exhibit is to examine exactly how people view differences between something like a television program , and a book or a novel . What makes the two different ? It raises questions as to where exactly novels have gone as a once - predominant medium of entertainment , and why exactly they have been replaced , by and large , by movies and television . But , beyond all of this , the exhibit is engaging , and because of that it can very likely act as a mechanism that rekindles an audience member’s interest in books and novels , making him ask himself exactly why reading has been placed on the backburner in favor of other mediums of entertainment . TECHNOLOGY The technology behind Legere is quite novel , and is worth dedicating a short description to . The program uses speech recognition technology ( the Sphinx4 library , a speech recognition library developed at Carnegie Melon University ) to parse audio input into timestamped text . Speech recognition as we know it , however , is very far from perfect , and a naïve attempt at parsing audio input using just the recognition library will yield around ~ 30 % recognition accuracy , and will take in excess of a day for a single , hour - long passage , which is more or less unusable for our purposes . However , by progressively chunking the input audio , and with some clever pre - processing ( by guiding small portions of audio with text from the transcription ) , we can achieve nearer ~ 80 % recognition accuracy along with a linear parsing time ( linear , but still faster than real - time ) . After that , running the transcribed audio through a post - processor that matches it exactly with the transcribed text then gives us perfect to near - perfect accuracy when reading back the text to the user . Speech recognition is a finicky process , and the field as a whole is still very far from perfect ( and it most likely never will be ) , but it is still capable of being very , very accurate when it is used in novel ways ( in this case by the use of an audio transcription ) . 54 OPENKI The platform for open education Urban Sand Autonome Schule Z¨urich Z¨urich , Switzerland urban @ xiala . net Stephan Balmer Denk : mal Bern Bern , Switzerland sb @ cis . ch Luca Obert ¨ ufer Autonome Schule Frauenfeld Z¨urich , Switzerland lucaobertuefer @ mailbox . org Emre Sarigol ETH Z¨urich Z¨urich , Switzerland semre @ ethz . ch ABSTRACT In this demo we aim to introduce and demonstrate O PENKI , an interactive web - platform designed and developed with the aim of facilitating a barrier - free access to education . In a nutshell , O PENKI is an open - source tool to facilitate self - organized , regionalized and ofﬂine knowledge exchange . It provides a basis for mediating non - commercial education op - portunities by means of acting as a meeting point for indi - viduals interested in similar subjects . The platform connects individuals who are interested learning or teaching speciﬁc topics , or have a physical space to offer where the coordi - nated events can take place , and gather themselves around interest groups . Through its lightweight interface , all stages of a learning processes are made possible from the selection of topics and the organization and execution of courses up to the documentation of the learning material . ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . 2 Information Interfaces and Presentation : User Inter - faces ; Author Keywords Open Education ; Social Network ; Knowledge Exchange ; Self Organization . INTRODUCTION O PENKI 1 is motivated by a set of existing needs in education and knowledge exchange . First , despite the growing variety of institutional - and private - sector education and advanced training offers , access to new knowledge is still short of be - ing open for many individuals due mainly to socio - economic conditions where high costs , entrance limitations and lan - guage barriers prevail , hampering potential learners to access knowledge . Second , providers of advanced training possibil - ities for low access barrier are poorly connected and possess 1 http : / / openki . net Copyright© 2015 is held by the author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to Aarhus University and ACM . 5th Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives August 17 – 21 , 2015 , Aarhus Denmark DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21319 only a limited capacity for the distribution and organization of what they have to offer , mainly due to centralization of teach - ing resources . The internet opens up vast possibilities for in - formation exchange . However a platform fully dedicated to utilizing these in favor of education and knowledge exchange through a social framework is still missing . O PENKI aims to ﬁll this gap by inheriting an alternative perspective which leans away from conventional education to a digitilized , re - gionalized and barrier - free education . TECHNOLOGY & DEMO SETUP At the heart of it , O PENKI is built using Meteor , a Node . js based web application platform . The platform extends the Meteor framework through a set of libraries that provide com - munity support where individuals may express membership to multiple interest groups and take different roles within these groups . Using a variety of roles in a peer - to - peer fash - ion , the platform gives individuals the freedom to organize or take part in events and courses , watch updates , physically host events , etc . The designed community framework is able to support features such as regionalization and formation of ad - hoc interest groups based on the speciﬁed interest . Through these features , each user views the piece of information that is most relevant to herself at all times , and is closer to the in - dividuals with similar interests and in nearby regions . These features also improve server load optimization signiﬁcantly Figure 1 . An overview of how users interact with O PENKI to announce interests and take part in relevant events . 55 Figure 2 . Workﬂow from course proposal to meet - up since the information presented to the individual is ﬁltered by region and interests . Figure 1 summarizes how the platform provides interaction among individuals . As of the time of this writing , the plat - form is used by the Autonome Schule Z¨urich , an independent organization that aims at providing voluntary education for underprivilaged indivudals that reside in Z¨urich , Switzerland . What follows is some of the features that we would like to introduce in our demo . Selection of topics The learning contents are created by the users and are as di - verse as their interests . They can range from language courses and theater workshops to outdoor survival camps , from bee - keeping to training weeks in programming . Registered users can propose the course of interest in cases where a similar course does not exist . Proposed course announcements build the seeds of new courses that are to be organized . A subscrip - tion function informs interested users about changes within a certain subject . Organizing Courses O PENKI offers a series of tools and roles to coordinate and develop real courses from subject proposals . Speciﬁcally , four functional roles exist for each course : participant , or - ganizer , mentor , host . Each individual can have have mul - tiple roles among different courses . Once a course proposal attracts enough interested individuals ( 5 to 8 ) , the course is bound to take place at a proposed time and space that the host can offer or suggest . Therefore each coordinated course is tied with a physical space . Therefore , the course organization scheme opens ways for more efﬁcient usage of existing learn - ing infrastructures . Course times are ﬁxed using a voting tool ( Doodle ) and then added to an event calendar . For further de - cisions of all kinds , the platform offers the possibility to start a round of voting . Course participants are informed about any sort of change through a publish / subscribe mechanism using e - mails and SMS . Course - relevant documents ( scripts , videos etc . ) can be exchanged using the course organization inter - face . These documents can then be viewed and stored by all users . Finally , each course can be replicated for the weeks or months to come . This entire workﬂow is presented in Fig . 2 . Figure 3 . Comparison of existing platforms that offer open education COMPARISON TO EXISTING ONLINE - PLATFORMS The Internet and web technologies have a higher impact on education processes each year . In the past few years various online platforms and offerings that are committed to open education have emerged . However , existing platforms dif - fer strongly in terms of mission , functionality and properties from O PENKI . We have analyzed existing platforms primar - ily according to the following three categories : • Regionalization and physical meetings : A principal dis - tinction exists between the so - called E - Learning Systems ( only digital contents ) and local based platforms , which render physical learning meet - ups possible . • Financial access barriers : Through the usage of the web - site and the access to the actual knowledge contents , users may be subject to costs . On the contrary , O PENKI is acces - sible for free and distinguishes itself as an ad - free platform exclusively for non - commercial educational offers . • Openness of contents : Fundamental criteria for content openness are : 1 . Speciﬁcation of topics , 2 . Possibility for users to put up content , 3 . An open license for the con - tent , 4 . Open - source technology . Diagram 3 compares some of the known platforms according to the mentioned dimensions . As a platform with a very low access barrier , O PENKI stands out as a unique choice in meeting all three criteria we have identiﬁed as necessary . CONCLUSION We have introduced O PENKI , an open source tool built us - ing the Meteor framework , aimed at providing a social net - work for open education . We think that our platform differs in many ways from existing platforms for the reasons dis - cussed above . Thanks to the platform’s ﬂexible design , we believe that many individuals can use and beneﬁt from the platform to socialize with other individuals and have access to free and open education . This demo will be a good in - troduction point to make the platform known to a valuable community . 56 The Messaging Kettle : It’s IoTea time Alessandro Soro , Margot Brereton , Paul Roe Electrical Engineering and Computer Science , Queensland University of Technology 2 George St , Brisbane , QLD 4000 , Australia [ alessandro . soro , m . brereton , p . roe ] @ qut . edu . au ABSTRACT It’s time to consider people in designing the Internet of Things ( IoT ) . We demonstrate a working prototype of a Messaging Kettle . It is designed to facilitate asynchronous communication and enable a sense of presence between adult children and their older parents living remotely from them through the familiar comfort routine of boiling the kettle to make a cup of tea . Our goal is to offer a human centred critique of the Internet of Things , which has largely been conceived without consideration of the people who will use the things , and rather has traditionally moved from a technology oriented perspective . In the case of smart homes this approach has produced a wide array of projects focused on monitoring the habits of the elderly , recognizing anomalies and alerting the caregivers . In contrast we propose to focus on engagement and reciprocity , building on the rituals associated with habitually used and cherished objects . We conclude by revisiting the technology - oriented framework for the Internet of Things to include our observations on people’s perspectives on smart communicating objects . Author Keywords Habituation ; Elderly ; Internet of Things ; Intimate ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 3 . Group and organisation interfaces INTRODUCTION The vision for the Internet of Things has moved over time from a supply chain management perspective [ 1 ] to one aimed at combining the power of smart objects , ubiquitous connectivity and semantic interoperability [ 2 ] . Fuelled by the increasing availability of miniaturized computing and cheap sensing devices , a multitude of research initiatives has envisioned , prototyped and investigated in depth a wide range of tools and architectures . In the smart home , especially when aiming at elderly users , these initiatives have often taken the form of intelligent surveillance systems , aimed at monitoring , making sense and ( mostly automatically ) acting upon the behaviors of the occupants . However , despite the claimed direct and indirect benefits that would result from a fast and widespread adoption , older people often actively resist such technologies , suggesting problems in their conception and or design [ 5 , 6 ] ; In homes , people have primacy , not data . Our work is aimed at designing technologies that engage older people by building on their individual affective attachment to habituated objects [ 3 , 8 ] and leveraging , from a participatory design perspective , the associated rituals and the meaning that such objects have in day to day life . We explored this research space by means of a Messaging Kettle [ 4 ] consisting of two augmented kettles that can connect and exchange information over the Internet . When one kettle boils , its remote partner kettle glows and vice versa . Each party can see when the other ' s kettle is boiling or has recently boiled . Voice or written messages can also be sent through the kettle , with the idea that it is simple to send a message each time one boils the kettle . This is done with a simple push of a button and does not involve any kind of complex configuration . SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE To implement the Messaging Kettle ( Figure 1 ) we designed two devices that complement a common kettle ( not shown in the figure ) , endowing it with temperature sensing and voice / scribble messaging capabilities . Figure 1 Kettle Mate and Tea Box . When the connected remote kettle ( in another house ) is switched on , the kettle mate displays a dynamic orange / red show of lights as shown . Copyright© 2015 is held by the author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to Aarhus University and ACM 5th Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives August 17 – 21 , 2015 , Aarhus Denmark DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21323 57 Figure 2 Modified version of Atzori et al . 2010 ‘Internet of Things’ paradigm [ 2 ] . The Kettle Mate ( Figure 1 , right ) hosts an Arduino microcontroller , a contact - less infra - red temperature sensor to recognize the state of use of the local kettle ( for example when it is switched on , boiling , or cooling down ) and the corresponding visualization of the remote kettle’s state of use by means of an orange / red glowing animation . It is shaped itself as a kettle and is meant to sit close to the actual kettle or teapot and augment its functionalities without interfering with its original and primary uses , thus allowing people to use their own kettle . It also houses a microphone and speaker to provide voice messaging controlled by a minimalistic ( two pushbuttons ) user interface for recording / replaying . A second device , the smart Tea Box ( Figure 1 , left ) , consists of an Android tablet embedded in a hardwood tea chest , and has scribbling and message archive abilities . The two devices communicate via Bluetooth , and an embedded GSM ( phone ) chip is used to provide internet connectivity , so that no home network is needed . The Tea Box allows the user to draw small notes using a stylus and scroll through previous messages . On the top edge of the screen , a simple interface allows changing ink color , erasing errors , posting a message and browsing received messages . The Messaging Kettle is coupled to an identical companion device , possibly located several time zones away . The two provide a “red telephone” connection between the two locations , restoring ( though on a virtual level ) the intimacy associated with the ritual of boiling the kettle to make tea . A CRITICAL VIEW ON THE INTERNET OF THINGS An initial evaluation consisting of ‘morning teas’ and in - home demonstrations was conducted [ 4 ] . Besides the usability challenges and the numerous issues that emerge from the special setting and intended users , designing and evaluating the Messaging Kettle reshaped our understanding of the role that people have ( or should have ) in the conceptualization of the Internet of Things . A useful and widely adopted technical framework by Atzori et al . [ 2 ] places the Internet of Things at the intersection of T hings , Internet and Semantic oriented visions . As Koreshoff et al . [ 7 ] have observed , such a model can be fruitfully extended to include HCI oriented efforts . This resulted in including in the model topics central to HCI research , e . g . involving people in the sensemaking of things / data , smart interoperability of things , and design implications resulting from devices’ and networks’ capabilities . We propose to further extend the model , in order to fully include people ( i . e . aims , goals , values , skills , emotions ) in the Internet of Things , as we summarize in Figure 2 , replacing “Semantic” with “People” , since it is people that largely make sense of and utilize things . We argue that this modified version provides a more complete account of the current research issues and design opportunities for smart communicating objects . By demonstrating the Messaging Kettle at the conference we aim to leverage insights and exchange views on this subject with other delegates . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Ashton , K . 2009 . That “internet of things” thing . RFiD Journal . 22 , 7 ( 2009 ) , 97 – 114 . [ 2 ] Atzori , L . , Iera , A . and Morabito , G . 2010 . The internet of things : A survey . Computer networks . ( 2010 ) . [ 3 ] Brereton , M . 2013 . Habituated Objects : Everyday Tangibles That Foster the Independent Living of an Elderly Woman . interactions . 20 , 4 , 20 – 24 . [ 4 ] Brereton , M . , Soro , A . , Vaisutis , K . and Roe , P . 2015 . The Messaging Kettle : Prototyping Connection over a Distance Between Adult Children and Older Parents . Proc . of the 33rd ACM SIGCHI ( New York , NY , USA , 2015 ) , 713 – 716 . [ 5 ] Gaul , S . and Ziefle , M . 2009 . Smart Home Technologies : Insights into Generation - Specific Acceptance Motives . HCI and Usability for e - Inclusion SE - 22 . A . Holzinger and K . Miesenberger , eds . Springer Berlin Heidelberg . 312 – 332 . [ 6 ] Kleinberger , T . , Becker , M . , Ras , E . , Holzinger , A . and Müller , P . 2007 . Ambient Intelligence in Assisted Living : Enable Elderly People to Handle Future Interfaces . Universal Access in HCI . Ambient Interaction SE - 11 . C . Stephanidis , ed . Springer Berlin Heidelberg . 103 – 112 . [ 7 ] Koreshoff , T . L . , Leong , T . W . and Robertson , T . 2013 . Approaching a Human - centred Internet of Things . Proc 25th OzCHI Conference . ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 2013 ) , 363 – 366 . [ 8 ] Vaisutis , K . , Brereton , M . , Robertson , T . , Vetere , F . , Durick , J . , Nansen , B . and Buys , L . 2014 . Invisible Connections : Investigating Older People’s Emotions and Social Relations Around Objects . Proc . CHI2014 ACM ( New York , NY ) , 1937 – 1940 . 58 Tilting \ Plate and Bending \ Arches : Shape - Changing Interfaces as Expressive Forms Morten Winther IT University of Copenhagen Copenhagen , Denmark mwla @ itu . dk ABSTRACT How can designers gain a better sensibility for designing more sensory engaging and aesthetically pleasing objects as well as for the expressive richness and potentials of shape - change ? The two exploratory prototypes , Tilting \ Plate and Bending \ Arches , investigate the visceral , aesthetic dimensions of shape - changing interfaces . While shape - change is currently receiving a lot of attention in Human – Computer Interaction ( HCI ) and interaction design , less attention has been given to the expressive qualities of such interfaces . The prototypes presented here focus on the immediate , aesthetic potentials of shape - change and illustrate the expressional diversity and richness of actuation . Aesthetic explorations can also help to identify radically new applicational uses of shape - change as a design modality . Author Keywords Shape - changing interfaces ; Interaction design ; Aesthetic interactions ; Expressive forms ACM Classification Keywords B . 4 . 2 Input / Output Devices ; F . m MISCELLANEOUS INTRODUCTION Objects with the ability to change their physical shape are receiving increased attention due to their new potentials for design . However , current research in shape - changing interfaces is primarily dominated by functionality and technological advancements [ cf . 3 ] . But instead of exploring shape - change as yet another technology for efficiency and utility , this work seeks to propose an alternative path , which entails a sensibility for the aesthetic potentials of actuation . Thus , the two prototypes presented here approaches shape - changes as expressive forms to draw attention to the immediate and sensory qualities of shape - changing interfaces , which is still a rather under - explored domain [ 3 , 4 ] . In this sense , the prototypes are the beginning of an aesthetic inquiry into better understanding the visceral , expressional dimensions of actuation as a design modality : “ Forms , either abstract or concrete always carry meanings . It is the responsibility of the designer to make good use of these meanings , for example to make products beautiful , exploiting all the sensorial aesthetic languages , to stress the importance of certain values , or to improve a product’s ease of use to create and facilitate richer experiences ” [ 1 ] . The purpose of the prototypes is to bring attention to a need for design literacy about the expressive means that designers have available to attend to the visceral meanings within shape - changing objects and to argue for attention to the radically new possibilities they hold . DESCRIPTIONS OF THE PROTOTYPES What is the expressional diversity that can be created with steel as the main material and two motors as actuators ? This is the specific question that the prototypes seek to answer . The scope of the two prototypes is to explore the diversity of contrasting expressions that can be made based on the basic design principles of steel as the main material and two motors as each of the prototypes’ actuating technology . Figure 1 . Tilting \ Plate has a rigid surface plate that can move around two axes of symmetry Copyright© 2015 is held by the author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to Aarhus University and ACM 5th Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives August 17 – 21 , 2015 , Aarhus Denmark DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21322 59 Figure 2 . Bending \ Arches consists of ten flexible steel arches Prototype 1 : Tilting \ Plate Tilting \ Plate is a 60x60x30 cm steel box . Its top plate is connected to a frame with two bolts . This frame is , in turn , connected to the steel box , also with two bolts ( figure 1 ) . This makes it possible for the top plate to rotate around one axis of symmetry , and for the frame to rotate independently around a second axis perpendicular to the first axis . Two servomotors are used to tilt the angular positions of the inner plate and the frame respectively . The motors are controlled with an Arduino board . As input , a Kinect is used to monitor the space immediately above Tilting \ Plate . Within this space , users can interact with the prototype through abstract gestures . Prototype 2 : Bending \ Arches Bending \ Arches consists of ten pieces of flexible steel , which are fastened onto a 67x50x7 cm steel base ( figure 2 ) . Bending \ Arches reacts to sound ; the louder the sounds , the more the arches bend . A quieter soundscape results in relaxation of the arches . Each of the arches is connected to an inside crossbar . The two ends of the crossbar are then attached to two linear actuators inside the steel base . These two actuators are driven by stepper motors and are used to pull down each end of the crossbar . This way it is possible to control the slope of the crossbar , which results in the shape - changes in the prototype . As such , the individual arches cannot be independently controlled , but follows the slope of the crossbar . SHAPE - CHANGING INTERFACES AS EXPRESSIVE FORMS While both prototypes have been made from steel and two motors , their expressions are quite diverse . The planar shapes in Tilting \ Plate give it a more uniform and rigid expression , whereas Bending \ Arches has a flexible and softer aesthetic . The qualities of the dynamics in Tilting \ Plate are its fluid movements , where the plate almost seems to be floating , because the inner plate and the frame are able to move independently . Bending \ Arches , on the other hand , is characteristic in the way it goes from a uniform surface in its relaxed state to a complex , uneven surface when the arches are bent . As such , the dynamic qualities of Tilting \ Plate stem from its continuous movements , whereas in Bending / Arches they stem from the transformations between its expressional diverse states . With their leitmotif “ function resides in the expression of things” , Hallnäs and Redström [ 2 ] have advocated for not only defining an object’s form based on its functionality , but to use form explorations to help discover new applications . In this sense , an aesthetic approach to shape - changing interfaces will not merely improve design literacy about their visceral expressions , but can also pave the way for radically new uses of actuation . Perhaps Tilting \ Plate could be appropriate for visualizing balance or indicating states of equilibrium . The dynamic permeability of the surface in Bending \ Arches could , for instance , be used for controlling the inflow of light . As such , different expressive forms allow for different potential uses , which can allow for new and more aesthetically pleasing types of objects . As illustrated here , the two prototypes exemplify the expressional richness of shape - changing interfaces through rather contrasting expressions made from the same basic principles . The purpose of the prototypes is to draw attention to this richness and the aesthetic potentials of actuation as a design modality . However , it is not a matter of if shape - changing interfaces should encompass aesthetic dimensions , but rather how qualified we deal with the expressions of such objects . As designers , we must be aware of the expressive means we can use when designing with actuation to create sensory stimulating and engaging experiences . Furthermore , we must use appropriate shape - changing modalities to support desired functionalities and uses . Aesthetic explorations of shape - change seek to improve design literacy to help designers make better design decisions for shape - changing interfaces . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Feijs , L . and Kyffin , S . A taxonomy of semantic design knowledge . Proceedings of DeSForM 2006 , Koninklijke Philips Electronics N . V ( 2006 ) , 70 – 83 . [ 2 ] Hallnäs , L . and Redström , J . Abstract information appliances . DIS ’02 Proceedings of the 4th conference on Designing interactive systems : processes , practices , methods , and techniques , ACM Press ( 2002 ) , 105 – 116 . [ 3 ] Rasmussen , M . K . , Pedersen , E . W . , Petersen , M . G . , and Hornbæk , K . Shape - changing interfaces : a review of the design space and open research questions . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM Press ( 2012 ) , 735 – 744 . [ 4 ] Zigelbaum , J . and Labrune , J . - B . Some Challenges of Designing Shape Changing Interfaces . Proceedings of CHI 2009 , ( 2009 ) . 60 Here ends the second half of the proceedings 61