Modeling semiﬂexible polymer networks C . P . Broedersz Lewis - Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics and Joseph Henry Laboratories of Physics , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 , USA ∗ F . C . MacKintosh Department of Physics and Astronomy , Vrije Universiteit , Amsterdam , The Netherlands † ( Dated : April 17 , 2014 ) Here , we provide an overview of theoretical approaches to semiﬂexible polymers and their net - works . Such semiﬂexible polymers have large bending rigidities that can compete with the entropic tendency of a chain to crumple up into a random coil . Many studies on semiﬂexible polymers and their assemblies have been motivated by their importance in biology . Indeed , crosslinked networks of semiﬂexible polymers form a major structural component of tissue and living cells . Reconsti - tuted networks of such biopolymers have emerged as a new class of biological soft matter systems with remarkable material properties , which have spurred many of the theoretical developments discussed here . Starting from the mechanics and dynamics of individual semiﬂexible polymers , we review the physics of semiﬂexible bundles , entangled solutions and disordered cross - linked networks . Finally , we discuss recent developments on marginally stable ﬁbrous networks , which exhibit critical behavior similar to other marginal systems such as jammed soft matter . Contents I . Introduction 1 II . Semiﬂexible polymers 4 A . Worm - like Chain Model 4 B . Force - extension 5 1 . Inextensible versus extensible polymers 8 2 . Euler buckling 9 C . Dynamics 10 D . Wormlike bundles 12 III . Entangled solutions of semiﬂexible polymers 13 A . Rheology of entangled networks 13 B . Glassy wormlike chain model 15 C . Transient linkers and cross - link governed dynamics 16 IV . Cross - linked networks 18 A . Aﬃne model 18 1 . Aﬃnely deforming semiﬂexible polymer networks 19 2 . Comparison of the aﬃne model to experiments on reconstituted biopolymer networks 19 B . Contractility and motor - generated stiﬀening in aﬃne thermal networks 21 C . Nonaﬃne approaches for disordered ﬁber networks 22 1 . Characterizing nonaﬃnity in disordered elastic media 22 2 . Unit cell approaches 23 3 . A minimal model for disordered , athermal ﬁber networks in 2D : The Mikado model 24 4 . Floppy mode theory 26 5 . 2D versus 3D networks 26 6 . 3D Phantom and generalized Kagome networks 27 7 . Is the aﬃne limit stable ? 29 D . Nonaﬃnity and nonlinear elasticity of athermal ﬁber networks 29 1 . More on the role of intrinsic curvature 32 ∗ Electronic address : cbroeder @ princeton . edu † Electronic address : fcm @ nat . vu . nl 2 . Negative normal stress in athermal networks 32 V . Marginal stability and critical phenomena in ﬁber networks 33 A . Lattice - based bond - dilution networks 34 1 . Counting argument for the “bending” rigidity threshold 34 2 . The critical crossover regime between stretching and bending dominated mechanical behavior 35 3 . What can we learn from the nonaﬃne ﬂuctuations in marginal networks ? 36 B . Stability of marginal networks 36 C . Eﬀective medium theories 37 1 . Contractile nonaﬃne and marginal networks 39 VI . Summary and outlook 41 Acknowledgments 42 References 42 I . INTRODUCTION Over the past decades , semiﬂexible polymers and their assemblies in the form of solutions and networks have emerged as a distinct new class of soft condensed mat - ter with striking properties . A major reason for the re - cent interest in semiﬂexible polymers has been their im - portance in living systems . Biopolymer assemblies form principal structural components throughout biology ( Al - berts et al . , 1994 ; Bausch and Kroy , 2006 ; Fletcher and Mullins , 2010 ; Kasza et al . , 2007 ; Lieleg et al . , 2010 ) , from the intracellular scaﬀold known as the cytoskele - ton to extracellular matrices of collagen , as illustrated in Figs . 1 and 2 . Cytoskelatal structures contribute to intra - cellular transport and organization , and ensure the struc - tural integrity and mobility of cells ( Alberts et al . , 1994 ) . Thus , most of the experimental studies of semiﬂexible polymers have been carried out on biopolymers . From a r X i v : 1 404 . 4332v1 [ c ond - m a t . s o f t ] 16 A p r 2014 2 FIG . 1 Fluorescence microscopy image of bovine pulmonary artery endothelial cells . Nuclei are stained blue with DAPI , microtubules ( green ) are labeled by an antibody bound to FITC and actin ﬁlaments ( red ) are labelled with phalloidin bound to TRITC . Source http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij / images / ( example image from ImageJ ( public domain ) ) FIG . 2 Confocal microscopy image of a ﬂuorescently labeled collagen network with a concentration of 0 . 4 mg / ml . Courtesy of Stefan M¨unster ( Erlangen - Nurnberg ) . a fundamental physics perspective , a major motivation for many of the experimental and theoretical studies of biopolymers has been the diverse behavior of biopolymer systems , which are often in stark contrast to their now better understood synthetic and ﬂexible counterparts in polymer science and materials . A polymer is said to be semiﬂexible when its bend - ing stiﬀness is large enough , such that the bending energetics—that favors a straight conformation—can just out - compete the entropic tendency of a chain to crumple up into a random coil . Thus , semiﬂexible polymers ex - hibit small , yet signiﬁcant , thermal ﬂuctuations around a straight conformation . This competition between en - tropic and energetic eﬀects gives rise to many of the unique physical properties of semiﬂexible polymers and their assemblies ( Bausch and Kroy , 2006 ; Fletcher and Mullins , 2010 ; Kasza et al . , 2007 ; Lieleg et al . , 2010 ; MacKintosh and Janmey , 1997 ) . The semiﬂexible nature of the polymers also has major implications for how they interact with each other to form entangled or crosslinked networks , and for the linear and nonlinear elastic and ﬂow properties of such networks . A deep and predictive un - derstanding of the physics of such networks has proven to be a daunting theoretical challenge , in part due to their disordered many - body nature , and the fundamen - tally more peripheral role of entropy in these systems . Here , we review recent advances in modeling such sys - tems , and highlight some of the major remaining open questions . Biopolymers , especially those composed of globular proteins much larger than the atomic or molecular scale , are far more rigid than most synthetic polymers , and they constitute prime examples of semiﬂexible polymers . Their rigidity results in conformations , both at the sin - gle polymer and network level , that are very far from the near gaussian or random coil conﬁgurations common in polymer physics ( Wilhelm and Frey , 1996 ) . This diﬀer - ence turns out to be more than just a quantitative one : Semiﬂexible polymer systems exhibit qualitatively diﬀer - ent elastic and viscoelastic properties . These properties include reversible softening under compression ( Chaud - huri et al . , 2007 ) , as well as both stiﬀening ( Gardel et al . , 2004a ; Lieleg et al . , 2007 ; Storm et al . , 2005 ) and negative normal stress under shear ( Janmey et al . , 2007 ) . Because of the unusual material properties of biopoly - mers and their assemblies , much can be learned from them and they can serve as inspiration for new mate - rials or new experimental systems to test fundamental physics . An example of the latter is the recent use of carbon nanotubes , which have comparable mechanical properties to many biopolymers and which can be very eﬀectively visualized with light microscopy , to address long - standing puzzles in polymer physics ( Doi and Ed - wards , 1988 ; Fakhri et al . , 2010 , 2009 ; Odijk , 1983 ) . From a physical point of view , the main diﬀerences between various semiﬂexible polymers , biological or syn - thetic , are their dimensions and mechanical properties . One of the ways to quantify the bending stiﬀness of poly - mers is by their so - called persistence length , which is es - sentially the length over which they appear straight in the presence of Brownian forces . The persistence lengths and dimensions of various semiﬂexible polymers are listed in Table I . An important aspect , setting biopolymers apart from most synthetic polymers , is that their persistence length is much larger than the molecular or single pro - tein scale , and is often comparable to or larger than the relevant length scale on which the polymer is considered , such as its contour length or the cross - linking length scale of the network in which they are embedded . Thus , many biopolymers are considered to be semiﬂexible , and their dynamics is governed by a competition between entropic and energetic eﬀects . Many theories of semiﬂexible poly - mers have been put to a test , since it became possible 3 to study the dynamics and elastic properties of isolated biopolymers . Quantitative measurements of the properties of biopolymer systems in their native environment in vivo remains a formidable experimental challenge ( Fletcher and Mullins , 2010 ) . However , important advances have been achieved by using a bottom - up approach : proteins are puriﬁed and reconstituted to form simpliﬁed in vitro models of real biopolymer systems , which can be studied quantitatively under well - controlled conditions ( Bausch and Kroy , 2006 ; Kasza et al . , 2007 ; Lieleg et al . , 2010 ) . Most biopolymers , including ﬁlamentous actin ( F - actin ) , intermediate ﬁlaments and microtubules , as well as as - sociated regulatory proteins can now be puriﬁed and re - constituted into networks . These reconstituted networks have not only formed an ideal testing ground for theory , but have often lead the way for new theoretical devel - opments . Thus , a large share of the work reviewed here was done in the context of such reconstituted biopolymer networks . As an example , we show an electron micrograph and a ﬂuorescence microscopy image of an in vitro F - actin net - work in Figs . 3a , b . The microstructure and mechanics of such networks can depend sensitively on the type and concentration of polymer and crosslinking proteins ( Lie - leg et al . , 2010 ) . This represents yet another key dif - ference with respect to ﬂexible polymers : semiﬂexible polymers are fundamentally less prone to entangle with their neighbors , since they cannot readily form tight coils or knots . This renders biopolymer networks much more sensitive to cross - linking , and may be a reason why na - ture employs a wide variety of crosslinkning proteins . In - deed , distinguishing properties of physiological crosslink - ers , such as their dynamic or transient nature ( Broedersz et al . , 2010a ; Heussinger , 2011 ; Lieleg et al . , 2008 , 2009 ; Strehle et al . , 2011 ; Ward et al . , 2008 ; Yao et al . , 2013 ) or a nonlinear elastic response ( Broedersz et al . , 2008 ; Gardel et al . , 2006 ; Kasza et al . , 2010 , 2009 ; Wagner et al . , 2006 ) , have been found to have a major impact on the linear and nonlinear viscoelastic properties of the net - works they form . The addition of motor proteins such as myosin , which can actively generate stochastic forces by tugging on F - actin ﬁlaments , can drive the network into a nonequilibrium state ( Koenderink et al . , 2009 ; Mizuno et al . , 2007 ) , with striking eﬀects on the dynamics and mechanics of the system . One of the key mechanical properties of such reconsti - tuted networks is the shear modulus . The shear modulus typically exhibits a rich frequency dependence ( Hinner et al . , 1998 ; Koenderink et al . , 2006 ; Schnurr et al . , 1997 ) , including frequency - independent plateau regimes at in - termediate frequencies , and various power law regimes at both low and high frequencies . This variety reﬂects how the network can be dominated by qualitatively dif - ferent dynamics on diﬀerent times scales . Insights into these various frequency regimes were given by theories on the dynamics of semiﬂexible polymers or bundles in per - manently or transiently crosslinked networks ( Broedersz FIG . 3 a ) Electron micrograph of a ﬁxed and rotary - shadowed ﬁlamin - F - actin network at an actin concentration 1 mg / ml , average ﬁlament length 15 µ m , and a ﬁlamin : actin molar ra - tio of 0 . 005 : 1 . From ( Kasza et al . , 2009 ) b ) Confocal mi - croscopy image of a ﬂuorescently labeled bundled ﬁlamin - F - actin network at high ﬁlamin concentrations ( From ( Kasza et al . , 2010 ) ) . c ) Electron micrograph of a ﬁxed and rotary - shadowed Vimentin network . Courtesy of Y - C . Lin and D . Weitz ( Harvard ) . et al . , 2010a ; Gittes and MacKintosh , 1998 ; Heussinger et al . , 2007a , 2010 ; Lieleg et al . , 2008 ; Morse , 1998a , b , c ) . In some cases , weak power laws were observed ( Semm - rich et al . , 2007 ) , suggesting soft glassy dynamics , which spurred the developments of theories on the dynamics of polymers in glassy environments ( Kroy , 2008 ; Kroy and Glaser , 2007 ) . These systems also exhibit a striking non - linear response ( Gardel et al . , 2006 , 2004a , b ; Storm et al . , 2005 ) , in which the networks’ diﬀerential stiﬀness can increase 10 - 100 fold at moderate strains between 10 % - 100 % , which lead to much debate on the origins of this behavior ( Conti and MacKintosh , 2009 ; Heussinger et al . , 2007b ; Huisman et al . , 2008 , 2007 ; Kabla and Mahade - van , 2006 ; Lieleg et al . , 2007 ; Onck et al . , 2005 ; Wyart et al . , 2008 ) . In this review we focus largely on minimal , physical approaches . We begin with the properties of single ﬁla - ments , and then move on to the collective properties of entangled solutions and semiﬂexible polymer networks . 4 TABLE I Persistence lengths and dimensions of various biopolymers ( Dogic et al . , 2004 ; Gittes et al . , 1993 ; Howard , 2001 ; Lin et al . , 2010a , b ; M¨ucke et al . , 2004 ) . Type approximate diameter persistence length contour length Microtubule 25 nm ∼ 1 − 5 mm 10s of µ m F - actin 7 nm 17 µ m < ∼ 20 µ m Intermediate ﬁlament 9 nm 0 . 2 − 1 µ m 2 − 10 µ m DNA 2 nm 50 nm < ∼ 1 m SWNTs < 1 nm ∼ 10 µ m > ∼ 1 µ m II . SEMIFLEXIBLE POLYMERS Biopolymers such as those that make up the cytoskele - ton and extracellular matrices typically consist of aggre - gates of large globular proteins ( Fig . 4 ) . These are usu - ally bound together more weakly than most synthetic , covalently - bonded polymers . Biopolymers can neverthe - less exhibit surprising stability and strength . Speciﬁ - cally , given that their diameter can be as large as tens of nanometers or more , they are far more rigid to bend - ing than most common synthetic polymers , and it can be a good approximation in some cases to treat them as elastic ﬁbers . Thus , their bending rigidity is often their most important characteristic . In many cases , however , the contour length of these ﬁlaments is still long enough that they may exhibit signiﬁcant thermal bending ﬂuc - tuations . Thus they are said to be semiﬂexible or worm - like . The most intuitive characterization of the stiﬀness of biopolymers is their persistence length (cid:96) p , which can be regarded as the contour length at which signiﬁcant bend - ing ﬂuctuations occur . This characterization is convent , but can be misleading . It is not correct , for instance , to think of a semiﬂexible polymer as rod - like and eﬀec - FIG . 4 The three families of cytoskeletal ﬁlaments , including F - actin , intermediate ﬁlaments and microtubules . tively athermal on length scales shorter than (cid:96) p : even for lengths much less than this , thermal ﬂuctuations can play an important , even dominant role , e . g . , in determin - ing the axial stretching response of a semiﬂexible chain . Also , it is important to bear in mind that (cid:96) p is directly related to the ﬁlament stiﬀness only in thermal equilib - rium and only for ﬁlaments that are perfectly straight in their relaxed state . Sometimes , the term persistence length is also used merely as a way of characterizing how straight a given polymer is , for instance , in AFM exper - iments that measure the conformation of a polymer ad - sorbed on a surface . Such conformations can be far from equilibrium , and thus the shape may not directly reﬂect the bending rigidity of the ﬁlament . Under conditions of thermal equilibrium , the persistence length is more pre - cisely deﬁned in terms of the angular correlations of the local tangent along the polymer backbone , which decay exponentially with a characteristic length (cid:96) p . The per - sistence lengths of a few important semiﬂexible polymers are given in Table I , along with their approximate diam - eter and contour length . A . Worm - like Chain Model On the scale of several nanometers to micrometers , biopolymers are often eﬀectively modeled as inextensi - ble elastic rods or ﬁbers with ﬁnite resistance to bend - ing . This is the essence of the so - called worm - like - chain ( WLC ) model ( Kratky and Porod , 1949 ) . This can be described by a bending energy of the form , H bend = κ 2 (cid:90) ds (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ∂(cid:126)t ∂s (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) 2 , ( 1 ) where κ is the bending modulus and (cid:126)t is a ( unit ) tangent vector along the chain , and the integrand represents the square of the local curvature along the chain . Here , the chain position (cid:126)r ( s ) is described by an arc - length coor - dinate s along the chain backbone . Hence , the tangent vector (cid:126)t = ∂(cid:126)r ∂s . ( 2 ) These quantities are illustrated in Fig . 5 . The bending modulus κ has units of energy times length . A natural energy scale due to Brownian ﬂuc - tuations is k B T , where T is the temperature and k is 5 2 a s t ( s ) FIG . 5 A ﬁlamentous protein can be regarded as an elas - tic rod of radius a . Provided the length of the rod is very long compared with the monomeric dimension a , and that the rigidity is high ( speciﬁcally , the persistence length (cid:96) p (cid:29) a ) , this can be treated as an abstract line or curve , characterized by the length s along its backbone . A unit vector (cid:126)t tangent to the ﬁlament deﬁnes the local orientation of the ﬁlament . Curvature is present when this orientation varies with s . For bending in a plane , it is suﬃcient to consider the the angle θ ( s ) that the ﬁlament makes with respect to some ﬁxed axis . The curvature is then ∂θ / ∂s . Boltzmann’s constant . Thus , (cid:96) p = κ / ( k B T ) is a length . In fact , this is precisely the persistence length described above . For a homogeneous rod of diameter 2 a consisting of a homogeneous material , the bending modulus should be proportional to the material’s Young’s modulus E , which has units of energy per volume . Thus , having units of energy times length , we expect that κ to be of order Ea 4 . In fact ( Landau and Lifshitz , 1986 ) , κ = π 4 Ea 4 . ( 3 ) This is often expressed as κ = EI , where I is the moment of inertia of the cross - section . For a cylindrical ﬁber , the moment of inertia I depends on the fourth power of the ﬁber radius a , apart from a purely geometric prefactor depending only on the cross - section . The factor πa 4 / 4 happens to be the right one for a cylindrical solid rod of radius a . For a hollow tube , the prefactor would be dif - ferent , but still of order a 4 , where a is the ( outer ) radius . This elastic rod ( or tube , as in the case of microtubules ) approximation can be a good one , at least if the radius of curvature of the ﬁlament is large compared with the molecular scale a . Within this approximation , the im - plied Young’s modulus E for polymers such as F - actin and microtubules can be as large as 1 GPa ( Howard , 2001 ; de Pablo et al . , 2003 ) . It is instructive to begin our analysis of the WLC model with the case of motion conﬁned to a plane , for which there is a single transverse degree of freedom , the deﬂec - tion away from a straight line . Here , the integrand above in Eq . ( 1 ) becomes ( ∂θ / ∂s ) 2 , where θ is simply the lo - cal angle that the chain axis makes relative to any ﬁxed axis . A discrete approximation to the integral in Eq . ( 1 ) is then (cid:80) i ( ∆ θ i ) 2 / ∆ s , where ∆ θ i = θ i − θ i − 1 is the angle change between points separated by a small distance ∆ s along the contour . If the ∆ θ i are independent degrees of freedom , which can be expected to be valid in the ab - sence of long - range forces , the equipartition theorem tells TABLE II List of main symbols used in text . Symbol Description a Filament radius E Young’s modulus φ Volume fraction G Shear modulus γ Strain Γ Nonaﬃnity parameter (cid:15) Relative extension K Diﬀerential shear modulus κ Filament bending rigidity (cid:96) Filament length (cid:96) p Persistence length (cid:96) c Spacing between crosslinks . µ Filament stretching modulus ρ Filament length density σ Stress τ Tension ξ Mesh size z Network connectivity z CF Central force isostatic point z b Bending isostatic point us that (cid:104) ∆ θ 2 i (cid:105) = k B T ∆ s κ . ( 4 ) This can be used to determine the correlations of orien - tations from one point along the chain to another . We note that the thermal average (cid:104) cos ( θ m − θ n ) (cid:105) = (cid:104) cos ( ∆ θ m ) (cid:105)(cid:104) cos ( θ m − 1 − θ n ) (cid:105) . . . ( 5 ) = (cid:104) cos ( ∆ θ m ) (cid:105) m − n − 1 , where we have used the independence of the various ∆ θ i , and the fact that (cid:104) sin ( ∆ θ m ) (cid:105) = 0 . From this , it follows that the correlation function decays as (cid:104) (cid:126)t ( s ) · (cid:126)t ( s (cid:48) ) (cid:105) = e − | s − s (cid:48) | / (cid:96) p , ( 6 ) where (cid:96) p = 2 κ / k B T . Of course , this is all for motion conﬁned to a plane . Taking into account the two inde - pendent transverse directions for thermal ﬂuctuations in 3D , the persistence length becomes (cid:96) p = κ / k B T . This persistence length provides a geometric measure of the mechanical stiﬀness of the rod , provided that it is in equi - librium at temperature T . This provides , in principle , a way to measure the per - sistence length , and thus the bending modulus of ﬁla - ments by imaging the angular correlations along a ﬁla - ment . As discussed below , however , one must also be careful to account for the dynamics of ﬁlaments . B . Force - extension A single ﬁlament can respond to forces applied to it by bending , stretching or compressing . On length scales 6 shorter than the persistence length , the bending can be described in mechanical terms , as for elastic rods . By contrast , stretching and compression may involve a purely elastic or mechanical response ( as for macroscopic , elastic rods ) , a purely entropic response , or a combina - tion of the two . For an inextensible chain , the entropic response comes from the thermal bending ﬂuctuations of the ﬁlament . Perhaps surprisingly , as we shall see below , the longitudinal response can be dominated by entropy even on length scales small compared with the persistence length . Thus , it may be incorrect to think of a ﬁlament as truly rod - like , even on length scales shorter than (cid:96) p . The longitudinal single ﬁlament response is often de - scribed in terms of a so - called force - extension relation - ship , in which the axial force required to extend the ﬁlament is measured or calculated in terms of the de - gree of extension along a line . At any ﬁnite temperature , there is an entropic resistance to such extension due to the presence of thermal ﬂuctuations that make the poly - mer deviate from a straight conformation : since there are many more crumpled conﬁgurations of the polymer than the ( unique ) straight conformation , extending the polymer reduces the entropy and may increase the free energy . This entropic force - extension has been the basis of mechanical studies , for example , of long DNA ( Busta - mante et al . , 1994 ) , and a full , general calculation for low and high force , as well as short and long chains is very involved , although simple approximations can be very ac - curate in the limit of long chains ( (cid:96) (cid:29) (cid:96) p ) or high forces ( Marko and Siggia , 1995 ) . An interesting and univer - sal form was recently proposed and shown to capture a broad range of polymer properties ( Carrillo et al . , 2013 ; Dobrynin and Carrillo , 2010 ) . Here , we focus on a simple calculation appropriate for high tensile forces or for stiﬀ polymers such as those that make up the cytoskeleton of cells , for which a nearly straight chain is most relevant ( MacKintosh et al . , 1995 ) . For a ﬁlament segment of length (cid:96) < ∼ (cid:96) p the ﬁlament is nearly straight , with only small transverse ﬂuctuations . We let the x - axis deﬁne the average orientation of the chain segment , and let u and v represent the two inde - pendent transverse degrees of freedom . These can then be thought of as functions of x and time t in general . For simplicity , we ﬁrst consider just a single transverse coordinate , u ( x , t ) . The bending energy is then H bend = κ 2 (cid:90) dx (cid:18) ∂ 2 u ∂x 2 (cid:19) 2 = (cid:96) 4 (cid:88) q κq 4 u 2 q , ( 7 ) where u ( x ) is represented by a Fourier decomposition u ( x , t ) = (cid:88) q u q sin ( qx ) . ( 8 ) As illustrated in Fig . 6 , the local orientation of the ﬁla - ment can be characterized by the slope ∂u / ∂x , while the local curvature involves the second derivative ∂ 2 u / ∂x 2 . Such a description is appropriate for the case of a nearly FIG . 6 If one end of a ﬁlament is ﬁxed , both in position and orientation , while the other is free . The ﬁlament tends to wander in a way that can be characterized by u ( x ) , a trans - verse displacement ﬁeld . For a ﬁxed total arc length of the ﬁlament , thermal ﬂuctuations result in a contraction of the end - to - end distance , which is denoted by ∆ (cid:96) . In fact , this con - traction is actually distributed about a thermal average value (cid:104) ∆ (cid:96) (cid:105) . The mean - square ( longitudinal ) ﬂuctuations about this average are denoted by (cid:104) δ(cid:96) 2 (cid:105) , while the mean - square lateral ﬂuctuations ( i . e . , with respect to the dashed line ) are denoted by (cid:104) u 2 (cid:105) . The bottom image shows how the ﬂuctuations are reduced and the chain is extended when a tension τ is applied . straight ﬁlament with ﬁxed boundary conditions u = 0 at the ends , x = 0 , (cid:96) . Here , the wave vectors q = nπ / (cid:96) , where n = 1 , 2 , 3 , . . . . If the chain is inextensible , with no compliance in its contour length , then the end - to - end contraction of the chain in the presence of thermal ﬂuctuations in u is ∆ (cid:96) = (cid:90) dx   (cid:115) 1 + (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ∂u ∂x (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) 2 − 1   (cid:39) 1 2 (cid:90) dx (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ∂u ∂x (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) 2 = (cid:96) 4 (cid:88) q q 2 u 2 q . ( 9 ) The integration here is actually over the projected length of the chain . But , to leading ( quadratic ) order in the transverse displacements , we make no distinction be - tween projected and contour lengths here , and above in H bend . Because the tension τ is conjugate to ∆ (cid:96) , we can write the energy in terms the applied tension as H = 1 2 (cid:90) dx (cid:34) κ (cid:18) ∂ 2 u ∂x 2 (cid:19) 2 + τ (cid:18) ∂u ∂x (cid:19) 2 (cid:35) = (cid:96) 4 (cid:88) q (cid:0) κq 4 + τq 2 (cid:1) u 2 q . ( 10 ) Under a constant tension τ therefore , the equilibrium amplitudes u q satisfy the equipartition theorem , (cid:104) | u q | 2 (cid:105) = 2 k B T (cid:96) ( κq 4 + τq 2 ) , ( 11 ) 7 and the contraction (cid:104) ∆ (cid:96) (cid:105) τ = k B T (cid:88) q 1 ( κq 2 + τ ) . ( 12 ) There are , of course , two transverse degrees of freedom , and this ﬁnal expression incorporates a factor of two ap - propriate for a chain ﬂuctuating in 3D . semiﬂexible ﬁlaments exhibit a strong suppression of bending ﬂuctuations for modes of wavelength less than the persistence length (cid:96) p , as can be seen in the q - dependence in Eq . ( 11 ) . This has important conse - quences for many of the thermal properties of such ﬁl - aments . In particular , it means that the longest uncon - strained wavelengths tend to be dominant in most cases of interest , provided that this length is short compared with (cid:96) p . This allows us , for instance , to anticipate the scaling form of the end - to - end contraction ∆ (cid:96) between points separated by arc length (cid:96) in the absence of an ap - plied tension . We note that it is a length , it must vary inversely with stiﬀness κ , and must increase with temper - ature . Thus , since the dominant mode of ﬂuctuations is that of the maximum wavelength , (cid:96) , we expect the con - traction to be of the form (cid:104) ∆ (cid:96) (cid:105) 0 ∼ (cid:96) 2 / (cid:96) p . More precisely , for τ = 0 , (cid:104) ∆ (cid:96) (cid:105) 0 = k B T(cid:96) 2 κπ 2 ∞ (cid:88) n = 1 1 n 2 = (cid:96) 2 6 (cid:96) p . ( 13 ) Similar scaling arguments to those above lead us to ex - pect that the typical transverse amplitude of a segment of length (cid:96) is approximately given by (cid:104) u 2 (cid:105) ∼ (cid:96) 3 (cid:96) p . ( 14 ) in the absence of applied tension . The precise coeﬃ - cient for the mean - square amplitude of the midpoint be - tween ends separated by (cid:96) ( with vanishing deﬂection at the ends ) is 1 / 24 . Apart from the prefactor , we could have anticipated the scaling form of the result in Eq . ( 14 ) by noting that , being a thermal eﬀect , it should increase proportional to k B T . It should also decrease inversely with bending rigidity κ . Thus , the expectation is that (cid:104) u 2 (cid:105) ∼ ( k B T / κ ) × (cid:96) 3 , where the dominating wavelength λ ∼ (cid:96) is the longest unconstrained mode and this length enters with a third power for dimensional reasons . For a ﬁnite tension τ , however , the longest uncon - strained wavelength is not the only relevant length . There is also a characteristic length (cid:96) t ∼ (cid:112) κ / τ asso - ciated with the competition of bending and the tension . In short , modes of wavelength shorter than this are gov - erned primarily by bending , while those of longer wave - length are governed by tension . Thus , the analysis above is valid provided that (cid:96) t > ∼ (cid:96) , i . e . , for tensions τ small compared with the Euler buckling force κ / (cid:96) 2 of an elas - tic rod of length (cid:96) . This also corresponds to the regime of force for which the response to tension is linear . In the other limit , (cid:96) t < ∼ (cid:96) , nonlinearities in the response can be expected . In both limits , the extension of the chain ( toward full extension ) under tension is given by δ(cid:96) ( τ ) = (cid:104) ∆ (cid:96) (cid:105) 0 − (cid:104) ∆ (cid:96) (cid:105) τ = (cid:96) 2 π 2 (cid:96) p (cid:88) n φ n 2 ( n 2 + φ ) , ( 15 ) where φ = τ(cid:96) 2 / ( κπ 2 ) ( 16 ) is a dimensionless force . As suggested above , the charac - teristic force κπ 2 / (cid:96) 2 that enters here is the critical force in the classical Euler buckling problem . The summation in Eq . ( 15 ) can be found analytically , with the result that the relative extension (cid:15) ≡ δ(cid:96) (cid:104) ∆ (cid:96) (cid:105) 0 = 1 − 3 π coth (cid:0) π √ φ (cid:1) − 1 π 2 φ . ( 17 ) Thus , the force - extension curve can be found by inverting this relationship numerically . In the linear regime , the extension becomes δ(cid:96) = (cid:96) 2 π 2 (cid:96) p φ (cid:88) n 1 n 4 = (cid:96) 4 90 (cid:96) p κτ , ( 18 ) i . e . , the eﬀective spring constant for longitudinal exten - sion of the chain segment is 90 κ(cid:96) p / (cid:96) 4 , which varies in - versely with k B T , in contrast to the freely - jointed chain 0 . 02 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 20 0 . 50 1 . 00 0 . 1 1 10 100 | φ | | ε | compression extension FIG . 7 The dimensionless force φ as a function of the relative extension (cid:15) = δ(cid:96) / (cid:104) ∆ (cid:96) (cid:105) from Eq . ( 17 ) . For small extension or compression , the response is linear . The upper curve de - picts the force under extension ( (cid:15) > 0 ) , where the force is positive . The lower solid curve depicts the case of compres - sion ( (cid:15) < 0 ) , where the force is negative . Both curves exhibit nonlinearities near the point where the extension or compres - sion become comparable to the thermal contraction (cid:104) ∆ (cid:96) (cid:105) 0 in the absence of force ( i . e . , | (cid:15) | (cid:39) 1 ) . For comparison , the lin - ear limit is shown by the dashed line . For both extension and compression , the nonlinearities appear when the force is near the buckling threshold , φ = 1 , indicated by the end of the dashed line . While these results are exact for inextensi - ble chains of length (cid:96) (cid:28) (cid:96) p under tension , ﬁnite - temperature buckling must be included for − (cid:15) (cid:39) − φ (cid:39) 1 ( Baczynski et al . , 2007 ; Emanuel et al . , 2007 ; Odijk , 1998 ) . 8 and semiﬂexible chains in the limit (cid:96) (cid:29) (cid:96) p , both of which exhibit increasing stiﬀness with temperature T . The scaling form of this could also have been anticipated , based on very simple physical arguments similar to those above . In particular , given the expected dominance of the longest wavelength mode ( i . e . , (cid:96) ) , we expect that the end - to - end contraction scales as δ(cid:96) ∼ (cid:82) ( ∂u / ∂x ) 2 ∼ u 2 / (cid:96) . Thus , (cid:104) δ(cid:96) 2 (cid:105) ∼ (cid:96) − 2 (cid:104) u 4 (cid:105) ∼ (cid:96) − 2 (cid:104) u 2 (cid:105) 2 ∼ (cid:96) 4 / (cid:96) 2 p , which is con - sistent with the eﬀective ( linear ) spring constant derived above from Eq . ( 18 ) , since (cid:104) δ(cid:96) 2 (cid:105) should be equal to k B T divided by the longitudinal spring constant . Importantly , due in part to the asymmetry of the wormlike chain under extension and compression , the statistics of the end - to - end ﬂuctuation of a semiﬂexible polymer are not described by a Gaussian distribution . The full distribution function was calculated analytically in ( Wilhelm and Frey , 1996 ) . The resulting distribution can be approximated by a Gaussian only near the thermal average extension , while the distribution cuts oﬀ sharply near the full extension . The full nonlinear force - extension curve can be calcu - lated numerically by inversion of the expression above . This is shown in Fig . 7 . Here , one can see both the linear regime for small forces , with the eﬀective spring constant given above , as well as a divergent force near full exten - sion . In fact , the force diverges in a characteristic way , as the inverse square of the distance from full extension : τ ∼ | 1 − (cid:15) | − 2 ( Fixman and Kovac , 1973 ; Marko and Sig - gia , 1995 ; Odijk , 1995 ) . This form of the divergence of force can be identiﬁed without preforming the full sum - mation in Eq . ( 12 ) , as follows . For q < ∼ q τ = (cid:112) τ / κ ∼ (cid:96) − 1 t , the tension τ governs the mode amplitudes , as noted above . Mathematically , in this range the tension term dominates the bending term in the denominator of Eqs . ( 11 , 12 ) . In the other limit , for larger q , the sum rapidly converges . Thus , only a number of terms that grows as √ τ are really needed in the sum , and these terms are themselves proportional to 1 / τ . Thus , (cid:104) ∆ (cid:96) (cid:105) τ ∼ 1 / √ τ and τ → κ(cid:96) 2 4 (cid:96) 2 p | (cid:104) ∆ (cid:96) (cid:105) 0 − δ(cid:96) | 2 ( 19 ) for large tension . As noted above , the force - extension relation can be found by numerically inverting Eq . ( 15 ) using Eq . ( 17 ) . In practice , however , it is often preferable to use a more tractable approximation to the exact force - extension re - lation , as is usually done for DNA ( Marko and Siggia , 1995 ) . However , this worm - like - chain approximation is only valid for (cid:96) (cid:29) (cid:96) p . In the opposite limit of (cid:96) < (cid:96) p , the small - extension or linear response regime is characterized by a diﬀerent spring constant , although the high - force asymptotic regime in Eq . ( 19 ) is the same , including pref - actor . An approximate force - extension relation can be obtained from the asymptotic limit in Eq . ( 19 ) , together with a constant term and a term linear in the extension , where these are chosen to yield the correct overall linear response and zero force at zero extension . The result can be expressed simply in terms of the normalized extension (cid:15) and force φ : φ = 9 π 2 (cid:20) 1 ( 1 − (cid:15) ) 2 − 1 − 1 3 (cid:15) (cid:21) . ( 20 ) Under extension , this yields the correct small and large force limits . It strictly overestimates the intermediate force range between these limits , but by less than 16 % . This form has been used for eﬃcient computation of the nonlinear elasticity of semiﬂexible networks ( Gardel et al . , 2004a ) . An equivalent force - extension expression with an additional approximate term to capture buckling was derived in ( Huisman et al . , 2008 ) . 1 . Inextensible versus extensible polymers Before concluding our discussion of the longitudinal re - sponse of semiﬂexible polymers , it is worth asking about another obvious contribution to their response . This , we can think of as the zero - temperature enthalpic or purely mechanical response . After all , we are treating semiﬂex - ible polymers as small bendable rods . To the extent that they behave of rigid rods , we might expect them to re - spond to longitudinal stresses by increasing / decreasing their countour length . Based on the arguments above , it seems that the persistence length (cid:96) p determines the length below which ﬁlaments behave like rods , and above which they behave like ﬂexible polymers with signiﬁcant thermal ﬂuctuations . It would be tempting to expect that enthalpic stretching dominates for any (cid:96) < ∼ (cid:96) p . Per - haps surprisingly , however , even for segments of semiﬂex - ible polymers of length much less than the persistence length , their longitudinal response can be dominated by the entropic force - extension described above . To examine this , we consider a simple model of a semi - ﬂexible polymer as a homogeneous elastic rod of radius a . We have already seen that the bending modulus is κ ∼ Ea 4 . Likewise , the ( linear ) stretching / compression of such an elastic rod is described by the Hamiltonian H stretch = 1 2 µ (cid:90) d s (cid:18) d (cid:96) ( s ) d s (cid:19) 2 ( 21 ) where d (cid:96) / d s gives the relative change in length ( strain ) along the ﬁlament . The stretch modulus µ ∼ Ea 2 . The eﬀective ( mechanical ) spring constant of a segment of length (cid:96) is thus k M ∼ µ / (cid:96) ∼ Ea 2 / (cid:96) , compared with the eﬀective ( thermal ) spring constant k T ∼ κ(cid:96) p / (cid:96) 4 ∼ k M a 2 (cid:96) p / (cid:96) 3 , since κ ∼ Ea 4 . Since the system will respond primarily according to the softer eﬀective spring con - stant , the dominant response will be thermal if (cid:96) 3 > ∼ a 2 (cid:96) p , and will be mechanical only if (cid:96) 3 < ∼ a 2 (cid:96) p . Thus , even segments of length much less than (cid:96) p can still respond according to the thermal response described above . For F - actin , for example , even ﬁlament segments as short as 100 - 200 nm in length may be dominated in their longitu - dinal compliance by the thermal response arising from 9 bending ﬂuctuations . The extent of this compliance , however , will be quite limited . Thus , there is expected to be a crossover from a nonlinear thermal compliance to an enthalpic stretching regime . This crossover can be char - acterized by two mechanical springs in series , in which one adds a purely enthalpic compliance δ(cid:96) ( e ) = (cid:96)τ / µ to the compliance in Eq . ( 15 ) ( Odijk , 1995 ) . However , the entropic stiﬀness is nonlinear , and nonlinear compli - ances do not simply add . There is an additional higher - order correction that corresponds to a renormalization of the force in the nonlinear entropic force extension curve ( Storm et al . , 2005 ) . The resulting extension in Eq . ( 15 ) for stiﬀ chains , where (cid:96) (cid:29) (cid:104) ∆ (cid:96) (cid:105) 0 , is given by δ(cid:96) ( τ ) = (cid:96)τ / µ + δ(cid:96) ( τ [ 1 + τ / µ ] ) . ( 22 ) 2 . Euler buckling In addition to the mechanical or enthalpic response to stretching , there is also another purely mechanical re - sponse under compression : Euler buckling ( Landau and Lifshitz , 1986 ) . When a straight elastic rod is subject to a compressive load , it initially responds by compressing longitudinally along its axis . Above a well - deﬁned force threshold , however , it undergoes a buckling instability . To a good approximation , the rod simply cannot bear any additional compressive load beyond this threshold . Thus , the rod is simply unstable and any additional load will cause the rod to completely collapse . This threshold compressive force can be calculated as follows . When a rod of length (cid:96) undergoes an oscillatory trans - verse deﬂection of amplitude u ( x ) = (cid:80) q u q sin ( qx ) , it contracts longitudinally by an amount given by Eq . ( 9 ) . The energy of this deﬂection is given by Eq . ( 10 ) , where τ is the ( tensile ) load . For τ > 0 , each term in the series contributes a positive energy , so that the system is ( harmonically ) stable against increasing amplitude u q , for each q . For compressive loads , however , where τ < 0 , this is no longer the case if τ < − κq 2 . In that case , the energy as function of u 2 q , transitions from being concave to being convex . Thus , for compressive tensions exceed - ing this q - dependent threshold , the corresponding trans - fer deﬂection modes become unstable . For such modes , the system is unstable to transverse displacements . As the compressive load − τ increases from zero , this insta - bility ﬁrst occurs for the smallest q possible , which is de - termined by the length of the rod : q = q 1 = π / (cid:96) . Thus , the buckling instability occurs for compressive force given by f c = κ (cid:16) π (cid:96) (cid:17) 2 , ( 23 ) and this instability corresponds to the fundamental os - cillatory mode for the rod , where the wavelength of the instability is twice the length of the rod , as illustrated in the upper panel of Fig . 8 . One important aspect of this buckling is its threshold nature , which has been used ef - fectively in numerous biopolymer experiments to measure MICROTUBULES ARE MECHANICALLY REINFORCED • BRANGWYNNE ET AL . 739 results suggest that this ubiquitous highly curved form of microtubule deformation refl ects the generic nature of reinforced microtubule compression in living cytoplasm . Our results suggest that microtubules can be used to probe the local mechanical environment within cells . Although we have focused on the cytoskeleton of interphase cells , the mitotic spindle is another important microtubule - based structure . This may provide additional insight into the poorly understood me - chanical behavior of mitotic spindles ( Pickett - Heaps et al . , 1984 ; Maniotis et al . , 1997 ; Kapoor and Mitchison , 2001 ; Scholey et al . , 2001 ) . Microtubules within spindles have been observed to buckle at somewhat longer wavelengths under natural condi - tions ( Aist and Bayles , 1991 ) , or after mechanical or pharma - cological perturbations ( Pickett - Heaps et al . , 1997 ; Mitchison et al . , 2005 ) , which suggests that spindle microtubules also experience compressive forces . This long - wavelength buck - ling may refl ect an increased effective stiffness of microtubules caused by reinforcement by intermicrotubule bundling connec - tions within the complex structure of the spindle . However , in the absence of bundling , these results suggest that the elasticity of any surrounding matrix cannot be very large . Another cell in which longer - wavelength buckling is observed is the fi ssion yeast , where nuclear positioning is thought to occur by com - pressive loading of microtubules ( Tran et al . , 2001 ) . This again suggests that the elasticity of any surrounding network must be considerably less than that of the interphase animal cells we studied . Thus , in these particular microtubule arrays , structural reinforcement may be either unnecessary , or mediated by other mechanisms , such as microtubule bundling . An important implication of this work is the demonstra - tion that cytoplasmic microtubules are effectively stiffened when embedded in even a relatively soft ( elastic modulus (cid:2) 1 kPa ) cytoskeletal network ; e . g . , a reinforced 20 - μ m - long cytoplasmic microtubule can withstand a compressive force ( > 100 pN ) > 100 times larger than a free microtubule before buckling . Consequently , individual microtubules can withstand much larger compressive forces in a living cell than previously con - sidered possible ( Fig . 7 ) . Moreover , as demonstrated by our re - sults with cytochalasin - treated cells , the lateral reinforcement is robust ; even disruption of the surrounding actin network only slightly increases the buckling wavelength , with a corresponding decrease in the critical force by a factor of (cid:2) 2 . This is likely caused by the presence of other sources of elasticity , such as in - termediate fi laments , which have been previously shown to both connect laterally to microtubules ( Bloom et al . , 1985 ) , and to contribute to whole cytoskeletal mechanics ( Wang et al . , 1993 ) . As illustrated with the macroscopic model , this reinforcement is a robust phenomenon that is insensitive to the specifi c molecu - lar details ; the only requirement is that the surrounding matrix must be elastic . Mechanical reinforcement by the surrounding cytoskele - ton may therefore provide a physical basis by which the mi - crotubule network can bear the large loads required to stabilize the entire cytoskeleton and thereby control cell behavior that is critical for tissue development , including polarized cell spread - ing , vesicular transport , and directional motility . These data also suggest that these are often large compressive forces ; this is consistent with mechanical models of the cell that incorporate compression - bearing microtubules which balance tensional forces present within a prestressed cytoskeleton ( Wang et al . , 1993 ; Stamenovic et al . , 2002 ; Ingber , 2003 ) . Compressive loading of reinforced microtubules may also have important implications for specialized cell functions , such as in cardiac myocytes , where elastic recoil of compressed microtubules may contribute to dia - stolic relaxation or interfere with normal contractility in diseased tissue . These results represent a fi rst step toward a quantitative understanding of how living cells are constructed as composite materials and mechanically stabilized at the nanometer scale . Materials and methods Cell culture and transfection Cos7 cells ( African green monkey kidney – derived ) were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection and cultured in 10 % FBS DME . Bovine capillary endothelial cells were cultured as previously described ( Parker et al . , 2002 ) . For EGFP studies , conﬂ uent monolayers of cells were incu - bated for 24 – 48 h with an adenoviral vector encoding EGFP - tubulin ( Wang et al . , 2001 ) . Cells were sparsely plated onto glass - bottomed 35 - mm dishes ( MatTek Corp . ) and allowed to adhere and spread overnight . For some studies , cells were microinjected with (cid:2) 1 mg / ml rhodamine - labeled tubulin ( Cytoskeleton , Inc . ) using a Femtojet microinjection system ( Eppendorf ) and allowed to incorporate ﬂ uorescent tubulin for at least 2 h . For some experiments , cells were incubated with 2 μ M cytochalasin D ( Sigma - Aldrich ) for 30 min before imaging . Microtubules were buckled using Femtotip needles controlled with a micromanipulator ( both Eppendorf ) . Figure 7 . Schematic summarizing how the presence of the surrounding elastic cytoskeleton reinforces micro - tubules in living cells . Free microtubules in vitro buckle on the large length scale of the ﬁ lament , at a small critical buckling force . Microtubules in living cells are surrounded by a reinforcing cytoskeleton . This leads to a larger criti - cal force , and buckling on a short wavelength . on J une 5 , 2006 www . j c b . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m FIG . 8 Schematic of classical Euler buckling ( above ) , show - ing the expected shape for an elastic rod that is free to bend between its ends . Under compression deﬁned by a ﬁxed end - to - end distance , beyond a well - deﬁned threshold force , the elastic energy can be lowered by relieving the compression at the cost of a bend to accommodate the reduced end - to - end distance ( Landau and Lifshitz , 1986 ) . When the lateral de - ﬂection of the rod is suppressed by a surrounding elastic ma - trix ( indicated in red ) , the buckling exhibits a shorter wave - length bend at a correspondingly higher force threshold ( Lan - dau and Lifshitz , 1986 ) . Microtubules in vivo exhibit such a constrained buckling under compression ( Brangwynne et al . , 2006 ) . c (cid:13) Brangwynne et al . , 2006 . Originally published in Journal of Cell Biology . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200601060 . axial forces precisely ( Dogterom and Yurke , 1997 ; Footer et al . , 2007 ) . Thermal ﬂuctuations modify this classical , Euler buck - ling result . As might be expected for thermal ﬂuctua - tions , the sharp force threshold no longer applies for ﬁl - aments at ﬁnite temperature . Rather , the smooth force - compression curve is found , and for even small forces there is a ﬁnite compression . This can be seen in the lin - ear regime for compression in Fig . 7 . Qualitatively , ther - mal ﬂuctuations can be said to enhance the compliance under compression , resulting in reduced forces , relative to Euler buckling , for the same degree of compression ( Emanuel et al . , 2007 ; Odijk , 1998 ) . Interestingly , how - ever , this only holds for buckling in three dimensions , and there are qualitative diﬀerences for buckling in two dimensions : for large compressive forces ( f > ∼ f c ) , ﬁ - nite temperature ﬁlaments actually exhibit reduced com - pressive compliance , relative to zero - temperature buck - ling ( Baczynski et al . , 2007 ; Emanuel et al . , 2007 ) . As discussed by Emanuel et al . , the enhanced compliance arises from ﬂuctuations out of the plane of buckling . Interestingly , if an athermal elastic rod is embedded in a surrounding elastic material , as can be the case for microtubules embedded in the matrix formed by the rest of the cytoskeleton ( Brangwynne et al . , 2006 ) , then this classical Euler buckling problem and corresponding threshold is altered ( Landau and Lifshitz , 1986 ) . We can see this from Eg . ( 9 ) , since a given amount of longitu - dinal compression ∆ (cid:96) requires a larger amplitude u q for smaller q . Such large amplitude lateral deﬂections are suppressed by the surrounding matrix . More precisely , 10 for a transverse deﬂection u , the elastic energy per unit length along the rod is approximately given by 1 2 α ⊥ u 2 , ( 24 ) where α ⊥ (cid:39) 4 πG ln ( λ / b ) . ( 25 ) Here , G is the shear modulus of the surrounding elastic medium , λ is the bending wavelength and b is a micro - scopic length of order the radius of the rod . This result is the elastic analogue of a possibly more familiar hy - drodynamics result for the viscous drag per unit length on a thin rod of length ∼ λ moving transverse to its axis ( Lamb , 1945 ) . The hydrodynamics case will be dis - cussed in the next section on dynamics . There are two important points to note in deriving either result : ( 1 ) on dimensional grounds , the elastic spring constant α ⊥ for transverse displacement cannot involve an additional factor of length beyond the obvious term ∝ G , and ( 2 ) the elastic as well as viscous stress balance equations in - volve the Laplacian , for which the solutions in the two transverse dimension naturally lead to logarithms . Thus , using the mode decomposition above , we obtain the elas - tic energy H = 1 2 (cid:90) dx (cid:34) κ (cid:18) ∂ 2 u ∂x 2 (cid:19) 2 + τ (cid:18) ∂u ∂x (cid:19) 2 + α ⊥ u 2 (cid:35) = (cid:96) 4 (cid:88) q (cid:0) κq 4 + τq 2 + α ⊥ (cid:1) u 2 q . ( 26 ) The elastic energy of the matrix has the eﬀect of both increasing the threshold force and shifting the instability to a shorter wavelength . The ﬁrst unstable mode corre - sponds to q ∗ = 4 (cid:112) α ⊥ / κ , ( 27 ) and the critical buckling force is now f c = 2 κq 2 ∗ , ( 28 ) which can be much larger than for unconstrained buck - ling . Such constrained buckling has been reported for microtubules under compression in cells , where the sur - rounding cytoskeletal meshwork can greatly enhance the compressive load bearing capability of microtubules by up to 100 times ( Brangwynne et al . , 2006 ; Das et al . , 2008 ; Liu et al . , 2012 ; Shan et al . , 2013 ) . C . Dynamics In the above , we have considered only static proper - ties of individual polymer chains . The dynamics of sin - gle chains exhibit rich behavior that can have important consequences even at the level of bulk solutions and net - works . The principal dynamic modes come from the transverse motion , i . e . , the degrees of freedom u and v above . The equation of motion of these modes can be found from H bend above , together with the hydro - dynamic drag of the ﬁlaments through the solvent . In the presence of only thermal forces , this is done via a Langevin equation describing the net force per unit length on the chain at position x , 0 = − ζ ∂ ∂tu ( x , t ) − κ ∂ 4 ∂x 4 u ( x , t ) + ξ ⊥ ( x , t ) , ( 29 ) which is , of course , zero within linearized , inertia - free ( low Reynolds number ) hydrodynamics that we assume here . The ﬁrst term represents the hydrodynamic drag per unit length of the ﬁlament . Here , we have assumed a constant transverse drag coeﬃcient that is independent of wavelength . In fact , given that the actual ( low Reynolds number ) drag per unit length on a rod of length (cid:96) is ζ = 4 πη ln ( A(cid:96) / a ) , ( 30 ) where (cid:96) / a is the aspect ratio of the rod , and A is a con - stant of order unity that depends on the precise geometry of the rod ( Lamb , 1945 ) . As noted above , the logarithm is a natural consequence of the 2D nature of the transverse plane in which the motion occurs . For a ﬁlament under - going free bending ﬂuctuations in solution , the relevant length (cid:96) is the wavelength λ of the bending mode . Thus , a week logarithmic dependence of the relaxation rate on the wavelength is expected . However , this hydrodynamic eﬀect is weak and has not been directly observed . In practice , the presence of other chains in solution gives rise to an eﬀective screening of the long - range hydrody - namics beyond a length of order the typical separation ξ between chains , which can then be taken in place of (cid:96) above . The second term in the Langevin equation above is the restoring force per unit length due to bending , which is obtained by the functional derivative − δ δuH bend = − κ ∂ 4 ∂x 4 u ( x , t ) . ( 31 ) Finally , we include a random force ξ ⊥ , which can be taken to be uncorrelated white - noise in the case of a purely viscous solvent . Equation ( 29 ) represents an example of model A dynamics , in which the dissipation ( here , hy - drodynamic drag ) is local and the ﬁeld u ( x , t ) is non - conserved ( Chaikin and Lubensky , 2000 ; Hohenberg and Halperin , 1977 ) . A simple force balance in the Langevin equation above after thermal averaging ( i . e . , without the noise term ) leads us to conclude that the characteristic relaxation rate of a mode of wavevector q is ( Farge and Maggs , 1993 ) ω ( q ) = κq 4 / ζ . ( 32 ) 11 This is valid provided end - eﬀects are not important , i . e . , provided that the wavelength is short compared to the contour length of the chain . The fourth - order depen - dence of this rate on q is to be expected from the appear - ance of a single time derivative along with four spatial derivatives in Eq . ( 29 ) . This relaxation rate determines , among other things , the correlation time for the ﬂuctu - ating bending modes . Speciﬁcally , in the absence of an applied tension , (cid:104) u q ( t ) u q ( 0 ) (cid:105) = 2 k B T (cid:96)κq 4 e − ω ( q ) t . ( 33 ) That the relaxation rate varies as the fourth power of the wavevector q has important consequences . For example , while the time it takes for an actin ﬁlament bending mode of wavelength 1 µ m to relax is of order 10 ms , it takes about 100 s for a mode of wavelength 10 µ m . The very strong wavelength dependence of the relax - ation rates in Eq . ( 32 ) has important consequences , for instance , for imaging of the thermal ﬂuctuations of ﬁla - ments , as is done in order to measure (cid:96) p and the ﬁlament stiﬀness ( Gittes 1993 ) . This is the basis , in fact , of most measurements to date of the stiﬀness of DNA , F - actin , and other biopolymers . Using Eq . ( 33 ) , for instance , one can both conﬁrm thermal equilibrium and determine (cid:96) p by measuring the mean - square amplitude of the thermal modes of various wavelengths . However , in order to both resolve the various modes , as well as establish that they behave according to the thermal distribution , one must sample over times long compared with 1 / ω ( q ) for the longest wavelengths λ ∼ 1 / q . At the same time , one must be able to resolve fast motion on times of order 1 / ω ( q ) for the shortest wavelengths . Given the strong dependence of these relaxation times on the correspond - ing wavelengths , for instance , a range of order a factor of 10 in the wavelengths of the modes requires a range of a factor 10 4 in observation times . Another way to look at the result of Eq . ( 32 ) is that a bending mode of wavelength λ relaxes ( i . e . , fully ex - plores its equilibrium conformations ) in a time of order ζλ 4 / κ . Since it is also true that the longest ( uncon - strained ) wavelength bending mode has by far the largest amplitude , and thus dominates the typical conformations of any ﬁlament ( see Eqs . ( 12 ) and ( 33 ) ) , we can see that in a time t , the typical or dominant mode that relaxes is one of wavelength (cid:96) ⊥ ( t ) ∼ ( κt / ζ ) 1 / 4 . As we have seen above in Eq . ( 14 ) , the mean - square amplitude of transverse ﬂuc - tuations increases with ﬁlament length (cid:96) as (cid:104) u 2 (cid:105) ∼ (cid:96) 3 / (cid:96) p . Thus , in a time t , the expected mean - square transverse motion is given by ( Farge and Maggs 1993 ; Amblard et al . 1996 ) (cid:104) u 2 ( t ) (cid:105) ∼ ( (cid:96) ⊥ ( t ) ) 3 / (cid:96) p ∼ t 3 / 4 , ( 34 ) because the typical and dominant mode contributing to the motion at time t is of wavelength (cid:96) ⊥ ( t ) . The dynamics of longitudinal motion can be calculated similarly . Here , however , we must account for the fact that the mean - square longitudinal ﬂuctuations (cid:104) δ(cid:96) 2 ( t ) (cid:105) of a long ﬁlament involve the sum ( in quadrature ) of in - dependently ﬂuctuating segments along a full ﬁlament of length (cid:96) . The typical size of such independently ﬂuc - tuating segments at time t is (cid:96) ⊥ ( t ) , of which there are (cid:96) / (cid:96) ⊥ ( t ) . As shown above , the mean - square amplitude of longitudinal ﬂuctuations of a fully relaxed segment of length (cid:96) ⊥ ( t ) is of order (cid:96) ⊥ ( t ) 4 / (cid:96) 2 p . Thus , the longitudinal motion is given by ( Granek 1997 ; Gittes 1998 ) (cid:104) δ(cid:96) ( t ) 2 (cid:105) ∼ (cid:96) (cid:96) ⊥ ( t ) × (cid:96) ⊥ ( t ) 4 (cid:96) 2 p ∼ t 3 / 4 , ( 35 ) where the mean - square amplitude is smaller than for the transverse motion by a factor or order (cid:96) / (cid:96) p . Thus , for both the short - time ﬂuctuations as well as the static ﬂuctuations of a ﬁlament segment of length (cid:96) , a point on the ﬁlament explores a disk - like region with longi - tudinal motion smaller than perpendicular motion by a factor of order (cid:96) / (cid:96) p , which is assumed here to be small . This is illustrated in Fig . 6 . From the end - to - end ﬂuc - tuations in Eq . ( 35 ) , it is also possible to determine the time - or frequency - dependent compliance of such a ﬁla - ment to a longitudinal force applied at one end , using the Fluctuation - Dissipation Theorem . The result can be ex - pressed in terms of a ( complex ) spring constant K eﬀ ( ω ) : K eﬀ ( ω ) = κ(cid:96) p ( − 2 iζ / κ ) 3 / 4 ω 3 / 4 . ( 36 ) This is valid in the limit of high frequency and high molecular weight . As discussed in Sec . III , additional relaxations are expected for ﬁnite length polymers . For the problem as stated above , i . e . , for an isolated ﬂuctuating ﬁlament in a quiescent solvent , there is a po - tential problem with the analysis above , which includes only the eﬀect of drag for motion perpendicular to the ﬁlament ( Everaers 1999 ) . In fact , there is a ﬁnite propa - gation of tension along a semiﬂexible ﬁlament , expressed by yet another length ( Morse 1998b ) (cid:96) (cid:107) ( t ) ∼ (cid:113) (cid:96) ⊥ ( t ) (cid:96) p ∼ t 1 / 8 . ( 37 ) This represents , for instance , the range along the ﬁla - ment over which the tension has spread from a point of disturbance . At very short times , it is possible to observe a t 7 / 8 motion of ends of a freely ﬂuctuating ﬁlament in a quiescent solvent , rather than the t 3 / 4 in Eq . ( 35 ) ( Ever - aers 1999 ) . For the high - frequency rheology of semiﬂexi - ble polymer networks , however , only a dynamical regime corresponding to Eq . ( 35 ) is observed ( Gittes 1997 ; Koen - derink 2006 ) and expected ( Morse 1998a ; Gittes 1998 ) . This will be examined in greater detail in Sec . III . There are two important extensions to the dynamic analysis above . First , when a ﬁlament is subject to ten - sion τ , the equation of motion in Eq . ( 29 ) must be mod - iﬁed to include τ ∂ 2 ∂x 2 u ( x , t ) . Then , the relaxation rate in Eq . ( 32 ) becomes ω ( q ) = 1 ζ (cid:0) κq 4 + τq 2 (cid:1) . ( 38 ) 12 As noted above , tension becomes dominant for wave - lengths longer than (cid:96) t ∼ (cid:112) κ / τ . Here , the relaxation rate reduces to τq 2 / ζ This has important consequences , e . g . , for the end - to - end ﬂuctuations ( R . Granek , 1997 ) : (cid:104) δ(cid:96) ( t ) 2 (cid:105) ∼ t 1 / 2 . ( 39 ) Tension also leads to a corresponding G ( ω ) ∼ ω 1 / 2 regime in the rheology of networks ( Mizuno et al . , 2007 ) . The analysis based on Eq . ( 38 ) fails for large applied ten - sions . As the linearized theory above appears to be suﬃ - cient for many purposes , including a quantitative under - standing of network and solution rheology , this is what we have focused on here . It is interesting to note , however , that there are rich nonlinear aspects of the full dynam - ics . These have been addressed in part by scaling anal - yses ( Seifert et al . , 1996 ) and more rigorous multi - scale perturbative approaches ( Hallatschek et al . , 2007a , b ) . The second important extension of the analysis above is required for quantitative dynamics of ﬁnite length ﬁl - aments , such as any practical situation of isolated or di - lute chains freely ﬂuctuating in a solvent . The important thing to note here is that , while the mode decomposi - tion and amplitudes in Eqs . ( 8 and 11 ) are valid when considering static ﬂuctuations , they do not correspond to proper normal modes , i . e . , modes that exhibit single - exponential relaxation , as in Eq . ( 33 ) . Put diﬀerently , the simple Fourier modes mix in their dynamics . For a discussion of the proper analysis of this situation , we point the interested reader to excellent discussions and derivations in Ref . ( Aragon and Pecora , 1985 ; Wiggins et al . , 1998 ) , as well as speciﬁc discussion of the dynam - ics of isolated F - actin and microtubule ﬁlaments in Refs . ( Brangwynne et al . , 2007 ; Gittes et al . , 1993 ) . D . Wormlike bundles In many biological systems individual ﬁlaments can be crosslinked or ligated together to form hierarchical bun - dles , which in some cases combine to form networks . For instance , actin is known to form networks of thick bun - dles when polymerized in the presence of certain actin crosslinker proteins ( Claessens et al . , 2008 ; Gardel et al . , 2004a ; Hirst et al . , 2005 ; Kasza et al . , 2010 ; Lieleg et al . , 2010 ; Pelletier et al . , 2003 ; Schmoller et al . , 2009 ) , and such bundles constitute important cytoskeletal compo - nents of live cells , including ﬁlopodia , sensory hair cells and microvilli ( Bathe et al . , 2008 ; Claessens et al . , 2006 ; Fletcher and Mullins , 2010 ) . An illustrative example of a network of long , straight semiﬂexible bundles obtained by polymerizing actin in the presence of fascin crosslink - ing proteins is shown in Fig . 9 ( Lieleg et al . , 2007 ) . In this review we focus on work that addressed the mechan - ical properties of such bundles , and for more detail on the structural properties of bundles we refer the reader to ( Claessens et al . , 2008 ; Grason , 2009 ; Grason and Bru - insma , 2007 ; Kierfeld et al . , 2005 ; Shin et al . , 2009 ) . Can such bundles be described as an inextensible chain with the standard worm like chain model with some eﬀective , renormalized bending stiﬀness ? We may al - ready suspect various problems . For instance , the WLC model would not account for internal deformation modes of the bundle , i . e twisting or relative sliding ( shear ) of the constituent ﬁlaments in the bundle . To address this , a new theory was proposed termed the worm - like bun - dle ( WLB ) model ( Bathe et al . , 2008 ; Heussinger et al . , 2007a , 2010 ) , which explicitly accounts for the discrete character of the internal architecture of the bundle , and its internal deformation modes . The WLB model describes a bundle of length (cid:96) as a collection of N ﬁlaments oriented in parallel , which are connected by crosslinks with a stiﬀness k x and spacing δ ( see Figs . 10 and 11 ) . The individual ﬁbers run the full length of the bundle , have a bending rigidity κ , and a stiﬀness k s on the scale of the crosslinking distance δ . An important dimensionless parameter in this model FIG . 9 a ) Fluorescence microscopy image of a bundled F - actin network ( 0 . 1 mg / ml actin ) crosslinked by fascin proteins ( scale bar is 10 micron ) . ( b ) From transmission electron mi - crographs ( inset , scale bar is 0 . 2 micron ) a scaling relation for the average bundle diameter D is obtained . Image and data adapted from ( Lieleg et al . , 2007 ) . 13 is ( Bathe et al . , 2008 ; Heussinger et al . , 2007a , 2010 ) α = k x (cid:96) 2 k s δ 2 , ( 40 ) which is a measure of the competition between crosslink shearing and ﬁlament stretching . The continuum limit of this model is obtained by taking N → ∞ at ﬁxed bundle diameter , at which the WLB model describes a Timoshenko beam . Importantly , it was found that the bundle can not be described by a single bending rigidity . Instead , the bending stiﬀness is state - dependent and , in particular , depends on the wavenumber q n of a bending mode of the bundle ( Heussinger et al . , 2007a ) κ n = Nκ (cid:34) 1 + (cid:18) 12ˆ κ N − 1 + ( q n λ ) 2 (cid:19) − 1 (cid:35) , ( 41 ) with a dimensionless bending stiﬀness ˆ κ = κ / k s δb 2 and length scale λ = ( (cid:96) / √ α ) (cid:112) M ˆ κ / ( M − 1 / 2 ) , where b is the inter ﬁlament distance and M = √ N / 2 . Note , however , that λ itself does not depend on bundle length (cid:96) . For a ﬁxed wavenumber q n ∼ n / (cid:96) , three elastic regimes can be identiﬁed : 1 ) If the shear stiﬀness of the bundle is large , α (cid:29) N , the system is in the “tightly coupled” limit and the ﬁbers do not slide ( shear ) relative to each other to accommodate bundle bending , and κ n ∼ N 2 k s . 2 ) If the shear stiﬀness is small , α (cid:28) 1 , the system is “decoupled” and the ﬁbers contribute to bundle bending independently , and κ n ∼ Nκ . 3 ) For intermediate shear stiﬀness , 1 (cid:28) α < < N , the bundles’ bending stiﬀness is dominated by internal shearing , and thus has a strong wavelength dependence , κ n ∼ Nk x q − 2 n . The various regimes for the dependence of the bun - dles bending rigidity on N have been observed for single F - actin bundles formed with variety of actin binding pro - teins ( Claessens et al . , 2006 ) . This was done by inferring the scaling dependence of the bundles persistence length , (cid:96) p , on N . For actin bundles crosslinked by plastin , evi - dence of a decoupled regime was found ( (cid:96) p ∼ N ) , while for actin crosslinked with fascin and α - actinin , the results were consistent with tightly - coupled behavior ( (cid:96) p ∼ N 2 ) for lower values of N , which then crossed over to de - coupled behavior for larger values of N . By contrast , actin bundles formed by the depletion agent PEG ex - hibited tightly - coupled behavior for a broad range of N . Thus , the molecular details of the crosslinker can have an important impact on the mechanical ( and dynami - cal ) behavior of bundles . Clearly , this will impact the mechanics of a bundle network on the macroscopic level . Indeed , various studies have found evidence for decoupled or coupled regimes in the macroscopic rheology of bun - dle networks ( Lieleg et al . , 2007 ) . Moreover , evidence for such behavior has also been found for networks of ﬁbrinogen , which forms complex , hierarchical ﬁbers con - sisting of many protoﬁbrils . The resulting ﬁbers can be modeled as bundles , although the protoﬁbrils are less dis - tinct than , e . g . , actin in bundles . Interestingly , ﬁbrin networks have also shown evidence of a nonlinear ther - mal compliance that goes beyond the mechanical models above ( Piechocka et al . , 2010 ) . It has also been argued that the WLB model is a more appropriate description than the WLC model for microtubules , owing to their anisotropic molecular ar - chitecture ( Taute et al . , 2008 ) : as shown in Fig . 4 , mi - crotubules are cylindrical and tubular in shape , but the axial binding of tubulin proteins into protoﬁlaments is stronger than the lateral binding of these ﬁlaments . In - terestingly , it has been reported that microtubules have a length - or wavelength - dependent stiﬀness ( Pampaloni et al . , 2006 ; Taute et al . , 2008 ) , and the elastic anisotropy of their structure has been implicated as the cause of this ( Heussinger et al . , 2010 ) . However , it was also noted that the degree of anisotropic elasticity required to account for the reported length dependence is ex - tremely large , and much larger than recent detailed sim - ulations found ( Sept and MacKintosh , 2010 ) . Moreover , AFM experiments probing the response of microtubules to radial forces have not shown evidence for signiﬁcant anisotropy ( de Pablo et al . , 2003 ) . Thus , this remains and interesting and unresolved puzzle ( Liu et al . , 2012 ) . The remarkable wavelength dependence of the bundles bending rigidity has a number of important implications . The entropic stiﬀness of a bundle in the parameter range λ √ N (cid:29) (cid:96) (cid:29) λ is given by ( Heussinger et al . , 2007a ) k entr ∼ ( Nκ ) 2 (cid:96)λ 3 k B T ( 42 ) Importantly , the strong 1 / (cid:96) 4 dependence of length in the WLC model ( see Eq . ( 18 ) ) , is replaced here by 1 / (cid:96)λ 3 with implications for the modulus of a network and its scaling with concentration ( Heussinger et al . , 2007a ) . Under a compressive force , the bundle buckles ( see Sec . II . B . 2 ) at a force threshold f c ∼ κ n / (cid:96) 2 ( with n = 1 ) . However , in the intermediate regime , where internal shear dominates , κ n ∼ (cid:96) 2 , and thus the strong length - dependence of the buckling force threshold drops out f c ∼ Nκ / λ 2 . It has been argued that this mechanism may stabilize biopoly - mer assemblies under compression , with possible impli - cations for microtubules , and actin bundles in growing ﬁlliopodia ( Bathe et al . , 2008 ; Heussinger et al . , 2007a ) . III . ENTANGLED SOLUTIONS OF SEMIFLEXIBLE POLYMERS A . Rheology of entangled networks Given the rigidity of semiﬂexible polymers at scales shorter than their contour length , it is not surprising that in solutions they interact with each other in very diﬀerent ways than ﬂexible polymers would , e . g . , at the same concentration . In addition to the important char - acteristic lengths of the molecular dimension ( say , the ﬁl - ament diameter 2 a ) , the material parameter (cid:96) p , and the contour length of the chains , there is another important 14 ↵ ⌧ 1 ↵   N k x b FIG . 10 Semiﬂexible ﬁlaments ( black ) are coupled to nearest - neighbor ﬁlaments by crosslinks ( green ) with axial spacing , δ , and stiﬀness , k x . The inter - ﬁlament spacing , b , is ﬁxed by the length of the intervening ABPs and remains constant in tightly crosslinked bundles . The ratio α ( See Eq . ( 40 ) ) , rep - resents the competition between crosslink shearing and ﬁla - ment extension or compression during bundle bending . This ratio determines the degree of coupling in the bundle . Image adapted from ( Claessens et al . , 2006 ) . FIG . 11 Schematic illustrating the wormlike bundle model . Bundles consist of regular arrangements of ﬁlaments held to - gether by equally spaced crosslinking proteins . The bundle can bends and twists in space , which can result in internal ﬁl - ament sliding / shear . Image adapted from ( Heussinger et al . , 2010 ) . new length scale in a solution , the mesh size , or typical spacing between polymers in solution , ξ . A simple esti - mate ( Schmidt et al . , 1989 ) shows how ξ depends on the molecular size a and the polymer volume fraction φ . In the limit that the persistence length (cid:96) p is large compared with ξ , we can approximate the solution on the scale of the mesh as one of rigid rods . Hence , within a cubical volume of size ξ , there is of order one polymer segment of length ξ and cross - section a 2 , which corresponds to a volume fraction φ of order ( a 2 ξ ) / ξ 3 . Thus , ξ ∼ a / (cid:112) φ . ( 43 ) While the mesh size characterizes the typical spacing between polymers within a solution , it does not entirely determine the way in which they interact sterically with each other . For instance , for a random static arrange - ment of rigid rods , it is not hard to see that polymers will not touch each other on average except on a much larger length : imagine threading a random conﬁguration of rods at small volume fraction with a thin needle . An estimate of the distance between typical interactions ( en - tanglements ) of semiﬂexible polymers must account for their thermal ﬂuctuations ( Odijk , 1983 ) . As we have seen above , the transverse range of ﬂuctuations δu a distance (cid:96) away from a ﬁxed point grows according to δu 2 ∼ (cid:96) 3 / (cid:96) p . Along this length , such a ﬂuctuating ﬁlament explores a narrow cone - like volume of order (cid:96)δu 2 . An entangle - ment that leads to a constraint of the ﬂuctuations of such a ﬁlament occurs when , with probability of order unity , another ﬁlament crosses through this volume , in which case it will occupy a volume of order a 2 δu , since δu (cid:28) (cid:96) . Thus , the volume fraction and the contour length (cid:96) be - tween constraints is of order φ ∼ a 2 / ( (cid:96)δu ) . Taking the corresponding length as an entanglement length (cid:96) e ∼ ( a 4 (cid:96) p ) 1 / 5 φ − 2 / 5 , ( 44 ) which is larger than the mesh size ξ in the semiﬂexible limit (cid:96) p (cid:29) ξ . These transverse entanglements , separated by a typi - cal length (cid:96) e , govern the elastic response of solutions , in a way ﬁrst outlined by ( Isambert and Maggs , 1996 ) . A more complete discussion of the rheology of such solu - tions can be found in ( Morse , 1998b , c ) , along with ex - perimental evidence in ( Hinner et al . , 1998 ) . The ba - sic result for the rubber - like plateau shear modulus G 0 for such solutions can be obtained by noting that the number density of entropic constraints ( entanglements ) is n ∼ 1 / ( ξ 2 (cid:96) e ) , where ρ ∼ 1 / ξ 2 is the concentration in total chain length per volume . In the absence of other en - ergetic contributions to the modulus , the reduction in en - tropy associated with these constraints results in a shear modulus proportional to k B T per entanglement : G ∼ k B T ξ 2 (cid:96) e ∼ φ 7 / 5 . ( 45 ) This is analogous to the case of ﬂexible polymers , where G ∼ k B T / ξ 3 . It is also interesting to note that the semi - ﬂexible result in Eq . ( 45 ) is strictly smaller than the cor - responding ﬂexible polymer result for the same mesh size , since stiﬀ polymers are fundamentally less entangled than ﬂexible polymers , and (cid:96) e > ξ . The modulus in Eq . ( 45 ) has been well - established in experiments , such as those of ( Hinner et al . , 1998 ) . With increasing frequency , or for short times , the macroscopic shear response of solutions is expected to 15 show the underlying dynamics of individual ﬁlaments . One of the main signatures of the frequency response of polymer solutions in general is an increase in the shear modulus with increasing frequency . In practice , for high molecular weight F - actin solutions of approximately 1 mg / ml , this is seen for frequencies above a few Hertz . Initial experiments measuring this response by imaging the dynamics of small probe particles have shown that the shear modulus increases as G ( ω ) ∼ ω 3 / 4 ( Gittes et al . , 1997 ; Schnurr et al . , 1997 ) , which has since been conﬁrmed in other experiments and by other techniques ( Deng et al . , 2006 ; Gardel et al . , 2004b ; Gisler and Weitz , 1999 ; Hoﬀman et al . , 2006 ; Koenderink et al . , 2006 ) . This behavior can be understood in terms of the dynamic longitudinal ﬂuctuations of single ﬁlaments , as shown above ( Gittes and MacKintosh , 1998 ; Morse , 1998a ) . Much as the static longitudinal ﬂuctuations (cid:104) δ(cid:96) 2 (cid:105) ∼ (cid:96) 4 / (cid:96) 2 p correspond to an eﬀective longitudinal spring constant ∼ k B T(cid:96) 2 p / (cid:96) 4 , the time - dependent longitu - dinal ﬂuctuations shown above in Eq . ( 35 ) correspond to a time - or frequency - dependent compliance or stiﬀness , in which the eﬀective spring constant increases with increas - ing frequency , as shown in Eq . ( 36 ) . This is because , on shorter time scales , fewer bending modes can relax , which makes the ﬁlament less compliant and stiﬀer . Account - ing for the random orientations of ﬁlaments in solution results in a frequency - dependent shear modulus G ( ω ) = 1 15 ρκ(cid:96) p ( − 2 iζ / κ ) 3 / 4 ω 3 / 4 − iωη , ( 46 ) where ρ is the polymer concentration measured in length per unit volume . As shown in Fig . 12 , this frequency dependence of the shear modulus has been quantitatively conﬁrmed in measurements on in vitro actin networks ( Koenderink et al . , 2006 ) , and has also been reported for the high - frequency response of living cells ( Deng et al . , 2006 ; Hoﬀman et al . , 2006 ) . Moreover , the experiments of Koenderink et al . , also showed evi - dence of an additional relaxation predicted by Pasquali et al . ( Pasquali et al . , 2001 ) . These authors identiﬁed a macroscopic relaxation associated with tension prop - agation along the polymer chains , which was predicted to occur at frequencies intermediate between the high - frequency ω 3 / 4 regime and an entangled plateau in the rheology . The experiments in in the inset of Fig . 12 are consistent with the predicted relaxation , and are also consistent with the fact that the relaxation mechanism is predicted to be absent in cross - linked networks . B . Glassy wormlike chain model Microrheology experiments on live cells have provided evidence that cells may behave as soft glassy materials— existing close to a glass transition ( Deng et al . , 2006 ; Fabry et al . , 2001 ) . The rheology of cells was found to exhibit weak power law behavior G ∼ ω 0 . 17 over ﬁve decades in frequency . This weak frequency dependence a ) b ) FIG . 12 ( a ) Storage modulus G (cid:48) ( ω ) and b ) loss modu - lus G (cid:48)(cid:48) ( ω ) of 1mg / ml solutions of F - actin ﬁlaments with ( triangles ) and without ( squares ) crosslinks plotted against frequency . The solid lines indicate theoretical predic - tions from Eq . ( 46 ) Inset : scaled loss modulus G (cid:48)(cid:48) s ( ω ) = − [ G (cid:48)(cid:48) ( ω ) + iωη ] / ( c a ω 3 / 4 ) . From ( Koenderink et al . , 2006 ) . can not be understood within existing theories for semi - ﬂexible polymer networks or solutions , and indeed ap - pears to be reminiscent to the glassy rheology of other soft matter systems . This suggest that the cytoskeleton and its polymer constituents , which are thought to pro - vide the dominant contribution to the rheological mea - sured by Fabry et al . , may be surrounded by a “glassy” environment . However , the aﬀect of such a glassy envi - ronment of the dynamic rheology of a semiﬂexible poly - mer network remains poorly understood . Kroy and Glaser addressed this issue by considering the aﬀect of a glassy environment on the dynamics of a semiﬂexible polymer ( Kroy , 2008 ; Kroy and Glaser , 2007 ) . Their approach starts from the relaxation spec - trum of a polymer under tension using the ordinary worm like chain model . From Eq . ( 38 ) , one obtains a relaxation 16 FIG . 13 Schematic to illustrate the Glassy worm - like chain model . The ( red ) test polymer can be trapped through ef - fective interactions with the surrounding polymer solution . These interaction are indicated by the potential wells at sticky entanglement points , which are on average separated by the entanglement length (cid:96) e . The test polymer can bind or unbind by overcoming an energy barrier of height (cid:15) . The average dis - tance length between the “closed” bonds is represented by Λ . Image from ( Wolﬀ et al . , 2010 ) . time for the n - th mode of wavevector q n = nπ / (cid:96) give by t n = 1 ω ( q n ) = ζ(cid:96) 4 κπ 4 1 n 4 + n 2 τ / τ (cid:96) ( 47 ) where τ (cid:96) = κπ 2 / (cid:96) 2 and τ is the backbone tension . This spectrum describes the relaxation time of the n - th mode of the transverse ﬂuctuations ( see Sec . II . C ) for a ﬁlament under tension . From the equilibrium mode amplitudes and the relax - ation spectrum one can calculate various quantities of interest , such as the dynamic structure factor and the rheological response . The question , asked by Kroy and Glaser , was how a glassy environment might aﬀect the dynamics of the wormlike chain . Such a glassy envi - ronment may be thought of as a collection of traps dis - tributed in space , with a broad power law distribution in strength ( set by the height of a free energy barrier ) , lo - cally pinning the polymer—along the lines of the trap models underlying soft glassy rheology ( Sollich et al . , 1997 ) The trapping interactions will impact the relaxation timescales of the transverse ﬂuctuations , and longer wavelength modes are expected to be slowed down more substantially , since there will be more trapping interac - tions ( see Fig . 13 ) . To obtain a description of the glassy worm like chain ( GWLC ) , the relaxation spectrum of the ordinary WLC is “stretched” as follows ˜ t n = t n exp ( N n (cid:15) ) ( 48 ) for wavelengths longer than λ n = 2 π / q n > Λ . Here , N n = λ n / Λ − 1 represents the number of trapping inter - actions per wavelength λ n of a given mode . The so - called stretching parameter (cid:15) controls how modes get slowed down by the trapping interaction through an Arrhenius factor ; (cid:15) may be thought of as the characteristic height of the free energy barriers associated to the traps in units of k B T , while Λ represent the typical distance between traps . In principle , one expects that the rough energy landscape of a glassy environment might also aﬀect the mode amplitudes , but this presents a very daunting cal - culation , and has so far remained elusive . However , it was argued that the slowing down of the relaxation times could capture the most relevant aspects of the glassy wormlike chain . Thus , it was assumed that the mode amplitudes of the ordinary WLC , but with a stretched relaxation spectrum . The predictions of the GWLC model include logarith - mic tails in the long - time behavior of the dynamic struc - ture factor , which can account for experiments on F - actin solutions ( Semmrich et al . , 2007 ) . In addition , within an aﬃne framework the rheology of a collection of GWLC’s can be calculated , also in the presence of a prestress on the network ( Kroy and Glaser , 2007 ) . The role of pre - stress was included in the model by its aﬀect on the pa - rameter (cid:15) , since the free energy landscape gets tilted by the presence of a force directed along the reaction co - ordinate . It is interesting to contrast the GWLC pre - dictions for the dynamic rheology with that predicted for a crosslinked network , which exhibits a frequency - independent plateau at low frequencies . The GWLC still allows relaxation beyond the interaction length Λ , in con - trast to a permanently crosslinked network for which the transverse ﬁlament ﬂuctuations can not relax for modes with wavelengths beyond the crosslinking scale (cid:96) c . Thus , in the GWLC model , the “plateau” regime is no longer ﬂat but appears to increase with frequency as a weak power law , consistent with experiments on live cells ( Deng et al . , 2006 ; Fabry et al . , 2001 ) . In the GWLC model , the exponent of this power law depends on the level of prestress and the interaction strength (cid:15) , which is a phenomenological parameter that is hard to predict from ﬁrst principles . Nonetheless , various predictions of the glassy wormlike chain agree favorably with the rhe - ology of actin solutions , as well as live cells , and this was taken as evidence that these systems operate near a glass transition ( Semmrich et al . , 2007 ) . C . Transient linkers and cross - link governed dynamics One essential feature of many physiological biopoly - mer networks is the intrinsically dynamic nature of their cross - links . For instance , many actin - binding crosslink - ing proteins only form transient bonds between ﬁlaments . Such systems represent a distinct class of polymeric ma - terials whose long - time dynamics are not governed by vis - cosity or reptation ( Doi and Edwards , 1988 ) , but rather by the transient nature of their cross - links ( Broedersz et al . , 2010a ; Heussinger , 2011 ; Lieleg et al . , 2008 , 2011 , 2009 ; Strehle et al . , 2011 ; Ward et al . , 2008 ; Yao et al . , 2011 , 2013 ) . This can give rise to a complex mechanical 17 b ) a ) c ) FIG . 14 a ) For times shorter than the unbinding time τ oﬀ , only small scale bend ﬂuctuations between the eﬀectively per - manent cross - inks can relax , resulting in a plateau in G 0 for frequencies > 1 / τ oﬀ . b ) For longer times , large scale con - formational relaxation can occur via linker unbinding ( open circle ) and subsequent rebinding at a new location . c ) Mea - sured linear rheology of a 23 . 8 µ M actin network cross - linked with various concentrations of α - actinin - 4 . The low - frequency behavior is consistent with G ∼ ω 1 / 2 . The solid and dashed lines are global ﬁts using the mean - ﬁeld CGD model for the low - frequency regime together with the known high frequency response . Image adapted from ( Broedersz et al . , 2010a ) . response , particularly at long times , where the network is expected to ﬂow . In the next section we will discuss per - manently crosslinked networks in detail . Here , we brieﬂy discuss some recent work on transient networks , which forms a natural segue between solutions and crosslinked networks . The simplest possible description of a material that is elastic on short time scales while ﬂowing on long time scales is that of a Maxwell ﬂuid ; this exhibits a sin - gle relaxation time . Indeed , some experiments on tran - sient networks have been modeled with a single relax - ation time ( Lieleg et al . , 2008 , 2009 ) ; however , those experiments and others ( Broedersz et al . , 2010a ; Ward et al . , 2008 ; Yao et al . , 2011 , 2013 ) —probing longer rela - tive time scales compared to the linker unbinding time— show amore complex low - frequency viscoelastic behavior , indicative of multiple relaxation times . To address these experimental observations , a micro - scopic model was developed for long - time network relax - ation that is controlled by cross - link dynamics ( Broed - ersz et al . , 2010a ) . This cross - link - governed dynamics ( CGD ) model describes the structural relaxation that results from many independent unbinding and rebind - ing events ( FIg . 14 ) , leading to very slow relaxation of stress . Using a combination of Monte Carlo simulations and an analytic approach , it was shown that this type of cross - link dynamics yields power - law rheology G ∼ ω 1 / 2 ( 49 ) at frequencies below the crosslink unbinding rate , aris - ing from a broad spectrum of relaxation rates . An im - portant diﬀerence with the GWLC model for entangled solutions described in the previous section , is that in the CGD model the relaxation spectrum of the bend - ing modes is derived from the microscopic unbinding of individual crosslinks at a constant rate 1 / τ oﬀ , and the exponent of the power law rheology is ﬁxed at a value of 1 / 2 . The predictions from the CGD model are in quanti - tative agreement with experiments on F - actin networks using the transient linker protein α - actinin - 4 ( Broedersz et al . , 2010a ; Yao et al . , 2011 , 2013 ) , as shown in Fig . 14c . The CGD model can be qualitatively understood in simple physical terms , as follows . Each ﬁlament is as - sumed to be cross - linked into the network , with an av - erage spacing (cid:96) c . Only ﬁlament bending modes between cross - links can relax ( Fig . 14a ) , and the thermalization of these results in an entropic , spring - like response ( e . g . , that of Eq . ( 18 ) ) . To account for transient crosslinking , the linkers may unbind at a rate 1 / τ oﬀ . This initiates the relaxation of long - wavelength ( λ > (cid:96) c ) modes ( Fig . 14b ) , giving rise to a reduced macroscopic modulus . However , the relaxation of successively longer wavelength modes becomes slower , as an increasing number of unbinding events are needed for such a relaxation . Interestingly , this suppression of longer wavelength relaxation cannot be accounted for , even phenomenologically , by an eﬀec - tively larger viscosity for polymer motion . This would lead to a terminal relaxation and viscous - like response . Rather , this simple physical picture of multiple , unco - ordinated unbinding events suggests a broad spectrum of relaxation times for the diﬀerent mode wavelengths λ > ∼ (cid:96) c , leading to a power - law rheology . Speciﬁcally , this model predicts the scaling in Eq . ( 49 ) below the charac - teristic frequency 1 / τ oﬀ . This model does not account for the steric entangle - ments of the surrounding chains that can hinder the re - laxation of bending modes . These constraints will be - gin to aﬀect the relaxation of modes with wavelength λ > ∼ (cid:96) e . Thus , the ω 1 / 2 regime above can be expected for networks with (cid:96) c substantially smaller than (cid:96) e , and this power - law regime is expected to give way to a solution - like plateau in Eq . ( 45 ) , albeit at much lower frequen - cies due to the transient binding . Finally , at the lowest frequencies , a dramatically slowed - down reptation , and correspondingly enhanced viscous behavior is expected . The unbinding kinetics of the transient crosslinks may also depend on the level of an imposed macro - 18 scopic stress . One possibility is that stress leads to forced unbinding ( Kasza et al . , 2010 ; Lieleg and Bausch , 2007 ) , which has been studied within the GWLC framework ( Wolﬀ and Kroy , 010b ) . Interest - ingly , various experiments with actin and myosins ( Lieleg et al . , 2009 ; Norstrom and Gardel , 2011 ) or α - actinin - 4 crosslinks ( Yao et al . , 2013 ) appear to show a counter in - tuitive response to stress ; macroscopical rheological ex - periments indicate that the upper bound of the cross - link governed dynamical regime shifts to lower frequen - cies with increasing stress , suggesting that the unbind - ing rate slows down with increasing stress . Such behav - ior may be caused by a “catch - bond” mechanism at the molecular level , causing an enhances gel - like range in the macroscopic rheology ( the ﬂuid like regime is shifted to lower frequency with increasing stress levels ) . Another framework to describe networks with tran - sient crosslinks was proposed in ( Heussinger , 2012 ) . This model went beyond the assumption of aﬃne deforma - tions ( See Sec . IV . A ) on the scale of a ﬁlament , and assigned an elastic stiﬀness to the transient crosslinks . Using a self - consistent eﬀective medium approach , this model treated a test - ﬁlament connected by reversible crosslinks to a “tube” , representing the surrounding net - work . When a ﬁnite strain is applied , this conﬁning tube deforms , stretching the crosslinks and bending the test ﬁlament . Thus , using this approach , it is possible to self - consistently calculate the nonlinear mechanical prop - erties of the network . When the network is deformed , crosslink unbinding processes lead to stress relaxation , resulting in a reduction of the network modulus with in - creasing strain . However , in the current model , both the crosslinks and ﬁlaments were treated as linear ele - ments , and it will be interesting to investigate how the network softening caused by linker unbinding competes with stiﬀening contributions from the ﬁlaments and cross links ( Broedersz et al . , 2008 ; DiDonna and Levine , 2006 ; Gardel et al . , 2006 ; Kasza et al . , 2010 , 2009 ; Wagner et al . , 2006 ) . IV . CROSS - LINKED NETWORKS A major challenge in this ﬁeld is to construct a formu - lation to bridge the gap between the mechanical proper - ties of an individual polymer and the collective response of a network of such polymers . Here , among other things , the disordered nature of these networks complicates such a description because it can lead to nonuniform defor - mations , which may depend sensitively on the local de - tails of network inhomogeneities . In some cases , such nonuniform strain ﬁelds can have a major qualitative impact on the network’s elastic response . Nonetheless , we shall start by ignoring these spatial strain ﬂuctua - tions . This constitutes the central assumption of the aﬃne model ( MacKintosh et al . , 1995 ; Morse , 1998b ; Storm et al . , 2005 ) . This is inspired , in large part , by the success of such an approach in ﬂexible polymer sys - tems ( Doi and Edwards , 1988 ; Rubinstein and Colby , 2003 ) . Then , after discussing various experimental stud - ies of reconstituted biopolymer gels that have made direct comparisons with the aﬃne model , we will resume with theoretical approaches that have gone beyond the aﬃne assumption . In the following , we treat the crosslinks as freely hing - ing but otherwise noncompliant . Thus , we shall not cover various interesting aspects of physiological crosslinking proteins that are themselves compliant , or that tend to impose speciﬁc bond angles . Recent reviews cover - ing these topics can be found in ( Fletcher and Mullins , 2010 ; Lieleg et al . , 2010 ) . Moreover , we focus here on isotropic networks . We point the interested reader to several recent studies addressing phase behavior and pos - sible anisotropic networks in ( Benetatos and Zippelius , 2007 ; Borukhov et al . , 2005 ; Cyron et al . , 2013 ; Zilman and Safran , 2003 ) . A . Aﬃne model The aﬃne model assumes that all crosslinks in the net - work deform according to the externally imposed ( uni - form ) strain , γ . A polymer strand of length (cid:96) be - tween two such crosslinks will deform through stretch - ing or compressing by an amount that scales with its length and depends on both its orientation and the macroscopic strain γ . In the limit of small γ , this extension / compression is simply proportional to strain , δ(cid:96) ∼ (cid:96)γ , with a simple trigonometric prefactor related to the polymer orientation relative to the shear direc - tion ( MacKintosh et al . , 1995 ; Morse , 1998a ) . Thus , this aﬃne assumption completely speciﬁes how each polymer strand in the network deforms , making the calculation of all the stresses in the system straightforward . The stress tensor is found by adding contributions from poly - mer strands over all orientations . These aspects form the essence of aﬃne models of both the semiﬂexible networks reviewed here , as well as much earlier approaches to rub - ber elasticity ( Doi and Edwards , 1988 ; James and Guth , 1943 ; Rubinstein and Colby , 2003 ; Wall and Flory , 1951 ) that have been the inspiration for much of what follows in this section . We begin with the approach by ( Storm et al . , 2005 ) , which extends the small - strain approach of Refs . ( MacK - intosh et al . , 1995 ; Morse , 1998a ) to larger strains . Here , we consider a semiﬂexible polymer strand with an ori - entation ˆ n in the initially undeformed network . The de - formation of such a strand is described by the uniform Cauchy deformation tensor Λ ij . For example , for a sim - ple shear of the xy - plane in the x - direction we have Λ =   1 0 γ 0 1 0 0 0 1   . ( 50 ) The total polymer length per unit volume in the unde - formed network , ρ , is not conserved under this deforma - 19 tion . While the volume is conserved , the total length of polymer will increase when the network is deformed . To calculate all components of the stress tensor , we need to decompose the various contributions to the stress . It is helpful to recall that the stress is a rank - 2 tensor be - cause it contains both information about the direction of the forces in a given plane , as well as the orientation of this plane . The length density of strands per unit volume crossing a plane oriented perpendicular to the j - direction transforms as ρ detΛ Λ jk n k , where the determinant , detΛ , accounts for the volume change associated with the de - formation . For a simple shear , as considered here , the volume is conserved , and thus , detΛ = 1 . The tension in a strand between the two aﬃnely deforming crosslinks is denoted as τ ( | Λˆ n | − 1 ) , where | Λˆ n | − 1 represents the axial strain of the polymer . The i - component of this ten - sion is given by τ ( | Λˆ n | − 1 ) Λ il n l / | Λˆ n | . Adding all these contributions , weighed by the amount of polymer length crossing the j - plane , results in the ij - component of the symmetric stress tensor ( Morse , 1999 ; Storm et al . , 2005 ) , σ ij = ρ detΛ (cid:28) τ ( | Λˆ n | − 1 ) Λ il n l Λ jk n k | Λˆ n | (cid:29) , ( 51 ) where summation of repeated indices is implied . The angular brackets indicate an average over the distribution of chain orientations in the initial , undeformed network . For a small shear deformation γ (cid:28) 1 , the stress simpliﬁes to ( Gittes and MacKintosh , 1998 ; Morse , 1998b ) σ ij = ρ (cid:104) τ ( γn x n z ) ˆ n i ˆ n j (cid:105) + O ( γ 3 ) , ( 52 ) where γn x n z represents the axial strain of a polymer with orientation ˆ n due to the strain tensor in Eq . ( 50 ) . 1 . Aﬃnely deforming semiﬂexible polymer networks So far we have not speciﬁed the force - extension be - havior of the network’s polymer constituents , which is implied by the τ ( γn x n z ) term in Eq . ( 52 ) . Here , we con - sider the case of a semiﬂexible polymer networks . To model an inextensible , semiﬂexible polymer of length (cid:96) c between two point - like , freely - hinging cross - links in the network , we can use the WLC model ( Kratky and Porod , 1949 ; Marko and Siggia , 1995 ) in the semiﬂexible limit (cid:96) p > ∼ (cid:96) c ( MacKintosh et al . , 1995 ) , which was discussed in Sec . II . B . Taking the linearized force - extension relation for a semiﬂexible polymer in Eq . ( 18 ) , the tension above in the small strain limit becomes τ ( γn x n z ) = 90 κ(cid:96) p (cid:96) 3 c γn x n z ( 53 ) and the shear stress becomes σ xz = ρ 90 κ(cid:96) p (cid:96) 3 c γ (cid:104) n x n z n x n z (cid:105) . ( 54 ) For an assumed isotropic distribution of orientations ˆ n , we obtain the linear shear modulus of a semiﬂexible poly - mer network , G 0 = 6 ρ κ 2 k B T(cid:96) 3 c . ( 55 ) Thus , the network stiﬀness depends sensitively on the crosslinking density . Using the small strain approximation , γ (cid:28) 1 , for the stress tensor ( Eq . ( 52 ) ) , we can also cast the nonlin - ear network response in a universal form ( Gardel et al . , 2004a ) ˜ σ ij = (cid:104) φ ( ˜ γn x n z ) ˆ n i ˆ n j (cid:105) ( 56 ) where ˜ σ = σ / σ c , ˜ γ = γ / γ c , and φ was deﬁned in Eq . ( 15 ) . Here , the characteristic strain and stress for the onset of nonlinearity are deﬁned as γ c = 1 6 (cid:96) c (cid:96) p and σ c = ρ κ (cid:96) 2 c . ( 57 ) Beyond these characteristic values , the diﬀerential shear modulus , K = dσ / dγ , asymptotically approaches a scal - ing regime where K ∼ σ 3 / 2 . This can be seen by the high tension limit of the force extension relation in Eq . ( 19 ) , since σ ∼ τ and dσ dγ ∼ dτ d ( δ(cid:96) ) ∼ 1 | δ(cid:96) − ∆ (cid:96) | − 3 ∼ τ 3 / 2 . ( 58 ) This scaling form is not exact , as it does not account for the angular distribution of ﬁlaments , but this does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the asymptotic behavior ( Gardel et al . , 2004a ) . 2 . Comparison of the aﬃne model to experiments on reconstituted biopolymer networks A comparison of the functional form of the nonlinear elastic response of a range of biopolymer networks re - veales a remarkable qualitative similarity , even between intracellular and extracellular biopolymers , as shown in Fig . 15 ( Storm et al . , 2005 ) . All these systems stiﬀen un - der applied strain . These data suggested that the nonlin - ear elasticity across systems may have the same biophys - ical origins , despite large diﬀerences in architectural de - tails and mechanical properties at both the ﬁlament and network level . Indeed , it has been shown , for systems ranging from actin ( Gardel et al . , 2004a , b ; Koenderink et al . , 2006 ; Tharmann et al . , 2007 ) and intermediate ﬁlaments ( Lin et al . , 2010a , b ; Yao et al . , 2010 ) to syn - thetic stiﬀ polymers ( Kouwer et al . , 2013 ) , that aspects of both linear and nonlinear rheological response can be accounted for by simple aﬃne thermal models . In this section we discuss a few of these experimental studies . First , we would like to relate some of the quantities in - troduced in the previous section , such as the crosslinking 20 FIG . 15 a ) The shear modulus G (cid:48) = σ / γ as a function of strain for various reconstituted biopolymer networks and polyacry - lamide ( from ( Storm et al . , 2005 ) ) . b ) The diﬀerential shear modulus K = dσ / dγ as a function of applied external stress σ 0 for reconstituted actin networks croslinked by scruin ( Gardel et al . , 2004a ) . The lines indicate the theoretically predicted form of stiﬀening for small strains , as outlined in Sec . IV . A . 1 . c ) Neuroﬁlament network moduli ( K = dσ / dγ ) normalized by the linear modulus G 0 vs applied stress normalized by the characteristic stress σ c for the onset of nonlinearity ( adapted from ( Lin et al . , 2010a ) ) . These data are compared with the predicted behavior for the small - strain approximation ( solid line ) introduced in ( Gardel et al . , 2004a ) , as well as the asymptotic 3 / 2 scaling ( dashed line ) . The inset also shows a comparison with the behavior predicted in Eq . ( 60 ) for both Neuroﬁlaments and Vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments ( Lin et al . , 2010a ) . The diﬀerence between these two ﬁlament types is consistent with a diﬀerence between their persistence lengths . d ) Biomimetic polyisocyanopeptide hydrogels also show nonlinear rheology consistent with the aﬃne thermal model in Sec . IV . A . 1 ( Kouwer et al . , 2013 ) . length scale (cid:96) c , to experimental control parameters . For example , consider a reconstituted F - actin network . Two important experimental control parameters are the con - centration of monomeric actin , c , and the concentration of crosslinking protein , c × . It will also turn out to be use - ful to quantify the degree of crosslinking by the ratio of crosslinkers to polymer , which is often most conveniently expressed in terms of the molar ratio ratio R = c × / c . We will limit this discussion to the aﬃne thermal model for homogenous , isotropic networks in which the crosslinks do not lead to bundling of ﬁlaments . For such cases , we expect that varying the polymer concen - tration will not only aﬀect the polymer length density ρ ∼ c but also the crosslinking lenghtscale (cid:96) c , since the number of potential physical bonds between crosslinks increases with more polymer ( see Eqs . ( 55 ) and ( 57 ) ) . The precise dependence of the crosslinking distance (cid:96) c on parameters is subtle . The mostly likely binding sites on the polymer for eﬀective crosslinks are sites where two polymer strands interact sterically , i . e . , the entan - glement points ( Odijk , 1983 ) . Thus , we expect that crosslinking will occur on the entanglement length scale (cid:96) c ∼ (cid:96) e ∼ ( a 4 (cid:96) p ) 1 / 5 φ − 2 / 5 ( see Eq . ( 44 ) ) , where a is the polymer’s diameter , and the polymer volume frac - 21 tion φ ∼ c . However , if we ﬁx the actin concentration to hold the entanglement length constant , while varying R , we expect that (cid:96) c will also vary . It is often postulated that (cid:96) c ∼ R − x , where x is a phenomenological exponent that may depend on the type of crosslinker . Taking the scaling of (cid:96) c with the entanglement length scale and the degree of crosslinking together yields , (cid:96) c ∼ ( a 4 (cid:96) p ) 1 / 5 c − 2 / 5 R − x ( 59 ) If R is held ﬁxed , then it is expected that G 0 ∼ c 11 / 5 , which is a stronger dependence than the prediction for an entangled solution , G ∼ c 7 / 5 ( see section III ) . Various measurements of the linear shear modulus of F - actin and intermediate ﬁlament networks have been found to be consistent with the 11 / 5 scaling predicted by the aﬃne model ( Gardel et al . , 2004a , b ; Lin et al . , 2010a , b ; MacK - intosh et al . , 1995 ; Tharmann et al . , 2007 ; Yao et al . , 2010 ) . It is often found that the network response becomes nonlinear for stresses ( or strains ) beyond a characteristic or critical stress σ c ( or strain γ c ) . From Eqs . ( 55 ) and ( 57 ) , the critical stress can be expressed in terms of the linear modulus according to G 0 = 6 (cid:114) κ ρσ 3 / 2 c ∼ c − 1 / 2 ( k B T(cid:96) p ) 1 / 2 σ 3 / 2 c . ( 60 ) Note that (cid:96) c drops out of this equation , and hence , this relationship should only depend on directly measured rheological quantities and material parameters such as (cid:96) p that are usually known by independent means . The pre - dicted relationship in Eq . ( 60 ) is in good agreement with recent experiments on intermediate ﬁlaments ( Lin et al . , 2010a ) ( see Fig . IV . A . 1 ) and has also been tested in syn - thetic hydrogels ( Kouwer et al . , 2013 ) . In particular , this relation should be insensitive to the details of crosslink - ing . Moreover , from the measured rheological quantities G 0 and σ c , one can the infer microscopic quantities (cid:96) p = 1 36 ρk B T G 20 σ 3 c , ( 61 ) and (cid:96) c = 6 (cid:96) p σ c G 0 . ( 62 ) Since the persistence length is often known indepen - dently , the ﬁrst of these represents an additional test of the model . These relations have been tested recently in intermediate ﬁlament gels and in synthetic hydrogels ( Kouwer et al . , 2013 ; Lin et al . , 2010a , b ; Yao et al . , 2010 ) . Another important prediction of this model is the uni - versality of the stiﬀening response to applied stress . Scal - ing the diﬀerential shear modulus K = dσdγ by G 0 and the stress by σ c should result in a collapse of all data on a universal curve ( see Eq . ( 56 ) ) that exhibits a high stress scaling regime in which K ∼ σ 3 / 2 ( Gardel et al . , 2004a ) . Such behavior has been observed for actin , intermedi - ate ﬁlaments and for synthetic hydrogels ( Gardel et al . , 2004b ; Kouwer et al . , 2013 ; Lin et al . , 2010b ; Yao et al . , 2010 ) ( See Fig . 15 ) . However , this universal response is only valid if the polymers are truly inextensible . Real polymers will have some purely energetic / enthalpic ( as apposed to entropic ) mode of extension ( Odijk , 1995 ) , which could start playing a role at high stresses , result - ing in a departure from the universal stiﬀening curve . Evidence of this has been seen for ﬁbrin gels and interme - diate ﬁlament gels ( Lin et al . , 2010a , b ; Piechocka et al . , 2010 ; Storm et al . , 2005 ) . B . Contractility and motor - generated stiﬀening in aﬃne thermal networks Given the ubiquitous nonlinear elastic response of biopolymer networks to applied stress , it is natural to ask whether internal stresses in living systems might also couple to such nonlinearities . These internal stresses might arise , for instance , due to molecular motors that are known to induce motion and exert forces within cy - toskeletal networks in the cytoplasm of living cells . While the evidence for this in vivo remains indirect , reconsti - tuted systems in vitro with added motor activity have observed mechanical stiﬀening , qualitatively consistent with the elastic stiﬀening due to externally applied stress ( Koenderink et al . , 2009 ; Mizuno et al . , 2007 ) . Speciﬁ - cally , when myosin motor proteins are added to actin net - works , together with adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) that acts as a fuel for the activity , an approximate 100 - fold increase in the modulus was observed , both by local mi - cromechanical measurements ( Mizuno et al . , 2007 ) and by macroscopic rheological measurements ( Koenderink et al . , 2009 ) . While such a stiﬀening can also arise from an increase of mechanical crosslinking , e . g . , due to dead or inactive myosins , Mizuno et al . , were able to conﬁrm that there was a signiﬁcant increase in network tension that was coincident with the mechanical stiﬀening , con - sistent with a mechanisms due to network nonlinearity . These authors were also able to demonstrate directly the non - equilibirum nature of both reconstituted and living systems ( Mizuno et al . , 2009 , 2008 , 2007 ) . Interestingly , analogous behavior is beginning to be studied in syn - thetic systems ( Bertrand et al . , 2012 ) . These observations are consistent with mean - ﬁeld the - ories of stiﬀening due to network tension induced by motor activity ( Liverpool et al . , 2009 ; MacKintosh and Levine , 2008 ) , as well as simulations of networks of stiﬀ ﬁbers activated by motors ( Broedersz and MacKintosh , 2011 ) . Both of these approaches model the motors by force dipoles of pairs of equal and opposite forces within the network . This was done to ensure the necessary force balance within the network . Subsequent theory has be - gun to account for the nonlinear nature of the networks in determining the local response of networks to inter - nal motor forces ( Shokef and Safran , 2012 ) . Here , we shall only brieﬂy return to motor - activated systems in Sec . V . C . 1 , but we would point the interested reader to 22 recent reviews on the subject ( Brangwynne et al . , 2008 ; MacKintosh and Schmidt , 2010 ; Marchetti et al . , 2013 ) . C . Nonaﬃne approaches for disordered ﬁber networks Considering the success of the aﬃne model in describ - ing rubber elasticity ( Doi and Edwards , 1988 ) , its appli - cation to semiﬂexible polymer networks may seem rea - sonable . Indeed , in many cases , the aﬃne model for semiﬂexible polymers agrees well with in vitro experi - ments for a range of biopolymer systems , including in - tracellular actin and intermediate ﬁlament gels as well as extracellular ﬁbrin networks ( Gardel et al . , 2004a , b ; Lin et al . , 2010a , b ; MacKintosh et al . , 1995 ; Piechocka et al . , 2010 ; Storm et al . , 2005 ; Tharmann et al . , 2007 ; Yao et al . , 2010 ) . There are reasons , however , to expect the aﬃne approximation to fail . In detail , of course , even rubber or ﬂexible polymer networks are not strictly aﬃne in their response ( Basu et al . , 2011 ; Wen et al . , 2012 ) . But , in such cases , nonaﬃnity does not result in a signif - icant deviation from the aﬃne limit ( Carrillo et al . , 2013 ) . The more interesting question for semiﬂexible networks is whether nonaﬃnity leads to a qualitatively diﬀerent behavior . This can happen , for instance , if the response becomes dominated by chain / ﬁber bending , rather than stretching . Naively , aﬃne shear cannot lead to bend - ing of straight ﬁlaments . If bending dominates , one can expect , for instance , a softer network response than for purely aﬃne deformations , as well as a diﬀerent scaling of G with the concentration c ( Broedersz et al . , 2012 ; Kroy and Frey , 1996 ; Satcher Jr and Dewey Jr , 1996 ) . Recent evidence seems to point in this direction for some systems ( Lieleg et al . , 2007 ; Piechocka et al . , 2011 ; Stein et al . , 2011 ) , and the aﬃne state may even be considered to be unstable ( Heussinger and Frey , 2006b ) . This leaves us now with the question : when should we expect this model to break down and what are the signatures of a network response that is dominated by nonaﬃne defor - mations ? An important aspect of aﬃne models is that the polymer strands only deform through stretching - modes . In contrast to ﬂexible polymers , however , the force - extension behavior of a semiﬂexible polymer is highly anisotropic : semiﬂexible polymers are typically much softer to bending than to stretching . In particular , the ratio of the restoring force for a transverse displace - ment ( bending ) to that for an axial deformation ( stretch - ing ) is k ⊥ / k (cid:107) ∼ (cid:96) c / (cid:96) p . Naively , this may suggest that in semiﬂexible polymer networks , for which (cid:96) p > ∼ (cid:96) c , it may be considerably more favorable to avoid costly aﬃne stretching - modes by , instead , favoring deformation through the ( presumed ) softer bending modes . Inter - estingly , however , it turns out to be not that simple . The energy of a deformation mode is not just set by the associated elastic rigidity , but also by the amplitude of the deformation ; even though the ﬁbers themselves can be softer to bending , the bending deformations required FIG . 16 Schematic to illustrate nonaﬃne deformations in net - works ( DiDonna and Lubensky , 2005 ) . a ) Undeformed refer - ence state . b ) Sheared state with nonaﬃne displacements . Under aﬃne deformation , points on the vertical dotted lines in a ) would map to points on the slanted dotted lines . The schematic in b ) illustrates a nonaﬃnely deformed network where they do not . to accommodate the macroscopically imposed strain can still be large compared to the stretching deformations , which may render the nonaﬃne scenario energetically less favorable than the aﬃne alternative . Clearly , there is a tradeoﬀ , which may depend sensitively on the system properties . Moreover , given the connectivity of the net - work , it might simply be impossible to construct modes of deformation that avoid stretching of bonds . Thus , we seek to determine a “phase” or regime diagram of some sort for ﬁber networks , describing which deforma - tion modes dominate the macroscopic response , given certain network and ﬁber parameters . To set the stage for this , we start by discussing how the nonaﬃne defor - mation ﬁeld can be characterized and quantiﬁed . 1 . Characterizing nonaﬃnity in disordered elastic media A detailed discussion of nonaﬃne correlation functions of inhomogeneous elastic media was provided in Ref . ( Di - Donna and Lubensky , 2005 ) , and here we summarize some of their results . The most general and straightforward way of charac - terizing the nonaﬃne deformation ﬁeld ( Figs . 16 and 17 ) is by the correlation function G ij ( x , x (cid:48) ) = (cid:104) δu i ( x ) δu j ( x (cid:48) ) (cid:105) , ( 63 ) or , perhaps , the related form , G ( x ) = (cid:104) [ δ u ( x ) − δ u ( 0 ) ] 2 (cid:105) . ( 64 ) Here , δu i represents the nonaﬃne component of the dis - placement δu = u − u aﬀ in the i direction . Since δu will scale with strain , both these nonaﬃnity measures scale with γ 2 . The scaling of this function with distance may be an - ticipated from continuum elasticity theory . Considering the nonaﬃne displacement , δ u ( 0 ) , multiplied by the local modulus , as a force applied at the origin we should expect 23 FIG . 17 Simulated ﬁber network on a diluted triangular lat - tice ( see Sec . V . A ) . The gray network in the background rep - resents the aﬃnely sheared state . Segments in the simulated network are colored red for large nonaﬃne deformations and blue for deformations closer to the aﬃne state . a scaling δ u ( x ) ∼ δ u ( 0 ) | x | − ( d − 2 ) . Indeed it was shown by Didonna and Lubensky that for disordered media with spatially varying elastic properties that G scales logarith - mically with distance in 2D and inversely with distance in 3D . The 3D results makes intuitive sense as we expect the network to become more aﬃne on larger scales ( Di - Donna and Lubensky , 2005 ; Hatami - Marbini and Picu , 2008 ; Head et al . , 2003a ; Liu et al . , 2007 ) . Furthermore , Didonna and Lubensky reported that , within this contin - uum approach , the nonaﬃnity parameter is expected to be proportional to the variance of the spatial ﬂuctuations of the elastic modulus . There are numerous other nonaﬃnity parameters in the literature . However , it has been shown in ( DiDonna and Lubensky , 2005 ) that many of these nonaﬁnity pa - rameters are closely related and can be expressed in terms of the nonaﬃnity correlation function in Eq . ( 63 ) . Per - haps the simplest measure of nonaﬃnity is the variance of local nonaﬃne ﬂuctuations Γ = 1 γ 2 (cid:104) [ δ u ( x ) ) ] 2 (cid:105) ( 65 ) Note that in this measure the strain dependence is scaled out , and it thus represents an intrinsic network property , equal to the trace γ − 2 G ii ( x , x ) . The advantage of this measure is its simplicity and convenience in experiments ( an accurate estimate of a one - point measure requires less data than a two - point measure ) . However , there are drawbacks : in 2D this measure has a logarithmic depen - dence on system size , and this measure may be more sen - sitive to spurious long - wavelength inhomogeneities com - pared to a two - point measure . Finally , another example of a two - point measure is one that characterizes the change in orientation of a vector between two nodes separated by a distance x under de - formation , relative to the aﬃne prediction ( Head et al . , 2003a , b ; Liu et al . , 2007 ) . The variance in the nonaﬃne component of this angular deformation is a measure of nonaﬃnity , and depends on the distance between two points . This measure can be shown to scale as ∼ G ( x ) / x 2 , and is thus related to the other measure discussed above . We are still left with the question : What can we learn from these nonaﬃnity measures ? The message we hope to convey in the next few sections is that although these nonaﬃnity parameters can be extremely insightful , they need to be interpreted with caution . For instance , para - doxically , a system with higher values of the nonaﬃnity parameter may still have a mechanical response that is dominated by aﬃne deformation modes , compared to a system with lower nonaﬃne ﬂuctuations that is governed by a nonaﬃne mechanical response . Again , it must be re - membered that all disordered networks can be expected to exhibit some level of nonaﬃnity , so that simply mea - suring a non - zero value of any of the above measures of nonaﬃne deformation does not imply an essential break - down of the aﬃne limit , e . g . , in the form of qualitative changes to the elastic response . We will discuss these issues in Sec . IV . C . 6 . 2 . Unit cell approaches Various unit cell approaches have been developed for networks such as rubber , especially in the mechanics lit - erature ( Arruda and Boyce , 1993 ) . In such approaches , rather than assuming that all network strands deform aﬃnely , a small cell consisting of a few strands of diﬀer - ent orientations is repeated to form a 2D or 3D struc - ture . The resulting networks are studied as mechan - ical and athermal structures . Such approaches have been adapted go beyond the aﬃne formalism to calcu - late the viscoelastic or viscoplastic properties of biopoly - mer solutions ( Brown et al . , 2009 ; Cioroianu et al . , 2013 ; Fern´andez et al . , 2009 ; James and Guth , 1943 ; Jerry Qi et al . , 2006 ; Palmer and Boyce , 2008 ; Satcher Jr and Dewey Jr , 1996 ) . Among the earlier theoretical studies of nonaﬃne be - havior of crosslinked nonaﬃne , Refs . ( Kroy and Frey , 1996 ; Satcher Jr and Dewey Jr , 1996 ) borrowed from the ﬁeld of cellular solids . The assumption of this model is that ﬁbers only deform through bending and that such network deformations can be characterized using a cubic unit cell with sides equal to the mesh size , ξ . Assuming that the ﬁber strands deform by an amount δu ∼ γξ , perpendicular to their orientation , the bending energy becomes , E b ∼ κ ( δuξ 2 ) 2 ξ = κ ( γ 2 ξ ) . Thus , the energy den - sity amounts to κ ( γ 2 ξ 4 ) . Using this unit cell picture , we can relate the mesh size to the polymer concentration ξ ∼ √ c ( see Eq . ( 44 ) ) , suggesting a scaling for the shear modulus G ∼ κc 2 . ( 66 ) This concentration dependence should be contrasted with the aﬃne thermal model for which G ∼ c 11 / 5 in Sec . IV . A . 2 , although from this scaling alone , it is diﬃ - cult to distinguish the two models in practice . 24 Tuesday , September 11 , 12 FIG . 18 2D Mikado networks at low and high density under a small shear . The colors indicate distribution of tensions on a ﬁlament ; the load on a ﬁlament increases from blue to red . Adapted from ( Wilhelm and Frey , 2003 ) . Unit cell models have the advantage that an aﬃne re - sponse does not need to be enforced at the crosslink level , and aspects such as averaging over diﬀerent ﬁber orienta - tions are included naturally . Recently , a variation on this theme was introduced in Ref . ( Carrillo et al . , 2013 ) , in which a diamond lattice unit cell was used to create and study fully thermalized networks of semiﬂexible ﬁlaments spanning a wide range of mechanical properties . These authors found good agreement with several experimental observations . Such unit - cell approaches , whether thermal or ather - mal , should be appropriate , at least for networks of short stubby ﬁlaments with lengths comparable to the network’s mesh size , such as in a foam like architec - ture ( Heussinger and Frey , 2006b ) . However , in many cases ﬁlaments have lengths greatly exceeding the net - works’ mesh size . At the very least , this introduces addi - tional correlations since the ﬁlaments exhibit mechanical integrity beyond the scale of the unit cell . A unit cell - based approach cannot account for this , and one may need to deal with network of linear dimension at least as large as the ﬁbers themselves . In addition , one might challenge the assumption that deformations of the ﬁbers scale with mesh size and the implicit assumption made here that nonaﬃne deformations are uncorrelated . These assumptions clearly fail in some cases , such as networks that are close to marginal stability ( see Sec . ? ? ) , where network deformations may be correlated over large length scales , and where nonaﬃne deformations may be con - trolled by other network parameters such as connectiv - ity or ﬁlament length . To address these issues , we now continue with a discussion of whole - network models that have been studied numerically . 3 . A minimal model for disordered , athermal ﬁber networks in 2D : The Mikado model One of the simplest whole - network models for crosslinked ﬁlamentous networks is the Mikado model ( Head et al . , 2003a , b ; Wilhelm and Frey , 2003 ) . Mikado networks are constructed by randomly depositing monodisperse ﬁlaments of length (cid:96) onto a two dimensional square of size W × W , as shown in Fig . 18 . The intersections between ﬁlaments are identiﬁed as point - like , freely - hinging crosslinks . The energy of this system can be expressed as H = µ 2 (cid:88) i δ(cid:96) 2 i (cid:96) i + κ 2 (cid:88) (cid:104) ij (cid:105) δθ 2 ij (cid:96) ij ( 67 ) Here , (cid:96) i indicates the length of segment i , (cid:96) ij is the av - erage length of segments i and j , and δθ ij is the angu - lar deﬂection between segments i and j . For ﬁbers , the second sum runs only over neighboring segments along the same ﬁber . This is a purely mechanical model , and the thermal properties of semiﬂexible polymers can be captured , at best in a coarse - grained sense , by setting the modulus µ = 90 κ(cid:96) p / (cid:96) 3 c —the entropic elasticity of a semiﬂexible polymer ( Head et al . , 2003a ) . Moreover , the model treats the ﬁlaments as linearly elastic elements with respect to both bending and stretching . Thus , it does not capture ﬁlament nonlinearities such as the en - tropic stiﬀening behavior . This does not mean , however , that networks of these simple elastic ﬁlaments are neces - sarily linear in their macroscopic response : networks of purely linear elements can have a nonlinear response , as we shall see below . In fact , even at the level of single ﬁbers with linear bending and stretching elasticity , non - linearity can appear due to buckling under compression . The parameter space of the Mikado model can be ex - pressed in terms of a line density ρ = π / (cid:104) (cid:96) c (cid:105) and the di - mensionless parameter (cid:96) b / (cid:96) c . Here , the material length scale (cid:96) b = (cid:112) κ / µ characterizes the ratio of the bend - ing and stretching rigidities . For simple elastic beams of length (cid:96) c , (cid:96) b / (cid:96) c is a measure of their aspect ratio , while for thermal semiﬂexible polymers (cid:96) b / (cid:96) c = (cid:112) (cid:96) c / 90 (cid:96) p . Simulations of the Mikado model reveal various quali - tatively distinct mechanical regimes , including a stretch - ing dominated regime where the shear modulus is close to the aﬃne limit G ≈ G aﬀ ( large (cid:96) / (cid:96) c or (cid:96) b / (cid:96) c ) . The aﬃne shear modulus of the Mikado model can easily be calculated and is given by G aﬀ = π 16 µ (cid:96) c ( 68 ) in 2D . This aﬃne value forms a strict upper bound on the shear modulus of such networks : networks always have the aﬃne deformation mode available to them , and any deviations from this deformation will only occur if they lower the elastic energy . In addition to the aﬃne regime , there is a nonaﬃne bending regime G ∼ κ , and a rigidity percolation point ρ c at low network densities at which the shear modulus vanishes continuously . The crossover between bending dominated elastic behavior G ∼ κ and stretching dominated behavior G ∼ µ is shown in Fig . 19 for a simulated Mikado network response . An understanding of the bending regime poses one of the main theoretical challenges in this model . Ow - ing to the disordered nature of the network , bending 25 10 - 7 10 - 6 10 - 5 10 - 4 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 1 1 10 - 7 10 - 6 10 - 5 10 - 4 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 1 1 G / G a ff i ne l b / G ∝ κ 10 - 2 10 - 7 10 - 6 10 - 5 10 - 4 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 1 1 1 10 1 G / G a ff i ne FIG . 19 Simulations of the Mikado model indicate a transi - tion between a nonaﬃne bending regime and an aﬃne stretch - ing regime ( adapted from ( Head et al . , 2003b ) ) . Shear modu - lus G as a function of ﬁlament rigidity (cid:96) b = (cid:112) κ / µ for (cid:96) / (cid:96) c = 29 . 09 , where G has been scaled to the aﬃne prediction for this density and (cid:96) b is shown in units of (cid:96) . The straight line corre - sponds to the bending - dominated regime with G ∼ κ , which gives a line of slope 2 when plotted on these axes . The inset depicts the shear modulus G , normalized by the aﬃne value , for diﬀerent densities as function of ﬁlament length scaled by the non aﬃnity length scale λ ( See Eq . ( 71 ) ) . This rescaling results in a good data collapse , as described by Eq . ( 70 ) . deformations may be correlated and could extend over large length scales . Initially , two basic approaches where oﬀered to provide insight into the origins of this non - aﬃne bending regime and the crossover to aﬃne net - work behavior . One argument approaches the problem from the rigidity percolation point ( Wilhelm and Frey , 2003 ) , which we will discuss ﬁrst , while the other ap - proach starts from the aﬃne limit ( Head et al . , 2003a , b ) . In Sec . IV . C . 4 we discuss a more recent approach , based on constructing the networks’ ﬂoppy modes ( Heussinger and Frey , 2006a ; Heussinger et al . , 2007b ) . For densities beyond the regime controlled by the rigid - ity percolation point , Wilhelm and Frey proposed the fol - lowing form for the shear modulus ( Wilhelm and Frey , 2003 ) G = κ (cid:96) 3 | δ ˆ ρ | µ g (cid:18) (cid:96) b (cid:96) | δ ˆ ρ | ν (cid:48) (cid:19) , ( 69 ) where δ ˆ ρ = (cid:96) ( ρ − ρ c ) is dimensionless , and g ( x ) is a uni - versal scaling function . To capture the aﬃne limit G → G aﬀ , the universal function should scale as g ( x ) → x − 2 for x (cid:29) 1 , and the exponents must satisfy µ − 2 ν (cid:48) = 1 . By contrast , in the bending - regime x (cid:28) 1 , the function g ( x ) should be constant such that G ∼ κ(cid:96) 3 | δ ˆ ρ | µ . Wilhelm and Frey found an excellent collapse of their numerical data with this scaling function with the values ˆ ρ c = 5 . 71 , µ = 6 . 67 , and thus ν (cid:48) = 2 . 83 . One interesting implication of this scaling law is a length scale ξ (cid:48) = (cid:96) | δ ˆ ρ | − ν (cid:48) —distinct from the length scale of the incipient percolation cluster—controlling the crossover between the bending and stretching regimes . In particular , the crossover is expected when ξ (cid:48) (cid:39) (cid:96) b , yield - ing the crossover line density δρ cross = (cid:96) − 1 ( (cid:96) b / (cid:96) ) − 1 / ν ( re - instating units of length ) . Alternatively , this crossover line density can be understood from the limiting expres - sions of the shear moduli : In the bending regime the shear modulus scales more strongly with δ ˆ ρ than in the aﬃne limit . Thus , at high density the modulus of the bending - dominated regime would surpass the aﬃne “ceil - ing” , implying a crossover to aﬃne network behavior be - yond δρ cross . An alternative approach to understanding the rich me - chanical behavior of the Mikado model uses the aﬃne limit as a bench mark , together with a self - consistent scheme to ﬁnd the crossover to the nonaﬃne bending regime ( Head et al . , 2003a , b ) . The implicit assump - tion is that the bending regime near the nonaﬃne - aﬃne crossover is governed by diﬀerent physics than the rigid - ity percolation point . Conceptually , the main idea of this argument is to estimate when the total energy can be re - duced by relaxing the axial strain of a ﬁlament of length (cid:96) over a scale λ near the ends at the cost of bending other ﬁlaments in the surrounding network . This argument leads to the following scaling prediction G = µ (cid:96) c f (cid:18) (cid:96) λ (cid:19) , ( 70 ) where λ = (cid:96) c (cid:18) (cid:96) c (cid:96) b (cid:19) z (cid:48) ( 71 ) is a length scale controlling the crossover ( at (cid:96) (cid:39) λ ) be - tween the bending and the aﬃne stretching regime . This argument predicts a crossover exponent z (cid:48) = 2 / 5 . For the system to crossover to a bending dominated regime , given here by G ∼ κ(cid:96) 3 c ( (cid:96) / (cid:96) c ) 2 / z (cid:48) , the universal scaling func - tion f ( x ) ∼ x 2 / z (cid:48) for x (cid:28) 1 , while for large arguments f ( x ) is constant . Refs . ( Head et al . , 2003a , b ) report a good collapse of numerical data using this scaling form for z = 1 / 3 for low network density data , while a bet - ter collapse is obtained using z = 2 / 5 at higher densi - ties ( see inset to Fig . 19 ) . However , this scaling form does not capture the continuous vanishing of the shear modulus at the rigidity threshold , which may explain the diﬀerent scaling at low density . An eﬀective medium de - scription for diluted Kagome lattices was oﬀered by Mao et al . , as a model for 2D ﬁlamentous networks . This eﬀec - tive medium approach provided an analytical calculation of the crossover function that captures the bend - stretch transition ( Mao et al . , 2013b ) . Interestingly , the expo - nent that governs the crossover appears to be diﬀerent in lattice based networks than in Mikado networks . Other studies have discussed the impact of orientational order and length polydispersity of the ﬁlaments on this scal - ing ( Bai et al . , 2011 ; Missel et al . , 2010 ) . 26 Although the physical reasoning in the two approaches is diﬀerent and the two scaling forms diﬀer in detail , some reconciliation is obtained by identifying the length scales ξ (cid:48) and λ . Far from the rigidity threshold δρ ∼ ρ ∼ 1 / (cid:96) c and the two scaling forms become similar , im - plying a correspondence between the two lengthscales if z (cid:48) = 1 / ( ν (cid:48) − 1 ) or , equivalently , µ = 2 / z (cid:48) + 3 . However , the numerical values for these exponents reported in the two studies are inconsistent with these equations , still leaving the puzzle partially open . 4 . Floppy mode theory Heussinger and Frey proposed a theoretical frame - work to calculate the properties of the nonaﬃne bend - ing regime of semiﬂexible polymer networks ( Heussinger and Frey , 2006a ; Heussinger et al . , 2007b ) , although the general framework is not limited to ﬁbrous networks and could ﬁnd applications in other soft matter systems . The main premise of this model is that the low - frequency , soft deformation modes in the system derive from a set of zero - energy , ﬂoppy modes ( Liu and Nagel , 2010 ) . In the (cid:96) b → 0 limit , the network can deform through these ﬂoppy modes with no contribution to the mechanical en - ergy up to harmonic order . However , at a ﬁnite , yet small bending rigidity these modes are no longer ﬂoppy , but are still considered to be the softest modes , and may thus be used to calculate the network’s properties . By using a self - consistent eﬀective medium approach in which the ﬂoppy modes for the Mikado model are con - structed explicitly , the elastic properties of the nonaﬃne bending regime can be calculated ( Heussinger and Frey , 2006a ; Heussinger et al . , 2007b ) . This calculation yields the prediction G ∼ κρ µ , with µ = 6 . 75 , in good agree - ment with simulations ( Wilhelm and Frey , 2003 ) . The high value of this exponent ( µ ) may be understood from a simple scaling argument , which conveys the main idea behind the Floppy mode theory . The typical bend - ing energy of a segment of length (cid:96) s is w b ∼ κδu 2na / (cid:96) 3 s , where δ n a is the amplitude of a bend on the scale (cid:96) s . This amplitude represent the nonaﬃne deformation , and is independent of (cid:96) s , as apposed to an aﬃne model ; by assuming that individual ﬁber centers follow the aﬃne deformation ﬁeld , it was argued that δu n a ∼ (cid:96) . Thus , the average bending energy stored in a ﬁber is (cid:104) W b (cid:105) = ρ (cid:90) ∞ (cid:96) min d (cid:96) s P ( (cid:96) s ) κδu 2na (cid:96) 3 s , ( 72 ) where P ( (cid:96) s ) represents the distribution of segment lengths and (cid:96) min is a cutoﬀ . Below this cutoﬀ the seg - ments become too stiﬀ to contribute to the bending en - ergy . A localized bend on this scale can be relaxed by exciting a “ﬂoppy mode” in the ﬁber to which it is con - nected , with a corresponding typical energy (cid:104) W b (cid:105) . Hence , this cutoﬀ length scale can be found self - consistently from the condition w b ( (cid:96) min ) = (cid:104) W b (cid:105) . Using a Poissonian dis - tribution for P ( (cid:96) s ) , as in a Mikado network , the shear modulus is predicted to scale as G ∼ κρ µ , with µ = 7 . This is remarkably close to the result of the more elab - orate eﬀective medium calculation and the numerical re - sult . This model has provided insight in the mechanics of bundled actin networks ( Lieleg et al . , 2007 ) and in sim - ulations of composite networks ( Huisman et al . , 2010a ) . 5 . 2D versus 3D networks Biological ﬁlamentous networks are usually three - dimensional . To what extent should one expect the me - chanical behavior of such networks to be captured by the simple 2D models described above ? Put diﬀerently , are there essential qualitative diﬀerences in the mechanics of semiﬂexible polymer networks in 2D and 3D . Various computational approaches to address 3D net - works of semiﬂexible polymers or elastic ﬁbers have been developed recently , including Brownian dynamics mod - els ( Huisman et al . , 2010b ; Kim et al . , 2009 ) , Monte Carlo simulations ( Blundell and Terentjev , 2011 ) , energy mini - mization schemes for minimal mechanical models ( Broed - ersz et al . , 2012 ; Buxton and Clarke , 2007 ; Stenull and Lubensky , 2011 ) and coarse grained approaches ( Huis - man and Lubensky , 2011 ; Huisman et al . , 2008 , 2007 ; Stein et al . , 2011 ) . These have shown signiﬁcant non - aﬃne eﬀects . On very general grounds , nonaﬃne deformations could be expected to have a greater impact on the network’s elastic response in 3D systems . More speciﬁcally , the case of binary crosslinks between ﬁbers can be expected to be more bend - dominated than corresponding 2D sys - tems . This can be seen as a consequence of arguments going back to Maxwell ( Maxwell , 1865 ) , showing that the critical coordination number for mechanically stable networks of springs ( i . e . , with stretching and no bending resistance ) is greater in 3D than than the local coordi - nation of binary crosslinked networks . Moreover , this critical coordination or connectivity depends on dimen - sionality , and is close to that of ﬁlament networks in 2D , while it is far from that of such networks in 3D . Thus , the mechanical stability of 3D ﬁbrous networks with binary crosslinks is expected to rely on the bending elasticity of the ﬁbers , while a 2D network is ( marginally ) stable without ﬁber bending elasticity . This suggests that non - aﬃne bending deformations could play a more dominant role in 3D ﬁbrous networks with binary crosslinks ( Broed - ersz et al . , 2012 ; Huisman and Lubensky , 2011 ; Huisman et al . , 2007 ; Stenull and Lubensky , 2011 ) . However , the scaling arguments in ( Head et al . , 2003a ) appear to sug - gest that the behavior in 2D and 3D , at least for high molecular weight , should not be qualitatively diﬀerent . Thus , there are fundamental questions regarding the behavior of 3D networks that makes their study more important than simply the need to examine more real - istic systems . However , addressing these questions in 3D proved to be a signiﬁcant computational challenge , partly because , by analogy with the Mikado work in 2D , 27 FIG . 20 Comparison between various ﬁber network models . a ) Mikado model with curved ﬁlaments ( Onck et al . , 2005 ) b ) Thermalized semiﬂexible polymer network model ( Huisman and Lubensky , 2011 ; Huisman et al . , 2008 ) . c ) Lattice - based dilution model of a 3D ﬁber network on an fcc lattice ( Broedersz et al . , 2011 ) . the transition from bending to stretching may only occur for long ﬁbers , compared to the spacing of the crosslinks , which would suggest the need for large networks and , thus , computationally slow models in 3D . To develop a three - dimensional network model that re - ﬂects architectural characteristics of an actual biopoly - mer gel , Huisman et al . used a Monte Carlo scheme to generate thermalized networks ( Huisman and Lubensky , 2011 ; Huisman et al . , 2008 , 2007 ) using the worm - like chain model for semiﬂexible polymers . Starting from a random , isotropic network , Monte Carlo moves that alter the topology of the network are performed to minimize the free energy of the network . Subsequently , segments are cut until an average ﬁlament length (cid:96) is obtained . This procedure results in a disordered network of curved ﬁlaments ( see Fig . 20b ) . Though these ﬁlaments have disordered intrinsic curvatures , they maintain direction - ality over their persistence length . Once the network is generated , the ﬁlament segments are described by a bending rigidity , and the nonlinear force - extension curve for semiﬂexible ﬁlaments ( Eq . ( 15 ) ) . Finally , an energy minimization scheme is used to simulate the network un - der shear . Simulations of this model found a nonaﬃne bending regime that covered the range of network parameters studied ( Huisman and Lubensky , 2011 ) . Importantly , however , computational limits did not permit the au - thors to exceed system sized about an order of magnitude larger than the network mesh size . Also , the persistence length was held constant , while increasing the molecular weight . Networks in the high molecular weight limit con - structed in this way consist of ﬁlaments that are much longer than their persistence length . Thus , the question of what happens in networks of long stiﬀ ﬁlaments that are approximately straight over their full contour length remained . An obvious practical problem associated with this high molecular weight limit is that networks with large (cid:96) / (cid:96) c have a large number of degrees of freedom , which may not be computationally tractable . To overcome this problem , ﬁber networks with underlying lattice geometries were developed for which such large networks are computa - tionally feasible , although the architectures were obvi - ously simpliﬁed . We will discuss these lattice - based net - works in the next section , as well as in Sec . V . A . 6 . 3D Phantom and generalized Kagome networks Three dimensional lattice - based ﬁber network models with binary crosslinks have been developed ( Broedersz et al . , 2012 ; Stenull and Lubensky , 2011 ) . Because of the computational eﬃciency of lattice - based networks , these models have been able to address the outstandinc ques - tion of whether 3D networks exhibit a bend - to - stretch crossover analogous to 2D networks . In particular , these approaches have been able to address the high molecular weight limit . Stennul and Lubensky generated a 3D gen - eralization of the Kagome lattice by appropriately com - bining 2D Kagome lattices . The result was a large unit cell with 54 nodes . In ( Broedersz et al . , 2012 ) a network based on a face centered cubic ( fcc ) lattice ( ( see Fig . 20c ) ) was constructed , and disorder was introduced in such a way as to reduce the maximum coordination number to 4 while maintaining individual ﬁbers of arbitrary length . Although an fcc lattice has local 12 - fold coordination , a simple trick can be used to achieve the desired network structure in which the maximum coordination number at each vertex can be reduced : Three independent pairs of crosslinked ﬁbers are formed out of the six ﬁbers cross - ing at a vertex . Thus , this results in 3 binary crosslinks that may overlap in space , but do not interact with or constrain each other ; these 3 pairs of ﬁbers move through each other as phantom chains . This lattice is termed the 3D Phantom network . In both the Kagome - based lattice and the 3D Phan - 28 tom lattice networks , the ﬁber length can be tuned (cid:96) = (cid:96) 0 / ( 1 − p ) by cutting bonds with a probability 1 − p , where (cid:96) 0 is the distance between vertices . In the Phan - tom model at least one bond is removed along every ﬁber to avoid ﬁlaments that span the system ; such spanning ﬁlaments will deform more aﬃnely . Thus , this model can only approach z = 4 asymptotically from below . Al - though this may seem like a technical detail , some of the most subtle and interesting behavior in this model occurs in the limit where ﬁlaments are long , and spanning ﬁla - ments can completely overshadow the macroscopic elastic response of the network . The perfect , undiluted lattice is mechanically rigid when κ = 0 in both models , and there is a ﬁrst - order jump in the shear modulus to zero when p is less than 1 . Surprisingly , however , for diluted networks it was found that for a ﬁnite bending rigidity , no matter how small , the network shear modulus approaches its aﬃne value in the high molecular weight limit , which becomes insensitive to the ﬁber bending stiﬀness . This is similar to what was observed in 2D Mikado networks ( Sec . IV . C . 3 ) . However , the reason this is particularly surprising in 3D is that in this case the network connectivity is still well below the Maxwell isostatic threshold , which governs the stability of networks with κ = 0 ; only beyond a higher local co - ordination number do stretching constraints imposed by the connectedness of the network force the system to be stretch - dominated and nearly aﬃne ( see discussion on isostaticity in Sec . V . A ) . Put diﬀerently , these are net - works that are strictly mechanically unstable ( G = 0 ) when κ = 0 , and yet stretch - dominated and approxi - mately aﬃne ( G ≈ G aﬃne ) for any κ > 0 , provided (cid:96) / (cid:96) 0 is chosen to be suﬃciently large . Another interesting ﬁnd - ing in the 3D 4 - fold networks is that , in the limit of ﬂoppy ﬁlaments with weak bending rigidity or inﬁnite molecu - lar weight , the elastic response of the system becomes intrinsically nonlinear with a vanishing linear response regime ( Broedersz et al . , 2012 ) . We will discuss nonlin - ear properties of ﬁlamentous networks in more detail in Sec . IV . D . The linear response of these systems can be under - stood within an eﬀective medium framework developed for 2D Kagome networks ( Mao et al . , 2013b ) , as dis - cussed in ( Stenull and Lubensky , 2011 ) . An alternative approach ( Broedersz et al . , 2012 ) builds on some of the ideas of the ﬂoppy mode theory ( Heussinger and Frey , 2006a ; Heussinger et al . , 2007b ) ( see Sec . IV . C . 4 ) , as well as ideas presented in ( Head et al . , 2003a , b ) . We start by considering a deformed network in which the ﬁbers are softer to bending than to stretching . Network nodes along a ﬁber are assumed to undergo independent non - aﬃne deformations scaling as δu NA ∼ γ(cid:96) to avoid stretch - ing of the other ﬁbers to which they are connected . As a result , we would anticipate a scaling for the nonaﬃne ﬂuctuations of the form Γ ∼ (cid:96) 2 independent of κ , which is indeed observed numerically ( Broedersz et al . , 2012 ) ( ( see Sec . IV . C . 1 and Eq . ( 65 ) for more detail on the def - inition of the nonaﬃnity parameter ) . Nonaﬃne ﬂuctuations of this form have interesting im - plications for the bending energy in the system . Such length - controlled nonaﬃne deformations store an amount of elastic energy that scales as κ ( δu NA / (cid:96) 20 ) 2 (cid:96) 0 per segment of length (cid:96) 0 , which at the macroscopic level results in a shear modulus for the bending regime given by G LC ∼ κ (cid:96) 20 (cid:18) δu NA (cid:96) 20 (cid:19) 2 1 γ 2 ∼ κ (cid:96) 60 (cid:96) 2 . ( 73 ) We can relate this to the behavior discussed for the 2D Mikado model ( Sec . IV . C . 3 ) . Thus , for 3D lattice net - works we expect a similar scaling , but with the exponent µ = 5 in Eq . ( 69 ) . This type of bending elasticity im - plies that the energetic cost of nonaﬃne bending defor - mations grows with increasing (cid:96) . But , the aﬃne shear modulus G A ∼ µ / (cid:96) 20 represents an upper bound . Thus , with increasing (cid:96) , at some point the nonaﬃne modulus in Eq . ( 73 ) exceeds the aﬃne upper bound , and thus be - comes unphysical . This suggests a crossover from bend - dominated to stretch - dominated elasticity , as the non - aﬃne bending deformations become less favorable than the (cid:96) - independent aﬃne stretching deformations . This crossover is expected to occur for an average molecular weight comparable to λ NA , which can be identiﬁed as a nonaﬃne length scale . This length can be estimated by comparing G LC with the aﬃne stretching shear modulus G A ∼ µ / (cid:96) 20 , which become comparable for (cid:96) ∼ λ NA = (cid:96) 20 / (cid:96) b , ( 74 ) where (cid:96) b = (cid:112) κ / µ . Consistent with this expected crossover , numerical simulations of both the 2D andy 3D Kagome - based and 3D Phantom models show a length - controlled crossover in G to the aﬃne prediction for large (cid:96) ( Broedersz et al . , 2012 ; Mao et al . , 2013b ; Stenull and Lubensky , 2011 ) . Moreover , G / G A is a universal function of (cid:96) / λ NA , for which G / G A (cid:39) 1 when (cid:96) / λ NA > ∼ 1 . These results are qualitatively consistent with the ear - lier Mikado model in 2D , which also showed a length - controlled crossover from non - aﬃne to aﬃne elasticity with increasing ﬁber length , indicating that dimension - ality does not play a qualitatively important role , in spite of the Maxwell argument ( Maxwell , 1865 ) . In de - tail , however , the prior 2D work showed a diﬀerent non - aﬃne length scale : λ NA ∼ (cid:96) − α b , with α ≈ 0 . 3 − 0 . 4 ( Head et al . , 2003a , b ; Wilhelm and Frey , 2003 ) ( see Sec . IV . C . 3 ) . However , for such 2D Mikado networks it is diﬃcult to unambiguously identify the origin of the crossover as the same length - controlled mechanism in 3D , since the high molecular weight limit also corresponds to the CF isostatic point for the Mikado model , which also leads to a bend - stretch crossover . ( Broedersz et al . , 2011 ; Buxton and Clarke , 2007 ; Heussinger and Frey , 2006a ; Heussinger et al . , 2007b ) . Head et al . argued for a length - controlled mechanism that was independent of dimensionality ( Head et al . , 2003a ) , and it may be that the diﬀerence in the exponent α is due primarily to the diﬀerence in local network structure : the Mikado 29 model exhibits inherently larger polydispersity of ﬁber segment lengths than lattice - based networks ( Heussinger and Frey , 2006a ; Heussinger et al . , 2007b ) . By con - trast , 2D diluted Kagoma lattice networks ( Mao et al . , 2013b ) , which do not exhibit a large polydispersity in ﬁber segment length , exhibit crossover behavior quan - titatively more similar to the 3D networks with binary crosslinks ( Broedersz et al . , 2012 ; Stenull and Lubensky , 2011 ) . The scaling argument discussed in this section also pro - vides some insight into the amplitude of the nonaﬃne ﬂuctuations at the nonaﬃne - aﬃne transition . Intrigu - ingly , at this crossover the nonaﬃne ﬂuctuations reach a maximum Γ λ = λ 2 NA / (cid:96) 20 = (cid:96) 20 / (cid:96) 2 b ( Broedersz et al . , 2012 ) . This counter - intuitive result shows that the amplitude of the nonaﬃnity parameter can actually be large ( or max - imal ) , even if the networks shear modulus is very close to the aﬃne value . This analysis suggest that we should be cautious interpreting the nonaﬃne ﬂuctuations in an absolute sense ; these nonaﬃnity parameters may only be meaningful when considered in the context of the elastic properties of the relevant modes of deformation . We can summarize the main results from these studies in a simple diagram , as shown in Fig . 21 . In panel a ) we show the expectation for a thermal semiﬂexible polymer network with binary crosslinks as a function of two im - portant control parameters : Filament length (cid:96) and poly - mer concentration c . When the connectivity is too low , the network is mechanically unstable , and thus is best de - scribed as a solution . However , just beyond this thresh - old , the network is marginally stable and is described by the physics of the rigidity percolation . In principle , the network can be dominated either by bending ( low concentration ) or stretching modes ( high concentration ) . When the polymer length is increased further , we enter the nonaﬃne bending regime , and subsequently crossover to the aﬃne regime . At low concentrations the distance between crosslinks is large , and thus the entropic stretch - ing modulus of the semiﬂexible polymers is softer than the enthalpic stretching modulus . Thus , there is a low - concentration aﬃne thermal regime , and a high concen - tration aﬃne mechanical regime ( Head et al . , 2003a ) . In panel b ) of Fig . 21 , we sketch the expected regimes for an athermal ﬁber network in 3D with binary crosslinks as a function of (cid:96) / (cid:96) c and (cid:96) b / (cid:96) c , where (cid:96) 2 b is set by the ratio between the bending and stretching rigidity of a ﬁber . When increasing (cid:96) / (cid:96) c , the system transitions from a solution state ( G = 0 ) , to a marginally stable network . When the ﬁber length is further increased , it starts dominating the nonaﬃne deformations , and thus we enter the length - controlled bending regime . However , no matter how soft the ﬁbers are to bending , the systems always crosses over over to an aﬃne regime at high (cid:96) / (cid:96) c . As long as the network is mechanically stable ( G > 0 ) , the system is bend - dominated at low (cid:96) b / (cid:96) c , and stretch dominated at (cid:96) b / (cid:96) c . 7 . Is the aﬃne limit stable ? The discussion above was limited to the simple ather - mal ﬁber limit , in which the ﬁber segments are charac - terized by a 1D Young’s modulus that is independent of length . By contrast , thermal semiﬂexible polymers have an entropic stretch modulus that depends sensitively on length ( see Sec II . B ) , and this may have important impli - cations for the macroscopic elastic response of real semi - ﬂexible polymer networks ; typically , such systems can be expected to exhibit polydispersity in the length of seg - ments between crosslinks , and thus also a polydispersity in the stretching moduli of these segments . It has been argued that the pure aﬃne limit in such networks is not strictly stable ( Heussinger and Frey , 2007 ; Mao et al . , 2013b ) . This can be understood in terms of the local force balance in the network . Consider two consecutive segments along the a single ﬁlament ( 1 ) somewhere in a network of straight ﬁlaments . These two segments are separated by a crosslink to another ﬁlament ( 2 ) crossing at some angle . Assuming a purely aﬃne net - work deformation , the force due to the stretching of ﬁla - ment 1 on each side of the crosslink will be proportional to the Young’s modulus of the respective segments . If these are diﬀerent , there is a net force on the crosslink that must be balanced by ﬁlament 2 . As this crosses at an angle , some resulting bending energy is expected and the network deformation must be locally nonaﬃne . Thus in networks with polydispersity , the aﬃne limit is stable for athermal simple elastic ﬁbers , but not for ther - mal semiﬂexible ﬁlaments or other systems where the 1D Young’s modulus is not constant . How important is this lack of local force balance and the resulting local instability in networks with polydis - perse Young’s moduli ? Will the necessary bending en - ergy generated in such systems under strain be dominant over stretching , or will this result in merely a quanti - tative correction to an otherwise still stretch - dominated response ? On the one hand , it has been argued based on scaling and simulations of 2D Mikado network ar - chitectures that regimes can arise where the mechanical response depends on both stretching and bending ener - gies ( Heussinger and Frey , 2007 ) . On the other hand , as argued in the previous section , if the response is purely bend - dominated with small or vanishing stretch response , then the bend elastic energy must increase with molecu - lar weight (cid:96) . Thus , in the limit of high molecular weight , a purely bend - dominated behavior may not be possible . Thus , the question as to whether real , disordered net - works are stretch - or bend - dominated remains , particu - larly in the limit of high molecular weight . D . Nonaﬃnity and nonlinear elasticity of athermal ﬁber networks In Sec . IV . A we discussed the nonlinear network re - sponse of the aﬃne thermal model . As ﬁlaments in 30 FIG . 21 a ) Schematic for the elastic regimes ( a ) for a thermal semiﬂexible polymer network with binary crosslinks as a function of two important control parameters : Filament length (cid:96) and polymer concentration c , and ( b ) for an athermal ﬁber network in 3D with binary crosslinks as a function of (cid:96) / (cid:96) c and (cid:96) b / (cid:96) c . Here (cid:96) c is the distance between crosslinks measured along a ﬁlament , and (cid:96) 2 b is set by the ratio between the bending and stretching rigidity of a ﬁber . the network undergo large aﬃne deformations , the ther - mal undulations in the polymer get “stretched out” , giv - ing rise to a dramatic entropic stiﬀening response , re - ﬂected by a 10 - 1000 fold increase of the networks diﬀer - ential shear modulus at large deformations ( Gardel et al . , 2004a ; Kroy and Frey , 1996 ; Lin et al . , 2010a ; MacKin - tosh et al . , 1995 ; Morse , 1998b ; Storm et al . , 2005 ; Yao et al . , 2010 ) . However , as discussed above , semiﬂexi - ble polymer networks can be nonaﬃne , and dominated by athermal ﬁlament bending deformations . Thus , the question arises : what is the elastic response under large imposed shear deformations of an athermal ﬁber net - work dominated by nonaﬃne ﬁber bending deformation modes ? Naively , one might not expect a nonlinear stiﬀen - ing response for athermal networks that are composed of purely linear elastic elements . Strikingly however , it was shown that athermal ﬁber networks also strain stiﬀen , with a dramatic increases of the diﬀerential shear modu - lus at moderate deformations . Onck et al . employed 2D Mikado networks to study the eﬀects of large strains in ﬁlamentous networks , with the additional feature that static , intrinsic curvatures could be build into the ﬁlaments ( Onck et al . , 2005 ) . These “frozen - in” undulations were sampled from a thermal equilibrium distribution for semiﬂexible ﬁlaments with - out tension , although the network was otherwise treated as athermal and fully mechanical . They found that net - works that were dominated by soft bending modes for small strains crossed over to a high - strain elastic regime dominated by stiﬀer stretching modes . The authors ar - gued that such a strain - induced bend - to - stretch crossover is due to ﬁlament reorientations , which is reﬂected as a peak in the nonaﬃnity parameter at strain values near the transition . The additional frozen - in undulations were not found to be responsible for the transition , although these tended to increase the strain threshold for the stiﬀ - ening transition ( we will return to the point of frozen - in curvature below ) . Indeed , a similar stiﬃng response was observed in 2D athermal networks even without curva - ture defects along the ﬁlaments in ( Chandran and Baro - cas , 2006 ; Conti and MacKintosh , 2009 ; Heussinger et al . , 2007b ) . Similar results have also been seen in 3D ( Broed - ersz et al . , 2012 ) . Despite the numerous numeric studies demonstrating nonlinear strain stiﬀening originating in nonaﬃne net - work deformations , very little analytical progress was made initially to provide insight into this behavior . The ﬂoppy mode theory , which provided a description for the linear regime , also has implications for the onset of the nonlinear behavior ( Heussinger and Frey , 2006a ; Heussinger et al . , 2007b ) . An essential point in under - standing the nonlinear elastic response of athermal net - works , is that ﬁbers can not undergo large bending de - formations without stretching at all . This can be under - stood from a simple geometric argument . We consider one of the ﬁlaments crosslinked at a length scale (cid:96) c in a deformed network , and suppose that there is a trans - verse displacement δu ⊥ at one of the crosslinks . This transverse displacement not only results in a curvature of the ﬁlament , but also in an axial deformation (cid:96) c + δ . 31 This axial deformation can be related to the transverse bend deformation , (cid:96) 2 c + δu 2 ⊥ ∼ ( (cid:96) c + δ ) 2 , where δu ⊥ ∼ γ(cid:96) is assumed in the ﬂoppy mode model . For moderate de - formations one ﬁnds to leading order δ ∼ δu 2 ⊥ / (cid:96) c . It was argued in ( Lieleg et al . , 2007 ) that the ﬂoppy mode description for the linear regime only remains valid as long as the axial ﬁber stretch δ is small compared to the available thermal excess length (cid:96) c / (cid:96) p ( see Eq . ( 57 ) ) . Thus , this implies a critical strain set by δu 2 ⊥ / (cid:96) 2 c ∼ δ c / (cid:96) c , yielding γ c ∼ (cid:96) 3 / 2 c / ( (cid:96) 2 (cid:96) p ) 1 / 2 . ( 75 ) This is an argument for a thermal semiﬂexible polymer that is dominated by nonaﬃne bending mechanics in the linear regime , but that stiﬀens entropically under shear . From simulations , we know that athermal networks of linear elastic ﬁbers also stiﬀen . We can build on the argument in the previous section to provide some in - sight in this behavior ( Broedersz et al . , 2012 ) . As in the ﬂoppy mode model , length - controlled nonaﬃne deforma - tions are assumed δu ⊥ ∼ γ(cid:96) . This deformation results in a bend with an amplitude ∼ γ(cid:96) , and a corresponding bending energy δE B ∼ κ(cid:96) 2 γ 2 / (cid:96) 3 c . We know from the ge - ometric argument in the previous paragraph , that there is also a higher order axial stretch δ ∼ δu 2 ⊥ / (cid:96) c of the ﬁla - ment , but what is the energy associated to this stretching deformation ? The axial strain associated to this stretch is (cid:15) ∼ ( γ(cid:96) / (cid:96) 0 ) 2 + O ( γ 4 ) , which amounts to a stretch en - ergy δE S ∼ µ ( γ(cid:96) ) 4 / (cid:96) 30 . Thus , we expect that these higher order stretch contributions start dominating the elastic response at a strain where δE B ≈ δE S , resulting in a stiﬀening of the network’s shear modulus . This implies a critical strain , γ c ∼ (cid:96) b (cid:96) , ( 76 ) where (cid:96) b = (cid:112) κ / µ . Interesting , both Eqs . ( 75 ) and ( 76 ) show a characteristic strain for the onset of nonlinear behavior that vanishes in the limit of increasing molec - ular weight (cid:96) . Thus , both models can be said to have an absent or vanishing linear response regime in this limit . The argument that led to this last result assumed that the bending energy scales with (cid:96) 2 . However , the ﬂoppy mode model for the Mikado network predicted a slightly stronger scaling , which would then lead to γ c ∼ ( (cid:96) b / (cid:96) ) ( (cid:96) / (cid:96) c ) ( µ − 5 ) / 2 , with µ = 5 for the 3D Phan - tom model and µ ≈ 6 . 67 for the 2D Mikado model . In the discussion above , we have assumed that the non - aﬃne deformations are governed by ﬁlament length . Near isostatic connectivity thresholds ( See section V ) , where the network is marginally stable , we know that nonaﬃne deformations can be dominated by the proximity of net - work connectivity to the isostatic point . Indeed , for such cases , arguments like the one discussed in the previous paragraph taken together with nonaﬃne deformations that follow the form in Eq . ( 83 ) ( Broedersz et al . , 2011 ; Wyart et al . , 2008 ) , imply a critical strain for the onset of stiﬀening γ c ∼ (cid:18) (cid:96) b (cid:96) c (cid:19) λ CF / φ + 1 , ( 77 ) where λ CF is a critical exponent associated with the non - aﬃne ﬂuctuations , and φ is a crossover exponent , both of which are discussed in detail in sections V . A . 2 and V . A . 3 . It is interesting to note that the various results in Eqs . ( 75 ) , ( 76 ) and ( 77 ) make rather diﬀerent predictions for the dependence of the critical strain on (cid:96) c . Since this is a parameter that is expected to depend on network con - centration c , roughly as (cid:96) c ∼ c − 1 / 2 . Thus Eqs . ( 75 ) and ( 77 ) both predict a decrease in the critical strain with increasing polymer concentration . Qualitatively , such a decrease is observed for many biopolymer networks , in - cluding actin ( Gardel et al . , 2004a , b ; Tharmann et al . , 2007 ) , ﬁbrin ( Piechocka et al . , 2010 ) and intermediate ﬁl - aments ( Lin et al . , 2010b ) . However , the experimentally observed exponents are more consistent the predictions of Eqs . ( 57 ) and ( 59 ) . By contrast , the prediction of the athermal nonaﬃne model far from the isostatic point in Eq . ( 76 ) is that the critical strain should be independent of concentration . This is consistent with reports for colla - gen networks ( Piechocka et al . , 2011 ) , which are expected to be athermal . The arguments above only address the strain at which stiﬀening sets in . Numerical data also clearly indicate the presence of a stiﬀening regime in athermal ﬁber net - works ( Onck et al . , 2005 ) , but such results do not identify a speciﬁc functional form of the stiﬀening response . Be - yond the critical strain ( or critical stress ) , the network stiﬀens gradually as the system crosses over from bend - ing dominated to stretching dominated elasticity . At very large deformations , the diﬀerential shear modulus of linear elastic ﬁbers is expected to asymptotically ap - proach the aﬃne high - strain prediction , and no longer stiﬀen . But , what happens during the crossover ? Recent lattice - based and Mikado simulations not only show the expected asymptotic aﬃne behavior , but also suggest a regime where K ∼ σ 1 / 2 at higher stress , as well as an initial stiﬀening regime with an approximate K ∼ σ α with α ≈ 1 ( Broedersz and MacKintosh , 2011 ; Conti and MacKintosh , 2009 ) , as shown in Fig . 22 . However , the origin of this form of stiﬀening behavior , and even whether it represents a genuine power - law regime remains unclear . It has been argued that such nonlinearity can be viewed as a transition from predominantly bending to stretching behavior ( Onck et al . , 2005 ) . But , pure spring networks without bending have been shown to exhibit shear stresses σ that increase quadratically with strain γ ( Wyart et al . , 2008 ) , suggesting that only the onset of the K = dσ / dγ ∼ σ 1 / 2 regime corresponds to a transition to stretching - dominated behavior . ( See also Sec . V . B . ) Thus , whether the nonlinear response of ﬁber networks can be generally described by a crossover from bending to stretching remains unclear ( Licup et al . , 2014 ) . 32 10 − 7 10 − 6 10 − 5 10 − 4 10 − 3 10 − 2 10 − 1 10 0 10 1 10 − 4 10 − 3 10 − 2 10 − 1 10 0 10 1 (cid:109) ext K 20 3 . 33 2 . 85 20 10 6 . 67 5 4 3 . 33 2 . 85 1 / 2 1 ! L " / ! 0 10 − 7 10 − 6 10 − 5 10 − 4 10 − 3 10 − 2 10 − 1 10 0 10 1 10 − 4 10 − 3 10 − 2 10 − 1 10 0 10 1 (cid:109) ext K 20 3 . 33 2 . 85 20 10 6 . 67 5 4 3 . 33 2 . 85 1 / 2 1 ! L " / ! 0 FIG . 22 Nonlinear elasticity of a ﬁber network on a diluted 2D Phantom lattice . The diﬀerential shear modulus K = d σ / d γ as a function of the applied external stress σ ext for various val - ues of (cid:104) (cid:96) (cid:105) at ﬁxed bending rigidity κ = 10 − 3 . K and σ ext are measured in units of µ / (cid:96) 0 . It is not completely clear whether deﬁnite powerlaw regimes exist , but the stiﬀening curves for (cid:104) (cid:96) (cid:105) < ∼ 5 initially show a stiﬀening behavior of approximately K ∼ σ that crosses over to a regime K ∼ σ 1 / 2 at large shear , as shown by the dashed lines that indicate a slope of 1 and 1 / 2 . For longer ﬁlaments , only the second , weaker stiﬀen - ing response is apparent . From ( Broedersz and MacKintosh , 2011 ) . 1 . More on the role of intrinsic curvature We would like to return brieﬂy to the point of intrin - sic curvature . An interesting perspective on the role of intrinsic curvatures was provided in ( Kabla and Mahade - van , 2006 ) . Their model captures the geometrical eﬀects of the quenched disorder in the intrinsic curvatures of the ﬁbers . When a single such ﬁlament is stretched , it will ﬁrst unbend as the natural curvatures are ironed out , af - ter which the presumedly stiﬀer back bone may stretch . They considered an inextensible , weakly curved ﬁlament with random curvatures chosen from a distribution that represents the curvatures of ﬁbers in felt . Using this , they calculated a force extension curve , which for large forces diverges as f ∼ 1 √ 1 − (cid:15) , ( 78 ) where (cid:15) measures the extension relative to the fully ex - tended state . Interestingly , this is in contrast to the predicted divergence of the force - extension behavior of a semiﬂexible polymer , for which f ∼ 1 ( 1 − (cid:15) ) 2 ( Fixman and Kovac , 1973 ; Gardel et al . , 2004a ; MacKintosh et al . , 1995 ; Marko and Siggia , 1995 ) . Thus , even though both mechanisms for a nonlinear response have their origin in stretching out ﬂuctuations , quenched ﬂuctuations and thermal ﬂuctuations can give rise to a quantitatively dif - ferent form for the divergence . Kabla and Mahadevan used a unit - cell approach in their quenched ﬁber model to describe the elastic and plastic behavior of felt net - works . 2 . Negative normal stress in athermal networks Recently , biopolymer networks were shown to exhibit an additional form of nonlinear elastic response known as negative normal stress or a negative / anomalous Poynt - ing eﬀect . When most materials are subjected to simple shear , they tend to expand in the strain gradient direc - tion . This is an eﬀect ﬁrst observed by Poynting a lit - tle more than one hundred years ago ( Poynting , 1909 ) . Poynting performed careful experiments twisting wires , which he showed resulted in an axial extension of the wires . This Poynting eﬀect can also be expressed in terms of the positive ( compressive ) stresses that would develop axially if such a wire is not allowed to elongate . This ef - fect is fundamentally nonlinear , in that it cannot change sign under twisting in the reverse direction : while shear stresses are odd in twist or shear strain , normal stresses must be even . Thus , no linear normal stress response is expected at small strain . Interestingly , rheological studies of a wide variety of biopolymer gels have been shown to exhibit the opposite eﬀect : they develop tensile stresses or contract in the axial direction , which shows up as a negative thrust in a rheometer ( Janmey et al . , 2007 ) . Moreover , the nor - mal stresses were shown to become as large in magnitude as the shear stresses . It was shown in that same work that the aﬃne thermal model can account for the unex - pected sign and large magnitude of the normal stresses . The stiﬀening response of Mikado networks has also been shown to coincide with additional nonlinearities , such as the appearance of negative normal stresses and a soft - ening response due to buckling ( Conti and MacKintosh , 2009 ; Heussinger et al . , 2007b ; Kang et al . , 2009 ; Onck et al . , 2005 ) . Although both aﬃne and nonaﬃne models can account for negative normal stresses , they predict a qualitatively diﬀerent dependence of the normal stress as a function of shear stress ( Conti and MacKintosh , 2009 ) . Experiments on ﬁbrin networks appear to be in better agreement with the non - aﬃne predictions ( Kang et al . , 2009 ) . Normal stresses are frequently studied in other soft matter systems , in connection with such phenomena as the Weissenberg eﬀect , in which a viscoelastic ﬂuid tends to climb a rod that is rotated in the liquid ( Larson , 1999 ) . This can also be seen in the stirring of bread dough , as a network of gluten begins to form . Normal stresses appear in the stress tensor along the diagonal , where hydrostatic pressure also appears as a uniform contribution along the diagonal of the stress tensor . But , only spatial varia - tions in the pressure can aﬀect the ﬂow and deformation of incompressible materials . Thus , the stress tensor for such materials is only deﬁned up to an additive isotropic 33 ( pressure - like ) term , with the result that rheological mea - surements are only sensitive to normal stress diﬀerences among the various diagonal terms in the stress tensor . It is important to note , however , that this only follows for incompressible materials . And , while systems such as biopolymer network can usually be considered to be incompressible by virtue of the solvent they are imbed - ded in , the two - component character of such systems can lead osmotic compressibility of the network ( Brochard and De Gennes , 1977 ; Gittes et al . , 1997 ; Levine and Lubensky , 2001 ; MacKintosh and Levine , 2008 ) . This means that rheological measurements in such eﬀectively compressible materials can , in principle , measure indi - vidual normal stress components of the tensor . As was argued by Janmey et al . , ( Janmey et al . , 2007 ) , this can be expected especially for biopolymer systems with their relatively open meshworks , where the mesh size can be as large a several micrometers , e . g . , in the case of col - lagen and ﬁbrin gels . On long time scales , the solvent can be expected to move relatively freely through such a porous network . Only on shorter time scales , or for ﬁner meshworks , where this motion is impeded by hy - drodynamics , will the network be expected to inherit the incompressibility of the solvent : here , a strong hydrody - namic coupling of network and solvent is expected . For this reason , normal stress measurements in biopolymer gels have been reported in terms of the single , axial nor - mal stress component ( Janmey et al . , 2007 ; Kang et al . , 2009 ) . V . MARGINAL STABILITY AND CRITICAL PHENOMENA IN FIBER NETWORKS The importance of network connectivity , and concepts such as isostaticity and criticality have long been recog - nized in the ﬁelds of rigidity percolation and jamming phenomena . As we will discuss here , many of these con - cepts have also proven to be helpful in understanding interesting aspects of ﬁbrous networks . Maxwell introduced an analysis of the mechanical sta - bility of spring networks highlighting the importance of connectivity ( Maxwell , 1865 ) . Spring - like bonds give rise to central forces , i . e . , forces which only depend on the relative distance between two connected network nodes . Maxwell’s constraint counting argument predicts that such spring networks are mechanically rigid at connec - tivities exceeding z CF = 2 d . At this central force ( CF ) isostatic point the number of constraints arising from the central - force interactions Nz / 2 precisely balances the number of internal degrees of freedom Nd . This predic - tion for the isostatic connectivity is remarkably accurate for jammed systems and is reasonably accurate in per - colation networks ( Feng and Sen , 1984 ; He and Thorpe , 1985 ; Schwartz et al . , 1985 ; Thorpe , 1985 , 1983 ) . ( See ( van Hecke , 2010 ; Liu and Nagel , 2010 ) for recent re - views on this subject . ) These , and many other studies have also demonstrated that a variety of systems , includ - ing network glasses and jammed systems exhibit a rich mechanical behavior that is controlled by the proximity of network connectivity to the isostatic connectivity . What is the role of connectivity and isostaticity in ﬁber networks ? Clearly this is more subtle than for spring networks , since ﬁbers resist both stretching and bend - ing ; while ﬁber stretching can be modeled with spring - like central - force interactions , ﬁber bending requires non - central , 3 - point interactions . Thus , bending interactions add constraints of a diﬀerent nature that can stabilize the systems at connectivities below the central - force iso - static point . Indeed , various studies on network glasses and jammed systems have illustrated how additional in - teractions can stabilize networks below the CF thresh - old ( Garboczi and Thorpe , 1986 ; Wyart et al . , 2008 ) . More recently , various studies looked at the role of other stabilizing quantities , such as contractile stresses , viscous interaction and temperature , and we will return to these studies below . Filamentous networks such as biological gels typically have average connectivities between three and four , po - sitioning them well below the CF isostatic threshold in 3D ( Lindstr¨om et al . , 2010 ) . Thus , their rigidity can be be strongly inﬂuenced or even controlled by other sta - bilizing eﬀects , such as bending rigidity . However , al - though the network stability may rely on ﬁber bending rigidity , this does not necessarily imply that the network mechanics is governed by ﬁber bending , as evidenced by the length controlled bend - to - stretch crossover discussed in Sec . IV . C . 6 . The role of network disorder and non - aﬃnity is also presumed to become more important in such under - connected networks . Indeed , the precise role of bending interactions in biological ﬁber networks has been subject of much debate ( Buxton and Clarke , 2007 ; Chaudhuri et al . , 2007 ; Gardel et al . , 2004a ; Head et al . , 2003a , b ; Heussinger and Frey , 2006a ; Heussinger et al . , 2007b ; Huisman and Lubensky , 2011 ; Lieleg et al . , 2007 ; Onck et al . , 2005 ; Storm et al . , 2005 ; Wilhelm and Frey , 2003 ) One fruitful approach to studying the role of network connectivity in 2D and 3D has been to use network ar - chitectures based on lattice structures ( Broedersz et al . , 2012 ; Broedersz and MacKintosh , 2011 ; Broedersz et al . , 2011 ; Das et al . , 2007 , 2012 ; Mao et al . , 2013a , b ; Shein - man et al . , 2012a ) , and we discuss these studies in the next section . We should pause to ask how useful such an approach might be for describing real networks . Diﬀerences in net - work architecture can have dramatic consequences for the network mechanics ( Heussinger and Frey , 2007 ) . The precise architecture of biological networks in diﬀerent physiological contexts and in vitro reconstituted biopoly - mer gels is not well understood . While the architectural variety is an interesting subject of investigation in and of itself , we now ask whether there may be simple overarch - ing principles governing the network mechanics that do not depend sensitively on architectural details . If such principles exist , this could justify using a network archi - 34 tecture that is convenient from a theoretical perspective , enabling both eﬃcient computation and tractable analyt - ical calculations . However , one should ask whether the results of these lattice models , or other minimalistic mod - els for that matter ( see IV . C . 3 ) , do not rely crucially on the simpliﬁed geometry or dimensionality and still hold for more realistic network . A . Lattice - based bond - dilution networks These networks consist of straight ﬁbers organized on a lattice geometry . The constituent ﬁlaments resist stretch , with modulus µ , and compression , with modulus κ . Thus , they generate central forces directed along the ﬁber segment between crosslinks ; because the ﬁbers re - sist bending , they also generate torques favoring parallel alignment of consecutive segments along a single ﬁber . The connectivity can be controlled by randomly diluting bonds between crosslinks , such that the probability for each bond to be present is p , as illustrated in Fig . 17 for a 2D triangular lattice and Fig . 20c for a 3D face centered cubic lattice . Thus the connectivity in such a network , set by the average number of bonds connected to a node excluding dangling bonds , is roughly given by z = pZ , where Z is the coordination number of the undiluted lat - tice . We focus here on networks with freely - hinged bonds between ﬁbers , in contrast with earlier studies of rigidity percolation , including studies of network glasses ( He and Thorpe , 1985 ; Sahimi and Arbabi , 1993 ; Schwartz et al . , 1985 ; Thorpe , 1983 ) . The motivation for this is partly to keep the number of parameters to a minimum , but also because of the large aspect ratio of crosslink distance to molecular scale or low volume fraction of most biopoly - mer networks , which means that the ﬁber segments have a large lever - arm for bending ﬁbers at crosslinks that ﬁx the bond angles . Bond bending can be included , how - ever , and it has been shown to stabilize networks to a somewhat lower connectivity threshold ( Das et al . , 2012 ) . Otherwise , the qualitative features are much the same as for freely - hinged bonds . The numerical results for this lattice - based ﬁber model with freely freely - hinged crosslinks are shown in Fig . 23 for a triangular lattice in 2D . For κ = 0 ( dashed grey line Fig . 23 ) , the shear modulus vanishes continuously at a critical value p CF ( for a 2D triangular lattice p CF ≈ 0 . 651 , and for a 3D fcc lattice p CF ≈ 0 . 473 ) . In particular , it is well established that near the CF isostatic point G ∼ µ | p − p CF | f CF ( see Table III ) . In contrast , in the limit of large κ / µ the shear modulus is approximately G ∼ µp . Thus , the shear modules approaches the aﬃne limit and , thus , becomes independent of κ ; even if the network has a connectivity below the CF threshold , if nonaﬃne bending deformations are energetically more costly than stretching deformation , it is more favorable to deform through stretching . For all networks with a ﬁnite bending stiﬀness , the 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 10 −8 10 −6 10 −4 10 −2 10 0 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 10 −4 10 −2 10 0 10 2 10 4 a b 10 0 10 − 3 10 − 4 10 − 6 EMT Sim . FIG . 23 The shear modulus for a diluted 2D triangular lattice ﬁber networks . The shear modulus G , is shown in units of µ / (cid:96) 0 as a function of the bond occupation probability , p , for a range of ﬁlament bending rigidities , κ ( in units of µ(cid:96) 20 ) . The numerical results for κ = 0 are shown as dashed grey lines . The EMT calculations for a 2D triangular lattice are shown as solid lines in ( a ) . b ) The nonaﬃnity measure , Γ , is shown as a function of p for various values of κ for a 2D triangular lattice . Adapted from ( Broedersz et al . , 2011 ) . shear modulus vanishes continuously at a rigidity thresh - old p b . This behavior is governed by the bending rigidity exponent f b ( see Table III ) . The value of p b indepen - dent of the bending rigidity ( for a 2D triangular lattice p b ≈ 0 . 445 , and for a 3D fcc lattice p b ≈ 0 . 268 ) . This bending threshold can be understood from a counting argument similar to Maxwell’s analysis at the central - force threshold , but now extended to include bending constraints . 1 . Counting argument for the “bending” rigidity threshold The bending isostatic point p b of lattice - based ﬁbrous networks can be calculated using Maxwell counting and mean - ﬁeld arguments . Isostatic conditions require that the total number of network constraints due to both stretching and bending are equal to the total number of degrees of freedom . In d dimension , the total num - ber of internal degrees of freedom is equal to dN c , where N c is the number of network crosslinks . The number of 35 constrains due to the stretching stiﬀness of the bonds is N b p , where N b is the number of bonds in the undiluted network ( p = 1 ) . In addition , the bending rigidity con - tributes d − 1 constraints at any pair of neighboring coax - ial bonds , and the total number of such bonds is N b p 2 . Thus , the rigidity percolation transition occurs when dN c = N b (cid:0) p + ( d − 1 ) p 2 (cid:1) ( 79 ) or p b = (cid:113) 1 + 4 dN c N b ( d − 1 ) − 1 2 ( d − 1 ) . ( 80 ) For the triangular lattice we obtain p b = √ 113 − 1 2 (cid:39) 0 . 4574 , for the Kagome and square lattices p b = √ 5 − 1 2 (cid:39) 0 . 618 , while for the fcc lattice p b = √ 5 − 1 4 (cid:39) 0 . 309 , in reasonable agreement with simulations ( Broedersz et al . , 2011 ; Das et al . , 2012 ; Mao et al . , 2013a , b ) . A more accurate calculation of the rigidity points can be found in ( Broedersz et al . , 2011 ) , and similar arguments for oﬀ - lattice networks have also been presented ( Huisman and Lubensky , 2011 ) . 2 . The critical crossover regime between stretching and bending dominated mechanical behavior Although this bending threshold , p b , marks the true onset for rigidity in ﬁber networks , there is another im - portant connectivity threshold for these systems : For low enough κ , the shear modulus crosses over at the cen - tral force isostatic point p CF from bending dominated to stretching dominated behavior , as shown in Fig . 23a . This crossover in the mechanical response is accompanied by a cusp in the nonaﬃne ﬂuctuations , as quantiﬁed by the nonaﬃnity parameter Γ ( see Fig . 23b and Eq . ( 65 ) for the deﬁnition of the nonaﬃnity parameter ) ; the ampli - tude of this cusp diverges with vanishing κ , highlighting the critical state of the network when p = p CF and κ = 0 . It is instructive to draw an analogy between these ob - servations in ﬁber networks and the behavior of other well - understood models for critical behavior at ﬁnite tem - perature . When a small bending rigidity is added to the network model , the system is stabilized at and below the central - force isostatic point : the shear modulus no longer vanishes and the strain ﬂuctuations are now ﬁnite . Thus , at least qualitatively , the impact of κ on the strain ﬂuc - tuations and the shear modulus near the central - force isostatic point is analogous to the impact of an exter - nal ﬁeld or coupling parameter on the order parameter and its ﬂuctuations near the critical temperature , as the ﬁeld takes the system away from criticality . This turns out to be more than just a qualitative analogy , but with some intriguing nuances between athermal networks and thermal systems . The CF isostatic point plays a central role in determin - ing the cross - over from the stretching dominated regime to the bending dominated regime ( Broedersz et al . , 2011 ; Buxton and Clarke , 2007 ; Garboczi and Thorpe , 1986 ; Straley , 1976 ; Wyart et al . , 2008 ) . Only in the limit κ → 0 , the CF isostatic point is a true critical point . From the perspective of critical phenomena , the bending rigidity may be thought of as an applied ﬁeld or cou - pling constant that leads to a crossover from one critical system to another ( such as from the Heisenberg model to the Ising model ( Fisher , 1982 ) ) . In such thermal systems , there is a continuous evolution of the critical point as this coupling parameter is varied . Interestingly , there is no such continuous evolution with variation in κ in athermal ﬁber networks , which show a discontinuous jump from p CF to p b , as soon as κ becomes nonzero . Furthermore , although the analogy between κ and a ﬁeld is insight - ful , there are other important formal diﬀerences . For instance , the magnetic ﬁeld couples linearly to a symme - try breaking order parameter , while this not the case for κ . These ideas about how κ impacts the mechanical re - sponse near p CF have been formalized by constructing an eﬀective medium theory ( EMT ) using the coher - ent potential approximation ( CPA ) by Mao and Luben - sky ( Broedersz et al . , 2011 ; Mao et al . , 2013a ) ( See Sec . V . C ) . This model shows that the shear modulus may be written as a universal function when κ / µ (cid:28) ∆ p , with G = µ | ∆ p | f CF G ± (cid:16) κ µ | ∆ p | − φ (cid:17) , ( 81 ) where G ± is a universal function where the two branches apply above and below the transition . When the argu - ment of G ± ( y ) , y (cid:28) 1 , G + ( y ) ∼ const . and G − ( y ) ∼ y , such that G ∼ µ | ∆ p | f CF for ∆ p > 0 and G ∼ κ | ∆ p | f CF − φ for ∆ p < 0 . In the opposite limit ( κ / µ ) | ∆ p | − φ > ∼ 1 , i . e . , in the critical regime , G must become independent of ∆ p since G is neither zero nor inﬁnite at ∆ p = 0 . Thus , Eq . ( 81 ) predicts G ∼ κ f CF / φ µ 1 − ( f CF / φ ) in the vicinity of p CF , yielding an anomalous mechanical regime that is gov - erned by both the stretching and bending energies . The various mechanical regimes are summarized in a phase diagram in Fig . 24 . Interestingly , the scaling form in Eq . ( 81 ) is analogous to that for the conductivity of a random resistor net - work ( Straley , 1976 ) with bonds occupied with resistors of conductance σ > and σ < with respective probabilities p and ( 1 − p ) , as well as random spring networks with soft and stiﬀ springs ( Garboczi and Thorpe , 1986 ; Wyart et al . , 2008 ) . The universal scaling function in Eq . ( 81 ) is also pre - dicted by the EMT theory when κ / µ (cid:28) ∆ p , with G ± ( y ) (cid:39) 3 2 (cid:0) ± 1 + (cid:112) 1 + 4 A y / 9 (cid:1) ( 82 ) where A (cid:39) 2 . 413 , f EMT = 1 and φ EMT = 2 . Interest - ingly , these mean ﬁeld exponents are identical to those found in central - force networks with two types of springs 36 FIG . 24 Phase diagram for a ﬁbrous network on a diluted triangular lattice . Above the rigidity percolation point p b there are three distinct mechanical regimes : a stretching dom - inated regime with G ∼ µ , a bending dominated regime with G ∼ κ and a regime in which bend and stretch modes couple with G ∼ µ 1 − x κ x . Here x is related to the critical exponents x = f CF / φ . The mechanical regimes are controlled by the isostatic point p CF , which acts as a zero - temperature criti - cal point . Adapted from ( Broedersz et al . , 2011 ; Mao et al . , 2013a ) . TABLE III Critical exponents for bond - diluted lattice ﬁber networks in 2D ( triangular lattice ) and 3D ( fcc lat - tice ) ( Broedersz et al . , 2011 ) . exponent 2D sim 2D EMT 3D sim f CF 1 . 4 ± 0 . 1 1 1 . 6 ± 0 . 2 φ 3 . 0 ± 0 . 2 2 3 . 6 ± 0 . 3 ν CF 1 . 4 ± 0 . 2 λ CF 2 . 2 ± 0 . 4 f b 3 . 2 ± 0 . 4 1 2 . 3 ± 0 . 2 ν b 1 . 3 ± 0 . 2 λ b 1 . 8 ± 0 . 3 ( Garboczi and Thorpe , 1986 ; Wyart et al . , 2008 ) . How - ever , in lattice - based ﬁber networks non mean - ﬁeld ex - ponents are found ( See Table III ) . We will provide a more detailed discussion of the eﬀec - tive medium approach below . But , we will ﬁrst discuss some other interesting aspects of these networks , which generalize to other marginal systems , including networks in the presence of viscous interactions , thermal ﬂuctua - tions or internal stresses . 3 . What can we learn from the nonaﬃne ﬂuctuations in marginal networks ? The analogy observed above between the mechanics of ﬁber networks and thermal critical phenomena begs the question as to whether other signature of criticality may also be present here . Among the most important and general aspects of critical phenomena are ﬂuctuations and a corresponding correlation length , both of which diverge at the critical point . These features have also been shown for athermal ﬁber networks , as well as for particle packings near the jamming transition . Perhaps the most natural candidate for ﬂuctuations in such sys - tems is the nonaﬃnity of the deformation ﬁeld , i . e . , the ﬂuctuations in the strain ﬁeld . Indeed , it was found that the nonaﬃne ﬂuctuations Γ diverge as Γ ± | p − p CF | − λ cf for κ = 0 near the CF critical point , and Γ ± | p − p b | − λ b for κ > 0 at the rigidity percolation point ( See Sec . IV . C . 1 and Eq . ( 65 ) for more details on the deﬁnition of the non - aﬃnity parameter ) . This is similar to ﬁndings in spring networks in a jammed conﬁguration ( Wyart et al . , 2008 ) , but with non mean - ﬁeld exponents in the case of lattice ﬁber networks . Moreover , one can ﬁnd an associated di - vergent length - scale ξ = ξ ± | ∆ p | − ν near the respective critical points . This scaling can be determined by per - forming a ﬁnite size scaling analysis . The divergence of ξ is limited by the system size W , which should and does suppress the divergence of Γ . When κ > 0 , the system is no longer critical at p CF , yet signatures of criticality remain near p CF . Speciﬁcally , the divergence of the nonaﬃnity parameter is suppressed , but grows as κ → 0 . Close to the CF isostatic point one ﬁnds a peak of Γ that scales as Γ max ∼ (cid:18) κ µ (cid:19) − λ CF / φ . ( 83 ) Moreover , as in ordinary critical phenomena , the diverg - ing ﬂuctuations are also associated with a diverging sus - ceptibility χ ∼ Γ . This suggests that the order parameter ( here , G ) can be expressed in terms of the susceptibility and the ﬁeld or coupling constant ( here , κ ) that takes the system away from the critical point at p CF : G ∼ κ Γ max ∼ µ λ CF / φ κ 1 − λ CF / φ = µ 1 − f CF φ κ f CF / φ , ( 84 ) which can be conﬁrmed by simulation . The scaling be - havior of the nonaﬃne ﬂuctuations also has important implications for the critical strain at which these net - works become nonlinear , as discussed in Sec . IV . D . B . Stability of marginal networks We have discussed above how bending rigidity can sta - bilize an otherwise ﬂoppy network below the isostatic or marginal state of connectivity . This is an example of a much broader class of phenomena , in which additional interactions or ﬁelds can change the state of a system and lead to rich critical phenomena associated with the marginal state . The basic idea goes back at least to the 1970s in the context of random resistor networks ( Dykne , 1971 ; Efros and Shklovskii , 1976 ; Straley , 1976 ) . In the present context , this is also closely related to rigidity per - colation studies in 1980s , e . g . , in ( Garboczi and Thorpe , 1986 ) . More recently , in the context of jamming , the im - portance of critical ﬂuctuations and crossover has also been shown ( Wyart et al . , 2008 ) . 37 Here , it is useful to draw an analogy with ferromag - netism in statistical physics . We associate the shear modulus G of a network with the magnetic order pa - rameter m : the ordered phase is the stable , rigid one . In essence , much as a magnetic ﬁeld h can stabilize a paramagnet , i . e . , by creating a non - zero magnetization , the bending stiﬀness κ above can act to stabilize an oth - erwise ﬂoppy network . Given the critical nature of the underlying marginal point in the absence of additional interactions , signatures of this critical point can be seen away from the critical point , as for a magnetic system : for instance , for weak applied magnetic ﬁelds , both the susceptibility and magnetic ﬂuctuations exhibit evidence of a divergence near the critical point , although this di - vergence is suppressed or rendered ﬁnite by the ﬁnite magnetic ﬁeld . For ﬁber networks , this is illustrated by the divergence of the ﬂuctuations near p CF in Fig . 23b , which is suppressed by bending stiﬀness κ . Similar ef - fects are also seen in jamming ( Wyart et al . , 2008 ) , where nonaﬃne ﬂuctuations are suppressed by addition of weak springs . One of the signatures of criticality in magnetic sys - tems is the relationship between the magnetization m and the applied ﬁeld h along the critical isotherm , where m ∼ h 1 / δ , where δ = 3 in mean - ﬁeld theory . This can be seen as a consequence of the equation of state relating h to m , much like the pressure - volume relation in a liquid - gas critical system : h (cid:39) m / χ + bm 3 , for some constant b . The susceptibility χ diverges at the critical point , re - sulting in m ∼ h 1 / 3 along the critical isotherm . Here , the form of the equation of state is constrained by sym - metry to have only odd terms . For bending stabilized marginal networks , one can expect a similar relationship between G and κ : κ ∼ G / χ κ + bG 2 , where χ κ represents the susceptibility of G on κ . Note that this is based on the following assumptions : i ) the system is operating in a regime where G = 0 in the absence of κ ; ii ) κ is a sta - bilizing ﬁeld that renders G nonzero , but small ; and iii ) κ is analytic and can be expanded in powers of small G , in analogy with other mean - ﬁeld theories . Importantly , even terms are no longer forbidden here by symmetry , resulting in G ∼ κ 1 / 2 at the critical point . This suggests a simple explanation for the observation of the approx - imate square - root dependence of G on κ in Sec . V . A . 2 . This mean - ﬁeld argument is general , and it suggests a similar square - root dependence of G in the critical regime on any stabilizing ﬁeld such as κ , viscous stresses , ac - tive internal stresses , and thermal ﬂuctuations . Such be - havior is consistent with other mean - ﬁeld arguments and eﬀective medium theories ( Broedersz et al . , 2011 ; Das et al . , 2012 ; Mao et al . , 2013a , b ; Sheinman et al . , 2012a ; Tighe , 2011 , 2012 ; Wyart , 2010 ; Wyart et al . , 2008 ; Yucht et al . , 2013 ) . Both the stabilization and associated critical behav - ior of marginal and ﬂoppy ( sub - marginal ) networks have been shown for a broad class of diﬀerent networks , includ - ing spring and ﬁber networks , and for range of stabilizing ﬁelds , including external and internal stresses ( Broed - ersz and MacKintosh , 2011 ; Sheinman et al . , 2012a ) , vis - cous interactions by an embedding Newtonian ﬂuid ( An - dreotti et al . , 2012 ; Lerner et al . , 2012a , b , 2013 ; Tighe , 2011 , 2012 ; Wyart , 2010 ; Yucht et al . , 2013 ) , large exter - nal strains ( Sheinman et al . , 2012b ) , and even thermal ﬂuctuations ( Dennison et al . , 2013 ) . Although each of these cases has interesting distinguishing features , the general critical phenomena framework and the connec - tion between network mechanics and strain ﬂuctuations applies to all . Moreover , these cases show approximate square - root dependence of G on the corresponding stabi - lizing ﬁeld : e . g . , in the presence of thermal ﬂuctuations , anomalous entropic elasticity is seen , in which G ∼ √ T at ﬁnite temperature T or G ∼ √ σ under applied shear stress σ ( see discussion at end of Sec . IV . D . ) One of the possible biological implications of the sta - bilizing eﬀect of stresses is the observation that inter - nal stress by molecular motors can stabilize and control the mechanics of intracellular networks ( Sheinman et al . , 2012a ) . This can provide a simple and general mech - anism for control of cell mechanics without the need to change the amount or even the connectivity of cy - toskeletal networks . Additionally , the critical nature of the model systems suggests the possibility of exquisite control of mechanics through the expected strong ( me - chanical ) susceptibility , making such a system a highly responsive material . C . Eﬀective medium theories We now review the eﬀective medium approach , ﬁrst formulated in ( Feng et al . , 1985 ) , in its most simplest form : for spring networks . We will then end with a brief discussion on how this EMT approach can be extended for various situations . The eﬀective medium network is an undiluted network , with renormalized bond stiﬀness ˜ g , depending on the de - gree of dilution p of the actual network it represents . The EMT provides a self - consistent construction to determine this renormalized bond stiﬀness from which the mechan - ical response of the eﬀective network can be calculated . Suppose the eﬀective network is subjected to a macro - scopic inﬁnitesimal strain (cid:15) , deforming bond nm aﬃnely by ˆr nm (cid:15) , where ˆr nm is the unit vector along bond nm . Subsequently , replacing this eﬀective medium bond with stiﬀness g ( See Fig . 25 ) , sampled from the distribution P ( g ) , gives rise to an additional , nonaﬃne deformation δ u . The original , ( uniform ) deformation can be restored by applying an additional force to the bond f = ˆr nm (cid:15) ( (cid:101) g − g ) ( 85 ) Since the network is assumed to be in the linear response regime , applying this force to an unstrained network would have given the same deformation δ u , that resulted from substituting a bond in the strained eﬀective network in the absence of the force . If we had only removed the nm bond , the eﬀective stiﬀness between these two nodes 38 FIG . 25 Illustration of the eﬀective medium framework . a ) The bonds in the eﬀective medium have a stiﬀness ˆ g , which are calculated self - consistently . The bond between nodes n and m is replaced by a random bond g , which leads to a distortion if the eﬀective network is under strain . However , an additional force f can be applied to counter this distortion . b ) Illustrates how the stiﬀness between nodes n and m can be described by two springs in parallel . This ﬁgure is a slightly altered version from ( Feng et al . , 1985 ) . due to the surrounding network is g EM − ˆ g , where g EM is the force on a bond in the perfect eﬀective medium net - work in response to a unit displacement . Then , inserting a random bond g between nodes n and m , leads to a local stiﬀness g EM − ˆ g + g ( See Fig . 25b ) . Thus , the nonaﬃne deformation that arose from the bond replacement in the strained eﬀective network ( without the force f ) can be expressed as δ u = ˆr nm (cid:15) ( (cid:101) g − g ) g EM − (cid:101) g + g , ( 86 ) This deformation clearly depends on the stiﬀness of the inserted bond chosen randomly from the distribution P ( g ) , leading to either a contraction or dilation of the network . The stiﬀness of the eﬀective medium should be chosen such that on average , we recover the macroscopi - cally imposed deformation , and thus , these nonaﬃne dis - placements due to bond insertion should vanish on aver - age . Hence , the self - consistency condition requires that the local ﬂuctuations in the deformation ﬁeld in the de - formation ﬁeld must average to zero , (cid:104) δ u (cid:105) = 0 , leading to the following implicit equation for (cid:101) g , (cid:90) ∞ 0 g − (cid:101) g g EM + g − (cid:101) g P ( g ) dg = 0 . ( 87 ) This equation can be solved by ﬁrst determining g − 1 EM as the displacement in response to a unit force with wave vector k between directed along nodes n and m , f ( k ) = ˆr nm (cid:0) 1 − e i k · ˆr nm (cid:1) , by solving the network’s equation of motion u ( k ) = − D − 1 ( k ) · f ( k ) , ( 88 ) where D ( k ) is the dynamical matrix of the Bravais lat - tice , and u ( k ) is the displacement in k - space due to this force . The displacement of the nm bond due to a unit force , which is needed to solve ( 87 ) , follows from g − 1 EM = 1 N r nm · (cid:88) k u ( k ) (cid:0) e − i k · r nm − 1 (cid:1) = ( 89 ) where N is the total number of nodes in the network . For a random bond - diluted lattice with bond stiﬀness µ and dilutiom p , the self - consistency condition ( Eq . ( 87 ) ) can be written as p µ − (cid:101) g g EM + µ − (cid:101) g − ( 1 − p ) (cid:101) g g EM − (cid:101) g = 0 , ( 90 ) From this it can be found that G vanishes continuously at the CF isostatic point as G ∼ µ ∆ p f CF , with ∆ p = p − p CF , and the mean ﬁeld results p CF = 2 / 3 and f CF = 1 . A more detailed discussion of this approach can be found in ( Feng et al . , 1985 ) . In this reference Feng et al . also describe an alternative , scattering ap - proach ( Lax , 1951 ) using the Coherent Potential Approx - imation ( CPA ) , which leads to the same results as the “static” approach discussed above . The EMT framework was further developed to de - scribe spring networks for a variety of situations . An EMT was developed to describe “glasses” with bond - bending forces ( He and Thorpe , 1985 ) . To describe the nonlinear elastic response of spring networks under large external isotropic strain ( Fig 26 ) , a perturbative ap - proach for inﬁnitesimal dilution was discuss in ( Tang and Thorpe , 1988 ) , and , more recently , for arbitrary di - lution in ( Sheinman et al . , 2012b ) . In this approach , the EMT Hamiltonian at ﬁnite strain is expanded around a nonlinear state for small nonaﬃne deformations . It was found that the external strain shifts the isostatic point continuously from p CF to the ( lower ) conductiv - ity threshold of the network . Networks with internal stresses ( Alexander , 1998 ) garnished attention recently because of their relevance for ﬁber networks contracted by force - generating molecular motors ( Koenderink et al . , 2009 ; Mizuno et al . , 2007 ) or contractile cells ( Lam et al . , 2010 ) . An EMT approach developed for this scenario was described in ( Sheinman et al . , 2012a ) . Such inter - nal stresses can stabilize subisostatic networks mechani - cally , and can even poise the network in a critical state . Finally , EMT’s were also developed to describe the dy - namic shear modulus of a spring network embedded in a viscous medium ( Lerner et al . , 2013 ; Wyart , 2010 ; Yucht et al . , 2013 ) . EMTs for bond - diluted lattices with CF springs are , in principle , straightforward because the springs reside on an individual bond . In contrast , EMTs for lattices with 3 - point bending forces are considerably more involved be - cause such bending forces reside on two bonds , whereas the dilution procedure only removes individual bonds one at a time . Two such approaches have been developed to incorporate this eﬀect by Das et al . , ( Das et al . , 2007 , 2012 ) and Mao et al . , ( Broedersz et al . , 2011 ; Mao et al . , 2013a , b ) . Given the complications of 3 - point bending forces , there is no single , obvious way to implement the 39 FIG . 26 A small section of the undeformed ( a ) and expanded ( b ) diluted triangular lattice . The average coordination num - ber in this example is z = 3 . Adapted from ( Sheinman et al . , 2012b ) . eﬀective medium approach , and these two groups have introduced two diﬀerent approximations , which will not be elaborated here . However , it is interesting to note that one of these approaches appears to be better at cal - culating the rigidity threshold ( Das et al . , 2012 ) , while the other does a better job of capturing the magnitude of the elastic modulus far from this threshold ( Broedersz et al . , 2011 ; Mao et al . , 2013a , b ) . The latter approach necessitated the inclusion of third - neighbor couplings not present in the earlier approach by Das et al . ( Das et al . , 2007 , 2012 ) . Thus , it still remains a challenge to con - struct an EMT for a ﬁber network that can accurately capture both the bending threshold and the mechanical response . Furthermore , EMT approaches to describe the nonlinear response of such networks , or their dynamic response when coupled to a viscous liquid , should be of considerable interest , but have not yet been reported . 1 . Contractile nonaﬃne and marginal networks The nonlinear mechanical response of reconstituted biopolymer networks in many cases reﬂects the nonlinear force - extension behavior of the constituting cross - links or ﬁlaments ( Broedersz et al . , 2008 ; Gardel et al . , 2004a , b ; Kasza et al . , 2009 ; Storm et al . , 2005 ; Wagner et al . , 2006 ) . For such networks , both experiments and the - oretical studies show that internal stress generation by molecular motors can result in network stiﬀening in direct analogy to an externally applied uniform stress ( Head and Mizuno , 2010 ; Koenderink et al . , 2009 ; Levine and MacKintosh , 2009 ; Liverpool et al . , 2009 ; MacKintosh and Levine , 2008 ; Mizuno et al . , 2007 ) . However , as discussed above , the mechanical response of semiﬂexi - ble polymers is highly anisotropic and is typically much softer to bending than to stretching . In some cases , this renders the network deformation highly nonaﬃne with most of the energy stored in bending modes . Such non - aﬃnely deforming stiﬀ polymer networks can also exhibit a nonlinear mechanical response , even when the network constituents are linear elastic ﬁbers . Can internal stresses generated , for instance , by molecular motors or contrac - tile cells embedded in the network , stiﬀen such networks ? This was studied numerically 2D networks of ather - mal , stiﬀ ﬁlaments using the 2D Phantom model ( Broed - ersz and MacKintosh , 2011 ) ( also see Sec . IV . C . 6 ) . In the absence of motors , these networks can exhibit strain stiﬀening under an externally applied shear . This be - havior has been attributed to a cross - over between two mechanical regimes ; at small strains the mechanics is gov - erned by soft bending modes and a nonaﬃne deformation ﬁeld , while at larger strains the elastic response is gov - erned by the stiﬀer stretch modes and an aﬃne defor - mation ﬁeld ( Onck et al . , 2005 ) . Interestingly , motors that generate internal stresses can also stiﬀen the net - work . The motors induce force dipoles leading to muscle like contractions , which “pull out” the ﬂoppy bending modes in the system ( Broedersz and MacKintosh , 2011 ) . This induces a cross - over to a stiﬀer stretching dominated regime . Through this mechanism , motors can lead to network stiﬀening in nonaﬃne athermal ﬁber networks in which the constituting ﬁlaments in the network are themselves linear elements . To obtain a better understanding of this behavior , this was studied in more detail in 3D ﬁber networks based on the diluted face centered cubic ( fcc ) lattice , using both simulations and an analytical approach . Networks are formed by crosslinked straight ﬁbers with linear stretch - ing and bending elasticity . These ﬁbers are organized on a fcc lattice in which a certain fraction of the bonds can randomly be removed . This allows one to explore a wide range of network connectivities , 0 ≤ z ≤ 12 . Motor activity is introduced by contractile , static and strain - independent force dipoles acting between neigh - boring network nodes . The shear modulus of these net - works , with or without contractile stress , can be deter - mined numerically by applying a small shear deforma - tion . It was found that motors can stabilize the elastic re - sponse of otherwise ﬂoppy , unstable networks . The mo - tor stress also controls the mechanics of stable networks above a characteristic threshold in connectivity , in the vicinity of which the network exhibits critical strain ﬂuc - tuations . Interestingly , the network’s stiﬀness is con - trolled by a coupling of the motor induced stresses σ m to the strain ﬂuctuations according to a constitutive re - lation , G = G 0 + Γ ( σ m ) × σ m + σ m , ( 91 ) G 0 is the shear modulus in the absence of stress , and where prefactors in the last two terms have been left out . The linear modulus G 0 in the absence of stress may be zero . Γ is the nonaﬃnity parameter proportional to the susceptibility that controls the network response to stress , and which may depend on the stress σ m . The coupling between stress and the nonaﬃne ﬂuctu - ations gives rise to anomalous regimes at the stability thresholds , at which network criticality implies divergent strain ﬂuctuations with a power law dependences on mo - 40 Affine thermal networks Plateau modulus : frequency , Charecteristic frequency : Dynamic shear modulus strain , Critical strain for the onset of stiffening : Strain stiffening Critical stress : Nonaffine networks Marginal athermal networks Schematic for the various elastic regimes of a crosslinked semiflexible polymer networks rigidity percolation Filament length , Bend - to - stretch tranistion 2D Mikado network : 3D lattice models : Nonlinear elasticity Bend dominated Stetch dominated Stress , frequency , Critical strain for the onset of stiffening : Dynamic shear modulus connectivity , Isostaticity Fiber networks a ) b ) c ) d ) e ) Universality Nonlinear elasticity Stress , connectivity , ( large ) FIG . 27 Graphical summary for the behavior of crosslinked networks . a ) Aﬃne thermal model ( Sec . IV . A ) ( Gardel et al . , 2004a , b ; MacKintosh et al . , 1995 ) b , c ) Nonaﬃne ﬁber networks ( Sec . IV . C ) ( Broedersz et al . , 2012 ; Broedersz and MacKintosh , 2011 ; Head et al . , 2003a , b ; Heussinger and Frey , 2006a ; Heussinger et al . , 2007b ; Onck et al . , 2005 ; Stenull and Lubensky , 2011 ; Wilhelm and Frey , 2003 ) . d ) Marginally stable spring networks ( Sec . V . A ) ( Andreotti et al . , 2012 ; Lerner et al . , 2012a , b , 2013 ; Tighe , 2011 , 2012 ; Wyart , 2010 ; Wyart et al . , 2008 ; Yucht et al . , 2013 ) . e ) Marginally stable ﬁber networks ( Broedersz et al . , 2011 ; Mao et al . , 2013a , b ; Wyart et al . , 2008 ) . 41 tor stress . This is reﬂected as an anomalous dependence of the network’s shear modulus on stress . To be in such a critical regime the network needs to be marginally stable . This can be achieved by either tuning the network con - nectivity such that it is close to the bending or central - force isostatic point , or by adding a near - critical den - sity of motors to marginally stabilize an otherwise ﬂoppy network . Importantly , this critical density does not suﬃ - ciently enhance the eﬀective connectivity of the network to bring it near to the bending or central - force isostatic point . In such critical regimes , the shear modulus de - pends nonlinearly on both motor stress and single ﬁla - ment elasticity ( Broedersz and MacKintosh , 2011 ; Chen and Shenoy , 2011 ; Lam et al . , 2010 ) . Interestingly , this dependence on internal motor stress diﬀers qualitatively from that of an applied external stress . VI . SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK In this review , we discussed some of the main theo - retical developments over roughly the last two decades on semiﬂexible polymers and their assemblies as bun - dles , solutions , and crosslinked networks . We focussed on physical and minimal approaches that have studied the basic principles of these systems , with some bias towards biopolymer systems ( Bausch and Kroy , 2006 ; Fletcher and Mullins , 2010 ; Kasza et al . , 2007 ; Lieleg et al . , 2010 ) and our personal interests . We have not discussed more realistic approaches that aim to capture some of the spe - ciﬁc molecular details of biopolymers and architectural features of the networks they form ( Kim et al . , 2009 ) . And , we have only brieﬂy touched upon some fascinating recent examples of applications of some of the ideas com - ing from various biopolymer studies to synthetic hydro - gels ( Kouwer et al . , 2013 ) and carbon nanotubes ( Fakhri et al . , 2010 , 2009 ) . Both of these examples are likely just the tip of the iceberg : it seems there is much more to be gained in translation of such ideas to new materials ( Bertrand et al . , 2012 ) , and one can expect much more work in the future along these lines . We started oﬀ with a discussion of the properties of single semiﬂexible polymers . A deﬁning characteristic of semiﬂexible polymers is that thermal energy only ex - cites small bending ﬂuctuations around their straight zero - temperature conformation . As a result , their me - chanical response is highly anisotropic : Buckling under compression , stiﬀening entropically under even modest extensions , while bending easily . Moreover , the entropic stretch modulus of a semiﬂexible polymer governed by its bending rigidity , and is inversely proportional to temper - ature ( Kroy and Frey , 1996 ; MacKintosh et al . , 1995 ) , in contrast to a ﬂexible polymer which has an entropic mod - ulus proportional to temperature ( Rubinstein and Colby , 2003 ) . Thus , while ﬂexible polymers are completely dom - inated by entropy , the properties of semiﬂexible polymers reﬂect a competition between the entropy and the bend - ing energy . The important role of bending also has impli - cations for the dynamics of semiﬂexible ﬁlaments , which exhibit a much stronger wavelength dependence of relax - ation than for ﬂexible polymers . The competition between entropy and bending energy in semiﬂexible polymers has interesting consequences for the assemblies they form . We discussed the intriguing properties of semiﬂexible bundles ( Bathe et al . , 2008 ; Claessens et al . , 2006 ; Heussinger et al . , 2007a , 2010 ) and solutions ( Gittes et al . , 1997 ; Hinner et al . , 1998 ; Isambert and Maggs , 1996 ; Morse , 1998a , b ; Schnurr et al . , 1997 ) . Various experiments indicate that semi - ﬂexible polymer solutions such as entangled actin net - works ( Semmrich et al . , 2007 ) and living cells ( Deng et al . , 2006 ; Fabry et al . , 2001 ) exhibit soft glassy be - havior ( Sollich et al . , 1997 ) , e . g . , a weak power - law de - pendence of the dynamic shear modulus on frequency . The glassy worm like chain model has oﬀered various im - portant insights into such behavior ( Kroy , 2008 ; Kroy and Glaser , 2007 ) , but in its current form , this is a phe - nomenological approach . Thus , the construction of a mi - croscopic theory for glassy semiﬂexible polymer systems remains an important challenge . Networks with dynamic crossllinks have aspects of both solutions and permanently crosslinked net - works ( Broedersz et al . , 2010a ; Heussinger , 2011 ; Lie - leg et al . , 2008 ; Strehle et al . , 2011 ) . However , these transiently crosslinked networks exhibit a dynamic rhe - ological response distinct from solutions or permanent networks , with a surprising dependence on stress ( Lieleg et al . , 2009 ; Norstrom and Gardel , 2011 ; Yao et al . , 2013 ) . Experiment on reconstituted actin networks indicate that the onset of stress relaxation shifts to lower frequency in the presence of stress , suggesting that the crosslinks may actually become more stable under an applied force . This may have implications in biological processes such as mechanosensing ( Luo et al . , 2013 ) . The aﬃne model constitutes the simplest analytical ap - proach to describe the mechanical response of a perma - nently crosslinked semiﬂexible polymer network ( MacK - intosh et al . , 1995 ; Morse , 1998b , c ; Storm et al . , 2005 ) , and this model captures various experiments on recon - stituted biopolymer networks ( Gardel et al . , 2004a , b ; Koenderink et al . , 2006 ; Lin et al . , 2010a , b ; Tharmann et al . , 2007 ; Yao et al . , 2010 ) and synthetic stiﬀ poly - mers ( Kouwer et al . , 2013 ) . However , the low connectiv - ity ( < ∼ 4 ) of many biopolymer networks implies that net - works are only weakly constrained ( especially in 3D ) , and could deform through nonaﬃne bending modes ( Head et al . , 2003a , b ; Wilhelm and Frey , 2003 ) . In addition , semiﬂexible polymers are softer to bending deformations than to stretching deformations , which begs the ques - tion : Why would the network not always favor nonaﬃne deformations ? Nonaﬃne bending deformations can be “leveraged” by ﬁlament length , and thus become large and energetically less favorable than the aﬃne stretching deformations in the high molecular weight limit ( Head et al . , 2003a , b ; Heussinger and Frey , 2006a ; Heussinger et al . , 2007b ) . Hence , even 3D networks with connectiv - 42 ities < ∼ 4 can be tuned into a mechanical regime where the shear modulus is governed by aﬃne stretching de - formations ( Broedersz et al . , 2012 ; Stenull and Luben - sky , 2011 ) . We have summarized the main predictions of aﬃne and nonaﬃne ﬁlamentous networks in Fig . 27a - c . We discussed various approaches to describe the non - aﬃne regime , and the crossover to aﬃne behavior in athermal ﬁlamentous networks ( Broedersz et al . , 2012 ; Head et al . , 2003a , b ; Heussinger and Frey , 2006a ; Stenull and Lubensky , 2011 ; Wilhelm and Frey , 2003 ) . Many , if not all , of the elastic regimes of these networks have now been identiﬁed and understood , at least at the level of scaling theory . However , a comprehensive an - alytical theory that describes ﬁber networks over the full range of behaviors , including the rigidity percola - tion regime , the length - controlled bending regime , and the aﬃne regime still remains elusive . Theoretical stud - ies have recently started exploring nonlinear ( Broedersz et al . , 2012 ; Broedersz and MacKintosh , 2011 ; Conti and MacKintosh , 2009 ; Heussinger et al . , 2007b ; Onck et al . , 2005 ) , dynamic ( Huisman et al . , 2010b ) , and thermal ef - fects in nonaﬃne ﬁbrous networks ( Carrillo et al . , 2013 ) , but these eﬀects still remain poorly understood . More - over , experiments have still provided little direct evi - dence for nonaﬃne mechanical behavior ( Lieleg et al . , 2007 ; Stein et al . , 2011 ) , in part probably because un - ambiguous theoretical predictions have been lacking . To address nonaﬃne behavior in ﬁbrous networks , various groups have now started combining macroscopic rheo - logical methods with a microscopic visualization of the strain ﬁeld in the network ( Basu et al . , 2011 ; Liu et al . , 2007 ; M¨unster et al . , 2013 ; Schmoller et al . , 2010 ; Wen et al . , 2012 ) . Nonaﬃne deformations become paramount when a ﬁber network becomes marginally stable ( Broedersz et al . , 2011 ; Wyart et al . , 2008 ) . This represents and interesting and promising connection between the ba - sic physics of elastic networks and jamming ( van Hecke , 2010 ; Liu and Nagel , 1998 , 2010 ) . Depending on con - nectivity , networks can be poised near a marginally sta - ble state analogous to that of granular packings . And , much as compression can stabilize such packings , ﬁber or biopolymer networks can be stabilized by various inter - actions or ﬁelds , including applied stress , strain , internal molecular motor activity , and even thermal ﬂuctuations , leading to rich critical phenomena ( Broedersz et al . , 2011 ; Dennison et al . , 2013 ; Sheinman et al . , 2012a , b , b ; Sun et al . , 2012 ; Tighe , 2012 ; Vitelli , 2012 ; Wyart et al . , 2008 , ? ) . Theoretically , marginally stable ﬁber networks are predicted to exhibit rich critical behavior , including large , or even divergent , nonaﬃne strain ﬂuctuations and anomalous elasticity ( Fig . 27d , e ) , with close connections to the ﬁeld of rigidity percolation ( Feng et al . , 1984 ; He and Thorpe , 1985 ; Schwartz et al . , 1985 ; Thorpe , 1985 , 1983 ) , as well as jamming . However , easily tunable ex - perimental ﬁbrous systems to study this behavior are still lacking , and to date , there is little direct evidence on marginal or critical behavior in real biopolymer systems . Recently , however , several groups have begun to study networks in which molecular motors drive the system to eﬀectively lower connectivity ( K¨ohler et al . , 2011 ; Murrell and Gardel , 2012 ; Soares e Silva et al . , 2011 ) , and even to a state resembling a critical point ( Alvarado et al . , 2013 ) . Acknowledgments This work was supported in part by a Lewis - Sigler fel - lowship ( CPB ) , and in part by FOM / NWO ( FCM ) . We thank W . Bialek , C . Brangwynne , A . Bausch , E . Conti , M . Das , M . Dennison , M . Depken , B . Fabry , E . Frey , M . Gardel , D . Head , C . Heussinger , L . Huisman , P . Jan - mey , L . Jawerth , K . Kasza , G . Koenderink , A . Levine , A . Licup , O . Lieleg , Y . - C . Lin , T . Liverpool , T . Lubensky , B . Machta , X . Mao , S . M¨unster , A . Sharma , M . Shein - man , L . Sander , C . Schmidt , C . Storm , M . Tikhonov , B . Tighe , D . Weitz , M . Wigbers , M . Wyart , and N . Yao , and M . Yucht for many stimulating discussions . References Alberts , B . , A . Johnson , J . Lewis , M . Raﬀ , K . Roberts , and P . Walter ( 1994 ) , Molecular Biology of the Cell ( Garland Press , New York ) . Alexander , S . ( 1998 ) , Physics Reports 296 ( 24 ) , 65 . Alvarado , J . , M . Sheinman , A . Sharma , F . C . MacKintosh , and G . H . Koenderink ( 2013 ) , Nature Physics . Amblard , F . , A . C . Maggs , B . Yurke , A . N . Pargellis , and S . Leibler ( 1996 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 77 , 4470 . Andreotti , B . , J . - L . Barrat , and C . Heussinger ( 2012 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 109 , 105901 . Aragon , S . R . , and R . Pecora ( 1985 ) , Macromolecules 18 ( 10 ) , 1868 . Arbabi , S . , and M . Sahimi ( 1993 ) , Physical Review B 47 ( 2 ) , 695 . Arruda , E . M . , and M . C . Boyce ( 1993 ) , Journal of the Me - chanics and Physics of Solids 41 ( 2 ) , 389 . Baczynski , K . , R . Lipowsky , and J . Kierfeld ( 2007 ) , Physical Review E 76 ( 6 ) , 061914 . Bai , M . , A . R . Missel , A . J . Levine , and W . S . Klug ( 2011 ) , Acta Biomaterialia 7 ( 5 ) , 2109 . Basu , A . , Q . Wen , X . Mao , T . Lubensky , P . A . Janmey , and A . Yodh ( 2011 ) , Macromolecules 44 ( 6 ) , 1671 . Bathe , M . , C . Heussinger , M . M . Claessens , A . R . Bausch , and E . Frey ( 2008 ) , Biophysical Journal 94 ( 8 ) , 2955 . Bausch , A . R . , and K . Kroy ( 2006 ) , Nature Physics 2 ( 4 ) , 231 . Benetatos , P . , and A . Zippelius ( 2007 ) , Physical review let - ters 99 ( 19 ) , 198301 . Bertrand , O . J . , D . K . Fygenson , and O . A . Saleh ( 2012 ) , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 ( 43 ) , 17342 . Block , S . M . ( 2007 ) , Biophysical Journal 92 , 2986 . Blundell , J . R . , and E . M . Terentjev ( 2011 ) , Proceedings of the Royal Society A : Mathematical , Physical and Engineer - ing Science 467 ( 2132 ) , 2330 . Boal , D . ( 2002 ) , Mechanics of the Cell ( Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . ) . 43 Borukhov , I . , R . F . Bruinsma , W . M . Gelbart , and A . J . Liu ( 2005 ) , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102 ( 10 ) , 3673 . Brangwynne , C . P . , G . H . Koenderink , E . Barry , Z . Dogic , F . C . MacKintosh , and D . A . Weitz ( 2007 ) , Biophysical journal 93 ( 1 ) , 346 . Brangwynne , C . P . , G . H . Koenderink , F . C . MacKintosh , and D . A . Weitz ( 2008 ) , The Journal of Cell Biology 183 ( 4 ) , 583 . Brangwynne , C . P . , F . C . MacKintosh , S . Kumar , N . A . Geisse , J . Talbot , L . Mahadevan , K . K . Parker , D . E . Ing - ber , and D . A . Weitz ( 2006 ) , The Journal of Cell Biology 173 ( 5 ) , 733 . Brochard , F . , and P . De Gennes ( 1977 ) , Macromolecules 10 ( 5 ) , 1157 . Broedersz , C . , M . Sheinman , and F . MacKintosh ( 2012 ) , Physical Review Letters 108 ( 7 ) , 078102 . Broedersz , C . P . , M . Depken , N . Y . Yao , M . R . Pollak , D . A . Weitz , and F . C . MacKintosh ( 2010a ) , Physical Review Letters 105 ( 23 ) , 238101 . Broedersz , C . P . , K . E . Kasza , L . M . Jawerth , S . Muenster , D . A . Weitz , and F . C . MacKintosh ( 2010b ) , Soft Matter 6 ( 17 ) , 4120 . Broedersz , C . P . , and F . C . MacKintosh ( 2011 ) , Soft Matter 7 ( 7 ) , 3186 . Broedersz , C . P . , X . Mao , T . C . Lubensky , and F . C . MacK - intosh ( 2011 ) , Nature Physics 7 ( 12 ) , 983 . Broedersz , C . P . , C . Storm , and F . C . MacKintosh ( 2008 ) , Physical Review Letters 101 ( 11 ) , 118103 . Brown , A . E . X . , R . I . Litvinov , D . E . Discher , P . K . Purohit , and J . W . Weisel ( 2009 ) , Science 325 ( 5941 ) , 741 . Bustamante , C . , J . Marko , E . Siggia , and S . Smith ( 1994 ) , Science 265 ( 5178 ) , 1599 . Buxton , G . , and N . Clarke ( 2007 ) , Physical Review Letters 98 ( 23 ) , 238103 . Carrillo , J . - M . Y . , F . C . MacKintosh , and A . V . Dobrynin ( 2013 ) , Macromolecules . Caspi , A . , R . Granek , and M . Elbaum ( 2000 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 85 , 5655 . Chaikin , P . A . , and T . C . Lubensky ( 2000 ) , Principles of Condensed Matter Physics ( Cambridge University Press ) . Chandran , P . L . , and V . H . Barocas ( 2006 ) , Journal of Biome - chanical Engineering 128 ( 2 ) , 259 . Chaudhuri , O . , S . H . Parekh , and D . A . Fletcher ( 2007 ) , Nature 445 ( 7125 ) , 295 . Chen , P . , and V . B . Shenoy ( 2011 ) , Soft Matter 7 ( 2 ) , 355 . Cioroianu , A . R . , E . M . Spiesz , and C . Storm ( 2013 ) , Bio - physical Journal 104 ( 2 , Supplement 1 ) , 511a . Claessens , M . , C . Semmrich , L . Ramos , and A . Bausch ( 2008 ) , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105 ( 26 ) , 8819 . Claessens , M . M . A . E . , M . Bathe , E . Frey , and A . R . Bausch ( 2006 ) , Nature Materials 5 ( 9 ) , 748 . Conti , E . , and F . MacKintosh ( 2009 ) , Physical Review Let - ters 102 ( 8 ) , 088102 . Cyron , C . , K . M¨uller , K . Schmoller , A . Bausch , W . Wall , and R . Bruinsma ( 2013 ) , EPL ( Europhysics Letters ) 102 ( 3 ) , 38003 . Das , M . , A . J . Levine , and F . C . MacKintosh ( 2008 ) , EPL ( Europhysics Letters ) 84 ( 1 ) , 18003 . Das , M . , F . MacKintosh , and A . Levine ( 2007 ) , Physical Review Letters 99 ( 3 ) , 038101 . Das , M . , D . Quint , and J . Schwarz ( 2012 ) , PloS one 7 ( 5 ) , e35939 . Deng , L . , X . Trepat , J . P . Butler , E . Millet , K . G . Morgan , D . A . Weitz , and J . J . Fredberg ( 2006 ) , Nat Mater 5 ( 8 ) , 636 . Dennison , D . , M . Sheinman , C . Storm , and F . MacKintosh ( 2013 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 111 ( 9 ) , 095503 . DiDonna , B . , and A . J . Levine ( 2006 ) , Physical review letters 97 ( 6 ) , 068104 . DiDonna , B . A . , and T . C . Lubensky ( 2005 ) , Phys . Rev . E 72 , 066619 . Dobrynin , A . V . , and J . - M . Y . Carrillo ( 2010 ) , Macro - molecules 44 ( 1 ) , 140 . Dogic , Z . , J . Zhang , A . Lau , H . Aranda - Espinoza , P . Dal - haimer , D . E . Discher , P . Janmey , R . D . Kamien , T . C . Lubensky , and A . Yodh ( 2004 ) , Physical review letters 92 ( 12 ) , 125503 . Dogterom , M . , and B . Yurke ( 1997 ) , Science 278 ( 5339 ) , 856 . Doi , M . , and S . Edwards ( 1988 ) , The Theory of Polymer Dynamics ( Oxford University Press ) . Dykne , A . M . ( 1971 ) , JETP 32 , 63 . Efros , A . L . , and B . I . Shklovskii ( 1976 ) , Physica Status Solidi ( b ) 76 , 475 . Emanuel , M . , H . Mohrbach , M . Sayar , H . Schiessel , and I . M . Kuli´c ( 2007 ) , Physical Review E 76 ( 6 ) , 061907 . Everaers , R . , F . J¨ulicher , A . Ajdari , and A . C . Maggs ( 1999 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 82 , 3717 . Fabry , B . , G . N . Maksym , J . P . Butler , M . Glogauer , D . Nava - jas , and J . J . Fredberg ( 2001 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 87 , 148102 . Fakhri , N . , F . C . MacKintosh , B . Lounis , L . Cognet , and M . Pasquali ( 2010 ) , Science 330 ( 6012 ) , 1804 . Fakhri , N . , D . A . Tsyboulski , L . Cognet , R . B . Weisman , and M . Pasquali ( 2009 ) , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106 ( 34 ) , 14219 . Farge , E . , and A . C . Maggs ( 1993 ) , Macromolecules 26 ( 19 ) . Feng , S . , and P . Sen ( 1984 ) , Physical Review Letters 52 ( 3 ) , 216 . Feng , S . , P . Sen , B . Halperin , and C . Lobb ( 1984 ) , Physical Review B 30 ( 9 ) , 5386 . Feng , S . , M . Thorpe , and E . Garboczi ( 1985 ) , Physical Re - view B 31 ( 1 ) , 276 . Fern´andez , P . , S . Grosser , and K . Kroy ( 2009 ) , Soft Matter 5 ( 10 ) , 2047 . Fisher , M . E . ( 1982 ) , Proceedings of the School on Critical Phenomena , Stellenbosch , South Africa , 1982 ( Springer - Verlag , Berlin , 1983 , Vol . 186 . ) . Fixman , M . , and J . Kovac ( 1973 ) , The Journal of Chemical Physics 58 ( 4 ) , 1564 . Fletcher , D . A . , and R . D . Mullins ( 2010 ) , Nature 463 ( 7280 ) , 485 . Footer , M . J . , J . W . Kerssemakers , J . A . Theriot , and M . Dogterom ( 2007 ) , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104 ( 7 ) , 2181 . Garboczi , E . , and M . Thorpe ( 1986 ) , Physical Review B 33 ( 5 ) , 3289 . Gardel , M . , F . Nakamura , J . Hartwig , J . Crocker , T . Stossel , and D . Weitz ( 2006 ) , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 103 ( 6 ) , 1762 . Gardel , M . , J . Shin , F . MacKintosh , L . Mahadevan , P . Mat - sudaira , and D . Weitz ( 2004a ) , Science 304 ( 5675 ) , 1301 . Gardel , M . , J . Shin , F . MacKintosh , L . Mahadevan , P . Mat - sudaira , and D . Weitz ( 2004b ) , Physical review letters 93 ( 18 ) , 188102 . Gisler , T . , and D . A . Weitz ( 1999 ) , Physical review letters 82 ( 7 ) , 1606 . Gittes , F . , and F . MacKintosh ( 1998 ) , Physical Review E 44 58 ( 2 ) , R1241 . Gittes , F . , B . Mickey , J . Nettleton , and J . Howard ( 1993 ) , The Journal of Cell Biology 120 ( 4 ) , 923 . Gittes , F . , B . Schnurr , P . D . Olmsted , F . C . MacKintosh , and C . F . Schmidt ( 1997 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 79 , 3286 . Grason , G . M . ( 2009 ) , Physical Review E 79 ( 4 ) , 041919 . Grason , G . M . , and R . F . Bruinsma ( 2007 ) , Physical review letters 99 ( 9 ) , 098101 . Hallatschek , O . , E . Frey , and K . Kroy ( 2007a ) , Physical Re - view E 75 ( 3 ) , 031905 . Hallatschek , O . , E . Frey , and K . Kroy ( 2007b ) , Physical Re - view E 75 ( 3 ) , 031906 . Hatami - Marbini , H . , and R . C . Picu ( 2008 ) , Phys . Rev . E 77 , 062103 . He , H . , and M . Thorpe ( 1985 ) , Physical Review Letters 54 ( 19 ) , 2107 . Head , D . , A . Levine , and F . MacKintosh ( 2003a ) , Physical Review Letters 91 ( 10 ) , 108102 . Head , D . , A . Levine , and F . MacKintosh ( 2003b ) , Physical Review E 68 ( 6 ) , 061907 . Head , D . , and D . Mizuno ( 2010 ) , Physical Review E 81 ( 4 ) , 041910 . van Hecke , M . ( 2010 ) , Journal of Physics : Condensed Matter 22 ( 3 ) , 033101 . Heussinger , C . ( 2011 ) , Phys . Rev . E 83 , 050902 . Heussinger , C . ( 2012 ) , New Journal of Physics 14 ( 9 ) , 095029 . Heussinger , C . , M . Bathe , and E . Frey ( 2007a ) , Physical Review Letters 99 ( 4 ) , 048101 . Heussinger , C . , and E . Frey ( 2006a ) , Physical Review Letters 97 ( 10 ) , 105501 . Heussinger , C . , and E . Frey ( 2006b ) , Physical Review Letters 96 ( 1 ) , 017802 . Heussinger , C . , and E . Frey ( 2007 ) , Physical Review E 75 ( 1 ) , 011917 . Heussinger , C . , B . Schaefer , and E . Frey ( 2007b ) , Physical Review E 76 ( 3 ) , 031906 . Heussinger , C . , F . Sch¨uller , and E . Frey ( 2010 ) , Physical Review E 81 ( 2 ) , 021904 . Hinner , B . , M . Tempel , E . Sackmann , K . Kroy , and E . Frey ( 1998 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 81 , 2614 . Hirst , L . S . , R . Pynn , R . F . Bruinsma , and C . R . Saﬁnya ( 2005 ) , The Journal of chemical physics 123 ( 10 ) , 104902 . Hoﬀman , B . D . , G . Massiera , K . M . Van Citters , and J . C . Crocker ( 2006 ) , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 ( 27 ) , 10259 . Hohenberg , P . C . , and B . I . Halperin ( 1977 ) , Reviews of Modern Physics 49 ( 3 ) , 435 . Howard , J . ( 2001 ) , Mechanics of Motor Proteins and the Cy - toskeleton ( Sinauer Press , Sunderland , MA . ) . Huisman , E . , C . Heussinger , C . Storm , and G . Barkema ( 2010a ) , Physical Review Letters 105 ( 11 ) , 118101 . Huisman , E . , and T . Lubensky ( 2011 ) , Physical Review Let - ters 106 ( 8 ) , 088301 . Huisman , E . , C . Storm , and G . Barkema ( 2008 ) , Physical Review E 78 ( 5 ) , 051801 . Huisman , E . , C . Storm , and G . Barkema ( 2010b ) , Physical Review E 82 ( 6 ) , 061902 . Huisman , E . , T . Van Dillen , P . Onck , and E . Van Der Giessen ( 2007 ) , Physical Review Letters 99 ( 20 ) , 208103 . Humphrey , D . , C . Duggan , D . Saha , D . Smith , and J . Kas ( 2002 ) , Nature 416 ( 6879 ) , 413 . Isambert , H . , and A . C . Maggs ( 1996 ) , Macromolecules 29 ( 3 ) , 1036 . James , H . M . , and E . Guth ( 1943 ) , The Journal of Chemical Physics 11 ( 10 ) , 455 . Janmey , P . A . , S . Hvidt , J . Ks , D . Lerche , A . Maggs , E . Sack - mann , M . Schliwa , and T . P . Stossel ( 1994 ) , Journal of Biological Chemistry 269 ( 51 ) , 32503 . Janmey , P . A . , M . E . McCormick , S . Rammensee , J . L . Leight , P . C . Georges , and F . C . MacKintosh ( 2007 ) , Nature Ma - terials 6 ( 1 ) , 48 . Jerry Qi , H . , C . Ortiz , and M . C . Boyce ( 2006 ) , Journal of Engineering Materials and Technology 128 ( 4 ) , 509 . Kabla , A . , and L . Mahadevan ( 2006 ) , Journal of The Royal Society Interface 4 ( 12 ) , 99 . Kang , H . , Q . Wen , P . A . Janmey , J . X . Tang , E . Conti , and F . C . MacKintosh ( 2009 ) , The Journal of Physical Chem - istry B 113 ( 12 ) , 3799 . Kasza , K . E . , C . P . Broedersz , G . H . Koenderink , Y . C . Lin , W . Messner , E . A . Millman , F . Nakamura , T . P . Stossel , F . C . MacKintosh , and D . A . Weitz ( 2010 ) , Biophysical Journal 99 ( 4 ) , 1091 . Kasza , K . E . , G . H . Koenderink , Y . C . Lin , C . P . Broedersz , W . Messner , F . Nakamura , T . P . Stossel , F . C . MacKintosh , and D . A . Weitz ( 2009 ) , Physical Review E 79 ( 4 ) , 041928 . Kasza , K . E . , A . C . Rowat , J . Liu , T . E . Angelini , C . P . Brangwynne , G . H . Koenderink , and D . A . Weitz ( 2007 ) , Current Opinion in Cell Biology 19 ( 1 ) , 101 . Kierfeld , J . , T . K¨uhne , and R . Lipowsky ( 2005 ) , Physical review letters 95 ( 3 ) , 038102 . Kim , T . , W . Hwang , H . Lee , and R . D . Kamm ( 2009 ) , PLoS computational biology 5 ( 7 ) , e1000439 . Koenderink , G . H . , M . Atakhorrami , F . C . MacKintosh , and C . F . Schmidt ( 2006 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 96 , 138307 . Koenderink , G . H . , Z . Dogic , F . Nakamura , P . M . Bendix , F . C . MacKintosh , J . H . Hartwig , T . P . Stossel , and D . A . Weitz ( 2009 ) , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci - ences 106 ( 36 ) , 15192 . K¨ohler , S . , V . Schaller , and A . R . Bausch ( 2011 ) , Nature materials 10 ( 6 ) , 462 . Kouwer , P . H . , M . Koepf , V . A . Le Sage , M . Jaspers , A . M . van Buul , Z . H . Eksteen - Akeroyd , T . Woltinge , E . Schwartz , H . J . Kitto , R . Hoogenboom , et al . ( 2013 ) , Nature 493 ( 7434 ) , 651 . Kratky , O . , and G . Porod ( 1949 ) , Recueil des Travaux Chim - iques des Pays - Bas 68 ( 12 ) , 1106 . Kroy , K . ( 2008 ) , Soft Matter 4 , 2323 . Kroy , K . , and E . Frey ( 1996 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 77 , 306 . Kroy , K . , and J . Glaser ( 2007 ) , New Journal of Physics 9 ( 11 ) , 416 . Lam , W . A . , O . Chaudhuri , A . Crow , K . D . Webster , A . Kita , J . Huang , D . A . Fletcher , et al . ( 2010 ) , Nature materials 10 ( 1 ) , 61 . Lamb , H . ( 1945 ) , New York 43 . Landau , L . D . , and E . M . Lifshitz ( 1986 ) , Theory of Elasticity ( Pergamon Press , Oxford . ) . Larson , R . G . ( 1999 ) , The structure and rheology of complex ﬂuids , Vol . 702 ( Oxford university press New York ) . Lau , A . W . C . , B . D . Hoﬀman , A . Davies , J . C . Crocker , and T . C . Lubensky ( 2003 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 91 , 198101 . Lax , M . ( 1951 ) , Rev . Mod . Phys . 23 , 287 . Lerner , E . , G . Dring , and M . Wyart ( 2012a ) , EPL ( Euro - physics Letters ) 99 ( 5 ) , 58003 . Lerner , E . , G . Dring , and M . Wyart ( 2012b ) , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 ( 13 ) , 4798 . Lerner , E . , G . Dring , and M . Wyart ( 2013 ) , Soft Matter 9 , 8252 . Levine , A . J . , and T . Lubensky ( 2001 ) , Physical Review E 45 63 ( 4 ) , 041510 . Levine , A . J . , and T . C . Lubensky ( 2000 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 85 , 1774 . Levine , A . J . , and F . C . MacKintosh ( 2009 ) , The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 113 ( 12 ) , 3820 . Licup , A . , S . Muenster , A . Sharma , M . Sheinman , L . M . Jaw - erth , B . Fabry , D . A . Weitz , and F . C . MacKintosh ( 2014 ) , unpublished . Lieleg , O . , and A . R . Bausch ( 2007 ) , Physical review letters 99 ( 15 ) , 158105 . Lieleg , O . , M . Claessens , C . Heussinger , E . Frey , and A . Bausch ( 2007 ) , Physical Review Letters 99 ( 8 ) , 088102 . Lieleg , O . , M . M . Claessens , and A . R . Bausch ( 2010 ) , Soft Matter 6 ( 2 ) , 218 . Lieleg , O . , M . M . A . E . Claessens , Y . Luan , and A . R . Bausch ( 2008 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 101 , 108101 . Lieleg , O . , J . Kayser , G . Brambilla , L . Cipelletti , and A . Bausch ( 2011 ) , Nature materials 10 ( 3 ) , 236 . Lieleg , O . , K . Schmoller , M . Claessens , and A . Bausch ( 2009 ) , Biophysical Journal 96 ( 11 ) , 4725 . Lin , Y . - C . , C . P . Broedersz , A . C . Rowat , T . Wedig , H . Her - rmann , F . C . MacKintosh , and D . A . Weitz ( 2010a ) , Jour - nal Of Molecular Biology 399 ( 4 ) , 637 . Lin , Y . - C . , N . Y . Yao , C . P . Broedersz , H . Herrmann , F . C . MacKintosh , and D . A . Weitz ( 2010b ) , Physical Review Letters 104 ( 5 ) , 058101 . Lindstr¨om , S . B . , D . A . Vader , A . Kulachenko , and D . A . Weitz ( 2010 ) , Physical Review E 82 ( 5 ) , 051905 . Liu , A . J . , and S . R . Nagel ( 1998 ) , Nature 396 ( 6706 ) , 21 . Liu , A . J . , and S . R . Nagel ( 2010 ) ( Annual Reviews ) pp . 347 – 369 . Liu , J . , G . H . Koenderink , K . E . Kasza , F . C . MacKintosh , and D . A . Weitz ( 2007 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 98 , 198304 . Liu , X . , Y . Zhou , H . Gao , and J . Wang ( 2012 ) , Biophysical journal 102 ( 8 ) , 1793 . Liverpool , T . B . , A . C . Maggs , and A . Ajdari ( 2001 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 86 , 4171 . Liverpool , T . B . , M . C . Marchetti , J . - F . Joanny , and J . Prost ( 2009 ) , EPL ( Europhysics Letters ) 85 ( 1 ) , 18007 . Luby - Phelps , K . , P . E . Castle , D . L . Taylor , and F . Lanni ( 1987 ) , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 84 ( 14 ) , 4910 . Luo , T . , K . Mohan , P . A . Iglesias , and D . N . Robinson ( 2013 ) , Nature materials . MacKintosh , F . C . , and P . A . Janmey ( 1997 ) , Current Opin - ion in Solid State and Materials Science 2 ( 3 ) , 350 . MacKintosh , F . C . , J . K¨as , and P . A . Janmey ( 1995 ) , Phys - ical Review Letters 75 ( 24 ) , 4425 . MacKintosh , F . C . , and A . J . Levine ( 2008 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 100 , 018104 . MacKintosh , F . C . , and C . F . Schmidt ( 2010 ) , Current opin - ion in cell biology 22 ( 1 ) , 29 . Mao , X . , O . Stenull , and T . C . Lubensky ( 2013a ) , Phys . Rev . E 87 , 042601 . Mao , X . , O . Stenull , and T . C . Lubensky ( 2013b ) , Physical Review E 87 ( 4 ) , 042602 . Mao , X . , N . Xu , and T . C . Lubensky ( 2010 ) , Physical Review Letters 104 ( 8 ) , 085504 . Marchetti , M . , J . Joanny , S . Ramaswamy , T . Liverpool , J . Prost , M . Rao , and R . A . Simha ( 2013 ) , Reviews of Modern Physics 85 ( 3 ) , 1143 . Marko , J . F . , and E . D . Siggia ( 1995 ) , Macromolecules 28 ( 26 ) , 8759 . Maxwell , J . C . ( 1865 ) , Philos . Mag . 27 . Missel , A . R . , M . Bai , W . S . Klug , and A . J . Levine ( 2010 ) , Physical Review E 82 ( 4 ) , 041907 . Mizuno , D . , R . Bacabac , C . Tardin , D . Head , and C . F . Schmidt ( 2009 ) , Physical review letters 102 ( 16 ) , 168102 . Mizuno , D . , D . A . Head , F . C . MacKintosh , and C . F . Schmidt ( 2008 ) , Macromolecules 41 ( 19 ) , 7194 . Mizuno , D . , C . Tardin , C . F . Schmidt , and F . C . MacKintosh ( 2007 ) , Science 315 ( 5810 ) , 370 . Mogilner , A . , and G . Oster ( 1996 ) , Biophysical Journal 71 ( 6 ) , 3030 . Morse , D . ( 1998a ) , Physical Review E 58 ( 2 ) , R1237 . Morse , D . C . ( 1998b ) , Macromolecules 31 ( 20 ) , 7030 . Morse , D . C . ( 1998c ) , Macromolecules 31 ( 20 ) , 7044 . Morse , D . C . ( 1999 ) , Macromolecules 32 ( 18 ) , 5934 . M¨ucke , N . , L . Kreplak , R . Kirmse , T . Wedig , H . Herrmann , U . Aebi , and J . Langowski ( 2004 ) , Journal of molecular biology 335 ( 5 ) , 1241 . M¨unster , S . , L . M . Jawerth , B . A . Leslie , J . I . Weitz , B . Fabry , and D . A . Weitz ( 2013 ) , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . Murrell , M . P . , and M . L . Gardel ( 2012 ) , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 ( 51 ) , 20820 . Nedlec , F . J . , T . Surrey , A . C . Maggs , and S . Leibler ( 1997 ) , Nature 389 ( 6648 ) , 305 . Norstrom , M . , and M . L . Gardel ( 2011 ) , Soft matter 7 ( 7 ) , 3228 . Odijk , T . ( 1983 ) , Macromolecules 16 ( 8 ) , 1340 . Odijk , T . ( 1995 ) , Macromolecules 28 ( 20 ) , 7016 . Odijk , T . ( 1998 ) , The Journal of chemical physics 108 ( 16 ) , 6923 . O’Hern , C . S . , L . E . Silbert , and S . R . Nagel ( 2003 ) , Physical Review E 68 ( 1 ) , 011306 . Onck , P . R . , T . Koeman , T . van Dillen , and E . van der Giessen ( 2005 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 95 , 178102 . de Pablo , P . , I . Schaap , F . MacKintosh , and C . Schmidt ( 2003 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 91 ( 9 ) , 098101 . Palmer , J . S . , and M . C . Boyce ( 2008 ) , Acta Biomaterialia 4 ( 3 ) , 597 . Pampaloni , F . , G . Lattanzi , A . Jon´aˇs , T . Surrey , E . Frey , and E . - L . Florin ( 2006 ) , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 ( 27 ) , 10248 . Pasquali , M . , V . Shankar , and D . C . Morse ( 2001 ) , Phys . Rev . E 64 , 020802 . Pelletier , O . , E . Pokidysheva , L . S . Hirst , N . Bouxsein , Y . Li , and C . R . Saﬁnya ( 2003 ) , Physical review letters 91 ( 14 ) , 148102 . Phillips , J . C . ( 1981 ) , Journal of Non - Crystalline Solids 43 ( 1 ) , 37 . Piechocka , I . K . , R . G . Bacabac , M . Potters , F . C . MacK - intosh , and G . H . Koenderink ( 2010 ) , Biophysj 98 ( 10 ) , 2281 . Piechocka , I . K . , A . S . van Oosten , R . G . Breuls , and G . H . Koenderink ( 2011 ) , Biomacromolecules 12 ( 7 ) , 2797 . Poynting , J . ( 1909 ) , Proceedings of the Royal Society of Lon - don . Series A , Containing Papers of a Mathematical and Physical Character 82 ( 557 ) , 546 . R . Granek , ( 1997 ) , J . Phys . II France 7 ( 12 ) , 1761 . Rubinstein , M . , and R . H . Colby ( 2003 ) , Polymer physics ( OUP Oxford ) . Sahimi , M . , and S . Arbabi ( 1993 ) , Physical Review B 47 ( 2 ) , 703 . Satcher Jr , R . , and C . Dewey Jr ( 1996 ) , Biophysical Journal 71 ( 1 ) , 109 . Schmidt , C . F . , M . Baermann , G . Isenberg , and E . Sackmann 46 ( 1989 ) , Macromolecules 22 ( 9 ) , 3638 . Schmoller , K . , P . Fernandez , R . Arevalo , D . Blair , and A . Bausch ( 2010 ) , Nature communications 1 , 134 . Schmoller , K . , O . Lieleg , and A . Bausch ( 2009 ) , Biophysical journal 97 ( 1 ) , 83 . Schnurr , B . , F . Gittes , and F . C . MacKintosh ( 2002 ) , Phys - ical Review E 65 ( 6 ) , 061904 . Schnurr , B . , F . Gittes , F . C . MacKintosh , and C . F . Schmidt ( 1997 ) , Macromolecules 30 ( 25 ) , 7781 . Schwartz , L . , S . Feng , M . Thorpe , and P . Sen ( 1985 ) , Physical Review B 32 ( 7 ) , 4607 . Seifert , U . , J . Shillcock , and P . Nelson ( 1996 ) , Physical review letters 77 ( 26 ) , 5237 . Semmrich , C . , T . Storz , J . Glaser , R . Merkel , A . R . Bausch , and K . Kroy ( 2007 ) , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104 ( 51 ) , 20199 . Sept , D . , and F . C . MacKintosh ( 2010 ) , Physical review let - ters 104 ( 1 ) , 018101 . Shan , W . L . , Z . Chen , C . P . Broedersz , A . A . Gumaste , W . O . Soboyejo , and C . P . Brangwynne ( 2013 ) , Soft Matter 9 , 194 . Sheinman , M . , C . P . Broedersz , and F . C . MacKintosh ( 2012a ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 109 , 238101 . Sheinman , M . , C . P . Broedersz , and F . C . MacKintosh ( 2012b ) , Physical Review E 85 ( 2 ) , 021801 . Shin , H . , K . R . P . Drew , J . R . Bartles , G . C . Wong , and G . M . Grason ( 2009 ) , Physical review letters 103 ( 23 ) , 238102 . Shokef , Y . , and S . A . Safran ( 2012 ) , Physical Review Letters 108 ( 17 ) , 178103 . Soares e Silva , M . , M . Depken , B . Stuhrmann , M . Korsten , F . C . MacKintosh , and G . H . Koenderink ( 2011 ) , Proceed - ings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 ( 23 ) , 9408 . Sollich , P . , F . m . c . Lequeux , P . H´ebraud , and M . E . Cates ( 1997 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 78 , 2020 . Soven , P . ( 1969 ) , Physical Review 178 ( 3 ) , 1136 . Stein , A . M . , D . A . Vader , D . A . Weitz , and L . M . Sander ( 2011 ) , Complexity 16 ( 4 ) , 22 . Stenull , O . , and T . Lubensky ( 2011 ) , arXiv preprint arXiv : 1108 . 4328 . Storm , C . , J . J . Pastore , F . C . MacKintosh , T . C . Lubensky , and P . A . Janmey ( 2005 ) , Nature 435 ( 7039 ) , 191 . Straley , J . ( 1976 ) , J . Phys . C : Solid State Phys . 9 , 783 . Strehle , D . , J . Schnau , C . Heussinger , J . Alvarado , M . Bathe , J . K¨as , and B . Gentry ( 2011 ) , European Biophysics Jour - nal 40 ( 1 ) , 93 . Sun , K . , A . Souslov , X . Mao , and T . Lubensky ( 2012 ) , Pro - ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 ( 31 ) , 12369 . Tang , W . , and M . F . Thorpe ( 1988 ) , Phys . Rev . B 37 , 5539 . Taute , K . M . , F . Pampaloni , E . Frey , and E . - L . Florin ( 2008 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 100 , 028102 . Tharmann , R . , M . Claessens , and A . Bausch ( 2007 ) , Physical Review Letters 98 ( 8 ) , 088103 . Thorpe , M . ( 1985 ) , Journal of Non - Crystalline Solids 76 ( 1 ) , 109 . Thorpe , M . F . ( 1983 ) , Journal of Non - Crystalline Solids 57 ( 3 ) , 355 . Tighe , B . P . ( 2011 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 107 , 158303 . Tighe , B . P . ( 2012 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 109 , 168303 . Vitelli , V . ( 2012 ) , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 ( 31 ) , 12266 . Wagner , B . , R . Tharmann , I . Haase , M . Fischer , and A . Bausch ( 2006 ) , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 ( 38 ) , 13974 . Wall , F . T . , and P . J . Flory ( 1951 ) , The Journal of Chemical Physics 19 ( 12 ) , 1435 . Ward , S . M . V . , A . Weins , M . R . Pollak , and D . A . Weitz ( 2008 ) , Biophysical journal 95 ( 10 ) , 4915 . Waterman - Storer , C . M . , and E . Salmon ( 1997 ) , The Journal of Cell Biology 139 ( 2 ) , 417 . Wen , Q . , A . Basu , P . A . Janmey , and A . G . Yodh ( 2012 ) , Soft matter 8 ( 31 ) , 8039 . Wiggins , C . H . , D . Riveline , A . Ott , and R . E . Goldstein ( 1998 ) , Biophysical Journal 74 ( 2 ) , 1043 . Wilhelm , J . , and E . Frey ( 1996 ) , Physical Review Letters 77 ( 12 ) , 2581 . Wilhelm , J . , and E . Frey ( 2003 ) , Physical Review Letters 91 ( 10 ) , 108103 . Wolﬀ , L . , P . Fernandez , and K . Kroy ( 2010 ) , New Journal of Physics 12 ( 5 ) , 053024 . Wolﬀ , L . , and K . Kroy ( 2010b ) , arXiv preprint arXiv : 1010 . 6264 . Wolﬀ , L . , and K . Kroy ( 2012 ) , Phys . Rev . E 86 , 040901 . Wyart , M . ( 2010 ) , EPL ( Europhysics Letters ) 89 ( 6 ) , 64001 . Wyart , M . , H . Liang , A . Kabla , and L . Mahadevan ( 2008 ) , Physical Review Letters 101 ( 21 ) , 215501 . Yao , N . Y . , D . J . Becker , C . P . Broedersz , M . Depken , F . C . MacKintosh , M . R . Pollak , and D . A . Weitz ( 2011 ) , Jour - nal Of Molecular Biology 411 ( 5 ) , 1062 . Yao , N . Y . , C . P . Broedersz , M . Depken , D . J . Becker , M . R . Pollak , F . C . MacKintosh , and D . A . Weitz ( 2013 ) , Phys . Rev . Lett . 110 , 018103 . Yao , N . Y . , C . P . Broedersz , Y . - C . Lin , K . E . Kasza , F . C . MacKintosh , and D . A . Weitz ( 2010 ) , Biophysical Journal 98 ( 10 ) , 2147 . Yucht , M . G . , M . Sheinman , and C . P . Broedersz ( 2013 ) , Soft Matter 9 , 7000 . Zilman , A . , and S . Safran ( 2003 ) , EPL ( Europhysics Letters ) 63 ( 1 ) , 139 .