State - of - the - art of Literature Reviews on Project Financing Models for Toll Road Investments Lukas B . Sihombing 1 , a , Yusuf Latief 2 , b , Ayomi D . Rarasati 3 , c , and Andreas Wibowo 4 , d 1 Civil Engineering , University of Indonesia , Indonesia 2 Civil Engineering , University of Indonesia , Indonesia 3 Civil Engineering , University of Indonesia , Indonesia 4 Agency for Research and Development , Ministry of Public Works and Housing , Indonesia a lukas _ sihombing @ yahoo . com , b latief73 @ eng . ui . ac . id , c ayomi @ eng . ui . ac . id , d andreaswibowo @ pu . go . id Keywords : state of the art , literature , financing model , toll road , investment Abstract . The financial sustainability has been a major issue in greenfield toll - road projects . Most of Indonesia’s 24 toll road concessions already signed by Toll Road Authority , for instance , cannot be put in operation because of financing problems . Uncertainties of long - term project revenues , limitation of budget provided by governments , inadequate government supports for land acquisitions , lack of toll road financing itself and low traffic estimates have been widely cited as potential sources of this unsustainability . Using desk study and meta analysis , this research aims to investigate the state - of - the - art of innovative financing models recently introduced to address financial problems . These models include earmarked tax revenue system , deep discount bonds , take out financing , tax increment financing , land leases , deferred debt , and private donation . 1 . Introduction Project finance takes place when a project is a legally and economically independent project company or independent assets in which economic unit or special purpose vehicle ( SPV ) services the debt from the project cash flow alone ; this type of financing is also known as non - recourse as the lender cannot recourse to the parent company of the borrowing SPV when the project goes wrong [ 1 , 2 ] . According to Finnerty [ 3 ] , in project financing careful financial engineering must ensure that risks and rewards are properly traded - off and the SPV is economically strong to meet its obligations to both creditors and shareholders . The application of project financing scheme especially for public infrastructure project is actually not a new concept ; it has been used in English road systems in the 18 th and early 19 th centuries [ 4 ] . In Indonesia , the first application was in 1978 whenever the Government built the 60 km Jakarta - Bogor - Ciawi ( Jagorawi ) toll road [ 5 ] . This project costed about IDR 350 million per kilometers at that time’s currency value and financed by a combination of foreign loan and government budget [ 6 ] . At present , most of project finance - based Indonesian toll roads are implemented under build - operate - transfer ( BOT ) contract [ 7 ] . However , despite a great demand over the years , the construction and operation of new toll roads developed very slowly . The list of reasons to explain this slow progress is long but some factors seem to stand out more than the others and one of these factors is financial sustainability . For instance , most of Indonesia’s 24 toll road concessions already signed by Toll Road Authority cannot be put in operation because they faced financing problems . The potential sources of financial unsustainability include uncertainties of long - term project revenues , limitation of budget provided by governments for toll roads [ 8 ] , inadequate government supports for land acquisitions [ 9 , 10 ] , lack of toll road financing itself [ 11 , 12 ] and low traffic estimates [ 13 ] . The objective of this paper is to present state of the art literature related to project financing models in toll roads . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3386170 2 . Sources of Fund Project finance often involves many stakeholder organizations and constitutes complex contractual arrangements among them . It is also typically characterized by high leverage , averaging 70 % or even more . The debt generally comes from four sources : bank financing ( domestic and overseas ) , insurance companies , conduit - loan securitization , and single - asset securitization [ 15 ] . To analyze the default risks , banks employ qualitative or quantitative approaches or both of them [ 16 ] . For large projects , banks also usually assign financial advisers and lead managers to help underwrite debt and place them in capital markets , [ 16 ] . Equity is the second source of capital to finance large projects [ 17 ] . Private equity investors‘ decision to invest in an infrastructure project is influenced by country risk , project structure , year of investment and project cost [ 17 ] . Whether or not equity investors receive cash distribution will depend on the expected residual value of the project and the profitability of the project . 3 . Literature Review Fink [ 18 ] defined literature review as “a systematic , explicit , and reproducible method for identifying , evaluating , and synthesizing…” . Fitt [ 19 ] concluded that the purpose of literature review prepares to remain a gap in the understanding of the process . A systematic review involves a number of discrete steps : question formulation ; finding studies ; appraisal and selection of studies ; summary and synthesis of relevant studies ; and determining the applicability of results” [ 22 ] . There are eight steps in conducting a systematic review : formulate review question , define inclusion and exclusion on criteria , locate studies , select studies , assess study quality , extract data , analyze and present results , and interpret results [ 27 ] . Iterating the objective of this paper here that it presents the research trend of project financing models , the paper’s methodology followed the procedure suggested by Mayring [ 23 ] . In order to enhance the level of understanding , the research question introduced to guide the review process is “what is the current status of literature addressing the major investment project issues causing financing gap in toll road investment scheme financing models ? ” The delimitation criteria were analyzed to qualify research papers for the research outlets . The effort of researchers and practitioners from various disciplines were evaluated to perform exercise on the current status of toll road financing models ( TRFMs ) literature . A total of 24 articles met the criteria and were used for further analysis . The list of the journals addressing the financing model issues for toll road infrastructure is presented in Table 1 . It is evident that most of the journals ( i . e . 22 ) are either from infrastructure project financing or economic and regulation management . Table 1 . List of Journals Reviewed and Number of Papers for the Period 1999 - 2013 Name of Journal Number of papers published Infrastructure Project Financing The Journal of Structured Finance 1 Finance and Investment in Japan 1 Journal of Financial Management of Property and Construction 2 Public Finance and Management 1 Transportation 1 Australasian Transport Research Forum ( ATRF06 ) 1 Brookings - Wharton papers on Urban Affairs 1 The IUP Journal of Infrastructure 2 Journal of Construction Engineering and Management 1 Engineering , Construction and Architectural Management 1 Built Environment Project and Asset Management 2 Economics & Regulation Management Network Spatial Economics 1 Journal of Economic Cooperation and Development 1 Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3386170 Regulation 2 St . John’s Law review 1 International Journal of Management Research and Review 1 Management Research and Practice 1 Public Administration Research 1 Others Thesis Master MIT 1 Kementerian Keuangan Paper 1 We now consider the papers addressing the toll road project financing models to classify and review the research based on infrastructure project financing issues causing financing gap . According to the categorization by the practitioners and academicians , the major issues are classified into three categories of : ( 1 ) Financing ; ( 2 ) Delivery system ; and ( 3 ) Revenue . 4 . Discussion and Conclusion This paper presents a state - of - the - art literature review of TRFMs , discussing major infrastructure project financing issues accountable for toll road financing . The aim is to highlight the trends and opportunities in research addressing the TRFMs . To meet this objective , literature is collected from various databases over a period of 14 years ( 1999 - 2013 ) . The literature is systematically reviewed and classified to provide a better understanding of the research in the last two decades . In order to maintain the rigor of the overall process , a structured and fit - for - purpose systematic research process is followed in both the collection and content analysis of the literature . The review process is inspired and guided by the principles of [ 23 , 25 , 26 ] , considering the advantages and ignoring the disadvantages of the respective processes . A two - step process is followed for literature segmentation and synthesis . First the literature is segmented according to the journals , publications per year , and countries to get an overview . The journals are categorized into infrastructure project financing journals , economics & regulation management journals , and other journals . It was found that out of 24 papers , 14 were published in infrastructure project financing journals and 8 were published in economics & regulation management journals . The literature is also segmented according to the countries and it is found that most of the research is in the USA , India , China , Japan , and Indonesia with only a limited attention paid to the developing countries . This is also evident from the fact that 60 percent of the papers are addressing issues of developed countries while only 40 percent are focused on developing countries . This is quite similar to the research trend in other disciplines with few exceptions . But , it is believed that in the coming years , there will be huge change in this trend , with a majority of research publications from Asian countries with growing economies such as India and China . These countries are one of the longest toll road . It is found that the second longest of toll road in the world is China , 45 , 000 km . In the second step , the literature is classified according to the problem context , methodology , and product and geographical region for an in - depth analysis of the same . The research in TRFMs is in the nascent stage and is disintegrated into problem contexts . The studies have addressed the problems in isolation with little attention to the interdependence of the problems . This phenomenon can be attributed to the fragmented nature of the TRFMs itself . Most of the problems are generally well studied and explored for infrastructure project financing but have recently gained attention for toll road financing models . It is also implicit that the research in Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3386170 specific problem contexts will continue to increase in the short term . Nevertheless , with the increase in efforts , the requirement for integrative contributions will emerge to understand the overall phenomena of TRFMs . It is seen that the level of interest varies across the problem contexts . There are a lot of context specific papers , especially in delivery system and financing focus . Other problems such as revenue focus have been explored to some extent but very few studies considered the toll road financing . Therefore , a huge potential exists for exploring these problems in TRFMs . The literature was classified according to the applied methodologies to find out the theoretical orientation of the field as a whole . From this analysis , it is revealed that most of the problems were solved case study and action research general . Methods such as modeling and simulation are confined to areas such as problem identification and forecasting . Taking into account the relative infancy of the field , it is expected that in the future there will be an increase in use of other methodologies . Even cross methodological approaches are expected considering the fragmented nature of the problems . Best practices from the practitioners have not emerged in the papers . This shows the lack of universally accepted practices and the complex nature of the problem . With the increase in literature it is also assumed that best practices and advanced techniques will emerge as in the infrastructure literature . The classification according to the produce shows that , in a majority of the cases all the toll road financing produce is assumed as a single factor , with only limited attention to the individual product characteristics . It is very important to study the produce at the individual level given its factor . The consumption habits and climate of any geographical location plays an important role in deciding the relative importance of the toll road financing to that particular region . The study of literature across the geographies reveals that there is an increase in TRFMs research but it is mainly limited to a few countries . It is interesting to note that these countries have almost the same ranking for research in all other disciplines ( www . scimagojr . com ) . There are a few exceptions such as Indonesia due to its commitment towards infrastructure . There is a need for research to be replicated and studied in the developing nations which are among the biggest financing models of toll road infrastructure . Table 2 shows the result of state - of - the - art of literature reviews on project financing models in Indonesia , all of them come from the mapping of problem context to methodology and to product shows a clear picture of the link of product - problem - methodology . Table 2 . The Result of State - of - the - art of Literature Review on Toll Road Financing Models in Indonesia Author ' s Name Variable of Financing Models Nambu [ 32 ] Earmarked tax revenue system Srivastava , Lakhmani and Sikroria [ 35 , 39 ] Take out financing Lakhmani and Sikroria [ 39 ] Deep discount bonds Xueming [ 45 ] Tax increment financing Xueming [ 45 ] Land leases Xueming [ 45 ] Deferred Debt Xueming [ 45 ] Private donation Financing model of earmarked tax revenue is funds which obtained from vehicle tax and fuel tax . The revenue utilized for land acquisition , financial costs , or legal cost in the phases of pre - construction and construction . Successful countries has ever applied this model was Japan and USA [ 32 , 36 , 56 - 60 ] . Deep discount bonds financing model is funds which obtained from financial markets debt with zero coupon bonds . Successful countries had ever applied this model was USA , they borrowed 1 . 5 billion US dollars for infrastructure development [ 39 , 61 - 63 ] . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3386170 Take out financing ( TOF ) model is funds which obtained by financial institutions which takes over bank lender because of construction duration over 10 - 15 years , while the bank lenders are only able to provide a loan of up to 5 years . Successful countries has ever applied this model was India , where financial institutions such as the India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited ( IIFCL ) took over the loan from the bank [ 35 , 64 ] . Tax increment financing ( TIF ) model is funds which is obtained base on land and building tax ( PBB ) and tax object sales value ( NJOP ) difference around toll road building between before and after toll road construction [ 45 , 65 - 67 ] . Financing model of land leases is funds which obtained from leases of the property and land property of toll road during the operation [ 45 , 68 - 70 ] . Deferred debt financing model is funds which obtained by suspension of debt payments , and it is paid at operational phase when the financial statement is positive [ 45 , 71 ] . Finally , the state - of - the - art of TRFMs from a holistic perspective could be understood with the classification of this paper . This mapping may be used as a framework to facilitate the work of managers and researchers addressing the TRFMs . It may serve as a frame of reference to decide a suitable methodology for a given problem context . The mapping of products to geographies gives the insights about the real - life problems . The problem - methodology mapping helps in understanding the way in which these problems are addressed in other parts of the world . This can help the practitioners analyze the similarities and differences from other contexts and guide them to build , modify , and practice new solutions . References [ 1 ] T . Merna : Project Finance in Construction : A Structured Guide to Assessment ( Wiley - Blackwell 2010 ) , p . 11 - 13 [ 2 ] S . Gatti : Project Finance in Theory and Practice : Designing , Structuring , and Financing Private and Public Projects ( Academic Press , 2008 ) , p . 2 [ 3 ] J . D . Finnerty : Project Financing : Asset - Based Financial Engineering ( 3 rd Edition ) ( John Wiley & Sons , 2013 ) , p . 2 [ 4 ] E . Yescombe : Principles of Project Finance ( Academic Press , 2002 ) p . 8 [ 5 ] Jasa Marga , Jagorawi , http : / / www . jasamarga . com / layanan - jalan - tol / jagorawi . html , cited on January 27st , 2015 [ 6 ] Wikipedia , Jalan Tol jagorawi , http : / / id . wikipedia . org / wiki / Jalan _ Tol _ Jagorawi , cited on January 27st , 2015 [ 7 ] A . Wibowo and B . Kochendörfer : Financial Risk Analysis of Project Finance in Indonesian Toll Roads , Journal of Construction Engineering and Management , Vol . 131 , No . 9 , September ( 2005 ) , p . 963 [ 8 ] Ethridge : ARTBA forecast calls for modest 2015 growth , Better Roads , ( 2014 ) http : / / www . betterroads . com / artba - forecast - calls - for - modest - 2015growth / cited on 05 December 2014 . [ 9 ] The World Bank , Ministry of Construction Japan : Asian Toll Road Development Program : Review of Recent Toll Road Experience in Selected Countries and Preliminary Tool Kit for Toll Road Development ( 1999 ) , p . II - 4 . [ 10 ] S . Dikun : Infrastruktur Indonesia : Sebelum , Selama , dan Pasca Krisis , ( Bappenas , Indonesia , 2003 ) , p . 173 . [ 11 ] Gautier and M . Mitra : Financing Infrastructure Under Budget Constraints , ( Core Discussion Paper 2003 / 37 , Belgium , 2003 ) , p . 10 [ 12 ] F . Nix : Alternative Road Financing Arrangements , Research conducted for the Canada Transportation Act Review , ( 2001 ) , p . 58 [ 13 ] C . Harris : Infrastructure Projects : A Review of Canceled Private Projects ( The World Bank - PPI 2003 ) , p . 4 [ 15 ] R . Elgemony : Debt - financing Alternatives : Refinancing and Restructuring in the Lodging Industry , Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Adminstration Quarterly ; Jun ; 43 , 3 ; ABI / INFORM complete , ( 2002 ) , p . 11 [ 16 ] E . Scannella : Project Finance in the Energy Industry : New Debt - based Financing Models , International Business Research , Vol . 5 , No . 2 ; February , ( 2012 ) , p . 85 [ 17 ] N . G . Josephine ; K . V . Gautami ; and R . A . Thillai : Infrastructure Finance : A Comparative Analysisi of Projects with and without Private Equity Funding , Electronic copy available at : http : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 1912321 ( 2009 ) . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3386170 [ 18 ] Fink : Conducting Research Literature Reviews : From the Internet to paper ( SAGE Publications 1998 ) . p . 3 [ 19 ] M . R . H . Fitt : An Investigation of the Doctoral Dissertation Literature review : From the materials we use to prepare students to the materials that students prepare , ( PhD Thesis , Utah State University 2011 ) , p . 92 [ 22 ] P . Glasziou : Systematic Reviews in Health Care : A Practical Guide ( Cambridge University Press 2001 ) [ 23 ] P . Mayring : Qualitative Content Analysis : Theoretical Foundation ( Basic Procedures and Software Solution 2014 ) [ 25 ] M . Shukla and S . Jharkharia : Agri - fresh produce supply chain management : a state - of - the - art literature review , International Journal of Operations & Production Management , Vol . 33 , No . 2 ( 2013 ) , p . 122 . [ 26 ] P . Mayring : Qualitative Content Analysis , Theories Methods Applications , Vol . 1 , No . 2 ( 2000 ) . [ 27 ] H . H . Kassarjian : Content Analysis in Consumer Research , The Journal of Consumer Research , Vol . 4 , No . 1 ( 1977 ) . [ 32 ] T . Nambu : History of Road Development ( Finance and Investment in Japan , 2006 ) , p . 5 [ 35 ] V . Srivastava : Project appraisal in infrastructure financing by Indian Banks , The IUP Journal of Infrastructure , Vol . IX , No . 1 ( 2011 ) [ 36 ] Zhirong J . Z . and Chengxin C : Funding China’s Urban Infrastructure : Revenue Structure and Financing [ 39 ] P . Lakhmani and R . Sikroria : Infrastructure financing instruments with a special emphasis on highways and road , International Journal of Management Research and Review , Vol . 2 , Issu 9 , Article N0 - 20 / 1668 - 1677 , ISSN : 2249 - 7196 ( 2012 ) . [ 45 ] Xueming C : Managing Transportation Financing in an Innovative Way , Management Research and Practice , Vol . 4 , Issue 3 , pp . 5 - 17 , ISSN : 2067 - 2462 ( 2012 ) . [ 56 ] R . Carling : Tax Earmarking : Is it good practice ? , The Centre for Independent Studies , p . 1 ( 2007 ) . [ 57 ] A . Athanassakos : General fund financing versus earmarked taxes : An alternative model of budgetary choice in a democracy , Public Choice ( 1986 - 1998 ) ; 66 , 3 : ProQuest ( 1990 ) . [ 58 ] C . Doll and H . van Essen : Road Infrastructure cost and revenue in Europe , Report to Internalization Measures and Policies for all external cost of Transport ( IMPACT ) ( 2008 ) . [ 59 ] G . Favero : Fiscal decentralization and urban public transport , MIT Thesis , p . 29 ( 2006 ) . [ 60 ] K . Kunz : The use of earmarked to fund state and local infrastructure , PhD Thesis , University of Ilinois ( 2004 ) . [ 61 ] R . S . Varma : Capital Structure Changes and Shareholder Wealth : The Case of Deep Discount Debt , PhD Thesis , The Pennsylvania State University , p . 29 ( 1987 ) . [ 62 ] S . Parameswaran : Fundamentals of Financial Instruments : Stocks , Bonds , Foreign Exchange , and Derivatives , John Wiley & Sons , Hoboken , NJ , USA , p . 176 ( 2010 ) . [ 63 ] A . A . Collins , A . J . Durst , H . Levebthal , and M . N . Schwarz : Deep discount bonds - International financing technique , The CPA Journal , p . 51 ( 1982 ) . [ 64 ] The India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited ( IIFCL ) : Takeout Finance Scheme for Financing Viable Infrastructure Projects , http : / / www . iifcl . org / Content / mtfc . aspx ( 2015 ) . [ 65 ] T . G . Johnson and J . K . Scott : A Comprehensive approach to the assessment of tax increment financing ( TIF ) projects , Journal of Public Budgeting , Accounting & Financial Management ; Fall 2004 ; 16 , 3 ; proQuest , p . 395 ( 2004 ) . [ 66 ] M . Royse : Advantages & Disadvantages of Tax Increment Financing , Economic Development Review ; Spring 1992 ; 10 , 2 ; ProQuest , p . 84 ( 1992 ) . [ 67 ] S . Farris and J . Horbas : Creation vs . Capture : Evaluating the True Costs of Tax Increment Financing , Journal of Property Tax Assessment & Adminstration , Vol . 6 , Issue 4 , p . 23 ( 2009 ) . [ 68 ] M . S . Jairath : Dynamics of land - lease market in hilly area , Indian Journal of Agricultural Economics ; Jul - Sep 2000 ; 55 , 3 ; ProQuest , p . 349 ( 2000 ) . [ 69 ] Q . Weidong and L . Xiaolong : The Journal of Real Estate Research , suppl . Special Issue on Chinese Real Estate Markets 34 . 3 ( Jul - Sep 2012 ) : 291 - 310 ( 2012 ) . [ 70 ] E . C . Hui : An empirical study of the effects of land supply and lease conditions on the housing market , Property Management , 2004 ; 22 , 2 ; ABI / INFORM Complet , p . 132 ( 2004 ) . [ 71 ] E . T . Nwaeze and A . Lulseged : Valuation Relevance of Allowance for Funds Used During Construction and Operating Income : The effects of Regulatory Climates and Deregulation , Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting , 19 : 131 - 154 , p . 149 ( 2002 ) . Electronic copy available at : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3386170