Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID - 19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID - 19 . The COVID - 19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect , the company ' s public news and information website . Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID - 19 - related research that is available on the COVID - 19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories , such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re - use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source . These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID - 19 resource centre remains active . Commentary Global COVID - 19 vaccine inequity : The scope , the impact , and the challenges Archana Asundi , 1 , 2 Colin O’Leary , 3 and Nahid Bhadelia 2 , 4 , 5 , * 1 Department of Medicine , Boston University School of Medicine , Boston , MA 02118 , USA 2 Section of Infectious Diseases , Boston Medical Center , Boston , MA 02118 , USA 3 Program in Virology , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02115 , USA 4 Center for Emerging Infectious Diseases Policy and Research ( CEID ) , Boston , MA 02118 , USA 5 National Emerging Infectious Diseases Laboratories ( NEIDL ) , Boston , MA 02118 , USA * Correspondence : nbhadeli @ bu . edu https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2021 . 06 . 007 Global vaccine inequity is prolonging the COVID - 19 pandemic . Here , we outline the scope and impact of ineq - uitable vaccine distribution and identify challenges in vaccine development , manufacturing , and distribution as well as potential solutions to address this crisis . Introduction Within a year of the initially reported clus - ter of COVID - 19 in Wuhan City in China , the ﬁrst preventative vaccinations against the novel coronavirus , SARS - CoV - 2 , were administered in the United Kingdom on December 8 th , 2020 , followed by the approval and administration of multiple other vaccine candidates globally ( Led - ford , 2021 ) . With funding and political commitment , the development and the manufacturing of vaccines could take advantage of existing science and be accelerated well beyond the typical pro - cess of 5 to 10 years . However , the discourse has increasingly shifted to the looming risk of inequitable global distribu - tion of developed vaccines and whether the same urgency can be mounted to address it . At present , the scope of global COVID - 19 vaccine inequity is immense , and its repercussions are and will continue to be felt worldwide . While initia - tives such as COVAX have made some progress in mitigating inequitable vaccine distribution , these efforts currently appear insufﬁcient to address the scale of global need . We outline the scope and impact of inequitable vaccine distribution and discuss major diplomatic initiatives , such as COVAX , targeted to address vaccine inequality . We will summarize the pitfalls to equity in the vaccine research and development pipeline , ranging from intel - lectual property to manufacturing and regulatory considerations . Finally , we will highlight bold new steps such as updating international agreements and capacity building that should be undertaken in the long term to address this global crisis and the next one . The scope of global vaccine inequity As the pandemic abates in many high - in - come countries ( HICs ) , cases and mortal - ity continue to increase in many LMICs ( low - and middle - income countries ) ( The Economist , 2021a ) . At time of writing , almost 85 % of global vaccine doses administered have been in high - and up - per - middle - income countries and 75 % of those have been administered in just 10 countries , including the United States , the United Kingdom , Germany , and France ( Mathieu et al . , 2021 ) . Only 5 % of the world has received one dose of the vaccine , and the inequities are even more profound in areas such as the conti - nent of Africa where most countries have administered doses to less than 1 % of their population . So far , these stark disparities appear to follow the same sequence of events that have been encountered during prior pan - demics . During the 2009 H1N1 pandemic , developed countries initially purchased and stockpiled as much vaccine as was manufactured . Even when WHO and UN intervened to try and secure vaccines for developing countries , donations to LMICs were often limited ( Eccleston - Turner and Upton , 2021 ) . The impact of global vaccine inequity Inequities in vaccine coverage will and are resulting in both direct and indirect conse - quences , in affected countries and the overall global community . Aside from the direct illnesses and loss of life , continued vulnerability to surges in cases leaves already struggling healthcare systems with limited ability to provide care for other health conditions . Illness and deaths among healthcare workers im - pacts the human resources required for continued response to COVID - 19 and non - COVID - 19 health burdens . Over the last year , rates of childhood vaccination have dropped precipitously due to post - poned vaccination campaigns , delaying immunization to 13 . 5 million people in some of the most vulnerable countries in the world ( U . S . Global Leadership Coali - tion , 2021 ) . Lastly , continued transmis - sion of COVID - 19 creates a scenario conducive to continued viral evolution and development of new mutations , some of which may confer selective advantage in terms of transmission or im - mune evasion as has already been occur - ring over the past year . These viral vari - ants could pose a threat to individuals in HICs , particularly those who are unvacci - nated or those who cannot mount a high enough immune response to vaccination . Additionally , overwhelmed healthcare and surveillance systems are also far less likely to detect new emerging and endemic infectious diseases threats that may arise . In 2020 , 1 million people were undiagnosed and untreated for tubercu - losis , undercutting over a decade of in - vestment in curbing this disease globally . Beyond direct health impacts , the ongoing diversion of resources to ll 1036 Cell Host & Microbe 29 , July 14 , 2021 ª 2021 Elsevier Inc . COVID - 19 response can keep countries from returning to normal socially and economically ( U . S . Global Leadership Coalition , 2021 ) . As communities around the world deal with the wreckage of their economies , 95 million more people have been pushed into extreme poverty , with another 200 million predicted to be at risk between now and the year 2030 . The pandemic has also led to worsening food insecurity and has had detrimental effects on global childhood education and women’s empowerment . The longer the COVID - 19 pandemic continues as an acute crisis in LMICs , the greater the likely devastation to all the above indicators . However , the economic toll of unequal vaccine allocation is also going to impact the entire global market . A RAND Europe report estimates that if the poorest coun - tries cannot access the vaccine , the world would still lose $ 153 billion a year in GDP ( including a loss of $ 40 billion in EU and $ 16 billion in US ) ( Hafner et al . , 2020 ) . Given these economic costs , HICs would get back about $ 4 . 8 for every $ 1 spent on supplying vaccine . The urgency for global vaccine coverage is even greater now in the face of more transmissible variants that seem to be causing a surge of cases in coun - tries that were initially thought to have escaped the worst impact of the pandemic due in part to a younger popu - lation . Surges in Brazil and India appear to be fueling case increases in countries sur - rounding them due to variants that seem to affect younger patients more than the initial virus , and in some cases causing re - infections in those with prior immunity through natural infection . The case of In - dia highlighted the possibility that large gatherings and multiple introductions of these variants could create an envirno - ment where more LMICs may see large surges , making the speed of vaccination paramount . New outbreaks across sec - tions of Africa , Asia , Latin America , and Russia in July 2021 appear to conﬁrm these fears . COVAX and vaccine diplomacy WHO’s COVAX utility represents the vac - cine pillar of the multi - lateral , multi - orga - nizational ACT - Accelerator and was formed in part to address the delay that was seen in access and distribution of H1N1 vaccines to LMICs ( Eccleston - Turner and Upton , 2021 ) . COVAX is a partnership between WHO , the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations , the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Im - munizations ( Gavi ) , and UNICEF . Its ambi - tious goal is both to support research and development and to use ﬁnancial commit - ment of purchase by rich countries to pro - vide doses of successful vaccine candi - dates for 20 % of the population in 92 of the poorest countries ( Eccleston - Turner and Upton , 2021 ) . Several barriers currently hinder its ability to meet its goal by the end of 2021 . First , COVAX faces a funding gap of $ 3 . 7 billion dollars immedi - ately ( which the US has promised to help cover in the short term ) and an additional $ 23 . 7 billion over the course of the next year . Second , COVAX has not been able to compete with HICs on the global mar - ket , which have already purchased a huge portion of the available supply of approved vaccines . Despite joining COVAX , many HICs established their own bilateral agreements with vaccine manufacturers . As discussed in detail below , further production of vaccines is currently plagued with shortage of raw materials and limits on manufacturing ca - pacity . Third , COVAX faced another large challenge when one of its largest con - tracted producers , Serum Institute of In - dia , fell behind on its targets and eventu - ally delayed the anticipated date of export due to the large surge of COVID - 19 cases during India’s second wave ( Co - hen and Kupferschmidt , 2021 ) . As a result , COVAX will face a vaccine shortage , even as India itself recovers from a devasting public health emergency and tries to balance domestic needs with international commitments for manufacturing . Moving forward , the speed of global vaccination is paramount in the advent of new highly transmissible variants as is responsiveness to geographic areas fac - ing acute surges . Some have criticized the COVAX utility for not been responsive enough to new surges in LMICs , by continuing to distribute vaccines based on country’s population , rather than on severity of outbreaks or resilience of affected healthcare systems to handle such surges ( Herzog et al . , 2021 ) . Against this backdrop , a perverse juxtaposition is arising where many HICs are predicted to have a large surplus of vaccines , with the US predicted to have nearly 1 billion doses in surplus despite vaccinating everyone over 5 years of age and keeping stockpiles ( Evenett , 2021 ) . Although HICs have started to make both bilateral donations and further commitment of doses to COVAX , to date these donations to not approach the scale of what is needed . For example , G7 countries recently announced a pledge of 870 million vaccine doses to LMICs , whereas the WHO estimates that 11 billion will be needed to vaccinate 70 % of the global population ( Wise , 2021 ) . Alternatively , China and Russia , who did not partake in COVAX , are providing doses of domestically devel - oped vaccine candidates ( such as Sputnik , Sinopharm , and Sinovac ) through bilateral agreements , which they hope will improve their global standing , while improving relationships and providing strategic inﬂuence ( The Econo - mist , 2021b ) . While the short - term solution to ensuring more equitable vaccine access is reliant on re - distributing the global stockpile to places in need , the long - term solution should focus on local ca - pacity strengthening in regions and coun - tries that will not depend on philanthropic contributions . Barriers to expanding vaccine manufacturing The advent of next - generation , ‘‘plug and play’’ vaccines utilizing mRNA , viral vec - tor , or protein subunit technology offers opportunities to develop new products to reduce the burden of infectious dis - eases . During the COVID - 19 pandemic , the use of these technologies demon - strated the speed at which a new vaccine could be developed . However , difﬁculties in scaling the production of these vac - cines to achieve global vaccine equity highlights the challenges that these new technologies still face in meeting global demand . Legal barriers , including intellec - tual property transfer , are well known in the ﬁeld of therapeutic technology devel - opment . But beyond familiar legal and regulatory hurdles , scaling next - genera - tion vaccine production confronts barriers including a lack of physical infrastructure , technical expertise , and supply chain capability ( Wouters et al . , 2021 ) . Next - generation COVID - 19 vaccines incorporate a large number of patent - pro - tected technologies , ranging from the modiﬁed adenoviral vectors to the lipid Commentary Cell Host & Microbe 29 , July 14 , 2021 1037 ll nanoparticles used to deliver mRNA and the design of a stabilized SARS - CoV - 2 spike protein that serves as the critical an - tigen for multiple vaccines . Liberalizing in - tellectual property rules around these in - novations via a Trade - Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights ( TRIPS ) waiver would make these underlying technologies available for use at a global scale . Proponents point to the Treatment Action Campaign and the TRIPS waiver granted for antiretroviral therapies as evi - dence that this approach can greatly improve access to COVID - 19 vaccines . However , as many vaccine developers actively worked to set up licensing agree - ments or pledged not to enforce patent protections for COVID - 19 vaccines , legal barriers may not be the primary barrier to global vaccine equity . In this event , liberalizing patent laws is a ﬁrst step to - ward improving equity but will not be the whole solution . Production and supply chain barriers remain a larger constraint on global vac - cine equity . The ability to produce com - plex biologic products , including vac - cines , remains highly unequal and concentrated in certain countries , including the United States , European Union , India , and China . Entire continents , such as Africa , broadly lack vaccine manufacturing capacity , despite having ‘‘ﬁnish and ﬁll’’ capabilities . COVID - 19 vaccines made in Africa currently utilize active ingredient produced abroad and shipped to these ‘‘ﬁnish and ﬁll’’ facil - ities—at this time there are no complete COVID - 19 manufacturing chains in Africa ( Gennari , 2021 ) . This is , in part , a side ef - fect of a constricted supply chain that uses highly specialized materials . For example , the mRNA caps utilized in mRNA vaccine manufacture are primarily produced by a single company that holds the IP rights . Ionizable cationic lipids , which are critical for mRNA vaccine deliv - ery , are subject to a considerable supply bottleneck—limiting the number of doses of mRNA vaccine that can be produced . Currently , the technical capabilities of the vaccine manufacturers that do exist in Africa to produce next - generation vac - cines is likely limited . Legal and production barriers to ex - panding vaccine production are further compounded by technical barriers related to technology transfer and regu - latory capacity , such as the concentra - tion of vaccine production knowledge in companies in HICs and the current dearth of trained personnel in LMICs ( Price et al . , 2020 ; Wouters et al . , 2021 ) . The lack of research and development infrastructure and personnel in LMICs is a signiﬁcant challenge to vaccine tech - nology transfer and reﬂects overall ur - gency for international investment in research capacity strengthening for this and future threats . Likewise , the weaker regulatory and surveillance capacity in many LMICs represents a technical bar - rier to both producing high - quality vac - cines that are safe and efﬁcacious and monitoring the safety of vaccines as they are administered using domestic surveillance capabilities , as opposed to relying on WHO adverse event moni - toring ( Lurie et al . , 2020 ) . This is a critical barrier to where the manufacturing and deployment of in - country manufactured vaccines can be expanded : the WHO es - timates that only 30 % of national regula - tors have the current capability to effec - tively oversee vaccine manufacturing and administration of those vaccines . Together , these challenges represent immediate barriers to expansion manufacturing capacity but also highlight areas where global investment needs to focus moving forward . Overcoming barriers to vaccine equity The ﬁrst step toward meeting the current global need must be redistribution of surplus that is starting to develop in some high - income countries . Alterna - tives , such as increasing production ca - pacity where it is currently possible and then facilitating the export of vaccine components , including active ingredient , to ﬁnish and ﬁll facilities globally would ensure that vaccines reach markets with critical need . Continuing research and development , including support through expensive clinical trials , of additional COVID - 19 vaccine candidates would further serve to increase supply . Were these candidates ( such as protein subunit vaccines ) to use different components than mRNA or viral vector - based vac - cines , they may not be subject to the same supply chain bottlenecks currently constraining vaccine production . More - over , initiatives such as COVAX continue to require full funding in order to ensure that COVID - 19 vaccine production con - tinues even as demand for vaccines in up - per - income countries wanes . Over the next year these actions could dramatically improve equitable access to vaccines . The possible approval of TRIPS waiver for COVID - 19 vaccine intellectual prop - erty signals a desire to strive for global vaccine equity but true global vaccine eq - uity will require a long - term , global effort to expand vaccine production capability , facilitate technology transfer , and develop regulatory systems that support vaccine innovation . Efforts are underway , ﬁnanced by development banks and in - ternational development agencies , to expand the physical infrastructure neces - sary for vaccine production where it is currently nonexistent . Facilitating tech - nology transfer and improving regulatory capability receive less priority—a critical oversight given the importance of a sup - portive scientiﬁc ecosystem to facilitating vaccine development . Facilitating technology transfer could be paired with efforts to support the trans - fer of intellectual property rights for vac - cines and their underlying components . A system in which established vaccine developers provide production know how to new vaccine manufacturers while licensing their products to these manu - facturers would allow them to generate revenue from the use of their technology , while boosting vaccine manufacturing ca - pacity globally . These efforts could be paired with commitments from vaccina - tion programs to purchase vaccines locally , where possible , to support local manufacturers . The African vaccine mar - ket , in 2020 , was estimated to be worth $ 1 . 2 billion annually , with 99 % of vaccines imported from outside the continent . There is a market for vaccines that could be transitioned to local production . More - over , as vaccine candidates for malaria and other endemic diseases that use next - generation vaccine technologies are developed , the size of the market for locally produced , next - generation vac - cines will continue to grow . Improving biopharmaceutical regulato - ry capacity , on a global scale , could be achieved by increasing collaborative pro - grams between regulatory agencies . As part of their global health initiatives , the Centers for Disease Control and Preven - tion ( CDC ) regularly engages peer institu - tions to boost surveillance and infectious disease management capabilities . This Commentary 1038 Cell Host & Microbe 29 , July 14 , 2021 ll model could be utilized by the Food and Drug Administration ( or other medical reg - ulatory agencies ) to boost the regulatory capabilities of peer institutions beyond their current efforts . Such activities should include improving the regulatory capabil - ities identiﬁed as critical in the Global Health Security Index ( GHSI ) ( which was developed to measure readiness of coun - tries to combat infectious disease threats across different sectors ) , as well as improving capabilities related to vaccine production and post - market adverse event monitoring where appropriate . Regulation is critical to ensuring the safe manufacture , utilizing good manufacturing practices , and use of vac - cines , both traditional and next genera - tion . For vaccine production to move for - ward in new markets and meet WHO standards , it is critical for a robust regula - tory apparatus to be in place . The ability to regulate the manufacture of medical countermeasures , such as vaccines , and monitor their use during deployment ( to detect adverse events and reduce the burden on WHO personnel ) should be made a component of GHSI scoring . Conclusions Dr . Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus , Di - rector - General of the WHO , has called global vaccine equity ‘‘the challenge of our time . ’’ Although achieving global COVID - 19 vaccine coverage is clearly tied to all of our mutual return to normalcy and long - term recovery , it also poses an unprecedented need for global invest - ment , coordination , and solidarity . It rep - resents the ﬁrst test of whether the global community has recognized the impor - tance of escaping the cycle of panic and neglect that generally follows emerging infectious diseases threats . REFERENCES Cohen , J . , and Kupferschmidt , K . ( 2021 ) . Rich countries cornered COVID - 19 vaccine doses . Four strategies to right a ‘scandalous inequity . Science . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . abj6604 . Eccleston - Turner , M . , and Upton , H . ( 2021 ) . International Collaboration to Ensure Equitable Access to Vaccines for COVID - 19 : The ACT - Accelerator and the COVAX Facility . Milbank Quarterly . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1468 - 0009 . 12503 . Evenett , S . J . ( 2021 ) . How big of a vaccine surplus will the US have ? ( Brookings Insitute ) . Gennari , A . , Holt , T . , Jordi , E . , and Kaplow , L . ( 2021 ) . Africa needs vaccines . What would it take to make them here ? ( McKinsey Insights : McKinsey & Co . ) , p . 12 . Hafner , M . , Yerushalmi , E . , Fays , C . , Dufresne , E . , and Van Stolk , C . ( 2020 ) . COVID - 19 and the cost of vaccine nationalism ( RAND Corporation ) . Herzog , L . M . , Norheim , O . F . , Emanuel , E . J . , and McCoy , M . S . ( 2021 ) . Covax must go beyond pro - portional allocation of covid vaccines to ensure fair and equitable access . BMJ 372 , m4853 . Ledford , H . ( 2021 ) . Six months of COVID vaccines : what 1 . 7 billion doses have taught scientists . Nature 594 , 164 – 167 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / d41586 - 021 - 01505 - x . Lurie , N . , Sharfstein , J . M . , and Goodman , J . L . ( 2020 ) . The Development of COVID - 19 Vaccines : Safeguards Needed . JAMA 324 , 439 – 440 . Mathieu , E . , Ritchie , H . , Ortiz - Ospina , E . , Roser , M . , Hasell , J . , Appel , C . , Giattino , C . , and Rode´s - Guirao , L . ( 2021 ) . A global database of COVID - 19 vaccinations . Nat . Hum . Behav . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41562 - 021 - 01122 - 8 . Price , W . N . , 2nd , Rai , A . K . , and Minssen , T . ( 2020 ) . Knowledge transfer for large - scale vaccine manufacturing . Science 369 , 912 – 914 . The Economist . ( 2021a ) . There have been 7m - 13m excess deaths worldwide during the pandemic , ( London : The Economist Newspaper NA , Inc . ) https : / / www . economist . com / brieﬁng / 2021 / 05 / 15 / there - have - been - 7m - 13m - excess - deaths - worldwide - during - the - pandemic . The Economist . ( 2021b ) . Vaccine diplomacy boosts Russia’s and China’s global standing : Daily chart , London : The Economist Newspaper NA , Inc . https : / / www . economist . com / graphic - detail / 2021 / 04 / 29 / vaccine - diplomacy - boosts - russias - and - chinas - global - standing U . S . GlobalLeadershipCoalition ( 2021 ) . COVID - 19 Briefs : Impact on the Economies of Developing Countries , Global Immunization , Women and Children , Food Security . In COVID - 19 Briefs : Defeating a Global Pandemic . https : / / www . usglc . org / coronavirus / . Wise , Jacqui ( 2021 ) . Covid - 19 : G7 vaccine prom - ises fail to meet scale of challenge , say critics . British Medical Journal . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1136 / bmj . n1520 . Wouters , O . J . , Shadlen , K . C . , Salcher - Konrad , M . , Pollard , A . J . , Larson , H . J . , Teerawattananon , Y . , and Jit , M . ( 2021 ) . Challenges in ensuring global access to COVID - 19 vaccines : production , afford - ability , allocation , and deployment . Lancet 397 , 1023 – 1034 . Commentary Cell Host & Microbe 29 , July 14 , 2021 1039 ll