Building your own games : A platform for authoring digital games Kamila Rios da Hora Rodrigues ICMC University of S˜ao Paulo S˜ao Carlos , S˜ao Paulo , Brazil kamila . rios @ icmc . usp . br Ticianne de Gois Ribeiro Darin MDCC Federal University of Cear´a Fortaleza , Cear´a , Brazil ticianne @ virtual . ufc . br Vˆania Paula de Almeida Neris DC Federal University of S˜ao Carlos S˜ao Carlos , S˜ao Paulo , Brazil vania @ dc . ufscar . br Abstract —End - User Development ( EUD ) solutions is a resource that empowers professionals from different domains to create their tools . However , the design of this type of solution must be well - thought - out so that such professionals can interact with the solution , creating your applications in a simple and intuitive way , without the presence of an IT specialist . Game design and development brings with it the inherent challenges of the media type . When creating a solution to make authoring viable , you should use holistic approaches that bring the target user to the focus of the process . This paper presents a platform for digital authoring games , named RUFUS , created with the precepts of EUD , Organizational Semiotics , and Participatory Design . The platform offers a guided walkthrough for professionals to create their own games . A previous evaluation pointed to the tool’s advantages , but also revealed aspects that the tool should improve , such as help and documentation . Index Terms —serious games , authoring platform , RUFUS , end - user development , organizational semiotics I . I NTRODUCTION End - User Development tools have been increasingly de - signed to support professionals in different areas . Such tools should allow these users to create their computing solutions without needing nearby computing professionals . The con - struction of these tools , however , is not trivial . In the gaming area , specifically , there are game engines , a computer program and / or set of libraries , used to simplify and abstract the development of electronic games or other applications with real - time graphics . A game engine is a more technical solution for specialist professionals . They usually have feature - rich interfaces , but use by specialized profession - als . The literature is rich in methodologies for the development of software products . However , it is necessary to think of a more holistic and user - focused approach to the application to allow the use of the same in an easy and guided way . In this work we describe an authoring interface , a Web application , with a simplified interface , which makes use of easy - to - configure graphical components so that professionals from different domains can make use of it without the need for a manual or prior knowledge of concepts and techniques of computing . This work also used Organizational Semiotics and Participa - tory Design artifacts to design a serious digital game authoring platform that allows Health and Education professionals , for example , to create their own games using pre - defined mechan - ics . The professional is guided on the interface through a set of steps to create each type of game . The following sections describe the background used in the design of the application , as well as how the research group has designed serious games . Next , the authoring platform is described , and its first evaluation is described . II . B ACKGROUND In this work , the main concepts studied are End - User Development , serious games , and interfaces . They are briefly described in this section . A . End - User Development - EUD According to Lieberman et al . [ 1 ] , EUD can be defined as a set of methods , techniques , and tools that allow users of software systems , acting as non - professional software devel - opers , at some point , to create , modify or extend a software artifact . Fischer et al . [ 2 ] , in turn , defines Meta - Design ( MD ) , which characterizes objectives , techniques , and processes for creating new media and environments that allow end - users to act as designers . A fundamental goal of meta - design is to create sociotechnical environments that enable users to actively engage in ongoing systems’ development , rather than being restricted to using existing systems . Tools for EUD and MD should be more flexible , easier to understand , learn , use and teach , and be considered by users as easy to test and evaluate [ 1 ] . In EUD , there are two types of end - user activities from the user - centered design perspective [ 1 ] : a ) Parameterization or customization , which are activities that allow users to choose behaviors available in the application and which have adaptive systems such as those that automatically customize themselves – according to user behavior ; b ) Program creation and modification , which are activities that involve creating software from scratch or modifying an existing software artifact , such as programming for example ( Programming by Example - PbE ) , visual pro - gramming , macros , and scripting languages . 978 - 1 - 6654 - 6156 - 6 / 22 / $ 31 . 00 ©2022 IEEE 2022 21 s t B r a z ili a n S y m p o s i u m o n C o m pu t e r G a m e s a nd D i g i t a l E n t e r t a i n m e n t ( S B G a m e s ) | 978 - 1 - 6654 - 6156 - 6 / 22 / $ 31 . 00 © 2022 I EEE | D O I : 10 . 1109 / S B G A M E S 56371 . 2022 . 9961073 This work employs EUD concepts in developing digital games that can be planned and created by professionals from different domains through a computational platform , described in Section IV . B . Serious Games and Their Interfaces Games designed to go beyond entertainment and induce players to learn content or skill while having fun are called [ 3 ] serious games . Players can potentially transfer such abilities to real context and everyday situations [ 4 ] . Therefore , there are several applications for EUD platforms that support the development of serious games [ 5 ] . In the context of games , the customization and cre - ation / modification activities brought by the EUD can impact crucial aspects of player engagement , such as the game’s interface and story . According to Schell [ 6 ] , one can break down games into four fundamental elements : technology , aesthetics , history , and mechanics . The technology mediates the gaming experience , is tied to implementation requirements , and cannot be easily modified by the user . Aesthetics is about the user’s sensory experience in the game and can be open to basic or advanced customization . The story relates to the sequence of events that unfold in the game , while mechanics encompasses game procedures , such as interactive features . Aesthetic choices of game elements ( including characters , items , and settings ) and interface ( including buttons , menus and dialogues ) must be consistent with the game’s mechanics , and story [ 5 ] , [ 7 ] . The interface is intrinsically essential for players , as it connects it to the game mechanics and determines the flow of the player’s experience , allowing the player to take control of the characters , navigate the environment , make decisions and perform [ 8 ] tasks . A game’s interface can include passive components , usually informational displays such as feedback , life bars , and scores , and active components , such as [ 8 ] game controls . The interface design impacts a game’s usability and , therefore , its gameplay and must be connected with the game’s aesthetic and narrative choices . As player interactions in a game get more advanced , so does the complexity of the game’s interface , so the quality of the game’s interface affects players’ gaming experience as it directly affects their gameplay [ 8 ] . In this scenario , wrong choices for the interface cause confusion and distraction , distancing players from the serious goals of the game in question [ 7 ] . It is challenging to provide user interfaces for both EUD systems and their resultant games that are easy , intuitive , and usable . In this work , we sought to carry out a process in a participatory way , with the presence of different stakeholders , to achieve greater adherence to the computational solution . The following section describes the methodology used in this work and an approach created for the design of serious games employed in the development of the authoring platform described here . The approach was essential to mitigate possible problems related to the interface and interaction with the platform and the games generated . III . D ESIGN A PPROACH FOR S ERIOUS G AMES Organizational Semiotics supports the methodology for con - ducting the activities used in this work ( OS ) [ 9 ] . Organi - zational Semiotics constitutes a discipline that has roots in Semiotics applied to organizational processes . The discipline studies the nature , characteristics , function , and effect of information and communication in organizational contexts . An organization is a social system in which people behave in an organized way and follow a particular system of norms . These norms are regularities of perception , behavior , belief , and value expressed as customs , habits , behavior patterns , and other cultural artifacts [ 9 ] , [ 10 ] . Therefore , a heterogeneous population of users can be seen as an organization . Using a Semiotics approach , the Human - Computer Inter - action ( HCI ) can be understood through complex processes . These processes , designed from an engineering perspective only , have been interpreted as purely syntactic phenomena . Semiotic analysis views the primary function of computer sys - tems as vehicles of signs . It provides an adequate vocabulary that enables the understanding of computational systems in terms of other types of sign systems [ 11 ] , [ 12 ] . Therefore , to develop technical solutions , it is necessary to identify the formal and informal norms in the specific context . According to Neris and Rodrigues [ 13 ] , the informal layer is based on non - formalized aspects , for example , the customs , habits , values , behavior patterns , and intentions of each individual . In the setting of a therapeutic system , each pa - tient’s particularities must come from a holistic perspective and consider information about that patient , their family , and the healthcare providers , as well as from academic / demographic studies . The formal layer , in turn , is related to what is formalized in the context , for example , norms , rules , and social conventions , among others . In this layer , it is essential to identify the health procedures and protocols supporting therapeutic goals . Finally , system flexibility and data logging aspects need to be addressed at the technical level . Flexible characteristics can be implemented considering the cognitive and physical aspects of the patients , essential aspects that must be respected during the interaction . The User Characterization Framework is an artifact pro - vided by OS that allows for a more comprehensive view of the system’s stakeholders and considers different contexts of interest . The use of this artifact allows for a greater comprehension of the design problem and the requirements needed for the intended solution , further clarified through discussion and the investigation of stakeholders who directly or indirectly influence the solution [ 9 ] . We use this artifact to identify stakeholders in developing the application described here . For the formal , informal , and technical norms of OS applied to this project , the Participatory Design ( PD ) approach was adopted [ 14 ] , [ 15 ] . Workshops were held between the project’s technical team and a hospital’s healthcare professionals to discuss the meaning , design , and development solutions . This work has benefited from the view of Organizational Semiotics for Information Systems and is supported by its methods and artifacts . In turn , we adopted Participatory Design as a way to identify and collect requirements for the design of the platform interface for authoring games , developing the system for and with users . Participatory workshops were carried out in the stages of design and evaluation of the solution , with hospital professionals , our first client , so that it was possible to understand the profile of patients treated at the hospital , their needs and characteristics , as well as specific needs and requirements of the context of use of this solution , having the different profiles of the professionals who carry out a multidisciplinary treatment ( e . g . doctors , therapists , social workers ) as the parameters . The SemTh approach was also adopted in this project at the stage of designing the mini - games that currently compose the platform . These games were conceived , a priori , for the context of treating children with cancer and with the support of healthcare professionals specialized in this context . Later , with the advance of the studies , the game mechanics were generalized and started to compose the platform . The SemTh is organized into four stages for the design , which are [ 16 ] : 1 ) Clarification of the design problem - which seeks to understand the area and propose the style of the game ; 2 ) Interaction modeling - in which game interactions are modeled ; 3 ) Design materialization - in which prototypes are created , and the game is implemented ; and 4 ) Evaluation - at this stage the game is evaluated by the team of professionals and end users . With the proposed approach , “ it has also become possible to validate the progress made by the computer team and the empowerment of the health team ” during the design of a therapeutic digital game [ 16 ] . The problems identified during the studies with EUD in - clude the difficulty , on the part of domain professionals , regarding the understanding of requirements and the dynamics of constructing games , [ 17 ] , difficulties that are intrinsic to the EUD area . The use of the theoretical references mentioned in Section III has alleviated these difficulties , however , there are still many challenges , especially that of developing an intuitive and easy - to - use interface for domain professionals . These challenges led us to the design and development of a game authoring interface with a guided interface to support domain professionals in creating authored games . The next section describes the platform designed in the context of this work , first for the healthcare domain , but nowadays , it is a generic solution for creating serious games . IV . RUFUS : P LATFORM FOR S ERIOUS G AME A UTHORING The RUFUS 1 platform [ 17 ] is a system built on the premises of EUD and MD . It aims to allow professionals from different domains , other than Computing , to create their own games and use them with their target audience of interest . In the application design stage , SO and SemTh artifacts ( such as the User Characterization Framework ; the creation of personas ) were employed to identify requirements and 1 https : / / rufus . icmc . usp . br stakeholders in a platform for authoring serious games . The design stage is described in detail in a previous work [ 17 ] . Currently , the platform allows the creation of games in four pre - defined mechanics : quiz , puzzle , platform , and sto - rytelling . Through the web authoring interface , professionals are guided in elaborating and creating these games . After creating a game in the authoring interface , a player mobile reads the metadata and creates the respective game interface for smartphones and tablets . Fig . 1 illustrates the structure of the platform . Fig . 1 . RUFUS structure . The proposed mechanics , they were identified in previous work with professionals from different domains [ 17 ] . Our goal is to continue expanding the mechanics in order to offer more game diversity to professionals . These new mechanics , however , will be collected in field studies with the target professionals . In the Web system , the domain professional should be regis - tered by the system administrator and has a login and password to access it . By accessing the system , the professional can register the players . Within the Web system , the professional creates game projects , configuring the mechanics and content of the game . After the creation , it is possible to associate players ( e . g . , patients , students ) with the project . The player enters a login and password when accessing the game via smartphone or tablet . After logging in , the player is redirected to the menu screen – if the professional has configured more than one game to be played – or directly to the game , they should play when they have only one . While the participants play , their actions are captured , stored , and sent to the Web system , which is responsible for generating reports for the professionals . The mobile application was developed using the Game Engine Unity tools 2 and the C # 3 programming language . The Web system was implemented using the GraphQL 4 , Node . JS 5 , ReactJS 6 and TypeScript 7 technologies . When creating specific games for each player , the profes - sional can customize the game from four pre - defined mechan - 2 https : / / www . unity . com / 3 https : / / docs . microsoft . com / pt - br / dotnet / csharp / 4 https : / / graphql . org / 5 https : / / nodejs . org / en / 6 https : / / pt - br . reactjs . org / 7 https : / / www . typescriptlang . org / ics , thus setting specific parameters for each mechanic . Fig . 2 illustrates the parameters for each game . Some parameters are common , such as name , description , success , and error feedback . Fig . 2 . Parameters configurable for each of the four games . When defining a quiz type game , for example , the pro - fessional will need to point out information in three guided steps : 1 ) Basic game information ( such as name , description , wallpaper ) and game soundtrack ; 2 ) Creation of questions , number of answers offered , what are the alternatives , their scores and the correct answer and ; 3 ) Set specific parameters like positive and negative feedbacks , for example . In all four mechanics , it is possible to configure the name and description of the game , as well as error and success feedback – if the professional believes it is important . For the quiz , puzzle and platform mechanics , it is also possible to configure the wallpaper and soundtrack . In Puzzle , it is also possible to define the puzzle images and the positioning of each of these images on the screen . In Quiz , it is possible to define the questions , the number of answers that will be displayed , the possible answers , the score for each answer and the correct answer . On the platform , it is possible to configure the name of the correctable object , a score for that object , an image of the correctable , the limit score to end the game , as well as success and error sounds for each correctable chosen by the player . One of our users , for example , a nutritionist , needed to talk to a child undergoing leukemia treatment about how to eat during the side effects of the treatment . The professional made available in the game created by the collection type , suitable and unsuitable foods for the diet . The patient ( player ) should collect the appropriate ones , acquiring as many points as possible . Upon receiving the report of interaction with the game , the nutritionist was able to observe whether the child had understood what had been discussed in the consultation . If necessary , he could make a new intervention with the child and their caregivers . Finally , in storytelling it is possible to configure the char - acters ( main and supporting characters ) , accessories for the characters , the scenes , the characters and their position in each scene , and their speeches . This game mechanic brought several challenges to the platform’s designers and developers . Currently , in its third version , storytelling can add , in addition to the narrative itself , the other games created on the platform . This is a way to make storytelling more interactive and with additional routing options for player responses . So if the professional wants to , in one of the routes he / she can lead the player to a quiz , platform or puzzle game previously configured on the platform by the professional . One of our users , an occupational therapist , created a storytelling game in which she discussed grief with children who have lost relatives to COVID . The child initially chose his / her character and a friend , named them , and could choose accessories for them ( e . g . hat , glasses ) . When starting the narrative , the narrator said that he had lost his pet , a hamster , and that he was sad . Throughout the conversation , the child was guided through a dialogue in which he / she explained the existence of death , the importance of talking about this subject , and that it was okay to feel sad . He / she could also make choices about which route to take in the dialogue . One of these routes foresaw the fact that the child did not want to talk about it . When this happened , the occupational therapist used another dialogue strategy with the child . Fig . 3 illustrates some of the steps to configure a game of this mechanic on the platform . Fig . 4 , in turn , illustrates a storytelling game created on the platform by an Occupational Therapy professional to dialogue with children about death . a ) b ) c ) d ) Fig . 3 . Creating a storytelling game : a ) Defining information such as name and description ; b ) Defining characters and accessories ; c ) Defining the scene and its elements , such as characters , their positions and speeches ; d ) Defining the speeches , who will speak them , and the narrative routes . Throughout the development , evaluations were carried out on the interface of the Web platform , together with profes - a ) b ) c ) d ) Fig . 4 . A storytelling game created : a ) Defining the main character , b ) Configuring accessories for the character , c ) Part of the narrative in which the player is invited to interact with another game on the platform , d ) Puzzle game inserted in the narrative . sionals from different domains , to verify if it is intuitive and easy to use . The next section describes one of the evaluations conducted . V . P RELIMINARY E VALUATION AT P LATFORM The usability test at the platform aimed to investigate whether the system interface was intuitive , easy to understand and navigate . This was carried out with professionals from the health area , but also from education . The Usability Test [ 18 ] , [ 19 ] is an empirical method of eval - uation , which relies on the observation of the user’s interaction with the system . In this test , the design solution is evaluated according to the user’s performance and preferences , which enables the obtaining of quantifiable measures of established criteria by determining the maximum , minimum and desired limits of the measures . The test allows the evaluation of factors that characterize the usability of software such as learnability , ease of use , efficiency , productivity , user satisfaction , flexibil - ity and safety in use . Some typical measures for this type of test include time spent in tasks , number of errors , favorable and unfavorable comments , among others . Participants were selected using a non - probabilistic sam - pling technique known as convenience sampling . In this type of sampling , participants are selected according to availability and interest in participating in the research [ 20 ] . Five people volunteered to participate in the test , 3 from the health area ( two psychologists and one gerontologist ) and 2 from education ( a pedagogue and a teacher trained in Literature ) . Participants were also asked about using a platform to create games for their patients / students , and whether they thought such games could help in their treatment or learning process . All said that the platform would be useful . Some highlighted : P2 : ” It can help , because the teacher can create according to the teaching material he / she uses ” , P3 : ” students end up being interested ” , P3 : ” I believe that a lot [ helps ] , because it is difficult to find something that pleases 100 % ( . . . ) and creating it can have a greater gameplay ” , P5 : ” it is another language that facilitates contact with issues that cannot be expressed so clearly ” . To carry out the tests , an individual time was scheduled with each professional , and the meetings were held using the Google meet tool . At first , the participants were informed about the project and , subsequently , the Consent Form was read and signed , made available through a Google form . A pre - test questionnaire for profile collection was applied , and the interface test was started next . Participants shared the screen with the researcher and consented to its recording . In total , 11 tasks were applied . The metrics evaluated were : time to complete tasks , number of clicks on screen , positive / negative feedbacks and trial and error . After performing the tasks , two post - test questionnaires were applied : the SUS ( System Usability Scale ) [ 21 ] and the SAM ( Self - Assessment Manikin ) [ 22 ] to assess aspects of usability and satisfaction of the participants when interacting with the platform . Then , a brief semi - structured interview was carried out , and the test was completed . About the SUS questionnaire , this is used to assess 3 aspects of an interface : 1 ) Effectiveness ( successful use of the product ) , 2 ) Efficiency ( the effort to use the product ) and 3 ) Satisfaction ( experience in using the product ) [ 21 ] . The questionnaire is composed of a set of 10 questions , which are rated by the user on a scale from 1 to 5 , with 1 - ”Strongly disagree” and 5 - ”Strongly agree” . The ten questions in the questionnaire are : [ 1 ] I think that I would like to use this system frequently ; [ 2 ] I thought the system unnecessarily complex ; [ 3 ] I thought the system was easy to use ; [ 4 ] I think that I would need the support of a technical person to be able to use this system ; [ 5 ] I thought the various functions in this system were well integrated ; [ 6 ] I thought there was too much inconsistency in this system ; [ 7 ] I would imagine that most people would learn to use this system very quickly ; [ 8 ] I thought the system very cumbersome to use ; [ 9 ] I felt very confident using the system ; [ 10 ] I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with this system . About the SAM [ 22 ] , an instrument capable of measuring the effective aspect of an individual in response to events or objects . For this , images categorized into three dimensions are used : pleasure , arousal and dominance . Each dimension has a set of images that represent some kind of feeling . The pleasure dimension varies from a smiling and happy figure to a grumpy and unhappy figure . The representation for arousal ranges from an excited , wide - eyed figure to a relaxed , sleepy figure . For the dominance dimension , the representation varies from a large figure , which indicates control of the situation , to a small figure , which characterizes the lack of mastery of the situation . The questionnaire is a 9 - point Likert scale , in which the first two domains - between 1 and 4 - represent positive feelings ; 5 a neutral feeling and between 6 and 9 negative feelings . In the third domain the scale inverts , between 1 and 4 reflect a feeling of low control and between 6 and 9 high control in the use of the solution . The tests lasted between 40 minutes and 1 hour . In general , professionals were satisfied with the tool and did not ask many questions and / or comments about the system flow . On average , adding all tasks , there was an average of 24 minutes of completion of these tasks and 155 clicks on the screen , with the highest number of clicks 164 and the lowest 141 . The results of the SUS questionnaire , applied after in - teraction with the platform interface , point to an average score of 88 . 75 points , being considered as having ”best pos - sible” usability and positive acceptance . The scores for each participant ( P1 = 91 . 07 ; P2 = 78 . 57 ; P3 = 93 . 75 ; P4 = 92 . 86 ; P5 = 87 . 5 ) . As for the SAM [ 22 ] , the results were posi - tive for all domains : pleasure / satisfaction ( M = 1 , SD = 0 . 89 ) , arousal / motivation ( M = 1 , SD = 0 . 45 ) and dominance / feeling of control ( M = 8 , SD = 3 . 27 ) . VI . F INAL R EMARKS The End - User Development area has several challenges to be overcome , one of them , intrinsic to this context , is to provide an intuitive and easy - to - use authoring interface for professionals who are not game specialists , however , who can create and configure mini - games for their populations of interest using our platform . The use of Participatory Design techniques and instruments proposed by SemTh has helped to achieve positive results in this regard . We would like to point out that the games created by the platform are instantiated by Health and Education pro - fessionals and must contain therapeutic and / or pedagogical objectives , idealized by these professionals . Games should be used in specific educational and / or clinical contexts . They are , therefore , a resource for professionals to use with their population of interest in a personalized and monitored way . The platform provides a report with data from the player’s interaction with the game to the professional who created it , which can help these professionals in decision - making for clinical treatment , for example . We consider as benefits the possibility of creating games to talk about practices used in clinical and educational contexts with patients and students , as well as the generation of reports that can help the professional in decision - making and intervention needs . The small number of users in the preliminary evaluating can be mentioned as a limitation of the work . However , there has been interest from other health researchers who will use the platform in their study contexts . We are working to carry out evaluations with other professionals and their target users . The feedback we have so far encourages us to continue working on the platform , creating new mechanics and improving its interface . Another limitation of the platform is the absence of some accessibility requirements . However , the research team is currently working in this direction , especially in the mobile application . Regarding future works , the implementation of other game mechanics can be highlighted , as well as the availability of a repository of copyright images that can be employed by users of the platform in their game instances . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] H . Lieberman , F . Patern ` o , M . Klann , and V . Wulf . “End - user develop - ment : An emerging paradigm” . In End user development . Springer , 1 – 8 , 2006 . [ 2 ] G . Fischer . “End user development and meta - design : foundations for cultures of participation . In End - user computing , development , and software engineering : new challenges” . IGI Global , 202 – 226 , 2012 . [ 3 ] D . Michael and S . Chen . “Serious games : Games that educate , train , and inform” . Muska Lipman / Premier - Trade , 2005 . [ 4 ] E . Connors , E . Chrastil , J . S´anchez , and L . B Merabet . “Action video game play and transfer of navigation and spatial cognition skills in adolescents who are blind” . Frontiers in human neuroscience 8 ( 2014 ) , 133 , 2014 . [ 5 ] Z . Menestrina and A . De Angeli . “End - user development for serious games” . In New Perspectives in End - User Development . Springer , 359 – 383 , 2017 . [ 6 ] J . Schell . “TTenth Anniversary : The Art of Game Design : A Book of Lenses” . ( 3rd ed . ) . A K Peters / CRC Press , 2019 . [ 7 ] T . Darin , R . Andrade , and J . S´anchez . “Usability Evaluation of Mul - timodal Interactive Virtual Environments for Learners Who Are Blind : An Empirical Investigation” . Int . J . Hum . - Comput . Stud . 158 , C ( feb 2022 ) , 16 pages , 2022 . [ 8 ] S . Adinolf and S . Turkay . “Controlling your game controls : interface and customization” . 13 – 22 , 2011 . [ 9 ] K . Liu . “Semiotics in information systems engineering” . Cambridge University Press , 2000 . [ 10 ] R . K Stamper and J Backhouse . “MEASUR : method for Eliciting , Analysing , and Specifying user Requirements . In Computerized assis - tance during the information systems life cycle” . North Holland , 1988 . [ 11 ] O . L . de Oliveira and M C . C . Baranauskas . “A Semi´otica e o Design de Software” , 1998 . [ 12 ] M . Nadin . “Interface design : A semiotic paradigm” . 1988 . [ 13 ] V . Neris and K . Rodrigues . “Design of therapeutic information systems as indicating through signs” . In International Conference on Informatics and Semiotics in Organisations . Springer , 203 – 208 , 2016 . [ 14 ] D . Schuler and A . Namioka . “Participatory design : Principles and practices” . CRC Press . 1993 . [ 15 ] M . J Muller , J . Haslwanter and T . Dayton . “Participatory practices in the software lifecycle” . In Handbook of human - computer interaction . Elsevier , 255 – 297 , 1997 . [ 16 ] P . de Souza , K . Rodrigues and V . Neris . “Semth : An approach to the design of therapeutic digital games” . In Proceedings of the 18th Brazilian Symposium on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 11 . 2019 . [ 17 ] K . R . Rodrigues , V . P . Neris , P . M . Souza , R . G . Zavarizz , J . W . da Silva , T . M . Silva , and A . E . Verhalen . “ Rufus - Uma Plataforma de Autoria para Jogos Digitais Terapˆeuticos” . In X Latin American Conference on Human Computer Interaction ( CLIHC 2021 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 15 , 1 – 5 , 2021 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3488392 . 3488407 [ 18 ] J . Nielsen . Usability engineering . Elsevier . 1994 . [ 19 ] J . T Hackos , J . Rubin , J . S Dumas , J . C Redish , and J . Nielsen . Handbook of Usability Testing . 1995 . [ 20 ] I . Etikan , S . Musa , and R . Alkassim . Comparison of convenience sampling and purposive sampling . American journal of theoretical and applied statistics 5 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 1 – 4 . [ 21 ] J . Brooke . SUS : A quick and dirty usability scale . Usability Eval . Ind . 189 ( 11 1995 ) . [ 22 ] M . M Bradley and P . J Lang . Measuring emotion : the self - assessment manikin and the semantic differential . Journal of behavior therapy and experimental psychiatry 25 , 1 ( 1994 ) , 49 – 59 .