Leading Edge Perspective A Phase Separation Model for Transcriptional Control Denes Hnisz , 1 , 10 Krishna Shrinivas , 2 , 7 , 8 , 10 Richard A . Young , 1 , 3 , * Arup K . Chakraborty , 2 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , * and Phillip A . Sharp 3 , 9 , * 1 Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research , 9 Cambridge Center , Cambridge , MA 02142 , USA 2 Department of Chemical Engineering 3 Department of Biology 4 Department of Physics 5 Department of Chemistry 6 Department of Biological Engineering 7 Institute for Medical Engineering & Science Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , MA 02139 , USA 8 Ragon Institute of Massachusetts General Hospital , Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University , Cambridge , MA 02139 , USA 9 Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , MA 02142 , USA 10 Co - ﬁrst author * Correspondence : young @ wi . mit . edu ( R . A . Y . ) , arupc @ mit . edu ( A . K . C . ) , sharppa @ mit . edu ( P . A . S . ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2017 . 02 . 007 Phase - separated multi - molecular assemblies provide a general regulatory mechanism to compart - mentalize biochemical reactions within cells . We propose that a phase separation model explains established and recently described features of transcriptional control . These features include the formation of super - enhancers , the sensitivity of super - enhancers to perturbation , the transcrip - tional bursting patterns of enhancers , and the ability of an enhancer to produce simultaneous acti - vation at multiple genes . This model provides a conceptual framework to further explore principles of gene control in mammals . Recent studies of transcriptional regulation have revealed several puzzlingobservationsthat , asofyet , lackquantitativedescription , butthefurtherunderstanding ofwhichwouldlikelyaffordnew and valuable insights into gene control during development and dis - ease . For example , although thousands of enhancer elements control the activity of thousands of genes in any given human cell type , several hundred clusters of enhancers , called super - en - hancers ( SEs ) , control genes that have especially prominent roles in cell - type - speciﬁc processes ( ENCODE Project Consortium , 2012 ; Hnisz et al . , 2013 ; Love´n et al . , 2013 ; Parker et al . , 2013 ; Kundaje et al . , 2015 ; Whyte et al . , 2013 ) . Cancer cells acquire su - per - enhancers to drive expression of prominent oncogenes , so SEs play key roles in both development and disease ( Chapuy et al . , 2013 ; Love´n et al . , 2013 ) . Super - enhancers are occupied by an unusually high density of interacting factors , are able to drive higher levels of transcription than typical enhancers , and are exceptionally vulnerable to perturbation of components commonly associated with most enhancers ( Chapuy et al . , 2013 ; Hnisz et al . , 2013 ; Love´n et al . , 2013 ; Whyte et al . , 2013 ) . Another puzzling observation that has emerged from recent studiesisthatasingleenhancerisabletosimultaneouslyactivate multiple proximal genes ( Fukaya et al . , 2016 ) . Enhancers physi - cally contact the promoters of the genes they activate , and early studies using chromatin contact mapping techniques ( e . g . , at the b - globin locus ) found that at any given time , enhancers activate only one of the several globin genes within the locus ( Palstra et al . , 2003 ; Tolhuis et al . , 2002 ) . However , more recent work us - ing quantitative imaging at a high temporal resolution revealed that enhancers typically activate genes in bursts , and that two gene promoters can exhibit synchronous bursting when acti - vated by the same enhancer ( Fukaya et al . , 2016 ) . Previous models of transcriptional control have provided importantinsightsintoprinciplesofgeneregulation . Akeyfeature of most previous transcriptional control models is that the under - lying regulatory interactions occur in a stepwise manner dictated by biochemical rules that are probabilistic in nature ( Chen and Larson , 2016 ; Elowitz et al . , 2002 ; Levine et al . , 2014 ; Orphanides and Reinberg , 2002 ; Raser and O’Shea , 2004 ; Spitz and Furlong , 2012 ; Suter et al . , 2011 ; Zoller et al . , 2015 ) . Such kinetic models predict that gene activation on a single gene level is a stochastic , noisy process , and also provide insights into how multi - step reg - ulatory processes can suppress intrinsic noise and result in bursting . These models do not shed light on the mechanisms un - derlying the formation , function , and properties of SEs or explain puzzles such as how two gene promoters exhibit synchronous bursting when activated by the same enhancer . In this perspective , we propose and explore a model that may explain the puzzles described above . This model is based on principles involving the phase separation of multi - molecular as - semblies . Cooperativity in Transcriptional Control Since the discovery of enhancers over 30 years ago , studies have attempted to describe functional properties of enhancers Cell 169 , March 23 , 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Inc . 13 in a quantitative manner , and these efforts have mostly relied on the concept of cooperative interactions between enhancer components . Classically , enhancers have been deﬁned as elements that can increase transcription from a target gene promoter when inserted in either orientation at various distances upstream or downstream of the promoter ( Banerji et al . , 1981 ; Benoist and Chambon , 1981 ; Gruss et al . , 1981 ) . Enhancers typically consist of hundreds of base - pairs of DNA and are bound by multiple transcription factor ( TF ) molecules in a cooperative manner ( Bulger and Groudine , 2011 ; Levine et al . , 2014 ; Malik and Roeder , 2010 ; Ong and Corces , 2011 ; Spitz and Furlong , 2012 ) . Classically , cooperative binding de - scribes the phenomenon that the binding of one TF molecule to DNA impacts the binding of another TF molecule ( Figure 1A ) Figure1 . ModelsandFeaturesofSuper - En - hancers and Typical Enhancers ( A ) Schematic depiction of the classic model of cooperativity for typical enhancers and super - enhancers . The higher density of transcriptional regulators ( referred to as ‘‘activators’’ ) through cooperative binding to DNA binding sites is thoughttocontributetobothhighertranscriptionaloutputandincreasedsensitivitytoactivatorcon - centration at super - enhancers . Image adapted from Love´n et al . ( 2013 ) . ( B ) Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing ( ChIP - seq ) binding proﬁles for RNA polymerase II ( RNA Pol II ) and the indicated transcriptional co - factors and chromatin regulators at the POLE4 and miR - 290 - 295 loci in murine embryonic stem cells . The transcription factor binding proﬁle is a merged ChIP - seq binding proﬁle of the TFs Oct4 , Sox2 , and Nanog . rpm / bp , reads per million per base pair . Image adapted from Hnisz et al . ( 2013 ) . ( C ) ChIA - PET interactions at the RUNX1 locus displayed above the ChIP - seq proﬁles of H3K27Ac in human T cells . The ChIA - PET in - teractions indicate frequent physical contact be - tween the H3K27Ac occupied regions within the super - enhancer and the promoter of RUNX1 . ( Carey , 1998 ; Kim and Maniatis , 1997 ; Thanos and Maniatis , 1995 ; Tjian and Maniatis , 1994 ) . Cooperative binding of transcription factors at enhancers has been proposed to be due to the effects of TFs on DNA bending ( Falvo et al . , 1995 ) , interactions between TFs ( John - son et al . , 1979 ) , and combinatorial recruitment of large cofactor complexes by TFs ( Merika et al . , 1998 ) . Super - Enhancers Exhibit Highly Cooperative Properties Several hundred clusters of enhancers , called super - enhancers ( SEs ) , control genes that have especially prominent roles in cell - type - speciﬁc processes ( Hnisz et al . , 2013 ; Whyte et al . , 2013 ) . Three key features of SEs indicate that cooperative properties are especially important for their formation and function : ( 1 ) SEs are occupied by an unusually high density of interacting factors ; ( 2 ) SEs can be formed by a single nucleation event ; and ( 3 ) SEs are exceptionally vulnerable to perturbation of some components commonly associated with most enhancers . SEs are occupied by an unusually high density of enhancer - associated factors , including transcription factors , co - factors , chromatin regulators , RNA polymerase II , and non - coding RNA ( Hnisz et al . , 2013 ) . The non - coding RNA ( enhancer RNA or eRNA ) , produced by divergent transcription at transcription factor binding sites within SEs ( Hah et al . , 2015 ; Sigova et al . , 2013 ) , can contribute to enhancer activity and the expression of the nearby gene in cis ( Dimitrova et al . , 2014 ; Engreitz et al . , 2016 ; Lai et al . , 2013 ; Pefanis et al . , 2015 ) . The density of the protein factors and eRNAs at SEs has been estimated to be 14 Cell 169 , March 23 , 2017 approximately 10 - fold the density of the same set of compo - nents at typical enhancers in the genome ( Figure 1B ) ( Hnisz et al . , 2013 ; Love´n et al . , 2013 ; Whyte et al . , 2013 ) . Chromatin contact mapping methods indicate that the clusters of en - hancers within SEs are in close physical contact with one another and with the promoter region of the gene they activate ( Figure 1C ) ( Dowen et al . , 2014 ; Hnisz et al . , 2016 ; Ji et al . , 2016 ; Kieffer - Kwon et al . , 2013 ) . SEs can be formed as a consequence of introducing a single transcription factor binding site into a region of DNA that has the potential to bind additional factors . In T cell leukemias , a small ( 2 – 12 bp ) mono - allelic insertion nucleates the formation of an entire SE by creating a binding site for the master transcrip - tion factor MYB , leading to the recruitment of additional tran - scriptional regulators to adjacent binding sites and assembly of a host of factors spread over an 8 - kb domain whose features are typical of a SE ( Mansour et al . , 2014 ) . Inﬂammatory stimula - tion also leads to rapid formation of SEs in endothelial cells ; here again , the formation of a SE is apparently nucleated by a single binding event of a transcription factor responsive to inﬂamma - tory stimulation ( Brown et al . , 2014 ) . Entire super - enhancers spanning tens of thousands of base pairs can collapse as a unit when their co - factors are perturbed , and genetic deletion of constituent enhancers within an SE can compromise the function of other constituents . For example , the co - activator BRD4 binds acetylated chromatin at SEs , typical enhancers and promoters , but SEs are far more sensitive to drugs blocking the binding of BRD4 to acetylated chromatin ( Chapuy et al . , 2013 ; Love´n et al . , 2013 ) . A similar hypersensitiv - ity of SEs to inhibition of the cyclin - dependent kinase CDK7 has also been observed in multiple studies ( Chipumuro et al . , 2014 ; Kwiatkowski et al . , 2014 ; Wang et al . , 2015 ) . This kinase is critical for initiation of transcription by RNA polymerase II ( RNA Pol II ) and phosphorylates its repetitive C - terminal domain ( CTD ) ( Lar - ochelle et al . , 2012 ) . Furthermore , genetic deletion of constituent enhancers within SEs can compromise the activities of other constituents within the super - enhancer ( Hnisz et al . , 2015 ; Jiang et al . , 2016 ; Proudhon et al . , 2016 ; Shin et al . , 2016 ) , and can lead to the collapse of an entire super - enhancer ( Mansour et al . , 2014 ) , although this interdependence of constituent enhancers is less apparent for some developmentally regulated super - enhancers ( Hay et al . , 2016 ) . In summary , several lines of evidence indicate that the forma - tion and function of SEs involves cooperative processes that bring many constituent enhancers and their bound factors into close spatial proximity . High densities of proteins and nucleic acids—and cooperative interactions among these molecules— have been implicated in the formation of membraneless organ - elles , called cellular bodies , in eukaryotic cells ( Banjade et al . , 2015 ; Bergeron - Sandoval et al . , 2016 ; Brangwynne et al . , 2009 ) . Below , we ﬁrst describe features of the formation of cellular bodies , and then develop a model of super - enhancer for - mation and function that exploits related concepts . Formation of Membraneless Organelles by Phase Separation Eukaryotic cells contain membraneless organelles , called cellular bodies , which play essential roles in compartmentalizing essential biochemical reactions within cells . These bodies are formed by phase separation mediated by cooperative interac - tions between multivalent molecules ( Banani et al . , 2017 ; Ban - jade et al . , 2015 ; Bergeron - Sandoval et al . , 2016 ; Brangwynne et al . , 2009 ) . Examples of such organelles in the nucleus include nucleoli , which are sites of rRNA biogenesis ; Cajal bodies , which serve as an assembly site for small nuclear RNPs ; and nuclear speckles , which are storage compartments for mRNA splicing factors ( Mao et al . , 2011 ; Zhu and Brangwynne , 2015 ) . These or - ganelles exhibit properties of liquid droplets ; for example , they can undergo ﬁssion and fusion , and hence their formation has been described as mediated by liquid - liquid phase separation . Mixtures of puriﬁed RNA and RNA - binding proteins form these types of phase - separated bodies in vitro ( Berry et al . , 2015 ; Feric et al . , 2016 ; Kato et al . , 2012 ; Kwon et al . , 2013 ; Li et al . , 2012 ; Wheeler et al . , 2016 ) . Consistent with these observations , past theoretical work indicates that the formation of a gel is usually accompanied by phase separation ( Semenov and Rubinstein , 1998 ) . Thus , a number of studies show that high densities of pro - teins and nucleic acids—and cooperative interactions among these molecules—are implicated in the formation of phase sepa - rated cellular bodies . As described above , super - enhancers can be in essence considered to be cooperative assemblies of high densities of transcription factors , transcriptional co - factors , chromatin regu - lators , non - coding RNA , and RNA Pol II . Furthermore , some transcription factors with low complexity domains have been proposed to create gel - like structures in vitro ( Han et al . , 2012 ; Kato et al . , 2012 ; Kwon et al . , 2013 ) . We thus hypothesize that formation of a phase separated multi - molecular assembly likely occurs during the formation of SEs and less frequently with typical enhancers ( Figure 2A ) . We propose a simple model that emphasizes cooperativity in the context of the number and valency of the interacting compo - nents , and afﬁnity of interactions between these transcriptional regulators and nucleic acids , to explore the role of a phase sep - aration for SE assembly and function . Computer simulations of this model show that phase separation can explain critical fea - tures of SEs , including aspects of their formation , function , and vulnerability . The simulations are also consistent with observed differences between transcriptional bursting patterns driven by weak and strong enhancers , and the simultaneous bursting of genes controlled by a shared single enhancer . We conclude by noting several implications and predictions of the phase separa - tion model that could guide further exploration of this concept of transcriptional control in vertebrates . A Phase Separation Model of Enhancer Assembly and Function Many molecules bound at enhancers and SEs , such as tran - scription factors , transcriptional co - activators ( e . g . , BRD4 ) , RNA Pol II , and RNA can undergo reversible chemical modiﬁca - tions ( e . g . , acetylation , phosphorylation ) at multiple sites . After such modiﬁcations , these multivalent molecules are able to interact with multiple other components , thus forming ‘‘cross - links’’ ( Figure 2A ) . Here , a cross - link can be deﬁned as any reversible feature , including reversible chemical modiﬁcation , or any other feature involved in dynamic binding and unbinding Cell 169 , March 23 , 2017 15 interactions . In considering whether phase separation may un - derlie certain observed features of transcriptional control , a simple model is needed to describe the dependence of phase separation on changes in valences and afﬁnities of the inter - acting molecules , parameters biologists measure . Below , we describe such a model , and explain how the parameters of this model represent characteristics of typical enhancers and super - enhancers . In the model , the protein and nucleic acid components of en - hancers are represented as chain - like molecules , each of which contains a set of residues that can potentially engage in interac - tionswithotherchains ( Figure2B ) . Theseresiduesarerepresented as sites that can undergo reversible chemical modiﬁcations , and modiﬁcation of the residues is associated with their ability to form non - covalent cross - linking interactions between the chains ( Figure 2B ) . Numerous enhancer - components , including tran - scription factors , co - factors , and the heptapeptide repeats of the C - terminaldomain ( CTD ) ofRNA PolIIare subject tophosphoryla - Figure 2 . A Simple Phase Separation Model of Transcriptional Control ( A ) Schematic representation of the biological system that can form the phase - separated multi - molecular complex of transcriptional regulators at a super - enhancer – gene locus . ( B ) Simpliﬁed representation of the biological system , and parameters of the model that could lead to phase separation . ‘‘M’’ denotes modiﬁca - tion of residues that are able to form cross - links when modiﬁed . ( C ) Dependence of transcriptional activity ( TA ) on the valency parameter for super - enhancers ( con - sisting of N = 50 chains ) , and typical enhancers ( consisting of N = 10 chains ) . The proxy for tran - scriptional activity ( TA ) is deﬁned as the size of the largest cluster of cross - linked chains , scaled by the total number of chains . The valency is scaled such that the actual valency is divided by a refer - ence number of three . The solid lines indicate the mean , and the dashed lines indicate twice the standard deviation in 50 simulations . The value of K eq and modiﬁer / demodiﬁer ratio was kept con - stant . HC , Hill coefﬁcient , which is a classic metric todescribecooperativebehavior . Theinsetshows the dependency of the Hill coefﬁcient on the number of chains , or components , in the system . See also Figures S1 – S3 . tion and are known to bind other proteins based on their phosphorylation status ( PhatnaniandGreenleaf , 2006 ) . Ourmodel encompasses such phosphorylation or dephosphorylation that can result in bind - ing interactions , as well as interactions of histones and other proteins found at enhancers and transcriptional regulators modulated by acetylation , methylation , or other types of chemical modiﬁcations . Forsimplicity , werefertoalltypesofchem - ical modiﬁcations and de - modiﬁcations generically as ‘‘modiﬁcation’’ and ‘‘demo - diﬁcation’’ mediated by ‘‘modiﬁers’’ and ‘‘demodiﬁers , ’’ respectively . In its simplest form , the model has three parameters : ( 1 ) ‘‘N’’ = the number of macromolecules ( also referred to as ‘‘chains’’ ) in the system ; this parameter sets the concentration of interacting components—the larger the value of N , the greater the concen - tration—SEs are considered to have a larger value of N while typical enhancers are modeled as having fewer components . ( 2 ) ‘‘ f ’’ = valency , which corresponds to the number of residues in each molecule that can potentially be modiﬁed and engage inacross - linkwithotherchains . Notethatinoursimpliﬁedmodel , the modiﬁcation of a residue is required to allow the residue to create a cross - link with another chain . Conceptually , the model works in a similar way if the demodiﬁed state of a residue is required for cross - link formation , except the enzymatic activities that allow or inhibit cross - link formation are reversed . ( 3 ) K eq = ( k on / k off ) the equilibrium constant , deﬁned by the on and off - rates describing the cross - link reaction or interaction ( Figure 2B ) . With a few assumptions , such as large chain length and not al - lowing intramolecular cross - links or multiple bonds between the 16 Cell 169 , March 23 , 2017 same two chains , the equilibrium properties of this model can be obtained analytically ( Cohen and Benedek , 1982 ; Semenov and Rubinstein , 1998 ) . Above a critical concentration of the interact - ing chains , C * , phase separation occurs creating a multi - molec - ular assembly . Under these conditions , C * varies as 1 / K eq f 2 . Thus , the critical concentration for formation of the assembly de - pends sensitively on valency and less so on the binding constant . We carried out computer simulations of the model ( relaxing some of the assumptions in the equilibrium theories noted above ) to explore its dynamic , rather than equilibrium , proper - ties . In dynamic computer simulations of the model , the valency changes between 0 and ‘‘ f ’’ as the residues are modiﬁed and de - modiﬁed ; the rates of the modiﬁcation and de - modiﬁcation reactions are not varied in our studies . The modiﬁer to demodiﬁer ratio ( e . g . , kinase to phosphatase ratio ) in the system determines the number of sites on each component that are modiﬁed and can be cross - linked , and is varied in our studies . The model was simulated with N chains in a ﬁxed volume rep - resenting the region where various components of the enhancer or SE are present . We considered various values of N . During the simulation , the chains can undergo modiﬁcations and de - modiﬁcations with kinetic constants , k mod = 0 : 05 ; k demod = 0 : 05 : The modiﬁer and demodiﬁer levels ð N mod ; N demod Þ are varied . Cross - link formation and disassociation is simulated with kinetic constants , k on = 0 : 5 and k off = 0 : 5 ð K eq = ð k on = k off Þ = 1 Þ . Only modiﬁed residues on different chains were allowed to cross - link ; i . e . , intra - chain cross - linking reactions are disal - lowed , but multiple bonds can form between two chains . The simulations were carried out in the limit at which every site on every chain is permitted to cross - link with all other sites on other chains ( Cohen and Benedek , 1982 ; Semenov and Rubinstein , 1998 ) ; i . e . , while there is an average concentration of interacting sites ( determined by N and the number of modiﬁed sites ) , varia - tions in local concentrations within the simulation volume are not considered . The simulations were carried out using the Gillespie algorithm ( Gillespie , 1977 ) , which generates stochastic trajectories of the temporal evolution of the considered dynamic processes ( i . e . , modiﬁcations and cross - linking reactions ) . Any single trajectory describes the time - evolution of the state of interacting chains , including how they are distributed among connected clusters of varying sizes . All trajectories are initialized with demodiﬁed , non - crosslinkedchains ; i . e . , eachchainisina‘‘separatecluster . ’’ Simulations are run until steady state is reached , where proper - ties of the system ( e . g . , average cluster size ) are time - invariant . Multiple trajectories ( 50 replicates ) are performed for all calcula - tions to obtain statistically averaged properties when desired . The proxy for transcriptional activity ( TA ) in the simulations was deﬁned as the size of the largest cluster of cross - linked chains , scaled by the total number of chains [ TA = ( size of Cluster max ) / N ] . The approximation of TA with the size of the largest cluster is supported by recent evidence that the concen - tration of some transcriptional regulators may be rate - limiting for gene activity in mammalian cells ( Lin et al . , 2012 ; Nie et al . , 2012 ) . When all chains in the system form a single cross - linked cluster ( TA z 1 ) , the phase - separated assembly is the result . This as - sembly is thought to encompass binding of factors at the enhancer / SE and also at the promoter , which leads to the con - centration of components important for enhanced transcription of the gene . We recorded the transcriptional activity generated by the enhancers and SEs as a function of time . Transcriptional Regulation with Changes in Valency Modeling transcriptional activity as a function of valency re - vealed that the formation of SEs involved more pronounced co - operativity than the formation of typical enhancers ( Figure 2C ) . In these simulations , SEs were modeled as a system consisting of N = 50 molecules , and typical enhancers as a system consisting of N = 10 molecules , consistent with an approximately one order of magnitude difference in the density of components at these elements ( Hnisz et al . , 2013 ) . We then graphed the transcrip - tional activity ( TA ) for different valences , while all other parame - ters remained constant . SEs reached (cid:2) 90 % of the maximum transcriptional activity at a normalized valency value of 2 ( i . e . , twice the reference value of f = 3 ) , while for typical enhancers 90 % of the maximum transcriptional activity is attained at a normalized valency value of ﬁve . At a normalized valency value of two , typical enhancers reached (cid:2) 40 % of the maximum tran - scriptional activity ( Figure 2C ) . These results suggest that , under identical conditions , SEs consisting of a larger number of com - ponents form larger connected clusters ( i . e . , undergo phase separation ) at a lower level of valency than typical enhancers consisting of a smaller number of components . Furthermore , we observed a sharp increase of transcriptional activity at a normalized valency value of (cid:2) 1 . 5 for SEs , while increases in va - lency lead to a more moderate , smooth increase of transcrip - tional activity for typical enhancers ( Figure 2C ) , in agreement with previous considerations ( Figure 1A ) ( Love´n et al . , 2013 ) . The sharper change in transcriptional activity of SEs upon changing the valency of the interacting components due to enhanced cooperativity can be quantiﬁed by the Hill coefﬁcient . The behavior of SEs is characterized by a larger value of the Hill coefﬁcient , indicating greater cooperativity and ultrasensitivity to valency changes ( Figure 2C ) . Indeed , as the inset in Figure 2C shows , the Hill coefﬁcient increases with the number of compo - nents involved in the enhancer as (cid:2) N 0 . 4 , over a large range of values of N . Also , as expected , the difference between the tran - scriptional activity of typical enhancers and SEs correlated with the difference in values of ‘‘N’’ that are used to model them ; for a sufﬁciently large difference in N , the behavior reported in Figure 2C is recapitulated ( Figure S1 ) . Super - Enhancer Formation and Vulnerability These predictions of the phase separation model are qualita - tively consistent with previously published experimental data . For example , stimulation of endothelial cells by tumor necrosis factor alpha ( TNF a ) leads to the formation of SEs at inﬂammatory genes ( Brown et al . , 2014 ) . In this study , SE formation was monitored by the genomic occupancy of the transcriptional co - factor BRD4 , which is a key component of SEs and typical en - hancers . The inﬂammatory stimulation in these cells resulted in a more pronounced recruitment of BRD4 at the SEs of inﬂamma - tory genes as compared to typical enhancers at other genes ( Brown et al . , 2014 ) . Our phase separation model suggests that this is because stimulation by TNF a led to modiﬁcations that change the valency of interacting components , and for Cell 169 , March 23 , 2017 17 SEs , phase separation occurs sharply above a lower value of valency compared to typical enhancers , thus resulting in enhanced recruitment of interacting components such as BRD4 ( Figure 2C ) . Next , we investigated whether the phase separation model ex - plains the unusual vulnerability of SEs to perturbation by inhibi - tors of common transcriptional co - factors . BRD4 and CDK7 are components of both typical enhancers and SEs , but SEs and their associated genes are much more sensitive to chemical inhibition of BRD4 and CDK7 than typical enhancers ( Figure 3A ) ( Chipumuro et al . , 2014 ; Christensen et al . , 2014 ; Kwiatkowski et al . , 2014 ; Love´n et al . , 2013 ) . We modeled the effect of BRD4 - and CDK7 inhibitors as reducing valency by changing the ratio of Demodiﬁer / Modiﬁer activity in our system , which shifts the balance of modiﬁed sites within the interacting mole - cules . This is because CDK7 is a kinase which acts as a modiﬁer , and BRD4 has a large valency as it can interact with many com - ponents , and so inhibiting BRD4 reduces the average valency of the interacting components disproportionately . As shown in Figure 3B , SEs ( N = 50 ) lose more of their activity sharply at a lower Demodiﬁer / Modiﬁer ratio than typical enhancers ( N = 10 ) . These results are consistent with the notion that SE ac - tivity is very sensitive to variations in valency because phase separation is a cooperative phenomenon that occurs suddenly when a key variable exceeds a threshold value . Transcriptional Bursting Gene expression in eukaryotes is generally episodic , consisting of transcriptional bursts , and we investigated whether the phase - separation model can predict transcriptional bursting . A recent study using quantitative imaging of transcriptional bursting in live cells suggested that the level of gene expression driven by an enhancer correlates with the frequency of transcrip - tional bursting ( Fukaya et al . , 2016 ) . Strong enhancers were found to drive higher frequency bursting than weak enhancers , and above a certain level of strength the bursts were not resolved anymore and resulted in a relatively constant high transcriptional activity ( Figure 4A ) . The phase separation model shows that SEs recapitulate the high frequency with low variation ( around a rela - tively constant high transcriptional activity ) bursting pattern ex - hibited by strong enhancers while typical enhancers exhibit more variable bursts with a lower frequency ( Figure 4B ) . Once sustained phase separation occurs ( TA saturates ) , ﬂuctuations are quenched , which results in lower variation in TA for SEs . This difference in bursting patterns can be quantiﬁed by trans - lating our results to a power spectrum ( data not shown ) . We expect that strong enhancers , in spite of having fewer compo - nents ( N ) than SEs will form stable phase - separated multi - mo - lecular assemblies more readily than typical enhancers because of higher afﬁnity cross - links . Therefore , a prediction of our model is that SEs , like strong enhancers , should display a different transcriptional bursting pattern compared to weak or typical enhancers . The phase separation model is also broadly consistent with the intriguing observation that two promoters can exhibit syn - chronous bursting when activated by the same enhancer ( Fu - kaya et al . , 2016 ) ; in this case the phase - separated assembly incorporates the enhancer and both promoters ( Figure 4C ) . Candidate Transcriptional Regulators Forming the Phase - Separated Assembly In Vivo In our simpliﬁed model , phase separation is mediated by changes in the extent to which residues on the interacting com - ponents are modiﬁed ( or valency ) , with resulting intermolecular - interactions . In reality , however , enhancers are composed of many diverse factors that could account for such interactions , most of which are subject to reversible chemical modiﬁcations ( Figure 5 ) . These components include transcription factors , Figure 3 . Super - Enhancer Vulnerability ( A ) Enhanceractivitiesofthefragmentsofthe IGLL5 super - enhancer ( red ) andthe PDHX typicalenhancer ( gray ) aftertreatmentwiththeBRD4inhibitorJQ1atthe indicated concentrations . Enhancer activity was measured in luciferase reporter assays in human multiple myeloma cells . Note that JQ1 inhibits (cid:2) 50 % of luciferase expression driven by the super - enhancer at a 10 - fold lower concentration than luciferase expression driven by the typical enhancer ( 25 nM versus 250 nM ) . Data and image adapted from Love´n et al . ( 2013 ) . ( B ) Dependence of transcriptional activity ( TA ) on the demodiﬁer / modiﬁer ratio for super - enhancers ( consisting of N = 50 chains ) , and typical enhancers ( con - sisting of N = 10 chains ) . Theproxy for transcriptional activity ( TA ) is deﬁned as the sizeof the largest cluster of cross - linkedchains , scaled by the total number of chains . The solid lines indicate the mean and the dashed lines indicate twice the standard deviation of 50 simulations . K eq and f were kept constant . Note that increasing the demodiﬁer levels is equivalent to inhibiting cross - linking ( i . e . , reducing valency ) . TA is normalized to the value at log ( demodiﬁer / modiﬁer ) = (cid:3) 1 . 5 , and the ordinate shows the normalized TA on a log scale . 18 Cell 169 , March 23 , 2017 transcriptional co - activators such as the Mediator complex and BRD4 , chromatin regulators ( e . g . , readers , writers , and erasers of histone modiﬁcations ) , cyclin - dependent kinases ( e . g . , CDK7 , CDK8 , CDK9 , and CDK12 ) , non - coding RNAs with RNA - binding proteins , and RNA Pol II ( Lai and Shiekhattar , 2014 ; Lee and Young , 2013 ; Levine et al . , 2014 ; Malik and Roeder , 2010 ) . Many of these molecules are multivalent , i . e . , contain multiple modular domains or interaction motifs , and are thus able to interact with multiple other enhancer compo - nents . For example , the large subunit of RNA Pol II contains 52 repeats of a heptapeptide sequence at its C - terminal domain ( CTD ) in human cells , and several transcription factors contain repeats of low - complexity domains or repeats of the same amino - acid stretch prone to polymerization ( Gemayel et al . , 2015 ; Kwon et al . , 2013 ) . The DNA portion of enhancers and many promoters contain binding sites for multiple transcription factors , some of which can bind simultaneously to both DNA and RNA ( Sigova et al . , 2015 ) . Histone proteins at enhancers are enriched for modiﬁcations that can be recognized by chro - matin readers , and thus adjacent nucleosomes can be consid - ered as a platform able to interact with multiple chromatin readers . RNA itself can be chemically modiﬁed and physically interact with multiple RNA - binding molecules and splicing fac - tors . Many of the residues involved in these interactions can create a ‘‘cross - link’’ ( Figure 5 ) . Possible Implications and Predictions of the Phase Separation Model Our simple phase separation model provides a conceptual framework for further exploration of principles of gene control in development and disease . Below we discuss a few examples of phenomena possibly related to assemblies of phase sepa - rated multi - molecular complexes in transcriptional control and some testable predictions of the model . Visualization of Phase - Separated Multi - molecular Assemblies of Transcriptional Regulators A critical test of the model is whether phase separation of multi - molecular assemblies of transcriptional regulators can be directly observed in vivo , with the demonstration that phase sep - aration of those complexes is associated with gene activity . Several lines of recent work provide initial insights into these questions . For example , recent studies using high - resolution mi - croscopy indicate that signal stimulation leads to the formation of large clusters of RNA Pol II in living mammalian cells ( Cisse et al . , 2013 ) and concordant activation of transcription at a sub - set of genes ( Cho et al . , 2016 ) . This , as well as other single mole - cule technologies ( Chen and Larson , 2016 ; Shin et al . , 2017 ) , may thus enable visualization and testing of whether phase separated multi - molecular complexes form in the vicinity of genes regulated by SEs , and whether the simple model we describe here predicts features of transcriptional control . As an example , we hypothesize that the RNA Pol II C - terminal domain , which consists of 52 heptapeptide repeats , is a key contributor to the valency within this assembly , and in cells that express a RNA Pol II with a truncated CTD , the clusters would exhibit signiﬁcantly lower half - lives . Signal - Dependent Gene Control Cells sense and respond to their environment through signal transduction pathways that relay information to genes , but genes responding to a particular signaling pathway may exhibit Figure 4 . Transcriptional Bursting ( A ) Representative traces oftranscriptional activity inindividual nuclei of Drosophila embryos . Transcriptional activity was measuredby visualizing nascent RNAs usingﬂuorescentprobes . Toppanelshowsarepresentativetraceproducedbyaweakenhancer , andthebottompanelshowsarepresentativetraceproducedby a strong enhancer . Data and image adapted from Fukaya et al . ( 2016 ) . ( B ) Simulationoftranscriptionalactivity ( TA ) ofsuper - enhancers ( N = 50chains ) , andtypicalenhancers ( N = 10chains ) overtimerecapitulatesburstingbehaviorof weak and strong enhancers . ( C ) Model of synchronous activation of two gene promoters by a shared enhancer . Cell 169 , March 23 , 2017 19 different amplitudes of activation to the same signal . We have carried out calculations with the hypothesis that once phase separation occurs , the assembly recruits components that are de - modiﬁers . Under these conditions , transition to and resolu - tion of phase separation , i . e . , transcriptional activity , are more distinct for SEs compared to typical enhancers . Interestingly , such simulations suggest that there is a maximum valency and a maximum number of SE components , which if exceeded , does not allow disassembly in a realistic timescale ( Figure S2 ) . This is because the molecules are so heavily cross - linked that it remains in a metastable state for long periods of time . The pre - diction of the model is that pathological hyperactivation of cellular signaling could underlie disease states through locking cells in an expression program that—at least transiently—be - comes unresponsive to signals that would counteract them un - der normal physiological conditions . We speculate that such states can be artiﬁcially induced by increasing the valency or number of interacting components . Fidelity of Transcriptional Control Variability in the transcript levels of genes within isogenic popu - lation of cells exposed to the same environmental signals— referred to as transcriptional noise—can have a profound impact on cellular phenotypes ( Raj and van Oudenaarden , 2008 ) . The phase separation model indicates that because of the high coop - erativity involved in the formation of SEs , transcription occurs when the valency ( modulated by the modiﬁer / demodiﬁer ratio , which is in fact similar to the developmental signals being trans - duced through activation cascades ) exceeds a sharply deﬁned threshold ( Figure 2C ) . For the smaller number of components in a typical enhancer , the variation of transcription with the envi - ronmental signal is more continuous , potentially leading to ‘‘noisier’’ or more error - prone transcription over a wider range of signal strength . In the vicinity of a phase separation point , there are ﬂuctuations between the two phases ( low TA and robust TA in our case ) . Our model shows that these ﬂuctuations ( or noise ) are conﬁned to a narrow range of environmental signals for SEs compared to the broad range over which this occurs for a typical enhancer ( Figure S3 ) . The normalized amplitude of these ﬂuctuations is also smaller for SEs . These results suggest that one reason why SEs have evolved is to enable relatively error free and robust transcription of genes necessary to maintain cell identity . This form of transcriptional ﬁdelity through cooper - ativity , and not chemical speciﬁcity mediated by evolving speciﬁc molecules for controlling each gene , may however be co - opted to drive aberrant gene expression in disease states ( e . g . , SEs in cancer cells ) . Resistance to Transcriptional Inhibition Small molecule inhibitors of super - enhancer components such as BRD4 are currently being tested as anticancer therapeutics in the clinic , where a ubiquitous challenge has been the emer - gence of tumor cells resistant to the targeted therapeutic agent ( Stathis et al . , 2016 ) . Interestingly , recent studies revealed that resistance to JQ1 , a drug that inhibits BRD4 , develops without any genetic changes in various tumor cells ( Fong et al . , 2015 ; Rathert et al . , 2015 ; Shu et al . , 2016 ) . While JQ1 inhibits the inter - action of BRD4 with acetylated histones , BRD4 is still recruited to super - enhancers due to its hyper - phosphorylation in JQ1 - resistant cells ( Shu et al . , 2016 ) . This is consistent with a predic - tion of our model that BRD4 is a high valency component of SEs , and inhibition of its interaction with acetylated histones ( i . e . , decrease of its valency ) may be compensated for by increasing its valency through the activation of kinase pathways targeting BRD4 itself . In our model , super - enhancers are characterized by a high Hill coefﬁcient , i . e . , high cooperativity ( Figure 2C ) , which suggests that inhibition of multiple properly chosen SE components might have a synergistic on effect SE - driven onco - genes in tumor cells . If this prediction is true , resistance to BRD4 inhibitors may be prevented through combined treatment with additional inhibitors of transcriptional regulators . Concluding Remarks The essential feature of this phase separation model of transcrip - tional control is that it considers cooperativity between the inter - acting components in the context of changes in valency and number of components . This single conceptual framework consistently describes diverse recently observed features of transcriptional control , such as clustering of factors , dynamic changes , hyper - sensitivity of SEs to transcriptional inhibitors , and simultaneous activation of multiple genes by the same enhancer . Cellular signaling pathways could modulate transcrip - tion over short time periods by alterations of valency . Selection of cell growth and survival would expand or contract the number of interactions or size of the enhancer over longer times . The model also makes a number of predictions ( some noted above ) that could be explored in many cellular contexts . Such studies , and others that will be envisaged , will help determine whether a variant of the model we propose underlies transcriptional con - trol in mammals . Also , attractively , this model sets enhancer , and especially super - enhancer - type gene regulation into the broad Figure 5 . Transcriptional Control Phase Separation In Vivo Model of a phase - separated complex at gene regulatory elements . Some of the candidate transcriptional regulators forming the complex are highlighted . P - CTDdenotesthephosphorylatedC - terminaldomainofRNAPolII . Chemical modiﬁcations of nucleosomes ( acetylation , Ac ; methylation , Me ) are also highlighted . Divergent transcription at enhancers and promoters produces nascent RNAs that can be bound by RNA splicing factors . Potential in - teractions between the components are displayed as dashed lines . 20 Cell 169 , March 23 , 2017 family of membraneless organelles , such as the nucleolus , Cajal bodies , and splicing - speckles in the nucleus , and stress gran - ules and P bodies in the cytoplasm , as results of phase - sepa - rated multi - molecular assemblies . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes three ﬁgures and one data ﬁle and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2017 . 02 . 007 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS P . A . S . and R . A . Y . thank the MIT students in their course ‘‘Structure and Func - tions of the Nucleus’’ for discussions . We are gratefulto Mehran Kardar , Steve McKnight , Ben Sabari , and Tony Lee for comments . The work was supported by an NIH grant ( HG002668 ) ( to R . A . Y . ) , an Erwin Schro¨dinger Fellowship ( J3490 ) fromtheAustrianScienceFundFWF ( toD . H . ) , aMargaretandHerman Sokol Postdoctoral Award ( to D . H . ) , and an NIH grant ( P01 - CA042063 ) ( to P . A . S . ) . This work was supported , in part , by a Koch Institute Support ( core ) grant ( P30 - CA14051 ) from the National Cancer Institute ( to P . A . S ) . R . A . Y . is a founder of Syros Pharmaceuticals and Marauder Therapeutics . REFERENCES Banani , S . F . , Lee , H . O . , Hyman , A . A . , and Rosen , M . K . ( 2017 ) . Biomolecular condensates : organizersofcellularbiochemistry . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Bio . Pub - lished online February 22 , 2017 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm . 2017 . 7 . Banerji , J . , Rusconi , S . , and Schaffner , W . ( 1981 ) . Expression of a beta - globin gene is enhanced by remote SV40 DNA sequences . Cell 27 , 299 – 308 . Banjade , S . , Wu , Q . , Mittal , A . , Peeples , W . B . , Pappu , R . V . , and Rosen , M . K . ( 2015 ) . Conserved interdomain linker promotes phase separation of the multivalent adaptor protein Nck . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 112 , E6426 – E6435 . Benoist , C . , and Chambon , P . ( 1981 ) . In vivo sequence requirements of the SV40 early promotor region . Nature 290 , 304 – 310 . Bergeron - Sandoval , L . P . , Safaee , N . , and Michnick , S . W . ( 2016 ) . Mechanisms and consequences of macromolecular phase separation . Cell 165 , 1067 – 1079 . Berry , J . , Weber , S . C . , Vaidya , N . , Haataja , M . , and Brangwynne , C . P . ( 2015 ) . RNA transcription modulates phase transition - driven nuclear body assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 112 , E5237 – E5245 . Brangwynne , C . P . , Eckmann , C . R . , Courson , D . S . , Rybarska , A . , Hoege , C . , Gharakhani , J . , Ju¨licher , F . , and Hyman , A . A . ( 2009 ) . Germline P granules are liquid droplets that localize by controlled dissolution / condensation . Sci - ence 324 , 1729 – 1732 . Brown , J . D . , Lin , C . Y . , Duan , Q . , Grifﬁn , G . , Federation , A . J . , Paranal , R . M . , Bair , S . , Newton , G . , Lichtman , A . H . , Kung , A . L . , et al . ( 2014 ) . NF - k B directs dynamic super enhancer formation in inﬂammation and atherogenesis . Mol . Cell 56 , 219 – 231 . Bulger , M . , and Groudine , M . ( 2011 ) . Functional and mechanistic diversity of distal transcription enhancers . Cell 144 , 327 – 339 . Carey , M . ( 1998 ) . Theenhanceosomeandtranscriptionalsynergy . Cell 92 , 5 – 8 . Chapuy , B . , McKeown , M . R . , Lin , C . Y . , Monti , S . , Roemer , M . G . , Qi , J . , Rahl , P . B . , Sun , H . H . , Yeda , K . T . , Doench , J . G . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Discovery and charac - terization of super - enhancer - associated dependencies in diffuse large B cell lymphoma . Cancer Cell 24 , 777 – 790 . Chen , H . , and Larson , D . R . ( 2016 ) . What have single - molecule studies taught us about gene expression ? Genes Dev . 30 , 1796 – 1810 . Chipumuro , E . , Marco , E . , Christensen , C . L . , Kwiatkowski , N . , Zhang , T . , Ha - theway , C . M . , Abraham , B . J . , Sharma , B . , Yeung , C . , Altabef , A . , et al . ( 2014 ) . CDK7 inhibition suppressessuper - enhancer - linked oncogenic transcription in MYCN - driven cancer . Cell 159 , 1126 – 1139 . Cho , W . K . , Jayanth , N . , English , B . P . , Inoue , T . , Andrews , J . O . , Conway , W . , Grimm , J . B . , Spille , J . H . , Lavis , L . D . , Lionnet , T . , andCisse , I . I . ( 2016 ) . RNAPo - lymerase II cluster dynamics predict mRNA output in living cells . eLife 5 , 5 . Christensen , C . L . , Kwiatkowski , N . , Abraham , B . J . , Carretero , J . , Al - Shahrour , F . , Zhang , T . , Chipumuro , E . , Herter - Sprie , G . S . , Akbay , E . A . , Altabef , A . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Targeting transcriptional addictions in small cell lung cancer with a co - valent CDK7 inhibitor . Cancer Cell 26 , 909 – 922 . Cisse , I . I . , Izeddin , I . , Causse , S . Z . , Boudarene , L . , Senecal , A . , Muresan , L . , Dugast - Darzacq , C . , Hajj , B . , Dahan , M . , andDarzacq , X . ( 2013 ) . Real - timedy - namics of RNA polymerase II clustering in live human cells . Science 341 , 664 – 667 . Cohen , R . J . , and Benedek , G . B . ( 1982 ) . Equilibrium and kinetic theory of poly - merization and the sol - gel transition . J . Phys . Chem . 86 , 3696 – 3714 . Dimitrova , N . , Zamudio , J . R . , Jong , R . M . , Soukup , D . , Resnick , R . , Sarma , K . , Ward , A . J . , Raj , A . , Lee , J . T . , Sharp , P . A . , and Jacks , T . ( 2014 ) . LincRNA - p21 activates p21 in cis to promote Polycomb target gene expression and to enforce the G1 / S checkpoint . Mol . Cell 54 , 777 – 790 . Dowen , J . M . , Fan , Z . P . , Hnisz , D . , Ren , G . , Abraham , B . J . , Zhang , L . N . , Wein - traub , A . S . , Schuijers , J . , Lee , T . I . , Zhao , K . , andYoung , R . A . ( 2014 ) . Control of cell identity genes occurs in insulated neighborhoods in mammalian chromo - somes . Cell 159 , 374 – 387 . Elowitz , M . B . , Levine , A . J . , Siggia , E . D . , and Swain , P . S . ( 2002 ) . Stochastic gene expression in a single cell . Science 297 , 1183 – 1186 . ENCODE Project Consortium ( 2012 ) . An integrated encyclopedia of DNA elements in the human genome . Nature 489 , 57 – 74 . Engreitz , J . M . , Haines , J . E . , Perez , E . M . , Munson , G . , Chen , J . , Kane , M . , McDonel , P . E . , Guttman , M . , and Lander , E . S . ( 2016 ) . Local regulation of gene expression by lncRNA promoters , transcription and splicing . Nature 539 , 452 – 455 . Falvo , J . V . , Thanos , D . , and Maniatis , T . ( 1995 ) . Reversal of intrinsic DNA bends intheIFNbeta gene enhancer bytranscription factors and the architec - tural protein HMG I ( Y ) . Cell 83 , 1101 – 1111 . Feric , M . , Vaidya , N . , Harmon , T . S . , Mitrea , D . M . , Zhu , L . , Richardson , T . M . , Kriwacki , R . W . , Pappu , R . V . , and Brangwynne , C . P . ( 2016 ) . Coexisting liquid phases underlie nucleolar subcompartments . Cell 165 , 1686 – 1697 . Fong , C . Y . , Gilan , O . , Lam , E . Y . , Rubin , A . F . , Ftouni , S . , Tyler , D . , Stanley , K . , Sinha , D . , Yeh , P . , Morison , J . , et al . ( 2015 ) . BET inhibitor resistance emerges from leukaemia stem cells . Nature 525 , 538 – 542 . Fukaya , T . , Lim , B . , and Levine , M . ( 2016 ) . Enhancer control of transcriptional bursting . Cell 166 , 358 – 368 . Gemayel , R . , Chavali , S . , Pougach , K . , Legendre , M . , Zhu , B . , Boeynaems , S . , van der Zande , E . , Gevaert , K . , Rousseau , F . , Schymkowitz , J . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Variable glutamine - rich repeats modulate transcription factor activity . Mol . Cell 59 , 615 – 627 . Gillespie , D . T . ( 1977 ) . Exact stochastic simulation of coupled chemical reac - tions . J . Phys . Chem . 81 , 2340 – 2361 . Gruss , P . , Dhar , R . , and Khoury , G . ( 1981 ) . Simian virus 40 tandem repeated sequences as an element of the early promoter . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 78 , 943 – 947 . Hah , N . , Benner , C . , Chong , L . W . , Yu , R . T . , Downes , M . , and Evans , R . M . ( 2015 ) . Inﬂammation - sensitive super enhancers form domains of coordinately regulated enhancer RNAs . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 112 , E297 – E302 . Han , T . W . , Kato , M . , Xie , S . , Wu , L . C . , Mirzaei , H . , Pei , J . , Chen , M . , Xie , Y . , Allen , J . , Xiao , G . , and McKnight , S . L . ( 2012 ) . Cell - free formation of RNA gran - ules : bound RNAs identify features and components of cellular assemblies . Cell 149 , 768 – 779 . Hay , D . , Hughes , J . R . , Babbs , C . , Davies , J . O . , Graham , B . J . , Hanssen , L . L . , Kassouf , M . T . , Oudelaar , A . M . , Sharpe , J . A . , Suciu , M . C . , etal . ( 2016 ) . Genetic dissection of the a - globin super - enhancer in vivo . Nat . Genet . 48 , 895 – 903 . Hnisz , D . , Abraham , B . J . , Lee , T . I . , Lau , A . , Saint - Andre´ , V . , Sigova , A . A . , Hoke , H . A . , and Young , R . A . ( 2013 ) . Super - enhancers in the control of cell identity and disease . Cell 155 , 934 – 947 . Cell 169 , March 23 , 2017 21 Hnisz , D . , Schuijers , J . , Lin , C . Y . , Weintraub , A . S . , Abraham , B . J . , Lee , T . I . , Bradner , J . E . , and Young , R . A . ( 2015 ) . Convergence of developmental and oncogenic signaling pathways at transcriptional super - enhancers . Mol . Cell 58 , 362 – 370 . Hnisz , D . , Weintraub , A . S . , Day , D . S . , Valton , A . L . , Bak , R . O . , Li , C . H . , Gold - mann , J . , Lajoie , B . R . , Fan , Z . P . , Sigova , A . A . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Activation of proto - oncogenes by disruption of chromosome neighborhoods . Science 351 , 1454 – 1458 . Ji , X . , Dadon , D . B . , Powell , B . E . , Fan , Z . P . , Borges - Rivera , D . , Shachar , S . , Weintraub , A . S . , Hnisz , D . , Pegoraro , G . , Lee , T . I . , et al . ( 2016 ) . 3D chromo - some regulatory landscape of human pluripotent cells . Cell Stem Cell 18 , 262 – 275 . Jiang , T . , Raviram , R . , Snetkova , V . , Rocha , P . P . , Proudhon , C . , Badri , S . , Bon - neau , R . , Skok , J . A . , andKluger , Y . ( 2016 ) . Identiﬁcationofmulti - locihubsfrom 4C - seq demonstrates the functional importance of simultaneous interactions . Nucleic Acids Res . 44 , 8714 – 8725 . Johnson , A . D . , Meyer , B . J . , and Ptashne , M . ( 1979 ) . Interactions between DNA - bound repressors govern regulation by the lambda phage repressor . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 76 , 5061 – 5065 . Kato , M . , Han , T . W . , Xie , S . , Shi , K . , Du , X . , Wu , L . C . , Mirzaei , H . , Goldsmith , E . J . , Longgood , J . , Pei , J . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Cell - free formation of RNA granules : low complexity sequence domains form dynamic ﬁbers within hydrogels . Cell 149 , 753 – 767 . Kieffer - Kwon , K . R . , Tang , Z . , Mathe , E . , Qian , J . , Sung , M . H . , Li , G . , Resch , W . , Baek , S . , Pruett , N . , Grøntved , L . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Interactome maps of mouse gene regulatory domains reveal basic principles of transcriptional regulation . Cell 155 , 1507 – 1520 . Kim , T . K . , andManiatis , T . ( 1997 ) . Themechanismoftranscriptionalsynergyof an in vitro assembled interferon - beta enhanceosome . Mol . Cell 1 , 119 – 129 . Kundaje , A . , Meuleman , W . , Ernst , J . , Bilenky , M . , Yen , A . , Heravi - Moussavi , A . , Kheradpour , P . , Zhang , Z . , Wang , J . , Ziller , M . J . , et al . ; Roadmap Epige - nomicsConsortium ( 2015 ) . Integrativeanalysisof 111reference humanepige - nomes . Nature 518 , 317 – 330 . Kwiatkowski , N . , Zhang , T . , Rahl , P . B . , Abraham , B . J . , Reddy , J . , Ficarro , S . B . , Dastur , A . , Amzallag , A . , Ramaswamy , S . , Tesar , B . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Targeting transcription regulation in cancer with a covalent CDK7 inhibitor . Nature 511 , 616 – 620 . Kwon , I . , Kato , M . , Xiang , S . , Wu , L . , Theodoropoulos , P . , Mirzaei , H . , Han , T . , Xie , S . , Corden , J . L . , and McKnight , S . L . ( 2013 ) . Phosphorylation - regulated binding of RNA polymerase II to ﬁbrous polymers of low - complexity domains . Cell 155 , 1049 – 1060 . Lai , F . , and Shiekhattar , R . ( 2014 ) . Enhancer RNAs : the new molecules of tran - scription . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 25 , 38 – 42 . Lai , F . , Orom , U . A . , Cesaroni , M . , Beringer , M . , Taatjes , D . J . , Blobel , G . A . , and Shiekhattar , R . ( 2013 ) . Activating RNAs associate with mediator to enhance chromatin architecture and transcription . Nature 494 , 497 – 501 . Larochelle , S . , Amat , R . , Glover - Cutter , K . , Sanso´ , M . , Zhang , C . , Allen , J . J . , Shokat , K . M . , Bentley , D . L . , and Fisher , R . P . ( 2012 ) . Cyclin - dependent kinase control of the initiation - to - elongation switch of RNA polymerase II . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 19 , 1108 – 1115 . Lee , T . I . , and Young , R . A . ( 2013 ) . Transcriptional regulation and its misregula - tion in disease . Cell 152 , 1237 – 1251 . Levine , M . , Cattoglio , C . , and Tjian , R . ( 2014 ) . Looping back to leap forward : transcription enters a new era . Cell 157 , 13 – 25 . Li , P . , Banjade , S . , Cheng , H . C . , Kim , S . , Chen , B . , Guo , L . , Llaguno , M . , Hol - lingsworth , J . V . , King , D . S . , Banani , S . F . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Phase transitions in the assembly of multivalent signalling proteins . Nature 483 , 336 – 340 . Lin , C . Y . , Love´n , J . , Rahl , P . B . , Paranal , R . M . , Burge , C . B . , Bradner , J . E . , Lee , T . I . , and Young , R . A . ( 2012 ) . Transcriptional ampliﬁcation in tumor cells with elevated c - Myc . Cell 151 , 56 – 67 . Love´n , J . , Hoke , H . A . , Lin , C . Y . , Lau , A . , Orlando , D . A . , Vakoc , C . R . , Bradner , J . E . , Lee , T . I . , and Young , R . A . ( 2013 ) . Selective inhibition of tumoroncogenes by disruption of super - enhancers . Cell 153 , 320 – 334 . Malik , S . , and Roeder , R . G . ( 2010 ) . The metazoan Mediator co - activator com - plex as an integrative hub for transcriptional regulation . Nat . Rev . Genet . 11 , 761 – 772 . Mansour , M . R . , Abraham , B . J . , Anders , L . , Berezovskaya , A . , Gutierrez , A . , Durbin , A . D . , Etchin , J . , Lawton , L . , Sallan , S . E . , Silverman , L . B . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Oncogene regulation . An oncogenic super - enhancer formed through somaticmutationofanoncodingintergenicelement . Science 346 , 1373 – 1377 . Mao , Y . S . , Zhang , B . , and Spector , D . L . ( 2011 ) . Biogenesis and function of nuclear bodies . Trends Genet . 27 , 295 – 306 . Merika , M . , Williams , A . J . , Chen , G . , Collins , T . , andThanos , D . ( 1998 ) . Recruit - ment of CBP / p300 by the IFN beta enhanceosome is required for synergistic activation of transcription . Mol . Cell 1 , 277 – 287 . Nie , Z . , Hu , G . , Wei , G . , Cui , K . , Yamane , A . , Resch , W . , Wang , R . , Green , D . R . , Tessarollo , L . , Casellas , R . , et al . ( 2012 ) . c - Myc is a universal ampliﬁer of ex - pressed genes in lymphocytes and embryonic stem cells . Cell 151 , 68 – 79 . Ong , C . T . , and Corces , V . G . ( 2011 ) . Enhancer function : new insights into the regulation of tissue - speciﬁc gene expression . Nat . Rev . Genet . 12 , 283 – 293 . Orphanides , G . , and Reinberg , D . ( 2002 ) . A uniﬁed theory of gene expression . Cell 108 , 439 – 451 . Palstra , R . J . , Tolhuis , B . , Splinter , E . , Nijmeijer , R . , Grosveld , F . , and de Laat , W . ( 2003 ) . Thebeta - globinnuclearcompartmentindevelopmentanderythroid differentiation . Nat . Genet . 35 , 190 – 194 . Parker , S . C . , Stitzel , M . L . , Taylor , D . L . , Orozco , J . M . , Erdos , M . R . , Akiyama , J . A . , van Bueren , K . L . , Chines , P . S . , Narisu , N . , Black , B . L . , et al . ; NISC Comparative Sequencing Program ; National Institutes of Health Intramural Sequencing Center Comparative Sequencing Program Authors ; NISC Comparative Sequencing Program Authors ( 2013 ) . Chromatin stretch enhancer states drive cell - speciﬁc gene regulation and harbor human disease risk variants . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 17921 – 17926 . Pefanis , E . , Wang , J . , Rothschild , G . , Lim , J . , Kazadi , D . , Sun , J . , Federation , A . , Chao , J . , Elliott , O . , Liu , Z . P . , et al . ( 2015 ) . RNA exosome - regulated long non - coding RNA transcription controls super - enhancer activity . Cell 161 , 774 – 789 . Phatnani , H . P . , and Greenleaf , A . L . ( 2006 ) . Phosphorylation and functions of the RNA polymerase II CTD . Genes Dev . 20 , 2922 – 2936 . Proudhon , C . , Snetkova , V . , Raviram , R . , Lobry , C . , Badri , S . , Jiang , T . , Hao , B . , Trimarchi , T . , Kluger , Y . , Aifantis , I . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Active and Inactive Enhancers Cooperate to Exert Localized and Long - Range Control of Gene Regulation . Cell Rep . 15 , 2159 – 2169 . Raj , A . , and van Oudenaarden , A . ( 2008 ) . Nature , nurture , or chance : stochas - tic gene expression and its consequences . Cell 135 , 216 – 226 . Raser , J . M . , and O’Shea , E . K . ( 2004 ) . Control of stochasticity in eukaryotic gene expression . Science 304 , 1811 – 1814 . Rathert , P . , Roth , M . , Neumann , T . , Muerdter , F . , Roe , J . S . , Muhar , M . , Deswal , S . , Cerny - Reiterer , S . , Peter , B . , Jude , J . , etal . ( 2015 ) . Transcriptionalplasticity promotes primary and acquired resistance to BET inhibition . Nature 525 , 543 – 547 . Semenov , A . N . , and Rubinstein , M . ( 1998 ) . Thermoreversible gelation in solu - tions of associative polymers . 1 . Statics . Macromolecules 31 , 1373 – 1385 . Shin , H . Y . , Willi , M . , Yoo , K . H . , Zeng , X . , Wang , C . , Metser , G . , and Hennigh - ausen , L . ( 2016 ) . Hierarchy within the mammary STAT5 - driven Wap super - enhancer . Nat . Genet . 48 , 904 – 911 . Shin , Y . , Berry , J . , Pannucci , N . , Haataja , M . P . , Toettcher , J . E . , and Brang - wynne , C . P . ( 2017 ) . Spatiotemporal control of intracellular phase transitions using light - activated optoDroplets . Cell 168 , 159 – 171 . Shu , S . , Lin , C . Y . , He , H . H . , Witwicki , R . M . , Tabassum , D . P . , Roberts , J . M . , Janiszewska , M . , Huh , S . J . , Liang , Y . , Ryan , J . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Response and resistance to BET bromodomain inhibitors in triple - negative breast cancer . Nature 529 , 413 – 417 . Sigova , A . A . , Mullen , A . C . , Molinie , B . , Gupta , S . , Orlando , D . A . , Guenther , M . G . , Almada , A . E . , Lin , C . , Sharp , P . A . , Giallourakis , C . C . , and Young , R . A . ( 2013 ) . Divergent transcription of long noncoding RNA / mRNA gene pairs in embryonic stem cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 2876 – 2881 . 22 Cell 169 , March 23 , 2017 Sigova , A . A . , Abraham , B . J . , Ji , X . , Molinie , B . , Hannett , N . M . , Guo , Y . E . , Jangi , M . , Giallourakis , C . C . , Sharp , P . A . , and Young , R . A . ( 2015 ) . Transcription fac - tor trapping by RNA in gene regulatory elements . Science 350 , 978 – 981 . Spitz , F . , and Furlong , E . E . ( 2012 ) . Transcription factors : from enhancer bind - ing to developmental control . Nat . Rev . Genet . 13 , 613 – 626 . Stathis , A . , Zucca , E . , Bekradda , M . , Gomez - Roca , C . , Delord , J . P . , de La Motte Rouge , T . , Uro - Coste , E . , de Braud , F . , Pelosi , G . , and French , C . A . ( 2016 ) . Clinical responseof carcinomas harboring the BRD4 - NUT oncoprotein to the targeted bromodomain inhibitor OTX015 / MK - 8628 . Cancer Discov . 6 , 492 – 500 . Suter , D . M . , Molina , N . , Gatﬁeld , D . , Schneider , K . , Schibler , U . , and Naef , F . ( 2011 ) . Mammalian genes are transcribed with widely different bursting ki - netics . Science 332 , 472 – 474 . Thanos , D . , and Maniatis , T . ( 1995 ) . Virus induction of human IFN beta gene expression requires the assembly of an enhanceosome . Cell 83 , 1091 – 1100 . Tjian , R . , and Maniatis , T . ( 1994 ) . Transcriptional activation : a complex puzzle with few easy pieces . Cell 77 , 5 – 8 . Tolhuis , B . , Palstra , R . J . , Splinter , E . , Grosveld , F . , and de Laat , W . ( 2002 ) . Looping and interaction between hypersensitive sites in the active beta - globin locus . Mol . Cell 10 , 1453 – 1465 . Wang , Y . , Zhang , T . , Kwiatkowski , N . , Abraham , B . J . , Lee , T . I . , Xie , S . , Yuzu - gullu , H . , Von , T . , Li , H . , Lin , Z . , et al . ( 2015 ) . CDK7 - dependent transcriptional addiction in triple - negative breast cancer . Cell 163 , 174 – 186 . Wheeler , J . R . , Matheny , T . , Jain , S . , Abrisch , R . , andParker , R . ( 2016 ) . Distinct stages in stress granule assembly and disassembly . eLife 5 , 5 . Whyte , W . A . , Orlando , D . A . , Hnisz , D . , Abraham , B . J . , Lin , C . Y . , Kagey , M . H . , Rahl , P . B . , Lee , T . I . , and Young , R . A . ( 2013 ) . Master transcription factors and mediator establish super - enhancers at key cell identity genes . Cell 153 , 307 – 319 . Zhu , L . , and Brangwynne , C . P . ( 2015 ) . Nuclear bodies : the emerging biophysics of nucleoplasmic phases . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 34 , 23 – 30 . Zoller , B . , Nicolas , D . , Molina , N . , and Naef , F . ( 2015 ) . Structure of silent tran - scription intervals and noise characteristics of mammalian genes . Mol . Syst . Biol . 11 , 823 . Cell 169 , March 23 , 2017 23