Nanoscale Mapping of the Elasticity of Microbial Cells by Atomic Force Microscopy Ahmed Touhami , † Bernard Nysten , ‡ , § and Yves F . Dufreˆne * , † , ‡ Research Center in Micro and Nanoscopic Materials and Electronic Devices and Unite ´ de chimie des interfaces , Universite ´ catholique de Louvain , Croix du Sud 2 / 18 , B - 1348 Louvain - la - Neuve , Belgium , and Unite ´ de physique et de chimie des hauts polyme ` res , Universite ´ catholique de Louvain , Croix du Sud 1 , B - 1348 Louvain - la - Neuve , Belgium Received January 27 , 2003 . In Final Form : April 12 , 2003 Single microbial cells can show important local variations of elasticity due to the complex , anisotropic composition of their walls . An example of this is the yeast during cell division , where chitin is known to accumulate in the localized region of the cell wall involved in budding . We used atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) to measure quantitatively the local mechanical properties of hydrated yeast cells . Topographic images and spatially resolved force maps revealed significant lateral variations of elasticity across the cell surface , the bud scar region being significantly stiffer than the surrounding cell wall . To get quantitative information on sample elasticity , force curves were converted into force vs indentation curves . The curves were then fitted with the Hertz model , yielding Young’s modulus values of 6 . 1 ( 2 . 4 and 0 . 6 ( 0 . 4 MPa for the bud scar and surrounding cell surface , respectively . These data lead us to conclude that in yeast , the bud scar is 10 times stiffer than the surrounding cell wall , a finding which is consistent with the accumulation of chitin in the bud scar region . This is the first report in which spatially resolved AFM force curves are used to distinguish regions of different elasticity at the surface of single microbial cells in relation with function ( i . e . , cell division ) . In future research , this approach will provide fundamental insights into the spatial distribution of physical properties at heterogeneous microbial cell surfaces . Introduction Unlike animal cells , microbial cells are surrounded by thick , mechanically strong cell walls which determine cellular shape and enable the organisms to resist turgor pressure . The cell wall mechanical properties also play important roles in controlling cell growth and division processes . During the past decades , much progress has been made in understanding the surface properties of microorganisms . Yet physical properties remain difficult to address at the subcellular level due to the small size ofthecells . Inthiscontext , atomicforcemicroscopy ( AFM ) has recently emerged as a valuable tool . 1 AFM can be used not only to image the sample surface topography at high resolution 2 but also to locally measure the elastic properties of materials using it as a nanoindentation technique . 3 - 9 To this end , force curves are recorded and converted into force vs indentation curves using appropri - ate treatments . The curves can then be analyzed with theoretical models to provide quantitative information on sample elasticity ( i . e . , Young’s modulus ) . This nano - indentation method enabled the measurement of the mechanicalpropertiesofanimalcells , includingglialcells , platelets , cardiomyocytes , macrophages , endothelialcells , epithelial cells , fibroblasts , and osteoblasts , in relation with various dynamic processes . 4 , 5 , 7 - 9 Concerning plant cells , Callow et al . 10 determined the Young’s modulus of a green plant cell adhesive glycoprotein to be 0 . 5 MPa and showed that within minutes of release the adhesive underwent a progressive curing process reflected in a 10 - fold increase in stiffness . AFM force measurements have also been applied to microbial specimens . For isolated sheaths of the archeon Methanospirillum hungatei GP1 , the “depression technique” , which is complementary to theindentationmethod , yieldedanelasticmodulusof20 - 40GPa , indicatingthissingle - layeredstructureofunusual strengthcouldwithstandaninternalpressureof400atm . 11 For isolated murein sacculi of Gram - negative bacteria in the hydrated state , elastic moduli of 25 MPa were measured , in excellent agreement with theoretical cal - culation of the elasticity of the peptidoglycan network . 12 With the nanoindentation approach , the wall compress - ibility of whole Magnetospirillum gryphiswaldense cells was determined to be about 42 mN / m 13 and the turgor pressure was determined to be in the range of 85 - 150 kPa . 14 To our knowledge , the application of spatially resolved AFM force curves to quantitatively distinguish regions of different elasticity on single microbial cells has not been reported . Microorganisms can show important lateral variations of surface properties ( i . e . , topography , physicochemical * Towhomcorrespondencemaybeaddressed . Phone : ( 32 ) 1047 36 00 . Fax : ( 32 ) 10 47 20 05 . E - mail : dufrene @ cifa . ucl . ac . be . † Unite´ de chimie des interfaces . ‡ Research Center in Micro and Nanoscopic Materials and Electronic Devices . § Unite´ de physique et de chimie des hauts polyme ` res . ( 1 ) Dufreˆne , Y . F . J . Bacteriol . 2002 , 184 , 5205 . ( 2 ) Binnig , G . ; Quate , C . F . ; Gerber , C . Phys . Rev . Lett . 1986 , 56 , 930 . ( 3 ) Burnham , N . A . ; Colton , R . J . J . Vac . Sci . Technol . , A 1989 , 7 , 2906 . ( 4 ) Weisenhorn , A . L . ; Khorsandi , M . ; Kasas , S . ; Gotzos , V . ; Butt , H . - J . Nanotechnology 1993 , 4 , 106 . ( 5 ) Radmacher , M . ; Fritz , M . ; Kacher , C . M . ; Cleveland , J . P . ; Hansma , P . K . Biophys . J . 1996 , 70 , 556 . ( 6 ) Tomasetti , E . ; Legras , R . ; Nysten , B . Nanotechnology 1998 , 9 , 305 . ( 7 ) Rotsch , C . ; Jacobson , K . ; Radmacher , M . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 1999 , 96 , 921 . ( 8 ) Matzke , R . ; Jacobson , K . ; Radmacher , M . Nat . Cell Biol . 2001 , 3 , 607 . ( 9 ) Radmacher , M . Methods Cell Biol . 2002 , 68 , 67 . ( 10 ) Callow , J . A . ; Crawford , S . A . ; Higgins , M . J . ; Mulvaney , P . ; Wetherbee , R . Planta 2000 , 56 , 641 . ( 11 ) Xu , W . ; Mulhern , P . J . ; Blackford , B . L . ; Jericho ; M . H . ; Firtel , M . ; Beveridge , T . J . J . Bacteriol . 1996 , 178 , 3106 . ( 12 ) Yao X . ; Jericho , M . ; Pink , D . ; Beveridge , T . J . Bacteriol . 1999 , 181 , 6865 . ( 13 ) Arnoldi , M . ; Kacher , C . M . ; Ba¨uerlein , E . ; Radmacher , M . ; Fritz , M . Appl . Phys . A : Matter . Sci . Process . 1998 , 66 , S613 . ( 14 ) Arnoldi , M . ; Fritz , M . ; Bauerlein , E . ; Radmacher , M . ; Sackmann , E . ; Boulbitch , A . Phys . Rev . E 2000 , 62 , 1034 . 4539 Langmuir 2003 , 19 , 4539 - 4543 10 . 1021 / la034136x CCC : $ 25 . 00 © 2003 American Chemical Society Published on Web 05 / 03 / 2003 properties , and elasticity ) due to the anisotropic composi - tion of their cell walls . An example of this is the yeast Saccharomycescerevisiae duringthecourseofthedivision process . The yeast cell wall consists essentially of a microfibrillar array of (cid:226) 1 - 3 glucans overlaid by an outer layer of (cid:226) 1 - 6 glucans and mannoproteins . 15 Just before bud emergence , a ring of chitin is formed in the cell wall . This ring remains at the base of the bud as the bud grows and ultimately forms part of the bud scar marking the division site on the mother cell . 16 , 17 Chitin is a poly - saccharide of ( (cid:226) 1 - 4 ) - linked N - acetylglucosamine , which serves to strengthen the supporting structures of various organisms . In S . cerevisiae , chitin is thought to play an essential role in stiffening the localized region of the cell wall involved in budding but a direct , quantitative demonstration of this effect is still lacking . To address thisissue , wemappedthesurfaceelasticityof S . cerevisiae cells in aqueous solution , using spatially resolved AFM forcemeasurements . Treatmentoftheforcevsindentation curves with the Hertz model shows that the cell wall Young’s modulus varies significantly across the cell surface , the bud scar being about 10 times stiffer than the surrounding cell wall . Materials and Methods The brewer’s yeast strain Saccharomyces cerevisiae MUCL 38475 ( top fermenting ) was kindly supplied by Professor A . M . Corbisier ( Unite´ de Microbiologie , Universite´ catholique de Louvain , Belgium ) . The cells were grown as described by Dengis et al . 18 Yeast cells were stored in 25 % ( vol / vol ) glycerol at - 20 °C . They were plated in Petri dish on solid medium ( 1 % ( wt / vol ) yeast extract , 3 % ( wt / vol ) glucose , 2 . 5 % ( wt / vol ) agar ) and incubated at 30 °C for 3 days . The plates were stored at 4 °C and repitched every 3 weeks by plating one yeast colony on a new solid medium . The culture broth contained 2 % ( wt / vol ) yeast extract and 5 % ( wt / vol ) glucose . Two or three colonies from the solidmediumplatewereusedasinoculumfora10mLpreculturewhichwasgrownbyshakingovernightat30°C . Then cells of the preculture were used to inoculate 200 mL of culture medium to a concentration of about 2 (cid:2) 10 6 cells per mL . The culture was incubated on a shaker at 100 rpm and 30 °C . Cells of the exponential growth phase were harvested after 10 h , washed three times with milliQ water , resuspended in water , and immediately used . AFMimagesandforce - distancecurveswereobtainedatroom temperature , using a commercial microscope ( Nanoscope III , DigitalInstruments , SantaBarbara , CA ) . Cellswereimmobilized bymechanicaltrappinginpolycarbonatemembranes ( Millipore ) with pore size similar to the cell size . 1 After a cell suspension was filtered , the filter was carefully cut ( 1 cm (cid:2) 1 cm ) , turned upside down , and attached to a steel sample puck ( Digital Instruments , SantaBarbara , CA ) usingasmallpieceofadhesive tape and the mounted sample was immediately transferred into theAFMliquidcell . AllmeasurementswereperformedinmilliQ water with commercial oxide sharpened Si 3 N 4 cantilevers ( Ther - moMicroscopes , Sunnyvale , CA ) with a tip radius of (cid:24) 20 nm . Thespringconstantsofthecantileversfromtheusedbatchwerefoundtobe8 ( 0 . 4 mN / m , as determined by measuring the free resonance frequency in air . 19 Force curves were recorded at rate of 0 . 5 (cid:237) m / s ( piezo displacement ) . Freshly cleaved mica was used asahardnon - deformablesubstrateforphotodetectorssensitivity calibration . The treatment of the experimental deflection vs heightcurves , theirtransformationintoloadvsindentationdepth curves , and their fit with theoretical relations were performed withhome - developedroutinesonIgorProsoftware ( Wavemetrics Inc . , Lake Oswego , OR ) . Mean values of the Young’s modulus were obtained by fitting nine retraction load indentation curves obtainedfromtwoindependentexperiments ( differentAFMtips , independent cell cultures ) . Results and Discussion Mapping Cell Surface Properties . Single S . cerevi - siae cellswereimmobilizedinporouspolymermembranes . Figure 1 presents a three - dimensional height image of a cell trapped into a pore of the membrane . The cell showed an heterogeneous morphology , the presence of a circular depression being clearly observed . This surface hetero - geneity may be attributed to the bud scar resulting from the cell division process , in agreement with earlier AFM 20 and electron microscopy 21 observations . High - resolution height and deflection images of the bud scar are shown in parts a and b of Figure 2 . 22 To investigate the mechanical properties of the cell wall at various locations , force - volume images 23 consisting of arrays of 32 (cid:2) 32 force curves were recorded in parallel with topographic images . For each force curve , the sample verticaldisplacement , z , wascontrolledtoobtainthesame maximum vertical deflection , d , and thus the same maximum applied force ( Figure 2d ) . Then , force maps reflecting qualitatively the sample mechanical properties were generated by taking a slice of the force volume at a given sample height in the contact region of the curves ( Figure 2c , d ) . The obtained force map , shown in Figure 2c , displayedheterogeneouscontrastwhichwascorrelated withtheheterogeneoussurfacemorphology ( Figure2a , b ) . The bud scar region clearly showed darker contrast compared to the surrounding cell surface , reflecting a difference in deflection on the two regions for the same sample height ( Figure 2d ) . This observation suggests that the bud scar is qualitatively stiffer than the mother cell wall . Force vs Indentation Curves . To quantitatively assess the elasticity of the bud scar and mother cell wall ( 15 ) Fleet , G . H . In Theyeasts : yeastorganelles ; Rose , A . H . , Harrison , J . S . , Eds . ; Academic Press : London , 1991 ; p 199 . ( 16 ) DeMarini , D . J . ; Adams , A . E . M . ; Fares , H . ; DeVirgilio , C . ; Valle , G . ; Chuang , J . S . ; R . Pringle , J . J . Cell Biol . 1997 , 139 , 75 . ( 17 ) Sloat , B . F . ; Pringle , J . R . Science 1978 , 200 , 1171 . ( 18 ) Dengis , P . B . ; Ne´lissen , L . R . ; Rouxhet , P . G . Appl . Environ . Microbiol . 1995 , 61 , 718 . ( 19 ) Cleveland , J . P . ; Manne , S . ; Bocek , D . ; Hansma , P . K . Rev . Sci . Instrum . 1993 , 64 , 403 . ( 20 ) Ahimou , F . ; Touhami , A . ; Dufreˆne , Y . F . Yeast 2003 , 20 , 25 . ( 21 ) Koch , Y . ; Rademacher , K . H . Can . J . Microbiol . 1980 , 26 , 965 . ( 22 ) Note that only 10 - 20 % of the cells investigated showed a bud scar . Thismayberelatedtothefactthatafractionofthecellpopulation wasnotinthecourseofthedivisionprocess ; anotherpossibleexplanation isthatsomebudscarsmaybehidden , i . e . , notexposedtowardtheAFM tip . ( 23 ) Heinz , W . F . ; Hoh , J . H . Tibtech . 1999 , 17 , 143 . Figure 1 . Three - dimensional AFM height image ( 6 (cid:237) m (cid:2) 6 (cid:237) m ; z - range 1 (cid:237) m ) , in aqueous solution , showing a single Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell protruding from a porous mem - brane . The cell clearly shows a circular bud scar left after detachment of the daughter cell . 4540 Langmuir , Vol . 19 , No . 11 , 2003 Letters regions , force curves obtained on both regions where converted into force vs indentation curves and analyzed using the following procedure . 3 , 4 , 6 , 9 Figure 3 shows typical raw force curves obtained for hard and soft surfaces , i . e . , mica and the yeast surface , respectively . In these curves , the cantilever vertical deflection , d , is plotted as a function of the sample height , z , and the load , F , applied by the cantilever to the tip - surface contact can be computed using Hooke’s law knowing the cantilever spring constant , k c In the case of mica ( Figure 3 ) , the slope of the deflection vs sample height curve was equal to 1 because mica is an infinitelystiffsurfacecomparedtothecantileverstiffness . Therefore , this slope was used to calibrate the sensitivity of the position - sensitive photodiode , i . e . , to convert the voltagemeasuredonthephotodiodeintocantileververticaldeflectionmakingtheassumptionthatthetipfollowsthesampledisplacement . 24 On the soft cell surface , the tip indented the sample surface and the cantilever deflection was smaller than the sample vertical displacement , leading to deflection vs height curves with a slope lower than 1 ( Figure 3 ) . The difference between the sample height or cantilever deflection that would be measured on a hard surface and the deflection measured on the soft surface is equal to the indentation depth of the tip into the sample surface , (cid:228) Typical deflection vs sample height curves measured on mica , bud scar , and mother cell wall regions are presented in Figure 4 . As can be seen , the deflection of the free cantilever was not equal to zero , due to drift in the detection system as well as to stresses in the cantilever . Therefore , itwasnecessarytosubtractthedeflectionoffset , d 0 , from all the deflection values , this offset being easily determinedfromtheforcecurvebymeasuringtheaveragecantileverdeflectionwhenthecantileverisfarfromthesamplesurface ( Figure4 ) . Theneq1wasmodifiedinorder to evaluate the actual load applied on the contact : To calculate the tip indentation depth , (cid:228) ( relation 2 ) , the point of contact or height offset , z 0 , where the tip first entersincontactwiththesamplesurfacewasdetermined . For typical force curves as measured on mica ( Figure 4a ) , a sudden jump to contact was observed upon approach and the height offset , z 0 , was easily determined as the height where this instability occurs . 25 For the bud scar and mother cell regions ( Figure 4b , c ) , this instability was not observed . The determination of the height offset was thus more difficult . In this case , z 0 was defined as the height where the cantilever deflection begins to level off from the horizontal line representing the average deflec - tion when the tip is off - contact , i . e . , the deflection offset . Following determination of d 0 and z 0 , the tip indentation depth or tip to surface distance was calculated using relation 2 modified as follows : Using then eqs 3 and 4 , deflection versus height curves were transformed into load , F , versus indentation , (cid:228) , curves . Typical F vs (cid:228) curves obtained for the bud scar and mother cell regions are shown in Figure 5 . These were clearly different , the indentation depth at a given load being much smaller on the bud scar compared to the mother cell surface . ( 24 ) D’Costa , N . P . ; Hoh , J . H . Rev . Sci . Instrum . 1995 , 66 , 5096 . ( 25 ) Burnham , N . A . ; Colton , R . J . In ScanningTunnelingMicroscopy andSpectroscopyTheory , Techniques , andApplications ; Bonnell , D . A . , Ed . ; Springer : New York , 1993 ; p 191 . Figure 2 . Maps of cell surface topography and mechanical properties . High - resolutionheight ( a ) anddeflection ( b ) images ( 1 . 5 (cid:237) m (cid:2) 1 . 5 (cid:237) m ) of a portion of the cell showing the bud scar . Force map ( c ) obtained at the same location by recording a force - volume image consisting of 32 (cid:2) 32 force curves and taking a slice of the force volume in the contact region of the curves at a given sample height represented by the vertical dashed line in ( d ) . Differences in gray levels correspond to variations in the deflection magnitude at the selected sample height . In ( d ) , typical curves measured on the mother cell wall ( solid line ) and on the bud scar ( dotted line ) are presented and the corresponding deflections are respectively labeled C and B . Similar results were obtained when using different AFM tips and independent cell cultures . Figure 3 . Examples of cantilever deflection versus sample heightcurvesmeasuredonahardsurface , i . e . , mica ( solidline ) , and a soft surface , i . e . , the yeast cell wall ( dotted line ) . The difference , (cid:228) , betweenbothcurvesisequaltothetipindentation depth . F ) k c d ( 1 ) (cid:228) ) z - d ( 2 ) F ) k c ( d - d 0 ) ( 3 ) (cid:228) ) ( z - z 0 ) - ( d - d 0 ) ( 4 ) Letters Langmuir , Vol . 19 , No . 11 , 2003 4541 Young’s Modulus . To extract quantitative values of Young’s modulus from the force - indentation curves , these were analyzed with Hertzian models from the continuum mechanics of contacts . 26 , 27 These simple models are valid for elastic surfaces and do not take into account tip - surfaceadhesion . Sinceadhesionforceswerealwayssmall or negligible in this study , it was reasonable to use these models . 28 Hertzian models describe the indentation of a non - deformable indenter ( the AFM tip made of silicon or silicon nitride ) into an infinitely extending deformable elastic half space ( the sample surface ) . In the case of AFM , the tip shape can be generally modeled by two geometries , a conical or a paraboloid indenter . In these cases , the load vs indentation depth relation are respec - tively given by In these relations , R is the half - opening angle of a conical tip , R istheradiusofcurvatureofasphericalorparaboloid indenter , and E * is the surface elastic constant of the material constituting the elastic half space . It is defined by the following equation where E is the Young’s modulus or tensile elastic modulus of the materials and (cid:238) is its Poisson’s ratio . From relations 5 and 6 , one can see that if a quasi - quadratic relation is observed between the load and the indentation depth , a conical model should be used for the tip , while if the load versus indentation depth relation is close to a (cid:228) 3 / 2 variation , the spherical or paraboloid model should be used . For both the bud scar and mother cell surfaces , quasi - quadraticload - indentationrelationswere obtained . Therefore , the curves were fitted using the conical model ( relation 5 ) using a value of 18° for the half - opening angle ( value given by the manufacturer ) . It can be seen in Figure 5 , that the retraction curves were well fitted by the theoretical model . From these fits and assuming a Poisson’s ratio of 0 . 5 , which is expected for ( 26 ) Hertz , H . J . Reine Angew . Math . 1882 , 92 , 156 . ( 27 ) Sneddon , I . N . Int . J . Eng . Sci . 1965 , 3 , 47 . ( 28 ) Note that on samples exhibiting significant adhesion forces , it would be more appropriate to use the JKR model : Johnson , K . L . ; Kendall , K . ; Roberts , A . D . Proc . R . Soc . London , Ser . A 1971 , 324 , 301 . Figure 4 . Typical cantilever deflection versus sample height curves obtained on mica ( a ) , on the bud scar ( b ) , and on the mother cell surface ( c ) . The height and deflection offsets are represented by z 0 and d 0 , respectively . Similar curves were obtained when probing different locations of the same regions as well as when using different AFM tips and independent cell cultures . Figure 5 . Typical load - indentation curves obtained for the budscar ( a ) andsurroundingmothercellsurface ( b ) . Thecurves were fitted with the Hertz model ( solid lines ) , yielding Young’s modulus values of 6 . 1 ( 2 . 4 and 0 . 6 ( 0 . 4 MPa for the bud scar andthemothercellsurface , respectively ( meanvaluesobtained from nine curves from two independent experiments ) . F cone ) 2 (cid:240) tan R E * (cid:228) 2 ( 5 ) F paraboloid ) 4 3 E * R 1 / 2 (cid:228) 3 / 2 ( 6 ) E * ) E 1 - (cid:238) 2 ( 7 ) 4542 Langmuir , Vol . 19 , No . 11 , 2003 Letters soft biological materials , we deduced Young’s modulus values of 6 . 1 ( 2 . 4 MPa ( n ) 9 ) for the bud scar and 0 . 6 ( 0 . 4 MPa ( n ) 9 ) for the mother cell surface . The rather large standard deviation on the obtained average values reflectsvariabilityofthemeasurementsacrossthesurfaceofthesamecellaswellasvariabilityassociatedwithindependentcellcultures . From the Young’s modulus values , it can be concluded that the bud scar is about 10 times stiffer than the mother cell surface , a finding which isconsistentwiththepresenceofchitininthebudscar . 16 , 17 It is interesting to compare our data to those reported for other cellular systems . We note that our Young’s modulus values are significantly larger than those ob - tained on animal cells ( typically , in the 100 Pa to 0 . 1 MPa range ) using similar nanoindentation measurements ( see ref9forarecentreview ) . Thisisconsistentwithdifferences in cell surface architecture ; i . e . , thick cell walls are not found in animal cells . Interestingly , the Young’s modulus values obtained here are smaller than those reported for other microbial systems . However , there are several reasons why these experiments should not be directly compared . First , some studies dealt with pure , isolated cell wall layers , yielding elastic moduli in the 10 MPa to 10 GPa range . 11 , 12 The authors focused on specific pro - teinaceous and peptidoglycan layers known to have unusualstrength , whichisverydifferentfromthecomplex , multilayered architecture of the yeast walls . Second , cell wall elasticity has also been measured on whole cells , using micromanipulation 29 and optical trapping 30 meth - ods . The measurements yielded elastic moduli of 110 and 50MPa , for S . cerevisiae and Bacillussubtilis , respectively . Here , the entire cells were subjected to mechanical stress , which is not the case in local AFM nanoindentation measurements . Clearly , further quantitative comparison of global and local measurements is needed to get a complete picture of the yeast cell wall elasticity . Summarizing , by use of combined AFM imaging and nanoindentation measurements , regions of different elas - ticity were distinguished on single yeast cells , in relation with the cell budding process . Fitting force vs indentation curves with the Hertz model yielded a Young’s modulus that was about 10 times higher on the bud scar than on the surrounding cell wall . This marked difference in local elasticity was attributed to the accumulation of chitin in the bud scar region during cell division . Acknowledgment . B . N . and Y . F . D . are Research Associates of the Belgian National Foundation for Sci - entific Research ( FNRS ) . The support of the FNRS , the Interuniversity Poles of Attraction Program ( Federal Office for Scientific , Technical and Cultural Affairs ) , and of the Research Department of Communaute´ Franc (cid:252) aise de Belgique ( Concerted Research Action ) is gratefully acknowledged . The authors thank Professor P . Grange for the use of the AFM and F . Ahimou and S . Derclaye for helping with the experiments . LA034136X ( 29 ) Smith , A . E . ; Zhang , Z . B . ; Thomas , C . R . ; Moxham , K . E . ; Middelberg , A . P . J . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2000 , 97 , 9871 . ( 30 ) Mendelson , N . H . ; Sarlls , J . E . ; Wolgemuth , C . W . ; Goldstein , R . E . Phys . Rev . Lett . 2000 , 84 , 1627 . Letters Langmuir , Vol . 19 , No . 11 , 2003 4543