Introduction Approximately 90 % of all pediatric radiology studies are performed and interpreted by general radiologists [ 1 ] . However , the Association of University Radiolo - gists merely suggests , but does not mandate , that radiolo - gy residents receive 12 weeks of pediatric radiology training during residency , and therefore some general radiologists may not have had this suggested amount of training . In addition , pediatric radiology is not a com - monly covered topic in radiology continuing medical education courses . Therefore , general radiologists need organized and authoritative pediatric radiology infor - mation conveniently delivered to the point - of - care if they are to practice pediatric radiology anywhere near the accuracy of fellowship - trained pediatric radiologists . Similarly , pediatric radiologists often need convenient access to organized and authoritative pediatric radiolo - gy information to conduct their practice optimally . Professional training and practice are now being rec - ognized as a process of apprenticeship that is in fact a continuum of learning [ 2 – 5 ] . Apprentices require a con - Michael P . D’Alessandro Creating and curating a pediatric radiology digital library to make the Internet a useful reference tool for the radiologist Received : 9 March 1998 Accepted : 4 June 1998 Presented at the 41st Annual Meeting of the Society for Pediatric Radiology , May 5 , 1998 Supported in part by a grant from the National Library of Medicine ( Contract Number N01 - LM - 4 – 3511 ) M . P . D’Alessandro Department of Radiology , University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics , 200 Hawkins Drive , Iowa City , IA 52242 USA Abstract Background . To practice pediatric radiology optimally , radi - ologists need convenient access to organized and authoritative pediat - ric radiology information . The In - ternet has the potential for offering such convenient access , but the ma - jority of information on it is poorly organized and of questionable au - thority . Objective . The goal of this project was to create and curate a pediatric radiology digital library that will make the Internet a useful reference tool for the radiologist at the point - of - care . Materials and Methods . A pediatric radiology digital library containing organized and authoritative pediat - ric radiology information from the Internet was created and has three components : ( 1 ) PediatricRadiolo - gy . com ( http : / / pediatricradiolo - gy . com ) – a catalog of pediatric radiology Web sites ; ( 2 ) The Meta - Textbook of Pediatric Radiology ( http : / / www . vh . org / Providers / Teach - ingFiles / MetatextbookPedRad / MetaTBPedRad . html ) – a catalog of pediatric radiology teaching file cases on the Internet ; and ( 3 ) Pae - diapedia ( http : / / www . vh . org / Provid - ers / TeachingFiles / PAP / PAP - Home . html ) – an imaging encyclopedia of pediatric disease . The pediatric radiology digital li - brary is curated regularly . Results . Over 7 months , 223 , 689 pages of information were read and 26 , 972 images were viewed in the pediatric radiology digital library by 69 , 866 individual users , with 20 % of the users from outside the United States . Conclusion . Creating a pediatric ra - diology digital library that identifies and organizes authoritative pediat - ric radiology information and makes it conveniently available can allow radiologists to use the Internet pro - ductively as a reference tool . Pediatr Radiol ( 1998 ) 28 : 890 – 895 (cid:211) Springer - Verlag 1998 tinuum of information support . In the past , authorita - tive information was organized and stored in journals and textbooks in offices and libraries , often distant from the point - of - care and therefore inconvenient to ac - cess . Currently , the Internet offers the potential to allow convenient access to information at the point - of - care [ 6 ] . However , the majority of the information on the In - ternet is poorly organized [ 7 ] , growing rapidly [ 8 ] and of questionable authority [ 9 ] . However , emerging Internet digital library technologies hold the promise of bring - ing order to this chaos and thereby helping the Internet to meet the information needs of medical apprentice learners . The goal of this project was to create and curate a pe - diatric radiology digital library that will make the Inter - net a useful reference tool for the radiologist at the point - of - care . Materials and methods The pediatric radiology digital library currently has three discrete components : ( 1 ) PediatricRadiology . com – a catalog of pediatric radiology Web sites ; ( 2 ) The MetaTextbook of Pediatric Radiolo - gy – a catalog of pediatric radiology teaching file cases on the In - ternet and ( 3 ) Paediapedia – an imaging encyclopedia of pediatric disease . Creation PediatricRadiology . com . The Internet address “pediatricradiolo - gy . com” ( http : / / pediatricradiology . com ) was chosen for this cata - log of pediatric radiology Web sites because it was easily remembered and it was felt this would help to lower barriers to us - ers accessing the catalog . In April 1997 the Internet was manually searched and curated for pediatric radiology Web sites . This was accomplished by identi - fying the largest medical Web site catalogs and browsing them to identify pediatric radiology , pediatric surgery , pediatric pathology and pediatric Web sites ( Table 1 ) . Then , major search engines were searched for the terms “pediatric radiology , ” “pediatric imag - ing , ” “pediatric surgery , ” and “pediatric pathology” ( Table 2 ) . The top 200 search engine hits for each term were investigated , leading to the identification of further pediatric radiology Web sites . The list of identified pediatric radiology Web sites was then re - viewed to determine if each Web site warranted inclusion in the PediatricRadiology . com catalog . To merit inclusion , a Web site had to fulfill three criteria : 1 . The Web site was created by an established local , state , national , or international commercial , educational , non - profit , or govern - mental organization to ensure that the site was authoritative , up - to - date , and long - lived . In addition , the Web site had to be authored in whole or in part by a staff physician . 2 . The Web site was free to use , in part or in whole . 3 . The Web site’s information had to be primarily in Hypertext Markup Language ( HTML ) format so that it could be read by users with standard World Wide Web browsers . Sixty - six Web si - tes met the criteria for inclusion . An information architecture for PediatricRadiology . com was de - veloped , whereby the cataloged Web sites were organized from a librarian’s perspective . Each Web site was cataloged in two ways , first by the organ system the Web site pertains to ( if applicable ) , and second by the type of information the Web site contains ( text - books , teaching files , scientific exhibits , lectures , continuing medi - cal education courses , patient education information , journals and mailing lists , professional societies , departments , and health sci - ences and general Internet directories and search engines ) . Pedia - tricRadiology . com allows its users to submit suggestions for new Web sites to be cataloged , and it publicizes these new sites promi - nently . Approximately 50 h of time were spent in the initial creation and curation of PediatricRadiology . com . MetaTextbook of Pediatric Radiology . Just as a meta - analysis is a study that synthesizes the data from pre - existing studies , in a simi - lar manner the MetaTextbook of Pediatric Radiology ( http : / / www . vh . org / Providers / TeachingFiles / MetatextbookPedRad / Me - taTBPedRad . html ) is a textbook that synthesizes the pediatric ra - diology information from pre - existing pediatric radiology Web sites . The MetaTextbook of Pediatric Radiology serves as a cata - log of pediatric radiology teaching file cases on the Internet . The MetaTextbook of Pediatric Radiology’s information archi - tecture was based upon the Society for Pediatric Radiology ( SPR ) Curriculum in Pediatric Radiology for Radiology Residents [ 10 ] . This curriculum specifies 402 diseases organized by organ system that radiology residents should be familiar with by the end of resi - dency and forms the outline of the MetaTextbook of Pediatric Ra - diology’s catalog . 891 Medical Web site catalog URL HealthWeb http : / / healthweb . org Martindale’s Health Science Guide http : / / www - sci . lib . uci . edu / HSG / HSGuide . html Medical Matrix http : / / www . medmatrix . org MedWeb http : / / www . gen . emory . edu / MEDWEB / medweb . html PedInfo http : / / www . uab . edu / pedinfo / index . html Pediatric Points of Interest http : / / www . med . jhu . edu / peds / neonatology / poi . html Yahoo http : / / www . yahoo . com / Health / Medicine / Table 1 Medical Web site catalogs browsed Table 2 Search engines used Search engine URL Altavista http : / / www . altavista . digital . com Hotbot http : / / www . hotbot . com NorthernLight http : / / www . northernlight . com Metacrawler http : / / www . metacrawler . com SavvySearch http : / / guaraldi . cs . colostate . edu : 2000 / All of the Web sites cataloged in PediatricRadiology . com were reviewed and relevant teaching file cases were linked to the Meta - Textbook of Pediatric Radiology . A total of 622 teaching file cases from 30 of PediatricRadiology . com’s Web sites were linked to the MetaTextbook of Pediatric Radiology . This covered 237 ( 59 % ) of the diseases in the SPR curriculum . Approximately 50 h of time were spent creating and curating the MetaTextbook of Pediatric Radiology . Paediapedia . Paediapedia ( http : / / www . vh . org / Providers / Teaching - Files / PAP / PAPHome . html ) is an imaging encyclopedia of pediat - ric disease . It contains information on the radiologic appearance of 300 pediatric diseases , differential diagnoses and imaging ap - proaches to common pediatric problems , technique descriptions for pediatric imaging procedures , and unknown cases that can be used for self - assessment . Paediapedia can also be searched free - text . The topics covered in Paediapedia were originally based upon the American College of Radiology’s Pediatric Learning File Curriculum [ 11 ] , but now are being adapted to encompass the topics covered by the SPR’s Curriculum in Pediatric Radiology for Radiology Residents as well . Paediapedia was initially created in November 1995 , with the content being repurposed from a hand - held digital book entitled The Hitchhiker’s Guide to Pediat - ric Imaging [ 12 ] . Paediapedia was completely revised and expand - ed in June 1997 and currently contains approximately 600 pages of text and 100 images . All content for the pediatric radiology digital library was creat - ed on a Macintosh PowerBook 3400 computer ( Apple Computer , Cupertino , Calif . ) using the Claris HomePage Hypertext Markup Language ( HTML ) editor ( Claris , Cupertino , Calif . ) . Its HTML syntax was checked at the WebSiteGarage Web site ( AtWeb , Sun - nyvale , Calif . ) and it was spell checked using the Microsoft Word ( Microsoft , Bellevue , Wash . ) word processor and Stedman’s Plus ( Williams & Wilkins , Baltimore , Md . ) medical dictionary . The in - tegrity of its internal and external links was checked using the Big - Brother ( Francois Pottier , French National Institute for Research in Computer Science and Control , Paris , France ) and LinkLint ( Bowlin Software , Oakland , Calif . ) link checkers . Images were dig - itized using the PhotoCD process ( Kodak , Rochester , N . Y . ) and processed using Photoshop ( Adobe , San Jose , Calif . ) on a Power Macintosh 8600 computer ( Apple Computer , Cupertino , Calif . ) . The pediatric radiology digital library is stored on an IBM RS6000 server and served using the Netscape FastTrack World Wide Web server ( Netscape , Mountain View , Calif . ) . The existence of the pediatric radiology digital library was pub - licized to members of the SPR at their Spring 1997 meeting by a flyer . In addition , SPR members with electronic mail addresses were notified of the pediatric radiology digital library’s existence by electronic mail . Further , the pediatric radiology digital library was indexed in the largest medical Web site indices and search en - gines noted above . Curation In December 1997 , the pediatric radiology digital library was up - dated . The largest medical Web site indices and search engines not - ed above were again manually curated in the same manner as in April 1997 to look for new pediatric radiology Web sites . Twenty - three new pediatric radiology Web sites were identified and found appropriate for inclusion into PediatricRadiology . com , leading to a total of 93 cataloged Web sites . This resulted in an additional 40 teaching file cases being cataloged in the MetaTextbook of Pediat - ric Radiology , leading to a total of 662 cataloged teaching file cases , which covered 244 ( 61 % ) of the diseases in the SPR curricu - lum . Two of the Web sites initially cataloged in PediatricRadiolo - gy . com were noted to have been removed from the World Wide Web . This updating of the pediatric radiology digital library was publicized via electronic mail to the members of the SPR that have electronic mail addresses . Overall , this manual curation of the pediatric radiology digital library took approximately 50 h . Evaluation To assess overall usage of the pediatric radiology digital library from July 1 , 1997 to January 31 , 1998 , World Wide Web server log file analysis was performed using the log file analysis program An - alog 1 . 2 . 3 ( University of Cambridge Statistical Laboratory , Cam - bridge , England ) . Electronic mail messages from the users of the pediatric radiology digital library over the same time period were also reviewed . Results Over a seven - month period from July 1 , 1997 to January 31 , 1998 , 5 , 414 pages of information were read from Pe - diatricRadiology . com by 2 , 753 individual users . Over a six - month period from August 1 , 1997 to Jan - uary 31 , 1998 , 8 , 086 pages of information were read from the MetaTextbook of Pediatric Radiology by 4 , 013 individual users . Over a seven - month period from July 1 , 1997 to Jan - uary 31 , 1998 , 210 , 189 pages of information were read and 26 , 972 images viewed from Paediapedia by 63 , 100 individual users . Approximately 80 % of the users of the pediatric ra - diology digital library were from the United States , and 20 % of the users were from outside the United States . Informal feedback from users of the pediatric radiol - ogy digital library by electronic mail consisted of 25 electronic mail messages over 7 months , all praising the digital library . In addition , users notified the pediatric radiology digital library by electronic mail of four new pediatric radiology Web sites that fit the criteria for in - clusion in the PediatricRadiology . com catalog . Discussion Inserting authoritative medical information at the point - of - care has been shown to improve patient out - comes [ 13 , 14 ] and decrease the length of stay and cost of patient care [ 15 ] . However , studies of physicians’ in - formation needs have shown physicians consistently generate patient care questions during their daily work , but they rarely take the time to seek answers to these questions due to inconvenient access to authoritative medical information at the point - of - care [ 16 – 23 ] . When physicians do seek answers , easy availability of informa - tion is more important to them than the credibility of the source [ 24 ] . 892 Computers have long been suggested as a means to deliver authoritative medical information to the point - of - care [ 17 , 19 , 22 ] , but initial attempts have been disap - pointing due to limited information resources and prim - itive user interfaces [ 25 ] . The rapid development of the Internet’s World Wide Web has resulted in the World Wide Web being proposed as an improved means to de - liver authoritative medical information to the point - of - care [ 6 ] . Unfortunately , the World Wide Web’s current form has limitations due to its unorganized nature , rapid growth and concerns over the credibility of the informa - tion on it . The reality is that it is very difficult to use the World Wide Web to find answers to medical questions today [ 7 ] . The World Wide Web consists of 400 , 000 World Wide Web servers which hold 50 , 000 , 000 pages of text infor - mation that comprise 2 terabytes of information . The World Wide Web is doubling in size each year , and the average lifetime of a page of information on it is 44 days . As a matter of comparison , since its founding in 1800 , the Library of Congress has grown to hold the equivalent of 20 terabytes of text information [ 8 , 26 , 27 ] . Criteria for evaluating a medical Web site are under development by a number of groups [ 9 , 28 , 29 ] , and there is a growing consensus that a Web site must clearly display the author’s name , credentials , affiliation , peer review status , and dates of creation and revision to be considered credible . Most medical Web sites lack these attributes , making them of questionable value [ 9 , 30 ] . Libraries are designed to support the organized pub - lication and retrieval of information and have a struc - tured approach to building collections of information . Although the World Wide Web was not designed to sup - port the organized publication and retrieval of informa - tion , subsets of the World Wide Web can be curated into digital libraries , which are organized collections of digi - tal information that have structured approaches to building collections of digital information [ 31 ] . If knowl - edge can be defined as information that is accessible and that can be directly used to solve a problem , then a digi - tal library can be said to contain knowledge , while the World Wide Web can be said to contain raw information [ 32 ] . The first article describing a digital library defined curatorship as one of the key roles that needed to per - formed within a digital library [ 33 ] . A role was foreseen for learned individuals called “trailblazers” who would serve as guides , weaving trails that others could follow through the vast amounts of information in the digital li - brary . More recently , with the advent of the World Wide Web , the importance of curatorship has been rediscov - ered and reconfirmed [ 34 ] . However , exactly who should serve as the curators of digital medical libraries – health care providers or librarians or patients – has yet to be formally decided . The end result will most probably be a combination of the content expertise of the health care providers merged with the curatorial ex - pertise of the librarians , with patients providing over - sight of the process to keep it focused on the medical problems they confront . Digital libraries are expanding medical librarianship [ 35 ] . Early examples of medical digital libraries are CliniWeb [ 36 ] and HealthWeb [ 37 ] . CliniWeb , curated by physicians , maintains a database of medical Web sites , with each Web site having appropriate Medical Subject Heading ( MeSH ) disease tree terms assigned to it . CliniWeb can be browsed by MeSH disease tree headings or searched . HealthWeb , curated by medical librarians , maintains a browsable catalog of medical Web sites , organized broadly by discipline . The main limitation of both CliniWeb and HealthWeb is that they are manually curated and have no way of learning of the availability of new medical Web sites to be cata - loged , and no way of learning if previously cataloged medical Web sites have been updated . Manual curation is time consuming and labor intensive and therefore done on an irregular basis , leading such digital libraries to be out - of - date and non - comprehensive . This pediatric radiology digital library takes a first step towards organizing the pediatric radiology informa - tion on the Internet into a useful collection of knowledge that can be used as a reference and for teaching at the point - of - care . World Wide Web server log file analysis showed the pediatric radiology digital library had been heavily used , indicating a demand for its organized and authoritative information . Preliminary feedback from users was highly favorable . However , the pediatric radi - ology digital library currently has several limitations . First , while tremendous effort was made to catalog all the authoritative pediatric radiology Web sites in Pedia - tricRadiology . com , there is the chance that several were not discovered , and therefore are missing . Second , the SPR Curriculum in Pediatric Radiology for Radiology Residents that is the basis of the information architec - ture of the MetaTextbook of Pediatric Radiology , while extensive , does not include certain diseases seen com - monly in pediatric radiology such as sinusitis and inflam - matory bowel disease . Third , Paediapedia currently contains images of diseases only in its neonatal chest sec - tion , and images need to be provided for all sections . Fi - nally , manual curation of the pediatric radiology digital library is extremely time consuming and will eventually become untenable as the Internet continues to expand . The next step in the development of the pediatric ra - diology digital library will be to further enhance it in the following ways . First , an automated technique for curat - ing the information in the pediatric radiology digital li - brary must be developed so the information within it remains current . Promising techniques that allow for the extraction of knowledge from raw information , or data mining , are currently under development [ 38 , 39 ] . Second , a problem - based interface to the pediatric radi - 893 ology digital library must be created , to allow it to be navigated by clinical problem , as well as by disease . Third , the content in Paediapedia must be continuously expanded and kept current , and will need to evolve into a collection of synthesized reviews of the literature , which have been found to be an information format ex - tremely useful to practicing physicians [ 17 , 40 ] . In addi - tion , images must be added to all sections in Paediapedia . Fourth , a pediatric radiology image data - base needs to be developed and integrated into the pedi - atric radiology digital library due to the centrality of images to the practice of pediatric radiology . Fifth , fur - ther work must be done in integrating the pediatric radi - ology digital library with Picture Archiving and Communication Systems ( PACS ) workstations , so that its authoritative information is delivered seamlessly to the point - of - care where it is of the most potential value . Finally , the pediatric radiology digital library needs to be modified so that the acquisition of educational infor - mation from it at the point - of - care is tied to the award - ing of Continuing Medical Education ( CME ) credits [ 41 ] . Integrating CME into the physician’s daily work - flow will hopefully modify physicians’ knowledge , atti - tudes , and behaviors and lead to improved patient care , thus meeting the spirit as well as the intent of CME . Im - plementing these features will allow the pediatric radi - ology digital library to function not only as a reference tool to be used occasionally by radiologists , but as a de - cision support tool to be used on every case . In summary , the creation and curation of this pediat - ric radiology digital library has taken a first step towards making the Internet a useful reference tool for the radi - ologist at the point - of - care by bringing some order to the chaos of the Internet . This technique should be gen - eralizable to other radiology subspecialties and medical disciplines . 894 References 1 . Kirks DR ( ed ) ( 1998 ) Practical pediat - ric imaging : diagnostic radiology of in - fants and children . Lippincott - Raven Publishers , Philadelphia , p xviii 2 . Holt J ( 1989 ) Learning all the time . Addison Wesley , Reading , Mass . , pp 148 – 162 3 . Norman DA , Spohrer JC ( 1996 ) Learn - er centered education . Commun ACM 38 : 24 – 27 4 . Resnick LB ( 1987 ) Learning in school and out . Education Res 16 : 13 – 20 5 . Seely Brown J , Collins A , Duguid P ( 1989 ) Situated cognition and the cul - ture of learning . Education Res 18 : 32 – 42 6 . Lowe HJ , Lomax EC , Polonkey SE ( 1996 ) The World Wide Web : a review of an emerging Internet - based technol - ogy for the distribution of biomedical information . J Am Med Inform Assoc 3 : 1 – 14 7 . Soloway E , Wallace R ( 1997 ) Does the Internet support student inquiry ? Don’t ask . Commun ACM 40 : 11 – 16 8 . Kahle B ( 1997 ) Preserving the Internet . Sci Am 276 : 82 – 83 9 . Silberg WM . Lundberg GD ( 1997 ) Mu - sacchio RA . Assessing , controlling , and assuring the quality of medical infor - mation on the Internet : caveant lector et viewor – Let the reader and viewer beware . JAMA 277 : 1244 – 1245 10 . Smith WL , Schlesinger AE ( 1995 ) A curriculum in pediatric radiology for diagnostic radiology residents . Pediatr Radiol 25 : 403 – 407 11 . Merten DF ( ed ) ( 1989 ) American Col - lege of Radiology pediatric learning file . American College of Radiology Institute , Reston , Va 12 . D’Alessandro MP , Galvin JR , Santer DM , Erkonen WE ( 1995 ) Handheld digital books in radiology : convenient access to information . AJR 164 : 485 – 488 13 . Lindberg DAB , Siegel ER , Rapp BA , Wallingford KT , Wilson SR ( 1993 ) Use of MEDLINE by physicians for clinical problem solving . JAMA 269 : 3124 – 3129 14 . Marshall JG ( 1992 ) The impact of the hospital library on clinical decision making : the Rochester study . Bull Med Libr Assoc 80 : 169 – 178 15 . Klein MS , Ross FV , Adams DL , Gilbert CM ( 1994 ) Effect of on - line literature searching on length of stay and patient care costs . Acad Med 69 : 489 – 495 16 . Covell DG , Uman GC , Manning PR ( 1985 ) Information needs in office practice : are they being met ? Ann In - tern Med 103 : 596 – 599 17 . Dee C , Blazek R ( 1993 ) Information needs of the rural physician : a descrip - tive study . Bull Med Libr Assoc 81 : 259 – 264 18 . Ely JW , Burch RJ , Vinson DC ( 1992 ) The information needs of family physi - cians : case - specific clinical questions . J Fam Prac 35 : 265 – 269 19 . Forsythe DE , Buchanan BG , Osheroff JA , Miller RA ( 1992 ) Expanding the concept of medical information : an ob - servational study of physician’s infor - mation needs . Comput Biomed Res 25 : 181 – 200 20 . Gorman PN , Helfand M ( 1995 ) Infor - mation seeking in primary care : how physicians choose which clinical ques - tions to pursue and which to leave un - answered . Med Decis Making 15 : 113 – 119 21 . Osheroff JA , Forsythe DE , Buchanan BG , et al ( 1991 ) Physicians’ informa - tion needs : analysis of questions posed during clinical teaching . Ann Intern Med 114 : 576 – 581 22 . Timpka T , Ekstrom M , Bjurulf P ( 1989 ) Information needs and information seeking behavior in primary health care . Scan J Prim Health Care 7 : 105 – 109 23 . Woolf SH , Benson DA ( 1989 ) The medical information needs of internists and pediatricians at an academic medi - cal center . Bull Med Libr Assoc 77 : 372 – 380 24 . Curley SP , Connelly DP , Rich EC ( 1990 ) Physicians and other health care practitioners use of medical knowledge resources : preliminary theoretical framework and findings . Med Decis Making 10 : 231 – 241 25 . Osheroff JA , Bankowitz RA ( 1993 ) Physician’s use of computer software in answering clinical questions . Bull Med Libr Assoc 81 : 11 – 19 26 . Kahle B . Archiving the Internet . [ Web document ] San Francisco : Internet Ar - chive , 1996 [ rev 4 November 1996 , cited 20 December 1997 ] Available from In - ternet : http : / / www . archive . org / sciam _ (cid:82) article . html . 27 . Steinberg SG ( 1996 ) Seek and ye shall find ( maybe . ) Wired 4 : 108 – 114 , 173 – 182 895 28 . Murray PJ ( 1996 ) Click here – and be disappointed ? Evaluating Web sites . Comput Nurs 14 : 260 – 261 29 . Wyatt JC ( 1997 ) Measuring quality and impact of the World Wide Web . BMJ 314 : 1879 – 1881 30 . Impicciatore P , Pandolfini C , Casella N , Bonati M ( 1997 ) Reliability of health information for the public on the World Wide Web : systematic survey of advice on managing fever in children at home . BMJ 314 : 1875 – 1879 31 . Lynch C ( 1997 ) Searching the Internet . Sci Am 276 : 52 – 56 32 . Richtel M ( 1997 ) New breed of worker transforms raw information into know - ledge . [ Web document ] New York City : New York Times on the Web Cyber - Times , [ rev 15 October 1997 , cited 20 December 1997 ] Available from Internet : http : / / www . nytimes . com / library / cyber / week / 101597knowledge . html 33 . Bush V ( 1945 ) As we may think . Atlan - tic Monthly 176 : 101 – 108 34 . Negroponte N ( 1994 ) Less is more : in - terface agents as digital butlers . Wired 2 : 142 35 . Braude RM , Florance V , Frisse M , Fuller S ( 1995 ) The organization of the digital library . Acad Med 70 : 286 – 291 36 . Hersh WR , Brown KE , Donohoe LC , et al ( 1996 ) CliniWeb : managing clinical information on the World Wide Web . JAMIA 3 : 273 – 280 37 . Redman PM , Kelly JA , Albright ED , et al ( 1997 ) Common ground : the HealthWeb Project as a model for Internet collaboration . Bull Med Libr Assoc 85 : 325 – 330 38 . Fayyad U , Uthurusamy R ( 1996 ) Data mining and knowledge discovery in da - tabases . Commun ACM 39 : 24 – 26 39 . Etzioni O ( 1996 ) The World Wide Web : quagmire or gold mine ? Commun ACM 39 : 65 – 68 40 . Williamson JW , German PS , Weiss R , et al ( 1989 ) Health science information management and continuing education of physicians . Ann Intern Med 110 : 151 – 160 41 . D’Alessandro MP , Galvin JR , Erkonen WE , et al ( 1996 ) The virtual hospital : an IAIMS integrating continuing educa - tion into the work flow . M . D . Comput - ing 13 : 323 – 329 Paul K . Kleinman : Diagnostic Imaging of Child Abuse , 2nd edn . Mosby , St . Louis , 1998 . 439 pp , with illustrations . Type of book : This is a multi - authored sec - ond edition of the most comprehensive book on the imaging of child abuse cur - rently available . Scope : The authors attempt to cover all as - pects of child abuse as they impact the radiologist . These include , of course , ima - ging in all its forms as well as excellent chapters on psychological , social and legal considerations , the radiologist’s responsi - bility vis - (cid:224) - vis films , discussions with par - ents and lawyers , and testimony . Content : This book contains 23 chapters . The first half of the book is devoted to all aspects of skeletal trauma : unique frac - tures , differential diagnosis ( including 17 pages on osteogenesis imperfecta ) , nor - mal variants and post - mortem imaging . The chapter on dating of fractures is parti - cularly excellent . The rest of the book dis - cusses extra - skeletal trauma , legal and psy - chosocial issues , and the radiologist and the court . The last 3 chapters discuss technical aspects of imaging i . e . , physics , dose , ra - diation safety and a lengthy discussion of the physics of MRI . Strengths : The strength of this book lies in its usefulness and thoroughness . The main author Paul Kleinman has devoted his aca - demic life to writing and teaching about child abuse . His many years of teaching has allowed him to present this subject in a well organized concise and expertly written manner . His selection of contributors is ex - cellent and all - inclusive . The quality of the imaging , boxes on differential diagnosis and other aids are all of high quality . Deficiencies : The only minor deficiency that I could find is that the physics of MRI is slightly over done for a text of this type . Summary : This text will join an excellent club of well used , and much quoted texts in radiology . I could not recommend it more highly for Pediatric Radiologists , General Radiologists , Pediatricians , Surgeons and Orthopedists . This book will also be in - valuable to Child Protection Law Enforce - ment individuals and the legal community who are often unsophisticated in imaging , yet must be wholly reliant on it for the pro - secution of their daily activities . Overall grading : * * * * * Jack O . Haller , M . D . BOOK REVIEW Grading key * * * * * = outstanding ; * * * * = excellent ; * * * = good ; * * = fair ; * = poor