Supporting Exploration of Far - Domain Analogical Inspirations with Bridging Analogies David Anthony Rudd Jr . University of Maryland , College Park USA drudd @ umd . edu Joel Chan University of Maryland , College Park USA joelchan @ umd . edu ABSTRACT Far domain analogies — relational comparisons between topics that seem very different on the surface , such as the solar system and an atom — can be a powerful source of new ideas . However , people struggle to benefit from them . We explore how bridging analogies , analogies that bridge between a knowledge anchor that is familiar to the problem solver , and a target analogy , can help innovators to benefit from far domain analogies . Utilizing a breadth first search for shortest paths between concepts on Wikipedia , we identified potential bridging analogies that connect a participant’s knowledge anchor to a far domain analogy . In a think aloud study , participants brainstormed on three design challenges , with only far analogies , or far analogies and bridging analogies tailored to their knowledge anchors . We observed that bridging analogies aided participants in producing more abstract solutions vs . more direct translation of the analogies in their solution . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI ; Interactive systems and tools . KEYWORDS analogy , creativity ACM Reference Format : David Anthony Rudd Jr . and Joel Chan . 2023 . Supporting Exploration of Far - Domain Analogical Inspirations with Bridging Analogies . In Creativity and Cognition ( C & C ’23 ) , June 19 – 21 , 2023 , Virtual Event , USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 5 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3591196 . 3596829 1 INTRODUCTION Analogies are comparisons between two topics in terms of relational similarity , such as comparing a spring and a flexible table in terms of how they both exert explain upward force on your hand . Far domain analogies — analogical comparisons between topics that seem very different on the surface , such as the solar system and an atom — have been identified as being useful for creative ideation [ 3 , 5 , 10 , 18 ] . Examples of innovations inspired by far analogies include the kinetoscope ( invented by analogy to the Phonograph , by Thomas Edison ) , Babbage’s invention of computer punch cards Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . C & C ’23 , June 19 – 21 , 2023 , Virtual Event , USA © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 979 - 8 - 4007 - 0180 - 1 / 23 / 06 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3591196 . 3596829 for programming by analogy to the Jacquard loom for weaving , and NASA’s novel satellite folding technique , inspired by origami . However , people can struggle to benefit from far analogies . In a classic series of studies , Gick and Holyoak showed that participants only used a far - domain analogous example to solve a problem 20 % of the time if they were not given a hint that the analogy was useful for solving the problem ; once they were given a hint , solution transfer rates increased to 80 % [ 7 ] . This finding has been replicated in a number of other studies [ 13 , 14 ] . Kang et al [ 11 ] also observed substantial premature rejection of far analogical inspirations . In this paper , we investigate how we might adapt the scaffolding strategy of bridging analogies from education to design a compu - tational intervention that can help innovators more reliably benefit from far analogies . In education , bridging analogies are concepts that can be used to " bridge " understanding from a learner’s knowl - edge anchors ( i . e . , concepts they are already familiar with ) to an unfamiiliar target . For example , given a common scenario where a learner is familiar with a knowledge anchor of the intuitive physics of a spring pushing back on your hand when you push on it , and the unfamiliar physics of a target situation of a book on a table also " pushing back " when pushed on ( Newton’s Third Law ) , Clement et al . [ 4 ] proposed bridging analogies such as a book on a foam pad and a book on a flexible table , both of which exhibit characteristics of both the target situation and the knowledge anchor ( foam pad closer to a spring , flexible table closer to a table ) . There is substantial evidence that bridging analogies can help learners learn unfamiliar target concepts more effectively and efficiently [ 2 , 4 , 15 ] . 2 ADAPTING THE BRIDGING ANALOGIES STRATEGY TO CREATIVE IDEATION Bridging analogies in an educational context are carefully selected , either in advance using domain knowledge , or during a class ses - sion by a seasoned instructor who knows their students . We are interested in adapting this into a computational intervention that innovators can use by themselves , so we explored the possibility of computationally identifying bridging analogies . As a first step , we explored a strategy of graph - search through Wikipedia concepts that connect a participant’s knowledge anchor to a far domain analogy . Wikipedia provides a convenient graph structure that we can leverage to find " bridges " between concepts via wikilinks between Wikipedia pages . For example , if we know something about what an innovator is familiar with in terms of a " knowledge anchor " Wikipedia concept page , and have some target analogies that can be expressed as another " target analogy " Wikipedia concept page , we can compute the shortest path between the knowledge anchor and target analogy pages in the Wikipedia 293 C & C ’23 , June 19 – 21 , 2023 , Virtual Event , USA Rudd Jr . and Chan Figure 1 : Screenshot from SixDegreesofWikipedia website ( left ) , which we used to find bridging analogies via shortest paths between users’ knowledge anchors and a target analogy for a design challenge ( example shown on right ) . graph , and identify possible " bridging analogy " Wikipedia concept pages on that shortest path . We explored this idea using the website SixDegreesofWikipedia 1 , which allows users to issue exactly this query ( given a home and target page , find pages on the shortest path between the home and target pages ) . An example of the process of SixDegreesofWikipedia can be seen in Figure 1 ( left panel ) to find the shortest paths be - tween the Nervous System and Induction Loop wikipedia pages . An example of a set of potential bridging analogies we identified for our prototypes can be seen in Figure 1 ( right panel ) : given an innovator who is familiar with robotics , who is attempting to solve a design challenge about providing means for busy frequent fliers to do weight training while traveling , we retrieved potential bridging analogies about artificial intelligence and bioinformatics to connect their prior knowledge anchor of robotics to the target analogy of protein biosynthesis . In an educational context , bridging analogies are carefully tuned towards a learning goal . In contrast , our goal here is not , strictly speaking , to maximize understanding of the target analogical in - spiration : instead , it is to help innovators generate and explore new ideas that are inspired by target far analogies . Past research shows that this process often involves " compound " mapping and recombination across multiple distinct analogies [ 9 , 12 ] . Thus , we decided to test design variants that show either a single bridging analogy path ( a lower cognitive load " recommendation " design ) , or multiple paths ( to allow for more divergent partial mappings and recombinations , with a " map " of bridging analogy paths ) . 3 EVALUATING THE BRIDGING ANALOGIES STRATEGY FOR CREATIVE IDEATION 3 . 1 Data Collection We conducted a think aloud study in which 12 participants ( 1 un - dergraduate student , 10 graduate students ) were asked to brain - storm on three design challenges ( each of which we paired with a manually constructed far analogy , alternating whether they were provided 1 ) only a far analogy , 2 ) a far analogy and a single bridg - ing analogy path " recommendation " tailored to their knowledge anchor ( the first " shortest path " from SixDegreesofWikipedia for the anchor - target - analogy query ) , or 3 ) a far analogy and a " map " of three potential bridging analogy paths ( the first three nonredundant " shortest path " from SixDegreesofWikipedia for the anchor - target - analogy query ) . The pairing of challenges with condition ( analogy , bridging - recommendation , or bridging - map ) was randomized , and the order of conditions shuffled , across participants . The three challenges and their associated analogies were : ( 1 ) Aquatic - Child - Safety Challenge : Design a way to enable young children to interact with aquatic animals in marine en - vironments while keeping both the animals and the children safe . This challenge was paired with a Negative room pres - sure Analogy , which is also about isolating people from harmful elements ( i . e . , disease - bearing agents in hospitals ) . ( 2 ) Weight - Training - on - the - Go Challenge : Design a way for a busy frequent flyer businessperson to do weight training wherever they go . This challenge was paired with a Protein Biosynthesis Analogy , which also contains the core con - cept of increasing in size when an element is added to them ( adding water to weights to increase weight , or adding more protein to the muscle when deteriorated ) ( 3 ) Baby - Protection Challenge : Design a way to protect ba - bies from all the elements while being carried . This challenge 1 https : / / www . sixdegreesofwikipedia . com 294 Supporting Exploration of Far - Domain Analogical Inspirations with Bridging Analogies C & C ’23 , June 19 – 21 , 2023 , Virtual Event , USA Figure 2 : Examples of a bridging - recommendation ( A ) vs . bridging - map ( B ) for the same target analogy ( negative room pressure ) . The maps are for two different participants with different knowledge anchors : " graphic design " for the bridging - recommendation , and " user interface " for the bridging - map . was paired with a Surface - to - air missile Analogy , which is also about protecting natives from harmful elements which aim to invade their native territory in some manner ( A mis - sile hitting a nearby building , while harmful diseases , or external events could harm a baby ) Bridging analogies were tailored to knowledge anchors obtained from participants in a pre - study survey , where we asked partici - pants to name their current area of study and the areas of knowl - edge they consider themselves proficient in . Examples of bridging analogies included : • Bridging from P1’s knowledge anchor of Human - Computer Interaction to target analogy of Protein Biosynthesis with bridging analogies Brain and Amino Acid • Bridging from P6’s knowledge anchor of Robotics to target analogy of Protein Biosynthesis with bridging analogies Arti - ficial Intelligence and Bioinformatics • Bridging from P10’s knowledge anchor of Graphic Design to target analogy of Negative Room Pressure with bridging analogies Future Studies and Pandemic Figure2showsexamplesofabridging - recommendationvs . bridging - map for the same target analogy . Each design challenge constituted of both a brainstorming phase ( in which they were introduced to the design challenge on a Figma canvas and generated initial ideas and wrote notes on the canvas ; 10 minutes ) , and an analogy phase ( where they were provided with the corresponding far analogy , with bridging analogies , if applicable , and asked to develop more ideas the Figma canvas ; 10 minutes ) . Participants were asked to think aloud during each challenge . The study was conducted over Zoom , and the session ( with the participant screen - sharing as they worked ) was audio - and video - recorded for analysis . 3 . 2 Analysis Approximately 11 hours of video recordings were transcribed . An informed grounded theory approach was taken when analyzing the data [ 17 ] , attending to the broad question of how people were in - teracting with and ideating from the analogies . Initial open coding yielded themes such as " Expanding possibilities " , " abstract trans - lation " , and " expressing confusion " . These codes we then refined into a higher category of " Using " or " Evaluating " the analogies . Evaluating occurred whenever a participant would interact with the analogies in the process of understanding how they related to the problem . Codes that fell into the " Using " code were when a participant expressed an idea using the analogies . Later coding began to focus on a particular distinction that emerged from the data between abstract translation and direct translation , sensitized by prior literature on different forms of solution transfer from ex - amples and analogies that distinguish between transfer of surface features ( often associated with fixation ) and deeper adaptation and transfer of structural features , such as analogical and schematic transfer [ 1 , 6 , 8 , 16 ] . For space reasons , we focus our reporting here on this key contrast . 3 . 3 Results The two core codes of interest for this analysis were " abstract trans - lation " and " direct translation " . An example of abstract translation ( 30 occurrences across the protocols ) from our protocols was “A pill for each muscle you’ll like to target . These pills will weaken the particular muscle fibers based on the number of pills you take . ” ( generated by P10 ) . The analogy they used to derive this idea for the Weight - Training - on - the - Go problem was fermentation and protein biosynthesis . They had noted for protein biosynthesis an idea for something like steroids and noted probiotics for fermentation . The combination of these two already abstracted ideas became the pill they describe . An example of direct translation ( 18 occurrences 295 C & C ’23 , June 19 – 21 , 2023 , Virtual Event , USA Rudd Jr . and Chan across the protocols ) was “A shuttle water bus with glass” ( gener - ated by P11 ) . The participant was provided the analogy of Negative room pressure for the Aquatic - Child - Safety problem and used the glass rooms in the photo to translate a surface level similarity to their ideas . Table 1 show the frequency of these codes across the analogy , bridging - recommendation , and bridging - map conditions . The key insight from our analysis was that bridging analogies ( particu - larly in map form ) seemed to enable deeper and more expan - sive ideation with analogies . This can be seen in the number of abstract translations from the analogies provided ; while our em - phasis in our analysis was not on precise quantitative comparisons , we did notice abstract translations more prominently in the map sessions , and a rough count of frequencies was consistent with this impression : 11 of the 17 occurrences ( almost 2 / 3 ) of abstract translation codes occurred in the bridging - map sessions . Condition Abstract Direct Analogy 3 9 Bridging - Recommendation 3 15 Bridging - Map 11 6 Table 1 : Abstract translation of ideas from analogies was most common when participants were given bridging anal - ogy maps How did this play out in the think - aloud protocols ? Consider P10’s Map session when they were solving the problem of design - ing a way for a frequent flyer businessperson to perform weight training while traveling . Their knowledge anchor was User Experi - ence Design , and the target analogy was Protein Biosynthesis . The bridging analogies provided were physical attractiveness , amino acid , protein design , fermentation , engineering , and immune sys - tem . During P10’s map session , they utilized multiple strategies to use the provided analogies effectively . They put the analogies on a separate whiteboard and took notes on potential ideas to keep track of their thoughts . For example , they put modular design with engi - neering ( bridging analogy ) , probiotics with fermentation ( bridging analogy ) , and weights that look like handbags next to physical at - tractiveness ( bridging analogy ) . This allowed them to expand their understanding of what is possible and produced the abstract idea of a pill that targets a specific muscle and weakens it . This would enable the frequent flier to walk around the airport performing the same activities while increasing the strain necessary to increase muscle mass . The abstraction mentioned above contrasts with the direct trans - lations during the analogy - only sessions . A direct translation hap - pened when the participants used the analogy in their solution , but there was no abstraction of the analogy to understand its basic concepts . For example , in P12’s analogy session , they were ideat - ing on the problem of designing a way for a busy frequent flier businessperson to conduct weight training wherever they went and were provided with the target analogy of Protein Biosynthe - sis . P12 incorporated different techniques to produce ideas for the problem , leading them to some abstract answers . Still , they also created an idea of a tool to track the amount of protein that a flier is intaking while they are traveling ( protein biosynthesis ) . They directly incorporate protein in their answer with no use of under - lying mechanisms of protein biosynthesis , as opposed to the more complex mechanisms of protein biosynthesis , which could have led to richer analogies and ideas . This lack of abstract translation did not seem to be due to a lack of ability ; in P12’s map session , they were attempting to find a solution for designing a way for young children to interact with marine animals while keeping both the animals and children safe . Their knowledge anchor was User Interface and they were provided with the target analogy of Neg - ative room pressure . The bridging analogies provided consisted of Cyberwarfare , Pandemic , Human factors and ergonomics , En - gineering controls , Simulation , and Field hospital . They began as the others before them by interacting with the analogies . After some initial confusion about how the analogies related , they could express connections between the given analogies . After making the connections , they began expanding on their idea of what was possible . They asked during the session , “do these ideas have to be realistic ? ” This broadening of their mind allowed them to produce novel ideas . 4 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION In this paper , we explored how we might adapt the scaffolding strategy of bridging analogies from education to the goal of enabling innovators better explore far analogies during ideation . In a think - aloud study , we found qualitative evidence bridging analogies — particularly in a map ( vs . a single recommended bridging analogy path— helped participants think more abstractly about the given problem instead of simply providing an analogy . The reason as to why the bridge - recommendation sessions did not produce abstract translations in a similar degree as the bridge - map sessions is not entirely clear . A simple explanation would be that participants in the bridge - map sessions had the highest quan - tity of inspirations , perhaps enabling more incremental , compound analogical mappings [ 9 , 12 ] . Another hypothesis that we need to test further is the mix of confusion ( in response to analogies ) and the presence / depth of bridging analogies . In the analogy sessions , participants often expressed high levels of confusion in response to the far analogies , but they did not have the bridging analogies to aid in bridging the gap between the problem and the target analogy . In the recommender sessions , participants were typically given only four stimuli : the target analogy , their knowledge anchor , and two bridging analogies . Participants expressed less confusion in these sessions ; we surmise that participants were able to ignore the target analogy entirely and just focus on their knowledge anchor and most closely connected bridging analogy . For example , in P10’s recommender session , their ideas were more technological focused , devising ideas surrounding VR and HUDs instead of health - related topics , which would draw their solutions more towards the far domain analogy . This can also be seen in P6’s recommender ses - sion : they produced ideas involving robotics , which was their near domain analogy , and computer vision to aid in weight training in - stead of using concepts from protein biosynthesis or bioinformatics . In contrast , in the bridge - map sessions , expressed confusion was common , and engagement with the multiple bridging analogies was also common . A working theory to test might be that both 296 Supporting Exploration of Far - Domain Analogical Inspirations with Bridging Analogies C & C ’23 , June 19 – 21 , 2023 , Virtual Event , USA sufficient confusion and the presence of bridging analogies might be needed to support inspiration from far - field analogies . Overall , we find these results encouraging for the potential of bridging analogies to support ideation with far - domain analogies , and are excited to continue exploring more precise ( quantitative ) evaluation of its effects , and refinement of different strategies for computationally retrieving / crafting and presenting bridging analo - gies alongside far - domain analogies . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research was supported in part by ONR N000142012506 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] L . J . Ball , T . C . Ormerod , and N . J . Morley . 2004 . Spontaneous analogising in engineeringdesign : acomparativeanalysisofexpertsandnovices . DesignStudies 25 , 5 ( 2004 ) , 495 – 508 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2004 . 05 . 004 [ 2 ] Tom Bryce and Kenneth MacMillan . 2005 . Encouraging conceptual change : the use of bridging analogies in the teaching of action – reaction forces and the ‘at rest’ condition in physics . International Journal of Science Education 27 , 6 ( Jan . 2005 ) , 737 – 763 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09500690500038132 00122 . [ 3 ] Joel Chan , Katherine Fu , Christian . D . Schunn , Jonathan Cagan , Kristin L . Wood , and Kenneth Kotovsky . 2011 . On the benefits and pitfalls of analogies for inno - vative design : Ideation performance based on analogical distance , commonness , and modality of examples . Journal of Mechanical Design 133 ( 2011 ) , 081004 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4004396 00304 . [ 4 ] J . Clement . 1993 . Using bridging analogies and anchoring intuitions to deal with students’ preconceptions in physics . Journal of Research in Science Teaching 30 , 10 ( 1993 ) , 1241 – 1257 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / tea . 3660301007 [ 5 ] Darren W . Dahl and Page Moreau . 2002 . The Influence and value of analogical thinking during new product ideation . Journal of Marketing Research 39 , 1 ( 2002 ) , 47 – 60 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1509 / jmkr . 39 . 1 . 47 . 18930 00714 . [ 6 ] C . Eckert and M . Stacey . 2003 . Adaptation of Sources of Inspiration in Knitwear Design . Creativity Research Journal 15 , 4 ( 2003 ) , 355 – 384 . 00000 . [ 7 ] Mary L . Gick and Keith J . Holyoak . 1980 . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology 12 , 3 ( 1980 ) , 306 – 355 . 03379 . [ 8 ] M . L . Gick and K . J . Holyoak . 1983 . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology 15 , 1 ( 1983 ) , 1 – 38 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0010 - 0285 ( 83 ) 90002 - 6 04045 . [ 9 ] M . E . Helms , S . Vattam , and A . K . Goel . 2008 . Compound analogical design , or how to make a surfboard disappear . In Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society . 00013 . [ 10 ] KeithJ . HolyoakandPaulThagard . 1996 . Mentalleaps : Analogyincreativethought . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . 02398 . [ 11 ] Hyeonsu B . Kang , Xin Qian , Tom Hope , Dafna Shahaf , Joel Chan , and Aniket Kittur . 2022 . Augmenting Scientific Creativity with an Analogical Search Engine . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( March 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3530013 Just Accepted . [ 12 ] Madeline K . Kneeland , Melissa A . Schilling , and Barak S . Aharonson . 2020 . Exploring Uncharted Territory : Knowledge Search Processes in the Origina - tion of Outlier Innovation . Organization Science 31 , 3 ( April 2020 ) , 535 – 557 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 2019 . 1328 00011 Publisher : INFORMS . [ 13 ] JamesR . Kubricht , HongjingLu , andKeithJ . Holyoak . 2017 . Individualdifferences inspontaneousanalogicaltransfer . Memory & Cognition 45 , 4 ( May2017 ) , 576 – 588 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3758 / s13421 - 016 - 0687 - 7 [ 14 ] S . K . Reed , G . W . Ernst , and R . Banerji . 1974 . The role of analogy in transfer between similar problem states . Cognitive Psychology 6 ( 1974 ) , 436 – 450 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0010 - 0285 ( 74 ) 90020 - 6 [ 15 ] L . E . Richland , O . Zur , and K . J . Holyoak . 2007 . Cognitive supports for analogies in the mathematics classroom . Science 316 , 5828 ( 2007 ) , 1128 – 1129 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1142103 00314 . [ 16 ] Pao Siangliulue , Joel Chan , Krzysztof Gajos , and Steven P . Dow . 2015 . Pro - viding timely examples improves the quantity and quality of generated ideas . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Creativity and Cognition . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2757226 . 2757230 [ 17 ] Robert Thornberg . 2012 . Informed Grounded Theory . Scandinavian Journal of EducationalResearch 56 , 3 ( June2012 ) , 243 – 259 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00313831 . 2011 . 581686 00835 . [ 18 ] T . B . Ward . 1998 . Analogical distance and purpose in creative thought : Mental leaps versus mental hops . In Advances in Analogy Research : Integration of Theory andDatafromtheCognitive , Computational , andNeuralSciences , KeithJ . Holyoak , Dedre Gentner , and B . Kokinov ( Eds . ) . Sofia , Bulgaria , 221 – 230 . 00142 . Received 20 February 2007 ; revised 12 March 2009 ; accepted 5 June 2009 297