Neural correlates of novelty and appropriateness processing in externally induced constraint relaxation Furong Huang a , Shuang Tang a , Pei Sun b , Jing Luo c , d , * a School of Psychology , Jiangxi Normal University , Nanchang 330022 , China b Department of Psychology , Tsinghua University , Beijing 100084 , China c School of Psychology , Capital Normal University , Beijing 100048 , China d Key Laboratory of Mental Health , Institute of Psychology , Chinese Academy of Sciences , Beijing 100101 , China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords : Novelty Appropriateness Insight Constraint relaxation TPJ A B S T R A C T Novelty and appropriateness are considered the two fundamental features of creative thinking , including insight problem solving , which can be performed through chunk decomposition and constraint relaxation . Based on a previous study that separated the neural bases of novelty and appropriateness in chunk decomposition , in this study , we used event - related functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) to further dissociate these mecha - nisms in constraint relaxation . Participants were guided to mentally represent the method of problem solving according to the externally provided solutions that were elaborately prepared in advance and systematically varied in their novelty and appropriateness for the given problem situation . The results showed that novelty processing was completed by the temporoparietal junction ( TPJ ) and regions in the executive system ( dorsolateral prefrontal cortex [ DLPFC ] ) , whereas appropriateness processing was completed by the TPJ and regions in the episodic memory ( hippocampus ) , emotion ( amygdala ) , and reward systems ( orbitofrontal cortex [ OFC ] ) . These results likely indicate that appropriateness processing can result in a more memorable and richer experience than novelty processing in constraint relaxation . The shared and distinct neural mechanisms of the features of novelty and appropriateness in constraint relaxation are discussed , enriching the representation of the change theory of insight . Introduction Creativity is generally de ﬁ ned as the ability to generate products or thoughts that are both original ( new , unusual , novel , unexpected ) and valuable ( useful , effective , adaptive , appropriate ) ( Barron , 1955 ; Stein , 1953 ; Sternberg and Lubart , 1996 , 1999 ) . Novelty and appropriateness have been considered the two basic features of creative thinking ( Hen - nessey and Amabile , 2010 ; Runco and Jaeger , 2012 ) . Although neuro - imaging studies of creativity have been conducted for more than a dozen years ( Arden et al . , 2010 ; Dietrich and Kanso , 2010 ; Kounios and Bee - man , 2014 ; Sawyer , 2011 ; Wu et al . , 2015 ) , the neural basis of the novelty and appropriateness features of creative thinking remains largely unknown . In addition to Kroger et al . ( 2012 ) , who preliminarily and incompletely addressed this issue , we systematically separated the cognitive and neural mechanisms of novelty and appropriateness in chunk decomposition ( Huang et al . , 2015 ) , which is a special form of insight problem solving . However , creative thinking can vary widely , and the general neural mechanism underlying its features of novelty and appropriateness remains unknown . In particular , the cognitive and neural basis underlying these two fundamental features for another equally important form of insight problem solving , i . e . , constraint relaxation , remain unknown . This topic is worth further exploration to enrich insight theory and the understanding of the role of novelty and appropriateness in insight problem solving . Insight problem solving is one of the most typical forms of creative thinking . According to the representation change theory , the problem solver will always reach an impasse if the initial mental representation of the problem is incorrect , even though they are competent to solve the insight problem ( Knoblich et al . , 1999 ; Ohlsson , 1984 , 1992 ) . The only way to break such impasses is to restructure the initial representation , and chunk decomposition and constraint relaxation are two possible mechanisms through which to do so ( Knoblich et al . , 1999 ) . Chunk decomposition refers to decomposing familiar patterns into their component elements so that they can be regrouped in another * Corresponding author . School of Psychology , Capital Normal University , Beijing 100048 , China . E - mail address : luoj @ psych . ac . cn ( J . Luo ) . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect NeuroImage journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / neuroimage https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2018 . 01 . 070 Received 9 June 2017 ; Received in revised form 21 December 2017 ; Accepted 28 January 2018 Available online 31 January 2018 1053 - 8119 / © 2018 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . NeuroImage 172 ( 2018 ) 381 – 389 meaningful manner ( Knoblich et al . , 1999 ) . For example , in the match - stick arithmetic problem task , problem solvers are given a false arith - metic statement ( e . g . , ‘ VI ¼ VII þ I ’ ) that is composed of roman numerals , operations and an equal sign and are required to transform the statement into a true equation ( e . g . , ‘ VII ¼ VI þ I ’ ) by moving only one stick from one position to another within the pattern . To resolve this example problem , the problem solver must decompose the numeral “ VII ” into “ VI ” and “ I ” and then move the “ I ” to the left side of the equation and regroup it with “ VI ” to form “ VII ” ; chunk decomposition refers to this process . Constraint relaxation is the process of relaxing the unnecessary con - straints that problem solvers implicitly place on their initial representa - tion of the problem ( Knoblich et al . , 1999 ) . For example , prior knowledge causes people to believe that equations involve changes to values , and thus , when problem solvers begin to solve matchstick arithmetic prob - lems , they consider only the matchsticks that make up values as valid moves . However , if the problem requires a change to an operator ( e . g . , IX ¼ VI – III requires interchanging one horizontal stick between the “ ¼ ” and “ – ” to attain IX – VI ¼ III ) , problem solvers will get stuck in an impasse until such a constraint is ﬁ nally relaxed . The same process frequently occurs in other classical insight problems , such as the 6 sticks riddle “ How to make 4 equilateral triangles using 6 equal length sticks ? ” . The right way to solve this riddle involves making a three - dimensional shape rather than just a two - dimensional ﬁ gure . Another example is the classic 9 dots puzzle “ How do you connect nine dots in a square using only four straight lines joined continuously ? ” . The key to solving this puzzle is to draw an arrow slightly larger than the box of dots itself . Theoretically , chunk decomposition can help problem solvers to up - date their interpretation of the problem situation and then restructure the starting states of the problem ' s representation , whereas constraint relaxation is required for the elimination of subjective assumptions and restructuring of the goal states of the problem ' s representation . Thus , these are two different mechanisms of insight problem solving . In a recently published study , we used event - related functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) to dissociate the brain mechanisms underlying novelty and appropriateness in chunk decomposition ( Huang et al . , 2015 ) . The results showed that novelty processing involved func - tional areas for procedural memory ( caudate ) , mental reward ( substantia nigra , or SN ) , and visual - spatial processing , whereas appropriateness processing was mediated by areas for declarative memory ( hippocam - pus ) and emotional arousal ( amygdala ) ( Huang et al . , 2015 ) . These re - sults indicate that the processing of novelty and appropriateness in chunk decomposition depend on different neural mechanisms , particularly the non - declarative and declarative memory systems . Importantly , the neural basis of novelty and appropriateness in constraint relaxation remains unknown . Separating the neural bases of these two features in constraint relaxation would help enrich the repre - sentation of the change theory of insight problem solving and reveal the properties of novelty and appropriateness associated with insight prob - lem solving . Although the “ 6 sticks riddle ” , “ 9 dots puzzle ” and “ matchstick arithmetic problem ” can be used to determine the neural correlates of constraint relaxation , three is an insuf ﬁ cient number of puzzles . There - fore , we collected a large number of riddles that can be solved through constraint relaxation and reliably produce insight - like experiences within a relatively short time window ( Luo and Niki , 2003 ; Mai et al . , 2004 ) . For example , people ﬁ nd the riddle “ When the boy was walking across the road slowly , and a car was speeding swiftly in his direction without any sign of slowing down , why did he not panic ? ” , impossible to solve because of an implicit subjective constraint . More speci ﬁ cally , problem solvers usually set the goal state of the problem representation as “ walk in the road ” , which is unreasonable and prevents them from ﬁ nding the right solution . Only when the solver relaxes the implicit constraint and realizes that crossing the road is not limited to walking in the road but may also extend to walking up in the air or down under the ground , such as through the use of a pedestrian bridge , hot air balloon , airplane , un - derground passageway and so on , can the goal state of the problem representation be restructured and the right operator activated and extracted . This process is also constraint relaxation . In previous studies , widely distributed activity in frontal , temporal , parietal , and occipital cortex was found during riddle solving ( Luo and Niki , 2003 ; Luo et al . , 2004 ) . Particularly , the bilateral temporoparietal junction ( TPJ , BA39 ) is probably associated with the restructuring of the problem ' s representation , the hippocampus might be involved in the formation of novel and task - related associations , and the anterior cingulate and left lateral prefrontal cortex may be related to the media - tion of cognitive con ﬂ ict and the breaking of mental sets ( Luo and Niki , 2003 ; Luo et al . , 2004 ) . However , these activations were observed only using the simple contrasts of “ insightful answer presentation minus riddle presentation ” or “ insightful answer minus regular answer ” . As a result , it is impossible to distinguish between brain regions related to novelty processing and those related to appropriateness processing . Thus , in this study , we attempted to adopt a 2 ( novelty : high vs . low ) (cid:2) 2 ( appropriateness : high vs . low ) within - group design , which can help us ef ﬁ ciently manipulate the novelty and appropriateness of riddle solving . For the same riddle “ When the boy was walking across the road slowly , and a car was speeding swiftly in his direction without any sign of slowing down , why did he not panic ? ” , we are able to distinguish four types of answers : high novelty - high appropriateness ( HNHA ) , such as “ He is walking on a pedestrian bridge ” ( real creative answer ) ; high novelty - low appropriateness ( HNLA ) , such as “ He is walking with a pogo stick ” ; low novelty - high appropriateness ( LNHA ) , such as “ The car is very far away from him ” ; and low novelty - low appropriateness ( LNLA ) , such as “ The car is running very fast ” . High novelty answers violate the ex - pectations of existing knowledge to a large extent , whereas low novelty ones do not or do so to a small extent . High appropriateness answers represent reasonably logical answers to the riddle , whereas low appro - priateness ones do not . Using a 2 (cid:2) 2 full factorial analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) with the factors Novelty ( high , low ) and Appropriateness ( high , low ) , we can detect the brain regions associated with novelty , appropriateness or both . However , we have to admit that it was impos - sible for the participants to generate a suf ﬁ cient number of each of the four types of answers in the limited scanning time . Therefore , we used the solution - induced paradigm , in which the participants perform prob - lem solving manipulation according to the methods suggested by the explicitly presented solution ( Kroger et al . , 2012 ; Luo and Knoblich , 2007 ) . As a result , both the processing of novelty and appropriateness are related to the comprehension , operation , and evaluation of a speci ﬁ c method for riddle solving . The former is related to the familiarity or novelty of the approach , whereas the latter is related to the appropri - ateness or validity of the approach . Although following a creative method of problem solving is not identical to generating a solution indepen - dently , it likely involves similar processes ( Abraham , 2014 ; Kroger et al . , 2012 ) , particularly the cognitive restructuring that has been regarded as the key component of insight ( Luo and Knoblich , 2007 ; Weisberg , 1995 ) . Therefore , use of the solution - induced paradigm provides the logical basis to reveal the neural mechanisms of novelty and appropriateness processing in constraint relaxation . Based on the theoretical assumptions of constraint relaxation and the results of neuroimaging studies of riddle solving , we aimed to investigate the activation of the TPJ , medial temporal lobe structures and the ex - ecutive system . Speci ﬁ cally , we proposed that the factors of novelty and appropriateness might in ﬂ uence the activation of the TPJ since this area is frequently associated with the updating of mental status or expecta - tions ( Murray et al . , 2015 ) . Furthermore , the factor of novelty likely evokes more activation in the executive system , which is responsible for mediating cognitive con ﬂ ict and breaking mental sets ( Oehrn et al . , 2014 ; Tong et al . , 2013 ) , whereas the factor of appropriateness likely regulates the medial temporal lobe , which is generally involved in forming and storing task - related associations ( Backus et al . , 2016 ; Mattfeld and Stark , 2015 ) . Finally , we also paid attention to the activa - tion of the default mode network ( DMN ) and the emotion and motivation systems because they often appear in neuroimaging studies of creative F . Huang et al . NeuroImage 172 ( 2018 ) 381 – 389 382 thinking and insight ( Kuhn et al . , 2014 ; Zhao et al . , 2013 ) . In particular , we hypothesized that the factors of novelty and appropriateness likely modulate task dif ﬁ culty and deactivation of the DMN , as previously re - ported in neuroimaging studies of chunk decomposition ( Huang et al . , 2015 ) . Methods Participants Twenty - six undergraduate or graduate students ( 13 females and 13 males , aged 21 – 26 years , mean age ¼ 23 . 75 years , all native Chinese speakers ) recruited from the University of Science and Technology of Beijing or Capital Normal University of Beijing participated in this study as paid volunteers . All participants were right - handed , had normal or corrected - to - normal vision , and had no history of neurological or psy - chiatric problems . Prior to the scanning session , the participants signed informed consent forms , and the study was approved by the institutional review board of the Center for Bio - Medical Imaging Research ( CBIR ) , Tsinghua University of China . Four participants ( three male and one fe - male ) were excluded from the analysis because of excessive head motion during scanning . Two participants ( one male and one female ) were excluded because they had a strong response bias ; as a result , the number of trials for the HNHA condition was less than 20 . In total , the data from 20 participants were included in the analysis and reported in the results . Materials This study used 36 riddles , each of which was coupled with 4 different answers ( i . e . , HNHA , HNLA , LNHA , and LNLA ) . The participants viewed all 144 trials ( 36 riddles (cid:2) 4 answers ) in the formal scanning session . In this way , by eliminating the confounding variationof the riddle items , we could better manipulate the novelty and appropriateness features of riddle solving to explore their neural basis . For all 144 trials , the length of the riddle was limited to 53 – 55 characters , and the length of the 4 an - swers for each riddle was the same . Before the formal experiment , twenty participants who did not participate in the formal fMRI experiment were required to rate the novelty and appropriateness of each answer for particular riddles on a 4 - point scale , which ranged from very low ( rating score 1 ) to very high ( rating score 4 ) . The mean rating ( SD ) of Novelty for the LNHA , LNLA , HNHA and HNLA conditions was 1 . 79 ( 0 . 33 ) , 2 . 25 ( 0 . 30 ) , 3 . 51 ( 0 . 28 ) , and 3 . 23 ( 0 . 32 ) , respectively . A 2 (cid:2) 2 ANOVA revealed that the main effect of Novelty [ F ( 1 , 19 ) ¼ 236 . 71 , p < 0 . 001 , η p2 ¼ 0 . 93 ] was signi ﬁ - cant , whereas the main effect of Appropriateness and the interaction were not signi ﬁ cant . The mean rating of Appropriateness for the LNHA , LNLA , HNHA and HNLA conditions was 3 . 46 ( 0 . 29 ) , 2 . 09 ( 0 . 24 ) , 3 . 45 ( 0 . 29 ) , and 2 . 23 ( 0 . 25 ) , respectively . The main effect of Appropriateness [ F ( 1 , 19 ) ¼ 350 . 61 , p < 0 . 001 , η p2 ¼ 0 . 95 ] was signi ﬁ cant , whereas the main effect of Novelty and the interaction between the two were not signi ﬁ cant . Imaging procedure The 144 trials were randomly divided into 6 runs of the same size . The sequence of the 6 runs was balanced across all participants , and the presentation order of all trials was randomized in each run . Speci ﬁ cally , the four answers for each riddle were randomly presented in several runs and did not appear one after another so that the interaction between them could be ruled out . The duration of each run was 10 min and 10 s , and the total duration of the functional imaging was 61 min . In each trial , the riddle was presented on the screen for a ﬁ xed duration of 12 , 10 , 8 or 6 s . Because each riddle was presented four times along with 4 different answers , the participants spent less and less time understanding each riddle as the exposure frequency increased . After a 4 – 6 s cross - viewing stage , the riddle and one answer were displayed together for a ﬁ xed duration of 8 s . During this period , the participants were asked to judge whether the answer was appropriate or not by pressing a response key with the right index and middle ﬁ ngers . A cross - viewing stage that ranged from 4 to 6 s was presented between two trials ( Fig . 1 ) . Immediately following the imaging session , the participants were asked to rate on a 4 - point scale ( from very low ( 1 ) to very high ( 4 ) ) the extent to which they thought the answer was novel or appropriate . Based on the participants ' online ( i . e . , during the MRI scanning session ) yes / no judgments regarding the answers ’ appropriateness and their of ﬂ ine ( i . e . , after the MRI scanning session ) evaluations regarding their novelty or appropriateness , we performed a participant - speci ﬁ c screening for all four kinds of trials . First , in all conditions , inaccurate or missed - response trials were excluded . Subsequently , regarding the dimension of novelty , trials were excluded from the key analysis if a high novelty trial was evaluated of ﬂ ine as less than 3 on the 4 - point rating scale or a low novelty trial was evaluated as higher than 3 . Similarly , regarding the dimension of appropriateness , we excluded the high appropriateness trials that were rated as less than 3 on the 4 - point rating scale as well as the low appropriateness trials that were rated as more than 3 . Image acquisition Imaging data were acquired at the Center for Bio - Medical Imaging Research ( CBIR ) , Tsinghua University . A Philips Achieva 3 . 0 T system with a standard 8 - channel head coil was used to acquire T2 - weighted echo - planar images ( EPIs ) with blood oxygenation level - dependent ( BOLD ) contrast . Thirty transverse , 4 - mm no - gap slices were acquired ( TR ¼ 2000 msec , TE ¼ 35 msec , FOV ¼ 200 mm (cid:2) 200 mm , FA ¼ 90 (cid:3) , 64 (cid:2) 63 matrix , and voxel size ¼ 3 . 12 mm (cid:2) 3 . 12 mm (cid:2) 4 mm ) . High - resolution T1 - weighted images were acquired for each participant , including 176 contiguous sagittal slices of 1 - mm thickness and an 8 (cid:3) ﬂ ip angle . Image analysis Image preprocessing and statistical analyses were performed using the SPM8 software package ( Statistical Parametric Mapping8 , Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology , Institute of Neurology , London , UK ) Fig . 1 . Schematic diagram showing the time course of a trial during MRI scanning . F . Huang et al . NeuroImage 172 ( 2018 ) 381 – 389 383 implemented within MATLAB 2010 ( MathWorks , Inc . , Natick , MA , USA ) . For preprocessing , the images for each subject were corrected for slice timing , realigned for head motion correction , spatially normalized into a standard echo - planar imaging template in the Montreal Neurological Institute ( MNI ) space , and smoothed with a Gaussian kernel with a full width at half maximum ( FWHM ) of 8 mm . At the ﬁ rst level of analysis , in addition to the riddle event that was time - locked to the onset of the riddle display , we also de ﬁ ned ﬁ ve answer events that were time - locked to the onset of the answer display . Among these answer events , four key events were de ﬁ ned as correct response trials in each condition ( LNHA , LNLA , HNHA and HNLA ) ; the ﬁ fth event was de ﬁ ned as an inaccurate response ( online judgments ) trial or an undesirable response ( of ﬂ ine judgments ) trial in all conditions that were of interest . The design matrix included one regressor for each condition and the six movement parameters from the realignment procedure . Regionally speci ﬁ c condition effects were tested using linear contrasts for each key event relative to the baseline and for each participant . For all participants , the contrast images resulting from the ﬁ rst level of analysis were submitted to a random - effects analysis . The hemody - namic effects of four key answer events were assessed using a 2 (cid:2) 2 full factorial ANOVA with the factors Novelty ( high vs . low novelty ) and Appropriateness ( high vs . low appropriateness ) . First , we calculated the main effect of Novelty , the main effect of Appropriateness , and the interaction between these two factors . Moreover , since the activation of TPJ areas appeared to play a role in both the main effect of Novelty and that of Appropriateness , we performed a conjunction analysis between the “ high vs . low Novelty ” contrast and the “ high vs . low appropriate - ness ” contrast to identify brain regions that might be associated with both Novelty and Appropriateness . Finally , less deactivation within the DMN was found in the analysis of the main effect of Appropriateness ( i . e . , in the contrast of “ high vs . low appropriateness conditions ” ) , whereas more deactivation within the DMN was found in the analysis of the main effect of Novelty ( i . e . , in the contrast of “ high vs . low novelty condi - tions ” ) . Therefore , we performed a conjunction analysis of the low vs . high Novelty contrast and the high vs . low Appropriateness contrast to identify brain regions within the DMN that might be associated with both Familiarity ( anti - novelty ) and Appropriateness . A number of studies predicted regions that appeared in the conjunction analysis , including the TPJ and regions within the DMN ( posterior cingulate cortex , PCC ) ; these regions were selected as regions of interest ( ROIs ) to extract the percentage signal changes , which could help further detect differences between the four conditions . For the whole - brain analyses , the threshold was generally set at p < 0 . 05 , family - wise error ( FWE ) corrected , but the threshold of p < 0 . 001 ( uncorrected ) was also used in the conjunction analysis , especially for detecting activation in the TPJ , amygdala , hippocampus and the DMN that was clearly expected . For the ROI analyses , all ROIs were de ﬁ ned as spheres with a radius of 6 mm based on the activation cluster that was reported in the contrast analysis , and the percentage signal changes were extracted using MarsBar ( http : / / marsbar . sourceforge . net ) . Results Behavioral results Following online and of ﬂ ine screening , there were , on average , 29 ( SD ¼ 4 . 33 ) , 24 ( SD ¼ 3 . 50 ) , 27 ( SD ¼ 3 . 75 ) , and 23 ( SD ¼ 3 . 02 ) valid trials for the LNHA , LNLA , HNHA , and HNLA conditions , respectively . The following analyses were performed only on the valid trials in each condition . For the mean reaction times , a 2 (cid:2) 2 ANOVA revealed that the main effects of Novelty [ F ( 1 , 19 ) ¼ 34 . 04 , p < 0 . 001 , η 2 ¼ 0 . 63 ] and Appro - priateness [ F ( 1 , 19 ) ¼ 7 . 81 , p < 0 . 05 , η 2 ¼ 0 . 29 ] were signi ﬁ cant . The interaction between these factors was not signi ﬁ cant [ F ( 1 , 19 ) ¼ 0 . 003 , p ¼ 0 . 958 , η 2 ¼ 0 . 000 ] . The participants spent more time on the high than on the low novelty conditions and on the low than on the high appropriateness conditions ( see Fig . 2 ) . Imaging results Main effect of novelty To assess the effect of Novelty , neural activity was examined by comparing the high and low novelty conditions . Increased neural activity was identi ﬁ ed in the bilateral TPJ ( BA39 ) and bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ( DLPFC , BA8 / 9 / 46 ) . Decreased neural activity was identi ﬁ ed in the PCC ( BA23 / 31 ) ( Table 1 ) . Main effect of appropriateness To assess the main effect of Appropriateness , neural activity was examined by comparing the high and low Appropriateness conditions . Increased neural activity was identi ﬁ ed in the bilateral TPJ ( BA39 ) , right Fig . 2 . Behavioral results . The panel shows the mean reaction times ( RTs ) as a function of Novelty and Appropriateness . LNHA , low novelty - high appropri - ateness ; LNLA , low novelty - low appropriateness ; HNHA , high novelty - high appropriateness ; HNLA , high novelty - low appropriateness . Error bars repre - sent the 95 % con ﬁ dence interval . The asterisks indicate signi ﬁ cant differences between conditions ( * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 001 ) . Table 1 Brain regions associated with the main effects of Novelty and Appropriateness . Brain regions L / R BA MNI coordinates t ( 20 ) k x y z High Novelty minus Low Novelty DLPFC L 46 (cid:4) 44 28 20 6 . 41 711 DLPFC L 9 (cid:4) 40 10 30 6 . 21 DLPFC R 46 46 28 18 5 . 69 56 TPJ L 39 (cid:4) 46 (cid:4) 68 24 5 . 88 149 * TPJ R 39 56 (cid:4) 66 22 4 . 57 299 High Appropriateness minus Low Appropriateness OFC R 10 8 52 4 6 . 10 169 OFC R 10 4 64 6 4 . 98 PCC – 31 4 (cid:4) 42 40 5 . 30 103 TPJ R 39 54 (cid:4) 64 40 6 . 06 188 * TPJ L 39 (cid:4) 42 (cid:4) 78 34 4 . 88 658 * VS – – (cid:4) 8 10 (cid:4) 4 5 . 03 2459 * Amyg R – 28 0 (cid:4) 16 4 . 87 * Amyg L – (cid:4) 26 (cid:4) 6 (cid:4) 14 4 . 71 * Hip R – 30 (cid:4) 24 (cid:4) 12 4 . 96 * Hip L – (cid:4) 26 (cid:4) 28 (cid:4) 12 4 . 10 126 Note : Activations were signi ﬁ cant at p < 0 . 05 ; FWE - corrected unless otherwise speci ﬁ ed ; * means the threshold was set at p < 0 . 001 , uncorrected . Statistics in the t column show the values at the peak coordinates . Cluster size is represented by k . L , left ; R , right . BA ¼ Broadmann ' s area . MNI ¼ Montreal Neurological Institute . Amyg , amygdala ; DLPFC , dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ; Hip , hippocampus ; OFC , orbitofrontal cortex ; PCC , posterior cingulate cortex ; TPJ , temporoparietal junction ; VS , ventral striatum . F . Huang et al . NeuroImage 172 ( 2018 ) 381 – 389 384 orbitofrontal cortex ( OFC , BA10 ) , PCC ( BA31 ) , ventral striatum ( VS ) , bilateral hippocampus and amygdala . No decreased neural activity was identi ﬁ ed ( Table 1 ) . Conjunction of novelty and appropriateness Since increased activation of the temporal and parietal lobes was found in the main effect of both Novelty ( i . e . , high vs . low novelty ) and Appropriateness ( i . e . , high vs . low appropriateness ) , we performed a conjunction analysis between the “ high minus low novelty ” contrast and the “ high minus low appropriateness ” contrast to demonstrate the re - gions of common activation . Common neural activity was identi ﬁ ed in the bilateral TPJ ( BA39 ) ( peak at L : (cid:4) 58 , (cid:4) 66 , 26 . t ( 20 ) ¼ 3 . 45 . Cluster size is 249 ; R : 56 , (cid:4) 60 , 24 . t ( 20 ) ¼ 3 . 82 . Cluster size is 214 ) . The per - centage signal changes in the TPJ were extracted and showed greater activation in the high novelty conditions than in the low ones and in the high appropriateness conditions than in the low ones ( Fig . 3 ) . Conjunction of familiarity ( anti - novelty ) and appropriateness Because signi ﬁ cantly more activation in the DMN was found in the main effect of Appropriateness ( i . e . , high vs . low appropriateness ) in contrast to the signi ﬁ cantly lower activation in the DMN found in the main effect of Novelty ( i . e . , high vs . low novelty ) , we performed a conjunction analysis between the “ high minus low novelty ” contrast and the “ low minus high appropriateness ” contrast to demonstrate the re - gions of common activation . Common neural activity was identi ﬁ ed in the PCC ( BA23 ) ( peak at (cid:4) 4 , (cid:4) 26 , 34 . t ( 20 ) ¼ 3 . 39 . Cluster size is 20 ) . Then , the percentage signal changes in the PCC demonstrated that it was deactivated in all four conditions , more so in the high novelty conditions than the low ones and in the low appropriateness conditions than the high ones ( Fig . 4 ) . Discussion Novelty and appropriateness are widely recognized as the two key features of creativity . This study used an induced insightful riddle task to dissociate the neurocognitive mechanism mediating the processing of novelty and appropriateness in constraint relaxation . Our results showed that a ) the representation of both novelty and appropriateness was involved in the activation of the TPJ ; b ) the mental representation of novelty features was also accompanied by activation in the executive system ( DLPFC ) ; c ) the mental representation of appropriateness features was also associated with activation in the episodic memory system ( hippocampus ) and in the emotion and reward systems ( amygdala , VS , OFC ) ; and d ) the appearance of novel and inappropriate features could increase processing dif ﬁ culty as well as deactivation of the DMN . Shared neural basis of novelty and appropriateness processing in externally induced constraint relaxation Both the processing of novelty and appropriateness in externally induced constraint relaxation were associated with increased activation of the TPJ , which was consistent with neuropsychological evidence that damage to the lateral parietal - temporal cortices was associated with poorer performance on the overcoming knowledge constraints toy task ( Abraham et al . , 2012 ) . Functionally , the TPJ is generally thought to be responsible for reorienting attention to unexpected , external stimuli ( Chang et al . , 2013 ; Geng and Mangun , 2011 ) and to have a more general post - perceptual function in conceptual updating and adjustments of top - down expectations ( Geng and Vossel , 2013 ; Lynch , 2014 ) . That “ contextual updating ” hypothesis is compatible with this study , and a number of studies have shown that the TPJ is associated with the ca - pacity to take another person ' s perspective ( Murray et al . , 2015 ) , i . e . , in Fig . 3 . Brain activations in the main effects of Nov - elty ( in yellow ) and Appropriateness ( in green ) were overlapped in the TPJ area . The graphs show the mean percentage signal changes separately for the left and right TPJ areas across the four experimental conditions . Error bars represent the 95 % con ﬁ dence intervals . The asterisks indicate signi ﬁ cant differ - ences between conditions ( * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 001 ) . Fig . 4 . The brain image shows PCC activation during the conjunction be - tween Familiarity and Appropriateness . The graphs show the mean percentage signal changes for the PCC across the four experimental conditions . Error bars represent the 95 % con ﬁ dence intervals . The asterisks indicate signi ﬁ cant differences between conditions ( * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 001 ) . F . Huang et al . NeuroImage 172 ( 2018 ) 381 – 389 385 the theory of mind ( Krall et al . , 2016 ) , altruism ( Morishima et al . , 2012 ) , empathy ( Morelli and Lieberman , 2013 ) , and perspective taking ( San - tiesteban et al . , 2012 ) . Therefore , the results of the present study showing that the TPJ is involved in externally induced constraint relaxation support the cognitive hypothesis that to ﬁ nd an appropriate solution , problem solvers must restructure the mental representation of insight problems , particularly the parts pertaining to goal states . As a critical hub in the “ contextual updating ” hypothesis , the TPJ is involved in updating internal models of the current behavioral context to generate appropriate actions ( Geng and Vossel , 2013 ) . In particular , it was assumed that the TPJ is responsible not only for integrating external information with internal models of task performance but also for eval - uating the value of the information based on whether it facilitates per - formance of the current task ( Han and Marois , 2014 ) . The results of the present study are fully consistent with the above assumptions , since both novelty and appropriateness evoked more activation in the TPJ . The results also indicate that both the novelty and appropriateness attributes of constraint relaxation were associated with the adjustment of subjec - tive expectations of goal states . This process is not free and without orientation ; instead , it is guided by intention , direction and , particularly , the salience of the novel goal states . This observation is in line with the twofold creative process that includes generative and evaluative com - ponents ( Finke et al . , 1992 ; Sowden et al . , 2015 ) ; furthermore , the TPJ was found to be extensively activated during creative generation and evaluation ( Ellamil et al . , 2012 ) . Thus , the current results clearly suggest that both the novelty and appropriateness attributes of constraint relax - ation play an important role in restructuring the goal state components of the insight problem ' s representation and share a common neural basis in the TPJ . Distinct neural basis of novelty and appropriateness processing in externally induced constraint relaxation In addition to the TPJ , novelty processing was also associated with increased activation of the DLPFC , whereas appropriateness processing was also associated with increased activation of the hippocampus , amygdala , and regions theorized to be components of the reward system , such as the VS and OFC . The DLPFC is viewed as a critical structure of the executive system , which is generally responsible for monitoring and control functions ( Bogdanov and Schwabe , 2016 ; Metuki et al . , 2012 ; Oehrn et al . , 2014 ) . In this study , novelty processing evoked greater DLPFC activation , sug - gesting that constraint relaxation increases the demand on top - down organization . More speci ﬁ cally , problem solvers must realize and relax the unnecessary subjective constraints that are implicitly placed on the goal state , which is essentially a con ﬂ ict detecting and resolving process that usually occurs in creative behavior . Consistently , a number of pre - vious studies have found that the DLPFC is generally involved in per - forming the novel cognitive sequences that characterize the creative process ( Aziz - Zadeh et al . , 2013 ; Colombo et al . , 2015 ; Liu et al . , 2015 ) . Particularly , the processing of novelty in chunk decomposition evoked distributed activation of the DLPFC , which was also considered to embody the extensive con ﬂ ict resolution processing that serves to resolve old and new cognitive models in insight problem solving ( Huang et al . , 2015 ) . The activation of the hippocampus suggests that task - related associ - ations were formed in the processing of appropriateness since the hip - pocampus is the core structure of the associative memory system ( Backus et al . , 2016 ; Mattfeld and Stark , 2015 ) . In line with this observation , a growing number of studies have shown that the hippocampus is associ - ated with the updating of memory representations in creative thinking ( Duff et al . , 2013 ; Shah et al . , 2013 ) and is especially involved in the appropriateness processing of creative chunk decomposition ( Huang et al . , 2015 ) . The amygdala has generally been regarded as a crucial node in the emotion network and has been implicated in a variety of emotional functions ( Hrybouski et al . , 2016 ; Kragel and Labar , 2016 ; Song et al . , 2015 ) . In particular , the amygdala may be related to the “ Aha ! ” experi - ence since it was found to participate in the process of insight problem solving and other insight events ( Jung - Beeman et al . , 2004 ; Ludmer et al . , 2011 ; Zhao et al . , 2013 ) . In this study , appropriateness processing rather than novelty processing was mediated by the amygdala , likely suggesting that the appropriateness processing of insight problem solving can evoke emotion , particularly a positive emotional experience . In other words , solving problems successfully can lead to positive emotional experiences , regardless of whether the solution was achieved in a novel or conven - tional manner . The “ Aha ” experience might be one of many positive emotional experiences accompanying successful problem solving ; how - ever , participants ’ subjective experiences were not collected . Consis - tently , recent investigations have found that there is a close relationship between the “ aha ” experience and the accuracy of insight problem solving ; speci ﬁ cally , correct solutions elicited stronger feelings of insight compared with incorrect solutions ( Webb et al . , 2016 ) . Moreover , the VS and OFC are the heart of the reward system that has long been associated with reward processing ( Daniel and Pollmann , 2014 ; Haber and Knutson , 2010 ; Sescousse et al . , 2013 ) . Particularly , the VS may be involved in reward anticipation and is sensitive to different reward outcomes , while the OFC may instead process positive reward valence during evaluation ( Liu et al . , 2011 ) . This study reported activa - tion of these regions during appropriateness processing , suggesting that this type of processing involves a reward message . Even though the subjects were not promised any material or abstract reward , they may have experienced positive emotions during insight problem solving ; these emotions may be embodied in the activation of the amygdala . Consistently , decision neuroscience studies have suggested that the VS and OFC constitute a core network for the subjective valuation of rewards from a range of different domains , including goal value , decision value , outcome value and action value ( Peters and Buchel , 2010 ) . Hence , we have reason to believe that the appropriateness processing of insightful constraint relaxation may induce an “ Aha ” feeling , satisfaction , excite - ment and other positive emotional experience that are a kind of subjec - tive reward . Taken together , appropriateness processing rather than novelty pro - cessing was mediated by regions in the memory , emotion , and reward systems , likely indicating that appropriateness processing can result in a more memorable and rich experience than novelty processing . This observation likely explains why people always think ﬁ rst or much about how to solve problems effectively rather than how to be more original ( Beghetto , 2007 ; Rietzschel et al . , 2009 ) , although some people still re - gard novelty as a ﬁ rst - order criterion and appropriateness as a second - order criterion of creativity ( Diedrich et al . , 2015 ) . Alternatively , the activation of emotion - and reward - related regions might be due to the appropriateness bias because participants were asked to rate appropri - ateness , but not novelty , during scanning . We directly compared the neural mechanisms of novelty and appropriateness between chunk decomposition and constraint relaxation , in which participants perform the same task ( appropriateness evaluation ) ( Huang et al . , 2015 ) . Increased activation of the emotion - related regions was found in the processing of appropriateness in both chunk decomposition and constraint relaxation , whereas the reward system was involved in the appropriateness processing of constraint relaxation and the novelty processing of chunk decomposition . It is very unlikely that appropriate - ness bias recruited the reward system in constraint relaxation but not in chunk decomposition . Furthermore , recent research has demonstrated that there is a close relationship between the “ aha ” experience and the appropriate processing of insight problem solving ( Salvi et al . , 2016 ; Webb et al . , 2016 ) . Therefore , we are inclined to believe that the emotion and reward systems were recruited by the appropriateness processing of constraint relaxation rather than the appropriateness bias , and leave it as an open question for further study . F . Huang et al . NeuroImage 172 ( 2018 ) 381 – 389 386 Brain activity associated with both the familiarity and appropriateness of externally induced constraint relaxation Regions of the DMN , particularly the PCC , were associated with both novelty and appropriateness . More speci ﬁ cally , novelty - related process - ing induced more PCC deactivation than familiarity - related processing , and inappropriateness - related processing induced more deactivation in the PCC than appropriateness - related processing , consistent with the results of creative chunk decomposition ( Huang et al . , 2015 ) . The DMN is a speci ﬁ c set of brain regions that are activated during spontaneous thought but are typically deactivated during the performance of goal - directed tasks ( Raichle et al . , 2001 ; Ralchle and Snyder , 2007 ) . Generally , spontaneity and cognitive load can be embodied as the acti - vation or deactivation of the DMN ( Andrews - Hanna , 2012 ; Mantini and Vanduffel , 2013 ; Newton et al . , 2011 ) ; the higher the degree of sponta - neity or the lower the level of cognitive load , the less deactivation of the DMN is observed during active thinking ( Mason et al . , 2007 ; Mayer et al . , 2010 ; Preminger et al . , 2011 ) . Hence , it can be inferred that the familiar or appropriate problem - solving strategies could be processed more smoothly than the novel or inappropriate ones , consistent with the dif - ferences in response times ( i . e . , HNLA > HNHA > LNLA > LNHA ) . In brief , the novelty and appropriateness aspects of constraint relaxation can be processed with parametrically differing dif ﬁ culty . Comparison of the neural mechanisms of novelty and appropriateness in externally induced chunk decomposition and constraint relaxation According to the representation change theory , chunk decomposition and constraint relaxation are distinct mechanisms of insight problem solving . The former was assumed to update the interpretation of the problem situation and restructure the beginning states of the problem ' s representation , whereas the latter could be useful in eliminating top - down assumptions and restructuring the goal states of the problem ' s representation ( Knoblich et al . , 1999 ; Ohlsson , 1992 ) . Functional imag - ing studies have shown that the novelty processing of externally induced chunk decomposition was accompanied by greater activation in the sensory cortex and caudate , which is a core structure of the procedural memory system , suggesting that the perception of the external stimulus and the script of perceptual encoding was changed ( Huang et al . , 2015 ) . In contrast , the novelty processing of externally induced constraint relaxation was accompanied by increased activation in the DLPFC and TPJ regions , which suggests that the problem solver adjusted the implicit subjective assumptions about the goal state . These distinct neural com - ponents of novelty processing in chunk decomposition and constraint relaxation further con ﬁ rms they are distinct mechanisms of insight problem solving . Moreover , the processing of appropriateness in both externally induced chunk decomposition and constraint relaxation was accompanied by increased activation in the hippocampus and amygdala , which may constitute a general neural platform for insight problem solving behavior and be responsible for forming and encoding task - related associations and positive emotional experiences . These ﬁ nding enrich the representation change theory of insight problem solving from a neuroscience perspective . In addition , the reward system was involved in both the externally induced chunk decomposition and the constraint relaxation task . Particularly , the increased activation of reward system regions was associated with the novelty processing of chunk decomposition ( Huang et al . , 2015 ) but with the appropriateness processing of constraint relaxation . These results indicate that the properties of novelty process - ing and appropriateness processing in chunk decomposition and constraint relaxation are not equal . For chunk decomposition , the pro - cessing of novelty was related to the re - encoding of extrinsic stimuli at the perceptual level , which is essentially a novelty - seeking behavior that refers to the exploration of unfamiliar stimuli or environments ( Costa et al . , 2014 ) and is modulated by reward circuitry including the VS , dopaminergic midbrain , and medial orbitofrontal cortex ( mOFC ) ( Bunzeck et al . , 2012 ) . For the constraint relaxation that occurred at the post - perception level , novelty processing was con ﬁ ned to changes in the implicit assumptions , which is not part of exploratory behavior . How - ever , the appropriateness processing of constraint relaxation was closely related to completion of the problem solving , which would be accom - panied by subjective satisfaction , and the “ Aha ” feeling of insight prob - lem solving ( Topolinski and Reber , 2010 ) . In other words , the processing of appropriateness in constraint relaxation may induce a kind of sub - jective value , particularly a spiritual reward , and has the potential to activate the reward system . Therefore , it is likely that reward attributes are associated with the novelty features of creativity , which are oriented toward external stimuli or environments , while the appropriateness features of creativity are oriented to internal thoughts or ideas . Finally , regions of the DMN were found to be associated with the factors of novelty and appropriateness in both externally induced chunk decomposition and constraint relaxation ( Huang et al . , 2015 ) , suggesting that the novelty and appropriateness of creativity can be processed with parametrically differing dif ﬁ culty . Based on the difference in cognitive load ( i . e . , HNLA > HNHA , LNLA > LNHA ) and the “ energy - saving laws ” that are indicative of the brain not working as much as possible ( Kov (cid:1) acs and Schweinberger , 2016 ; Renoult et al . , 2016 ) , we propose that there might be a hierarchical processing model in the brain that assigns higher priorities to the information processing with lower cognitive load . Particularly , with respect to novelty processing ( i . e . , creative thinking ) , familiar solutions ( i . e . , conventional thinking ) have overall processing priority regardless of whether such solutions are appropriate . This hier - archical system is consistent with the frequency - biased response mode that is related to creative problem solving ( Gupta et al . , 2012 ) and pro - vides a good account of the constraints of knowledge and previous experience ( Gupta et al . , 2012 ; McCaffrey , 2012 ; Storm and Angello , 2010 ) . On one hand , high - priority conventional thinking will mask the individual ' s awareness of innovation in a relatively automatic manner ; on the other , even if the individual is innovative in a conscious way , the conventional thinking will compete with the lower - priority creative thinking and cause strong interference ( Huang et al . , 2013 ) . Neural basis of novelty and appropriateness processing between externally induced and internally generated insights Triggering insights externally is simply a way of creating paradigms that make scienti ﬁ c research on insight feasible , especially when we try to detect the neural correlates with the novelty and appropriateness processing of insight problem solving . In this paradigm , the processing of novelty and appropriateness are related to the comprehension , operation , and evaluation of a speci ﬁ c method for riddle solving and are not simply a process of evaluation . Evaluating a suggested idea requires an initial understanding of it ; for example , humor appreciation occurs when people comprehend the humor by way of the detection and resolution of in - congruity ( Bartolo et al . , 2006 ; Chan et al . , 2012 ) . In contrast , internally generated insight problem solving includes generative and evaluative components . The twofold model or dual process model proposes that the creative process begins with the generation of crudely formed ideas , perhaps in an associative manner , followed by their exploration through evaluation and testing ( Ellamil et al . , 2012 ; Finke et al . , 1992 ) . Under - standing a creative solution of problem solving is not identical to generating a creative solution independently . Whatever the case , people must restructure the mental representation of a problem , which has been regarded as the main body of insight problem solving ( Luo and Knoblich , 2007 ; Ohlsson , 1984 , 1992 ) . Given that the externally induced insights also involved deep repre - sentational change and the subsequent veri ﬁ cation process , it would be expected that externally induced or internally generated insights will engage similar brain areas . For example , the hippocampus and other MTL regions have been found to be critically involved in internally induced insights ( see review in Shen et al . , 2017 ; Warren et al . , 2016 ) , were also observed in the solution - presentation paradigm ( Luo and Niki , 2003 ) and F . Huang et al . NeuroImage 172 ( 2018 ) 381 – 389 387 seem to play key roles in the solution comprehension and evaluation processes ( Zhao et al . , 2013 ; Huang et al . , 2015 ) . Moreover , both internal chunk decomposition ( Luo et al . , 2006 ) and externally induced chunk decomposition ( Wu et al . , 2009 ) recruited the attenuation of the early visual cortex , which was essential to decompose the familiar perceptual chunks . In this study , we may speculate that some observations of externally induced constraint relaxation can also be found in internal constraint relaxation , especially in regions associated with cognitive restructuring , such as memory updating in the hippocampus , top - down expectations adjustment in the TPJ , and the corresponding executive functions in the DLPFC . These associations are due to the fact that pro - cessing demands on the access , selection , and integration of information would be necessary regardless of whether the constraint relaxation was internally generated or externally induced . Several further processes accompanying the cognitive restructuring , such as positive emotional experiences and the subjective valuation of rewards , would also be ex - pected to be involved during internal constraint relaxation . However , for the cognitive brain processes that are sensitive to attention and con ﬂ ict ( such as those related to the function of the DMN and alpha power ) , there is likely a difference between internally generated and externally induced insights ( Rothmaler et al . , 2017 ) . More generally , the hippocampus and medial temporal areas have been shown to be involved in the processing of novel versus familiar stimuli ( Stern et al . , 1996 ) , and in the exposure to original versus com - mon ideas ( Fink and Smith , 1992 ) . Researchers have also found that both active conceptual expansion ( Abraham et al . , 2012 ) and “ passive ” or externally hinted expansion ( Kroger et al . , 2012 ; Rutter et al . , 2012 ) seem to be associated with similar brain structures related to semantic cogni - tion . The difference between active and passive conceptual expansion is believed to be based in concept emergence ( for a review , see Abraham , 2014 ) . Therefore , it is reasonable to propose that there are similar psy - chological processes underlying active and passive creative thinking ( Abraham , 2014 ; Kroger et al . , 2012 ) . Conclusions and future directions In summary , the novelty and appropriateness attributes of externally induced constraint relaxation have both shared and distinct neural bases . Specially , novelty processing was completed by the TPJ and regions in the execution system , whereas appropriateness processing was completed by the TPJ and regions in the episodic memory , emotion , and reward systems . These ﬁ ndings likely indicate that both attributes play an important part in restructuring the goal state of the insight problem , whereas the mental representation of appropriateness and novelty is different ; the appropriateness processing may result in a more memo - rable and rich experience than novelty processing . Moreover , the deac - tivation of the DMN was associated with both novelty and appropriateness , suggesting that there might be a hierarchical processing model in the brain that assigns higher priorities to the information pro - cessing with lower cognitive load , which provides a good account of the constraints of prior knowledge as well as important insights into why insight problem solving , even general creative thinking , is dif ﬁ cult . Further studies are needed to explore the cognitive and neural mechanisms of novelty and appropriateness processing in self - generated creativity and other forms of creativity , such as divergent thinking , as well as real - life creativity . By gradually identifying and comparing various forms of creative thinking , it will be possible to reveal the general and speci ﬁ c neural mechanisms of novelty and appropriateness . Con ﬂ icts of interest The authors declare no competing ﬁ nancial interests . Acknowledgments This work was supported by funding programs from the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( Grant Nos . 31700956 and 31671124 ) , Beijing Municipal Commission of Education ( TJSH20161002801 ) , and The Collaborative Innovation Center for Capital Education Development . References Abraham , A . , 2014 . Creative thinking as orchestrated by semantic processing vs . cognitive control brain networks . Front . Hum . Neurosci . 8 ( 95 ) . Abraham , A . , Bedut , S . , Ott , D . V . M . , von Cramon , D . Y . , 2012 . Creative cognition and the brain : disassociations between frontal , parietal - temporal and basal ganglia group . Brain Res . 1482 , 55 – 72 . Andrews - Hanna , J . , 2012 . The Brain ' s default network and its adaptive role in internal mentation . Neuroscientist 18 ( 3 ) , 251 – 270 . Arden , R . , Chavez , R . S . , Grazioplene , R . , Jung , R . E . , 2010 . Neuroimaging creativity : a psychometric view . Behav . Res . 214 ( 2 ) , 143 – 156 . Aziz - Zadeh , L . , Liew , S . L . , Dandekar , F . , 2013 . Exploring the neural correlates of visual creativity . Soc . Cognit . Affect Neurosci . 8 ( 4 ) , 475 – 480 . Backus , A . R . , Bosch , S . E . , Ekman , M . , Grabovetsky , A . V . , Doeller , C . F . , 2016 . Mnemonic convergence in the human hippocampus . Nat . Commun . 7 ( 11991 ) . Barron , F . , 1955 . The disposition towards originality . J . Abnorm . Soc . Psychol . 51 , 478 – 485 . Bartolo , Angela , Benuzzi , Francesca , Nocetti , Luca , Baraldi , Patrizia , Nichelli , Paolo , 2006 . Humor comprehension and appreciation : an fmri study . J . Cognit . Neurosci . 18 ( 11 ) , 1789 – 1798 . Beghetto , R . A . , 2007 . Does creativity have a place in classroom discussions ? Prospective teachers ' response preferences . Think . Skills Creativ . 2 ( 1 ) , 1 – 9 . Bogdanov , M . , Schwabe , L . , 2016 . Transcranial stimulation of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex prevents stress - induced working memory de ﬁ cits . J . Neurosci . 36 ( 4 ) , 1429 – 1437 . Bunzeck , N . , Doeller , C . F . , Dolan , R . J . , Duzel , E . , 2012 . Contextual interaction between novelty and reward processing within the mesolimbic system . Hum . Brain Mapp . 33 ( 6 ) , 1309 – 1324 . Chan , Y . C . , Chou , T . L . , Chen , H . C . , Liang , K . C . , 2012 . Segregating the comprehension and elaboration processing of verbal jokes : an fmri study . Neuroimage 61 ( 4 ) , 899 . Chang , C . F . , Hsu , T . Y . , Tseng , P . , Liang , W . K . , Tzeng , O . , Hung , D . L . , Juan , C . H . , 2013 . Right temporoparietal junction and attentional reorienting . Hum . Brain Mapp . 34 ( 4 ) , 869 – 877 . Colombo , B . , Bartesaghi , N . , Simonelli , L . , Antonietti , A . , 2015 . The combined effects of neurostimulation and priming on creative thinking . A preliminary tDCS study on dorsolateral prefrontal cortex . Front . Hum . Neurosci . 9 ( 403 ) . Costa , V . D . , Tran , V . L . , Turchi , J . , Averbeck , B . B . , 2014 . Dopamine modulates novelty seeking behavior during decision making . Behav . Neurosci . 128 ( 5 ) , 556 – 566 . Daniel , R . , Pollmann , S . , 2014 . A universal role of the ventral striatum in reward - based learning : evidence from human studies . Neurobiol . Learn . Mem . 114 , 90 – 100 . Diedrich , J . , Benedek , M . , Jauk , E . , Neubauer , A . C . , 2015 . Are creative ideas novel and useful ? Psychology of Aesthetics Creativity & the Arts 9 ( 1 ) , 35 – 40 . Dietrich , A . , Kanso , R . , 2010 . A review of EEG , ERP , and neuroimaging studies of creativity and insight . Psychol . Bull . 136 ( 5 ) , 822 – 848 . Duff , M . C . , Kurczek , J . , Rubin , R . , Cohen , N . J . , Tranel , D . , 2013 . Hippocampal amnesia disrupts creative thinking . Hippocampus 23 ( 12 ) , 1143 – 1149 . Ellamil , M . , Dobson , C . , Beeman , M . , Christoff , K . , 2012 . Evaluative and generative modes of thought during the creative process . Neuroimage 59 ( 2 ) , 1783 – 1794 . Fink , Smith , 1992 . Creative Cognition : Theory , Research and Applications . MIT Press , Cambridge . Finke , R . A . , Ward , T . B . , Smith , S . M . , 1992 . Creative Cognition : Theory , Research and Applications . MIT Press , Cambridge ( MA ) . Geng , J . J . , Mangun , G . R . , 2011 . Right temporoparietal junction activation by a salient contextual cue facilitates target discrimination . Neuroimage 54 ( 1 ) , 594 – 601 . Geng , J . J . , Vossel , S . , 2013 . Re - evaluating the role of TPJ in attentional control : contextual updating ? Neurosci . Biobehav . Rev . 37 ( 102 ) , 2608 – 2620 . Gupta , N . , Jang , Y . , Mednick , S . C . , Huber , D . E . , 2012 . The road not taken : creative solutions require avoidance of high - frequency responses . Psychol . Sci . 23 ( 3 ) , 288 – 294 . Haber , S . N . , Knutson , B . , 2010 . The reward circuit : linking primate anatomy and human imaging . Neuropsychopharmacology 35 ( 1 ) , 4 – 26 . Han , S . W . , Marois , R . , 2014 . Functional fractionation of the stimulus - driven attention network . J . Neurosci . 34 ( 20 ) , 6958 – 6969 . Hennessey , B . A . , Amabile , T . M . , 2010 . Creativity . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 61 , 569 – 598 . Hrybouski , S . , Aghamohammadi - Sereshki , A . , Madan , C . R . , Shafer , A . T . , Baron , C . A . , Seres , P . , Malykhin , N . V . , 2016 . Amygdala subnuclei response and connectivity during emotional processing . Neuroimage 133 , 98 – 110 . Huang , F . R . , Fan , J . , Luo , J . , 2015 . The neural basis of novelty and appropriateness in processing of creative chunk decomposition . Neuroimage 113 , 122 – 132 . Huang , F . R . , Zhou , Z . J . , Zhao , Q . B . , 2013 . An eye movement study of associate competition in Chinese idiom riddles solving . Acta Psychologica Sinica ( China ) 45 ( 1 ) , 35 – 46 . Jung - Beeman , M . , Bowden , E . M . , Haberman , J . , Frymiare , J . L . , Arambel - Liu , S . , Greenblatt , R . , et al . , 2004 . Neural activity when people solve verbal problems with insight . PLoS Biol . 2 , E97 . Knoblich , G . , Ohlsson , S . , Haider , H . , Rhenius , D . , 1999 . Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition in insight problem solving . J . Exp . Psychol . Learn . Mem . Cognit . 25 ( 6 ) , 1534 – 1555 . F . Huang et al . NeuroImage 172 ( 2018 ) 381 – 389 388 Kounios , J . , Beeman , M . , 2014 . The cognitive neuroscience ofinsight . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 65 , 71 – 93 . Kov (cid:1) acs , G . , Schweinberger , S . R . , 2016 . Repetition suppression : an integrative view . Cortex 80 , 1 – 4 . Kragel , P . A . , Labar , K . S . , 2016 . Decoding the nature of emotion in the brain . [ Review ] . Trends Cognit . Sci . 20 ( 6 ) , 444 – 455 . Krall , S . C . , Volz , L . J . , Oberwelland , E . , Grefkes , C . , Fink , G . R . , Konrad , K . , 2016 . The right temporoparietal junction in attention and social interaction : a transcranial magnetic stimulation study . [ Article ] . Hum . Brain Mapp . 37 ( 2 ) , 796 – 807 . Kroger , S . , Rutter , B . , Stark , R . , Windmann , S . , Hermann , C . , Abraham , A . , 2012 . Using a shoe as a plant pot : neural correlates of passive conceptual expansion . Brain Res . 1430 , 52 – 61 . Kuhn , S . , Ritter , S . M . , Muller , B . , van Baaren , R . B . , Brass , M . , Dijksterhuis , A . , 2014 . The importance of the default mode network in creativity - a structural MRI study . J . Creativ . Behav . 48 ( 2 ) , 152 – 163 . Liu , S . Y . , Erkkinen , M . G . , Healey , M . L . , Xu , Y . S . , Swett , K . E . , Chow , H . M . , Braun , A . R . , 2015 . Brain activity and connectivity during poetry composition : toward a multidimensional model of the creative process . Hum . Brain Mapp . 36 ( 9 ) , 3351 – 3372 . Liu , X . , Hairston , J . , Schrier , M . , Fan , J . , 2011 . Common and distinct networks underlying reward valence and processing stages : a meta - analysis of functional neuroimaging studies . Neurosci . Biobehav . Rev . 35 ( 5 ) , 1219 – 1236 . Ludmer , R . , Dudai , Y . , Rubin , N . , 2011 . Uncovering camou ﬂ age : amygdala activation predicts long - term memory of induced perceptual insight . Neuron 69 ( 5 ) , 1002 – 1014 . Luo , J . , Knoblich , G . , 2007 . Studying insight problem solving with neuroscienti ﬁ c methods . Methods 42 ( 1 ) , 77 – 86 . Luo , J . , Niki , K . , 2003 . Function of hippocampus in " insight " of problem solving . Hippocampus 13 ( 3 ) , 316 – 323 . Luo , J . , Niki , K . , Knoblich , G . , 2006 . Perceptual contributions to problem solving : chunk decomposition of Chinese characters . Brain Res . Bull . 70 ( 4 – 6 ) , 430 – 443 . Luo , J . , Niki , K . , Phillips , S . , 2004 . Neural correlates of the ' Aha ! reaction ' . Neuroreport 15 ( 13 ) , 2013 – 2017 . Lynch , C . J . , 2014 . Towards a reconceptualization of the temporoparietal junction in stimulus - driven attention . J . Neurosci . 34 ( 40 ) , 13277 – 13278 . Mai , X . Q . , Luo , J . , Wu , J . H . , Luo , Y . J . , 2004 . " Aha ! " effects in a guessing riddle task : an event - related potential study . Hum . Brain Mapp . 22 ( 4 ) , 261 – 270 . Mantini , D . , Vanduffel , W . , 2013 . Emerging roles of the Brain ' s default network . Neuroscientist 19 ( 1 ) , 76 – 87 . Mason , M . F . , Norton , M . I . , Van Horn , J . D . , Wegner , D . M . , Grafton , S . T . , Macrae , C . N . , 2007 . Wandering minds : the default network and stimulus - independent thought . Science 315 ( 5810 ) , 393 – 395 . Mattfeld , A . T . , Stark , C . , 2015 . Functional contributions and interactions between the human hippocampus and subregions of the striatum during arbitrary associative learning and memory . Hippocampus 25 ( 8 ) , 900 – 911 . Mayer , J . S . , Roebroeck , A . , Maurer , K . , Linden , D . , 2010 . Specialization in the default mode : task - induced brain deactivations dissociate between visual working memory and attention . Hum . Brain Mapp . 31 ( 1 ) , 126 – 139 . McCaffrey , T . , 2012 . Innovation relies on the rbscure : a key to overcoming the classic problem of functional ﬁ xedness . Psychol . Sci . 23 ( 3 ) , 215 – 218 . Metuki , N . , Sela , T . , Lavidor , M . , 2012 . Enhancing cognitive control components of insight problems solving by anodal tDCS of the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex . Brain Stimulation 5 ( 2SI ) , 110 – 115 . Morelli , S . A . , Lieberman , M . D . , 2013 . The role of automaticity and attention in neuralprocesses underlying empathy for happiness , sadness , andanxiety . Front . Hum . Neurosci . 7 , 160 . Morishima , Y . , Schunk , D . , Bruhin , A . , Ruff , C . C . , Fehr , E . , 2012 . Linking brain structureand activation in temporoparietal junction to explain the neurobiology of humanaltruism . Neuron 75 , 73 – 79 . Murray , R . J . , Debbane , M . , Fox , P . T . , Bzdok , D . , Eickhoff , S . B . , 2015 . Functional connectivity mapping of regions associated with self - and other - processing . Hum . Brain Mapp . 36 ( 4 ) , 1304 – 1324 . Newton , A . T . , Morgan , V . L . , Rogers , B . P . , Gore , J . C . , 2011 . Modulation of steady state functional connectivity in the default mode and working memory networks by cognitive load . Hum . Brain Mapp . 32 ( 10 ) , 1649 – 1659 . Oehrn , C . R . , Hanslmayr , S . , Fell , J . , Deuker , L . , Kremers , N . A . , Do Lam , A . T . , Axmacher , N . , 2014 . Neural communication patterns underlying con ﬂ ict detection , resolution , and adaptation . J . Neurosci . 34 ( 31 ) , 10438 – 10452 . Ohlsson , S . , 1984 . Restructuring revisited . 2 . An information - processing theory of restructuring and insight . Scand . J . Psychol . 25 ( 2 ) , 117 – 129 . Ohlsson , S . , 1992 . Information - processing explanations of insight andrelated phenomena . In : Keane , M . T . , Gilhooly , K . J . ( Eds . ) , Advances in the Psychology of Thinking , pp . 1 – 44 . New York ; London ; Toronto ; Tokyo ; Singapore : Harvester Wheatsheaf . ( Reprinted ) . Peters , J . , Buchel , C . , 2010 . Neural representations of subjective reward value . Behav . Brain Res . 213 ( 2 ) , 135 – 141 . Preminger , S . , Harmelech , T . , Malach , R . , 2011 . Stimulus - free thoughts induce differential activation in the human default network . Neuroimage 54 ( 2 ) , 1692 – 1702 . Raichle , M . E . , MacLeod , A . M . , Snyder , A . Z . , Powers , W . J . , Gusnard , D . A . , Shulman , G . L . , 2001 . A default mode of brain function . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 98 ( 2 ) , 676 – 682 . Ralchle , M . E . , Snyder , A . Z . , 2007 . A default mode of brain function : a brief history of an evolving idea . Neuroimage 37 ( 4 ) , 1083 – 1090 . Renoult , J . P . , Bovet , J . , Raymond , M . , 2016 . Beauty is in the ef ﬁ cient coding of the beholder . Royal Society Open Science 3 ( 3 ) . Rietzschel , E . , Nijstad , B . , Stroebe , W . , 2009 . The selection of creative ideas after individual idea generation : choosing between creativity and impact . Br . J . Psychol . 0 , 1 – 23 . Rothmaler , K . , Nigbur , R . , Ivanova , G . , 2017 . New insights into insight : neurophysiological correlates of the difference between the intrinsic " aha " and the extrinsic " oh yes " moment . Neuropsychologia 95 , 204 – 214 . Rutter , B . , Kr € oger , S . , Stark , R . , Schweckendiek , J . , Windmann , S . , Hermann , C . , et al . , 2012 . Can clouds dance ? Neural correlates of passive conceptual expansion using a metaphor processing task : implications for creative cognition . Brain Cognit . 78 , 114 – 122 . Runco , M . A . , Jaeger , G . J . , 2012 . The standard de ﬁ nition of creativity . Creativ . Res . J . 24 , 92 – 96 . Salvi , C . , Bricolo , E . , Bowden , E . , Kounios , J . , Beeman , M . , 2016 . Insight solutions are correct more often than those achieved by analysis . Think . Reas . 22 , 443 – 460 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13546783 . 2016 . 1141798 . Santiesteban , I . , Banissy , M . J . , Catmur , C . , Bird , G . , 2012 . Enhancing social ability by stimulating right temporoparietal junction . Curr . Biol . 22 , 2274 – 2277 . Sawyer , K . , 2011 . The cognitive neuroscience of creativity : a critical review . Creativ . Res . J . 23 , 137 – 154 . Sescousse , G . , Caldu , X . , Segura , B . , Dreher , J . C . , 2013 . Processing of primary and secondary rewards : a quantitative meta - analysis and review of human functional neuroimaging studies . Neurosci . Biobehav . Rev . 37 ( 4 ) , 681 – 696 . Shah , C . , Erhard , K . , Ortheil , H . J . , Kaza , E . , Kessler , C . , Lotze , M . , 2013 . Neural correlates of creative writing : an fMRI study . Hum . Brain Mapp . 34 ( 5 ) , 1088 – 1101 . Shen , W . , Yuan , Y . , Liu , C . , Luo , J . , 2017 . The roles of the temporal lobe in creative insight : an integrated review . Think . Reas . 23 ( 2 ) . Song , Y . Y . , Lu , H . H . , Hu , S . Y . , Xu , M . , Li , X . T . , Liu , J . , 2015 . Regulating emotion to improve physical health through the amygdala . Soc . Cognit . Affect Neurosci . 10 ( 4 ) , 523 – 530 . Sowden , P . T . , Pringle , A . , Gabora , L . , 2015 . The shifting sands of creative thinking : connections to dual - process theory . Think . Reas . 21 ( 1SI ) , 40 – 60 . Stein , M . I . , 1953 . Creativity and culture . J . Psychol . 36 , 31 – 32 . Stern , C . E . , Corkin , S . , Gonz (cid:1) alez , R . G . , Guimaraes , A . R . , Baker , J . R . , Jennings , P . J . , Rosen , B . R . , et al . , 1996 . The hippocampal formation participates in novel picture encoding : evidence from functional magnetic resonance imaging . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 ( 16 ) , 8660 – 8665 . Sternberg , R . J . , Lubart , T . I . , 1996 . Investing in creativity . Am . Psychol . 51 ( 7 ) , 677 – 688 . Sternberg , R . J . , Lubart , T . I . , 1999 . The concept of creativity : Prospects and paradigms . In : Sternberg , R . J . ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Creativity . Cambridge University Press , New York , pp . 3 – 15 ( Reprinted ) . Storm , B . C . , Angello , G . , 2010 . Overcoming ﬁ xation : creative problem solving and retrieval - induced forgetting . Psychol . Sci . 21 ( 9 ) , 1263 – 1265 . Tong , D . D . , Zhu , H . X . , Li , W . F . , Yang , W . J . , Qiu , J . , Zhang , Q . L . , 2013 . Brain activity in using heuristic prototype to solve insightful problems . Behav . Brain Res . 253 , 139 – 144 . Topolinski , S . , Reber , R . , 2010 . Gaining insight into the " aha " Experience . Current Directions in Psychological Science 19 ( 6 ) , 402 – 405 . Warren , D . E . , Kurczek , J . , Duff , M . C . , 2016 . What relates newspaper , de ﬁ nite , and clothing ? an article describing de ﬁ cits in convergent problem solving and creativity following hippocampal damage . Hippocampus 26 ( 7 ) , 835 . Webb , M . E . , Little , D . R . , Cropper , S . J . , 2016 . Insight is not in the problem : investigating insight in problem solving across task types . Front . Psychol . 7 . Weisberg , R . W . , 1995 . Case studiesof creative thinking : reproduction versus restructuring in the real world . In : Fink , S . ( Ed . ) , The Creative Cognition Approach . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , pp . 53 – 72 ( Reprinted ) . Wu , L . L . , Knoblich , G . , Wei , G . X . , Luo , J . , 2009 . How perceptual processes help to generate new meaning : an EEG study of chunk decomposition in Chinese characters . Brain Res . 1296 , 104 – 112 . Wu , X . , Yang , W . , Tong , D . , Sun , J . , Chen , Q . , Wei , D . , et al . , 2015 . A meta - analysis of neuroimaging studies on divergent thinking using activation likelihood estimation . Hum . Brain Mapp . 36 ( 7 ) , 2703 – 2718 . Zhao , Q . B . , Zhou , Z . J . , Xu , H . B . , Chen , S . , Xu , F . , Fan , W . L . , Han , L . , 2013 . Dynamic neural network of insight : a functional magnetic resonance imaging study on solving Chinese ' chengyu ' riddles . PLoS One 8 , e593513 . F . Huang et al . NeuroImage 172 ( 2018 ) 381 – 389 389