AI Assistance for UX : A Literature Review Through Human - Centered AI Yuwen Lu University of Notre Dame Notre Dame , IN , USA ylu23 @ nd . edu Yuewen Yang Cornell University New York , NY , USA yy2228 @ cornell . edu Qinyi Zhao University of Washington Seattle , WA , USA qyzhao @ uw . edu Chengzhi Zhang Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta , GA , USA czhang694 @ gatech . edu Toby Jia - Jun Li University of Notre Dame Notre Dame , IN , USA toby . j . li @ nd . edu ABSTRACT Recent advancements in HCI and AI research attempt to support user experience ( UX ) practitioners with AI - enabled tools . Despite the potential of emerging models and new interaction mechanisms , mainstream adoption of such tools remains limited . We took the lens of Human - Centered AI and presented a systematic literature review of 359 papers , aiming to synthesize the current landscape , identify trends , and uncover UX practitioners’ unmet needs in AI support . Guided by the Double Diamond design framework , our analysis un - covered that UX practitioners’ unique focuses on empathy building and experiences across UI screens are often overlooked . Simplistic AI automation can obstruct the valuable empathy - building pro - cess . Furthermore , focusing solely on individual UI screens without considering interactions and user flows reduces the system’s prac - tical value for UX designers . Based on these findings , we call for a deeper understanding of UX mindsets and more designer - centric datasets and evaluation metrics , for HCI and AI communities to collaboratively work toward effective AI support for UX . CCS CONCEPTS • General and reference → Surveys and overviews ; • Human - centered computing → HCI design and evaluation methods ; Interaction design process and methods ; Empirical studies in interaction design ; Systems and tools for interaction design . KEYWORDS literature review , UX design , human - centered AI , design support tools ACM Reference Format : Yuwen Lu , Yuewen Yang , Qinyi Zhao , Chengzhi Zhang , and Toby Jia - Jun Li . 2024 . AI Assistance for UX : A Literature Review Through Human - Centered AI . In DIS ’24 : ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems 2024 , July Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM mustbehonored . Abstractingwithcreditispermitted . Tocopyotherwise , orrepublish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK © 2024 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - XXXX - X / 18 / 06 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / XXXXXXX . XXXXXXX 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 23 pages . https : / / doi . org / XXXXXXX . XXXXXXX 1 INTRODUCTION Advancements in Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) enabled applications in numerous sectors , with the user experience ( UX ) industry being a notable potential beneficiary . AI models can facilitate processes that involve various data modalities , ranging from text - based affinity diagrams [ 15 , 70 ] and user interface ( UI ) development codes [ 13 , 59 ] to image - based UI screenshots [ 123 , 229 , 265 ] . The enhancements of language - based and multi - modal AI models have expanded the pos - sibilities of applications in UX design and research [ 44 , 45 , 109 ] . No - tably , the impressive capabilities of large - language models ( LLMs ) further promoted AI adoption in real applications [ 44 ] . Diffusion - based , text - to - image generative AI such as Stable Diffusion [ 191 ] and Midjourney 1 also opens up new avenues for creative profes - sionals to utilize AI in their work [ 225 , 232 ] . However , creating usable , effective , and enjoyable AI - enabled experiences for UX practitioners remains challenging [ 252 ] . A technology - driven mindset , prevalent in AI communities , can lead to applications that are driven by the latest technology , but do not necessarily address UX practitioners’ unique goals such as empathy - building . Furthermore , the fluid , nonlinear UX methodologies [ 72 ] are not the same as logical , computational thinking and can be hard to grasp for AI researchers . The lack of insight into designer workflow and practices can create challenges for AI research to create effective and seamless support for UX professionals . Not all UX processes are desired to be delegated to AI [ 148 , 154 ] , leading to concerns about the diminished empathy of the designer when valuable research processes become automated . Such concerns question the real - world efficacy of these AI models in providing meaningful UX support . Early research prototypes on AI - enabled design support systems have received positive feedback in user studies [ 28 , 67 , 82 , 190 ] . At the same time , unique data modalities , user needs , and workflows in UX also created new practical challenges for AI researchers to tackle [ 67 , 133 , 190 , 229 ] . The field of human - centered AI ( HCAI ) provides valuable per - spectives to investigate the current gap and future risks in AI for UX support . HCAI sits at the intersection of AI and Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) and embraces the human - centered philosophy . It aims to ensure that AI systems align with human values and 1 https : / / www . midjourney . com / a r X i v : 2402 . 06089v1 [ c s . H C ] 8 F e b 2024 DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK Anonymous Author et al . mitigate potential harms to individuals , communities , and soci - eties [ 209 ] . As AI models integrate into more real - world applica - tions , it becomes imperative to prioritize human - centered design and research principles in AI adoption . Researchers in HCAI have investigated useful design metaphors and paradigms for AI sys - tems [ 209 , 253 ] . In this work , we conducted a systematic literature review ( SLR ) through the lens of HCAI and analyzed the state of technical and system research in AI assistance for UX practitioners . We outline the role of AI in different phases of UX practices using the classic Double Diamond design framework [ 37 ] . Our SLR sought to under - stand AI’s current technical capabilities with UX - related tasks and map out the rapidly expanding design space of AI for UX support . Our general goal is to pinpoint opportunities for both HCI and AI communities , to identify the critical needs of UX professionals , and to find common ground between UX practices and frontier academic AI research . Thus , we define our research questions as follows . ( 1 ) What capabilities do the latest AI models possess for different UX - related tasks ? ( 2 ) Regarding UX practitioners’ needs and preferences for AI assistance , what insights have been revealed from past re - search ? ( 3 ) What are the gaps between existing empirical studies and opportunities for future AI research and interactive system development ? Through our SLR with 359 papers , we found that past work has a higher focus on technology - driven approaches than human - centered investigations . Our analysis underscored the contrast be - tween AI’s data - driven nature and the human - centric philosophy of UX . Building on this , our study maps existing research onto the Double Diamond framework [ 37 ] , identifying key technical capa - bilities of AI in UX ( Section 4 ) and underscoring overlooked areas such as empathy - building and enhancing user experiences across multiple UI screens ( Section 4 . 6 ) . The UX industry can also benefit from embracing data - driven strategies to capture feedback from ever - expanding user bases . We emphasize the need for a deeper understanding of UX methodologies and goals , the expansion of quantitative UX metrics , and careful consideration of AI delegability based on existing Human - Centered AI frameworks [ 148 ] . This work aims to offer valuable insights and direction for future research to the HCI , UX , and AI communities , highlighting the potential of this promising interdisciplinary , translational research domain . 2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 2 . 1 UI / UX Design and Support Tools UI / UX as a profession has established its status in both the tech industry and academia over the past decades . Nielson estimated that the population of UX professionals worldwide grew from about 1 , 000 to 1 million between 1983 and 2017 . It is also estimated that in 2050 , the number will increase by another 100 - fold to 100 mil - lion [ 170 ] . UX practitioners aim to create products and experiences that are user - friendly , enjoyable , and effective . They often try to understand target users’ needs through human - centered method - ologies , e . g . contextual interviews , and iteratively prototype their design solutions and elicit feedback from users . Such a process is well captured in British Design Council’s Double Diamond fram - work [ 37 ] . Through two divergent - convergent processes , UX practi - tioners brainstorm and select particular aspects of an issue to tackle , then iteratively prototype a few potential solutions and finalize on one through user feedback . Numerous support tools have been developed for UX design . From early HCI research , the SILK system was one of the first no - code designer - support UI prototyping tools [ 121 ] . Later , Sketch and Figma are among the most popular tools for UX prototyping . More related to the early exploratory phases , platforms such as Miro , Mu - ral , and FigJam are created for UX professionals to organize ideas , conduct brainstorming , or qualitatively analyze user data . Evalua - tion platforms such as UserTesting 2 and Maze 3 provide support for conducting user evaluations , while researchers also investigated automated design testing [ 41 ] and remote user testing [ 156 ] . No - tably , design systems such as Google Material Design and Apple Human Interface Guidelines also provided tools to help designers create user - friendly , consistent , and accessible UIs . Recently , we have witnessed an increase in AI integration into design support tools in both academia and industry . In academia , many researchers have been exploring AI - enabled support tools for UX practitioners [ 112 , 133 , 147 , 205 ] . In the industry , design tools like Uizard 4 and Framer 5 have rolled out AI features to generate UI screens from natural language descriptions . Figma also recently acquired Diagram 6 , a startup that previously focused on AI - enabled Figma plugins , and started to roll out AI features in their tool . However , the UX industry embodies a human - centered principle , which is inherently different from the technology - first mindset prevalent in AI communities . This has created friction in designing better AI experiences [ 252 ] as well as creating effective AI support for UX practitioners [ 147 ] . We have yet to observe any of these AI - enabled tools become mainstream and adopted by a significant portion of the UX industry . This might reflect a “research - practice gap” that is common across HCI research [ 173 ] , solving which requires more translational research and resources to fulfill the needs of practitioners [ 34 ] . 2 . 2 Human - Centered AI Human - Centered AI ( HCAI ) is an emergent interdisciplinary re - search field that bridges AI and HCI . HCAI embraces the human - centered philosophy and takes a humanistic and ethical view to - wards the latest AI technology : how to enhance humans rather than replace them [ 247 ] . Researchers in HCAI have predicted that by embracing a human - centered future , the AI community’s impact will likely grow even greater [ 209 ] . The primary research focuses of HCAI include : ( 1 ) improving AI - driven technology to better augment human needs , ( 2 ) identi - fying design methodologies for safe and trustworthy AI systems , and ( 3 ) understanding and safeguarding the impact of AI on in - dividuals , communities , and societies [ 209 , 247 ] . In this work , we investigate AI support for UX practitioners through the lens of 2 https : / / www . usertesting . com / 3 https : / / maze . co 4 https : / / uizard . io / 5 https : / / www . framer . com / ai 6 https : / / diagram . com / AI Assistance for UX : A Literature Review DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK HCAI , proposing our research questions ( see the Introduction sec - tion ) based on the research focuses above . We refer to past research in HCAI , including Principles of Mixed - Initiative Interfaces [ 84 ] , Guidelines for Human - AI Interaction [ 4 ] , and books on Human - Centered AI [ 209 ] . Particularly , we balance our analysis on both the technical and design aspects , seeking to understand existing AI models’ capabilities in UX tasks , as well as practitioners’ needs for automation in current methodologies and practices . 2 . 3 Literature Review in AI Support for UI / UX design Past literature review studies in computing and HCI have success - fully identified trends and gaps and proposed new research di - rections in different specific domains [ 42 , 46 , 146 , 180 , 214 ] . We consider the call for more literature review studies in HCI , CSCW , and Ubicomp [ 146 ] and specifically look at the emerging field of AI for UI / UX design support . While many researchers conducted general investigations on this topic [ 73 , 94 , 112 , 140 , 147 ] , only 3 papers used systematic literature review by the time we conducted this study . Malik et al . reviewed 100 papers and analyzed the deep learning approaches that have been utilized to support UI / UX design work [ 152 ] . Their analysis results revealed potential for cross - platform datasets , more advanced UI generation models , and a centralized deep - learning - based design automation system . In addition , Abbas et al . [ 1 ] analyzed 18 papers in this field and analyzed UX designers’ current challenges in incorporating ML in their design process . Their results showed that most ML - enabled UX design tools fail to be integrated in practical settings . They ar - gued the need to build support tools by considering existing design practices , rather than simply based on existing ML models’ capa - bilities . Interestingly , the paper did not distinguish designing with ML support ( the focus of our paper ) from designing ML - involved systems and experience ( i . e . , AI as a design material , outside of our scope ) . Many of their summaries and discussions were cen - tered around the need for designers’ understanding of ML , which is beyond the scope of our analysis . In 2022 , Stige et al . [ 215 ] conducted a literature review on 46 ar - ticles in this field to analyze how AI is currently used in UX design ( namely , user requirement specification , solution design , and de - sign evaluation ) and potential future research themes . Compared to their analysis sample ( N = 46 ) , our sample was more comprehensive ( N = 359 ) and up - to - date ( conducted in 2023 ) , resulting in a more complete analysis of the recent empirical and technical research landscape ( Section 4 ) . In addition , by mapping previous research into the four phases of the Double Diamond framework , we re - vealed more details regarding AI’s involvement in UX research and design activities . Our analysis also uncovered more in - depth differences between AI and UX communities’ mindsets and pointed out meaningful gaps to bridge for future research ( Section 5 ) . 3 LITERATURE REVIEW METHOD To address our research questions ( see Introduction ) , we conducted a systematic literature review ( SLR ) of papers in relevant research fields . SLRs are designed to help understand and interpret a large volume of information , to explain “what works” ( i . e . , current land - scape ) and “what should work” ( i . e . , potential gaps and future directions ) in a given field . The “systematic” aspect of SLR fo - cuses on identifying all research that addresses a specific ques - tion to conduct a balanced and unbiased summary [ 171 ] . We fol - lowed previous guidelines on conducting SLRs [ 171 , 240 ] and re - ferred to previous SLR studies in adjacent fields to form our meth - ods [ 46 , 104 , 180 , 235 ] . We used snowball sampling , a widely adopted literature search strategy , to select our literature sample 7 . It begins with a starter set of a few relevant papers , then iteratively includes related papers that were cited by , or cited , papers in the starter set ( i . e . , the backward and forward snowballing processes ) [ 235 ] . Google Scholar was used as our primary search engine , as it is one of the largest online academic search engines , and is commonly used in literature review studies [ 29 , 210 , 235 , 240 ] . We did not restrict the publication venues to reduce bias and get a diverse sample across disciplines [ 171 ] . We depict our process in Fig . 1 by following an adapted version of the PRISMA statement [ 162 ] . Below , we detail our literature selection process , including our inclusion / exclusion criteria , the selection of a starter set , and iterative backward and forward samplings . 3 . 1 Inclusion / Exclusion Criteria In line with our research scope , we included papers that satisfy both of the following criteria : • providing support for methodologies or artifacts in UI / UX design and research , • incorporating the use of artificial intelligence for such sup - port . We referred to articles regarding UX design and research prac - tices [ 56 , 182 , 192 , 193 ] to inform our selection process against the first criteria . Specifically , we used the Double Diamond design framework [ 37 ] to map out opportunities for AI support in the UX workflow , similar to past studies in this domain [ 252 ] . We excluded papers that focused only on UI development without relevance to UI / UX design or research . As discussed in previous work , coming up with a precise , com - prehensive definition of AI is hard , even within AI research com - munities [ 216 ] . It is even harder when considered in the HCI and UX contexts [ 252 ] and is beyond the scope of our paper . We use the term as a reference to a suite of computational techniques generally considered in the domain of AI , from neuron - network - based deep learning models to statistical , machine learning approaches [ 196 ] . We excluded papers investigating the design of AI systems , often referred to as “AI as a design material” [ 252 , 255 ] . These papers often work on the designerly understanding of AI [ 141 ] and design processes that account for AI safety and accountability [ 165 ] . They focus more on the design of AI instead of supporting design with the helpf of AI ( our focus ) . It is also noteworthy that our focus is specifically on AI adoption in UX support . While relevant , we do not aim to conduct a com - prehensive literature review on creativity support tools , human - AI co - creation , or human - centered AI , given these are much broader research topics independent of our scope . However , we did draw 7 More explanation of our rationale to use snowball sampling can be found in Appen - dix A . DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK Anonymous Author et al . Figure 1 : Adapted PRISMA statement of our snowball sampling process . inspiration from papers from these domains that do not fit our scope exactly and include them in our Discussion section for better generalizability of our findings . 3 . 2 Starter Set In the beginning , four researchers collaboratively searched for and filtered relevant papers using research search engines including Google Scholar and ACM Digital Library , based on our inclusion criteria defined in Section 3 . 1 . When selecting our starter set , we followed previous work [ 171 ] and aimed at the diversity of topics to minimize bias . Specifically , we also ensured to include a bal - anced set of papers addressing every phase of the Double Diamond process [ 37 ] . The four researchers frequently communicated and discussed in - depth during the selection process to ensure the repre - sentativeness and quality of our starter set . In the end , we included 17 papers related to the four Double Diamond phases ( four , three , five , and five papers from discover , define , develop , and deliver , re - spectively ) . We also included two papers that investigate the same problem domain but do not specifically fit into any phase above to ensure representativeness and comprehensiveness . In all , our starter set consisted of 19 representative papers . 3 . 3 Backward and Forward Sampling After selecting the starter set , we conducted two rounds of iterative sampling . In each iteration , both the papers that our sample cited ( backward sampling of past papers ) and the papers that cited our sample ( forward sampling of later papers ) were examined by four researchers . Researchers examined the full text of identified papers to determine their relevance , eligibility , and quality . A minimum of two researchers independently evaluated each paper and settled disagreements through discussions . Details of the iterations were depicted in Fig . 1 , following an adapted version of the PRISMA statement [ 162 ] . We stopped after the second snowballing iteration because we had already obtained a large sample ( N = 359 ) that is representative of the existing work in our domain . Also , in the second iteration , we observed that papers from the first iteration repeatedly appeared in papers of interest . In the analysis process , upon detailed examina - tion , 68 papers were excluded due to their relative lack of relevance to our research questions . Our final sample contained a total of 359 papers , sourced from March to July 2023 ( Fig 1 ) . To the best of our knowledge , it is to date the largest repository of existing litera - ture on the topic of AI for UX support compared to past literature reviews in this field [ 1 , 152 , 215 ] . 4 ANALYSIS After all papers were selected and screened , the research team mapped their main topic into one of the four phases in the Double Diamond design framework [ 37 ] , a classic framework that com - prehensively covers various activities in a design process . It has guided many previous academic research on UX design [ 5 , 75 , 252 ] . It encapsulates the two divergent – convergent processes in design , where designers explore potential problems to address in the do - main , then converge to main target issues ; prototype a few potential solutions , and decide on the most effective one through testings and evaluations [ 37 ] . It should be noted that modern design processes are mostly iterative , so designers can go back and forth between different phases . Given that we also focus on the technical feasibility of AI models in UX , two additional categories were also included : “Datasets” on UX - related datasets , and “General AI Models” , about AI models that work with UX - related data and can be applied to more than one phase in the Double Diamond framework . When a paper fits more than one phase , we include it in the primary phase it belongs to . The papers in each phase were analyzed and discussed by at least two researchers . For each paper , based on our research questions and our human - centered AI perspective , we define the following seven aspects to focus on : ( 1 ) Research contribution type ( according to [ 234 ] ) ( 2 ) Target problem / task ( 3 ) Study / discussion of user needs ( 4 ) Supporting empirical evidence from previous work ( if any ) ( 5 ) AI model architecture and data modality ( 6 ) Other important model aspects ( e . g . user control , explain - ability ) ( 7 ) UX artifacts involved AI Assistance for UX : A Literature Review DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK Figure 2 : The Double Diamond design framework , proposed by the Design Council [ 37 ] . Figure 3 : Trend of paper counts each year in our sample ( the cut - off date of our search is July 2023 ) . Researchers also took notes on meaningful information outside of these aspects . In a shared spreadsheet , researchers filled in infor - mation about the paper for the above aspects and discussed them for our analysis . Fig . 3 depicts the trend of paper counts for each year in our sample , and Fig . 4 provides a more detailed view of the six phases . They show that research in this field has significantly increased since 2020 . Note that the literature review was conducted from March to July 2023 , so we only included papers published before this . Through further analysis of the general trends , we identified two imbalances in the current research landscape : Imbalance between technology - centric and human - centered ap - proaches . We visualized the proportion of papers that studied or analyzed the needs of their target users using human - centered methodologies defined in previous literature [ 56 , 166 , 177 , 192 , 193 ] , such as ethnographic interviews , usability studies , etc . The result is shown in Figure 5 : in total , only 24 . 3 % papers ( N = 76 ) from all papers in these 4 phases ( N = 309 ) used human - centered methodologies and discussed user needs in their scenarios . This reflects the current technology - centric tendency of research in AI assistance for UX . Although this phenomenon is not uncommon given the nascent nature of this field , it also calls for a more balanced approach that DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK Anonymous Author et al . Figure 4 : Trend of the number of papers each year in our sample , for each phase . incorporates human - centered investigations . Emphasizing human - centered research not only addresses the preferences of users but also enhances the overall value and impact of AI solutions [ 209 ] . Imbalance between studies in Double Diamond phases . As depicted in Fig . 5 ( b ) , the papers in our sample display a noticeable incli - nation towards the develop and deliver phases , while seemingly underrepresenting the define phase . Determining the exact cause of this observed trend is challenging and beyond the scope of our review . Nevertheless , we hypothesize that this bias stems from the wealth of data available for the latter two phases ( as discussed in Section Datasets ) , coupled with the inherently subjective and task - dependent nature of evaluating design concepts during the define phase [ 37 , 72 ] . In the following sections , we dive deeper into our analysis of previous work in each of these six categories . At the end , we com - pare our findings from all six phases and summarize the results of our general analysis . 4 . 1 Discover Discover is the divergent phase in the first diamond . It is the be - ginning phase where most exploratory user research is conducted . Designers need to understand the design problems and build user empathy in this phase . Common methodologies and artifacts in - volved in this phase include personas , user interviews , and brain - storming [ 37 ] . Our analysis summarized related research themes from past works as follows : Review Mining ( N = 27 ) , Data - driven Persona ( N = 21 ) , and AI - supported Brainstorming ( N = 18 ) . 4 . 1 . 1 Review Mining . For UX researchers , analyzing user reviews helps them identify current design problems , potential user require - ments , and other user experience - relevant information [ 12 , 80 , 159 , 249 ] . The old - fashioned practice is manually coding data or using rule - based algorithms to classify user reviews into several topics and conducting statistical analysis [ 151 , 158 ] . The introduction of machine learning to this task could date back to the 2010s [ 51 ] . It automated the process of addressing vast amounts of textual data and advanced traditional algorithms with a better understanding of natural language . For example , it facilitates extracting structured information from the narratives , such as product features and user attitudes [ 224 ] . One concern is how these works quantify the goal of mining user reviews . Most of them simplify design practitioners’ needs to classify user narratives based on some empirically defined compu - tational models [ 80 , 249 ] or quantified metrics such as user senti - ments [ 76 , 139 ] , satisfaction levels [ 95 , 96 ] . Only a limited number of these works validated the effectiveness of this equivalence in meeting designers’ needs . Another concern is the generalizability of these formulations in identifying design problems in different scenarios . Some recent works indicated that review analysis could be fine - grained to user needs by integrating more advanced language models . For exam - ple , Wang et al . [ 231 ] increased the granularity of the extracted information and indicated specific problematic features for further improvements . 4 . 1 . 2 Data - Driven Persona . Data - driven persona refers to the adop - tion of algorithm methods to develop personas from numerical data [ 199 ] . Machine learning pushes the purview further with its capacity in clustering and segmenting a variety of user data , such AI Assistance for UX : A Literature Review DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK Figure 5 : Classification of papers based on their consideration of user needs in each phase of the Double Diamond process . Our classification is based on whether they employed human - centered research methodologies , introduced in previous books and articles [ 56 , 166 , 177 , 192 , 193 ] , to understand their target user groups . as feedback posts [ 101 , 221 , 259 ] and survey responses [ 86 ] . Besides , it also makes large - scale user data with time - changing behaviors feasible for persona development . For instance , user profiles and their interaction history [ 6 , 97 , 199 ] are introduced and make the persona construction more comprehensive . A common criticism of this data - driven approach is its automa - tion process hinders design practitioners from building as deep user empathy as they could with a qualitative approach [ 198 ] . Efforts have been made to integrate mixed methods in recent years . For instance , quantitative results are considered archetypes and inform the following qualitative analysis [ 97 , 221 , 259 ] . Some other ap - proaches verified qualitative insights via quantitative results [ 103 ] . However , evaluations of these mixed - method approaches are far from standardized and overlook examining their effectiveness as user - empathizing processes . 4 . 1 . 3 AI - supported Brainstorming . Ideation is another divergent thinking scenario with which many studies have tried to integrate AI . Research on AI for brainstorming includes individual support and human - human collaboration support . For individual ideation supports , early systems adopted machine learning for retrieving inspirational ideas and searching associative knowledge from a defined collection [ 8 , 57 , 69 , 111 ] , among which only a limited number of works considered learning from specific design contexts [ 113 ] . Recently , the advancement of Large Language Models ( LLMs ) has enhanced the capacity for divergent thinking in these ideation systems , but it also confines them primarily to textual modalities [ 45 , 149 , 157 ] . Besides , these systems mostly followed a series of linear structured stages in order to make AI integration more feasible , like a sequence model consisting of warm - up , generating ideas , discussing ideas with groups [ 149 , 157 , 222 ] . For collaborative brainstorming , researchers investigated how machine learning could be involved and support various interac - tions for team communication , like face - to - face ideation [ 8 ] and table - top interfaces [ 89 ] . Machine learning could also be a team facilitator for human group ideations [ 14 , 222 ] . The prosperity of generative AI provides more engaging roles for machine learn - ing [ 208 ] such as experts [ 14 , 157 ] and mediators [ 150 ] , and leads to further research opportunities . Another research focus is on how social effects in human - human teamingtransferinhuman - AIcollaborativeideation [ 90 , 157 ] , which sheds light on the negative impacts that AI has introduced in this process , like distraction [ 111 ] , cognitive loads [ 261 ] , and free - riding [ 157 ] , which are not limited to UX ideation . 4 . 1 . 4 Additional Topics . In addition to the aforementioned topics , some other emerging works merit mention . Some studies addressed challenges in traditional qualitative research , such as communi - cation fatigue and evaluation apprehension , by introducing AI - powered conversational agents [ 18 , 243 ] . Researchers have explored its adoption in conducting user interviews , facilitating engaging communication with users , and information elicitation [ 77 , 242 ] . Moreover , conducting user interviews at scale would be more acces - sible . How this interview mode affects interviewers , interviewees , and in - depth understanding leaves opportunities for future studies . 4 . 1 . 5 Summary . Current ML integrations in UX research mostly provide automation support for laborious work and enhance tra - ditional processes in work with large - scale and large - variety user data , especially for review mining and data - driven persona . Studies on ideation are more diverse and consider different collaborative settings and potential roles of AI beyond automation . Based on a DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK Anonymous Author et al . human - centered scope , an apparent question is how the integra - tion of machine learning aligns with the need of the UX discover phase , which is , understanding design problems and building user empathy . Whatwefoundfromouranalysisis anoversightoftheempathy - building process and a limited interpretation of design prac - titioners’ needs . For example , constructing personas is regarded as making deliverables that could be automated by machines , while it is primarily a process where designers synthesize materials and build user understanding ; quantitative metrics are adopted without validating its effectiveness for design practitioners and its gener - alizability for various design contexts . Future studies would be enriched by delving deeper into specific design contexts and de - signers’ cognitive processes , especially in enhancing the empathetic comprehension of users as highlighted by [ 266 ] . This should com - plement the focus on the informational necessities that bolster the designers’ empathetic processes . 4 . 2 Define Define is the convergent phase in the first diamond , where design - ers define the problem statement and pinpoint the products’ desired impact based on previous research findings . The main themes we identified in the define phase are Qualitative Analysis ( N = 22 ) and AI for Design Idea Evaluation ( N = 2 ) 8 . Methodologies and artifacts involved in this phase include affinity diagramming and focus groups [ 37 ] . The primary objective of this phase is to sort through the extensive research data , discerning the most promising directions that align with user requirements , business objectives , and technical viability [ 193 ] . 4 . 2 . 1 Qualitative Analysis . AI support for qualitative analysis has been an active research area and is prevalent in our sample ( N = 22 ) . UX professionals and HCI researchers use this methodology to organize , label , and analyze data , to identify patterns and extract insights [ 177 , 193 ] . Generally , researchers discovered that simplistic automation of qualitative analysis can break established workflows , increase discussion overhead , and lead to unexpected reductions in efficiency and quality [ 15 ] . In contrast , papers that closely examined different steps in qualitative analysis and intentionally preserved human agency , control , and goals often demonstrated better psy - chological and performative results [ 61 , 66 , 67 , 154 , 190 , 227 ] On the surface , qualitative analysis involves labeling data and extracting insights . Some studies aimed at speeding up the label - ing process and using AI to produce labeled results [ 138 ] . However , research has shown that these full automation approaches can eas - ily break the existing workflow and lead to increased discussion overhead and reduced efficiency and quality [ 15 ] . In contrast , some papers broke down detailed steps in qualitative analysis to analyze their distinctions and different potentials for automation . Marathe et al . [ 154 ] divided qualitative analysis into two phases : building a codebook by analyzing data , and applying the codes to the remaining data . Codebook building . Building a codebook with a data subset is a key learning and reasoning process in qualitative analysis , where 8 We specifically looked for other papers involving design idea evaluation and AI , but did not find any beyond our snowball sampling results . researchers build “emotional connection — the intimacy , pride , and ownership — with the data” [ 98 ] and “think with their hands” [ 15 ] . Researchers generally oppose the introduction of “low - level , suggestion - based automation” in this process , to avoid taking away the invaluable cognitive process of human researchers [ 98 , 154 ] . Feuston et al . [ 61 ] emphasized that qualitative research is a process that utilizes researchers’ unique perspectives in data analysis , whilst AI might take away this opportunity and reinforce past coding patterns in new data . Codebook application . Once a codebook is developed , applying it to the remaining data can be relatively more mechanical . Previous studies have shown that automation is more welcomed in this phase [ 154 ] . As a result , many systems were built to automate the tedious aspects of labeling while preserving the researcher’s agency in learning [ 61 , 67 , 98 , 154 , 190 ] . But there is also more to the labeling process than simply applying the codebook : since qualitative analysis is often a collaborative process , Drouhard et al . emphasized the value of disagreement between researchers in reflecting ambiguities in data [ 49 ] . Reflecting on and resolving these conflicts can help to improve researchers’ learnings [ 26 , 67 , 190 ] . Advantages of interactive ML in qualitative analysis . The inter - active ML technique provides great potential to automate tedious aspects of qualitative coding , while leaving the final decisions to users , preserving their agency . It has been employed in existing AI systems to support qualitative coding [ 67 , 189 , 190 ] . In the context of qualitative analysis , interactive ML engages users in a collabora - tive process , where they actively offer feedback on AI - generated outputs , thereby enhancing the precision and relevance of qual - itative coding [ 189 ] . Interactive ML also does not require large labeled datasets and learns as users annotate more data , which naturally fits the qualitative analysis process . Building on top of human - interpretable rules , patterns and relatively simple AI mod - els , they were able to achieve a certain level of explainability and interpretability . Cody also provided counterfactual explanations to help users further understand algorithmic predictions . User control in qualitative analysis . User control has been a com - mon theme in discussions of AI support in qualitative analysis [ 61 , 66 , 67 , 98 , 189 , 190 ] . Earlier papers discussed how the lack of control might prevent AI from providing valuable support [ 98 ] . However , Feuston and Brubaker discovered that it is more nuanced : AI sup - port can benefit certain steps in qualitative analysis , or even shifting some analytic practices , as long as it assists instead of automates existing analytic work practices [ 61 ] . The careful design of systems including Cody [ 190 ] and PaTAT [ 67 ] also confirmed the value of AI support while maintaining user control and agency . The “dele - gability” of human tasks to AI [ 148 ] in qualitative coding depends on human motivation , task difficulty , associated risk , and human trust [ 98 ] . 4 . 2 . 2 Design Idea Evaluation . Two papers in our sample investi - gated the use of AI in evaluating design ideas . Siemon conducted a comparative study with a simulated AI system to investigate AI’s utility in helping reduce apprehension in design idea evalu - ation [ 211 ] . In addition , Mesbah et al . combined AI with crowd - sourcing to effectively measure the desirability , feasibility , viabil - ity , and overall feeling of design ideas [ 160 ] . Given that current AI Assistance for UX : A Literature Review DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK methodologies around design idea evaluation are subjective and task - dependent [ 37 , 72 ] , AI models that are trained against general metrics such as in [ 160 ] are likely not sufficient for real - world sce - narios . It remains largely unclear how AI support might fit into existing manual evaluation processes . We believe a deeper empirical understanding of UX evaluation processes and practices is required to bridge this current gap . 4 . 2 . 3 Summary . In all , in the define phase , previous research that emphasized researchers’ agency in understanding , learning , and interpreting data with their unique perspectives generally showed better results than simplistic automation and acceleration [ 61 , 66 , 67 , 154 , 190 , 227 ] . The use of interactive ML techniques in qual - itative analysis support has demonstrated potential in balancing researchers’ agency in learning and interpreting the data with al - gorithmic support [ 67 , 190 ] . For evaluating design ideas with AI , the subjective and task - dependent nature of current evaluation practices [ 37 , 72 ] requires closer coupling between designers’ work - flows , goals , and AI support to provide meaningful , holistic support . 4 . 3 Develop Develop refers to the divergent phase where designers come up with solutions for the defined problem domain , informed by insights from the previous two phases [ 37 ] . Our analysis identified the following themes for papers in this phase : UI Generation ( N = 51 ) , Interface Design Inspiration ( N = 25 ) , UI Optimization ( N = 21 ) . 4 . 3 . 1 UI Generation . Large - scale UI datasets like RICO enabled AI research in automatic UI generation ( more discussion about datasets is in the Datasets section ) . We divide past UI generation research roughly into 3 categories : full - screen UIs , UI components , and fidelity conversion . Full - screen UIs . Many previous AI models focused on generating entire UI screens . As a fundamental step to effectively automate structuring UI elements , layout generation becomes a predomi - nant focus of many previous work . Earlier on , Li et al . proposed applying Generative Adversarial Networks ( GANs ) to synthesize and model geometric relations of graphical elements for accurate layout alignment [ 129 ] . Furthermore , transformer - based architec - tures [ 74 , 99 , 213 ] provided solutions that handle the hierarchical and sequential relationships of graphical elements , adding value especially for the UI generation task . Along the same line , Inoue et al . [ 93 ] and Zhang et al . [ 258 ] leveraged diffusion models for conditional layout generation . While these efforts mark consider - able progress , the generation of high - fidelity UI screens remains early - stage , with notable attempts such as GUIGAN by Zhao et al . [ 265 ] , approaching high - fidelity generation through integrating GUI component subtree sequences in the generation process . Over - all , we found only few existing AI models that offer high - fidelity UI generation ready for use in practice . The trajectory of UI layout and high - fidelity UI generation research reveals the critical need for so - lutions that are directly applicable in design workflows . Despite the trend towards more sophisticated AI capabilities , there remain un - resolved challenges and gaps to seamlessly blend model - generated results with user - centered design practices . UI Components . A few papers were dedicated to the generation of UI components , such as icons [ 264 ] and buttons . For example , ButtonTips [ 143 ] dived deeply into automatic web button design with user input constraints , including button layout generation with text labels , color selection , spatial relationships , and presence prediction . These research efforts can help generate need - based design resources for novice designers . Additionally , designers in the industry nowadays commonly work with company - specific design systems to ensure branding and visual consistency [ 64 ] . Generation within the constraints of design systems might increase the adoption of AI tools in design practitioners’ workflow . Fidelity Conversion . Except for AI models that adopt an end - to - end approach for UI generation , past research also investigated AI models’ capabilities in converting UI prototypes between different fidelities [ 20 ] . For example , Paper2Wire turns UI sketches into editable , mid - fidelity UI wireframes [ 20 ] , which can be helpful for early prototyping stages . MetaMorph , for another instance , assists in transforming constituent components from lo - fi sketches to higher fidelities [ 203 ] . Rather than directly delivering the final result , such AI models take an apporach to facilitate designers’ existing workflows and contain a higher potential for adoption . 4 . 3 . 2 Interface Design Inspiration . Designers usually refer to exter - nal resources for inspiration . Currently , prevalent applications of example search fall into two categories : ( 1 ) design galleries , such as Gallery D . C . [ 57 ] , where designers usually browse a wide range of examples as a serendipitous inspirational process ; ( 2 ) algorithmic recommendation tools [ 218 ] based on similarities to the user’s de - sign input , where designers look for suggestions focusing on more concrete ideas [ 168 ] . Previous studies showed two challenges of existing exploratory strategies : design fixation ( e . g . excessive focus on present concern ) [ 155 , 256 ] and focus drift ( e . g . deviation from original goal ) . Intelligent tools such as GANSpiration [ 168 ] gener - ate diverse but relevant design examples , which seek the balance between and provide both targeted and serendipitous inspiration . Scout , for another example , focused on overcoming design fixation , providing more spatially diverse design examples , and “breaking out the linear design process“ [ 220 ] . Meanwhile , AI might shed light on scaling up earlier solutions that help to avoid design fixa - tion , such as parallel prototyping , by supporting exploring relevant alternatives during iteration [ 48 ] . Example exploration usually takes place in the early stages of design and continues to be a crucial component throughout the iterative process , expanding potential solution space . Existing AI - infused tools for inspiration search have expanded diversity of search mediums , enabling inputs such as such as natural language description [ 229 ] , screenshots [ 218 ] , hand - drawn sketches and doo - dles [ 163 ] , low - fidelity design artifacts such as wireframes [ 23 ] , and hybrid inputs ( e . g . text and doodle [ 164 ] ) , supporting more flexible search processes [ 147 ] . In later stages of design , external references also allow for reinterpretation of ideas and are used as validation tools [ 83 ] . Given the iterative nature of design tasks , more research is needed on dynamically supporting and inspiring UI design as the artifact evolves in complexity and fidelity . DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK Anonymous Author et al . 4 . 3 . 3 UI Optimization . UI optimization encompasses two main aspects : at the interface level , it involves enhancing the layout posi - tioning and aesthetic style [ 185 ] ; at the user experience level , it fo - cuses on improving the perceived affordances of components [ 179 , 219 ] . The process mainly aim at optimizing visual appeal , func - tional clarity , are addressed , and the overall interaction with the user interface . First , applying appropriate visual aesthetics plays an important role in generating and optimizing high - fidelity UI . The underlying difficulties in automatically suggesting and applying de - sign styles include data - driven aesthetic assessment [ 114 , 119 ] and transforming high - level design principles into explicit constraints . Accordingly , researchers proposed solutions that 1 ) translate natural language requirements into predictions of design properties [ 110 ] and 2 ) extract applicable design constraints from design princi - ples [ 114 ] . There are also a few papers dedicated to specific aspects of aesthetics , such as color [ 60 , 82 , 175 ] and font design [ 176 , 263 ] . Meanwhile , due to the subjectivity of aesthetic styling , existing systems tend to keep designers actively engaged in the producing process , including making decisions about which recommended suggestions to adopt , iterating on their choices , and making fur - ther revisions afterwards [ 82 , 110 , 114 ] . For optimization at the user experience level , past work drew insights from the correlation between components’ spatial relationships and user task perfor - mance ( i . e . speed and accuracy ) , leveraging classic principles such as Fitts’s Law and neural network learning [ 50 ] to reach ideal layout . Different from the previous categories , optimization contributes to finishing the design cycle . Given the standardized and consis - tent requirements across UI design practices , optimization tasks can further explore topics including visual alignment and consis - tency checking , usability issue mitigation , and design guidelines adherence improvement . 4 . 3 . 4 Summary . Machine learning , by enhancing design processes with its search and generative capabilities , offers innovative path - ways for design inspiration [ 57 ] . AI - enabled search and generation might enable more rapid and parallel prototyping , previously lim - ited by human capacity , thereby increasing the potential to elevate design outcomes . While the quest for end - to - end solutions for com - plete UI design remains prevalent , there’s a shift towards automat - ing select intermediary steps in the design workflow , promising more effective support for design objectives [ 147 ] . Additionally , for design aspects steeped in subjectivity , like aesthetic choices , machine learning - assisted tools are emerging to bolster designers’ creative freedom through detailed interactions , ensuring technol - ogy complements rather than overrides human expertise . 4 . 4 Deliver Deliver is the convergent phase in the second diamond , where through different evaluation methods , designers elicit feedback from users on their design prototypes , iteratively improve them , and come up with a final solution [ 37 ] . There are several major themes in the testing phase : Visual Saliency Prediction ( N = 24 ) , Aesthetic Analysis ( N = 12 ) , Visual Error Detection ( N = 9 ) . 4 . 4 . 1 Visual Saliency Prediction . Visual saliency is a proxy of the perceived importance of screen components , indicating UIs’ vi - sual hierarchy . Such information can help UX practitioners better grasp users’ attention distribution , thus improving the information architecture design [ 174 ] . Many model architectures have been developed for predicting visual saliency [ 21 , 68 , 127 , 206 , 246 ] . Vi - sual attention prediction for different user groups [ 27 , 124 ] , and UI categories [ 63 ] allows more granularity and versatility for UX practi - tioners . Techniques to collect user gazing data with easy - to - access gadgets instead of expensive eye - tracking devices , such as web - cams [ 245 ] and mobile phones [ 137 ] , have also been investigated . Methods deploying crowd - sourcing for data collection are also pre - sented , with eye - tracking techniques [ 245 ] and by self - reporting where they had gazed at [ 30 ] . 4 . 4 . 2 Aesthetic Analysis . Automatic visual aesthetic analysis of UI screens can help UX professionals grasp perceptions of their de - sign . While judging the visual appearance of UIs can be subjective , automatic evaluations afford quick predictions as initial feedback to designers . Past work has focused on AI applications in the eval - uation of UI’s perceived aesthetics [ 38 , 47 , 142 , 161 , 244 ] and visual complexity [ 2 ] , which is a key aspect of design aesthetics . In addi - tion , aesthetic predictions according to different user groups [ 124 ] and in real usage contexts [ 200 ] facilitate more nuanced prediction needs . The majority of existing visual analyses of UIs relied on objective metrics and feature extraction [ 2 ] , or AI models trained on user ratings [ 47 , 123 ] . Both empirical analysis and experiment results have demonstrated the improved flexibility and quality of AI models’ evaluations [ 2 , 47 ] . A study conducted by Rozenholtz et al . revealed that in practice , the perceived visual quality is not the only factor contributing to the evaluation of a design [ 194 ] . Designers often have to make trade - offs between visual quality and design goals , which they concluded , “would likely interfere with acceptance of a perceptual tool by professional designers” . In addition , they observed that the overall “goodness” values were not useful beyond A / B comparisons between design options . A deeper empirical understanding of how UX practitioners utilize UI evaluation tools in real - world contexts would greatly benefit practical research in this direction . 4 . 4 . 3 Visual Error Detection . Automated visual error detection for UI screens is another key theme . Those systems can emulate human interactions with UI screens and save time and human effort after app development [ 181 ] . While these systems are often used after app development and to check implementation quality , they are also capable of identifying design issues that get propagated to code implementation . Unlike system - specific tests like those developed especially for Android [ 33 , 145 ] , image - based testing techniques can take UI screenshots from different systems , increasing cross - platform versatility [ 52 , 53 ] . These automated testing techniques help detect display issues [ 217 ] , generate testing reports , and de - tect UI discrepancies between its design and development [ 22 ] . Some specific techniques , such as interaction and tappability pre - diction [ 201 , 219 ] can also be utilized to serve more granular error detection goals . Design guideline violation checkers [ 250 , 251 , 262 ] also have great practical potential in UX workflows . Overall , AI has great potential in flexible and universal visual error detection . 4 . 4 . 4 Additional Topics . Systems around sentiment prediction , us - ability testing , and automatic feedback generation are also included in our sample . Sentiment prediction centers the user’s perception AI Assistance for UX : A Literature Review DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK Figure 6 : Double diamond with phase topic of the product [ 43 , 183 ] . Some related works are user satisfaction prediction [ 115 , 116 ] , and brand personality prediction [ 239 ] . These models help guide the designer to analyze the design target and the predicted user perception . Usability testing is also one processes that gather the researcher’s attention . To suit more nuanced device - specific usability testing needs , researchers present usability testing for mobile UI [ 201 ] , e - learning system [ 178 ] , and thermostat [ 184 ] . Researchers use live emotion logs [ 62 ] , think - aloud sessions [ 54 , 55 ] , and online reviews [ 81 ] to extract usability - related data and assess interfaces . In addition , automatic feedback generation empowers designers to improve on the current design with the help of the ML system [ 117 , 195 ] . Other less - explored themes include dark pattern detection [ 78 ] and A / B testing [ 106 , 107 ] . As accessibility design becomes more es - sential in UX design , researchers developed tools around automated accessibility testing [ 226 ] . Summary . Previous research in the deliver phase has explored various ways to provide UI evaluation feedback to designers . We observed that in our sample , these explorations are often based on the visual analysis of UIs . However , with the growing prevalence of design systems in practice [ 32 , 64 ] , UX designers are shifting their focus from pixel - level asthetics to interaction flows and the holisitc user experiences across UI screens . The evaluation of inter - action flows and user experiences go beyond saliency prediction ( Section 4 . 4 . 1 ) and visual asthetics ( Section 4 . 4 . 2 ) , yet is still over - looked in research . Moreover , current visual analysis metrics does not often align with unique UI design asthetics such as flat de - sign and skeumorphism , restricting their practical adoption . We believe more considerations of these unique aspects of UX design is important in creating translational research value [ 34 , 35 , 173 ] 4 . 5 Datasets Open - sourced datasets on user interfaces of different devices and modalities have significantly contributed to AI support for UI / UX design . In Table 1 , we summarized open - sourced datasets we col - lected in our sample . We discovered that current datasets often overlook the user experiences underlying the interfaces , lim - iting their applications in UX design . As a result , technical work based on these datasets often leans toward the latter two phases of develop and deliver in the Double Diamond ( Fig . 2 ) . In addition , we still lack universal benchmarks to evaluate design quality , reflected in UIs and the underlying user experiences , due to the often diverse goals of design in different digital products . Overall , existing datasets have enabled more technical solutions to user task automation [ 131 , 186 ] and design task automation [ 10 , 88 , 167 ] , instead of designer - centric augmentation tools . 4 . 5 . 1 Mobile UI Datasets . Most of the publicly available datasets for UX - related tasks focus on mobile user interfaces . RICO [ 40 ] is arguably the most utilized UI dataset , containing 72k mobile screens and 3M UI components . ReDraw [ 167 ] is a similar mobile UI dataset with 14k screens and 191k annotated components . Later on , many papers aimed at augmenting RICO in different directions , including topic modeling [ 122 ] , semantic summarization [ 229 ] , element mis - match denoising [ 125 ] , and adding new screens and wireframes [ 19 ] . In addition , Android in the Wild ( AitW ) is a mobile dataset contain - ing 715k interaction episodes , spanning 30k unique instructions on different Android devices [ 186 ] . FoursketchdatasetshavealsobeenreleasedformobileUIscreens and components . Swire was created by recruiting designers to hand - draw sketches of 3 . 8k interfaces taken from RICO [ 87 ] . Simi - larly , UISketch crowdsourced 18k hand - drawn low - fidelity UI ele - ments [ 205 ] andLofiSketchcrowdsourced4 . 5kscreensketches [ 202 ] . The Synz dataset took a purely synthetic approach and generated UI screen sketches with UI elements in UISketch and UI layouts from screens in RICO [ 204 ] . 4 . 5 . 2 Web UI Datasets . Given the significant resources and re - strictions involved in collecting mobile UI data , researchers also collected website UI datasets : Webzeitgeist [ 120 ] with 100k pages DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK Anonymous Author et al . Category Dataset Year Descriptions Size Mobile Interfaces RICO [ 40 ] 2017 a large repository of Android app designs 72k screens from 9 . 7k apps , 3M components ReDraw [ 167 ] 2018 UI screens with GUI metadata 14k screens , 191k components Enrico [ 122 ] 2020 human - annotated topic modeling of RICO subset 1 . 5k screens , 20 topics VINS [ 19 ] 2021 wireframes and annotations for sketches and high - fidelity UIs for Android and iOS 11 components , 257 wireframes , 4 . 5k high - fi screens Screen2Words [ 229 ] 2021 screen summarizations based on RICO 112k summaries for 22k screens Clay [ 125 ] 2022 human - made annotations to denoise RICO 60k screen layouts Android in the Wild [ 186 ] 2023 human demonstrations of mobile device interactions 715k interactions , 30k instructions Swire [ 87 ] 2019 crowd - sourced , hand - drawn sketches based on RICO 3 . 8k screens UISketch [ 205 ] 2021 crowd - sourced , hand - drawn low - fi UI element sketches 18k sketches of 21 UI elements Synz [ 204 ] 2021 synthetic smartphone low - fi screen sketches , generated based on RICO and UISketch 175k screens Lofi Sketch [ 202 ] 2022 crowd - sourced , hand - drawn smartphone low - fi screen sketches , generated by random allocation 4 . 5k screen sketches , annotated with 21 UI element categories Web Interfaces Webzeitgeist [ 120 ] 2013 a large repository of web interfaces 100k screens , 100M components WebUI [ 237 ] 2018 low - cost , large - scale repository of web interfaces 400k screens Webshop [ 254 ] 2022 human demonstrations of e - commerce website interactions 12k instructions , 1 . 6k demonstrations Table 1 : Overview of public datasets identified in literature review sample , categorized by interface type and detailed with descriptions , sizes , and publication years . and 100M elements , and WebUI [ 237 ] with 400k pages . The advan - tage of collecting web UI is the ability to scale up with responsive layouts in different viewport sizes . Many websites do not require lo - gins to view content , avoiding the potential login wall in mobile app UI collections [ 237 ] . Recent studies also demonstrated the potential to augment AI models’ understanding of mobile UIs with web UI data [ 237 ] . A UI navigation and automation dataset for e - commerce websites , WebShop , with 12k crowd - sourced text instructions and over 1 . 6k human demonstrations is also created [ 254 ] . 4 . 5 . 3 Discussion . Missing connections across UI screens . Most datasets in our sample consist of individually separated UI screenshots , their hierarchy in - formation , and metadata . They miss the connections across multiple UI screens , which encapsulate the underlying user tasks , experiences , and goals . The absence of these inter - screen connections highlights a fundamental distinction between UI and UX design , limiting ex - isting research’s practical applications in the UX industry [ 172 ] 9 . As a result , research based on these datasets tends to be biased 9 The RICO dataset [ 40 ] included interaction tracing and animation between screens , but they remain much underexplored , especially compared to the other parts of the dataset such as UI screenshots , hierarchies , and layouts . towards viewing UIs predominantly as static , multimodal entities comprising textual and visual information [ 87 , 133 , 167 , 228 , 229 ] . This also led to a research focus skewed towards the develop and deliver stages of the Double Diamond model ( Fig . 2 ) , where static UIs appear more than the first two exploratory phases ( Fig . 4 ) . We believe that a deeper understanding of UX practices and mindsets is essential to align datasets and AI models with the complexities of real - world UX design . The recent release of datasets for UI task automation , such as Android in the Wild [ 186 ] , provides valuable data on user flows across multiple UI screens . While the primary focus is on supporting task automation for end users , they also have the potential to benefit UX practitioners . For example , assessments of these user flows and their design contexts can help UX designers find relevant and high - quality inspirations in the early stages of design . In addition , commercially available , designer - centric datasets such as Mobbin 10 can inform academic creation of open - source datasets that more directly afford applications in realistic UX domains . Lack of meaningful evaluation metrics . We still lack objective metrics that effectively reflect the quality of UI and the underlying 10 https : / / mobbin . com AI Assistance for UX : A Literature Review DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK user experiences . Most AI generation models trained on existing datasets are evaluated against metrics including overlap , alignment , and intersect - over - union ( IoU ) that do not necessarily align with the perceived quality of UIs [ 100 , 108 , 129 ] . Other common metrics include visual complexities [ 3 , 92 , 187 , 188 ] , visual saliency [ 21 , 102 , 118 , 119 , 123 , 127 , 206 , 265 ] , and visual similarities [ 87 , 105 , 133 ] . This reflects the contrast between AI’s data - driven nature and UX’s user - centered philosophy , which contains opportunities for both disciplines and remains to be further explored [ 31 ] . Most UX tasks hardly be holistically evaluated using only objective metrics . In practice , they are often embedded in individual projects’ contexts of user needs , business objectives , and technical feasibility . Eval - uating UI screens and their user experiences significantly differs from traditional image - based assessment in domains like computer vision , requiring the development of novel , UX - focused objective metrics tailored for AI’s application in this field . 4 . 6 General AI Models In our sample , we also identified 37 AI - focused papers that do not specifically fit into any of the four Double Diamond phases , but still work with UX - and UI - related tasks . We analyze these papers here to further understand the current technical landscape . Generally , we identified three themes : ( 1 ) UI annotation & component detec - tion ; ( 2 ) UI semantic understanding ; ( 3 ) UI interaction automation . These foundational AI explorations from the 37 papers contain significant potential to assist UX designers through downstream tasks , providing practical applications that can enhance their design processes and outcomes . 4 . 6 . 1 UI Annotation & Component Detection . Detecting and an - notating visual elements on UIs can provide value in downstream tasks like UI semantic understanding and interaction automation , and also many different use cases including accessibility and UI testing [ 25 ] . In our sample , researchers utilized many AI model architectures for this task , but ResNet [ 24 , 25 , 135 ] and Faster - RCNN [ 153 , 260 ] remain dominant given their impressive capabil - ities in general object detection . For component detection specif - ically on UIs , the precision for UI component locations and sizes is paramount , which slightly differs from general object detection . To address this challenge , some papers also included UI view hier - archies in addition to screenshot images for more accurate location information [ 135 , 257 ] . Annotating UI components on screens can augment UI datasets with detailed meta - level information , support - ing modular design paradigms such as Atomic Design [ 64 ] . 4 . 6 . 2 UI Semantic Understanding . Many AI models were devel - oped to tackle the fundamental task of UI understanding . They mostly focused on the semantic meaning , i . e . , the functionalities and purposes , of UI components and screens . Many AI models take in screenshots and / or corresponding view hierarchies [ 9 , 11 , 133 , 136 , 236 ] and output an embedding of the interface screen or com - ponent . ActionBert used user actions with the UI to learn a UI em - bedding [ 79 ] . Fu et al . made the analogy between words – sentences in NLP and pixels – screens for UI understanding . Recently , with the rise of increasingly larger model sizes , a relatively large vision - only UI model based on pre - trained large ViT and T5 , Spotlight , was trained on 2 . 5M mobile screens and 80M web pages and achieved SoTA on some representative UI tasks [ 126 ] . These general - purpose models lay the groundwork for more sophisticated downstream tasks that can support various UX workflows . Another approach to achieving holistic UI understanding is through UI screen summarization . These summarizations present concise textual information regarding a UI screen’s appearance and functionality , which can be useful for many language - based appli - cation scenarios . Researchers have attempted to use multimodal AI models [ 229 ] and vision - based approaches [ 123 ] to generate such summaries . Such summaries can be helpful for text - based re - trieval of similar screens , screen readers enhancement , and screen indexing for conversational applications [ 229 ] . 4 . 6 . 3 UI Interaction Automation . Many researchers also investi - gated the potential of AI to automatically interact with UIs , which reduced the user efforts required for creating task automation compared with e . g . , programming by demonstration and inter - active task learning methods [ 131 , 132 , 134 ] . Over the years , re - searchers have explored single - turn , UI - element - based simple inter - actions [ 39 , 223 , 228 ] , to multi - turn [ 65 , 91 , 233 , 254 ] , more complex and precise actions , such as horizontal scrolls [ 186 ] . Language mod - els [ 65 , 91 , 186 , 223 , 228 , 233 ] and reinforcement learning [ 39 , 254 ] are the most utilized approaches for predicting action sequences in UIs . The understanding and prediction of user actions on UI screens can support diverse downstream designer - centric tasks , such as facilitating the prototyping of user flows , simplifying existing user experiences , and understanding user goals and intents . 4 . 6 . 4 Summary . In all , papers in this section focus on exploring and extending AI models’ general abilities on tasks related to UI and UX . The advancement of these AI models’ capabilities can benefit from ongoing innovations in the AI community . Multi - modal model pipelines remain mainstream with UI / UX datasets and have con - tinuously demonstrated impressive performance [ 9 , 133 , 229 , 260 ] . Compared to traditional computer vision tasks , merely considering pixel information is far from satisfactory . Other modalities , such as structural information in vector graphics , are quite common in human design practices and thus require more attention in these model architectures . Recently , the significant increase in AI model sizes , reflected in pipelines based on BERT [ 11 ] and large vision - language models [ 126 ] provide potential future directions . Mean - while , deeper engagement with the UX communities and human - centered approaches can help uncover more direct translational opportunities to support UX practitioners with AI , as discussed in Section 4 . 5 . 3 . We believe these two complementary approaches are both indispensable in pushing forward the boundary of AI - driven UX design support tools . 5 DISCUSSION In the previous section , we have mapped the existing literature on AI’s role in UX support , applying the Double Diamond framework to structure our exploration . Here , from a meta - level perspective , we draw inspiration from existing Human - Centered AI research [ 4 , 84 , 148 , 209 ] and distill the patterns observed across all phases , aiming to summarize and discuss generalizable insights . These insights pinpoint details of the gap between technical AI research and the human - centered UX mindset , emphasizing the need for the DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK Anonymous Author et al . collaborative adaptation and evolution of both domains to better complement each other . 5 . 1 AI Assistance for UX : A Promising Field for Interdisciplinary , Translational Research Our systematic literature review has demonstrated that the area of AI assistance for UX has witnessed significant growth . Research across HCI and AI has pushed the boundaries of AI datasets and models for UI / UX , understanding UX practices , and applications of technical innovations into various design activities . Various AI techniques have been effectively utilized to process , understand , and generate user interface data , an inherently rich , multimodal data format [ 40 , 186 ] . Techniques and methodologies from subfields of AI , such as natural language processing , com - puter vision , graph learning , and reinforcement learning , have all been utilized , often in combination , to experiment with UI datasets [ 17 , 53 , 85 , 133 , 144 , 201 , 229 , 230 , 260 ] . Research in the field has been consistently reflecting AI breakthroughs , with the latest adoption being Large Language Models [ 228 ] and Large Vision - Language Models [ 126 ] . To this extent , UX research and design have provided AI researchers with unique challenges to tackle , effectively benefiting the AI community . UX research and design are also fertile grounds for translational research [ 34 , 36 , 173 ] to impact the UX industry . It also has gen - eralizable values for various adjacent domains . For example , the non - linear aspect of UX processes makes the research findings gen - eralizable to AI - supported creativity research . Future research will continuously provide immense opportunities for both AI and UX to collaboratively evolve . 5 . 2 Unique Characteristics of UX : Empathy Building and Emphasis on Experiences 5 . 2 . 1 The Essence of UX Methodologies : Empathy Building . A cen - tral goal of UX methodologies and processes is empathy build - ing . Previous research has uncovered that UX practitioners view methodologies more as “ mindsets ” , rather than actual rigorous meth - ods , to scaffold listening to users and considering diverse user inputs [ 72 ] . Practitioners emphasized the need to prioritize this mindset when adopting and adapting UX methodologies based on each project’s unique scenarios : “ . . . methods themselves are quite rudimentary . . . you probably can describe in a page . But when it comes to actually getting the right value out of them , it’s having that right mindset – – what are the right questions we need to ask ? How can we answer them ? And then using that as the basis for what methods you need . ” [ 72 ] This unique characteristic of UX is often overlooked in current AI support tools : it is often not about automating the processes or methodologies , but supporting UX designers’ and researchers’ empathy - building with their users . Simplistic automation and accel - eration can overlook the cognitive process of UX professionals , thus obstructing the researchers’ learning and empathy - building [ 154 ] . As a result , existing research that uses AI for simplistic automation , as we have discussed in Sections 4 . 1 and 4 . 2 , is generally not desired by UX practitioners and hard to integrate into existing workflows . For example , AI systems that aim to directly provide synthetic user information [ 7 , 221 , 259 ] can obstruct the empathy - building goal of UX and reinforce stereotypes by providing “statistically most likely” information about users [ 197 ] . Addressing this gap calls for more adoption of a human - centered AI perspective [ 209 ] , orienting future research to support the mindsets and goals of UX designers , instead of simply automating UX processes and generating relevant UI / UX artifacts . 5 . 2 . 2 From Individual UI Screens To Underlying User Experiences . Most of past research focused on individual UI screens , often over - looking the user flows and user experiences encapsulated across multiple interfaces . As we discovered in Section 4 . 5 , most existing datasets focused on static UI screens and components . AI models and their applications , built on top of these datasets , also mostly worked with static UIs ( see Sections 4 . 3 , 4 . 4 , 4 . 6 ) . Only a limited number of exceptions were found in our sample , focusing on topics such as user engagement [ 238 ] and creating UI animations [ 169 ] . This is a main factor that limits existing research’s practical ap - plication in the real - world UX industry . During the past years , there has been a notable shift of design’s focus , from user interfaces to holistic user experiences [ 172 ] . This shift has been further amplified by the wide adoption of design systems [ 32 ] , i . e . libraries of UI com - ponents and styles defined within companies to ensure consistent visual styles and branding across products ( e . g . Google Material Design , IBM Carbon , Microsoft Fluent ) . The high - fidelity design components in design systems are defined with great detail and precision . Thus , designers are constrained in changing the visual aspects of design , while freed to focus more on crafting friendly , seamless user experiences with pre - defined UI elements [ 64 ] . Conse - quently , this gap between academic explorations and industry prac - tices widens , limiting practical , real - world adoption of AI - enabled design support tools created in academic settings . However , great potentials for AI support still exist , if coupled with a deep understanding of existing UX practices and workflows . Recent research in UI task automation , from datasets like Android in the Wild [ 186 ] to models such as UIBert [ 11 ] , reflect a gradual shift from individual UI screens to the underlying user flows and experiences . While the users’ perspective of interacting with UIs can still be different from designers’ considerations , great opportu - nities for design support tools lie in designer - centric applications of these datasets and AI models . In addition , as UI animation and motion design increasingly become integral parts of modern user experience [ 71 ] , video - based AI models present promising avenues to enhance relevant design processes and tools [ 169 , 238 ] . 5 . 3 Analyze Task Delegability in UX Workflows Given the intricacies of UX processes and methodologies , it is neces - sary to consider UX practitioners’ goals when determining the dele - gability of tasks to AI . Delegability is a concept in human - centered AI that describes the extent to which AI should be involved in certain tasks [ 61 , 98 ] . Lubars and Tan proposed a framework of task delegability for AI , considering the motivation , difficulty , risk , and trust when deciding the involvement of AI [ 148 ] . UX processes are often fluid and non - linear yet tied to practical business and design goals ( e . g . higher conversion rate , increased user engage - ment ) [ 128 ] . Such processes blend both creative and analytical tasks , complicating AI task delegability analysis . AI Assistance for UX : A Literature Review DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK In the context of UX , our analysis has highlighted UX practition - ers’ main motivation for empathy - building with users . We encour - age future researchers to carefully analyze the different UX method - ologies , as well as the detailed steps within these methodologies , against the task delegability framework . The level of AI automation and the granularity of task breakdown are not binary choices , but balances to be kept when designing UX support tools [ 209 ] . For example , for qualitative analysis ( Section 4 . 2 ) , prior research sug - gests less AI delegability for the initial codebook creation than for the later codebook labeling process [ 154 ] . Systems like Cody [ 190 ] and PaTAT [ 67 ] serve as positive examples , where AI models au - tomate manual work but still leave room for reflections , learnings about users , and empathy - building . The appropriate amount of automation with AI in suitable tasks will improve the quality of UX outcomes , helping practitioners get the right design and get the design right . 5 . 4 Designer - Centric Datasets and Evaluation Metrics as Solid Technical Foundations Most of the current open source UI / UX datasets [ 40 , 122 , 167 ] and user task automation [ 186 ] are not directly associated with de - signers’ considerations and priorities when designing for user ex - periences . Even the datasets in our sample that are created for design purposes are often limited to individual UI screens and wid - gets [ 87 , 204 , 205 ] , ignoring practitioners’ emphasis on user experi - ence across screens . For example , UX designers’ key considerations in the design process can include : how to identify appropriate de - sign patterns for a given design scenario [ 212 ] , how to implement user flows and product features with existing UI components from a design system [ 32 ] , and how to fit UI components into existing screens to support additional product features [ 147 ] . This calls for future research contributions in two main areas : first , we need better evaluation metrics of UI / UX data that align more closely with current UX design goals , such as usability heuris - tics [ 184 ] ( also see Section 4 . 5 . 3 ) ; second , more datasets containing the results of such metrics are needed for large - scale benchmarking efforts . Metrics that effectively reflect the quality of UI / UX design are still not efficient , which nowadays is mostly achieved through subjective scores provided by potential user groups [ 9 , 218 ] . UX designers and researchers should work closely with AI researchers and engineers in defining these metrics , as well as contributing to such data collection and labeling efforts [ 255 ] . The lowering barrier of utilizing AI , through pre - trained large language models [ 228 ] and large vision - language models [ 126 ] , can also enable more UX teams to easily integrate AI into their toolk - its [ 16 , 58 , 241 ] . Interacting with these models , whether through fine - tuning or prompt - based mechanisms , reduces the reliance on domain - specific datasets . This is advantageous for UX professionals leaning towards qualitative methods or those lacking the means to collect large - scale datasets . However , employing such exten - sive models also raises ethical concerns over potentially leaking user data , emphasizing the need for more ethical research on the responsible deployment of these models [ 207 ] . 6 CONCLUSION This study underscores the expanding potential of integrating AI into the UX domain through a systematic literature review ( SLR ) from a Human - Centered AI ( HCAI ) perspective . By mapping re - search onto the Double Diamond framework , we identified key technical capabilities of AI in UX and highlighted overlooked as - pects like empathy - building and multi - screen user experiences . We highlight the need for a deep understanding of UX practices , mind - sets , and goals to design effective AI support , calling for careful AI delegability analysis for UX tasks based on existing HCAI frame - works [ 148 ] . Designer - centric datasets and evaluation metrics can greatly improve the technical foundations for direct real - world im - pact . This review summarizes the current landscape and lays out future opportunities for this promising interdisciplinary , transla - tional research domain . 7 LIMITATIONS Given the rapid advancements in our focus areas , keeping up - to - date with the latest developments is challenging , particularly for a systematic literature review . Our snowball sampling method en - abled us to gather a substantial set of relevant papers ( N = 369 ) , but this approach limits our ability to incorporate new studies as they are published . Notably , recent papers on UI task automation us - ing LLMs [ 130 , 248 ] appeared after our review period and were not included in our analysis . Despite this , we believe our findings remain relevant and insightful in light of these new publications . Nonetheless , we acknowledge this as a limitation of our study . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Abdallah M . H . Abbas , Khairil Imran Ghauth , and Choo - Yee Ting . 2022 . User Ex - perience Design Using Machine Learning : A Systematic Review . IEEE Access 10 ( 2022 ) , 51501 – 51514 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ACCESS . 2022 . 3173289 Conference Name : IEEE Access . [ 2 ] Eren Akça and Ömer Özgür Tanriöver . 2021 . A comprehensive appraisal of perceptual visual complexity analysis methods in GUI design . Displays 69 ( Sept . 2021 ) , 102031 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . displa . 2021 . 102031 [ 3 ] Khalid Alemerien and Kenneth Magel . 2014 . GUIEvaluator : A Metric - tool for Evaluating the Complexity of Graphical User Interfaces . . In SEKE . 13 – 18 . [ 4 ] Saleema Amershi , Dan Weld , Mihaela Vorvoreanu , Adam Fourney , Besmira Nushi , Penny Collisson , Jina Suh , Shamsi Iqbal , Paul N . Bennett , Kori Inkpen , Jaime Teevan , Ruth Kikin - Gil , and Eric Horvitz . 2019 . Guidelines for Human - AI Interaction . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300233 [ 5 ] Ali Naufal Ammarullah , Mutia Marcha Fatika , Muhammad Hafizhan , and Auzi Asfarian . 2021 . Design Concept : Get Comfortable Sleep Using Ambient Experi - ence with Smart Pillow . In Asian CHI Symposium 2021 ( Asian CHI Symposium 2021 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 174 – 176 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3429360 . 3468205 [ 6 ] Jisun An , Hoyoun Cho , Haewoon Kwak , Mohammed Ziyaad Hassen , and Bernard J . Jansen . 2016 . Towards Automatic Persona Generation Using So - cial Media . In 2016 IEEE 4th International Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud Workshops ( FiCloudW ) . IEEE , Vienna , Austria , 206 – 211 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / W - FiCloud . 2016 . 51 [ 7 ] J . An , H . Kwak , S . Jung , J . Salminen , M . Admad , and B . Jansen . 2018 . Imaginary People Representing Real Numbers : Generating Personas from Online Social Media Data . ACM Transactions on the Web 12 , 4 ( Nov . 2018 ) , 1 – 26 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3265986 [ 8 ] Salvatore Andolina , Khalil Klouche , Diogo Cabral , Tuukka Ruotsalo , and Giulio Jacucci . 2015 . InspirationWall : Supporting Idea Generation Through Automatic Information Exploration . In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition . ACM , Glasgow United Kingdom , 103 – 106 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2757226 . 2757252 [ 9 ] Gary Ang and Ee - Peng Lim . 2022 . Learning Semantically Rich Network - based Multi - modalMobileUserInterfaceEmbeddings . ACMTransactionsonInteractive Intelligent Systems 12 , 4 ( Dec . 2022 ) , 1 – 29 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3533856 DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK Anonymous Author et al . [ 10 ] Diego Martin Arroyo , Janis Postels , and Federico Tombari . 2021 . Variational Transformer Networks for Layout Generation . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2104 . 02416 arXiv : 2104 . 02416 [ cs ] . [ 11 ] Chongyang Bai , Xiaoxue Zang , Ying Xu , Srinivas Sunkara , Abhinav Rastogi , Jindong Chen , and Blaise Aguera y Arcas . 2021 . UIBert : Learning Generic Multimodal Representations for UI Understanding . http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2107 . 13731 arXiv : 2107 . 13731 [ cs ] . [ 12 ] AnnaBaj - RogowskaandMarcinSikorski . 2023 . Exploringtheusabilityanduser experience of social media apps through a text mining approach . Engineering Management in Production and Services 15 , 1 ( March 2023 ) , 86 – 105 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2478 / emj - 2023 - 0007 [ 13 ] Tony Beltramelli . 2017 . pix2code : Generating Code from a Graphical User Inter - face Screenshot . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 1705 . 07962 arXiv : 1705 . 07962 [ cs ] . [ 14 ] Eva Bittner and Omid Shoury . 2019 . Designing Automated Facilitation for DesignThinking : AChatbotforSupportingTeamsintheEmpathyMapMethod . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 24251 / HICSS . 2019 . 029 [ 15 ] Parzival Borlinghaus and Stephan Huber . 2021 . Comparing Apples and Oranges : Human and Computer Clustered Affinity Diagrams Under the Microscope . In 26th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces . ACM , College Station TX USA , 413 – 422 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3397481 . 3450674 [ 16 ] Paul Brie , Nicolas Burny , Arthur Sluÿters , and Jean Vanderdonckt . 2023 . Eval - uating a Large Language Model on Searching for GUI Layouts . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 7 , EICS ( June 2023 ) , 178 : 1 – 178 : 37 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3593230 [ 17 ] LukasBrückner , LuisA . Leiva , andAnttiOulasvirta . 2022 . LearningGUIComple - tions with User - defined Constraints . ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems 12 , 1 ( March 2022 ) , 6 : 1 – 6 : 40 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3490034 [ 18 ] Denis Bulygin . 2022 . How do Conversational Agents Transform Qualitative In - terviews ? Exploration and Support of Researchers’ Needs in Interviews at Scale . In 27th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces . ACM , Helsinki Finland , 124 – 128 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3490100 . 3516478 [ 19 ] Sara Bunian , Kai Li , Chaima Jemmali , Casper Harteveld , Yun Fu , and Magy Seif Seif El - Nasr . 2021 . VINS : Visual Search for Mobile User Interface Design . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Yokohama Japan , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445762 [ 20 ] Daniel Buschek , Charlotte Anlauff , and Florian Lachner . 2020 . Paper2Wire : a casestudyofuser - centreddevelopmentofmachinelearningtoolsforUXdesign - ers . In Proceedings of Mensch und Computer 2020 . ACM , Magdeburg Germany , 33 – 41 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3404983 . 3405506 [ 21 ] Zoya Bylinskii , Nam Wook Kim , Peter O’Donovan , Sami Alsheikh , Spandan Madan , Hanspeter Pfister , Fredo Durand , Bryan Russell , and Aaron Hertzmann . 2017 . Learning Visual Importance for Graphic Designs and Data Visualizations . In Proceedingsofthe30thAnnualACMSymposiumonUserInterfaceSoftwareand Technology . 57 – 69 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3126594 . 3126653 arXiv : 1708 . 02660 [ cs ] . [ 22 ] Chun - Fu ( Richard ) Chen , Marco Pistoia , Conglei Shi , Paolo Girolami , Joseph W . Ligman , and Yong Wang . 2017 . UI X - Ray : Interactive Mobile UI Testing Based on Computer Vision . In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces ( IUI ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 245 – 255 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025171 . 3025190 [ 23 ] Jieshan Chen , Chunyang Chen , Zhenchang Xing , Xin Xia , Liming Zhu , John Grundy , and Jinshui Wang . 2020 . Wireframe - based UI Design Search through ImageAutoencoder . ACMTransactionsonSoftwareEngineeringandMethodology 29 , 3 ( July 2020 ) , 1 – 31 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3391613 [ 24 ] Jieshan Chen , Chunyang Chen , Zhenchang Xing , Xiwei Xu , Liming Zhu , Guo - qiang Li , and Jinshui Wang . 2020 . Unblind Your Apps : Predicting Natural - Language Labels for Mobile GUI Components by Deep Learning . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3377811 . 3380327 arXiv : 2003 . 00380 [ cs ] . [ 25 ] Jieshan Chen , Amanda Swearngin , Jason Wu , Titus Barik , Jeffrey Nichols , and Xiaoyi Zhang . 2022 . Towards Complete Icon Labeling in Mobile Applications . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New Orleans LA USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3502073 [ 26 ] Nan - Chen Chen , Margaret Drouhard , Rafal Kocielnik , Jina Suh , and Cecilia R . Aragon . 2018 . Using Machine Learning to Support Qualitative Coding in Social Science : Shifting the Focus to Ambiguity . ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems 8 , 2 ( June 2018 ) , 1 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3185515 [ 27 ] Shi Chen , Nachiappan Valliappan , Shaolei Shen , Xinyu Ye , Kai Kohlhoff , and Junfeng He . 2023 . Learning From Unique Perspectives : User - Aware Saliency Modeling . 2701 – 2710 . https : / / openaccess . thecvf . com / content / CVPR2023 / html / Chen _ Learning _ From _ Unique _ Perspectives _ User - Aware _ Saliency _ Modeling _ CVPR _ 2023 _ paper . html [ 28 ] Chin - Yi Cheng , Forrest Huang , Gang Li , and Yang Li . 2023 . PLay : Parametrically Conditioned Layout Generation using Latent Diffusion . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2301 . 11529 arXiv : 2301 . 11529 [ cs ] . [ 29 ] Mingming Cheng . 2016 . Sharing economy : A review and agenda for future research . International Journal of Hospitality Management 57 ( Aug . 2016 ) , 60 – 70 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhm . 2016 . 06 . 003 [ 30 ] Shiwei Cheng , Jing Fan , and Yilin Hu . 2023 . Visual saliency model based on crowdsourcing eye tracking data and its application in visual design . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 27 , 3 ( June 2023 ) , 613 – 630 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 020 - 01463 - 7 [ 31 ] Michael Chromik , Florian Lachner , and Andreas Butz . 2020 . ML for UX ? - An Inventory and Predictions on the Use of Machine Learning Techniques for UX Research . In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Shaping Experiences , Shaping Society ( NordiCHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3419249 . 3420163 [ 32 ] Elizabeth F Churchill . 2019 . Scaling UX with design systems . Interactions 26 , 5 ( 2019 ) , 22 – 23 . [ 33 ] Eliane Collins , Arilo Neto , Auri Vincenzi , and José Maldonado . 2021 . Deep Reinforcement Learning based Android Application GUI Testing . In Brazilian Symposium on Software Engineering . ACM , Joinville Brazil , 186 – 194 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3474624 . 3474634 [ 34 ] Lucas Colusso , Cynthia L . Bennett , Gary Hsieh , and Sean A . Munson . 2017 . TranslationalResources : ReducingtheGapBetweenAcademicResearchandHCI Practice . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( Edinburgh , United Kingdom ) ( DIS ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 957 – 968 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3064663 . 3064667 [ 35 ] Lucas Colusso , Ridley Jones , Sean A Munson , and Gary Hsieh . 2019 . A trans - lational science model for HCI . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 13 . [ 36 ] Lucas Franco Colusso . 2020 . Understanding and Tooling Translational Research in Human - Computer Interaction . Ph . D . Dissertation . University of Washington . [ 37 ] British Design Council . [ n . d . ] . The Double Diamond - Design Council . https : / / www . designcouncil . org . uk / our - resources / the - double - diamond / [ 38 ] Adriano Luiz de Souza Lima , Osvaldo P . Heiderscheidt Roberge Martins , Chris - tiane Gresse von Wangenheim , Aldo von Wangenheim , Adriano Ferreti Bor - gatto , and Jean C . R . Hauck . 2022 . Automated assessment of visual aes - thetics of Android user interfaces with deep learning . In Proceedings of the 21st Brazilian Symposium on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( IHC ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3554364 . 3559113 [ 39 ] Christian Degott , Nataniel P . Borges Jr . , and Andreas Zeller . 2019 . Learning user interface element interactions . In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis . ACM , Beijing China , 296 – 306 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3293882 . 3330569 [ 40 ] Biplab Deka , Zifeng Huang , Chad Franzen , Joshua Hibschman , Daniel Afergan , Yang Li , Jeffrey Nichols , and Ranjitha Kumar . 2017 . Rico : A Mobile App Dataset for Building Data - Driven Design Applications . In Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology . ACM , Québec City QC Canada , 845 – 854 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3126594 . 3126651 [ 41 ] Biplab Deka , Zifeng Huang , Chad Franzen , Jeffrey Nichols , Yang Li , and Ran - jitha Kumar . 2017 . ZIPT : Zero - Integration Performance Testing of Mobile App Designs . In Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology . ACM , Québec City QC Canada , 727 – 736 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3126594 . 3126647 [ 42 ] NicolaDellandNehaKumar . 2016 . TheInsandOutsofHCIforDevelopment . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI’16 ) . AssociationforComputingMachinery , NewYork , NY , USA , 2220 – 2232 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858081 [ 43 ] GiuseppeDesolda , AndreaEsposito , RosaLanzilotti , andMariaF . Costabile . 2021 . Detecting Emotions Through Machine Learning for Automatic UX Evaluation . In Human - Computer Interaction – INTERACT 2021 ( Lecture Notes in Computer Science ) , Carmelo Ardito , Rosa Lanzilotti , Alessio Malizia , Helen Petrie , Antonio Piccinno , Giuseppe Desolda , and Kori Inkpen ( Eds . ) . Springer International Publishing , Cham , 270 – 279 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 85613 - 7 _ 19 [ 44 ] Aparna Dhinakaran . [ n . d . ] . Survey : Massive Retooling Around Large Language Models Underway . https : / / www . forbes . com / sites / aparnadhinakaran / 2023 / 04 / 26 / survey - massive - retooling - around - large - language - models - underway / Sec - tion : AI . [ 45 ] Giulia Di Fede , Davide Rocchesso , Steven P . Dow , and Salvatore Andolina . 2022 . The Idea Machine : LLM - based Expansion , Rewriting , Combination , and Suggestion of Ideas . In Creativity and Cognition . ACM , Venice Italy , 623 – 627 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3527927 . 3535197 [ 46 ] Tawanna R . Dillahunt , Xinyi Wang , Earnest Wheeler , Hao Fei Cheng , Brent Hecht , and Haiyi Zhu . 2017 . The Sharing Economy in Computing : A Systematic Literature Review . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 1 , CSCW ( Dec . 2017 ) , 1 – 26 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3134673 [ 47 ] Qi Dou , Xianjun Sam Zheng , Tongfang Sun , and Pheng - Ann Heng . 2019 . Webthetics : Quantifying webpage aesthetics with deep learning . Interna - tional Journal of Human - Computer Studies 124 ( April 2019 ) , 56 – 66 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2018 . 11 . 006 [ 48 ] Steven P . Dow , Alana Glassco , Jonathan Kass , Melissa Schwarz , Daniel L . Schwartz , and Scott R . Klemmer . 2011 . Parallel prototyping leads to better AI Assistance for UX : A Literature Review DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK design results , more divergence , and increased self - efficacy . ACM Transac - tions on Computer - Human Interaction 17 , 4 ( Dec . 2011 ) , 18 : 1 – 18 : 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1879831 . 1879836 [ 49 ] Margaret Drouhard , Nan - Chen Chen , Jina Suh , Rafal Kocielnik , Vanessa Pena - Araya , Keting Cen , Xiangyi Zheng , and Cecilia R . Aragon . 2017 . Aeonium : Visual analytics to support collaborative qualitative coding . In 2017 IEEE Pacific Visualization Symposium ( PacificVis ) . IEEE , Seoul , South Korea , 220 – 229 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / PACIFICVIS . 2017 . 8031598 [ 50 ] Peitong Duan , Casimir Wierzynski , and Lama Nachman . 2020 . Optimizing User InterfaceLayoutsviaGradientDescent . In Proceedingsofthe2020CHIConference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376589 [ 51 ] Jacek Dąbrowski , Emmanuel Letier , Anna Perini , and Angelo Susi . 2022 . Analysing app reviews for software engineering : a systematic literature re - view . Empirical Software Engineering 27 , 2 ( March 2022 ) , 43 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10664 - 021 - 10065 - 7 [ 52 ] Juha Eskonen . 2019 . Deep Reinforcement Learning in Automated User Interface Testing . ( May 2019 ) . https : / / aaltodoc . aalto . fi : 443 / handle / 123456789 / 37895 Accepted : 2019 - 05 - 12T15 : 06 : 20Z . [ 53 ] Juha Eskonen , Julen Kahles , and Joel Reijonen . 2020 . Automating GUI Testing with Image - Based Deep Reinforcement Learning . In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Autonomic Computing and Self - Organizing Systems ( ACSOS ) . 160 – 167 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ACSOS49614 . 2020 . 00038 [ 54 ] Mingming Fan , Yue Li , and Khai N . Truong . 2020 . Automatic Detection of Usability Problem Encounters in Think - aloud Sessions . ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems 10 , 2 ( June 2020 ) , 1 – 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3385732 [ 55 ] Mingming Fan , Xianyou Yang , TszTung Yu , Q Vera Liao , and Jian Zhao . 2022 . Human - ai collaboration for ux evaluation : Effects of explanation and synchro - nization . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 6 , CSCW1 ( 2022 ) , 1 – 32 . [ 56 ] Susan Farrell . 2017 . UX Research Cheat Sheet . https : / / www . nngroup . com / articles / ux - research - cheat - sheet / [ 57 ] Sidong Feng , Chunyang Chen , and Zhenchang Xing . 2022 . Gallery D . C . : Auto - created GUI Component Gallery for Design Search and Knowledge Discovery . http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2204 . 06700 arXiv : 2204 . 06700 [ cs ] . [ 58 ] Weixi Feng , Wanrong Zhu , Tsu - jui Fu , Varun Jampani , Arjun Akula , Xuehai He , Sugato Basu , Xin Eric Wang , and William Yang Wang . 2023 . LayoutGPT : Compositional Visual Planning and Generation with Large Language Models . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2305 . 15393 arXiv : 2305 . 15393 [ cs ] . [ 59 ] Zhen Feng , Jiaqi Fang , Bo Cai , and Yingtao Zhang . 2021 . GUIS2Code : A Com - puterVisionTooltoGenerateCodeAutomaticallyfromGraphicalUserInterfaceSketches . In Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Learning – ICANN 2021 ( Lecture Notes in Computer Science ) , Igor Farkaš , Paolo Masulli , Sebastian Otte , and Stefan Wermter ( Eds . ) . Springer International Publishing , Cham , 53 – 65 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 86365 - 4 _ 5 [ 60 ] Zhitao Feng , Mingliang Hou , Huiyang Liu , Mujie Liu , Achhardeep Kaur , Falih Gozi Febrinanto , and Wenhong Zhao . 2021 . SmartColor : Automatic Web Color Scheme Generation Based on Deep Learning . In 2021 12th Interna - tional Conference on Information and Communication Systems ( ICICS ) . 285 – 290 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICICS52457 . 2021 . 9464536 ISSN : 2573 - 3346 . [ 61 ] Jessica L . Feuston and Jed R . Brubaker . 2021 . Putting Tools in Their Place : The Role of Time and Perspective in Human - AI Collaboration for Qualitative Analysis . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 , CSCW2 ( Oct . 2021 ) , 1 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3479856 [ 62 ] Jackson Feijó Filho , Thiago Valle , and Wilson Prata . 2015 . Automated Usability Tests for Mobile Devices through Live Emotions Logging . In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services Adjunct ( MobileHCI ’15 ) . Association for Computing Ma - chinery , New York , NY , USA , 636 – 643 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2786567 . 2792902 [ 63 ] Camilo Fosco , Vincent Casser , Amish Kumar Bedi , Peter O’Donovan , Aaron Hertzmann , and Zoya Bylinskii . 2020 . Predicting Visual Importance Across Graphic Design Types . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 249 – 260 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3379337 . 3415825 [ 64 ] Brad Frost . 2016 . Atomic Design . http : / / atomicdesign . bradfrost . com / [ 65 ] Hiroki Furuta , Ofir Nachum , Kuang - Huei Lee , Yutaka Matsuo , Shixiang Shane Gu , and Izzeddin Gur . 2023 . Instruction - Finetuned Foundation Models for Multimodal Web Navigation . ( 2023 ) . [ 66 ] JieGao , YuchenGuo , GionnieveLim , TianqinZhang , ZhengZhang , TobyJia - Jun Li , and Simon Tangi Perrault . 2023 . CollabCoder : A GPT - Powered Workflow for Collaborative Qualitative Analysis . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2304 . 07366 arXiv : 2304 . 07366 [ cs ] . [ 67 ] Simret Araya Gebreegziabher . 2023 . PaTAT : Human - AI Collaborative Qualita - tive Coding with Explainable Interactive Rule Synthesis . ( 2023 ) . [ 68 ] Vanessa Georges , François Courtemanche , Sylvain Senecal , Thierry Baccino , Marc Fredette , and Pierre - Majorique Leger . 2016 . UX Heatmaps : Mapping User Experience on Visual Interfaces . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on HumanFactorsinComputingSystems . ACM , SanJoseCaliforniaUSA , 4850 – 4860 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858271 [ 69 ] Karni Gilon , Joel Chan , Felicia Y . Ng , Hila Liifshitz - Assaf , Aniket Kittur , and DafnaShahaf . 2018 . AnalogyMiningforSpecificDesignNeeds . In Proceedingsof the2018CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems . ACM , Montreal QC Canada , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173695 [ 70 ] Ariel Goldman , Cindy Espinosa , Shivani Patel , Francesca Cavuoti , Jade Chen , Alexandra Cheng , Sabrina Meng , Aditi Patil , Lydia B Chilton , and Sarah Morrison - Smith . 2022 . QuAD : Deep - Learning Assisted Qualitative Data Anal - ysis with Affinity Diagrams . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com - puting Systems Extended Abstracts . ACM , New Orleans LA USA , 1 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491101 . 3519863 [ 71 ] Google . [ n . d . ] . Motion – Material Design 3 . https : / / m3 . material . io / styles / motion / overview [ 72 ] Colin M . Gray . 2016 . " It’s More of a Mindset Than a Method " : UX Practitioners’ Conception of Design Methods . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 4044 – 4055 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858410 [ 73 ] Julián Grigera , Jordán Pascual Espada , and Gustavo Rossi . 2023 . AI in User Interface Design and Evaluation . IT Professional 25 , 2 ( March 2023 ) , 20 – 22 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MITP . 2023 . 3267139 Conference Name : IT Professional . [ 74 ] KamalGupta , JustinLazarow , AlessandroAchille , LarryDavis , VijayMahadevan , and Abhinav Shrivastava . 2021 . LayoutTransformer : Layout Generation and Completion with Self - attention . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2006 . 14615 arXiv : 2006 . 14615 [ cs ] . [ 75 ] Daniel Gustafsson . 2019 . Analysing the Double diamond design process through research & implementation . ( 2019 ) . https : / / aaltodoc . aalto . fi : 443 / handle / 123456789 / 39285 Accepted : 2019 - 07 - 14T17 : 02 : 11Z . [ 76 ] Emitza Guzman and Walid Maalej . 2014 . How Do Users Like This Feature ? A FineGrainedSentimentAnalysisofAppReviews . In 2014IEEE22ndInternational Requirements Engineering Conference ( RE ) . IEEE , Karlskrona , Sweden , 153 – 162 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / RE . 2014 . 6912257 [ 77 ] Xu Han , Michelle Zhou , Matthew J . Turner , and Tom Yeh . 2021 . Designing Effective Interview Chatbots : Automatic Chatbot Profiling and Design Sug - gestion Generation for Chatbot Debugging . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Yokohama Japan , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445569 [ 78 ] S M Hasan Mansur , Sabiha Salma , Damilola Awofisayo , and Kevin Moran . 2023 . AidUI : Toward Automated Recognition of Dark Patterns in User Interfaces . In 2023 IEEE / ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering ( ICSE ) . 1958 – 1970 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICSE48619 . 2023 . 00166 ISSN : 1558 - 1225 . [ 79 ] Zecheng He , Srinivas Sunkara , Xiaoxue Zang , Ying Xu , Lijuan Liu , Nevan Wichers , Gabriel Schubiner , Ruby Lee , Jindong Chen , and Blaise Agüera y Arcas . 2021 . ActionBert : Leveraging User Actions for Semantic Understanding of User Interfaces . http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2012 . 12350 arXiv : 2012 . 12350 [ cs ] . [ 80 ] Steffen Hedegaard and Jakob Grue Simonsen . 2013 . Extracting usability and user experience information from online user reviews . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Paris France , 2089 – 2098 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2481286 [ 81 ] Steffen Hedegaard and Jakob Grue Simonsen . 2014 . Mining until it hurts : automatic extraction of usability issues from online reviews compared to traditional usability evaluation . In Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Fun , Fast , Foundational ( NordiCHI ’14 ) . As - sociation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 157 – 166 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2639189 . 2639211 [ 82 ] LenaHegemann , NirajRameshDayama , AbhishekIyer , ErfanFarhadi , Ekaterina Marchenko , and Antti Oulasvirta . 2023 . CoColor : Interactive Exploration of Color Designs . In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces . ACM , Sydney NSW Australia , 106 – 127 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3581641 . 3584089 [ 83 ] Scarlett R . Herring , Chia - Chen Chang , Jesse Krantzler , and Brian P . Bailey . 2009 . Getting inspired ! understanding how and why examples are used in creative design practice . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’09 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 87 – 96 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518717 [ 84 ] Eric Horvitz . 1999 . Principles of mixed - initiative user interfaces . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’99 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 159 – 166 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 302979 . 303030 [ 85 ] Alexandra Hotti , Riccardo Sven Risuleo , Stefan Magureanu , Aref Moradi , and Jens Lagergren . 2022 . Graph Neural Networks for Nomination and Rep - resentation Learning of Web Elements . http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2111 . 02168 arXiv : 2111 . 02168 [ cs ] . [ 86 ] Wen - jun Hou , Xiang - yuan Yan , and Jia - xin Liu . 2020 . A Method for Quickly EstablishingPersonas . In ArtificialIntelligenceinHCI , HelmutDegenandLauren Reinerman - Jones ( Eds . ) . Vol . 12217 . Springer International Publishing , Cham , DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK Anonymous Author et al . 16 – 32 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 50334 - 5 _ 2 Series Title : Lecture Notes in Computer Science . [ 87 ] Forrest Huang , John F . Canny , and Jeffrey Nichols . 2019 . Swire : Sketch - based User Interface Retrieval . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300334 [ 88 ] Forrest Huang , Gang Li , Xin Zhou , John F . Canny , and Yang Li . 2021 . Creating UserInterfaceMock - upsfromHigh - LevelTextDescriptionswithDeep - Learning Models . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2110 . 07775 arXiv : 2110 . 07775 [ cs ] . [ 89 ] Seth Hunter and Pattie Maes . [ n . d . ] . WordPlay : A Table - Top Interface for Collaborative Brainstorming and Decision Making . ( [ n . d . ] ) . [ 90 ] Angel Hsing - Chi Hwang and Andrea Stevenson Won . 2021 . IdeaBot : Investigat - ing Social Facilitation in Human - Machine Team Creativity . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Yokohama Japan , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445270 [ 91 ] Taichi Iki and Akiko Aizawa . 2022 . Do BERTs Learn to Use Browser User Interface ? ExploringMulti - StepTaskswithUnifiedVision - and - LanguageBERTs . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2203 . 07828 arXiv : 2203 . 07828 [ cs ] . [ 92 ] Gasmi Ines , Soui Makram , Chouchane Mabrouka , and Abed Mourad . 2017 . Evaluation of mobile interfaces as an optimization problem . Procedia computer science 112 ( 2017 ) , 235 – 248 . [ 93 ] Naoto Inoue , Kotaro Kikuchi , Edgar Simo - Serra , Mayu Otani , and Kota Yam - aguchi . 2023 . LayoutDM : Discrete Diffusion Model for Controllable Layout Generation . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2303 . 08137 arXiv : 2303 . 08137 [ cs ] . [ 94 ] Francesco Isgrò , Silvia D . Ferraris , and Sara Colombo . 2022 . AI - Enabled Design Tools : Current Trends and Future Possibilities . In [ ] With Design : Reinvent - ing Design Modes , Gerhard Bruyns and Huaxin Wei ( Eds . ) . Springer Nature , Singapore , 2836 – 2847 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 981 - 19 - 4472 - 7 _ 183 [ 95 ] Jincheul Jang and Mun Yong Yi . 2017 . Modeling User Satisfaction from the Extraction of User Experience Elements in Online Product Reviews . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Fac - tors in Computing Systems . ACM , Denver Colorado USA , 1718 – 1725 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3027063 . 3053097 [ 96 ] Yeonju Jang and Eunil Park . 2022 . Satisfied or not : user experience of mobile augmented reality in using natural language processing techniques on review comments . Virtual Reality 26 , 3 ( Sept . 2022 ) , 839 – 848 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10055 - 021 - 00599 - y [ 97 ] BernardJ . Jansen , Soon - gyoJung , andJoniSalminen . 2019 . CreatingManageable Persona Sets from Large User Populations . In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Glasgow Scotland Uk , 1 – 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3313006 [ 98 ] JialunAaronJiang , KandreaWade , CaseyFiesler , andJedR . Brubaker . 2021 . Sup - porting Serendipity : Opportunities and Challenges for Human - AI Collaboration in Qualitative Analysis . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 , CSCW1 ( April 2021 ) , 1 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3449168 arXiv : 2102 . 03702 [ cs ] . [ 99 ] Zhaoyun Jiang , Jiaqi Guo , Shizhao Sun , Huayu Deng , Zhongkai Wu , Vuksan Mijovic , ZijiangJamesYang , Jian - GuangLou , andDongmeiZhang . 2023 . Layout - Former + + : Conditional Graphic Layout Generation via Constraint Serialization and Decoding Space Restriction . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2208 . 08037 arXiv : 2208 . 08037 [ cs ] . [ 100 ] Qianzhi Jing , Tingting Zhou , Yixin Tsang , Liuqing Chen , Lingyun Sun , Yankun Zhen , and Yichun Du . 2023 . Layout Generation for Various Scenarios in Mobile Shopping Applications . In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’23 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581446 [ 101 ] An Jisun , Kwak Haewoon , and Jansen Bernard J . 2017 . Automatic Generation of Personas Using YouTube Social Media Data . Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ) ( 2017 ) . [ 102 ] Tilke Judd , Krista Ehinger , Frédo Durand , and Antonio Torralba . 2009 . Learning to predict where humans look . In 2009 IEEE 12th International Conference on Computer Vision . 2106 – 2113 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICCV . 2009 . 5459462 ISSN : 2380 - 7504 . [ 103 ] Summer Da Hyang Jung , Chandrayee Basu , Donghyeon Park , Julie Fukunaga , Maycon Cesar Santos , and Sohyeong Kim . 2022 . Two - handed Design : Develop - ment of Food Personality Framework Using Mixed Method Needfinding . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts . ACM , New Orleans LA USA , 1 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491101 . 3503554 [ 104 ] Thisaranie Kaluarachchi and Manjusri Wickramasinghe . 2023 . A systematic lit - eraturereviewonautomaticwebsitegeneration . JournalofComputerLanguages 75 ( June 2023 ) , 101202 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cola . 2023 . 101202 [ 105 ] Pegah Karimi , Jeba Rezwana , Safat Siddiqui , Mary Lou Maher , and Nasrin Dehbozorgi . 2020 . Creative sketching partner : an analysis of human - AI co - creativity . In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces ( IUI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 221 – 230 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3377325 . 3377522 [ 106 ] Miki Kaukanen . 2020 . Evaluating the impacts of machine learning to the future of A / B testing . ( 2020 ) . https : / / lutpub . lut . fi / handle / 10024 / 161780 Accepted : 2020 - 10 - 30T09 : 10 : 47Z . [ 107 ] Eugene Kharitonov , Alexey Drutsa , and Pavel Serdyukov . 2017 . Learning Sen - sitive Combinations of A / B Test Metrics . In Proceedings of the Tenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining ( WSDM ’17 ) . As - sociation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 651 – 659 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3018661 . 3018708 [ 108 ] Kotaro Kikuchi , Edgar Simo - Serra , Mayu Otani , and Kota Yamaguchi . 2021 . Constrained Graphic Layout Generation via Latent Optimization . In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Multimedia . 88 – 96 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3474085 . 3475497 arXiv : 2108 . 00871 [ cs ] . [ 109 ] TaeSooKim , MinsukChang , YoonjooLee , andJuhoKim . 2023 . Cells , Generators , and Lenses : Design Framework for Object - Oriented Interaction with Large Language Models . ( 2023 ) . [ 110 ] Tae Soo Kim , DaEun Choi , Yoonseo Choi , and Juho Kim . 2022 . Stylette : Styling the Web with Natural Language . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3501931 [ 111 ] Yui Kita and Jun Rekimoto . 2018 . V8 Storming : How Far Should Two Ideas Be ? . In Proceedings of the 9th Augmented Human International Conference . ACM , Seoul Republic of Korea , 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3174910 . 3174937 [ 112 ] Tiffany Knearem , Mohammed Khwaja , Yuling Gao , Frank Bentley , and Clara E Kliman - Silver . 2023 . Exploring the future of design tooling : The role of artificial intelligence in tools for user experience professionals . In Extended Abstracts of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’23 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544549 . 3573874 [ 113 ] Janin Koch , Andrés Lucero , Lena Hegemann , and Antti Oulasvirta . 2019 . May AI ? Design Ideation with Cooperative Contextual Bandits . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300863 [ 114 ] Wenyuan Kong , Zhaoyun Jiang , Shizhao Sun , Zhuoning Guo , Weiwei Cui , Ting Liu , Jianguang Lou , and Dongmei Zhang . 2023 . Aesthetics + + : Refining Graphic Designs by Exploring Design Principles and Human Preference . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 29 , 6 ( June 2023 ) , 3093 – 3104 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2022 . 3151617 Conference Name : IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics . [ 115 ] Kitti Koonsanit , Daiki Hiruma , Vibol Yem , and Nobuyuki Nishiuchi . 2022 . Using Random Ordering in User Experience Testing to Predict Final User Satisfaction . Informatics 9 , 4 ( Dec . 2022 ) , 85 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / informatics9040085 Number : 4 Publisher : Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute . [ 116 ] KittiKoonsanitandNobuyukiNishiuchi . 2021 . PredictingFinalUserSatisfaction Using Momentary UX Data and Machine Learning Techniques . Journal of Theo - retical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research 16 , 7 ( Dec . 2021 ) , 3136 – 3156 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / jtaer16070171 Number : 7 Publisher : Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute . [ 117 ] Markus Krause , Tom Garncarz , JiaoJiao Song , Elizabeth M . Gerber , Brian P . Bailey , and Steven P . Dow . 2017 . Critique Style Guide : Improving Crowdsourced Design Feedback with a Natural Language Model . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 4627 – 4639 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025883 [ 118 ] Srinivas S . S . Kruthiventi , Kumar Ayush , and R . Venkatesh Babu . 2017 . DeepFix : A Fully Convolutional Neural Network for Predicting Human Eye Fixations . IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 26 , 9 ( Sept . 2017 ) , 4446 – 4456 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TIP . 2017 . 2710620 Conference Name : IEEE Transactions on Image Processing . [ 119 ] Rahul Kumar , Shankar Natarajan , Mohamed Akram Ulla Shariff , and ParameswaranathVaduckupurathMani . 2023 . DynamicUserInterfaceComposi - tion . SNComputerScience 4 , 3 ( March2023 ) , 259 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s42979 - 023 - 01672 - w [ 120 ] Ranjitha Kumar , Arvind Satyanarayan , Cesar Torres , Maxine Lim , Salman Ah - mad , Scott R . Klemmer , and Jerry O . Talton . 2013 . Webzeitgeist : design mining theweb . In ProceedingsoftheSIGCHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 3083 – 3092 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466420 [ 121 ] James A . Landay . 1996 . SILK : sketching interfaces like krazy . In Conference companion on Human factors in computing systems common ground - CHI ’96 . ACM Press , Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada , 398 – 399 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 257089 . 257396 [ 122 ] Luis A . Leiva , Asutosh Hota , and Antti Oulasvirta . 2020 . Enrico : A Dataset for Topic Modeling of Mobile UI Designs . In 22nd International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services . ACM , Oldenburg Germany , 1 – 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3406324 . 3410710 [ 123 ] Luis A . Leiva , Asutosh Hota , and Antti Oulasvirta . 2022 . Describing UI Screen - shots in Natural Language . ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Tech - nology ( Sept . 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3564702 Just Accepted . AI Assistance for UX : A Literature Review DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK [ 124 ] Luis A . Leiva , Morteza Shiripour , and Antti Oulasvirta . 2022 . Modeling how different user groups perceive webpage aesthetics . Universal Access in the Information Society ( Aug . 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10209 - 022 - 00910 - x [ 125 ] Gang Li , Gilles Baechler , Manuel Tragut , and Yang Li . 2022 . Learning to Denoise Raw Mobile UI Layouts for Improving Datasets at Scale . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New Orleans LA USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3502042 [ 126 ] Gang Li and Yang Li . 2023 . Spotlight : Mobile UI Understanding using Vision - Language Models with a Focus . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2209 . 14927 arXiv : 2209 . 14927 [ cs ] . [ 127 ] Jian Li , Li Su , Bo Wu , Junbiao Pang , Chunfeng Wang , Zhe Wu , and Qingming Huang . 2016 . Webpage saliency prediction with multi - features fusion . In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing ( ICIP ) . 674 – 678 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICIP . 2016 . 7532442 ISSN : 2381 - 8549 . [ 128 ] JiayiZhouLi , JunxiuTang , TanTang , HaotianLi , WeiweiCui , YingcauiWu , etal . 2024 . Understanding Nonlinear Collaboration between Human and AI Agents : A Co - design Framework for Creative Design . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2401 . 07312 ( 2024 ) . [ 129 ] Jianan Li , Jimei Yang , Aaron Hertzmann , Jianming Zhang , and Tingfa Xu . 2021 . LayoutGAN : Synthesizing Graphic Layouts With Vector - Wireframe Adversarial Networks . IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 43 , 7 ( July 2021 ) , 2388 – 2399 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TPAMI . 2019 . 2963663 Confer - ence Name : IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence . [ 130 ] Tao Li , Gang Li , Zhiwei Deng , Bryan Wang , and Yang Li . 2023 . A Zero - Shot LanguageAgentforComputerControlwithStructuredReflection . arXivpreprint arXiv : 2310 . 08740 ( 2023 ) . [ 131 ] Toby Jia - Jun Li , Amos Azaria , and Brad A . Myers . 2017 . SUGILITE : Creating Multimodal Smartphone Automation by Demonstration . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Denver Colorado USA , 6038 – 6049 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025483 [ 132 ] Toby Jia - Jun Li , Tom Mitchell , and Brad Myers . 2020 . Interactive Task Learning from GUI - Grounded Natural Language Instructions and Demonstrations . In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics : System Demonstrations . Association for Computational Linguistics , Online , 215 – 223 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 18653 / v1 / 2020 . acl - demos . 25 [ 133 ] Toby Jia - Jun Li , Lindsay Popowski , Tom Mitchell , and Brad A Myers . 2021 . Screen2Vec : Semantic Embedding of GUI Screens and GUI Components . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Yokohama Japan , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445049 [ 134 ] Toby Jia - Jun Li , Marissa Radensky , Justin Jia , Kirielle Singarajah , Tom M . Mitchell , and Brad A . Myers . 2019 . PUMICE : A Multi - Modal Agent that Learns Concepts and Conditionals from Natural Language and Demonstrations . In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology . ACM , New Orleans LA USA , 577 – 589 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3332165 . 3347899 [ 135 ] Yang Li , Gang Li , Luheng He , Jingjie Zheng , Hong Li , and Zhiwei Guan . 2020 . Widget Captioning : Generating Natural Language Description for Mobile User Interface Elements . http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2010 . 04295 arXiv : 2010 . 04295 [ cs ] . [ 136 ] Yang Li , Gang Li , Xin Zhou , Mostafa Dehghani , and Alexey Gritsenko . 2021 . VUT : Versatile UI Transformer for Multi - Modal Multi - Task User Interface Mod - eling . http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2112 . 05692 arXiv : 2112 . 05692 [ cs ] . [ 137 ] YixuanLi , PingmeiXu , DmitryLagun , andVidhyaNavalpakkam . 2017 . Towards Measuring and Inferring User Interest from Gaze . In Proceedings of the 26th InternationalConferenceonWorldWideWebCompanion ( WWW’17Companion ) . International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee , Republic and Canton of Geneva , CHE , 525 – 533 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3041021 . 3054182 [ 138 ] Zhoufan Li . 2021 . Qualitative Coding in the Computational Era : A Hybrid Approach to Improve Reliability and Reduce Effort for Coding Ethnographic Interviews - Google Search . https : / / www . google . com / search ? q = Qualitative + Coding + in + the + Computational + Era % 3A + A + Hybrid + Approach + to + Improve + Reliability + and + Reduce + Effort + for + Coding + Ethnographic + Interviews & sourceid = chrome & ie = UTF - 8 [ 139 ] Z . Li , Z . G . Tian , J . W . Wang , and W . M . Wang . 2020 . Extraction of affective responses from customer reviews : an opinion mining and machine learning approach . International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing 33 , 7 ( July 2020 ) , 670 – 685 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 0951192X . 2019 . 1571240 [ 140 ] Jing Liao , Preben Hansen , and Chunlei Chai . 2020 . A framework of artificial intelligence augmented design support . Human – Computer Interaction 35 , 5 - 6 ( Nov . 2020 ) , 511 – 544 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370024 . 2020 . 1733576 Publisher : Taylor & Francis _ eprint : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370024 . 2020 . 1733576 . [ 141 ] Q . Vera Liao , Hariharan Subramonyam , Jennifer Wang , and Jennifer Wort - man Vaughan . 2023 . Designerly Understanding : Information Needs for Model Transparency to Support Design Ideation for AI - Powered User Experience . http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2302 . 10395 arXiv : 2302 . 10395 [ cs ] . [ 142 ] Adriano Luiz de Souza Lima and Christiane Gresse von Wangenheim . 2022 . Assessing the Visual Esthetics of User Interfaces : A Ten - Year Systematic Map - ping . International Journal of Human – Computer Interaction 38 , 2 ( Jan . 2022 ) , 144 – 164 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447318 . 2021 . 1926118 Publisher : Taylor & Francis _ eprint : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447318 . 2021 . 1926118 . [ 143 ] Dawei Liu , Ying Cao , Rynson W . H . Lau , and Antoni B . Chan . 2019 . ButtonTips : Design Web Buttons with Suggestions . In 2019 IEEE International Conference on MultimediaandExpo ( ICME ) . 466 – 471 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICME . 2019 . 00087 ISSN : 1945 - 788X . [ 144 ] Evan Zheran Liu , Kelvin Guu , Panupong Pasupat , Tianlin Shi , and Percy Liang . 2018 . Reinforcement Learning on Web Interfaces Using Workflow - Guided Exploration . http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 1802 . 08802 arXiv : 1802 . 08802 [ cs ] . [ 145 ] David Llàcer Giner . 2020 . A Deep Learning Based Approach to Automated App Testing . Master’s thesis . Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya . https : / / upcommons . upc . edu / handle / 2117 / 335561 Accepted : 2021 - 01 - 19T14 : 22 : 53Z . [ 146 ] Gustavo Lopez and Luis A . Guerrero . 2017 . Awareness Supporting Technologies used in Collaborative Systems : A Systematic Literature Review . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( CSCW ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 808 – 820 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998181 . 2998281 [ 147 ] Yuwen Lu , Chengzhi Zhang , Iris Zhang , and Toby Jia - Jun Li . 2022 . Bridging the Gap Between UX Practitioners’ Work Practices and AI - Enabled Design Support Tools . In Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491101 . 3519809 [ 148 ] Brian Lubars and Chenhao Tan . 2019 . Ask not what AI can do , but what AI should do : Towards a framework of task delegability . In Ad - vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , Vol . 32 . Curran Asso - ciates , Inc . https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper _ files / paper / 2019 / hash / d67d8ab4f4c10bf22aa353e27879133c - Abstract . html [ 149 ] Daniel Peña López . [ n . d . ] . Triggering ideas with Generative AI . ( [ n . d . ] ) . [ 150 ] Sebastian Löbbers , Mathieu Barthet , and György Fazekas . 2023 . AI as mediator between composers , sound designers , and creative media producers . http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2303 . 01457 arXiv : 2303 . 01457 [ cs ] . [ 151 ] Walid Maalej , Zijad Kurtanović , Hadeer Nabil , and Christoph Stanik . 2016 . On theautomaticclassificationofappreviews . RequirementsEngineering 21 , 3 ( Sept . 2016 ) , 311 – 331 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00766 - 016 - 0251 - 9 [ 152 ] Subtain Malik , Muhammad Tariq Saeed , Marya Jabeen Zia , Shahzad Rasool , Liaquat Ali Khan , and Mian Ilyas Ahmed . 2023 . Reimagining Application User Interface ( UI ) Design using Deep Learning Methods : Challenges and Opportu - nities . http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2303 . 13055 arXiv : 2303 . 13055 [ cs ] . [ 153 ] Dipu Manandhar , Hailin Jin , and John Collomosse . 2021 . Magic Layouts : Struc - turalPriorforComponentDetectioninUserInterfaceDesigns . In 2021IEEE / CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ( CVPR ) . IEEE , Nashville , TN , USA , 15804 – 15813 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / CVPR46437 . 2021 . 01555 [ 154 ] Megh Marathe and Kentaro Toyama . 2018 . Semi - Automated Coding for Qualita - tive Research : A User - Centered Inquiry and Initial Prototypes . In Proceedings of the2018CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems . ACM , Montreal QC Canada , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173922 [ 155 ] Richard L . Marsh , Joshua D . Landau , and Jason L . Hicks . 1996 . How examples may ( and may not ) constrain creativity . Memory & Cognition 24 , 5 ( Sept . 1996 ) , 669 – 680 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3758 / BF03201091 [ 156 ] NikolasMartelaroandWendyJu . 2017 . TheNeedfindingMachine . In Proceedings of the Companion of the 2017 ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction ( HRI ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 355 – 356 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3029798 . 3034811 [ 157 ] Lucas Memmert and Navid Tavanapour . 2023 . Towards Human - AI - Collaboration in Brainstorming : Empirical Insights into the Perception of Work - ing with a Generative AI . ( 2023 ) . [ 158 ] Marília S . Mendes , Elizabeth Furtado , Vasco Furtado , and Miguel F . De Castro . 2015 . Investigating Usability and User Experience from the User Postings in Social Systems . In Social Computing and Social Media , Gabriele Meiselwitz ( Ed . ) . Vol . 9182 . Springer International Publishing , Cham , 216 – 228 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 20367 - 6 _ 22 SeriesTitle : LectureNotesinComputer Science . [ 159 ] Marília Soares Mendes and Elizabeth Sucupira Furtado . 2017 . UUX - Posts : a tool for extracting and classifying postings related to the use of a system . In Proceedingsofthe8thLatinAmericanConferenceonHuman - ComputerInteraction . ACM , Antigua Guatemala Guatemala , 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3151470 . 3151471 [ 160 ] SepidehMesbah , InesArous , JieYang , andAlessandroBozzon . 2023 . HybridEval : A Human - AI Collaborative Approach for Evaluating Design Ideas at Scale . In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023 . ACM , Austin TX USA , 3837 – 3848 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3543507 . 3583496 [ 161 ] Aliaksei Miniukovich and Antonella De Angeli . 2015 . Computation of Interface Aesthetics . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1163 – 1172 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702575 [ 162 ] D . Moher , A . Liberati , J . Tetzlaff , D . G Altman , and for the PRISMA Group . 2009 . Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta - analyses : the PRISMA statement . BMJ 339 , jul21 1 ( July 2009 ) , b2535 – b2535 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1136 / bmj . b2535 DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK Anonymous Author et al . [ 163 ] Soumik Mohian and Christoph Csallner . 2022 . PSDoodle : fast app screen search via partial screen doodle . In Proceedings of the 9th IEEE / ACM Inter - national Conference on Mobile Software Engineering and Systems ( MOBILE - Soft ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 89 – 99 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3524613 . 3527816 [ 164 ] Soumik Mohian and Christoph Csallner . 2023 . Searching Mobile App Screens via Text + Doodle . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2305 . 06165 arXiv : 2305 . 06165 [ cs ] . [ 165 ] Steven Moore , Q . Vera Liao , and Hariharan Subramonyam . 2023 . fAIlureNotes : Supporting Designers in Understanding the Limits of AI Models for Computer Vision Tasks . In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Hamburg Germany , 1 – 19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581242 [ 166 ] Kate Moran . 2018 . Quantitative User - Research Methodologies : An Overview . https : / / www . nngroup . com / articles / quantitative - user - research - methods / [ 167 ] Kevin Moran , Carlos Bernal - Cárdenas , Michael Curcio , Richard Bonett , and Denys Poshyvanyk . 2020 . Machine Learning - Based Prototyping of Graphical User Interfaces for Mobile Apps . IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 46 , 2 ( Feb . 2020 ) , 196 – 221 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TSE . 2018 . 2844788 Conference Name : IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering . [ 168 ] Mohammad Amin Mozaffari , Xinyuan Zhang , Jinghui Cheng , and Jin L . C . Guo . 2022 . GANSpiration : Balancing Targeted and Serendipitous Inspiration in User Interface Design with Style - Based Generative Adversarial Network . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517511 arXiv : 2203 . 03827 [ cs ] . [ 169 ] Siva Natarajan and Christoph Csallner . 2018 . P2A : a tool for converting pix - els to animated mobile application user interfaces . In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Mobile Software Engineering and Systems ( MOBILE - Soft ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 224 – 235 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3197231 . 3197249 [ 170 ] Jakob Nielsen . 2017 . A 100 - Year View of User Experience ( by Jakob Nielsen ) . https : / / www . nngroup . com / articles / 100 - years - ux / [ 171 ] Alison Nightingale . 2009 . A guide to systematic literature reviews . Surgery ( Oxford ) 27 , 9 ( Sept . 2009 ) , 381 – 384 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . mpsur . 2009 . 07 . 005 [ 172 ] DonNormanandJakobNielsen . 1998 . TheDefinitionofUserExperience . Nielsen Norman Group ( Aug 1998 ) . https : / / www . nngroup . com / articles / definition - user - experience / [ 173 ] Donald A Norman . 2010 . The research - Practice Gap : The need for translational developers . interactions 17 , 4 ( 2010 ) , 9 – 12 . [ 174 ] JakubŠtěpánNovák , JanMasner , PetrBenda , PavelŠimek , andVojtěchMerunka . 2023 . Eye Tracking , Usability , and User Experience : A Systematic Review . International Journal of Human – Computer Interaction 0 , 0 ( June 2023 ) , 1 – 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447318 . 2023 . 2221600 Publisher : Taylor & Francis _ eprint : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447318 . 2023 . 2221600 . [ 175 ] Peter O’Donovan , Aseem Agarwala , and Aaron Hertzmann . 2011 . Color com - patibility from large datasets . ACM Transactions on Graphics 30 , 4 ( July 2011 ) , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2010324 . 1964958 [ 176 ] Peter O’Donovan , J¯anis L¯ıbeks , Aseem Agarwala , and Aaron Hertzmann . 2014 . Exploratory font selection using crowdsourced attributes . ACM Transactions on Graphics 33 , 4 ( July 2014 ) , 92 : 1 – 92 : 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2601097 . 2601110 [ 177 ] Judith S Olson and Wendy A Kellogg . 2014 . Ways of Knowing in HCI . Vol . 2 . Springer . [ 178 ] Asil Oztekin , Dursun Delen , Ali Turkyilmaz , and Selim Zaim . 2013 . A machine learning - based usability evaluation method for eLearning systems . Decision Support Systems 56 ( Dec . 2013 ) , 63 – 73 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . dss . 2013 . 05 . 003 [ 179 ] Xufang Pang , Ying Cao , Rynson W . H . Lau , and Antoni B . Chan . 2016 . Directing user attention via visual flow on web designs . ACM Transactions on Graphics 35 , 6 ( Dec . 2016 ) , 240 : 1 – 240 : 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2980179 . 2982422 [ 180 ] Jessica Pater , Amanda Coupe , Rachel Pfafman , Chanda Phelan , Tammy Toscos , and Maia Jacobs . 2021 . Standardizing Reporting of Participant Compensation in HCI : A Systematic Literature Review and Recommendations for the Field . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Yokohama Japan , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445734 [ 181 ] Chao Peng , Zhao Zhang , Zhengwei Lv , and Ping Yang . 2022 . MUBot : Learning to Test Large - Scale Commercial Android Apps like a Human . In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution ( ICSME ) . 543 – 552 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICSME55016 . 2022 . 00074 ISSN : 2576 - 3148 . [ 182 ] Kara Pernice . 2019 . Affinity Diagramming : Collaborate , Sort and Prioritize UX Ideas ( Video ) . https : / / www . nngroup . com / videos / affinity - diagramming / [ 183 ] CurtisLeePetersen , RyanHalter , DavidKotz , LorieLoeb , SummerCook , Dawna Pidgeon , BrockC . Christensen , andJohnA . Batsis . 2020 . UsingNaturalLanguage Processing and Sentiment Analysis to Augment Traditional User - Centered Design : Development and Usability Study . JMIR mHealth and uHealth 8 , 8 ( Aug . 2020 ) , e16862 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / 16862 Company : JMIR mHealth and uHealth Distributor : JMIR mHealth and uHealth Institution : JMIR mHealth and uHealth Label : JMIR mHealth and uHealth Publisher : JMIR Publications Inc . , Toronto , Canada . [ 184 ] Pedro Ponce , David Balderas , Therese Peffer , and Arturo Molina . 2018 . Deep learning for automatic usability evaluations based on images : A case study of the usability heuristics of thermostats . Energy and Buildings 163 ( March 2018 ) , 111 – 120 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . enbuild . 2017 . 12 . 043 [ 185 ] Soliha Rahman , Vinoth Pandian Sermuga Pandian , and Matthias Jarke . 2021 . RUITE : Refining UI Layout Aesthetics Using Transformer Encoder . In 26th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces - Companion ( IUI ’21 Com - panion ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 81 – 83 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3397482 . 3450716 [ 186 ] Christopher Rawles , Alice Li , Daniel Rodriguez , Oriana Riva , and Timothy Lillicrap . 2023 . Android in the Wild : A Large - Scale Dataset for Android Device Control . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2307 . 10088 arXiv : 2307 . 10088 [ cs ] . [ 187 ] Katharina Reinecke , Tom Yeh , Luke Miratrix , Rahmatri Mardiko , Yuechen Zhao , Jenny Liu , and Krzysztof Z Gajos . 2013 . Predicting users’ first impressions of website aesthetics with a quantification of perceived visual complexity and col - orfulness . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 2049 – 2058 . [ 188 ] Andreas Riegler and Clemens Holzmann . 2015 . UI - CAT : Calculating user in - terface complexity metrics for mobile applications . In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia . 390 – 394 . [ 189 ] Tim Rietz and Alexander Maedche . 2020 . Towards the Design of an Interactive Machine Learning System for Qualitative Coding . In International Conference on Information Systems , ICIS 2020 - Making Digital Inclusive : Blending the Local and the Global , India , December 13 - 16 , 2020 . Ed . : Joey George . 1830 . https : / / publikationen . bibliothek . kit . edu / 1000124563 [ 190 ] Tim Rietz and Alexander Maedche . 2021 . Cody : An AI - Based System to Semi - Automate Coding for Qualitative Research . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Yokohama Japan , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445591 [ 191 ] Robin Rombach , Andreas Blattmann , Dominik Lorenz , Patrick Esser , and Bjorn Ommer . 2022 . High - Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models . In 2022 IEEE / CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ( CVPR ) . IEEE , NewOrleans , LA , USA , 10674 – 10685 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / CVPR52688 . 2022 . 01042 [ 192 ] MariaRosala . 2020 . TheDiscoveryPhaseinUXProjects . https : / / www . nngroup . com / articles / discovery - phase / [ 193 ] Maria Rosala . 2022 . How to Analyze Qualitative Data from UX Research : The - matic Analysis . https : / / www . nngroup . com / articles / thematic - analysis / [ 194 ] Ruth Rosenholtz , Amal Dorai , and Rosalind Freeman . 2011 . Do predictions of visual perception aid design ? ACM Transactions on Applied Perception 8 , 2 ( Feb . 2011 ) , 12 : 1 – 12 : 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1870076 . 1870080 [ 195 ] Jenny Ruiz and Monique Snoeck . 2022 . Feedback Generation for Automatic User Interface Design Evaluation . In Software Technologies ( Communications in Computer and Information Science ) , Hans - Georg Fill , Marten van Sinderen , and Leszek A . Maciaszek ( Eds . ) . Springer International Publishing , Cham , 67 – 93 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 031 - 11513 - 4 _ 4 [ 196 ] Stuart J Russell and Peter Norvig . 2010 . Artificial intelligence a modern approach . London . [ 197 ] Niloufar Salehi . 2023 . I tried out SyntheticUsers , so you don’t have to . https : / / niloufars . substack . com / p / i - tried - out - syntheticusers - so - you [ 198 ] Joni Salminen , Kathleen Guan , Soon - Gyo Jung , Shammur A . Chowdhury , and BernardJ . Jansen . 2020 . ALiteratureReviewofQuantitativePersonaCreation . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Honolulu HI USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376502 [ 199 ] Joni Salminen , Kathleen Guan , Soon - Gyo Jung , and Bernard J . Jansen . 2021 . A Survey of 15 Years of Data - Driven Persona Development . International Journal of Human – Computer Interaction 37 , 18 ( Nov . 2021 ) , 1685 – 1708 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447318 . 2021 . 1908670 [ 200 ] AlbertoSameleandNicolasBurny . 2023 . BootstrappedEvaluationwithOctoDol - lop : A Mobile Application for Evaluating Mobile GUI Aesthetics in Context . In Companion Proceedings of the 2023 ACM SIGCHI Symposium on Engineering InteractiveComputingSystems ( EICS’23Companion ) . AssociationforComputing Machinery , NewYork , NY , USA , 73 – 75 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3596454 . 3597186 [ 201 ] Eldon Schoop , Xin Zhou , Gang Li , Zhourong Chen , Bjoern Hartmann , and Yang Li . 2022 . Predicting and Explaining Mobile UI Tappability with Vision Model - ing and Saliency Analysis . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New Orleans LA USA , 1 – 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517497 [ 202 ] Vinoth Pandian Sermuga Pandian , Abdullah Shams , Sarah Suleri , and Prof . Dr . Matthias Jarke . 2022 . LoFi Sketch : A Large Scale Dataset of Smartphone Low Fidelity Sketches . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts . ACM , New Orleans LA USA , 1 – 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491101 . 3519624 [ 203 ] Vinoth Pandian Sermuga Pandian , Sarah Suleri , Christian Beecks , and Matthias Jarke . 2021 . MetaMorph : AI Assistance to Transform Lo - Fi Sketches to Higher Fidelities . In Proceedings of the 32nd Australian Conference on Human - Computer Interaction ( OzCHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 403 – 412 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3441000 . 3441030 AI Assistance for UX : A Literature Review DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK [ 204 ] Vinoth Pandian Sermuga Pandian , Sarah Suleri , and Matthias Jarke . 2021 . SynZ : Enhanced Synthetic Dataset for Training UI Element Detectors . In 26th Interna - tional Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces . ACM , College Station TX USA , 67 – 69 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3397482 . 3450725 [ 205 ] Vinoth Pandian Sermuga Pandian , Sarah Suleri , and Prof . Dr . Matthias Jarke . 2021 . UISketch : A Large - Scale Dataset of UI Element Sketches . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Yokohama Japan , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445784 [ 206 ] Chengyao Shen , Xun Huang , and Qi Zhao . 2015 . Predicting Eye Fixations on Webpage With an Ensemble of Early Features and High - Level Representations from Deep Network . IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 17 , 11 ( Nov . 2015 ) , 2084 – 2093 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TMM . 2015 . 2483370 Conference Name : IEEE Transactions on Multimedia . [ 207 ] Hong Shen , Tianshi Li , Toby Jia - Jun Li , Joon Sung Park , and Diyi Yang . 2023 . Shaping the Emerging Norms of Using Large Language Models in Social Com - puting Research . http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2307 . 04280 arXiv : 2307 . 04280 [ cs ] . [ 208 ] JoonGiShin , JaninKoch , AndrésLucero , PeterDalsgaard , andWendyE . Mackay . 2023 . Integrating AI in Human - Human Collaborative Ideation . In Extended Abstracts of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Hamburg Germany , 1 – 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544549 . 3573802 [ 209 ] Ben Shneiderman . 2022 . Human - Centered AI . Oxford University Press . Google - Books - ID : mSRXEAAAQBAJ . [ 210 ] Andy P . Siddaway , Alex M . Wood , and Larry V . Hedges . 2019 . How to Do a Sys - tematic Review : A Best Practice Guide for Conducting and Reporting Narrative Reviews , Meta - Analyses , and Meta - Syntheses . Annual Review of Psychology 70 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 747 – 770 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - psych - 010418 - 102803 _ eprint : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - psych - 010418 - 102803 . [ 211 ] Dominik Siemon . 2023 . Let the computer evaluate your idea : evaluation appre - hension in human - computer collaboration . Behaviour & Information Technology 42 , 5 ( April 2023 ) , 459 – 477 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 0144929X . 2021 . 2023638 [ 212 ] Viridiana Silva - Rodríguez , Sandra Edith Nava - Muñoz , Luis A . Castro , Fran - cisco E . Martínez - Pérez , Héctor G . Pérez - González , and Francisco Torres - Reyes . 2019 . Machine Learning Methods for Inferring Interaction Design Patterns from Textual Requirements . Proceedings 31 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 26 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / proceedings2019031026 Number : 1 Publisher : Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute . [ 213 ] Andrey Sobolevsky , Guillaume - Alexandre Bilodeau , Jinghui Cheng , and Jin L . C . Guo . 2023 . GUILGET : GUI Layout GEneration with Transformer . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2304 . 09012 arXiv : 2304 . 09012 [ cs ] . [ 214 ] EvropiStefanidi , MaritBentvelzen , PawełW . Woźniak , ThomasKosch , MikołajP . Woźniak , Thomas Mildner , Stefan Schneegass , Heiko Müller , and Jasmin Niess . 2023 . Literature Reviews in HCI : A Review of Reviews . In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Hamburg Germany , 1 – 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581332 [ 215 ] ÅsneStige , EfpraxiaDZamani , PatrickMikalef , andYuzhenZhu . 2023 . Artificial intelligence ( AI ) for user experience ( UX ) design : a systematic literature review and future research agenda . Information Technology & People ( 2023 ) . [ 216 ] Peter Stone , Rodney Brooks , Erik Brynjolfsson , Ryan Calo , Oren Etzioni , Greg Hager , Julia Hirschberg , Shivaram Kalyanakrishnan , Ece Kamar , Sarit Kraus , et al . 2022 . Artificial intelligence and life in 2030 : the one hundred year study on artificial intelligence . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2211 . 06318 ( 2022 ) . [ 217 ] Yuhui Su , Zhe Liu , Chunyang Chen , Junjie Wang , and Qing Wang . 2021 . OwlEyes - online : a fully automated platform for detecting and localizing UI display issues . In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Joint Meeting on European Soft - ware Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering ( ESEC / FSE 2021 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1500 – 1504 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3468264 . 3473109 [ 218 ] Amanda Swearngin , Mira Dontcheva , Wilmot Li , Joel Brandt , Morgan Dixon , and Amy J . Ko . 2018 . Rewire : Interface Design Assistance from Examples . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174078 Place : New York , NY , USA . [ 219 ] AmandaSwearnginandYangLi . 2019 . ModelingMobileInterfaceTappabilityUs - ingCrowdsourcingandDeepLearning . In Proceedingsofthe2019CHIConference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300305 [ 220 ] Amanda Swearngin , Chenglong Wang , Alannah Oleson , James Fogarty , and Amy J . Ko . 2020 . Scout : Rapid Exploration of Interface Layout Alternatives through High - Level Design Constraints . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Confer - ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376593 arXiv : 2001 . 05424 [ cs ] . [ 221 ] Hao Tan , Shenglan Peng , Jia - Xin Liu , Chun - Peng Zhu , and Fan Zhou . 2022 . Generating Personas for Products on Social Media : A Mixed Method to Analyze Online Users . International Journal of Human – Computer Interaction 38 , 13 ( Aug . 2022 ) , 1255 – 1266 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447318 . 2021 . 1990520 Publisher : Taylor & Francis _ eprint : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447318 . 2021 . 1990520 . [ 222 ] Navid Tavanapour , Daphne Theodorakopoulos , and Eva A . C . Bittner . 2020 . A Conversational Agent as Facilitator : Guiding Groups Through Collaboration Processes . In Learning and Collaboration Technologies . Human and Technology Ecosystems , Panayiotis Zaphiris and Andri Ioannou ( Eds . ) . Vol . 12206 . Springer International Publishing , Cham , 108 – 129 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 50506 - 6 _ 9 Series Title : Lecture Notes in Computer Science . [ 223 ] Kashyap Todi , Luis A . Leiva , Daniel Buschek , Pin Tian , and Antti Oulasvirta . 2021 . ConversationswithGUIs . In DesigningInteractiveSystemsConference2021 . ACM , Virtual Event USA , 1447 – 1457 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461778 . 3462124 [ 224 ] Alexandre N . Tuch , Rune Trusell , and Kasper Hornbæk . 2013 . Analyzing users’ narratives to understand experience with interactive products . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Paris France , 2079 – 2088 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2481285 [ 225 ] Mathias Peter Verheijden and Mathias Funk . 2023 . Collaborative Diffusion : Boosting Designerly Co - Creation with Generative AI . In Extended Abstracts of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Hamburg Germany , 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544549 . 3585680 [ 226 ] Aaron Richard Vontell . 2019 . Bility : automated accessibility testing for mo - bile applications . Thesis . Massachusetts Institute of Technology . https : / / dspace . mit . edu / handle / 1721 . 1 / 121685 Accepted : 2019 - 07 - 15T20 : 33 : 58Z Journal Abbreviation : Automated accessibility testing for mobile applications . [ 227 ] Yuki Wakatsuki and Yusuke Yamamoto . 2021 . Clustering to Support Users Finding Unexpected Perspectives in Brainstorming . In 2021 10th International Congress on Advanced Applied Informatics ( IIAI - AAI ) . 494 – 497 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / IIAI - AAI53430 . 2021 . 00086 ISSN : 2770 - 8470 . [ 228 ] Bryan Wang , Gang Li , and Yang Li . 2023 . Enabling Conversational Interaction with Mobile UI using Large Language Models . http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2209 . 08655 arXiv : 2209 . 08655 [ cs ] . [ 229 ] Bryan Wang , Gang Li , Xin Zhou , Zhourong Chen , Tovi Grossman , and Yang Li . 2021 . Screen2Words : Automatic Mobile UI Summarization with Multimodal Learning . http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2108 . 03353 arXiv : 2108 . 03353 [ cs ] . [ 230 ] Guolong Wang , Zheng Qin , Junchi Yan , and Liu Jiang . 2020 . Learning to Select Elements for Graphic Design . In Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference on Multimedia Retrieval ( ICMR ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 91 – 99 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3372278 . 3390678 [ 231 ] Yawen Wang , Junjie Wang , Hongyu Zhang , Xuran Ming , Lin Shi , and Qing Wang . 2022 . Where is Your App Frustrating Users ? . In Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering . 2427 – 2439 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3510003 . 3510189 arXiv : 2204 . 09310 [ cs ] . [ 232 ] Jialiang Wei , Anne - Lise Courbis , Thomas Lambolais , Binbin Xu , Pierre Louis Bernard , and Gérard Dray . 2023 . Boosting GUI Prototyping with Diffusion Models . http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2306 . 06233 arXiv : 2306 . 06233 [ cs ] . [ 233 ] Hao Wen , Yuanchun Li , Guohong Liu , Shanhui Zhao , Tao Yu , Toby Jia - Jun Li , Shiqi Jiang , Yunhao Liu , Yaqin Zhang , and Yunxin Liu . 2023 . Empowering LLM to use Smartphone for Intelligent Task Automation . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2308 . 15272 arXiv : 2308 . 15272 [ cs ] . [ 234 ] Jacob O . Wobbrock and Julie A . Kientz . 2016 . Research contributions in human - computer interaction . Interactions 23 , 3 ( April 2016 ) , 38 – 44 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2907069 [ 235 ] Claes Wohlin . 2014 . Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature studies andareplicationinsoftwareengineering . In Proceedingsofthe18thInternational Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering . ACM , London England United Kingdom , 1 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2601248 . 2601268 [ 236 ] Jason Wu , Amanda Swearngin , Xiaoyi Zhang , Jeffrey Nichols , and Jeffrey P . Bigham . 2023 . Screen Correspondence : Mapping Interchangeable Elements between UIs . http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2301 . 08372 arXiv : 2301 . 08372 [ cs ] . [ 237 ] Jason Wu , Siyan Wang , Siman Shen , Yi - Hao Peng , Jeffrey Nichols , and Jeffrey P . Bigham . 2023 . WebUI : A Dataset for Enhancing Visual UI Understanding with Web Semantics . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2301 . 13280 arXiv : 2301 . 13280 [ cs ] . [ 238 ] ZimingWu , YulunJiang , YidingLiu , andXiaojuanMa . 2020 . PredictingandDiag - nosingUserEngagementwithMobileUIAnimationviaaData - DrivenApproach . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys - tems . ACM , Honolulu HI USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376324 [ 239 ] Ziming Wu , Taewook Kim , Quan Li , and Xiaojuan Ma . 2019 . Understanding and Modeling User - Perceived Brand Personality from Mobile Application UIs . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300443 [ 240 ] Yu Xiao and Maria Watson . 2019 . Guidance on Conducting a Systematic Liter - ature Review . Journal of Planning Education and Research 39 , 1 ( March 2019 ) , 93 – 112 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0739456X17723971 Publisher : SAGE Publica - tions Inc . [ 241 ] Ziang Xiao , Xingdi Yuan , Q . Vera Liao , Rania Abdelghani , and Pierre - Yves Oudeyer . 2023 . Supporting Qualitative Analysis with Large Language Models : Combining Codebook with GPT - 3 for Deductive Coding . In 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces . ACM , Sydney NSW Australia , 75 – 78 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3581754 . 3584136 [ 242 ] Ziang Xiao , Michelle X . Zhou , Wenxi Chen , Huahai Yang , and Changyan Chi . 2020 . If I Hear You Correctly : Building and Evaluating Interview Chatbots with DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK Anonymous Author et al . Active Listening Skills . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Honolulu HI USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376131 [ 243 ] Ziang Xiao , Michelle X . Zhou , Q . Vera Liao , Gloria Mark , Changyan Chi , Wenxi Chen , and Huahai Yang . 2020 . Tell Me About Yourself : Using an AI - Powered Chatbot to Conduct Conversational Surveys with Open - ended Questions . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 27 , 3 ( June 2020 ) , 1 – 37 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3381804 [ 244 ] Baixi Xing , Huahao Si , Junbin Chen , Minchao Ye , and Lei Shi . 2021 . Computa - tionalmodelforpredictinguseraestheticpreferenceforGUIusingDCNNs . CCF Transactions on Pervasive Computing and Interaction 3 , 2 ( June 2021 ) , 147 – 169 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s42486 - 021 - 00064 - 4 [ 245 ] Pingmei Xu , Krista A . Ehinger , Yinda Zhang , Adam Finkelstein , Sanjeev R . Kulkarni , and Jianxiong Xiao . 2015 . TurkerGaze : Crowdsourcing Saliency with Webcam based Eye Tracking . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 1504 . 06755 arXiv : 1504 . 06755 [ cs ] . [ 246 ] Pingmei Xu , Yusuke Sugano , and Andreas Bulling . 2016 . Spatio - Temporal Modeling and Prediction of Visual Attention in Graphical User Interfaces . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI’16 ) . AssociationforComputingMachinery , NewYork , NY , USA , 3299 – 3310 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858479 [ 247 ] Wei Xu . 2019 . Toward human - centered AI : a perspective from human - computer interaction . Interactions 26 , 4 ( June 2019 ) , 42 – 46 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3328485 [ 248 ] An Yan , Zhengyuan Yang , Wanrong Zhu , Kevin Lin , Linjie Li , Jianfeng Wang , Jianwei Yang , Yiwu Zhong , Julian McAuley , Jianfeng Gao , et al . 2023 . Gpt - 4v in wonderland : Large multimodal models for zero - shot smartphone gui navigation . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2311 . 07562 ( 2023 ) . [ 249 ] Bai Yang , Ying Liu , Yan Liang , and Min Tang . 2019 . Exploiting user experience from online customer reviews for product design . International Journal of Information Management 46 ( June 2019 ) , 173 – 186 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinfomgt . 2018 . 12 . 006 [ 250 ] Bo Yang , Zhenchang Xing , Xin Xia , Chunyang Chen , Deheng Ye , and Shanping Li . 2021 . Don’t Do That ! Hunting Down Visual Design Smells in Complex UIs Against Design Guidelines . In 2021 IEEE / ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering ( ICSE ) . 761 – 772 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICSE43902 . 2021 . 00075 ISSN : 1558 - 1225 . [ 251 ] Bo Yang , Zhenchang Xing , Xin Xia , Chunyang Chen , Deheng Ye , and Shan - ping Li . 2021 . UIS - Hunter : Detecting UI Design Smells in Android Apps . In 2021 IEEE / ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering : Com - panion Proceedings ( ICSE - Companion ) . 89 – 92 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICSE - Companion52605 . 2021 . 00043 ISSN : 2574 - 1926 . [ 252 ] Qian Yang , Aaron Steinfeld , Carolyn Rosé , and John Zimmerman . 2020 . Re - examiningWhether , Why , andHowHuman - AIInteractionIsUniquelyDifficult to Design . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com - puting Systems . ACM , Honolulu HI USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376301 [ 253 ] Qian Yang , Aaron Steinfeld , and John Zimmerman . 2019 . Unremarkable AI : Fitting Intelligent Decision Support into Critical , Clinical Decision - Making Pro - cesses . In Proceedingsofthe2019CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300468 [ 254 ] ShunyuYao , HowardChen , JohnYang , andKarthikNarasimhan . 2023 . WebShop : Towards Scalable Real - World Web Interaction with Grounded Language Agents . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2207 . 01206 arXiv : 2207 . 01206 [ cs ] . [ 255 ] NurYildirim , AlexKass , TeresaTung , ConnorUpton , DonnachaCostello , Robert Giusti , Sinem Lacin , Sara Lovic , James M O’Neill , Rudi O’Reilly Meehan , Eoin Ó Loideáin , Azzurra Pini , Medb Corcoran , Jeremiah Hayes , Diarmuid J Caha - lane , Gaurav Shivhare , Luigi Castoro , Giovanni Caruso , Changhoon Oh , James McCann , JodiForlizzi , andJohnZimmerman . 2022 . HowExperiencedDesigners of Enterprise Applications Engage AI as a Design Material . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New Orleans LA USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517491 [ 256 ] Robert J . Youmans and Thomaz Arciszewski . 2014 . Design fixation : Classifica - tions and modern methods of prevention . AI EDAM 28 , 2 ( May 2014 ) , 129 – 137 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0890060414000043 Publisher : Cambridge University Press . [ 257 ] Xiaoxue Zang , Ying Xu , and Jindong Chen . 2021 . Multimodal Icon Annotation For Mobile Applications . In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Mobile Human - Computer Interaction . ACM , Toulouse & Virtual France , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3447526 . 3472064 [ 258 ] Junyi Zhang , Jiaqi Guo , Shizhao Sun , Jian - Guang Lou , and Dongmei Zhang . 2023 . LayoutDiffusion : Improving Graphic Layout Generation by Discrete Diffusion Probabilistic Models . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2303 . 11589 arXiv : 2303 . 11589 [ cs ] . [ 259 ] Xiang Zhang , Hans - Frederick Brown , and Anil Shankar . 2016 . Data - driven Personas : ConstructingArchetypalUserswithClickstreamsandUserTelemetry . In Proceedingsofthe2016CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems . ACM , San Jose California USA , 5350 – 5359 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858523 [ 260 ] Xiaoyi Zhang , Lilian De Greef , Amanda Swearngin , Samuel White , Kyle Murray , Lisa Yu , Qi Shan , Jeffrey Nichols , Jason Wu , Chris Fleizach , Aaron Everitt , and Jeffrey P Bigham . 2021 . Screen Recognition : Creating Accessibility Metadata for Mobile Applications from Pixels . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Yokohama Japan , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445186 [ 261 ] Xiyuan Zhang , Xinyang Mao , Yang Yin , Chunlei Chai , and Ting Zhang . 2022 . Melting Your Models : An Integrated AI - based Creativity Support Tool for In - spiration Evolution . In 2022 15th International Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Design ( ISCID ) . 97 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ISCID56505 . 2022 . 00029 ISSN : 2473 - 3547 . [ 262 ] Dehai Zhao , Zhenchang Xing , Chunyang Chen , Xiwei Xu , Liming Zhu , Guo - qiang Li , and Jinshui Wang . 2020 . Seenomaly : vision - based linting of GUI ani - mation effects against design - don’t guidelines . In Proceedings of the ACM / IEEE 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering ( ICSE ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1286 – 1297 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3377811 . 3380411 [ 263 ] Nanxuan Zhao , Ying Cao , and Rynson W . H . Lau . 2018 . Modeling Fonts in Context : Font Prediction on Web Designs . Computer Graphics Forum 37 , 7 ( Oct . 2018 ) , 385 – 395 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / cgf . 13576 [ 264 ] Nanxuan Zhao , Nam Wook Kim , Laura Mariah Herman , Hanspeter Pfister , Ryn - son W . H . Lau , Jose Echevarria , and Zoya Bylinskii . 2020 . ICONATE : Automatic Compound Icon Generation and Ideation . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Confer - ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Honolulu HI USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376618 [ 265 ] Tianming Zhao , Chunyang Chen , Yuanning Liu , and Xiaodong Zhu . 2021 . GUIGAN : Learning to Generate GUI Designs Using Generative Adversarial Networks . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2101 . 09978 arXiv : 2101 . 09978 [ cs ] . [ 266 ] QihaoZhuandJianxiLuo . 2023 . TowardArtificialEmpathyforHuman - Centered Design : A Framework . http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2303 . 10583 arXiv : 2303 . 10583 [ cs ] . AI Assistance for UX : A Literature Review DIS ’24 , July 1 – 5 , 2024 , Copenhagen , DK Query ACM DL Google Scholar ( " UX " or " user experience " ) and ( " AI " or " Artificial Intelligence " or " ML " or " Machine Learning " ) 292 , 808 2 , 580 ( " UI " or " user interface " or " UX " or " user experience " or " HCI " ) and ( " AI " or " Artificial Intelligence " or " ML " or " Machine Learn - ing " ) 67 , 164 5 , 510 , 000 ( " UI design " or " UX design " or " interaction design " ) and ( " AI " or " ML " ) 3 , 222 16 , 900 Table 2 : Search Queries and Results A APPENDIX A . 1 Rationale to Use Snowball Sampling As discussed in section 3 , we used snowball sampling for literature selection instead of keyword - search in popular search engines or databases . We initially attempted to use keyword search and tested out a few advanced queries in ACM Digital Library and Google Scholar . A few advanced search queries about " UX " and " AI " , or " machine learning " in these systems all resulted in hundreds of thousands of papers , similar to [ 214 ] . Most of the search results were not relevant to our scope and it is hardly practical for us to manually filter through them all . Moreover , these online search engines / databases often disagree with each other in their results significantly , posing uncertainty regarding their reliability . As a result , we conducted snowball sampling instead . Here we attach a few queries we attempted to use and the count of their search results as of August 2023 when we write this paper .