79 Participants’ view on personal gains and PD process Julia A . Garde University of Twente Enschede , The Netherlands j . a . garde @ utwente . nl Mascha C . van der Voort University of Twente Enschede , The Netherlands m . c . vandervoort @ utwente . nl ABSTRACT While it is commonly claimed that users of participatory design projects reap benefits from their participation , little research exists that shows if this truly occurs in the real world . In this paper , we introduce the method and results of assessing the participants ' perception of their personal benefits and the degree of participation in a large project in the healthcare field . Our research shows that a well - executed participatory design project can produce most of the benefits hypothesized in the literature but also highlights the challenges of assessing individual benefits and the PD process . Author Keywords participant gains , healthcare , PD outcomes , PD process ACM Classification Keywords participation , healthcare , methods INTRODUCTION The democratic and mutually beneficial nature of the design process plays a central role in PD . However , little research exists that analyses whether these benefits in fact materialize in the real world . Most discussions on this subject are solely based on observations by the researchers and not on those of the actual participants . We agree with Bannon that “ the perspectives of other parties involved in the project are not adequately , if at all represented” ( 2009 ) . In this paper , we discuss the assessment procedure and the results of assessing the participants’ perception of user benefits and participatory process in a PD project in healthcare . Our research is similar to Bossen , Dindler and Iversen who interviewed participants after two PD projects about their experiences and the project ' s long - term impact ( 2010 , 2012 ) . The difference is that our evaluations took place not only after but also during the project , involved structured questionnaires and interviews , and touched not only on the benefits for the participants but also on the PD process and the design results . In this short paper the assessment of benefits and degree of participation by participants themselves will be discussed , not the design results . Assessing participation and participants ' benefits According to Robertson and Wagner ( 2013 ) , a PD project approach should include an evaluation of the design results and the design process by participants . More specifically , participants should assess to what extent the design process offers opportunities for genuine participation . While the design process of PD projects received considerable attention in the literature , it is almost always analysed by the researchers and not by the participants . Part of an ideal PD process is , that the active involvement of users or stakeholders in the design process not only leads to improved design results but also personal benefits of the participants , such as developing new insights in the way they work , in new technologies and tools , and even in the way designers work . However , to confirm that participants actually benefit in PD projects , they must be queried directly in a structured and meaningful way . PROJECT SWING Medisch Spectrum Twente hospital ( MST ) , located in the city Enschede in the Netherlands will migrate to a new building with a completely different layout in 2016 . The migration entails five important changes that will affect the work practices of the nursing staff ( Garde and van der Voort , 2012 , p 25 ) , of which the most important is , that “in the new building there will only be single - person rooms , while in the current building there are one - , two - , and four - person rooms . ” The consequence of the changes is that nurses , ward assistants , nutrition assistants , and ward secretaries have to review their shift organization , their material and appliances use , their ways of communication with other staff and with patients , and how they keep track of patient information . Project SWING ( Dutch acronym for an expression that translates to “jointly designing work processes for the new building” ) was initiated together with one of the authors ( from now on referred to as the researcher ) to explore the possibilities and restrictions of these changes and design a new nursing work practice for the general wards . SWING was not created to push any predefined concepts , i . e . , no elements were predetermined for the working processes when it started , apart from the architectural plans of the new hospital building and some requirements regarding the catering concept . The goal was to explore and design the future nursing work practice on the wards including walking routes and the application of new technologies for patient monitoring , communication , administration and “home” automation , focusing on the effects of the single person rooms . The fact that MST would provide only single - person rooms created concerns amongst the staff about social isolation of patients , reduced overview , and walking distances . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . PDC ' 14 Companion , October 06 - 10 2014 , Windhoek , Namibia Copyright 2014 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3214 - 9 / 14 / 10 … $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2662155 . 2662194 80 SWING consisted of two project managers , 45 participants , and representatives from facilitating services ( i . e . , the domain experts ) . In line with the recommendation of Bødker , Kensing , & Simonsen ( 2004 ) , a steering committee was created to provide information for the project , manage the detailed project aims and direction , lobby for the project , and organize the workshops . The participants , the domain experts , and the majority of the steering committee members participated in the workshops . The project managers ( the researcher and an employee of the hospital ) were part of the steering committee . Design workshops and Design Game SWING consisted of a preliminary investigation phase , four series of workshops with project participants ( visioning workshops , two consecutive design workshops , and an evaluation workshop ) and a wrap - up phase . The two design workshops were the most important part of the project and employed a design game ( see Brandt , Messeter and Binder , 2008 for applicable design game definition ) specifically developed for the project , called the HEAD game ( Garde and van der Voort , 2013 ) . Figure 1 : Design workshop , participants play the “ward rounds” scenario . The purpose of the HEAD game was to provide a holistic and efficient design approach that allowed different stakeholders to participate and communicate , independent of their interests , intellectual aptitude , and skills , and to imagine and create future nursing work processes . The developed game achieved this with the help of ( 1 ) a miniature environment including playing figures ( inspired by Urnes , Weltzien , Zanussi , Engbakk , & Rafn , 2002 , see Figure 1 ) , and ( 2 ) a task - flow ( inspired by Tudor , Muller , Dayton , & Root , 1993 ) . The miniature environment is a physical representation of the people and places involved in the work environments / scenarios and is used for role - playing purposes . The general steps of the role - playing scenario are made visible in the task - flow using paper cards to keep track of the chronology and timing of tasks . For more details about the HEAD game and SWING , we refer the reader to Garde and van der Voort ( 2013 ) . METHODOLOGY This research used for the most part a qualitative research approach . One - hour semi - structured interviews with project participants , members of the project steering group , and domain experts were conducted during and after SWING ( 6 and 14 participants ) . Five anonymous questionnaires were used to collect data before , in between , and after the project workshops ( 42 , 29 , 20 , and 23 responses ) . The qualitative approach was supplemented with quantitative methods . The questionnaires contained questions to be answered on a five - item Likert scale and open questions . As part of this , changes in participants’ perception of their own creativity and self - efficacy were measured by questionnaire items from psychological inventories ( Gough , 1996 ; Hogan & Hogan , 1995 ) . For the analysis , interview responses were coded based on categories that emerged from the notes of the interviews . The categories were reduced to a small set that described the spectrum of answers sufficiently . The responses to open questions in the questionnaires were analysed in the same way as the interview responses . The repetitive questions that had to be answered on a Likert scale in the questionnaires were analysed in a quantitative longitudinal study . Participants were asked to use a code name for the questionnaires to maintain anonymity but enable us to link all five questionnaires to the same individual and provide data for a within - subject analysis . Unfortunately , most project members forgot their code name / number . As a result , an unpaired analysis had to be applied . The nonparametric Kruskall - Wallis ANOVA method was used to find significant trends between questionnaire groups , as the groups’ data did not meet the criteria of normality . HOW PARTICIPATORY AND BENEFICIAL TO THE PARTICIPANTS WAS SWING ? SWING was intended to be a genuine PD project that not only delivers useful design results , but also generates benefits for the individual participants . Impact , Influence , and Agency We used a construct proposed by Segalowitz ( 2012 ) to describe the extent of participation in a PD project , consisting of three aspects with two dimensions each : ( 1 ) the impact of the project , ( 2 ) the participants ' influence , and ( 3 ) agency in the project . For the impact it was evaluated how much of the information generated was expected to be implemented in practice and how valuable this information was . Ideally , the design results should be valuable in the sense that they create an improved “use” situation ( solve a problem ) or make good use of a design opportunity due to a good use of design tools , and fruitful dialogue between designers , domain experts and participants . Because the MST building project was still in progress at the time of the interviews , the participants could only be asked about their expectations regarding the use and value of the information . Each participant rated the quality of the results based on correctness , diversity , and innovativeness , and was asked to elaborate what kind of follow - up the results would need in their opinion . More interviewees were positive about the quality of the project results than believed that the generated information will eventually be used . The explanations suggest that interviewees tied their assessments to the people who they expected would handle the follow - up and implementation , rather than the quality of the project results itself . With respect to the follow - up of the project , the prevailing opinion was that the project created a good basis to build upon and identified the teams to do the follow - up . The project ' s results were generally seen as positive , but not highly innovative by the interviewees . For assessing the influence of SWING , participants were asked whether the scope of the decisions that could be made during the project was broad enough and what they thought about the quantity of the project results . As 81 participatory design is concerned with people making decisions about their own fate , the scope of the design decisions that can be made ( the items and areas that can be decided about ) should be broad . This raises the question of how much participation is enough . Unfortunately , the majority of the respondents had difficulties understanding the question about the scope properly , even after rephrasing and explaining the question . Those who responded thought that the scope and boundaries were sufficiently broad , perhaps even too broad . There were not many responses with respect to the number of the decisions made in SWING . Four expressed satisfaction , while one was negative . The agency of the project was evaluated with respect to solidarity and willingness amongst the participants . A PD project can only be successful if it enjoys the support of the participants . The solidarity in the group and the willingness to contribute in the design process can depend on many aspects ( e . g . , individual personalities , project communication , organizational conflicts that date back prior to the project , attractiveness of the meetings and design tools ) . The majority of interviewees thought that the participants were willing to contribute , and that there was good solidarity among the group . Solidarity was attributed to the workshop atmosphere by half the interviewees . The willingness to participate was perceived lower by steering committee members than by participants , which may be explained by the fact that the committee had to deal with the cancellations of participants . Individual gains Since the personal benefit participants can gain from a project is one of the defining characteristics of PD , the participants were also asked during the final evaluation interview to what extent they personally benefited from their participation , to what extent the participants got a better insight into their own work , and how important personal benefits were to them . The questionnaire was used to explore whether the perception of participants of their self - efficacy and creativity changed over the course of the project . Results showed that SWING did not have a significant effect on the perception of the participants ' own self - efficacy and creativity . However , most participants agreed that they could make a relevant contribution to the project . The participants’ confidence in their own contribution also did not significantly change during the project . All interviewed participants listed concrete personal benefits of SWING . All but one interviewee said that they got a better insight into their own work . Personal benefits and growth of knowledge of one’s own work were also perceived relevant for a successful project by the majority of interviewees . The reasons given by the interviewees were all instrumental or political , not ideological , involving the success of SWING and future projects of MST . One participant indicated that knowledge of one’s own work is a condition to be able to improve processes , while another argued it to be a way to prevent complaining about processes developed by others . Furthermore , the questionnaire showed clearly that SWING was perceived as a positive experience . Interviewees stated that they liked to be involved and engage in imagining their future work processes with the provided design game . Results Overall , SWING was perceived as sufficiently participatory with respect to the scope and number of decisions , the solidarity among participants , and the willingness to contribute . Interviewees also thought that they benefited from the project personally . However , they had concerns about whether project results would be used and followed - up , which might put the management at risk of demotivating participants for future projects . DISCUSSION Temporary versus permanent effects While SWING was a long project with a duration of two full years , the measured benefits could still be considered temporary since the actual migration to the new building was not completed at the time of the assessment . Ideally , the participants would be interviewed again when the actual work process is in use in the new building . Unfortunately , there are no plans for this at this point in time . Though assessing permanent effects can be complicated , e . g . , by the fact that the staff finally working with the developed work process may not be the same who helped design it , we believe that research into permanent effects of PD projects is needed . Commitment versus design results Since one goal of SWING was to foster commitment among staff for design outcomes , participants from all wards were included in the project . This made the project more extensive than would have been strictly necessary to generate useful design outcomes . While commitment effects of SWING were indeed good , we ask ourselves if they could have been achieved by combining fewer staff members with external designers during the design workshops or a better project promotion within the organisation . The trade - offs between commitment effects , project size , and innovative results require more research . Potential bias Due to the size and duration of SWING , several participants left the project preliminarily . While these withdrawals did not negatively affect the project results , they might have biased the assessment results since only participants who completed the project were interviewed due to practical considerations . While the general assumption is that participation of employees in PD is beneficial for job satisfaction , we agree with Smith & Carayon - Saintfort , ( 1989 ) that more research on its potential negative effects ( e . g . , increased workload , pressure to participate by management ) needs to be done . Evaluation procedure The evaluation procedure used in SWING consisting of the interviews and the questionnaires worked well for the research purpose at hand . Furthermore , we believe that getting feedback from the participants between workshops was very helpful to make adjustments to the design process . If the latter is the only aim of intermediate evaluations , evaluations can probably be less extensive . Workload and project management The project management was led by the researcher in cooperation with a project manager from the hospital . 82 Steering group meetings were prepared by the researcher in consultation with the hospital project manager . Two steering group members indicated that they had been more busy with organisational than with content - related tasks , which did not favour the project . Content - related tasks were therefore for the most part executed by the researcher . As a result , the knowledge of the hospital manager about the hospital practice was not applied as extensively as possible to the determination of the project . The SWING organizers were really aiming for solutions to implement and acting on the authority of the board of business unit managers . Yet , interviewees tied their assessments of whether they believed that project results would be used less to the quality of the results than to the people who they expected would handle the follow - up and implementation . As negative expectations with respect to this aspect might impair the project work , this indicates the importance of communicating more clearly about the plans for the use of PD design results . Workshops & participation The presence of domain experts from ICT and medical technology and the facility management during workshops was greatly appreciated by the participants . They answered questions about technical feasibility , contested ideas and opinions of other participants in a constructive manner and brought ideas and insights from their specific domain into the game . This affirms the importance that is attributed to mutual learning in PD . As solidarity among the group was attributed to the relaxed and engaging workshop atmosphere by half the interviewees , it is essential to actively foster such an atmosphere during PD projects . Starting with a visioning session that allows everybody to put his vision and concerns on the table , using engaging design tools , and creating a safe environment for participant to voice their opinions appear to have been valuable in achieving this . Management Support SWING was initiated by the middle management but lacked direct commitment from the top management throughout the project . While it seems not necessary that top management takes part in all workshops , their participation in at least one session to demonstrate support would have been very helpful and should be considered in other PD projects as well . CONCLUSIONS Our study indicates that the democratic design process in a well - executed real world PD project can produce the benefits for individual participants often claimed but seldom thoroughly assessed in the literature . In particular , based on their assessment participants benefited by learning about new technology , exchanging experiences , being listened to , getting a better insight into their own work , and having a positive experience . However , more research is needed to identify the positive and negative effects of PD on participants and organizations . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are very grateful to MST for making SWING possible and thank all participants and especially the interviewees for their participation . REFERENCES Bannon , L . ( 2009 ) . Constructing utopia ( s ) in situ - Daring to be different . In T . Binder , J . Löwgren & L . Malmborg ( Eds . ) , ( Re ) Searching The Digital Bauhaus ( pp . 61 - 77 ) . London , UK : Springer . Bødker , K . , Kensing , F . , & Simonsen , J . ( 2004 ) . Participatory IT Design . Designing for Business and Workplace Realities ( pp . 58 - 65 ) . Cambridge , Massachusetts : MIT Press . Bossen , C . , Dindler , C . , & Iversen , O . S . ( 2010 ) . User gains and PD aims : Assessmment from a participatory design project . Paper presented at the PDC , Sidney , Australia . Bossen , C . , Dindler , C . , & Iversen , O . S . ( 2012 ) . Impediments to User Gains : Experiences from a Critical Participatory Design Project . Paper presented at the PDC 2012 , Roskilde , Denmark . Brandt , E . , Messeter , J . , & Binder , T . ( 2008 ) . Formatting design dialogues - games and participation . CoDesign , 4 ( 1 ) , 51 - 64 . Garde , J . A . and M . C . van der Voort ( 2012 ) . Co - designing better work organization in healthcare . Advances in Human Aspects of Healthcare , CRC Press , Taylor & Francis Group : 23 – 32 . Garde , J . A . and M . C . van der Voort ( 2013 ) . The Activity - Flow Co - Design Game : Designing for scheduled and unscheduled use situations . Paper presented at IASDR . Tokyo . Gough , H . G . ( 1996 ) . CPI Manual : Third Edition . Palo Alto , CA : Consulting Psychologists Press . Hogan , R . , & Hogan , J . ( 1995 ) . Hogan Personality Inventory Manual : Second Edition . Tulsa , OK : Hogan Assessment Systems . Robertson , T . , & Wagner , I . ( 2013 ) . Ethics ; Engagement , representation and politics - in - action . In T . Robertson & J . Simonsen ( Eds . ) , Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design ( pp . 64 - 85 ) . New York , USA : Routledge International Limited . Segalowitz , M . ( 2012 ) . " Participation " in Participatory Design Research . Master , Queensland University of Technology . Smith , M . J . , & Carayon - Saintfort , P . ( 1989 ) . A balance theory of job design for stress reduction . Industrial Ergonomics , Industrial Ergonomics , 67 - 79 . Tudor , L . G . , Muller , M . J . , Dayton , T . , & Root , R . W . ( 1993 ) . participatory design technique for high - level task analysis , critique , and redesign : The CARD method . Paper presented at the HFES , Seattle WA , USA . Urnes , T . , Weltzien , Å . , Zanussi , A . , Engbakk , S . , & Rafn , J . K . ( 2002 ) . Pivots and structured play : Stimulating creative user input in concept development . Paper presented at the NordiCHI , Århus , Denmark .