Current Biology 19 , 95 – 107 , January 27 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2008 . 12 . 029 Article Molecular Mechanisms of Membrane Deformation by I - BAR Domain Proteins Juha Saarikangas , 1 , 5 Hongxia Zhao , 1 , 5 Anette Pyka¨la¨inen , 1 Pasi Laurinma¨ki , 2 Pieta K . Mattila , 1 , 6 Paavo K . J . Kinnunen , 3 Sarah J . Butcher , 2 and Pekka Lappalainen 1 , 4 , * 1 Program in Cell and Molecular Biology 2 Program in Structural Biology and Biophysics Institute of Biotechnology P . O . Box 56 3 Helsinki Biophysics & Biomembrane Group Medical Biochemistry Institute of Biomedicine P . O . Box 63 4 Neuroscience Center P . O . Box 56 University of Helsinki FIN - 00014 Helsinki Finland Summary Background : Generation of membrane curvature is critical for the formation of plasma membrane protrusions and invagina - tionsandforshapingintracellularorganelles . Amongthecentral regulators of membrane dynamics are the BAR superfamily domains , which deform membranes into tubular structures . In contrast to the relatively well characterized BAR and F - BAR domains that promote the formation of plasma membrane invaginations , I - BAR domains induce plasma membrane protrusions through a poorly understood mechanism . Results : We show that I - BAR domains induce strong PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 clustering upon membrane binding , bend the membrane through electrostatic interactions , and remain dynamically associated with the inner leaﬂet of membrane tubules . Thus , I - BAR domains induce the formation of dynamic membrane protrusions to the opposite direction than do BAR and F - BAR domains . Strikingly , comparison of different I - BAR domains revealed that they deform PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - rich membranes through distinct mechanisms . IRSp53 and IRTKS I - BARs bind membranes mainly through electrostatic interactions , whereas MIM and ABBA I - BARs additionally insert an amphi - pathic helix into the membrane bilayer , resulting in larger tubule diameter in vitro and more efﬁcient ﬁlopodia formation in vivo . Furthermore , FRAP analysis revealed that whereas the mammalian I - BAR domains display dynamic association with ﬁlopodia , the C . elegans I - BAR domain forms relatively stable structures inside the plasma membrane protrusions . Conclusions : These data deﬁne I - BAR domain as a functional member of the BAR domain superfamily and unravel the mechanisms by which I - BAR domains deform membranes to induce ﬁlopodia in cells . Furthermore , our work reveals unex - pected divergence in the mechanisms by which evolutionarily distinct groups of I - BAR domains interact with PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - rich membranes . Introduction In addition to the well - established role of the cytoskeleton in producing forces to generate plasma membrane protrusions and invaginations , many membrane - associated proteins have also been shown to directly sculpt biological membranes . These proteins generate membrane curvature through in - sertion of hydrophobic or amphiphatic motifs into the mem - brane to induce bilayer asymmetry and through the forma - tion of membrane - bound protein scaffolds with intrinsic curvature [ 1 – 8 ] . The BAR ( Bin , Amphiphysin , Rvs ) domain superfamily of proteins are central regulators of membrane remodeling in all eukaryotes . Mutations in genes encoding BAR domain proteins have been linked to many diseases [ 9 – 11 ] , and inacti - vation of these proteins in cells and animals is often character - ized by severe phenotypes resulting from altered membrane dynamics [ 12 – 14 ] . Based on structural features and phyloge - netic relationships , the BAR domains can be divided into distinct subfamilies [ 15 ] . The canonical BAR domain is a dimeric module , where three kinked antiparallel a helices of each monomer form a banana - shaped dimeric 6 - helix bundle [ 16 ] . BAR domains interact with cellular membranes through their concave surface , which typically contains charged amino acids [ 16 ] . A subset of BAR domains ( N - BARs ) also contain an N - terminal amphiphatic helix that folds upon membrane interaction and penetrates into the bilayer [ 16 – 18 ] . In a number of proteins , the BAR domain is also functionally linked to other membrane - binding motifs such as PH or PX domains [ 19 – 21 ] . Thus , although the curved shape of BAR domains appears to be critical for membrane tubulation , in many cases the membrane curva - ture - sensing / generation activity is enhanced by additional lipid - binding motifs . F - BAR domain was originally identiﬁed as a FER - CIP4 homology ( FCH ) domain in the N - terminal region of many actin - regulating proteins . Subsequent studies revealed overall sequence homology between FCH and BAR domains and demonstrated that F - BAR ( FCH and BAR ) domains tubulate membranes in vitro and in vivo like BAR domains [ 13 , 22 ] . The structure of F - BAR domain differs from the canonical BAR domain by containing ﬁve a helices per monomer . Impor - tantly , being more elongated and gently curved , F - BAR domains induce thicker membrane tubules in comparison to BAR domains [ 23 – 25 ] . A recent cryo - EM study demonstrated that F - BAR domains self - assemble into a helical coat around the membrane tubules , providing evidence that these domains use a combination of scaffolding and cooperative assembly to induce membrane curvature [ 26 ] . The I - BAR domain , which is also known as IM ( IRSp53 / MIM homology ) domain , was ﬁrst identiﬁed as an F - actin crosslink - ing domain at the N - terminal region of mammalian IRSp53 and missing - in - metastasis ( MIM ) proteins [ 27 ] . However , sub - sequent studies suggested that I - BAR / IM domains do not signiﬁcantly crosslink actin ﬁlaments under physiological * Correspondence : pekka . lappalainen @ helsinki . ﬁ 5 These authors contributed equally to this work 6 Present address : Cancer Research UK London Research Institute , 44 Lincoln’s Inn Fields , London WC2A 3PX , UK conditions and revealed that the domain displays structural homology to BAR domains [ 28 – 30 ] . I - BAR / IM monomer consists of three a helices that dimerize into an antiparallel structure , which resembles a zeppelin or inverse BAR ( I - BAR ) domain shape . Biochemical studies demonstrated that I - BAR domains of MIM and IRSp53 directly bind and deform membranes into tubules in vitro [ 30 , 31 ] . However , in contrast to the concave - shaped lipid - binding interface of BAR and F - BAR domains , the positively charged lipid - binding surface of I - BAR domains displays a convex geometry [ 30 , 31 ] . This provided a possible structural explanation for why I - BAR domains induce membrane protrusions rather than invagina - tions when expressed in cells [ 27 , 32 , 33 ] . However , direct evidence for this ‘‘inverse mechanism’’ has not been demon - strated . Furthermore , possible differences in the membrane deformation properties within the I - BAR domain family ( there areﬁveI - BARdomainsproteinsinmammals , twoin Drosophila , and one in C . elegans ) have not been examined [ 34 ] . Here , we demonstrate that I - BAR domains bind to the inner leaﬂet of membrane tubules , thereby inducing the formation of dynamic membrane tubules in the opposite orientation to that of BAR and F - BAR domains . Furthermore , by comparing the membrane interactions of different vertebrate I - BAR domains and their C . elegans homolog , we reveal that different I - BAR domains utilize partially distinct mechanisms to deform membranes . These results provide important new mechanistic insights into the role of I - BAR proteins in the formation of plasma membrane protrusions such as ﬁlopodia . Results I - BAR Domains Bind to the Inner Leaﬂet of Membrane Tubules and Thereby Deform Membranes in the Opposite Direction to that of BAR Domains To examine the directionality and dynamics of I - BAR domain - induced membrane tubules in vitro , we monitored their effects on giant unilamellar vesicles ( GUVs ) . Because GUVs are relatively large ( w 5 – 500 m m ) and thus have similar tension properties to that of cellular membranes , they are considered good models to monitor protein - induced membrane deforma - tion in vitro [ 35 ] . Within 20 – 200 s after addition of MIM I - BAR , dynamic membrane tubules that invaginated toward the interior of GUVs appeared . At longer incubation times , these multiple invaginations led to the shrinkage of the GUVs ( Figure 1A and data not shown ) . In contrast , the N - BAR domain induced long outward protrusions at the surface of the GUV that in many cases resulted in the breakdown of the vesicle within w 100 – 200 s after addition of the protein ( Figure 1B ) . To reveal whether I - BAR domains indeed bind to the inner leaﬂet of the membrane tubules , as expected from the orienta - tion of the I - BAR domain - induced membrane tubules on GUVs , we incubated I - BAR domains with multilamellar vesi - cles ( MLVs ) that were subsequently visualized by cryo trans - mission electron microscopy ( cryo - EM ) . The morphology of the membrane structures in the electron micrographs fell under two distinct classes : tubular structures and spherical vesicles ( Figures 1C – 1F ) . Comparison of different I - BAR domains revealed that the tubules induced by the mammalian MIM and IRSp53 I - BARs were less uniform than the ones induced by the C . elegans I - BAR . MIM and IRSp53 I - BAR - induced membrane tubules typically contained perpendicu - larly oriented striations at the inner leaﬂet , indicating that these domains indeed associate with the inner leaﬂet of the membrane tubules ( Figures 1C and 1D ) . Similar striations were not observed in MLVs incubated with the C . elegans I - BAR domain , although the inner leaﬂet of the membrane tubules induced by the C . elegans I - BAR appeared thicker and more electron dense in the images . To detect the location of the C . elegans I - BAR domain in the membrane tubules , electron - density proﬁles of the membrane with and without I - BAR domains were compared . For this purpose , perpendic - ular density proﬁles of 20 randomly picked tubule sections and spherical vesicles were calculated . Density proﬁles demon - strated that in the C . elegans I - BAR - induced membrane tubules , additional electron density ( Figure 1E inset , area shaded by red lines ) was always detected at the inner face of the inner membrane leaﬂet , whereas no additional density was detected at the inner leaﬂet of vesicles exhibiting spher - ical morphology ( Figures 1E and 1F ) . Together , these data demonstrate that I - BAR domains deform membranes by binding to the inner leaﬂet of the membrane tubules . I - BAR Domains Cluster PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 upon Membrane Binding Previous studies established that I - BAR domains interact with phospholipid - rich membranes through positively charged patches located at the distal ends of the I - BAR domain [ 30 , 31 , 36 ] . The possible effects of I - BAR domains on PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 were ﬁrst examined by microscopy of GUVs containing NBD - labeled phosphatidylcholine ( PC ) and bodipy - TMR - labeled PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . As a control , we used BSA , which had no visible effects on the morphology of the GUVs or their lipid distribu - tion . Interestingly , in addition to the membrane invaginations and protrusions described in the previous paragraph above , I - BAR and amphiphysin N - BAR domains induced visible clus - tering of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 on GUVs . The PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 clusters were stable and rarely dissociated once formed . Importantly , ﬂuorescently labeled PC did not typically cocluster with PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , demon - strating that the bright PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 spots on GUVs are not a result of general membrane clustering / rufﬂing at certain foci ( Figure 2A ) . Importantly , PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 clustering was typically associated with the formation of membrane tubules ( Figure 2B ) . To quantify PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - clustering activities of different I - BARs , the self quenching of Bodipy - TMR - PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 resulting from clustering upon addition of protein was monitored by measuring ﬂuorescence intensity . All the I - BAR domains tested and the amphiphysin N - BAR domain resulted in self quenching of the ﬂuorescent probe molecules ( Figure 2B ) . The results were plotted ( equations are given in the Supple - mental Experimental Procedures available online ) to obtain values for PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 clustering of each protein at different concentrations . These data suggest that the IRSp53 I - BAR domain induced the strongest clustering of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , whereas the MIM and ABBA I - BARs were w 15 % less efﬁcient in clus - tering PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . Also , the amphiphysin N - BAR domain clus - tered PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , but signiﬁcantly less efﬁciently than I - BARs . Furthermore , these experiments revealed that the positively charged ‘‘lipid - binding interface’’ of the I - BAR domains is essential for PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 clustering , because neutralization of positively charged residues at these regions correlated with a decrease in the capacity of the I - BAR domain to cluster PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( Figure 2C ; Figure S1 ) . We also tested whether I - BAR domains are capable of clustering another negatively charged lipid , phosphatidylserine ( PS ) . Importantly , the I - BAR domains induced only very weak clustering of PS , whereas the amphiphysin BAR domain clustered PS nearly as efﬁciently as PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( Figure 2E ) . Current Biology Vol 19 No 2 96 Different I - BAR Domains Induce the Formation of Membrane Tubules with Distinct Diameters Both In Vitro and In Vivo A phylogenetic analysis shows that mammalian I - BAR domains can be divided into two evolutionarily diverged subfamilies : one consisting of MIM and ABBA , and the other one consisting of IRSp53 , IRTKS , and FLJ22582 ( Figure 3A ) . To examine possible differences in membrane interactions between I - BAR domains , we visualized multilamellar vesicles incubated with MIM , ABBA , IRSp53 , IRTKS , and C . elegans I - BAR domains with transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) . The mouse FLJ22582 I - BAR domain construct ( residues 1 – 239 ) displayed poor solubility when expressed in E . coli and therefore was not included in the analysis . All tested I - BARs A B C E F D Figure 1 . I - BAR Domains Induce Negative Membrane Curvature by Binding to the Interior of the Membrane Tubules ( A and B ) Time - course analysis of giant unilamellar vesicles ( GUVs ) incubated with MIM I - BAR domain ( A ) or amphiphysin N - BAR domain ( B ) . Both proteins induced tubulation of vesicles , but to opposite directions . N - BAR domain - induced membrane tubules point outwards from the vesicle , whereas I - BARs induced tubules invaginate toward the interior of the vesicle . Scale bars represent 10 m m . ( C – F ) Representative cryo - EM micrographs showing morphology of the membrane tubes induced by MIM , IRSp53 , C . elegans I - BAR domain , and the control vesicles . In MIM and IRSp53 I - BAR domain - induced tubules , clear striations were visible on the inner leaﬂet of the membrane tubules , indicating bound protein . Scale bar represents 100 nm . Insets in ( E ) and ( F ) : The orange rectangle denotes the areas from which the density proﬁles were calculated and plotted in the graph shown on the bottom of the image . The graphs demonstrate that in the spherical control vesicle , the inner leaﬂet ( IL ) and the outer leaﬂet ( OL ) havesimilardensityproﬁles , whereasinthe C . elegans I - BAR - inducedmembranetubule , theinnerleaﬂethasadditionalelectrondensity ( shaded with red lines ) as compared to the outer leaﬂet . Graph scale bar represents 10 nm . Membrane Deformation by I - BAR Domain Proteins 97 deformed membranes into tube - like structures ( Figure 3B ) . Surprisingly , despite the structural similarity within the I - BAR domains [ 28 , 29 ] , signiﬁcant differences in the diameters of the membrane tubules induced by different I - BAR domains were detected . The tubules induced by MIM ( 60 nm ) and ABBA ( 55 nm ) were signiﬁcantly thicker than the ones induced by IRSp53 ( 43 nm ) , IRTKS ( 40 nm ) , and C . elegans ( 41 nm ) I - BAR domains ( p < 0 . 001 , one - way ANOVA ) ( Figure 3C ) . Similar results were also obtained when the assay was carried out with unilamellar vesicles ( Figure S2B ) . When coexpressed in U2OS cells , I - BAR domains ( fused to either GFP or Cherry ﬂuorescent tags ) that induce the forma - tion of tubules of distinct diameters in vitro segregated into different compartments at the membranes ( Figure 3D ) . The A C E D B Figure 2 . I - BAR Domains Induce Clustering of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( A ) Images fromGUVs incubated withdifferent BARdomainsorcontrol protein ( BSA ) . AllBARdomains tested inducedclusteringof PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( red ) , whereas no clustering was seen in phosphatidylcholine ( PC ) ( green ) channel . ( B ) Time - lapse images of a GUV show the clustering of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( red ) preceding the formation of a membrane tubule ( arrowhead ) . Scale bars represent 10 m m . ( C ) TheclusteringofPI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 wasfurtherassayedbymonitoringtheself - quenchingofBodipy - TMR - PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 inthepresenceandabsenceofBARdomains . ( D ) Mutations in the positively charged residues at the lipid - binding interface of MIM I - BAR domain resulted in impaired clustering of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . ( E ) I - BARs cluster PS only very weakly , whereas amphiphysin BAR domain clusters PS almost as efﬁciently as does PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . Current Biology Vol 19 No 2 98 differences in distribution of the protein pairs was further vali - dated by measuring the intensity of both channels on a line drawn along the I - BAR domain - induced ﬁlopodia . As a control , the cells were transfected with both Cherry and GFP - tagged MIM I - BAR expression constructs , which showed very similar ﬂuorescence intensities along the line in both channels . A B C D Figure 3 . I - BARs Domains Induce the Formation of Tubules with Distinct Diameters In Vitro and In Vivo ( A ) A phylogenetic tree based on an amino acid sequence alignment of human ( Hs ) , mouse ( Mm ) , and C . elegans ( Ce ) I - BAR domains demonstrates that these domains can be divided into different branches . ( B ) TEM micrographs from vesicles incubated with different I - BARs . Scale bar represents 0 . 1 m m . ( C ) Quantiﬁcation of tube widths fromelectron micrographs shows that MIM andABBA I - BARs induce thickertubesthan do IRSp53 , IRTKS , and C . elegans I - BARs . Red and black lines in the plot indicate mean and median , respectively . The top box represents 75th and bottom box 25th percentiles and the bars 90th and 10th percentiles , respectively . ( D ) Image of an U2OS cell simultaneously transfected with C . elegans I - BAR - GFP ( green ) and MIM I - BAR - Cherry ( red ) . The line intensity proﬁle measured along the line indicated in the inset demonstrates that these proteins segregate into distinct compartments in ﬁlopodia . Scale bars represent 5 m m and 2 m m for the insets . Membrane Deformation by I - BAR Domain Proteins 99 Furthermore , when coexpressed in cells , MIM and ABBA as well as IRTKS and IRSp53 I - BARs , which in vitro induce the formation of membrane tubules of similar diameters , did not segregate into distinct compartments in ﬁlopodia ( Figures S3A , S3B , and S3D ) . However , clear segregation into distinct ﬁlopodia or ﬁlopodial compartments was detected when MIM I - BAR domain was coexpressed with either IRSp53 or C . elegans I - BAR domain ( Figure 3D ; Figure S3C and Movie S1 ) . Surprisingly , despite the similar tubule diameter in vitro , IRSp53 and C . elegans I - BAR domains also segregated into different compartments when expressed in cells ( Figure S3E ) . This may result from the very stable association of C . elegans I - BAR domain in ﬁlopodia as compared to mammalian I - BAR domains ( see Discussion ) . I - BAR Domains of MIM and ABBA Insert Their N - Terminal Amphiphatic Helix into the Membrane Bilayer To test whether MIM and IRSp53 I - BAR domains interact with membranes differently when electrostatic interactions are compromised , a cosedimentation assay with I - BARs and membranes was carried out at different salt concentrations . At physiological salt , both domains efﬁciently cosedimented with membranes . At 400 mM NaCl , the interaction between the IRSp53 I - BAR domain and membranes was severely diminished . The MIM I - BAR domain , however , still efﬁciently cosedimented with membranes , suggesting that besides electrostatic interactions , MIM I - BAR may harbor additional mechanisms to bind membranes ( Figure 4A ) . To examine whether I - BARs are capable in inserting part ( s ) of the domain into the membrane bilayer , we studied steady - state ﬂuorescence anisotropy of a membrane probe 1 , 6 - diphenyl 1 , 3 , 5 - hexatriene ( DPH ) . DPH locates into the hydrophobic core of a lipid bilayer without affecting the physical properties of the membranes and can thus be used for monitoring changes in the trans - gauche isomerization of phospholipid acyl chains in the membrane interior [ 37 ] . Binding of MIM and ABBA I - BAR domains to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - containing membranes induced a signiﬁcant increase in DPH anisotropy , suggesting that these domains insert into the acyl chain region of the bilayer . Also , C . elegans I - BAR domain inserted into the lipid bilayer , but changes in the DPH anisotropy were weaker compared to that of MIM and ABBA I - BARs . Importantly , IRSP53 and IRTKS I - BAR domains had no signiﬁcant effect on DPH anisotropy , indicating that these two ‘‘salt - sensitive’’ I - BARs do not insert into the acyl chain region of the bilayer ( Figure 4B ) . To test whether the N - terminal amphipatic a helix present in I - BARs of MIM and ABBA ( see Figure S3A ) is responsible for the membrane insertion , we deleted the ﬁrst 11 amino acids from the N terminus of MIM I - BAR domain ( MIM D N ) . When compared to the wild - type I - BAR domain of MIM , the deletion had no effect on the binding afﬁnity to the membranes as measured by cosedimentation assay ( data not shown ) . However , the effect of MIM D N I - BAR on DPH anisotropy was dramatically decreased compared to the wild - type MIM I - BAR , demonstrating that the N - terminal a helix is critical for membrane insertion . In contrast , the mutants with reduced afﬁnity to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 inserted into the membrane bilayer simi - larly to the wild - type MIM I - BAR , indicating that strong elec - trostatic interactions are not critical to the membrane insertion of MIM I - BAR ( Figure 4C ) . Accordingly , MIM - I - BAR induced an increase in the DPH anisotropy also in the absence of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and at high salt conditions ( 400 mM ) ( data not shown ) . However , when using zwitterionic membrane ( PC / PE = 8 / 2 ) to completely abolish all negative charges from the membrane , insertion of MIM I - BAR was clearly reduced ( Figure S4B ) , suggesting that membrane insertion still required weak electrostatic interactions . Based on EM analysis of multilamellar vesicles , the membrane tubulation activity of MIM I - BAR gradually decreased when the salt concentration was increased , indicating the importance of electrostatic interactions in the formation of membrane tubules by I - BAR domains ( Fig - ure S2A ) . Furthermore , we did not detect ‘‘inverse’’ tubulation by MIM I - BAR at high salt , suggesting that despite its membrane - inserting amphipathic N - terminal helix , the MIM I - BAR domain is not capable in bending membranes in the same direction as N - BARs when the electrostatic interactions are eliminated . To estimate the depth of the membrane insertion , we gener - ated mutant MIM I - BARs , which contain only one tryptophan ( Trp ) residue located at either position 4 or position 30 of the N - terminal a helix . To examine whether Trp4 and Trp30 insert into the membrane , we ﬁrst used acrylamide , a neutral , water - soluble quencher of Trp ﬂuorescence . The quenching of Trp by acrylamide was recorded in the absence and pres - ence of lipid vesicles and data analyzed by Stern - Volmer plots . The ﬂuorescence intensity of both Trp4 and Trp30 decreased in a concentration - dependent manner after the addition of acrylamide both in the absence and presence of liposomes without other effects on the spectra ( data not shown ) . However , the decrease in ﬂuorescence intensity was weaker in the presence of liposomes , demonstrating that Trp4 and Trp30 are less accessible to the quencher and thus most likely buried in the bilayer . As compared to Trp30 , Trp4 is located in a more hydrophobic environment in the absence of liposomes , but in the presence of liposomes became more accessible to the aqueous quencher as compared to Trp30 ( Figure 4D ) . This suggests that Trp4 is less buried in the bilayer . To measure the depth of Trp4 and Trp30 in the bilayer , we used bromine - labeled lipids , collisional quenchers that are present in the hydrocarbon phase of the bilayer . These lipids are brominated at different positions along the lipid acyl chains and can be used for estimating the depth of Trp insertion in the bilayer . Trp30 was quenched by 9 , 10 - Br 2 - PC and 11 , 12 - Br 2 - PC , whereas no quenching was observed by 6 , 7 - Br 2 - PC . Calculations via the parallax method suggest that Trp30 locates at a depth of 7 . 3 A˚ from the center of the bilayer . In contrast , no signiﬁcant quenching of Trp4 was observed by the two deep quenchers , 9 , 10 - Br 2 - PC and 11 , 12 - Br 2 - PC , but the shallower quencher 6 , 7 - Br 2 - PC quenched Trp4 ( Figures 4E and 4F ) . This suggests that Trp4 locates at a depth of approximately 10 . 8 A˚ from the center of the bilayer . Control experiments carried out with IRSp53 I - BAR mutants contain - ing a tryptophan residue at position 3 or 31 provided further evidence that the N - terminal helix of IRSp53 I - BAR does not insert into the membrane bilayer ( Figures S4C – S4E ) . Insertion of the N - Terminal Helix Affects the Membrane Tubule Diameter In Vitro and Filopodia Formation In Vivo To elucidate the role of the N - terminal amphipathic helix of MIM I - BAR in membrane tubulation , we mixed vesicles with MIM I - BAR or MIM D N I - BAR and visualized them with TEM ( Figure 5A ) . Interestingly , although MIM D N efﬁciently induced the formation of membrane tubules , the diameter of MIM D N tubules ( 45 . 9 nm ) was signiﬁcantly smaller than that of wild - type MIM I - BAR tubules ( 60 . 2 nm ; p < 0 . 001 , Student’s t test ) ( Figure 5B ) . Importantly , deletion of 11 N - terminal residues Current Biology Vol 19 No 2 100 from the IRSp53 I - BAR domain did not have signiﬁcant effect on the tubule width as compared to the wild - type domain ( data not shown ) . Measuring the width of the I - BAR domain - induced ﬁlopodia in cells proved difﬁcult , because these tubular protrusions also contain bundles of actin , which made them more variable in diameter ( data not shown ) . However , by measuring the number of ﬁlopodia induced by different I - BAR constructs , we found a signiﬁcant difference between the number of ﬁlopodia induced by the I - BARs . The I - BAR domains that insert their N - terminal a helix into the bilayer ( wild - type MIM and ABBA I - BARs ) were more efﬁcient in inducing ﬁlopodia compared to the ones that do not insert A B C D E F Figure 4 . MIM and ABBA I - BAR Domains Insert an Amphipathic a Helix into the Membrane Bilayer ( A ) Salt - sensitivity assay demonstrates that IRSp53 I - BAR domain binding to the membrane is more sensitive to salt than is the MIM I - BAR domain . I - BAR domains were incubated with or without vesicles in 100 mM or 400 mM NaCl followed by ultracentrifugation and SDS - PAGE analysis . S , supernatant fraction ; P , pellet fraction . ( B ) MIM , ABBA , and C . elegans I - BAR domains induce an increase in steady - state DPH anisotropy , indicating that these proteins insert into the bilayer . IRSp53 and IRTKS had no detectable effects on DPH anisotropy . ( C ) MIM I - BAR domain mutants where positively charged residues were neutralized showed similar insertion proﬁle as wild - type I - BAR , whereas deletion of 11 N - terminal amino acids from MIM I - BAR ( MIM D N ) resulted in a signiﬁcant decrease in DPH anisotropy . ( D ) The tryptophans introduced at positions 4 and 30 of the N - terminal a helix of MIM I - BAR are buried in the bilayer as demonstrated byStern - Volmer plots for the quenching of MIM - I - BAR by acrylamide in an aqueous buffer ( open symbol ) and in the presence of liposomes ( ﬁlled symbols ) . ( E and F ) Quenching of tryptophans with brominated lipids indicates that Trp30 and Trp4 are located at depths of approximately 7 . 3 A ˚ and 10 . 8 A ˚ from the center of the bilayer , respectively . Membrane Deformation by I - BAR Domain Proteins 101 ( IRSp53 , IRTKS , and MIM D N ) ( Figures 5C and 5D ; data not shown ) ( p < 0 . 001 , one - way ANOVA ) . The Dynamics of I - BAR Domains in Filopodia Measured by FRAP Upon interaction with membranes , F - BAR domains assemble into helical coats that are held together by lateral and tip - to - tip interactions [ 26 ] . To elucidate possible intermolecular inter - actions of I - BAR domains , we measured their exchange rate in ﬁlopodia by using ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) . U2OS cells were transfected with GFP - tagged I - BARs , GFP ﬂuorescence was photobleached at a region of ﬁlopodia , and the rate of ﬂuorescence recovery was measured . The recovery of MIM and IRSp53 I - BARs was rapid with t 1 / 2 of 8 . 3 s and 5 . 2 s , respectively . Interestingly , in the majority of the ﬁlopodia , therecoveryof C . elegans I - BARwas > 10 - foldslower with an average t 1 / 2 of 85 . 9 s ( Figures 6A and 6B ) . However , in some wider and more irregular ﬁlopodia induced by the C . elegans I - BARdomain , theﬂuorescence recoverywasmuch faster compared to that of thin , regular ﬁlopodia present in the same cell ( Figure 6C ) . This suggests that the C . elegans I - BAR domain , when oligomerized in the right conformation , can form relatively stable contacts with its neighbors . This is supported by our ﬁndings from cryo - EM experiments , in which the A B C D Figure 5 . Membrane Insertion of the N - Terminal Helix of MIM I - BAR Regulates the Diameter of Membrane Tubules In Vitro and Their Formation In Vivo ( A ) TEM micrographs of typical membrane tubules induced by MIM or MIM D N I - BARs . ( B ) Quantiﬁcationofdiametersoftubulesdemon - strates that the MIM D N forms signiﬁcantly thinner structures than the ones induced by wild - type MIM I - BAR ( p < 0 . 001 ; Student’s t test ) . ( C ) MIM I - BAR induces ﬁlopodia more efﬁciently than do MIM D N or IRSp53 I - BAR . Scale bars represent 10 m m . ( D ) Quantiﬁcation of the average number of ﬁlo - podia per cell . Error bars represent SEM values . p < 0 . 001 ( one - way ANOVA ) , n > 30 . C . elegans I - BAR appeared to form membrane tubules with a more regular diameter ( Figures 1C – 1E ) . Furthermore , live - cell imaging experiments demon - strated that the ﬁlopodia induced by the C . elegans I - BAR domain are more rigid than the ﬁlopodia induced by vertebrate I - BARs ( Movie S1 ) . Because MIM I - BAR recovered almost as fast as MIM D N and IRSp53 I - BARs , the inser - tionoftheN - terminal a helixismostlikely not responsible for the slow recovery observed in the case of C . elegans I - BAR ( Figures 6A and 6B ; data not shown ) . I - BAR Domain - Induced Membrane Protrusions Display Filopodial Characteristics I - BAR domains , when expressed in cells , induce actin containing ﬁlopodia - like protrusions . However , whether these structures are just morphologically ﬁlopodia - like membrane protrusions or if they indeed also harbor other characteristics typical of ﬁlopo - dia has not been reported . Thus , we examined the localization of ﬁlopodial markers [ 38 ] to I - BAR domain - induced membrane protrusions . U2OS , HeLa , and COS - 7 cells were transfected with GFP - tagged MIM and IRSp53 I - BARs as well as constructs encoding full - length proteins , and stained with myosin - 10 antibody [ 39 ] . Importantly , endogenous myosin - 10 often localized to the tips or shafts of membrane protru - sions in cells transfected with the full - length proteins or the I - BAR ( Figure S5A ) . U2OS cells were also cotransfected with MIM I - BAR and myosin - 10 - GFP or with the other well - charac - terized ﬁlopodial markers , fascin - GFP and VASP - GFP . Similar to endogenous ﬁlopodia , fascin localized to the shaft of I - BAR - induced protrusions , VASP was found both in the shaft and tip of these protrusions , and myosin - 10 was predominately local - ized at the tips , occasionally being found moving along the ﬁlopodial shaft ( Figure S5B and Movie S2 ) . Discussion The ﬁndings presented here deﬁne the I - BAR domain as a functional member of the BAR domain superfamily and reveal Current Biology Vol 19 No 2 102 the mechanisms by which I - BAR domains deform phospho - lipid - rich membranes . Time - lapse imaging of GUVs and cryo - EM analysis provided direct evidence that I - BAR domains bind to theinner surface of membranetubules andthus explain why I - BARs deform membranes in the opposite direction to that of BAR and F - BAR domains . These data are supported by previous studies demonstrating that the lipid - binding inter - face of I - BAR domains displays an opposite geometry to that of BAR and F - BAR domains , and that based on electron tomography , the I - BAR domain - induced membrane tubules appear to invaginate toward the interior of vesicles [ 28 – 31 ] . Interestingly , our data also revealed surprising variation in the mechanisms by which evolutionarily distinct classes of I - BAR domains generate membrane curvature ( Figure 7 ) . A general feature among BAR / F - BAR domains is that they bind phospholipids through positively charged residues that are located at their concave surface [ 1 ] . We show that upon membrane binding , I - BAR domains induce strong PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 clustering . Also , the N - BAR domain of amphiphysin clustered PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , although somewhat less efﬁciently , suggesting that PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 clustering may be a general feature among BAR domains . The stronger PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 clustering by I - BAR domains compared to amphiphysin N - BAR domain is in agreement with the stronger net - positive electrostatic potentials of I - BARs . It is also important to note that increased packing of phosphoinositides induces local lateral asymmetry in the inner leaﬂet of the plasma membrane , thereby altering the physical A B C Figure 6 . Dynamics of I - BARs in Filopodia ( A ) Representative images from FRAP analysis of the association MIM and IRSp53 and C . elegans I - BARs in ﬁlopodia . Scale bars represent 1 m m . ( B ) Analysis of FRAP recovery . Both IRSp53 and MIM I - BARs display rapid recovery after photo - bleaching , whereas C . elegans I - BAR recovers very slowly . Data represent mean values 6 SEM calculated from 6 – 12 FRAP series . ( C ) FRAP analysis of a cell transfected with a construct expressing C . elegans I - BAR demon - strates that the narrow ﬁlopodia with regular diameter ( arrowhead ) recover very slowly , whereas a thicker C . elegans I - BAR containing ﬁlopodia with a more variable diameter ( arrow ) recovers within a few seconds . Scale bars repre - sent 1 . 5 m m . properties of the membrane . This might also have an inﬂuence in cell signaling [ 40 ] . How proteins regulate the distribu - tion of various lipids in the membranes is an important but poorly understood subject . The data presented here suggest that I - BAR domains and BAR / F - BAR domains are capable of inducing the formation of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - rich microdo - mains at the plasma membrane . A subset of BAR domains , N - BARs , employs an additional N - terminal helix to enhance membrane curvature sensing and / or generation [ 17 ] . Our data show that a similar mechanism is used in the membrane interactions of a subset of I - BAR domains . However , in contrast to the amphipathic a helix of N - BARs , which runs parallel with the membrane at the level of the lipid headgroups , the N - terminal a helix of MIM I - BAR inserts deeper into the membrane bilayer . In the case of N - BAR domains , some controversy exists con - cerning whether or not the N - terminal a helix plays a critical role in membrane curvature sensing and / or membrane defor - mation [ 17 , 18 , 41 ] . Our data show that at least in I - BAR domains , insertion of the N - terminal a helix into the membrane bilayer is not critical to membrane deformation . However , this helix appears to enhance the membrane tubulation efﬁciency of MIM I - BAR in vivo and may thus enable this domain to bind ﬂat membranes or membranes with positive curvature more efﬁciently . Additionally , insertion of the helix into the membrane bilayer increases the diameter of I - BAR - induced membrane tubules . This can be explained by the fact that although the shape and electrostatic potential of I - BARs work toward inducing negative membrane curvature , the insertion of an amphipathic / hydrophobic helix into the inner leaﬂet of the membrane tubule may bend the membrane in the opposite direction if the helix is oriented in the membrane perpendicularly to the I - BAR domain . In addition to differences in membrane insertion of the N - terminal a helix , I - BAR domains also display signiﬁcant differences in the dynamics of ﬁlopodia association . Whereas mammalian I - BARs display dynamic association with ﬁlopo - dia , the C . elegans I - BAR is much more stably associated with ﬁlopodia . This suggests that like F - BAR domains [ 26 ] , the C . elegans I - BAR domain may form a helical scaffold inside Membrane Deformation by I - BAR Domain Proteins 103 A B C Figure 7 . A Working Model for the Mechanisms of I - BAR Domain - Induced Deformation ( A ) The MIM / ABBA subfamily of I - BAR domains insert their N - terminal amphiphatichelix intothe bilayer independently of their positively charged phospho - lipid - binding interface . Subsequently , strong electrostatic interactions between the positively charged poles of MIM / ABBA I - BARs and the negatively charged PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 headgroups induce clustering of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and generation of membrane curvature because of the convex geometry of the lipid - binding interface of the domain . In contrast , IRSp53 and IRTKS I - BAR domains rely solely on their electrostatic interactions in membrane binding and tubulation . The structures of mouse MIM I - BAR ( ID : 2D1L ) and human IRSp53 I - BAR ( ID : 1Y2O ) domains are from the Protein Data Bank . ( B ) A schematic model for the insertion of the N - terminal helix of MIM into the membrane . Tryptophans are in red , other hydrophobic residues in green , and polar residues in blue . Trp4 and Trp30 are located approximately 10 . 8 A˚ and 7 . 3 A˚ from the center of the bilayer , respectively . ( C ) BasedonFRAPexperiments , theMIMandIRSp53I - BARsdisplaydynamicassociationwithﬁlopodia ( t 1 / 2 = 8 . 1sand5 . 1s , respectively ) , suggestingthat these domains make signiﬁcantly weaker intermolecularcontacts between adjacent domains as compared to C . elegans I - BAR domain ( t 1 / 2 = 85 . 9 s ) . Thus , C . elegans I - BAR domain may form a more stabile lattice inside the membrane tubule as compared to vertebrate I - BAR domains . Current Biology Vol 19 No 2 104 the membrane tubules through lateral and / or tip - to - tip inter - actions . This would also provide an explanation for our obser - vation that IRSp53 I - BAR , which induce the formation of membrane tubules with a similar diameter than the C . elegans I - BAR , does not colocalize with the C . elegans I - BAR when coexpressed in cells . Although the association of MIM and IRSp53 I - BARs with ﬁlopodia is dynamic and the ﬁlopodia induced by these domains are somewhat irregular in diameter , these domains also appear to localize to membrane tubules cooperatively . This may result either from relatively weak inter - molecular interactions between these I - BARs in membrane tubules or from negative membrane curvature sensing that would make it energetically more favorable for these domains to bind membranes that already display appropriate negative curvature . It is an open question whether I - BAR domains , in full - length endogenous proteins , sense membrane curvature , and thus direct the protein with its possible interaction partners to the sites of negative membrane curvature , or whether these domains actively generate membrane curvature in cells . From our data we propose that MIM and ABBA I - BAR domains insert an amphipathic N - terminal a helix into the membrane and can thus perhaps sense positive membrane curvature before generating negative membrane curvature through their electrostatic interactions . This suggests that at least the role of these two I - BAR domains in the context of full - length proteins is to actively generate membrane curvature . This hypothesis is in agreement with recent studies demonstrating that IRSp53 and ABBA are involved in membrane rufﬂing and the formation of ﬁlopodia in cells [ 36 , 42 – 44 ] , with theoretical studies con - cerning the role of membrane deformation in membrane protrusions [ 45 ] and with the localization of ﬁlopodia markers to the I - BAR domain - induced membrane protrusions ( Figure S5 ) . In the future , it will be important to reveal how these domains in the context of full - length proteins and their interaction partners contribute to the formation of morpholog - ically distinct membrane protrusions in cells . Experimental Procedures Electron Microscopy Forcryo - EM , 0 . 1 – 0 . 5mg / mlvesicles ( describedinSupplementalData ) were mixed with 0 . 05 – 0 . 25 mg / ml protein in a 2 : 1 ratio ( mass : mass ) in 20 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 100 mM NaCl . After addition of the protein to the lipids , the samples were slowly cooled in a PCR machine as previously described [ 26 ] . Samples were prepared on copper holey carbon ﬁlm grids ( Quantifoil ) , blotted from the back , and vitriﬁed in liquid ethane [ 46 ] . A Gatan 626 cryo - stage was used to observe the sample in a FEI Tecnai F20 ﬁeld emission gun transmissionelectron microscope at 200kV underlow - doseconditions at 2 180 (cid:2) C . Electron micrographs were recorded on Kodak SO - 163 ﬁlm at a magniﬁcation of 50 , 000 3 and defocus values ranging from 2 1 . 6 to 2 3 . 8 m m . The ﬁlm was developed in full - strength D19 for 12 min . Micro - graphs were digitized at 7 m m step size on a Zeiss Photoscan TD scanner giving a pixel size of 1 . 4 A˚ / pixel . The program Digital Micrograph ( Gatan Inc . ) was used for calculating density proﬁles from the digitized images . Fixed samples for transmission electron microscopy were prepared by mixing 6 m M protein ( in the case of IRTKS 20 m M ) with 166 m M multilamellar vesicles in 20 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 100 mM NaCl . Sample preparation and microscopy were done as described [ 30 ] with the exception that all images were taken from 120 nm thick sections . Cell Culture , Transfections , and Immunoﬂuorescence U2OS human osteosarcoma cells were cultured in D - MEM containing 10 % FCS and antibiotics . Transient transfections were done with Fugene6 reagent ( Roche ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and , depend - ing on the application , cells were imagedorﬁxed with 4 % PFA the next day , 20 – 30 hr after transfection . For visualization of Myosin - 10 , cells were incubated with 2 m g / m l myosin - 10 antibody [ 39 ] ( R . Cheney , University of North Carolina ) with Alexa - 568 conjugated secondary antibody ( dilution 1 : 200 ) . Light Microscopy and Image Analysis Fixed cells were imaged with a ﬂuorescence microscope ( AX70 Provis ; Olympus ) equipped with a charge - coupled device camera ( DP70 ; Olympus ) with PlanApo 60x / 1 . 40 ( oil ) or UPlanApo 100x / 1 . 35 ( oil ) objectives ( Olympus ) . Images were acquired with AnalySIS software ( Olympus ) . Live - cell and GUV imaging were done with an inverted microscope ( IX - 71 ; Olympus ) equipped with a Polychrome IV monochromator ( TILL Photonics ) and Andor iXon ( Andor ) camera . For cell imaging , a heated sample environ - ment ( + 37 (cid:2) C ) withconstantCO 2 ﬂowwasused , whereasGUVswereimaged at RT without CO 2 . All imaging was done with a UPlanSApo 60xW / 1 . 20 ( water ) objective . Image acquirement was done with TILL Vision 4 ( TILL Photonics ) software . Video processing , measurement of intensity proﬁles , and amount of ﬁlopodia and the width of membrane tubes were done with Image - pro plus 5 . 1 software . Movies S1 and S2 and the still images shown in Figure 2B were deconvolved with AutoQuantX AutoDeblur ( Media Cyber - netics , Inc . ) . The width of membrane tubes was measured from EM images taken with 23 , 000 3 magniﬁcation from 2 – 3 grids . For ﬁlopodia quantiﬁca - tion , all peripheral protrusions that were longer than 0 . 6 m m and narrower than 0 . 6 m m were calculated from more than 30 cells derived from three independent experiments . Image processing was carried out with Adobe Photoshop 7 . 0 . FRAP Experiments FRAP experiments were carried out with Leica TCS SP2 AOBS confocal microscope , APO63x / 1 . 2WCorr / 0 . 17CS ( water ) objectiveandArgon488nm laser line ( 70 mW ) at + 37 (cid:2) C with constant CO 2 supply . GFP - tagged I - BAR constructs were bleached with a rectangular region of 18 m m 2 from the midregion of protruding ﬁlopodia with Flymode FRAP application ( Leica Lite 2 . 61 . 1537 confocal software ) . Bleaching was done with 100 % and imagingtherecoverywith4 % laserpower . Therecoverywasmonitoredevery 0 . 5 – 10soveratotalperiodof160s . Theintensityofthebleachedregionwas normalized to a nonbleached region to reduce the error caused by normal photobleachingduringtheimagingprocess . Fromeachsample , 6 – 12ﬁlopo - diawere analyzed and the average was plotted on a scatter plot ( SigmaPlot ) and the recovery half - time ( t 1 / 2 ) was analyzed from the plot . The prebleach valuewasnormalizedto1 . ImagesforFRAPpanelwereacquiredwithImaris ( Bitplane , Inc . ) and Adobe Photoshop software . Statistical Analysis All graphs and statistical analyses were done with SigmaPlot 9 . 0 or SPSS 15 . 0 with appropriate applications . Error bars in graphs indicate 6 SEM . Differences between independent groups were tested with Student’s t test ( twogroups ) orwithone - wayANOVA ( three ormore groups ) withTukey as a post hoc test . Signiﬁcance level was set at 0 . 05 . Supplemental Data Supplemental Data include Supplemental Experimental Procedures , ﬁve ﬁgures , and two movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / www . current - biology . com / supplemental / S0960 - 9822 ( 08 ) 01684 - 9 . Acknowledgments We thank Anna - Liisa Nyfors and the staff at the electron and light micros - copy units ( Institute of Biotechnology , University of Helsinki ) for technical assistance . Richard Cheney , Frank Gertler , Johanna Ivaska , Yuri Kohara , and Danijela Vignjevic are acknowledged for providing antibodies and GFP - fusion constructs , and Petri Auvinen is thanked for critical reading of the manuscript . This study was supported by grants from Academy of Finland , Finnish Cancer Foundation ( to P . Lappalainen and H . Z . ) and Bio - centrum Helsinki ( to P . Lappalainen and S . J . B . ) . J . S . was supported by a fellowship from Helsinki Graduate School in Biotechnology and Molecular Biology . Received : September 5 , 2008 Revised : November 26 , 2008 Accepted : December 8 , 2008 Published online : January 15 , 2009 Membrane Deformation by I - BAR Domain Proteins 105 References 1 . Zimmerberg , J . , andKozlov , M . M . ( 2006 ) . Howproteinsproducecellular membrane curvature . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 , 9 – 19 . 2 . McMahon , H . T . , and Gallop , J . L . ( 2005 ) . Membrane curvature and mechanisms of dynamic cell membrane remodelling . Nature 7068 , 590 – 596 . 3 . Daumke , O . , Lundmark , R . , Vallis , Y . , Martens , S . , Butler , P . J . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2007 ) . Architectural and mechanistic insights into an EHD ATPase involved in membrane remodelling . Nature 7164 , 923 – 927 . 4 . Martens , S . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2008 ) . Mechanisms of membrane fusion : disparate players and common principles . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 543 – 556 . 5 . Roux , A . , Uyhazi , K . , Frost , A . , andDeCamilli , P . ( 2006 ) . GTP - dependent twisting of dynamin implicates constriction and tension in membrane ﬁssion . Nature 7092 , 528 – 531 . 6 . Hu , N . J . , Bradshaw , J . , Lauter , H . , Buckingham , J . , Solito , E . , and Hofmann , A . ( 2008 ) . Membrane - induced folding and structure of membrane - bound annexin A1 N - terminal peptides : implications for annexin - induced membrane aggregation . Biophys . J . 5 , 1773 – 1781 . 7 . Hanson , P . I . , Roth , R . , Lin , Y . , and Heuser , J . E . ( 2008 ) . Plasma membrane deformation by circular arrays of ESCRT - III protein ﬁla - ments . J . Cell Biol . 2 , 389 – 402 . 8 . Lata , S . , Schoehn , G . , Jain , A . , Pires , R . , Piehler , J . , Gottlinger , H . G . , and Weissenhorn , W . ( 2008 ) . Helical structures of ESCRT - III are disas - sembled by VPS4 . Science 321 , 1354 – 1357 . 9 . Wise , C . A . , Gillum , J . D . , Seidman , C . E . , Lindor , N . M . , Veile , R . , Bashiardes , S . , and Lovett , M . ( 2002 ) . Mutations in CD2BP1 disrupt binding to PTP PEST and are responsible for PAPA syndrome , an auto - inﬂammatory disorder . Hum . Mol . Genet . 8 , 961 – 969 . 10 . Endris , V . , Wogatzky , B . , Leimer , U . , Bartsch , D . , Zatyka , M . , Latif , F . , Maher , E . R . , Tariverdian , G . , Kirsch , S . , Karch , D . , etal . ( 2002 ) . Thenovel Rho - GTPase activating gene MEGAP / srGAP3 has a putative role in severe mental retardation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 18 , 11754 – 11759 . 11 . Nicot , A . S . , Toussaint , A . , Tosch , V . , Kretz , C . , Wallgren - Pettersson , C . , Iwarsson , E . , Kingston , H . , Garnier , J . M . , Biancalana , V . , Oldfors , A . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Mutations in amphiphysin 2 ( BIN1 ) disrupt interaction with dynamin 2 and cause autosomal recessive centronuclear myop - athy . Nat . Genet . 9 , 1134 – 1139 . 12 . DiPaolo , G . , Sankaranarayanan , S . , Wenk , M . R . , Daniell , L . , Perucco , E . , Caldarone , B . J . , Flavell , R . , Picciotto , M . R . , Ryan , T . A . , Cremona , O . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Decreased synaptic vesicle recycling efﬁciency and cogni - tive deﬁcits in amphiphysin 1 knockout mice . Neuron 5 , 789 – 804 . 13 . Itoh , T . , Erdmann , K . S . , Roux , A . , Habermann , B . , Werner , H . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2005 ) . Dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton cooperatively regulate plasma membrane invagination by BAR and F - BAR proteins . Dev . Cell 6 , 791 – 804 . 14 . Steinberg , J . P . , Takamiya , K . , Shen , Y . , Xia , J . , Rubio , M . E . , Yu , S . , Jin , W . , Thomas , G . M . , Linden , D . J . , and Huganir , R . L . ( 2006 ) . Targeted invivomutationsoftheAMPAreceptorsubunitGluR2anditsinteracting protein PICK1 eliminate cerebellar long - term depression . Neuron 6 , 845 – 860 . 15 . Frost , A . , De Camilli , P . , and Unger , V . M . ( 2007 ) . F - BAR proteins join the BAR family fold . Structure 7 , 751 – 753 . 16 . Peter , B . J . , Kent , H . M . , Mills , I . G . , Vallis , Y . , Butler , P . J . , Evans , P . R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2004 ) . BAR domains as sensors of membrane curva - ture : the amphiphysin BAR structure . Science 5657 , 495 – 499 . 17 . Gallop , J . L . , Jao , C . C . , Kent , H . M . , Butler , P . J . , Evans , P . R . , Langen , R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2006 ) . Mechanism of endophilin N - BAR domain - mediated membrane curvature . EMBO J . 12 , 2898 – 2910 . 18 . Masuda , M . , Takeda , S . , Sone , M . , Ohki , T . , Mori , H . , Kamioka , Y . , and Mochizuki , N . ( 2006 ) . Endophilin BAR domain drives membrane curva - ture by two newly identiﬁed structure - based mechanisms . EMBO J . 12 , 2889 – 2897 . 19 . Pylypenko , O . , Lundmark , R . , Rasmuson , E . , Carlsson , S . R . , andRak , A . ( 2007 ) . The PX - BAR membrane - remodeling unit of sorting nexin 9 . EMBO J . 22 , 4788 – 4800 . 20 . Li , J . , Mao , X . , Dong , L . Q . , Liu , F . , andTong , L . ( 2007 ) . Crystal structures of the BAR - PH and PTB domains of human APPL1 . Structure 5 , 525 – 533 . 21 . Zhu , G . , Chen , J . , Liu , J . , Brunzelle , J . S . , Huang , B . , Wakeham , N . , Terzyan , S . , Li , X . , Rao , Z . , Li , G . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Structure of the APPL1 BAR - PH domain and characterization of its interaction with Rab5 . EMBO J . 14 , 3484 – 3493 . 22 . Tsujita , K . , Suetsugu , S . , Sasaki , N . , Furutani , M . , Oikawa , T . , and Takenawa , T . ( 2006 ) . Coordination between the actin cytoskeleton and membrane deformation by a novel membrane tubulation domain of PCH proteins is involved in endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 2 , 269 – 279 . 23 . Shimada , A . , Niwa , H . , Tsujita , K . , Suetsugu , S . , Nitta , K . , Hanawa - Suetsugu , K . , Akasaka , R . , Nishino , Y . , Toyama , M . , Chen , L . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Curved EFC / F - BAR - domain dimers are joined end to end into a ﬁlament for membrane invagination in endocytosis . Cell 4 , 761 – 772 . 24 . Henne , W . M . , Kent , H . M . , Ford , M . G . , Hegde , B . G . , Daumke , O . , Butler , P . J . , Mittal , R . , Langen , R . , Evans , P . R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2007 ) . Structure and analysis of FCHo2 F - BAR domain : a dimerizing and membrane recruitment module that effects membrane curvature . Structure 7 , 839 – 852 . 25 . Heath , R . J . , and Insall , R . H . ( 2008 ) . F - BAR domains : multifunctional regulators of membrane curvature . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 1951 – 1954 . 26 . Frost , A . , Perera , R . , Roux , A . , Spasov , K . , Destaing , O . , Egelman , E . H . , De Camilli , P . , and Unger , V . M . ( 2008 ) . Structural basis of membrane invagination by F - BAR domains . Cell 5 , 807 – 817 . 27 . Yamagishi , A . , Masuda , M . , Ohki , T . , Onishi , H . , and Mochizuki , N . ( 2004 ) . A novel actin bundling / ﬁlopodium - forming domain conserved in insulin receptor tyrosine kinase substrate p53 and missing in metas - tasis protein . J . Biol . Chem . 15 , 14929 – 14936 . 28 . Millard , T . H . , Bompard , G . , Heung , M . Y . , Dafforn , T . R . , Scott , D . J . , Machesky , L . M . , and Futterer , K . ( 2005 ) . Structural basis of ﬁlopodia formation induced by the IRSp53 / MIM homology domain of human IRSp53 . EMBO J . 2 , 240 – 250 . 29 . Lee , S . H . , Kerff , F . , Chereau , D . , Ferron , F . , Klug , A . , and Dominguez , R . ( 2007 ) . Structural basis for the actin - binding function of missing - in - metastasis . Structure 2 , 145 – 155 . 30 . Mattila , P . K . , Pykalainen , A . , Saarikangas , J . , Paavilainen , V . O . , Vihinen , H . , Jokitalo , E . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2007 ) . Missing - in - metastasis and IRSp53 deform PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - rich membranes by an inverse BAR domain - like mechanism . J . Cell Biol . 7 , 953 – 964 . 31 . Suetsugu , S . , Murayama , K . , Sakamoto , A . , Hanawa - Suetsugu , K . , Seto , A . , Oikawa , T . , Mishima , C . , Shirouzu , M . , Takenawa , T . , and Yokoyama , S . ( 2006 ) . The RAC binding domain / IRSp53 - MIM homology domain of IRSp53 induces RAC - dependent membrane deformation . J . Biol . Chem . 46 , 35347 – 35358 . 32 . Mattila , P . K . , Salminen , M . , Yamashiro , T . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2003 ) . Mouse MIM , a tissue - speciﬁc regulator of cytoskeletal dynamics , inter - acts with ATP - actin monomers through its C - terminal WH2 domain . J . Biol . Chem . 10 , 8452 – 8459 . 33 . Woodings , J . A . , Sharp , S . J . , andMachesky , L . M . ( 2003 ) . MIM - B , aputa - tive metastasis suppressor protein , binds to actin and to protein tyro - sine phosphatase delta . Biochem . J . 371 , 463 – 471 . 34 . Scita , G . , Confalonieri , S . , Lappalainen , P . , and Suetsugu , S . ( 2008 ) . IRSp53 : crossing the road of membrane and actin dynamics in the formation of membrane protrusions . Trends Cell Biol . 2 , 52 – 60 . 35 . Sens , P . , Johannes , L . , and Bassereau , P . ( 2008 ) . Biophysical approaches to protein - induced membrane deformations in trafﬁcking . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 4 , 476 – 482 . 36 . Saarikangas , J . , Hakanen , J . , Mattila , P . K . , Grumet , M . , Salminen , M . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2008 ) . ABBA regulates plasma - membrane and actin dynamics to promote radial glia extension . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 1444 – 1454 . 37 . Zaritsky , A . , Parola , A . H . , Abdah , M . , andMasalha , H . ( 1985 ) . Homeovis - cous adaptation , growth rate , and morphogenesis in bacteria . Biophys . J . 2 , 337 – 339 . 38 . Mattila , P . K . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2008 ) . Filopodia : molecular architec - ture and cellular functions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 , 446 – 454 . 39 . Berg , J . S . , Derﬂer , B . H . , Pennisi , C . M . , Corey , D . P . , and Cheney , R . E . ( 2000 ) . Myosin - X , a novel myosin with pleckstrin homology domains , associates with regions of dynamic actin . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 3439 – 3451 . 40 . Janmey , P . A . , and Kinnunen , P . K . ( 2006 ) . Biophysical properties of lipids and dynamic membranes . Trends Cell Biol . 10 , 538 – 546 . 41 . Farsad , K . , Ringstad , N . , Takei , K . , Floyd , S . R . , Rose , K . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2001 ) . Generation of high curvature membranes mediated by direct endophilin bilayer interactions . J . Cell Biol . 2 , 193 – 200 . 42 . Suetsugu , S . , Kurisu , S . , Oikawa , T . , Yamazaki , D . , Oda , A . , and Takenawa , T . ( 2006 ) . Optimization of WAVE2 complex - induced actin polymerization by membrane - bound IRSp53 , PIP ( 3 ) , and Rac . J . Cell Biol . 4 , 571 – 585 . Current Biology Vol 19 No 2 106 43 . Disanza , A . , Mantoani , S . , Hertzog , M . , Gerboth , S . , Frittoli , E . , Steffen , A . , Berhoerster , K . , Kreienkamp , H . J . , Milanesi , F . , Di Fiore , P . P . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Regulation of cell shape by Cdc42 is mediated by the synergic actin - bundling activity of the Eps8 - IRSp53 complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 1337 – 1347 . 44 . Lim , K . B . , Bu , W . , Goh , W . I . , Koh , E . , Ong , S . H . , Pawson , T . , Sudhaharan , T . , and Ahmed , S . ( 2008 ) . The Cdc42 effector IRSp53 generates ﬁlopodia by coupling membrane protrusion with actin dynamics . J . Biol . Chem . 29 , 20454 – 20472 . 45 . Veksler , A . , and Gov , N . S . ( 2007 ) . Phase transitions of the coupled membrane - cytoskeleton modify cellular shape . Biophys . J . 93 , 3798 – 3810 . 46 . Adrian , M . , Dubochet , J . , Lepault , J . , and McDowall , A . W . ( 1984 ) . Cryo - electron microscopy of viruses . Nature 5954 , 32 – 36 . Membrane Deformation by I - BAR Domain Proteins 107