A BSTRACT All teachers hope that students learn to apply and analyze , rather than simply memorize or parrot back , the teacher ’ s words . One method of encouraging the development of students ’ higher - level thinking skills is to give learners practice in identifying appropriate analogies for biological concepts , and in forming their own . Analogies focus on the larger concepts we are trying to teach , rather than specific biological details or actual biological examples . They are fun to practice in class , and this practice prepares students for similar test questions . Key Words : Analogy ; analogies ; teaching ; biology . Most educators are aware of the levels of the cognitive domain first established by Bloom and later revised by Anderson and Krahwohl . Occasionally the distinction between levels can be fuzzy , but it is vital – at least – to distinguish lower levels of thinking , such as rote mem - orization , from higher levels in which knowledge is applied , com - bined , or evaluated . It is not wrong to ask basic - level questions of our students – and , in fact , there are many instances in which rote memorization is required – though it is usually preferable not to limit our questions to this level . When students really understand a con - cept , they are able to apply it to diverse situations , which is a higher learning level than merely being able to parrot a concept back to the teacher . For example , after providing students with various real - life examples of natural selection , I often ask them to pair up and , for two minutes , make up an example of natural selection . They can even use imaginary crea - tures . Doing this encourages students to apply what they have learned and to integrate the concepts . When presenting their scenar - ios to the class , we discuss whether they have remembered to include a mutation ; whether they have specified how the resulting new allele helps the organism to reproduce , not merely be “ big and strong ” ; and how the frequency of that allele will increase in the population over time . By creating their own scenario , students apply personally relevant principles to new sit - uations , and comprehension of the concepts should thus become more deeply ingrained . Because science classes often include abstract concepts , and because analogies relate abstract concepts to ideas we are more familiar with , analogies are ideal for use in science teaching . Analogies promote higher - level thinking and help students grasp new concepts . Analogies are interesting and engaging to students and increase their confidence that they can learn abstract material ( Orgill & Bodner , 2004 ; Orgill & Thomas , 2006 ) . By asking students to describe how an analogy describes a scientific idea , and to point out where the analogy is not quite accurate ( no analogy completely reflects reality ) , we get students to think more deeply about the scientific principle . Then , by forming their own analogies , they apply their knowledge ( Orgill & Thomas , 2006 ) . Analogies should not be taken too far and should not become the limit of a student ’ s understanding ; this can sometimes be prevented by using multiple analogies combined with other learning methods . For example , we don ’ t want our students ’ understanding of the mito - chondrion to be limited to “ the power plant of the cell ” ( Orgill & Bodner , 2004 ) , although this may be a great place to start . Analo - gies are useful for both child and adult education . The authors of a middle school pedagogy study note that their students enjoyed analogies but sometimes would rather just learn by answering ques - tions instead , because it took less time . But they point out that if we are to produce creative students who are able to solve personal and societal problems , we need to encour - age analogy use to promote the needed creativity ( BouJaoude & Tamim , 2008 ) . We can present new concepts by analogy , and we can also test understanding of concepts by asking students to identify concepts illus - trated by analogy , or to form their own analo - gies . As an exercise , students pick a biological topic we ’ ve discussed in class and analogize it to something they are familiar with , explaining and defending their analogy . Analogies promote higher - level thinking and help students grasp new concepts . The American Biology Teacher , Vol . 78 , No 6 , pages . 512 – 514 , ISSN 0002 - 7685 , electronic ISSN 1938 - 4211 . © 2016 National Association of Biology Teachers . All rights reserved . Please direct all requests for permission to photocopy or reproduce article content through the University of California Press ’ s Reprints and Permissions web page , www . ucpress . edu / journals . php ? p = reprints . DOI : 10 . 1525 / abt . 2016 . 78 . 6 . 512 . THE AMERICAN BIOLOGY TEACHER VOLUME . 78 , NO . 6 , AUGUST 2016 512 T I P S , T R I C K S & T E C H N I Q U E S Teaching Biology with Extended Analogies • RICHARD D . GARDNER I have found it useful and engaging to present my students with “ extended analogy ” matching questions , as classroom practice . In them , students must connect a hypothetical scenario to a scien - tific concept . Like the use of imaginary creatures to support an understanding of natural selection , these matching questions require students to think more deeply about the underlying con - cepts . These matching sets can also appear on tests . I have learned by experience not to ask overly abstract analogy questions on tests , without first preparing students with practice questions during class time or as homework . But such questions , even on tests , can help students learn conceptual understanding ( Jensen et al . , 2014 ) . There is a “ right answer ” for each question , but I encourage students who choose a different answer to explain their reasoning , and if they can defend the logic of their choice , it deserves to be given credit , either verbally ( during classroom practice ) or in points ( on a test ) . Here are two sets of analogy matching questions that I use in my college courses , along with my answers . I use these analogies in this matching - question format to test understanding ( either informally in class or on a test ) after students have studied a con - cept , but they can also be used to introduce concepts . One of these sets is for an introductory course for nonmajors , and the other is for an advanced course for biology majors . First , consider the following example from a unit on cellular transport and energetics in the nonmajors course : Cellular Transport & Energetics Scenarios Answer list : • Enzyme specificity • Active site • Denaturation • Feedback inhibition • Diffusion • Gradient • Active transport • Enzyme • Metabolic pathway ( 1 ) You are bored , so you tinker with your door ’ s lock . When you alter the keyhole , the key no longer fits and the lock no longer works . What part did you alter ? ( The active site . Although the “ induced fit ” model is more technically correct , the lock - and - key model works well as an introduction for beginning students . Induced fit is just a more flexible lock . ) ( 2 ) You melt the lock in a really hot fire , and it no longer works . ( Denaturation , because you changed the shape of the lock / enzyme . ) ( 3 ) Your friend often sets up people on blind dates . In fact , his work has resulted in 50 weddings , but he is still single . ( Enzyme , because it facilitates reactions but does not itself get used up . ) ( 4 ) Your friend gets a job in the zoo working with chimpan - zees ( which are closely related to humans ) but is unable to set them up on dates . Evidently he can only match humans together . ( Enzyme specificity – enzymes require the correct substrate . ) ( 5 ) One hundred thousand people are in a stadium out in the middle of a sparsely populated desert area . ( Gradient – an area of high concentration and an area of low concentration . ) ( 6 ) One hundred thousand people are in a stadium , but when the game is over , they disperse in all directions . ( Diffu - sion , because they are moving from an area of high con - centration to areas of low concentration in a random sort of way . ) ( 7 ) On a tour of a car factory , you notice that cars are made not all at once , but step - by - step down the assembly line . First the chassis , then the engine is added , then the wheels , then the seats , etc . ( Metabolic pathway – a step - by - step synthesis of a final product . ) ( 8 ) You take 100 dogs who dislike each other and force them into a room together . ( Active transport – it requires energy to make them go where they don ’ t want to go . ) ( 9 ) Your robot factory is automated so that when there are too many being produced , some of them will hold down the off switch on the assembly line . But as the robots are sold , there are fewer of them to hold down the off switch , so that even - tually the assembly line turns on again . ( Feedback inhibi - tion – the metabolic pathway can shut off its own production . ) Next is an example of the strategy for a genetics course taken by biology majors who should have a good grasp on basic biology : Genetic Scenarios Answer list : • Codominance • Dominant negative • Epistasis • Lethality • Incomplete dominance • Maternal effect • Mitochondrial inheritance • Pleiotropy • Sex - linked ( or X - linked ) trait ( 1 ) The C allele leads people to drive Corvettes , and the V allele of the same gene leads people to drive Dodge Vipers . ( Note that this breaks the normal convention for using uppercase and lowercase letters as alleles . ) CC individuals therefore drive Corvettes , and VV individuals drive Dodge Vipers . But CV individuals drive both kinds of car . ( Codominance , because neither allele is dominant to the other ; those with both alleles have both traits . ) ( 2 ) A mutant chicken has paint glands , so that her eggs come out blue , yellow , purple , and green . In fact , some of this paint penetrates the shell so that the chicks come out col - ored as well . You might assume that these chicks have a mutation , but they are wild type . ( Maternal effect , THE AMERICAN BIOLOGY TEACHER EXTENDED ANALOGIES 513 because it is the mutation in the mother , rather than the offspring , that forms the offspring ’ s phenotype . ) ( 3 ) In cookies , the C allele promotes the inclusion of chocolate chips , while the c allele promotes the inclusion of caramel chips . So CC or Cc cookies taste chocolatey and cc cookies taste like caramel . But the rare dominant allele of the S gene promotes a tenfold higher salt concentration than normal , so SS or Ss cookies taste only salty – if you can eat them at all – in spite of which flavor they would other - wise have . ( Epistasis , in which the actions of one gene block the actions of another . Or two different genes – not to be confused with two different alleles of the same gene – are responsible for one phenotype . ) ( 4 ) You have two cars : one runs , and one does not . You would think that using the running car , you could get to work . But the non - running car is parked behind the running car in the narrow driveway , so you cannot get to work . ( Dominant negative , in which a nonfunctional allele that usually would act recessively exerts a dominant effect , which leads to no gene function . ) ( 5 ) In Shenandoah Skunks , the S allele leads to stinkiness , and the s allele is nonfunctional . You cross Ss males to Ss females . Of the offspring , you don ’ t find any that are SS . Turns out , SS skunks smell so bad they die in the womb . But you do find the expected number of Ss and ss skunks . There are two situations that should come to mind . ( Lethality , because SS skunks die ; and incomplete domi - nance , because the more S alleles , the greater the smell ; SS is stinkier than Ss . ) ( 6 ) While driving your car , it suddenly begins to overheat , and , at the same time , the power steering ceases to func - tion . You wonder what the chances are of two mechanical malfunctions happening at once ! But your mechanic informs you that a broken belt caused both of these prob - lems . ( Pleiotropy , in which one mutation has multiple effects . ) ( 7 ) Remote control hogging is genetically controlled . Occasion - ally women have this trait , but usually men are affected . When a man has the trait , his children never do ( unless the mother is a carrier or is herself affected ) . ( X - linkage , in which traits pass from carrier mothers to sons , and women are not affected unless they are homozygous . ) ( 8 ) Female dragons with a mutation that results in very little ATP production crossed to normal males result in off - spring that are all mutant . But crossing normal females to mutant males results in all normal offspring . ( Mitochon - drial effect , since the trait is passed on from mothers only . Another hint is the lack of ATP production when the mito - chondria are less functional , which the students in this course should recognize . ) Now that you have seen how these extended analogies can be used , you can create your own ( and ask your students to create their own ) and adapt them for use in different classroom situations in various courses and levels . They will engage both the students and the teacher . References Anderson , L . W . & Krathwohl , D . ( Eds . ) ( 2001 ) . A Taxonomy for Learning , Teaching , and Assessing : A Revision of Blooms Taxonomy of Educational Objectives . New York , NY : Longman . Bloom , B . S . ( Ed . ) ( 1956 ) . Taxonomy of Educational Objectives : The Classification of Educational Goals . New York , NY : McKay . BouJaoude , S . & Tamim , R . ( 2008 ) . Middle school students ’ perceptions of the instructional value of analogies , summaries and answering questions in life science . Science Educator , 17 , 72 – 78 . Jensen , J . L . , McDaniel , M . A . , Woodard , S . M . & Kummer , T . A . ( 2014 ) . Teaching to the test . . . ortesting to teach : exams requiring higher order thinking skills encourage greater conceptual understanding . Educational Psychology Review , 26 , 307 – 329 . Orgill , M . & Bodner , G . ( 2004 ) . What research tells us about using analogies to teach chemistry . Chemistry Education : Research and Practice , 5 , 15 – 32 . Orgill , M . & Thomas , M . ( 2007 ) . Analogies and the 5E model . Science Teacher , 74 ( 1 ) , 40 – 45 . RICHARD D . GARDNER is an Associate Professor of Biology at Southern Virginia University , 1 University Hill Dr . , Buena Vista , VA 24416 ; e - mail : richard . gardner @ svu . edu . THE AMERICAN BIOLOGY TEACHER VOLUME . 78 , NO . 6 , AUGUST 2016 514