The design of children’s technology Allison Druin , editor Morgan Kaufmann , 1999 When is the last time you read a book that you told all your friends to read ? One that would change their lives ; would encourage them ; they’d enjoy it and they’d see the world in a new light ? Children today are beleaguered : they watch too much television and become passive ; they play nasty computer games that inspire some of them to real crimes ; health and safety concerns , to say nothing about worries of predators on the internet , force us to make their lives riskless and unexciting . How is this generation to grow up to become the world’s next leaders ? Despair , for the future is in their hands ! Adults today are beleaguered too . Even the local gym is full of PCs , making the workers sit awkwardly and hasten the handicapped days of repetitive strain injury . The computer is our new slave master , and even researchers trying to find ways of making computers better are stuck in ruts , led by tenure track or research assessment exercises . The design of children’s technology says the sorts of things you’d expect it to say . If you are designing for children , sit on the floor and listen to them . Teachers are disempowered by educational material that makes them no more than IT technicians . It says things you didn’t expect it to say . Designing with children removes our blinkers . Computer systems can be much more creative , persuasive , useful and enjoyable . The book is of course full of creative and engaging systems , from movie authoring systems , functional programming , robotics , virtual reality , and touches real issues like pollution , traffic jams and food cycles , and of course says a lot about the learning experience . As The design of children’s technology is an edited book with 29 authors and 11 chapters , it covers a huge and very varied range of issues . It has stuff for interaction designers , and stuff for advanced programmers who , say , might want to know the difference between Turing Complete and Pac Man Complete . You will find something interesting in it , whatever your relation to technology or children . But why stop at children ? Why don’t we think like this with all technology design ? Why don’t we sit down with users when we design new systems , rather than just impose our preconceptions ? One reason is that we think we understand other people ; and of course we don’t — that is why a book about the design of children’s technology is an eye opener : we know we don’t understand children because we are not children , as we’re often reminded when the things we make for them fail . It’s uncontentious , then , that we must engage children effectively in the design process . If we do so , we will end up with better things , not just building more effective learning and discovery environments for children , but discovering ourselves : both how we were as children , and how we can be . In short , The design of children’s technology tells how people can learn about the world , understand asthma , learn to program , learn Chinese music or build an electron microscope , learn mathematics or , which is what it is all about , become better designers and effective agents for change . The design of children’s technology tells how we can create a better world for people , that pulls us all out the conventional mental slavery of consumer technology into active participation of understanding and creating a new world . Harold Thimbleby is Director of UCLIC , the University College London Interaction Centre , a London - based research centre in human - computer interaction . See www . uclic . ucl . ac . uk / harold