Australasian Journal of Educational Technology 2006 , 22 ( 3 ) , 336 - 354 Promoting conceptual change through active learning using open source software for physics simulations Mustafa Baser Abant Izzet Baysal University , Turkey This paper reports upon an active learning approach that promotes conceptual change when studying direct current electricity circuits , using free open source software , Qucs . The study involved a total of 102 prospective mathematics teacher students . Prior to instruction , students’ understanding of direct current electricity was determined by a subset of a previously developed multiple choice conceptual test . All students received an active learning instruction using Qucs simulations . After instruction , the same test was administered to the students to determine the effectiveness of the instruction they received . Paired t - test analyses showed that students’ progress on understanding of direct current electricity was significant . A six week delayed post - test revealed that this observed improvement promised to be durable , at least in the short term . Students ' evaluation of using Qucs is also reported . Introduction Although physics researchers frequently use free open source software in their research and preparing their research reports ( e . g . , Octave , Gnuplot , LaTeX ) , articles describing how to use open source as a teaching resource are relatively rare . Free and open source software ( F / OSS or FOSS ) is software which is liberally licensed to grant the right of users to study , change , and improve its design through the availability of its source code ( for example see http : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / FOSS ) . Qucs is FOSS for simulating complicated analog electric circuits . Although Qucs is not designed for teaching simple electric circuits , this paper provides evidence that it can be used by physics educators to build active learning environments for teaching simple electric circuits . Physics educators know that students come to physics classes with a range of misconceptions ( Novak , 2002 ) . Passive learning environments in traditional instruction do not help students to attain conceptual change Baser 337 ( e . g . Eryilmaz , 2002 ; Liégeois et al . , 2003 ) . Misconceptions arise from prior experiences and misinterpretations of information at hand ( Tsai , 2001 ; Sungur , Tekkaya & Geban , 2001 ) , resulting in naive understandings that are inconsistent with the scientific view ( Duit , 2002 ) . In general , misconceptions are resistant to change ( Ronen & Eliahu , 2000 ) . Changing students’ concepts is not simply the adding of new information , but is a process that enables students to synthesise models in their own minds , beginning with their existing explanatory frameworks ( Vosniadou , 2002 ) . According to Chi and Roscoe ( 2002 ) , conceptual change is repair of misconceptions . Starting with naive conceptions , the instruction must help students to identify their faulty conceptions and repair them . In this view , misconceptions are miscategorisations of concepts , so conceptual change is the reassignment of concepts to correct categories . Thus , physics instructors need to search for a new philosophy in which learners are actively constructing their own knowledge ( Jong et al . , 1998 ) , and instructors recognise students’ previous difficulties ( Cataloglu , 2006 ) . These are the key concepts of constructivism where students’ are encouraged to construct their own knowledge based on their existing knowledge and through an active participation . Studies on direct current electricity The abstract nature of concepts in electricity leads students to develop many misconceptions related to concepts of current , potential difference , complete circuit , and power dissipated within a circuit element . These misconceptions have been the focus of many studies in physics education ( e . g . , McDermott & Shaffer , 1992a ; Lee & Law , 2001 ; Engelhardt & Beichner , 2004 ; Sencar & Eryilmaz , 2004 ; Periago & Bohigas , 2005 ) , are common to both students and teachers , and are observed in various countries ( Shipstone et al . , 1998 ) . Many young students considered that a single wire is enough to carry current from the positive terminal of the battery to a bulb ( sink model , Fredette & Lochhead , 1998 ) . Alternatively , some students think that currents coming from positive and negative terminal meet at the bulb , are used up in the bulb and shine it ( clashing current , Osborne , 1983 ) . Many students thought that current flows in one direction around the circuit and is being used up so less is available to other elements further along in the circuit ( sequence model , Shipstone et al , 1984 ; attenuation model , Osborne , 1983 ) . When students are asked to deduce potential difference from resistance and current information , most of them relied only on current , and ignored or underestimated the importance of resistance information ( Liégeois & Mullet , 2002 ; Liégeois et al . , 2003 ) . This caused another misconception that , in an open circuit , there is no potential difference ( Engelhardt & Beichner , 2004 ) . Students also have many difficulties in 338 Australasian Journal of Educational Technology , 2006 , 22 ( 3 ) analysing electric circuits . For example , if a circuit is modified , they tend to analyse only the modified part of the circuit ( localist approach ) rather than the whole circuit ( Cohen , Eylon & Ganiel , 1983 ) . Students also have difficulty with electric diagrams and short circuit . A complete list of students’ difficulties and misconceptions related to direct current electricity is provided by Engelhardt and Beichner ( 2004 ) . Studies showed that traditional electricity courses does not much alter students ' misconceptions ( e . g . , Jaakkola , Nurmi & Lehtinen , 2005 ; Jaakkola & Nurmi , 2004 ; Liégeois & Mullet , 2002 ) . Evans ( 1978 ) suggested a teaching strategy which enforces qualitative understanding of electric circuits . Evans used batteries and bulbs as teaching material . Upcoming researchers used Evans’ teaching strategies that utilise batteries and bulbs as teaching materials , to foster understanding of concepts related to simple electric circuits ( e . g . , Engelhardt , Gray & Rebello , 2004 ; Slater , Adams & Brown , 2000 ; McDermott & Shaffer , 1992b ) . For example , Ates ( 2005 ) applied a teaching strategy based on a learning cycle method that included batteries and bulbs . He found that providing constructivist teaching with batteries and bulbs used as primary teaching materials was effective in increasing students’ understanding of simple electric circuits . Other methods that take students ' misconceptions into account seems to be effective for changing misconceptions related to the electric circuits . For example , Wang and Andre ( 1991 ) demonstrated that texts developed for facilitating conceptual change improved acquisition of qualitative concepts about simple electrical circuits . Laboratory based activities improve students’ conceptual understanding of current electricity ( McDermott & Shaffer , 1992b ) . On the other hand , some deep misconceptions may not be altered by direct experience with the real electric circuits ( Ronen & Eliahu , 2000 ) . Computer simulations and active learning In general , traditional physics experiments aim at convincingly demonstrating concepts . This means that the result obtained from the experiment should agree sufficiently well with the predicted value to persuade the student that the concept is true . Owing to apparatus or method reasons , agreement is often not satisfactory . Thus , students are usually left questioning why there is such a discrepancy ( Sethi , 2005 ) . This may cause students to disbelieve the experiment that they carried out and the fostering of conceptual change fails . However , computer simulations provide exact agreement with the predicted outcomes , thus reinforcing students ' understanding of relationships between variables . Constructivist approaches emphasise active learning ( Donaldson , 2005 ) which is described as “providing opportunities for students to meaningfully talk and listen , write , read , and reflect on the content , ideas , Baser 339 issues , and concerns of an academic subject” ( Meyers & Jones , 1993 , p . 6 ) . One way of creating an active learning environment is the use of “What if…” questions ( IDS , 2002 , p . 8 - 1 ; Sokoloff & Thornton , 1997 ) . Computer simulations can be used to build such an environment . For example , Mzoughi et al . ( 2005 ) used WebTop with “what will happen if …” kinds of questions , to provide an ideal mechanism for creating an active learning environment . Studies showed that computer simulations contribute to students ' understanding of physics concepts . Dori et al . ( 2003 ) indicated that visualising abstract concepts in physics by simulations enhances students’ conceptual understanding , and promotes active learning . Students in their study said that utilising computer simulations contributed to their conceptual understanding . Sethi ( 2005 ) explained how to set up virtual laboratories to enhance learning in physics . Papaevripidou , Hadjiagapiou and Constantinou ( 2005 ) used computer simulations to foster conceptual understanding in conservation of momentum . Lee , Nicol and Brooks ( 2004 ) indicated that Physlets ( undated ) are very useful for correcting student misconceptions . Physlets ( Physics Applets ) are small , flexible Java applets designed for science education . Jaakkola , Nurmi and Lehtinen ( 2005 ) used Electricity Exploration Tool to simulate electric circuits and showed that a computer simulation was able to improve students’ understanding of current electricity compared to the laboratory work . Free open source software ( FOSS ) in physics education Thompson ( 2002 , p . 101 ) explained the importance of the use of FOSS in education in these terms : … open source software will provide new and exciting possibilities for educators . Obviously , the free or low cost availability of open source software has great appeal for educators at all levels … the opportunity provided by open source software for education to adapt software to the needs of their students . In the same way a teacher might adapt a lesson plan to his or her needs ; open source software may provide the opportunity to adapt a software program . Moelter ( undated ) from California Polytechnic State University uses free open source software , Vpython , simulations to discuss what to expect in advance of showing the result . VPython is used as a teaching material by Salgado ( undated ) at the Department of Physics , Syracuse University . Sethi ( 2005 ) demonstrated that physics educators can utilise free open source software to set up virtual physics laboratories that contribute students’ understanding of difficult physics subjects . Sanchez ( 2005 ) introduced Linux and other FOSS with special emphasis upon physics research and education . Cataloglu and Baser ( 2005 ) used FOSS to teach vectors to freshman physics students . They concluded that the software 340 Australasian Journal of Educational Technology , 2006 , 22 ( 3 ) they used enhanced students’ understanding of vectors . Another similar study was done by Cataloglu ( 2006 ) . He found that students who utilised FOSS in their learning performed better than students who did not . Most educational software that simulates electric circuits implements only predefined circuits ( e . g . DC Circuits Challenge ) . These types of simulations fail to create active learning environments because students cannot alter the circuits . Instructors cannot ask “what happens if we modify the circuit…” kinds of questions to build an active learning environment . Spice is a general purpose FOSS circuit simulation program for nonlinear DC , nonlinear transient , and linear AC analyses . The use of spice in electric circuit lessons is suggested by Kuphaldt ( 2006 ) in his Lessons in Electric Circuits which is a series of free textbooks on the subjects of electricity and electronics . Using spice is not easy because it requires the writing of a ' netlist ' which describes a circuit . This non - visual property of spice inhibits its use in elementary physics courses . Qucs is an integrated circuit simulator having a graphical user interface ( GUI ) for circuit setup , to simulate the large - signal , small - signal and noise behavior of the circuit . After that simulation has finished one can view the simulation results on a presentation page or window . As setting up a circuit in Qucs is very easy , it is possible to use it with little difficulty in first year physics courses to simulate circuits . GEDA is another FOSS visual circuit simulator that can be used instead of Qucs . One can use similar commercial circuit simulators to build active learning environments and promote conceptual change . For example , Pspice and CircuitMaker are other commercial circuit simulators very similar to Qucs . However , this study concentrates upon free open source software to promote conceptual understanding , and thus Qucs was chosen as the circuit simulator instead of a commercial equivalent . Method Purpose The first purpose for this study is to investigate the building of an active learning environment utilising Qucs FOSS for simple DC circuit simulations . The second purpose is to test the immediate and delayed contribution of Qucs simulations to students’ understanding of DC circuits . Subjects and setting The students participating in this study were pre - service elementary mathematics teacher students , enrolled in two classes of a science education course at Abant Izzet Baysal University ( n = 102 , male = 59 , female = 43 ) . As a minor area for elementary mathematics teachers is science education , they had previously studied General Physics II , a calculus based course that includes the topics of static electricity , direct current circuits Baser 341 and magnetism . The students ranged in age from 21 - 24 years and their native language and language of instruction was Turkish . Students worked individually on computers . Experimental design and instruments To explore the effectiveness of Qucs simulations on developing students’ understanding , the direct current electricity test ( DCET ) was administered to all students at the beginning of the instruction , immediately after instruction and six weeks after instruction . The questions in the DCET were multiple choice items with five alternatives , selected from version 1 . 2 of DIRECT developed by Engelhardt and Beichner ( 2004 ) . Since it would not be possible to teach all the concepts assessed by DIRECT with Qucs simulations , the objectives listed in Table 1 were selected . DCET consisted of 16 questions from DIRECT , selected according to the objectives in Table 1 . The test was translated and adapted to Turkish by the author . The translated version of DIRECT was examined and verified by two physics instructors experienced in English . Prior to this study , the test was applied to a total of 243 elementary school , elementary science , and mathematics pre - service teachers . The range , mean , standard deviation and reliability ( KR20 ) of the Turkish version were 6 - 25 , 14 . 90 , 4 . 61 and 0 . 71 respectively . Table 1 : Objectives for DCET and number of questions assessing each objective Objective Number of questions O1 . To Identify and explain a short circuit 3 O2 . To understand open circuit 2 O3 . To understand and apply conservation of current to simple direct current circuits 2 O4 . To understand and apply that the amount of current is influenced by the potential difference provided by the battery and resistance in the circuit . 3 O5 . To apply the concept of potential difference to circuits . 5 O4 and O5 combined 1 All the tests were web based and served by a Python script written by author . At the end of the treatment , students were given an evaluation questionnaire containing 11 Likert type items . The purpose for this evaluation was to obtain students’ perceptions of using Qucs in learning physics . The activity sequence Since the students had studied an electricity course ( General Physics II ) one year before this investigation , principles of direct current electricity were discussed with students for two hours in case they had forgotten the principles included in current electricity . In this short lecture , the following 342 Australasian Journal of Educational Technology , 2006 , 22 ( 3 ) topics were summarised : potential difference , current , resistance , parallel and series combinations of resistors and batteries , measurement of current and potential difference , Ohm’s and Kirchhoff’s rules , and power dissipation in a circuit element . Some numerical problems were also solved . After this short introduction , students were administered DCET as a pre - test . After the pre - test , students in two classes were randomly divided into four groups , nearly 26 students in each group ( a total of four groups ) . Students from each group were brought to a computer laboratory having 26 computers where each worked individually . The students spent six hours in two sessions , each lasting three hours ( one session per week ) in the computer laboratory to fulfill the tasks . There were 19 simulation tasks that covered topics identified by objectives in Table 1 . For some of the circuit simulations , experiments from Physics by Inquiry ( McDermott et al . , 1996 ) were used . In the first hour of the first computer session , students were introduced to the Linux operating system and some of the educational software in KDE - Edu , high quality FOSS educational software collection for the K Desktop Environment . For example , since these students will become mathematics teachers , they were advised about using KmPlot , a mathematical function plotter for the KDE . The possibility of using some other software such as KTurtle in their teaching careers had also been demonstrated . Although the participants had not used Linux OS previously , it was noticed that their motivation toward Linux OS and KDE software was very high . Simulation tasks were assigned by the researcher . The researcher tried to ensure that collaborative learning did not take place while students performed the given task . After the students finished each task individually , a whole class discussion was conducted to provide an opportunity for them to reflect on their findings . The next step was to introduce Qucs to students . An extensive Turkish tutorial on using Qucs for beginners was prepared by the author . Students used this tutorial as supplementary material throughout their study with Qucs ( in Turkish , at http : / / mbaser . web . ibu . edu . tr / Qucs / , translation by the author ) . As an introduction , students set up a simple circuit containing a battery , a resistor and an ammeter as shown in Figure 1 . Figures give screenshots for an English reader although the students used the Turkish version of Qucs . After the first circuit with which students learned using Qucs to simulate electric circuits , students asked “what happens … if I …” questions to build an active learning environment as Sokoloff and Thornton ( 1997 ) suggested . The first question was “What happens to the current read by the ammeter Baser 343 Figure 1 : A simple circuit simulation with Qucs if I add an equivalent resistor in series to the first resistor ? ” Students set up the circuit and observed the change in the current probed by the ammeter . Students were asked to infer the change in power dissipation in the first resistor after modification . Then students were asked to add another series resistor to the circuit . Some of the questions for were : • What will happen to current passing through R2 if I short circuit R1 ? • What will happen to the power delivered to circuit by the battery if I open the branch connecting R3 ? • What will happen to the potential difference across resistor R2 if I add another equivalent battery in series to the first battery ? • What will happen to the potential difference across resistor R2 if I add another equivalent battery in parallel to the first battery ? As an example students first set up the circuit shown in Figure 2 where all circuit components are identical . In this circuit two parallel resistors are connected in series to another resistor . When students were asked to explain the change in current through R1 when R2 is short circuited , most 344 Australasian Journal of Educational Technology , 2006 , 22 ( 3 ) tended to analyse locally . That is , they considered only changes through R3 and responded that current through R1 remains the same . When students simulated the change , they saw that current through R1 changes as well as through R3 . These types of activities provide a means for attaining an active learning environment and promoting conceptual understanding . Figure 2 : Two parallel resistors connected in series to a third resistor There was no voltmeter object in Qucs to measure potential difference across a circuit element when this study was made . Instead , Qucs can measure potential on a point with respect to ground . It was speechless for students when they first encountered “potential on a point” . But subsequent information provided for them makes the concept of potential on a point clear . This relied on an analogy for potential drop , as depicted in Figure 3 . Baser 345 Figure 3 . Ladder analogy for potential drop in electric circuits This analogy enables students to understand “potential drop” as well as the cause of current in a circuit element . After this analogy and measuring potential drop in circuits , many participants in this study made statements such as “Before this analogy I always thought that the cause of potential difference across a circuit element is the current flowing through it . But now I can safely say that , the current through a circuit element is due to the potential difference across it . ” After two sessions totalling 6 hours were completed , the DCET was administered as a post - test . The evaluation questionnaire was given also . Results Development of students understanding in direct current electricity To evaluate the effectiveness of Qucs simulations , all students were administered DCET before the treatment and after the treatment . A six week delayed post - test also was administered to assess whether the change in achievement was durable . The data was analysed by using Rweb , a web interface for R , a free software environment for statistical computing and graphics . Paired t - test was used to evaluate students’ progress in understanding of direct current electricity concepts as measured by DCET . The analysis of data for comparison of pre and post DCET scores is shown in Table 2 . 346 Australasian Journal of Educational Technology , 2006 , 22 ( 3 ) Table 2 : Measures obtained from testing of significance of the difference between pre - and post - means of direct current electricity test ( DCET ) Tests n mean s df t - value p Pre DECT 7 . 25 2 . 22 101 16 . 33 0 . 00 * Post DECT 102 10 . 55 2 . 08 * p < 0 . 05 The results showed that there was a significant difference between the pre and post - test mean scores of the students who received active learning instruction with Qucs simulations ( Figure 4 ) . It can be concluded that post - test scores were significantly improved : the average percent of correct responses increased from 45 . 3 % to 65 . 9 % , resulting in average normalised gain , < g > = 0 . 38 . The overall average normalised gain ( see Appendix for a description ) for students in this study was in the “medium” category as defined by Hake ( 1998 ) . Gains for individual objectives ( Table 3 ) showed least improvement for objective 4 and paired t - test analyses revealed that it was not significant . Figure 4 : Proportions of correct responses in pre - DCET and post - DCET by objective as listed in Table 1 Table 3 : Average normalised gain by objective on DECT Objective < g > Category O1 0 . 4 Medium O2 0 . 3 Medium O3 0 . 2 Low O4 0 . 1 Low O5 0 . 6 Medium Baser 347 The questions for assessing objective 4 were related to power dissipation in circuits . For example , in one question , where all circuit elements are identical , a bulb is connected to a battery in the first circuit . In the second circuit , two bulbs in series were connected to a battery . Students were asked to compare the brightness of the bulbs . More than 90 % of the students selected an incorrect answer for this question . This indicated that students still thought that the brightness of a bulb was directly related to the current passing through it ( I ) rather than power consumed in the bulb ( I 2 R ) . Thus , it can be concluded that the instruction based on Qucs simulations failed to change misconceptions related to power consumption in a circuit . As this result was unexpected , seven students who had given incorrect answers to this question were interviewed . Students were asked to express their reasoning ; and all confirmed their incorrect conception of a direct relationship between the current and the brightness of a bulb . The greatest gain was obtained with objective 5 . The questions for objective 5 were related to comparisons of potential differences between two points when a circuit is modified or in an open circuit . For example , in one question , students were asked about a potential difference across two points where a current does not exist . In the pretest , 84 . 3 % of the students selected zero potential . When students were asked to reveal their reasoning , they stated that “Potential difference equals current times resistance . Since there is no current , potential difference is zero” . This way of thinking is consistent with the results obtained by Liégeois et al . ( 2003 ) . Almost all students ( 95 . 1 % ) answered this question correctly in the post test . The treatment seemed to be successful in changing this misconception . Table 4 : Measures obtained from testing of significance of the difference between post and delayed post means of direct current electricity test ( DCET ) Tests n mean s df t - value p Post DECT 10 . 55 2 . 08 Delayed post DECT 102 10 . 41 1 . 82 101 1 . 77 0 . 80 Paired t - test results for post and delayed post scores for DCET are shown in Table 4 . Analyses of data revealed no significant difference between post and delayed post DCET scores . This result suggests that students’ improved understanding of electric circuits was durable . The mean of the retention DCET was 10 . 41 and average percent of correct responses was 65 % . It can be said that changes in conceptual understanding of direct current circuits by Qucs simulations were retained at least in the short term . 348 Australasian Journal of Educational Technology , 2006 , 22 ( 3 ) Students ' evaluation of treatment and Qucs Students were administrated an evaluation questionnaire having 11 Likert type items , after the treatment . Students selected one of the alternatives : fully agree ( 5 ) , agree ( 4 ) , undecided ( 3 ) , not agree ( 2 ) , fully disagree ( 1 ) . The results are shown in Table 5 . Table 5 : Students evaluations of treatment and Qucs Item Averagescore ( out of 5 ) 1 The contribution of computer simulations to my understanding of electric circuits is comparable that of real laboratory experiments . 4 . 54 2 Computer simulations contributed to my understanding of electric circuits . 4 . 58 3 Topic of electricity become fun with computer simulations . 4 . 70 4 I would better understand other subjects of physics if I had chance to use computer simulations . 4 . 48 5 It is easy to make electric simulations with Qucs . 4 . 19 6 The software we used is sufficient for electric circuit simulations . 3 . 98 7 The software we used matches the objectives of the General Physics II course . 4 . 48 8 I suggest these simulations for other students who learn electric circuits . 4 . 66 9 I enjoy making simulations of electric circuits with Qucs . 4 . 52 10 I enjoy setting up circuits that I want . 4 . 55 11 Using open source free software in teaching may contribute learning . 4 . 81 As Table - 5 indicates , students’ perceptions are positive toward computer simulations and Qucs . All students did simple electric circuit experiments during their General Physis II course one year before this study . High scores on item 1 indicated that students almost fully agreed that Qucs simulations contributed to their understanding of electric circuits , compared with real laboratory experiments . Although the average score for item 6 was quite high , students had some suggestions . For example , some wondered why they could not measure potential difference rather than measuring potential at a point ( actually they are measuring potential difference between a point and the ground ) . This suggestion was quoted to the developers of Qucs and they intend to implement a ' voltmeter object ' in the next version . Qucs has facilities for users to save , retrieve and share a circuit simulation . As students seemed to like these features , the researchers asked whether they preferred to use saved circuit simulations or set up their own circuits . Only 17 % of the students indicated that they preferred to use saved circuit simulations . This preference could be the subject for further research . Baser 349 Conclusions The purpose for this study was to show the possibility of building an active learning environment by the use of free open source software , Qucs , and to evaluate its effectiveness upon students ' understanding of direct current electric circuits . The researcher feels that Qucs is a tool for improving students’ conceptual frameworks . It gives an opportunity for instructors to understand students’ thinking and to foster conceptual change . The analysis of data indicated that students’ progress in understanding direct current electric circuits was significant and was retained after six weeks . Furthermore , students’ perceptions of the exercise and the software were very positive . Using Qucs simulations , students were asked “what will happen if …” kinds of questions to create an active learning environment , as Sokoloff and Thornton ( 1997 ) proposed . Students also were asked to analyse certain electric circuits , to produce numerical or qualitative answers to questions , and then to use Qucs to simulate the circuit and check their answers . Furthermore , the data obtained from Qucs simulations is exactly what is predicted , to convince the students that a concept is true ( Sethi , 2005 ) . These activities fostered conceptual change . Computer simulations should not make the experiment more difficult , either conceptually or procedurally , but should rather provide clear explanations and encourage understanding ( Redish & Risley , 1990 ) . According to students’ evaluation , one may conclude that it is easy to make cicuit simulations with Qucs . Traditional methods teaching of electric circuits depend highly on the mathematical applications of Ohm’s law , without going deeper into a qualitative analysis of it from the point of view of physics . Simulation exercises can be used ( Periago & Bohigas , 2005 ) to cope with this problem . This study used computer simulations to encourage qualitative reasoning and showed that the activities promoted students’ conceptual understanding of direct current electricity . The success of computer simulations in changing student’s conceptual understanding of direct current electric circuits does not indicate any possibility for completely replacing traditional laboratory experiments ( Forinash & Wisman , 2005 ) . The topic of electricity is so complex that development of understanding of simple circuits requires direct experiences and hands on activity with the real electric circuits ( Shipstone et al . , 1988 ) . However , effective combinations of real laboratory experiments with Qucs simulations should be checked as Jaakkola , Nurmi and Lehtinen ( 2005 ) did for Electricity Exploration Tool . 350 Australasian Journal of Educational Technology , 2006 , 22 ( 3 ) The result of this study provided evidence that free open source software , Qucs in this case , can be used successfully in physics teaching . Qucs can also be used to check the solution of chapter end problems from a textbook . Other possible uses may be in class demonstrations when teaching series and parallel connections of resistors . References Ates , S . ( 2005 ) . The effectiveness of the learning - cycle method on teaching DC circuits to prospective female and male science teachers . Research in Science & Technological Education , 23 ( 2 ) , 213 - 227 . Baser , M . ( 2003 ) . Effect of instruction based on conceptual change activities on students’ understanding of electrostatics concepts . Unpublished PhD dissertation , METU , Ankara . Cataloglu , E . ( 2006 ) . Open source software in teaching physics : A case study on vector algebra and visual representations . The Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology , 5 ( 1 ) , Article 8 . http : / / www . tojet . net / articles / 518 . htm Cataloglu , E . & Baser , M . ( 2005 ) . Open source software in teaching physics : A case study on vector algebra and visual representations . Open Source for Education in Europe , Research & Practice - Conference proceedings . Open University of the Netherlands . Heerlen , 2005 . http : / / www . openconference . net / viewpaper . php ? id = 28 & cf = 3 Chi , M . T . H . , & Roscoe , R . D . ( 2002 ) . The process and challenges of conceptual change . In M . Limon & L . Mason ( Eds ) , Reconsidering conceptual change : Issues in theory and practice ( pp . 3 - 27 ) . Dordrecht : Kluwer . CircuitMaker ( undated ) . CircuitMaker - the virtual electronics lab . http : / / www . microcode . com / [ verified 24 July 2006 ] Cohen , R . , Eylon , B . & Ganiel U . ( 1983 ) . Potential difference and current in simple electric circuits : A study of student’s concepts . American Journal of Physics , 51 ( 5 ) , 407 - 412 . DC Circuits Challenge ( undated ) . Training software for DC electrical circuits . http : / / www . etcai . com / page3 . html [ verified 24 July 2006 ] Donaldson , N . ( 2005 ) . Addressing misconceptions in a constructivist , application - based physics course . Paper presented at The Thirty - Fifth Annual Conference of the International Society for Exploring Teaching and Learning ( ISETL ) , 13 - 15 October , Cocoa Beach , Florida . [ verified 24 July 2006 ] http : / / www . isetl . org / conference / presentation . cfm ? pid = 215 Dori , Y . J . , Belcher , J . , Bessette , M . , Danziger , M . , McKinney , A . & Hult E . ( 2003 ) . Teaching for active learning . Materials Today , December 2003 , p 44 - 49 . Duit , R . ( 2002 ) . Conceptual change - still a powerful frame for improving science teaching and learning ? Paper presented at the Third European Symposium on Conceptual Change , 26 - 28 June , Turku , Finland . [ verified 24 July 2006 ; 2 . 3 MB ] http : / / www . edu . utu . fi / konf / Proceedings . pdf Baser 351 Electricity Exploration Tool ( undated ) . NLN learning materials . [ verified 24 July 2006 ] http : / / nln . mimas . ac . uk / Engelhardt , P . & Beichner , R . ( 2004 ) . Students understanding of direct current resistive electrical forces . American Journal of Physics , 72 ( 1 ) , 98 - 115 . Engelhardt , P . V . , Gray K . E . & Rebello , N . S . ( 2004 ) . How many students does it take before we see the light ? The Physics Teacher , 42 ( 4 ) , 216 - 221 . Eryilmaz , A . ( 2002 ) . Effects of conceptual assignments and conceptual change discussions on students ' misconceptions and achievement regarding force and motion . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 39 , 1001 - 1015 . Evans , J . 1978 . Teaching electricity with batteries and bulbs . The Physics Teacher , 16 ( 1 ) , 15 - 22 . Forinash K . & Wisman , R . ( 2005 ) . Building real laboratories on the internet . International Journal of Continuing Engineering Education and Lifelong Learning , 15 ( 1 / 2 ) , 56 - 66 . Fredette , N . & Lochhead , J . ( 1980 ) . Student conceptions of simple circuits . Physics Teacher , 18 ( 3 ) , 194 - 198 . GEDA ( undated ) . gEDA project homepage . http : / / www . geda . seul . org / Gnuplot ( undated ) . gnuplot homepage . http : / / www . gnuplot . info / Hake , R . ( 1998 ) . Interactive engagement versus traditional methods : A six - thousand student survey of mechanics test data for introductory physics courses . American Journal of Physics , 66 ( 1 ) , 64 - 74 IDS ( 2002 ) . Instruction at FSU : A guide to teaching and learning practices . 4th ed . Instructional Development Services , Florida State University . http : / / online . fsu . edu / learningresources / handbook / instructionatfsu / PDF - Cover - TOC . pdf [ verified 24 July 2006 ] Jaakkola , T . & Nurmi , S . ( 2004 ) . Academic impact of learning objectives : The case of electric circuits . Paper presented at Learning objects in the classroom : A European perspective , symposium at the British Educational Research Association annual conference , Manchester , 16 - 18 September . Jaakkola , T . , Nurmi , S . & Lehtinen , E . ( 2005 ) . In quest of understanding electricity - Binding simulation and laboratory work together . Paper for AERA ( American Educational Research Association ) 2005 conference . Montreal , Canada , 11 - 15 April . Kuphaldt , T . R . ( 2006 ) . Lessons In Electric Circuits . http : / / www . ibiblio . org / obp / electricCircuits / KDE - Edu ( undated ) . The KDE Edutainment Project . http : / / edu . kde . org / LaTeX ( undated ) . LaTeX project : LaTeX - A document preparation system . http : / / www . latex - project . org / Lee , K . M . , Nicoll , G . & Brooks , D . W . ( 2004 ) . A comparison of inquiry and worked example web - based instruction using physlets . Journal of Science and Technology , 13 ( 1 ) , 81 - 88 . 352 Australasian Journal of Educational Technology , 2006 , 22 ( 3 ) Lee , Y . & Law , N . ( 2001 ) . Explorations in promoting conceptual change in electrical concepts via ontological category shift . International Journal of Science Education , 23 ( 2 ) , 111 - 149 . Liégeois , L . & Mullet , E . ( 2002 ) . High school students ' understanding of resistance in simple series electric circuits . International Journal of Science Education , 24 ( 6 ) , 551 - 564 . Liégeois , L . , Chasseigne , G . , Papin , S . & Mullet , E . ( 2003 ) . Improving high school students ' understanding of potential difference in simple electric circuits . International Journal of Science Education , 25 ( 9 ) , 1129 - 1145 . McDermoot , L . C . et . al . ( 1996 ) . Physics by Inquiry , Volume II . John Wiley & Sons , Inc . , New York . McDermott , L . C . & P . S . Shaffer ( 1992a ) . Research as a guide for curriculum development : An example from introductory electricity . Part I : Investigation of student understanding . American Journal of Physics , 60 ( 11 ) , 994 - 1003 . McDermott , L . C . & P . S . Shaffer ( 1992b ) . Research as a guide for curriculum development : An example from introductory electricity . Part II : Design of instructional strategies . American Journal of Physics , 60 ( 11 ) , 1003 - 1013 . Meyers , C . & Jones , T . B . ( 1993 ) . Promoting active learning : Strategies for the college classroom . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Moelter , M . ( undated ) . VPython in Physics . [ verified 24 July 2006 ] http : / / www . calpoly . edu / ~ mmoelter / Python / VPython . html Mzoughi T . , Foley J . T . , Herring S . D . , Morris M . & Wyser B . ( 2005 ) . WebTOP : Web - based interactive 3D optics and waves ' simulations . Journal of Continuing Engineering Education and Life - Long Learning , 15 ( 1 / 2 ) , 79 - 94 Novak , J . D . ( 2002 ) . Meaningful learning : The essential factor for conceptual change in limited or inappropriate propositional hierarchies leading to empowerment of learners . Science Education , 86 , 548 - 571 . Octave ( undated ) . Octave homepage . http : / / www . gnu . org / software / octave / Osborne , R . ( 1983 ) Towards modifying children’s ideas about electric current . Research in Science and Technology Education , 1 ( 1 ) , 73 – 82 . Papaevripidou , M . , Hadjiagapiou , M . & Constantinou , C . P . ( 2005 ) . Combined development of middle school student’s conceptual understanding of momentum conservation , procedural skills and epistemological awareness in a constructionist learning environment . International Journal of Continuing Engineering Education and Life - Long Learning , 15 ( 1 / 2 ) , 95 – 107 . Periago , M . C . & Bohigas , X . ( 2005 ) . A study of second - year engineering students’ alternative conceptions about electric potential , current intensity and Ohm’s law . European Journal of Engineering Education , 30 ( 1 ) , 71 - 80 . Physlets ( undated ) . Physlets resource page . http : / / webphysics . davidson . edu / Applets / Applets . html Baser 353 Piquette , J . S . & Heikkinen , H . W . ( 2005 ) . Strategies reported used by instructors to address student alternate conceptions in chemical equilibrium . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 42 ( 10 ) , 1112 - 1134 . Pspice ( undated ) . Pspice download page . Electronics Lab . http : / / www . electronics - lab . com / downloads / schematic / [ verified 24 July 2006 ] PXES ( undated ) . PXES homepage . 2X Software Ltd . http : / / www . 2x . com / pxes / Qucs ( undated ) . Qucs project . http : / / qucs . sourceforge . net / R ( undated ) . The R Project for Statistical Computing . http : / / www . r - project . org / Redish , E . F . & Risley , J . S . ( Eds ) ( 1990 ) . The Conference on Computers in Physics Instruction Proceedings . Addison - Wesley Publishing , Redwood City , CA . Ronen , M . & Eliahu , M . ( 2000 ) . Simulation - A bridge between theory and reality : The case of electric ciruits . Journal of Computer Assisted Learning , 16 , 14 - 26 . Rweb ( undated ) . Rweb homepage . http : / / bayes . math . montana . edu / Rweb / Salgado , R . ( 2006 ) . VPython applications for Teaching Physics . [ verified 24 July 2006 ] http : / / www . physics . syr . edu / ~ salgado / software / vpython / Sanchez , A . L . C ( 2005 ) . Doing physics with free / open - source software . Paper presented at 7th National Physics Conference and Workshop , Mindano State University , 27 - 29 October . [ verified 24 July 2006 ] http : / / physics . msuiit . edu . ph / spvm / papers / 2005 / sanchez . pdf Savinainen , A . , Scott , P . & Viiri , J . ( 2005 ) . Using a bridging representation and social interactions to foster conceptual change : Designing and evaluating an instructional sequence for Newton’s Third Law . Science Education , 89 ( 2 ) , 175 - 195 . Sencar , S . & Eryilmaz , A . ( 2004 ) . Factors mediating the effect of gender on ninth - grade Turkish students ' misconceptions concerning electric circuits . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 41 ( 6 ) , 603 - 616 . Sethi , R . J . ( 2005 ) . Using virtual laboratories and online instruction to enhance physics education . Journal of Physics Teacher Education Online , 2 ( 3 ) , 22 - 26 . http : / / www . phy . ilstu . edu / jpteo / issues / jpteo2 ( 3 ) feb05 . pdf Shipstone , D . M . , von Rhöneck , C . , Jung , W . , Kärrqvist , C . , Dupin , J . J . , Joshua , S . & Licht , P . ( 1988 ) . A study of students’ understanding of electricity in five European countries . International Journal of Science Education , 10 ( 3 ) , 303 - 316 . Shipstone , D . M . ( 1984 ) . A study of children’s understanding of electricity in simple DC circuits . European Journal of Science Education , 6 ( 2 ) , 185 – 198 . Slater , T . F . , Adams , J . P . & Brown , T . R . ( 2000 ) . Completing a simple circuit . Journal of College Science Teaching , 30 ( 2 ) , 96 - 99 . Sokoloff , D . R . & Thornton , R . K . ( 1997 ) . Using interactive lecture demonstrations to create an active learning environment . The Physics Teacher , 35 ( 6 ) , 340 . 354 Australasian Journal of Educational Technology , 2006 , 22 ( 3 ) Spice ( undated ) . The Spice Page . http : / / bwrc . eecs . berkeley . edu / Classes / IcBook / SPICE / Sungur , S . , Tekkaya , C . & Geban , O . ( 2001 ) . The contribution of conceptual change texts accompanied by concept mapping to students ' understanding of the human circulatory system . School Science and Mathematics , 101 ( 2 ) , 91 - 101 . Thompson , A . ( 2002 ) . The open source software movement : Implications for teacher educators . Journal of Computing in Teacher Education , 18 ( 4 ) , 110 . Tsai , C . ( 2001 ) . Collaboratively developing instructional activities of conceptual change through the Internet : Science teachers’ perspectives . British Journal of Educational Technology , 32 ( 5 ) , 619 - 622 . Vosniadou , S . ( 2002 ) . On the nature of naive physics . In M . Limon & L . Mason ( Eds ) , Reconsidering conceptual change : Issues in theory and practice . ( pp . 61 - 76 ) . Dordrecht : Kluwer . Vpython ( undated ) . 3D Programming for Ordinary Mortals . http : / / www . vpython . org / Wang , T . and Andre T . ( 1991 ) . Conceptual change text versus traditional text and application questions versus no questions in learning about electricity . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 16 ( 2 ) , 103 - 116 . Appendix : Average normalised gain Average normalised gain is a useful method to assess the effectiveness of instruction . Average normalised gain , < g > , is defined as the ratio of the average improvement in participant scores from pre - test to post - test with respect to the maximum possible improvement . < g > can be calculated : pre pre post X - 100 X - X g = > < Hake ( 1998 ) argues that the normalised gain is a meaningful measure of how well a course teaches topics in physics to students . Hake considered normalised gains in three categories : “high” for a normalised gain greater than 0 . 7 , “medium” between 0 . 3 and 0 . 7 , and “low” below 0 . 3 . Traditional courses typically have low < g > . Dr Mustafa Baser , Department of Secondary Science and Mathematics Education , Faculty of Education , Abant Izzet Baysal University , Golkoy Kampusu , Bolu , Turkey . Web : http : / / www . ibu . edu . tr / en / Email : mbaser @ ibu . edu . tr