Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 31 , Publication date : November 2019 . Towards Successful Knowledge Integration in Online Collaboration : An Experiment on the Role of Meta - Knowledge MEIKE OSINSKI , Ruhr - University Bochum , Germany NIKOL RUMMEL , Ruhr - University Bochum , Germany Successful knowledge integration , that is , systematic synthesis of unshared information , is key to success , but at the same time a challenging venture for teams with distributed knowledge collaborating online . For exam - ple , teams with heterogeneous knowledge often have only vague or even wrong ideas about who knows what . This situation is further complicated if the collaboration partners do not know each other and merely communicate online . Previous research has found meta - knowledge , that is , knowledge about one’s own and the partner’s knowledge areas , to be a promising but not yet sufficiently investigated approach to promote knowledge integration . With our experimental study we aimed to address this desideratum of research on the role of meta - knowledge in net - based collaborations . We “simulated” a chat - based collaboration between partners with heterogeneous knowledge by assigning specific information to students collaborating in dyads on a Hidden Profile task . To arrive at the correct joint solution for this task , collaborating partners had to pool their shared , but more importantly their unshared information . We compared two conditions : In the experi - mental condition meta - knowledge was promoted by providing the collaboration partners with self - presentations of each other’s roles , which pointed to their unique fields of knowledge , while participants in the control condition did not receive this information . Results suggest a positive impact of the meta - knowledge manipulation on two key factors of collaboration : knowledge integration and construction of a transactive memory system ( TMS ) . CCS Concepts • Human - centered computing ~ Empirical studies in collaborative and social computing • Human - centered computing ~ Interaction design • Human - centered computing ~ Computer supported cooperative work • Social and professional topics ~ Computer supported cooperative work • Applied computing ~ Collaborative learning Keywords Online collaboration ; Meta - knowledge ; Knowledge integration , Information pooling ; Transactive Memory System ACM Reference format : Meike Osinski and Nikol Rummel . Towards Successful Knowledge Integration in Online Collaboration : An Experiment on the Role of Meta - Knowledge . In Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , CSCW , Article 31 ( November 2019 ) , 17 pages , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359133 Author’s Contact Information : Institute of Educational Research , Ruhr - University Bochum , Bochum , 44801 , Germany , meike . goeseke @ rub . de , nikol . rummel @ rub . de Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . Copyright © ACM 2019 2573 - 0142 / 2019 / November – ART 31 , $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359133 31 31 : 2 Meike Osinski & Nikol Rummel Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 31 , Publication date : November 2019 . Theoretical background The Crux of Digital Knowledge Integration The rapidly growing complexity of our world gives rise to complex problems and questions that require close collaborations across disciplinary boundaries . Collaborations among partners with heterogeneous knowledge hold promising potential for comprehensive analyses of such problems since different perspec - tives and concepts can be unified and synthesized into new knowledge . However , collaboration partners do not necessarily externalize and share their unique knowledge ( i . e . unshared information ) . Small group re - search revealed that teams discuss shared information , that is , information that was already known to all collaboration partners prior to the collaboration , more often and much earlier in the communication process than unshared expert information ( e . g . [ 28 , 32 , 37 ] ) . Accordingly , knowledge integration , that is , externalizing and synthesizing complementary unshared information distributed across team members ( e . g . collaborative inferences ) and , finally , collaboratively making informed joint decisions , is thus hard to achieve [ 7 ] . The lack of pooling unshared information as compared to shared information is empirically well studied and known as information pooling effect [ 33 ] . The information pooling effect is usually investigated with so called hidden profile tasks [ 33 ] ( for an overview of research within the hidden profile paradigm see Sohrab , Waller and Kaplan [ 31 ] ) . These tasks can only be solved if collaboration partners pool their unshared information in such a way that they complement each other’s information and jointly uncover the hidden profile . The integration of unshared information can be particularly challenging in online collaborations between partners with heterogeneous knowledge for the following reasons . First , due to the lack of non - and para - verbal cues , which are available in face - to - face collaborations , the information pooling effect is amplified in net - based collaboration [ 13 , 14 ] . Especially in text - based online collaboration , due to the low spectrum of transmittable communication signals [ 4 , 19 ] , the development of a common ground is hampered , which is known to be a prerequisite for an elaborate exchange and fruitful integration of relevant information ( e . g . [ 8 , 26 ] ) . Second , the absence of common “language” in terms of terminology as well as common culture , routines and methods additionally hinders the establishment of a common ground [ 1 ] . To identify disciplinary inter - faces and differences , select relevant information and finally integrate heterogeneous perspectives and ele - ments successfully into new knowledge , team members must reach a certain mutual understanding despite their different “languages” [ 16 ] . In conjunction with this , third , collaborative sensemaking appears indispensable but concurrently difficult given the wealth of information in collaboration on complex problems between partners with diverse disci - plinary knowledge and backgrounds [ 34 ] . When entering a new collaborative problem solving setting , per - sons are flooded with both objective data and information about the given problem as well as subjective information , perspectives and assumptions of their partners speaking a foreign “language” . To avoid getting lost in such an information mess and , thus , making wrong decisions , team members need to collaboratively make sense of the problem and the collaboration [ 11 ] . To this end , partners have to forage , identify and cate - gorize relevant information from the outset of collaboration . Referring to an interview study of analysts conducted by Johnston [ 15 ] , Goyal [ 10 ] stresses initial organization of information and its sources to be par - ticular laborious . However , if this succeeds , persons are able to construct a mental model of the situation , based on which they can further forage and finally integrate relevant knowledge to make informed decision [ 10 ] . Successful foraging and sensemaking of decision - relevant information in collaboration require team members to expediently share and combine their unique information against the backdrop of probably dis - similar mental models . Considering the information pooling effect , collaboratively making sense and integrat - ing knowledge appear to be tricky dilemmas for disciplinary heterogeneous teams . Fourth , pooling and negotiation of unshared information are challenging especially for ad hoc teams as they can neither build upon a previous history of collaboration and common experiences nor have enough time to construct a comprehensive mutual understanding . Accordingly , ad hoc teams only have vague or even wrong ideas about their team members’ unique knowledge and , thus , cannot rely on a Transactive Memory System ( TMS ) [ 36 ] . In the TMS - approach the individual group members and their different infor - mation resources function as external knowledge stores interconnected through transactions , which enlarge information accessible for the team members without engrossing the capacities of the individual memory Towards Successful Knowledge Integration in Online Collaboration 31 : 3 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 31 , Publication date : November 2019 . systems . Wegner [ 36 ] describes three independent processes that accompany the development of a TMS : In the encoding phase , it is essential to identify the knowledge distributed in the team , so that incoming infor - mation can be correctly assigned to the respective expert . In the subsequent storage phase , the corresponding knowledge element is tagged with a label and the responsible team member . In the retrieval phase , the infor - mation can finally be requested and retrieved from the person in charge if required ( e . g . [ 21 , 23 ] ) . Through continuous transactions , unique knowledge distributed in the team becomes available for the members since specific expertise and skills are gradually revealed and assumptions about who knows what continuously validated or revised and further refined over time . Thus , teams are able to accurately encode , store and re - trieve unique information , when the group members possess or succeed to develop a shared organized men - tally represented knowledge system that reflects the expertise distributed in the group ( ibid . ) . However , with - out sufficiently knowing who knows what , collaborators can hardly discover and validate distributed knowledge , assign or assume responsibilities and contribute or retrieve specific information as required . Conversely , groups with a trained TMS work more efficiently , make fewer mistakes and develop higher - quality solutions than groups with a poorly trained TMS ( for an overview of the effects of a TMS see Pel - tokorpi [ 27 ] ) . Brauner [ 2 ] identifies four transactive processes responsible for the formation of a TMS : knowledge acquisition , knowledge allocation , knowledge requisition and knowledge disclosure . By the use of these four communication processes a speaker makes evident , which information he or she possesses and which further information he or she requires . Consequently , all of these processes shape the mentally repre - sented knowledge system since they make unique individual knowledge accessible for the group and , thus , differentiate the specialization in the group continually : Through knowledge acquisition , the speaking person implies that he or she is processing new information that will be retrievable from him or her in future . Knowledge allocation differentiates the mentally represented knowledge system since such externalizations create and hone shared knowledge about different responsibilities in the group . Knowledge requisition con - veys that the speaker him - or herself does not possess the requested information and may assume it to be owned by his or her partner . With the disclosure of knowledge , a person allows insights into his or her exper - tise , so that ( re ) definition of responsibilities is simplified for efficiently processing and storing of information in the team . Thus , through transactive knowledge processes a TMS evolves and is further refined [ 2 ] . Build - ing upon these assumptions , Brauner recommends for a direct measurement of a TMS by the investigation of those processes triggered while collaboration . However , construction of a TMS is primary investigated along with the aspects of specialization , coordination and trust ( e . g . [ 17 , 22 ] ) . These three aspects can be seen as indicators for the state of development of a TMS . A prerequisite for the formation of a TMS is that collabora - tion partners realize different expertise in the team and consider them relevant for the solution of the prob - lem at hand . This aspect is covered by specialization . Coordination is an indication of the development of a TMS since an accurately organized and shared mental knowledge system improves coordination within the team such as assigning responsibility and information to the respective expert . Last but not least , only when team members trust in their partners’ expertise , they will seek , retrieve or believe in information from him or her . Taken together , when team members oversee relevant specialized knowledge distributed in their team , fail to coordinate their collaborative problem solving activities or mistrust each other’s knowledge and abili - ties , a TMS is assumed to be not ( yet ) or only weakly developed . Thus , effective use of distributed knowledge by means of a TMS requires a certain recognition or ( shared ) awareness , trustworthiness of collaboration partners and accuracy , but this of all emerge as a demanding endeavor for heterogeneous ad hoc teams col - laborating online . To sum up , the specific nature of net - based ad hoc collaboration among persons with diverse knowledge and disciplinary backgrounds complicates knowledge integration . As special hindrances for successful knowledge integration , we have highlighted the information pooling effect , the hampered creation of a com - mon ground , the impeded sensemaking of the vast amount of information as well as the difficulty to establish a TMS . These pitfalls threaten to hide precious unshared information distributed across the team and , accord - ingly , hinder the synthesis of heterogeneous knowledge . This problematic situation illustrates the need for deliberate support of net - based integration of heterogeneous knowledge . For all of the pitfalls mentioned , the prevailing lack of knowledge about who knows what in the team appears as a significant catalyst . Promoting Digital Knowledge Integration Through Meta - Knowledge 31 : 4 Meike Osinski & Nikol Rummel Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 31 , Publication date : November 2019 . Providing collaboration partners with meta - knowledge , that is , knowledge about one’s own and the part - ner’s expertise [ 2 , 3 , 32 ] seems to be a promising approach to address the aforementioned pitfalls of ad hoc teams with distributed knowledge ( collaborating digitally ) . In distinction to meta - knowledge , object knowledge denotes the existence of a specific knowledge content ( e . g . " The sky is blue " ) . Meta - knowledge then refers to the knowledge about the existence or non - existence of certain object knowledge ( e . g . " I / You know or do not know the color of the sky " ) . Meta - knowledge is superior to object knowledge as it monitors and controls object knowledge . Stasser , Stewart and Wittenbaum [ 32 ] distinguish between two types of meta - knowledge : on the one hand the knowledge of one ' s own expertise or non - expertise , on the other hand the knowledge of the counterpart’s expertise or non - expertise . Brauner [ 2 ] differentiates the same types of meta - knowledge and labels them as personal meta - knowledge ( knowledge about one ' s own ( non - ) knowledge ) and social meta - knowledge ( knowledge about the collaboration partner’s ( non - ) knowledge ) . From various research strands , we deduce the potential of meta - knowledge to promote knowledge inte - gration . For example , research in the field of audience design demonstrates that individual behavior changes when a person knows about the non - existence of knowledge of his or her counterpart ( e . g . [ 6 ] ) Specifically , experts adapt their explanations when they know that their counterpart is a novice in their field of expertise . An expert - novice constellation also applies to collaborations between persons with differing disciplinary backgrounds [ 13 ] . If a person knows about his or her expertise as well as the non - expertise of their collabora - tion partner on a specific topic , he or she will more likely takeover responsibility for corresponding infor - mation . As a result , such a division of labor can lead to better group performance ( e . g . [ 18 ] ) . In line with this , research within the information pooling paradigma supports the beneficial role of know - ing who knows what in collaborations . For instance , Stasser , Stewart and Wittenbaum [ 32 ] reported that meta - knowledge provided by the disclosure of export roles successfully mitigated the information pooling effect within a face - to - face collaboration . In addition , research on group awareness , that is the conscious perception of specific characteristics or activities of collaboration partners in working or learning groups ( e . g . [ 6 ] ) , underlines the supportive role of meta - knowledge about the distribution of knowledge in collaborations . To support net - based collaborations , cognitive awareness tools , which provide team members with ( other - wise hardly visible ) information on the partners’ expertise , presumptions or skills , increasingly attract atten - tion in research and practice . Such tools open possibilities for team members to identify commonalities across and differences between their own and their collaboration partner’s expertise ( ibid . ) . In both settings comput - er supported collaborative work ( CSCW ) and computer supported collaborative learning ( CSCL ) such tools have positive impact on group performance ( e . g . [ 29 ] ) . Schreiber and Engelmann [ 30 ] demonstrated in a CSCL setting with a hidden profile task that the use of concept maps , which visualize one ' s own and the partner’s knowledge structure , can be beneficial for uncovering a hidden profile and in part for the construc - tion of a TMS . As an indicator for the establishment of a TMS , the authors used the participants ' individual and shared knowledge about the expertise distributed in the team . However , as outlined before , knowing who knows what is a necessary but not sufficient element to depict the developmental level of a TMS . Thus , Schreiber and Engelmann [ 30 ] recommend that future studies should employ interaction - analytical measures to generate differentiated ideas on the relevance of meta - knowledge for knowledge integration by examining the existence and development of a TMS . So far , no further studies have been carried out that consider the role of a TMS in ( digitally supported ) knowledge exchange on a hidden profile task [ 31 ] . Nevertheless , as outlined before , knowing who knows what is known to be a vital element for the establishment of a TMS since it facilitates the core processes encoding , storing and retrieving of distributed information within the team . When team members hold specific knowledge of the expertise distributed across the team , they can discover and validate information more easily , assign or assume responsibilities more accurately , and provide or retrieve specific information more effectively . Overall , the beneficial effect of meta - knowledge in collaborative settings with and without technology support on information exchange and team performance is well investigated . However , it is not yet sufficient - ly clear which processes are triggered through meta - knowledge and under which conditions these processes are initiated and , ultimately , gainful [ 35 ] . Research Question and Hypotheses Following the call for studies on the role of meta - knowledge in collaborations , it is our overarching goal to gain a closer insight into the role of meta - knowledge in online collaboration between partners with diverse Towards Successful Knowledge Integration in Online Collaboration 31 : 5 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 31 , Publication date : November 2019 . knowledge resources . We assume that providing participants with meta - knowledge in a way that enables them to recognize , compare , validate and reflect distributed expertise facilitates knowledge integration and the formation of a TMS . Hence , our research question focuses on two key factors for successful collaboration : Primarily , we aim at examining the impact of meta - knowledge on knowledge integration . Besides that , in this present study we inquire whether or to what extent teams can be supported in their construction of a TMS by providing them with meta - knowledge . We involve the formation of a TMS as a dependent variable since meta - knowledge appears to be a fundamental catalyst for the development of a functioning TMS , which in turn has been repeatedly highlighted by previous research as a crucial factor for group performance . By also looking at the formation of a TMS , we intend to lay groundwork for developing further research questions concerning the role of meta - knowledge , which we plan to address in future . The manipulation we employed in our experimental condition ( but not in our control condition ) compris - es both presenting fictitious roles’ curriculum vitae with clues to task - relevant knowledge , and a default self - presentation form to be filled in with participants’ individual estimations of their own role’s knowledge areas and their preliminary decision prior to collaboration . We derive the following hypotheses : Hypotheses 1 : The Manipulation of meta - knowledge improves knowledge integration , more specifically , the pooling of unshared information ( hypothesis 1a ) , drawing of collaborative inferences ( hypothesis 1b ) and the correctness of joint decision making ( hypothesis 1c ) in online collaboration . Hypotheses 2 : The Manipulation of meta - knowledge promotes the formation of a TMS , more specifically , triggering transactive knowledge processes during online collaboration ( hypothesis 2a ) and positively affect - ing team members’ retrospective perception of online collaboration regarding the TMS - relevant aspects ( hypothesis 2b ) . Because both TMS - variables serve as measures for the formation of a TMS , we finally assume them to be positively interrelated . The frequency of transactive knowledge processes initiated during collaborative discussion is positively related to team members’ retrospective perception of collaboration concerning the relevant aspects of a TMS ( hypothesis 2c ) . Taken together , our hypotheses suggest models that cut across knowledge integration and the formation of a TMS . There is reason to assume that the positive effect of the meta - knowledge manipulation on knowledge integration ( e . g . pooling of unshared information and / or drawing of collaborative inferences ) is mediated by the formation of a TMS ( e . g . transactive knowledge processes and / or the perception of the TMS - relevant aspects ) . However , given the relatively small data set in this first study on the role of meta - knowledge for promoting knowledge integration , we explore this assumption only in additional exploratory analyses rather than formulating and testing corresponding a priori hypotheses . Nevertheless , this current study aims at providing first hints concerning the assumed mediation models . Figure 1 visualizes our expectations on the effects of the meta - knowledge manipulation on knowledge in - tegration and the formation of a TMS . Method To investigate our hypotheses , we conducted an experimental lab study and varied the factor meta - knowledge . The experimental study thus comprised two conditions ( M + , with meta - knowledge intervention vs . M - , without meta - knowledge intervention ) . In both conditions students collaboratively worked in dyads . In the experimental condition students were provided with knowledge about their own expertise and the expertise of their collaboration partner . In the control condition students were not specifically supported to become aware of their own expertise nor provided with meta - knowledge about their collaboration partner . In both conditions , students worked on a Hidden Profile task about artificial tropical diseases to prevent prior knowledge effects . To investigate to what extent meta - knowledge enhanced students’ knowledge integration ( see hypotheses 1a - 1c ) we assessed three dependent variables : pooling of unshared information , drawing of collaborative inferences and making the correct decision . 31 : 6 Meike Osinski & Nikol Rummel Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 31 , Publication date : November 2019 . Figure 1 . Expected effects of the meta - knowledge manipulation on knowledge integration ( H1 ) and the formation of a TMS ( H2 ) . Grey dotted arrows represent the assumed mediation models investi - gated within additional explorative analyses . We further set out to investigate the impact of meta - knowledge on the development of a transactive memory system and thus analyzed transactive knowledge processes ( knowledge acquisition , knowledge allocation , knowledge requisition , knowledge disclosure ) as well as the team members’ perceptions of the relevant aspects of a TMS ( specialization , coordination , trust ; hypotheses 2a - 2c ) . Participants In total , 40 higher education students ( f = 24 , m = 16 ) from 24 different disciplines participated in the study . These 40 students were randomly paired while controlling for age , collaboration experience , experience in digitally supported collaboration , task interest , experience with the tools employed in the study and discipli - nary background . As a pair , students were randomly assigned to either the experimental condition ( M + : n = 10 dyads ) or the control condition ( M - : n = 10 dyads ) . The average age of the participants was 28 . 08 ( SD = 3 . 54 ) . All participants stated that they did not know who their collaboration partner was . Task Materials Hidden Profile Task . To investigate to which extent meta - knowledge affects the frequency of unshared information our problem solving task builds upon and extends the Hidden Profile task designed by Meier [ 20 ] . The task asks students to slip into the role of two tropical doctors ( Dr . A . / Dr . B . ) and to collaboratively find the correct diagnosis for a patient . The patient described in the task suffers from unexplained symptoms after travelling . During an initial individual acquisition phase , both dyad members were provided with shared and unshared ( distributed and undistributed ) information about the patient ( travel itinerary , symptoms , lab results , disease risks ) and three potential diseases . To ensure that the participants acquired enough knowledge in the individual acquisition phase and thus were theoretically able to contribute information in the subsequent collaboration phase , we checked their individual knowledge in a brief test . Participants had to answer at least 16 of 20 true / false items correctly before being able to move on to the collaboration phase . This inclusion criterion was achieved by all participants in the 3rd attempt at the latest . In the collaboration phase , pairs needed to pool their shared and more importantly their unshared information via chat during the collaborative phase to successfully uncover the Hidden Profile and to solve the task . Table 1 illustrates the information distribution and the corresponding types of inferences in our Hidden Profile task . In our analysis we focus on the number of unshared distributed and unshared undistributed information ( out of a total of 18 ) as well as on collaborative inferences ( out of a total of six ; for an example of a collaborative inference see Table Towards Successful Knowledge Integration in Online Collaboration 31 : 7 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 31 , Publication date : November 2019 . 1 ) . To create a typical collaboration situation between partners with different areas of expertise , terminologi - cal differences between both roles were embedded in the task materials by primary using Latin labels for the disease which falls in the specific knowledge field of a role : For example , as expert for “crane flue” Dr . A . received material introducing both the German and the ( primary used ) Latin label ( “grus influentia” ) of the disease . As non - expert for “crane flue” Dr . B . was unaware of the Latin label . Table 1 : Information distribution and types of inferences in the Hidden Profile task Information distribution Dr . A Dr . B Type of possible inference Unshared distributed Example Disease - related information : The vaccination against grus influentia ( known under the tradename “Kravirex” ) is only effective from the last of the three tablets which must be taken at weekly intervals . Patient - related information : One week before his journey the family doctor gave the patient one dose of " Kravirex " as a vaccination against crane flue . Collaborative inference : The vaccination was not effective because he was given only one tablet instead of three . The probability that he suffers from grus influentia / crane flue is therefore high . Unshared undistributed Example Disease - related information : In urban areas of Tatamia , which has not yet partici - pated in the vaccination programs , grus influentia is still widespread . Patient - related information : The patient made a stopo - ver on the outward and return flight in the capital of Tatamia . Individual inference : The patient visited the capital of Tatamia , where grus influentia is wide - spread . The probability that the patient was infected with this disease is there - fore high . Shared Example Disease - related information : Antibodies of a very special type ( Anti - F ) can be detect - ed in the blood of the pa - tient if an infection with fire fever has already existed for two weeks or longer . Patient - related information : Blood tests for the disease - specific antibodies " Anti - F " and " Anti - A " showed no positive results . Disease - related information : Antibodies of a very special type ( Anti - F ) can be detect - ed in the blood of the pa - tient if an infection with fire fever has already existed for two weeks or longer . Patient - related information : Blood tests for the disease - specific antibodies " Anti - F " and " Anti - A " showed no positive results . Shared inference : There is no Anti - F in the patient ' s blood . The proba - bility that the patient suf - fers from fire fever is there - fore low . Note . This table builds upon Deiglmayr and Spada [ 7 ] , p . 364 . Material For Promoting Meta - Knowledge in the Experimental Condition . To assess whether meta - knowledge has an impact on students’ knowledge integration , we experimentally varied whether students were provided with material promoting meta - knowledge or were not provided with such material . In the experimental condition , students received curriculum vitaes ( CVs ) of the fictitious roles as Dr . A . or Dr . B . 31 : 8 Meike Osinski & Nikol Rummel Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 31 , Publication date : November 2019 . including pointers to their expertise . For example , current publications or the dissertation title of Dr . A with reference to “crane flue” pointed to his specific expertise on this disease . Thus , the CVs reflected the expertise of the respective role and were isomorphic in their structure . In addition to the CVs , students in the experi - mental condition were prompted to make a self - presentation . The self - presentation was a pre - structured Google Doc form and needed to be filled out according to the participant’s role by listing the fields of own expertise and making a preliminary diagnosis . Once filled out , the self - presentation was visible for the collab - oration partner . Procedure The study took place at a German university . Collaboration partners were seated in separate rooms and did not meet each other before the study or during the entire data collection . In both conditions , participants first filled out a questionnaire asking for their age , gender , disciplinary background , experience with ( net - based ) collaboration , joy in riddles as well as experiences in using the implemented platforms and tools ( Moodle , Google Docs , chats ) and then worked on the Hidden Profile task across an individual and a collabo - rative phase . In the individual acquisition phase , participants studied paper - based information sets tailored to their role on the Hidden Profile task . Since participants in the experimental condition had additional material to study ( CVs ) , they were given 35 minutes , whereas students in the control condition had 30 minutes for the individual information acquisition phase . Subsequently , within a Moodle environment participants were then guided through different work steps for each role and in dependence of the condition . After completing the individual knowledge test in both conditions , only the participants in the experimental condition worked on their role ' s self - presentation which was made visible to the collaboration partner afterwards . Via text - chat participants in both conditions discussed given information to reach an agreement on a joint solution ( diag - nosis ) they finally entered in a form embedded in Moodle . Participants in both conditions then reflected about their previous collaboration in an online post - questionnaire regarding the TMS - relevant aspects and the distributed expertise as well as technical problems during investigation . The total duration of our study ranged from 70 and 120 minutes as depending on condition . Measures Meta - Knowledge . To check whether we achieved the aim of generating meta - knowledge in the experi - mental condition , we measured meta - knowledge for conducting a manipulation check . For this purpose , two multiple - choice items were integrated in the individual final online - survey to assess the participant ' s knowledge about their own expertise and the expertise of their collaboration partner . For instance , the item that referred to the expertise of the role of Dr . A . asks : " In your opinion , in which areas did Dr . A . have spe - cial expertise ? ( no matter if Dr . A . was your own or your partner ' s role ) " . The second item was identical but related to the perceived expertise of Dr . B . Response options consisted of the three fictional diseases as well as the categories of patient information ( itinerary , symptoms , laboratory results , risk of disease ) . Selection of the areas in which the respective role had most disease - related and most patient - related information was consid - ered correct . For example , in contrast to Dr . B . Dr . A . had all information about the disease “crane - flue” and all information about the patient’s travel itinerary . Thus , we judged selection of “crane flue” and selection of “travel itinerary” as expert areas of Dr . A . as well as non - selection of the other areas in which Dr . A . has no or only few information as correct . Based on this , we calculated a score , which reflects the amount of meta - knowledge a dyad gained . We used this score to check , whether we achieved our aim at promoting meta - knowledge in the experimental but not in the control condition . For further exploratory analyses , we differen - tiated the meta - knowledge score per dyad into a score for personal meta - knowledge , that is knowledge about one ' s own expertise , and a score for social meta - knowledge , that is knowledge about the partner ' s expertise . Coding the Number of Unshared Information , Collaborative Inferences and Transactive Knowledge Processes . To assess the number of unshared information and collaborative inferences ( hypotheses 1a and 1b ) as well as the number of transactive knowledge processes ( hypotheses 2a and 2c ) , we build upon the chat protocols . To analyze the number and quality of unshared information , we counted the unshared information that was correctly mentioned during discussion . For each dyad , this resulted in a value of frequency express - ing how much of the maximum of 18 unshared information was shared in discussion . To assess interrater reliability , our two raters coded the total number of unshared information in each of the 20 cases . In line with Towards Successful Knowledge Integration in Online Collaboration 31 : 9 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 31 , Publication date : November 2019 . Fleis [ 9 ] , interrater reliability was high across all 20 cases with an ICC ( 3 , 2 ) = . 99 ( 95 % - CI [ . 97 ; . 99 ] ) . To further examine the interplay between unshared distributed information , we focused on the number of collaborative inferences a dyad made . A collaborative inference was only considered drawn if both dyad members com - bined their complementary unshared information correctly . An inference was accepted as valid if the subse - quent statements related to the pair of unshared information contained a correct consequence or hypothesis referring to the estimation of probability for the disease in question ( e . g . " In that case , crane flue is unlikely " , cf . collaborative inference in Table 1 ) . Again , interrater reliability between our two trained raters across all cases was high across all 20 cases with an ICC ( 3 , 2 ) = . 92 ; 95 % - CI [ . 80 ; . 97 ] ) . To capture transactive knowledge processes , we used an interaction - analytical coding - scheme called TRAnsactive knoWledge Interaction System ( TRAWIS ) [ 2 ] . Note that we excluded those utterances from coding which did not reflect students’ knowledge exchange ( e . g . , investigator ' s instructions ) . As unit of analy - sis we labeled a meaningfully completed utterance [ 2 ] . We assigned each unit with one of the twelve knowledge - relevant TRAWIS - codes each reflecting one of the knowledge processes . Knowledge requisition reflects statements with which a speaker expresses that he or she is searching for information or does not have certain knowledge ( " I do not know ; I am searching ; I need " [ 2 ] , p . 103 ) . An utterance by which the speaking person expresses that he or she uses or has stored specific knowledge ( " I know this / something " [ 2 ] , p . 102 ) represents knowledge disclosure . If an utterance indicates that a knowledge content is taken up and processed ( " I hear ; I understand " [ 2 ] , p . 102 ) , this is knowledge acquisition . If responsibility is assigned or assumed expressed in an utterance , knowledge allocation is initiated ( " I take care of it ; you have to take care of it " [ 2 ] , p . 103 ) . Two trained raters independently applied the TRAWIS coding scheme to our chat protocols and therefore used the TRAWIS decision tree ( [ 2 ] , p . 106 ) . For coding examples from the chat logs of the present study differentiated according to the four transactive knowledge processes and their subcategories see Appendix , Table 2 . Some codes had to be excluded from further analyses , because they did not meet the reliability criterion ( ICC 3 , 2 < . 50 ) . Thus , we ultimately investigated knowledge disclosure , knowledge requisi - tion and knowledge acquisition . A total index which represents the mean value of all initiated processes ( i . e . , knowledge disclosure , knowledge requisition and knowledge acquisition ) per dyad was used for testing our hypotheses . Correctness of Joint Decision . At the end of the collaboration , dyads entered their joint diagnosis into a Google Doc form embedded in Moodle . This was used to determine the correctness of the decision ( yes / no ) , of which we assumed to be more often achieved in the condition M + as in the condition M - . Participants’ Perceptions of the Aspects of a TMS . To test our hypotheses 2b ( more positive ratings on the three TMS - relevant aspects in the condition M + compared to M - ) and 2c ( positive correlation between transactive knowledge processes and perceptions of the TMS - relevant aspects specialization , trust and coor - dination ) we survey participants ' perceptions on the TMS aspects using the Transactive Memory Scale devel - oped by Lewis [ 17 ] . The scale consists of three subscales each with five 5 - point Likert - Items ( 1 = " don ' t agree at all " to 5 = " fully agree " ) . With the first subscale specialization ( e . g . " Each of us had specialized knowledge about certain aspects of the task . " ) person ' s perception regarding the degree of specialization in their team is queried . Trust ( e . g . " I trusted that the knowledge of my colleague was credible in relation to the task " ) measures the extent to which the person relies on the expertise of the collaboration partner . Coordination ( e . g . " Our team worked together in a well - coordinated way " ) reflects how participants judge about coordination issues in team work . All three aspects reached still satisfying internal consistency even though specialization was slightly below the threshold of α = . 70 ( specialization : α = . 67 ; coordination : α = . 73 ; trust : α = . 74 ) . For test - ing hypotheses , we used an overall index which reflects mean value of team members’ ratings on all three aspects . For deeper analyses , we did not rely on the overall index but explored each aspect separately by forming their means . Results Prior Analyses To identify whether team members differ across conditions with regard to individual characteristics , we calculated non - parametric Mann - Whitney U tests ( two - tailed ) which were appropriate given the size of our sample , the lack of normal distribution and some outliers . We did not find any differences regarding all indi - vidual characteristics involved such as age , experience with ( net - based ) collaboration , experience with Google 31 : 10 Meike Osinski & Nikol Rummel Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 31 , Publication date : November 2019 . Docs , Moodle and chats , joy in riddles as well as technical problems during collaboration . Therefore , we did not consider these variables for further analyses . Dyads in the experimental condition developed significantly more meta - knowledge than dyads in the con - trol condition ( Mdn M + = 20 , Mdn M - = 17 . 9 , U = 21 . 00 , z = - 2 . 21 , p = . 027 , r = - . 49 ) . Manipulation of meta - knowledge can thus be deemed to have been successful . Note that this analysis and all subsequent analyses were conducted on the dyadic level and not on the individual level . Effects of Meta - Knowledge Manipulation On Knowledge Integration To test the effect of meta - knowledge on knowledge integration , we first calculated Mann - Whitney Tests ( two - tailed ) . To run these analyses , we set condition as independent variable and either the dependent varia - ble number of unshared knowledge ( hypothesis 1a ) or number of collaborative inferences ( hypothesis 1b ) . In contrast to our expectations , we found no significant differences between conditions with regard to both the frequency of pooling unshared information ( Mdn M + = 9 . 75 , Mdn M - = 7 . 50 , U = 40 . 00 , z = - . 759 , p = . 468 , r = - . 17 ) and the frequency of drawing collaborative inferences ( Mdn M + = 3 . 00 , Mdn M - = 2 . 00 , U = 29 . 00 , z = - 1 . 61 , p = . 111 , r = - . 36 ) . In other words , students in the M + condition did not share more unshared information and did not draw more collaborative inferences than students in the M - condition . To test hypothesis 1c we used Fisher ' s exact test which addresses the sample size and the non - normal dis - tribution of data . We set condition as independent and solution correctness as dependent variable . Descrip - tively , we found a medium to strong effect ( V = . 50 ) , but it was statistically not significant with 40 % correct solutions in the experimental condition and no correct solution in the control condition on a 5 % α - level ( p = . 087 ) . In total , only four out of 20 dyads were able to solve the Hidden Profile task correctly . All these four dyads were assigned to the experimental condition . Nevertheless , we had to reject our hypothesis 1c . Effects of Meta - Knowledge Manipulation On the Formation of a TMS According to hypothesis 2c we expected that the participants ' perception of their collaboration regarding the TMS - relevant aspects ( specialization , coordination , trust ) was positively linked to the frequency of trans - active knowledge processes which both functioned as indicators for the formation of a TMS in our study . To test our hypothesis 2a we calculated spearman rank correlations . We found a significant medium to strong positive relation between the relevant aspects of a TMS and the frequency of transactive knowledge processes initiated ( r s = . 49 , p = . 027 ) . To be more specific , significant correlations between specialization and knowledge acquisition ( r s = . 46 , p = . 041 ) as well as knowledge requisition ( r s = . 52 , p = . 020 ) could be detected . Therefore , we can confirm our hypothesis 2a . To investigate our hypotheses 2a and 2b we conducted Mann Whitney tests , with condition as independ - ent variable and either the frequency of transactive knowledge processes ( hypothesis 2a ) or participants’ assessments regarding the TMS - aspects as dependent variable ( hypothesis 2b ) . Firstly , we cannot confirm that more transactive knowledge processes were triggered in the experimental than in the control condition ( hy - pothesis 2b ) . Based on descriptive results even slightly more knowledge - relevant transactive processes took place in the control condition ( Mdn M + = 9 . 58 , Mdn M - = 9 . 79 , U = 44 . 00 , z = - 0 . 454 , p = . 684 , r = - . 10 ) . Further ex - ploration yielded that knowledge requisition ( Mdn M + = 8 . 38 , Mdn M - = 6 . 13 ) and knowledge acquisition ( Mdn M + = 6 . 88 ; Mdn M - = 5 . 50 ) tended to occur more frequently under experimental condition , whereas knowledge disclo - sure tended to occur slightly more often under the control condition ( Mdn M + = 16 . 17 ; Mdn E - = 16 . 75 ) . Hence , we must reject our hypothesis 2a . Secondly , dyads in the experimental condition rated their collaboration in total more positively regarding the TMS - relevant aspects than dyads in the control condition ( Mdn M + = 4 . 00 , Mdn M - = 4 . 33 , U = 23 . 50 , z = - 2 . 013 , p = . 044 , r = - . 45 ) . Thus , we can confirm our hypothesis 2b . More precisely , we identified specialization to be significant striking ( Mdn M + = 4 . 40 ; Mdn - = 4 . 00 , U = 20 . 00 , z = - 2 . 276 , p = . 021 , r = - . 51 ) , while we found no significant differences between the experimental and the control condition con - cerning trust ( Mdn M + = 4 . 44 ; Mdn M - = 4 . 25 , U = 40 . 50 , z = - . 722 , p = . 490 , r = - . 16 ) and coordination ( Mdn M + = 4 . 38 ; Mdn M - = 4 . 00 , U = 32 . 50 , z = - 1 . 361 , p = . 193 , r = - . 30 ) . Additional Exploratory Analyses To gain a deeper understanding about the underlying processes initiated through our meta - knowledge manipulation in the experimental condition in contrast to the participants’ self - developed meta - knowledge Towards Successful Knowledge Integration in Online Collaboration 31 : 11 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 31 , Publication date : November 2019 . ( e . g . built up during interaction with their partner ) in the control condition , we explored the data for each condition separately . Additionally , we considered the differentiated meta - knowledge scores gained per dyad , namely personal meta - knowledge about one ' s own knowledge and social meta - knowledge about the partner ' s knowledge . For our exploratory analyses , we continued using non - parametric analyses to account for our small data set . Hence , we conducted several Spearman rank correlations ( respectively pointbiserial correla - tion for relations with the dichotomous variable solution correctness ) with our main variables ( variables of knowledge integration and TMS ) for each of the two conditions separately . Note that all subsequent analyses and the corresponding results should be interpreted cautiously , since we conducted them beyond our hypoth - eses and they do not allow causal inferences . Exploratory analyses of data only within the experimental condition M + uncovered a strong positive correlation between social meta - knowledge and knowledge requisition ( r s = . 664 , p = . 036 ) . In other words , with increasing social meta - knowledge , participants in our experimental condition requested knowledge from their partner more frequently . In addition , correctness of joint decision strongly relates positive to partici - pants’ perceptions of the TMS - relevant aspect coordination ( r s = . 796 ; p = . 006 ) as well as to the overall percep - tions of the three TMS - relevant aspects ( r s = . 650 , p = . 042 ) . Hence , participants who found the right solution rated the collaboration more positively with regard to the TMS - relevant aspects , specifically in terms of coor - dination issues . In contrast , by exploration of data only within the control condition M - , we detected a strongly negative relation between their overall meta - knowledge and knowledge acquisition ( r s = - . 80 , p = . 006 ) . Moreover , personal meta - knowledge and the participants’ perception of two of the TMS - relevant aspects , namely spe - cialization ( r s = - . 82 , p = . 004 ) and coordination ( r s = - . 67 ; p = . 036 ) , interrelated strongly negative . To sum up , if participants in the control condition developed much ( personal ) meta - knowledge , they interactively acquired less knowledge and rated their collaboration more negatively regarding the TMS - aspects specialization and coordination . In addition to our exploratory analyses for both conditions seperately , we finally calculated multiple re - gression models , each with condition as predictor . As criterion we set either unshared information or collabo - rative inferences . Either one of our TMS - variables ( transactive knowledge processes or participants’ percep - tions on the TMS - relevant aspects ) served as possible mediator . Hence , we calculated four mediation anal - yses . In all models , we tested the significance of each path based on the confidence intervals determined by bootstrapping ( m = 5000 ) as suggested by Hayes [ 12 ] across all cases . We found no mediating effects in the models with the frequency of transactive knowledge processes as mediator . However , we discovered indica - tions for a significant positive indirect effect of the meta - knowledge manipulation on the pooling of unshared information mediated by team members’ perceptions on the TMS aspects ( b = 1 . 82 , [ CI 95 - = 0 . 26 , CI 95 + = 3 . 78 ] ) . Surprisingly , in this model the direct effect of the meta - knowledge manipulation on the pooling of unshared information was negative but non - significant ( b = - 0 . 87 ; [ CI 95 - = - 3 , 35 , CI 95 + = 1 , 61 ] ) . Furthermore , we identified a significant positive indirect effect on the drawing of collaborative inferences mediated by team members’ perceptions on the TMS aspects ( b = 0 . 68 , [ CI 95 - = 0 . 07 , CI 95 + = 1 . 74 ] ) . Discussion In light of the pitfalls such as the information pooling effect or the lack of accurate knowledge about who knows what , successful knowledge integration and construction of a TMS are hard to reach in ad hoc teams with distributed knowledge collaborating online . In an experimental lab study , we thus investigated whether providing meta - knowledge to dyads facilitates students’ knowledge integration and their construction of a TMS . More precisely , we aimed to contribute to answering the question what kind of mechanisms meta - knowledge might be able to initialize in teams with distributed expertise . As pairs in the experimental condi - tion gained significantly more meta - knowledge than pairs in the control condition our manipulation of meta - knowledge in the form of CVs including pointers to distributed expertise and pre - structured self - presentations was successful and demonstrates that even a simple manipulation can convey meta - knowledge and promote the formation of a TMS . We assumed a positive effect of meta - knowledge on the number of discussed unshared information ( hy - pothesis 1a ) and the frequency of drawing collaborative inferences ( hypothesis 1b ) , as well as on correct decision - making ( hypothesis 1c ) . Descriptively , students in the experimental condition shared more unshared information , drew more collaborative inferences and made more correct decisions than students in the con - 31 : 12 Meike Osinski & Nikol Rummel Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 31 , Publication date : November 2019 . trol condition . However , these results did not reach statistical significance . One potential explanation refers to Stasser et al . [ 32 ] who argue that an overly rigid division of labor ( as it might have been the case in the Hid - den Profile task implemented ) may result in a too narrow focus on the information falling into one’s own field of expertise . For our study this could mean that some solution - relevant cues may have been disregarded : Besides unshared expert information some decisive shared information was implemented in the Hidden Profile task , which did not clearly fall into one of the specific expertise areas . As a result , in the experimental condition relevant information may not have entered the discussion . This could have made it even more difficult for dyads in the experimental than for dyads in the control condition to identify wrong diseases , draw clear collaborative inferences and make the correct decision . With view on our hypotheses 2 , by which we formulated our expectations of a positive effect of the meta - knowledge manipulation on the development of a TMS , our results revealed the following : In accordance with hypothesis 2c ( positive relationship between the frequency of transactive knowledge processes and team members’ perceptions of the TMS - relevant aspects specialization , trust , coordination ) , both measures were positively related to each other . To be more specific , we discover significant correlations between the percep - tion of specialization and frequency of knowledge acquisition as well as knowledge requisition . A high degree of ( perceived ) specialization may have enabled team members to request and process knowledge in a more systematic and time - saving way . Contrary to hypothesis 2a ( more transactive knowledge processes in the condition M + compared to the condition M - ) , the manipulation of meta - knowledge did not result in an in - creased initiation of transactive knowledge processes such as knowledge disclosure , knowledge acquisition and knowledge requisition during discussion . Taken from exploration of descriptive results knowledge requi - sition and knowledge acquisition tended to ensue more frequently under experimental condition ( as already outlined both of them had a strong correlation to specialization ) , whereas knowledge disclosure tended to occur more often under control conditions . These findings can be explained with the results of a longitudinal case study conducted by Brauner [ 2 ] . In this study , knowledge was primarily disclosed in first knowledge transfer meetings in a consulting firm and was only increasingly requested in later sessions . Hence , the avail - ability of meta - knowledge has made it contingently possible to save or make efficient use of scarce time resources as teams might be able to skip certain steps ( i . e . knowledge disclosure ) in transaction . If dyads were one step ahead of the control groups when entering the discussion , frequency of transactive knowledge pro - cesses was not an adequate indicator to determine the level of TMS - development in our study . Similar inves - tigations should be aware of this aspect or check our assumption of time - saving benefits of meta - knowledge for the formation of a TMS in online collaboration of ad hoc teams with diverse knowledge resources . As expected , participants rated the investigated aspects of a TMS more positively in the experimental con - dition than in the control condition ( hypothesis 2b ) . Exploration yielded once again the aspect of specializa - tion to be significant striking , while there were no differences between conditions concerning trust and coor - dination . Based on these results and in line with the positive manipulation check , we can conclude that CVs and self - presentations have sensitized participants successfully to different expertise . We might explain the unexpected results with regard to trust and coordination as follows : The Hidden Profile task required a criti - cal review of information and , if necessary , to repeatedly go back in discussion . For example , Person A knew that a vaccination against “crane flue” would only be effective if the last of a total of three tablets was taken . Person B knew that the patient had received a single dose of vaccine against “crane flue” . If Person B contrib - uted the information that the patient had been vaccinated , a critical review by Person B was essential to check whether the vaccination was completed . Thus , high value on the mentioned item of the subscale trust does not necessarily indicate a personal distrust towards the team partner . The same line of argumentation is also plausible for subscale coordination . These assumptions are in accordance to Klein’s step model of interdisci - plinarity [ 16 ] that emphasize integration of different disciplinary knowledge not as a stringent , but rather a circular negotiation process which is accompanied by constant reflection and maybe by a revision of previous decisions . These assumptions are in accordance to Klein’s step model of interdisciplinarity ( 2005 ) that em - phasize integration of different disciplinary knowledge not as a stringent , but rather a circular negotiation process which is accompanied by constant reflection and maybe by a revision of previous decisions . The same argument is provided by research in the field of sensemaking , which points out that foraging , organizing and finally making sense of information and situations are activities of iterative nature ( e . g . Umpathy , 2010 ; Goy - al , 2017 ) . Towards Successful Knowledge Integration in Online Collaboration 31 : 13 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 31 , Publication date : November 2019 . In addition to our hypotheses , we explored the data separately for each condition and differentiated meta - knowledge into personal and social meta - knowledge . Thereby , we gained remarkable insights into the under - lying processes initiated through our meta - knowledge manipulation in the experimental compared to the participants’ completely self - developed meta - knowledge in the control condition . First , with increased social meta - knowledge , participants’ in our experimental condition requested more frequently knowledge from their partner . A strongly pronounced social meta - knowledge might have driven systematic search for missing information amongst the team . Moreover , finding the correct solution ( which was only the case in the exper - imental condition ) was accompanied with a more positive perception of the TMS - relevant aspects , specifically in terms of coordination . Thus , the perceptions of the TMS - relevant aspects may have made the difference between successful and less successful collaborations in our experimental condition . From this , we deduce the assumption that dyads only benefited from our manipulation if they succeeded in developing a TMS . This assumption stands in line with our findings extracted by our exploratory mediation analyses , which we take up in more detail in the outlook section as we use it as an occasion to call for further research . Separate analyses within the M - condition revealed conspicuously opposing effects of participants’ self - developed meta - knowledge in our control condition compared to the meta - knowledge promoted by our manipulation in the experimental condition . If participants in the control condition developed much ( person - al ) meta - knowledge , they interactively acquired less knowledge and rated their collaboration more negatively regarding specialization and coordination . These findings are consistent with our aforementioned suggestion that dyads in M - could have been rather busy building up their meta - knowledge and , thus , could not ( yet ) make immediate use of it for building up a TMS due to the brevity of time ( but could make it explicit to some extend afterwards ) . Since participants’ in control condition had no joint frame - work , clues or connecting points , which could have support them in foraging and organizing information , developing meta - knowledge on their own may have exhausted their cognitive and / or temporal capacities . In addition , if participants in control condition primary focused on foraging for clues to understand their own role , collaboration partners may have had less capacities to recognize their collaboration partner ' s complementary expertise or to engage in any coordinative efforts within the limited time . Limitations and Outlook Besides the aforementioned considerations , a methodical explanation for not ( yet ) finding more significant advantages of the experimental condition over the control condition in the course of testing our hypotheses is probably linked to the small sample size . Given that we descriptively could already find hints for a supportive role of meta - knowledge on knowledge integration ( i . e . pooling of unshared information , drawing of collabo - rative inferences and correct task solution ) , with view on a follow up study we would thus suggest to increase the sample size and to test for our hypotheses and more complex models again . Despite this limitation of our study , we still contribute to research on net - based knowledge communication of teams with diverse knowledge resources and would like to open the discussion for further future studies . Especially for research on interdisciplinary teams , we guess our study provides some inspiring ideas . Hence , our study raises several starting points for further research : Our study was designed as an experi - mental lab study in a randomized control group design . This approach had several advantages : An investiga - tion of teams with distributed knowledge in the field would not have permitted an exact control of individual knowledge resources or the exact tracking of contributed expert information and drawn inferences . However , although certain characteristics and conditions of collaborations among partners with diverse disciplinary backgrounds were embedded in this investigation ( e . g . terminological differences between experts ) , future studies should investigate the role of meta - knowledge in more natural , interdisciplinary collaboration set - tings . For example , the design of a future study could be inspired by the methodological approaches of Rum - mel and Spada [ 27 ] and Noroozi et al . [ 23 ] . In both studies , students were assigned to heterogeneous pairs based on their disciplinary backgrounds and asked to collaborate on tasks which required complementing their natural disciplinary expertise . In one of two tasks of the study realized by Rummel and Spada [ 27 ] , medical and psychology students jointly worked out a therapy plan for a patient suffering from depression . Participants of the study conducted by Noroozi et al . [ 23 ] either had a background in water management or a background in international development studies and collaborated to develop a joint concept for fostering the sustainable use of water among farmers . 31 : 14 Meike Osinski & Nikol Rummel Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 31 , Publication date : November 2019 . In addition to replicating the current study with a larger sample , it could be interesting to investigate the role of meta - knowledge for successful knowledge integration with various communication tools . For exam - ple , in this study dyads communicate via text - chat , which did not convey any auditory or visual communica - tion cues . In future studies , the effect of meta - knowledge could be investigated on knowledge integration via video conference for instance . This would also allow to test the effectiveness of other meta - knowledge ma - nipulations ( e . g . verbal self - presentations ) . Last but not least , search for mediating factors must be propelled . With our additional exploratory media - tion analyses , we have taken a first step in this direction . We found indications for a significant positive indirect effect of the meta - knowledge manipulation on both the pooling of unshared information and the drawing of collaborative inferences mediated by team members’ perceptions on the TMS aspects . When considering team members’ perceptions on the TMS - relevant aspects as mediator in the model with unshared information as criterion , the direct effect of the meta - knowledge manipulation on the pooling of unshared information was negative albeit non - significant . This may indicate that the meta - knowledge manipulation only had a beneficial effect on the pooling of unshared information if teams succeeded in establishing a TMS ( otherwise the meta - knowledge manipulation seems to had no or an even inhibitory effect on the pooling of unshared information ) . A pronounced TMS appears to be a central key factor for integrating knowledge and effectively managing of the meta - knowledge . This should be pursued in further research . It is also conceiva - ble that the impact of meta - knowledge may be influenced by other variables . For example , various individual characteristics ( e . g . cognitive load , social or problem - solving competencies , openness towards other discipli - nary perspectives , self - efficacy etc . ) should be considered as possible interacting variables . Field studies must also take into account other variables and contexts that might be relevant for successful knowledge integra - tion and construction of a TMS in natural team work ( e . g . personal fluctuations , team size , group cohesion or characteristics of team management ) . Practical Implications for facilitating knowledge integration This study also allows us to draw some conclusions on how meta - knowledge can be promoted in ( net - based ) collaboration among persons with diverse knowledge backgrounds . We were able to show that even a simple manipulation can generate knowledge about the distributed expertise in the group and also can partly promote the development of a TMS . Apart from being easy to implement , the manipulation was characterized by enabling a direct comparison between one ' s own and the partner’s expertise even before the start of the collaboration . By this , we aimed at providing a starting point for an elaborate exchange of arguments and information . In addition , with our manipulation we aspired to raise awareness for terminological differences across the team partners from the very beginning of collaboration . By working on one ' s own self - presentation , we intended to engage participants in an active reflection on their own role and knowledge . The standardized design of these forms should help participants to get a quick overview of the relevant knowledge areas , to pre - structure information and avoid information overload . Moreover , pictures and per - sonal statements of both roles ( integrated in CVs and self - presentations ) should familiarize team members with their own role and their unknown collaboration partner . We recommend to consider the aforementioned principles when developing an intervention or training to purposefully promote the development of meta - knowledge and , thus , knowledge communication in teams with heterogeneous knowledge resources . Some of these principles have already been successfully applied in face - to - face collaboration or trainings ( e . g . [ 1 , 5 , 25 ] ) . Research on tools for supporting collaborative sense - making in digitally based settings also underlines the beneficial role of some of these principles such as rais - ing awareness , disclosing of the partner’s insights , creating shared explicit representations or facilitating and moderating interactions ( for an overview of design principles to support collaborative sensemaking , see [ 34 ] ) . References [ 1 ] Stephenson J . Beck , Annika L . Meinecke , Yoichi Matsuyama and Chi - Chun Lee . 2017 . Initiating and maintaining collaborations and facilitating understanding in interdisciplinary group research . Small Group Research , 48 ( 5 ) , 532 - 543 . [ 2 ] Elisabeth Brauner . 2006 . Kodierung transaktiver Wissensprozesse ( TRAWIS ) . Ein Verfahren zur Erfassung von Wissenstransfers in Interaktionen . Zeitschrift für Sozialpsychologie , 37 , 99 – 112 . [ 3 ] Jürgen Buder . 2000 . Wissensaustausch und Wissenserwerb in Computerkonferenzen : Der Einfluss des Metawissens . ( doctoral disserta - tion at Eberhard Karls University Tübingen ) . Retrieved June 20 , 2019 from : http : / / w210 . ub . Unituebingen . de / dbt / volltexte / 2002 / 445 . Towards Successful Knowledge Integration in Online Collaboration 31 : 15 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 31 , Publication date : November 2019 . [ 4 ] Herbert H . Clark and Susan E . Brennan . 1991 . Grounding in Communication . In Lauren B . Resnick , Joseph M . Levine and Stephanie D . Teasley ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on socially shared Cognition ( pp . 127 - 149 ) . Washington : APA Books . [ 5 ] Rico Defila and Antonietta di Giulio . 1998 . Interdisziplinaritaet und Disziplinaritaet . In Jan H . Olbertz ( Ed . ) . Zwischen den Faechern — ueber den Dingen ? Schriften der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Erziehungswissenschaft ( pp . 111 - 137 ) . Wiesbaden : VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften . [ 6 ] Jessica Dehler - Zufferey , Daniel Bodemer , Jürgen Buder and Friedrich W . Hesse . 2011 . Partner knowledge awareness in knowledge communication : Learning by adapting to the partner , The Journal of Experimental Education , 79 ( 1 ) , 102 - 125 . [ 7 ] Anne Deiglmayr and Hans Spada . 2011 . Training for fostering knowledge co - construction from collaborative inference - drawing . Learning and Instruction , 21 ( 3 ) , 441 - 451 . [ 8 ] Sharon J . Derry , Lori Adams DuRussel and Angela M . O‘Donnell . 1998 . Individual and distributed cognitions in interdisciplinary teamwork : A developing case study and emerging theory . Educational Psychology Review , 10 ( 1 ) , 25 – 56 . [ 9 ] Joseph L . Fleis . 1986 . Design and Analysis of Clinical Experiments . New York : John Wiley & Sons . [ 10 ] Nitesh Goyal . 2017 . Designing Tools for Collaborative Sensemaking During Complex Crime Analysis . ( doctoral dissertation at Cornell University ) . Retrieved June 20 , 2019 from : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7298 / X4G15Z1W . [ 11 ] Nitesh Goyal and Susan R . Fussell . 2016 . Effects of Sensemaking Translucence on Distributed Collaborative Analysis . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( pp . 288 – 302 ) . [ 12 ] Andrew F . Hayes . 2018 . Introduction to mediation , moderation , and conditional process analysis : A regression - based perspective ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : The Guilford Press . [ 13 ] Fabian Hermann , Nikol Rummel and Hans Spada . 2001 . Solving the case together : The challenge of net - based interdisciplinary collabo - ration . In Pierre Dillenbourg , Anneke Eurelings and Kai Hakkarainen ( Eds . ) . Proceedings of the first European conference on computer - supported collaborative learning ( pp . 293 – 300 ) . Maastricht : McLuhan Institute . [ 14 ] Andrea B . Hollingshead . 1996 . Information suppression and status persistence in group decision making . The effects of communication media . Human Communication Research , 23 ( 2 ) , 193 - 219 . [ 15 ] Rob Johnston . 2005 . Analytic culture in the US intelligence community : An ethnographic study . Central Intelligence Agency Washing - ton DC Center for Study of Intelligence . [ 16 ] Julie T . Klein . 2005 . Interdisciplinary teamwork : The dynamics of collaboration and integration . In Sharon J . Derry , Christian D . Schunn and Morton Ann Gernsbacher ( Eds . ) , Interdisciplinary collaboration : An emerging cognitive science ( pp . 23 – 50 ) . New York : Law - rence Erlbaum . [ 17 ] Kyle Lewis . 2003 . Measuring transactive memory systems in the field : scale development and validation . Journal of Applied Psychology , 88 , 587 - 604 . [ 18 ] Glenn E . Littlepage , Greg W . Schmidt , Eric W . Whisler and Alan G . Frost . 1995 . An input - process - output analysis of influence and performance in problem - solving groups , Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 69 ( 5 ) , 877 - 889 . [ 19 ] John C . McCarthy , Victoria C . Miles and Andrew F . Monk . 1991 . An experimental study of common ground in text - based communica - tion . Proceedings of CHI19 Conference on Computer Human Interaction ( pp . 209 - 215 ) . New York : ACM Press . [ 20 ] Anne Meier . 2009 . Analyse und Förderung der gemeinsamen Wissenskonstruktion auf der Grundlage verteilter , interdependenter Informationen ( doctoral dissertation at Albert - Ludwigs - University Freiburg ) . [ 21 ] Richard L . Moreland . 1999 . Transactive memory : Learning who knows what in work groups and organizations . In Leigh L . Thompson , John M . Levine and David M . Messick ( Eds . ) . Shared cognition in organizations : The management of knowledge ( pp . 3 – 31 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . [ 22 ] Richard L . Moreland , Linda Argote and Ranjani Krishnan . 1998 . Training people to work in groups . In R . Scott Tindale , John Edwards , Linda Heath , Emil J . Posavac , Fred B . Bryant , Eaaron Henderson - King , Yolanda Suarez - Balcazar and Judith Myers ( Eds . ) , Social psy - chological applications to social issues : Applications of theory and research on groups ( Vol . 4 , pp . 37 – 60 ) . New York : Plenum . [ 23 ] Omid Noroozi , Armin Weinberger , Harm J . A . Biemans , Martin Mulder and Mohammad Chizari . 2013 . Facilitating argumentative knowledge construction through a transactive discussion script in CSCL . Computers and Education , 61 , 59 - 76 . [ 24 ] Vesa Peltokorpi . 2008 . Transactive memory systems . Review of General Psychology , 12 ( 4 ) , 378 – 394 . [ 25 ] Deana Pennington . 2016 . A conceptual model for knowledge integration in interdisciplinary teams : orchestrating individual learning and group processes . Journal of Environmental Studies and Sciences , 6 ( 2 ) , 300 - 312 . [ 26 ] Allen F . Repko . 2007 . Integrating interdisciplinarity . How the theories of common ground and cognitive interdisciplinarity are inform - ing the debate on interdisciplinary integration . Issues in Integrative Studies , 25 , 1 – 31 . [ 27 ] Nikol Rummel and Hans Spada . 2005 . Learning to collaborate : An instructional approach to pro - moting collaborative problem - solving in computer - mediated settings . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 14 ( 2 ) , 201 - 241 . [ 28 ] Nikol Rummel , Hans Spada and Sabine Hauser . 2009 . Learning to collaborate from being scripted or from observing a Model . Interna - tional Journal of Computer - Supported Collaborative Learning , 26 ( 4 ) , 69 – 92 . [ 29 ] Mirweis Sangin , Gaelle Molinari , Marc - Antoine Nüssli and Pierre Dillenbourg . 2011 . Facilitating peer knowledge modeling : Effects of a knowledge awareness tool on collaborative learning outcomes and processes . Computers in Human Behavior , 27 ( 3 ) , 1059 – 1067 . [ 30 ] Mareike Schreiber and Tanja Engelmann . 2010 . Knowledge and information awareness for initiating transactive memory system processes of computer - supported collaborating ad hoc groups . Computers in Human Behavior , 26 ( 6 ) , 1701 - 1709 . [ 31 ] Serena G . Sohrab , Mary J . Waller and Seth Kaplan . 2015 . Exploring the Hidden Profile paradigm : A literature review and analysis . Small Group Research , 46 , 489 - 535 . 31 : 16 Meike Osinski & Nikol Rummel Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 31 , Publication date : November 2019 . [ 32 ] Garold Stasser , Dennis D . Stewart and Gwen M . Wittenbaum . 1995 . Expert roles and information exchange during discussion : the importance of knowing who knows what . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 31 , 244 – 265 . [ 33 ] Garold Stasser and William Titus . 1985 . Pooling of unshared information in group decision making : Biased information sampling during discussion . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 48 , 1467 – 1478 . [ 34 ] Karthikeyan Umapathy . 2010 . Requirements to support collaborative sensemaking . Paper presented at the Computer Supported Coop - erative Work ( CSCW ) Workshop on Collaborative Information Seeking . [ 35 ] Wendy P . Van Ginkel and Daan Van Knippenberg . 2009 . Knowledge about the distribution of information and group decision making : When and why does it work ? Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 108 , 218 - 229 . [ 36 ] Daniel M . Wegner . 1995 . A computer network model of human transactive memory . Social Cognition , 13 , 313 - 339 . [ 37 ] Gwen M . Wittenbaum , Anne P . Hubbel and Cynthia Zuckerman . 1999 . Mutual Enhancement : Toward an Understanding of the Collective Preference for Shared Information . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 77 ( 5 ) , 967 - 978 . Received April 2019 ; revised June 2019 ; accepted August 2019 . Towards Successful Knowledge Integration in Online Collaboration 31 : 17 Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 31 , Publication date : November 2019 . Appendix Table 2 . Coding examples of transactive knowledge processes from chat logs using the TRAWIS coding scheme Note . Codes highlighted in grey had to be excluded from further analyses because they did not meet the relia - bility criterion ( ICC 3 , 2 < . 50 ) . The original messages in the chat - logs are in German and have been translated into English . Transactive knowledge process Subcategories ( with numbers of codes according to the TRAWIS coding scheme ) Examples in chat communication from the current study Knowledge acquisition - accepting / taking in information ( learning new information ) ( 7 ) Ah ok , I get it . - drawing inferences , developing hypotheses ( creating new in - formation ) ( 8 ) Apparently there must be something wrong with his vaccination . . . - accepting / rejecting other’s in - ferences ( agreeing or disagree - ing with statements ) ( 10 ) Yeah , that ' s right , and fever also matches . Knowledge allocation - assigning / not assigning respon - sibility ( defining expertise areas ) ( 6 ) Please describe the symptoms that you think are significant . - accepting / not accepting respon - sibility for information ( 3 ) I ' m going to write down the symptoms . Knowledge requisition - rejecting / denying having knowledge or meta - knowledge ( 2 ) However , I don ' t know anything about the lab results . - unsystematic searching for information ( 4 ) Is there anything speaking against fire fever ? - systematic searching for information ( 12 ) By the way , do you have exact information about how long he ' s been back again / at the hospital ? Knowledge disclosure - using personal meta - knowledge ( showing existing expertise ) ( 1 ) But according to my extensive qualifica - tions , I tend to trust the blood tests . - using personal object - level knowledge ( sharing expertise ) ( 9 ) According to my information , however , the patient has already been vaccinated against crane flu by his family doctor . - referring to other’s specific knowledge or to shared knowledge ; ( showing shared ex - pertise ) ( 11 ) You said earlier you could think of disease 1 as a diagnosis . - searching for information ( when knowing who has it ) ( 5 ) You have further information about possible situations of contact with the pathogens , right ?