2043 DEVELOPMENT AND DISEASE RESEARCH ARTICLE INTRODUCTION Adhesion of muscle fibers to the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) is essential for skeletal muscle development and integrity and is mediated by two protein complexes : the dystrophin glycoprotein complex ( DGC ) and complexes formed by members of the integrin superfamily . The DGC is crucial for muscle integrity as exemplified by the fact that mutations in components of the DGC cause muscular dystrophy ( Davies and Nowak , 2006 ; Durbeej and Campbell , 2002 ; Durbeej et al . , 1998 ; Straub et al . , 1997 ) . Far less is known about the function of integrins in muscle . Integrins are heterodimeric ECM receptors consisting of α - and β - subunits ( Hynes , 1992 ) . Skeletal muscle fibers in vertebrates express many integrin subunits , including the β 1 - subunit and its partners α 1 , α 3 , α 4 , α 5 , α 6 , α 7 and α v ( Gullberg et al . , 1998 ) . β 1 integrins appear to have partially redundant functions in skeletal muscle . Accordingly , inactivation of all α / β 1 integrins by CRE / lox - mediated ablation of the β 1 - subunit gene causes defects in myoblast fusion and sarcomere assembly that are not observed in muscle lacking individual integrin α - subunits ( Schwander et al . , 2003 ) . Of all integrin α - subunit gene knockout mice , muscle defects have only been observed for mice with mutations in the integrin α 5 - and α 7 - subunit genes , and the phenotypes manifest later than in β 1 - deficient mice . Chimeric mice that lack the integrin α 5 β 1 in muscle develop dystrophic symptoms ( Taverna et al . , 1998 ) . Mutations in the gene for the murine integrin α 7 - subunit cause defects in myotendinous junctions ( MTJs ) ( Mayer et al . , 1997 ) and humans with mutations in the integrin α 7 - subunit gene suffer from myopathy ( Hayashi et al . , 1998 ) . The cytoplasmic domains of integrins bind to many cytoskeletal and signaling proteins ( Geiger et al . , 2001 ; Liu et al . , 2000 ) , raising questions about the specific contributions of individual proteins to integrin function . Talin 1 is a major integrin effector . It binds to the cytoplasmic domain of several integrin β - subunits and connects β 1 integrins at focal adhesions to the actin cytoskeleton ( Critchley , 2000 ) . Talin 1 binds to focal adhesion components such as vinculin and focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ; Ptk2 – Mouse Genome Informatics ) , two important regulators of actin dynamics ( Mitra et al . , 2005 ; Ziegler et al . , 2006 ) . Importantly , the assembly of focal adhesions is dependent on mechanical force , which regulates recruitment of vinculin to focal adhesions ( Balaban et al . , 2001 ; Choquet et al . , 1997 ; Galbraith et al . , 2002 ; Riveline et al . , 2001 ) . Talin 1 is crucial for force - dependent vinculin recruitment , and for the strengthening of interactions between integrins and cytoskeletal proteins ( Giannone et al . , 2003 ) . In addition , in vitro and in vivo studies have shown that talin 1 modulates the ligand - binding activity of the extracellular domain of integrins by a mechanism termed insight - out signaling ( Calderwood , 2004a ; Campbell and Ginsberg , 2004 ; Nieswandt et al . , 2007 ; Petrich et al . , 2007 ) . In skeletal muscle fibers , talin 1 is localized to costameres and MTJs ( Tidball et al . , 1986 ) , and its expression is regulated by mechanical loading ( Frenette and Tidball , 1998 ) . However , the function of talin 1 in vertebrate muscle is unclear because mice with a mutation in the talin 1 ( Tln1 ) gene die during gastrulation ( Monkley et al . , 2000 ) . Vertebrates contain a second talin gene ( Tln2 ) encoding talin 2 ( McCann and Craig , 1997 ; McCann and Craig , 1999 ; Monkley et al . , 2001 ) , the function of which in skeletal muscle is likewise unknown . In vitro studies show that expression Progressive myopathy and defects in the maintenance of myotendinous junctions in mice that lack talin 1 in skeletal muscle Francesco J . Conti 1 , Amanda Felder 2 , Sue Monkley 3 , Martin Schwander 1 , Malcolm R . Wood 4 , Richard Lieber 2 , David Critchley 3 and Ulrich Müller 1 , * The development and function of skeletal muscle depend on molecules that connect the muscle fiber cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) . β 1 integrins are ECM receptors in skeletal muscle , and mutations that affect the α 7 β 1 integrin cause myopathy in humans . In mice , β 1 integrins control myoblast fusion , the assembly of the muscle fiber cytoskeleton , and the maintenance of myotendinous junctions ( MTJs ) . The effector molecules that mediate β 1 integrin functions in muscle are not known . Previous studies have shown that talin 1 controls the force - dependent assembly of integrin adhesion complexes and regulates the affinity of integrins for ligands . Here we show that talin 1 is essential in skeletal muscle for the maintenance of integrin attachment sites at MTJs . Mice with a skeletal muscle - specific ablation of the talin 1 gene suffer from a progressive myopathy . Surprisingly , myoblast fusion and the assembly of integrin - containing adhesion complexes at costameres and MTJs advance normally in the mutants . However , with progressive ageing , the muscle fiber cytoskeleton detaches from MTJs . Mechanical measurements on isolated muscles show defects in the ability of talin 1 - deficient muscle to generate force . Collectively , our findings show that talin 1 is essential for providing mechanical stability to integrin - dependent adhesion complexes at MTJs , which is crucial for optimal force generation by skeletal muscle . KEY WORDS : Integrin , Talin , Muscular dystrophy , Myopathy , Mouse Development 135 , 2043 - 2053 ( 2008 ) doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 015818 1 The Scripps Research Institute , Department of Cell Biology and Institute of Childhood and Neglected Disease , La Jolla , CA 92037 , USA . 2 University of California and Veterans Administrative Centers , Department of Orthopaedics and Bioengineering , San Diego , CA 92037 , USA . 3 University of Leicester , Department of Biochemistry , Leicester LE1 7RH , UK . 4 The Scripps Research Institute , Microscopy Core Facility , La Jolla , CA 92037 , USA . * Author for correspondence ( e - mail : umueller @ scripps . edu ) Accepted 31 March 2008 D E V E L O P M E N T 2044 of talin 2 is upregulated during myoblast differentiation into myotubes , whereas talin 1 expression remains unchanged during differentiation ( Senetar et al . , 2007 ) . The genomes of C . elegans and D . melanogaster contain only one talin gene , which is essential for the attachment of muscle fibers to surrounding tissue ( Brown et al . , 2002 ; Cram et al . , 2003 ) . The invertebrate ortholog of the vertebrate integrin β 1 - subunit gene plays a similar role , indicating that talin 1 mediates integrin functions in invertebrate muscle ( Brabant et al . , 1996 ; Brown , 1994 ; Brown et al . , 2002 ; Cram et al . , 2003 ; Gettner et al . , 1995 ; Lee et al . , 2001 ; Leptin et al . , 1989 ; Volk et al . , 1990 ) . However , the mechanism by which defects in talin lead to the perturbation of adhesion sites is unclear . To define the function of talin 1 in skeletal muscle of vertebrates , we have taken a genetic approach and crossed mice carrying a floxed Tln1 allele with mice expressing CRE in developing skeletal muscle . We show here that talin 1 is not essential for the assembly of integrin β 1 - dependent adhesion complexes at costameres and MTJs . Instead , talin 1 plays an important role in stabilizing adhesion complexes at MTJs , thereby providing resistance against mechanical stress that is exerted during muscle contraction and relaxation . Surprisingly , although talin 2 is abundantly expressed in skeletal muscle , it cannot compensate for loss of talin 1 , suggesting that the two talin isoforms are not entirely functionally interchangeable . MATERIALS AND METHODS Mouse lines and genotyping The generation of Tln1 - flox mice and HSA - CRE mice have been described ( Leu et al . , 2003 ; Nieswandt et al . , 2007 ; Petrich et al . , 2007 ; Schwander et al . , 2003 ) . The mice were on a mixed 129 (cid:2) C57Bl / 6 genetic background . For genotyping , tail DNA was analyzed by PCR using primers for Tln1 as indicated in Fig . 1 : ( a ) 5 (cid:3) - AAGCAGGAACAAAAGTAGGTCTCC - 3 (cid:3) ; ( b ) 5 (cid:3) - GCATCGTCTTCACCACATTCC - 3 (cid:3) ; and ( c ) 5 (cid:3) - TAGAGAAGGTTC - AGCTGTCAGGG - 3 (cid:3) . Real - time PCR Transcript levels for talin 1 and talin 2 were determined by quantitative real - time PCR ( RT - PCR ) . RNA from gastrocnemius muscle from 5 - day - old ( n = 3 ) and 6 - month - old ( n = 3 ) C57Bl / 6 mice was prepared using Trizol LS ( Invitrogen ) . RNA ( 1 . 6 - 2 μ g ) was reverse - transcribed using the Superscript III System ( Invitrogen ) . Transcripts were quantitated by RT - PCR using Chromo4 ( MJ Research ) and SYBR Green ( Applied Biosystems ) . Two sets of primers were used for each transcript : Talin 1 set 1 , 5 (cid:3) - GGAAAT - CTGCCGGAGTTTGG - 3 (cid:3) and 5 (cid:3) - TTGGCTGTTGGGGTCAGAGA - 3 (cid:3) ; Talin 1 set 2 , 5 (cid:3) - GGGCTGGAGGGAGATGAAGA - 3 (cid:3) and 5 (cid:3) - AGA - GCCGTGCTCCACTTTCC - 3 (cid:3) ; Talin 2 set 1 , 5 (cid:3) - AAAACCCGAAT G - AGCCTGTGA - 3 (cid:3) and 5 (cid:3) - GAAATCCCTGCCATTGACTCG3 (cid:3) ; Talin 2 set 2 , 5 (cid:3) - GAAAACCCGAATGAGCCTGTG - 3 (cid:3) and 5 (cid:3) - GAAATCC - CTGCCATTGACTCG - 3 (cid:3) . Primers spanned at least one exon / intron boundary and were verified in BLAST searches for specificity . To determine primer efficiency , RNA was diluted serially and linear regression analysis was applied . The slope of the resulting curve was used as a measure of PCR efficiency [ E = ( 10 – 1 / slope ) – 1 ] . Efficiencies of the primer pairs were 95 - 98 % . Both set of primers produced comparable results and data from one set are shown . mRNA levels were determined using the comparative threshold ( Ct ) method ( Livak and Schmittgen , 2001 ) and normalized to glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase or β - actin mRNA . Antibodies , immunohistochemistry and electron microscopy Rabbit antibodies to talin 1 and talin 2 were produced at Animal Pharm Services ( Healdsburg ) using peptides corresponding to amino acids 1830 - 1850 ( mouse talin 1 ) and 940 - 957 ( mouse talin 2 ) . Immunohistochemistry was carried out as described ( Schwander et al . , 2003 ) using the following antibodies : mouse monoclonal antibodies against vinculin ( Sigma ) , dystrophin ( clone NCL - DYS2 , Novocastra ) , myosin heavy chain fast ( Sigma ) and Ilk ( Li et al . , 1999 ) ; rabbit polyclonal antibodies against collagen IV ( Chemicon ) , laminin ( Chemicon ) , talin 1 , talin 2 and α 7 integrin ( kindly provided by U . Meyer , University of East Anglia , Norwich , UK ) . Electron microscopy was carried out as described ( Schwander et al . , 2003 ) . Western blotting Gastrocnemius muscles were lysed in 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail ( Roche Diagnostics ) . Equal amounts of protein , as determined using the Micro BCA Kit ( Pierce ) , were analyzed by western blotting with the following antibodies : talin 1 , vinculin ( Sigma ) , Erk1 / 2 total and phosphorylated ( Cell Signaling Technology , Danvers , MA ) , FAK and FAK - PY397 ( UBI ) . To verify equal loading , membranes were stripped with Stripping Solution ( Chemicon ) and probed with antibodies to α - tubulin ( Sigma ) . Signal intensity was determined by densitometry using MetaMorph Optical Density analysis software ( Molecular Devices ) . Films from three independent experiments were scanned . Evans Blue Dye ( EBD ) uptake and creatine kinase assay EBD ( Sigma ) was dissolved in PBS ( 10 mg / ml ) and injected via the tail vein using 50 μ l per 10 g body weight . After 5 hours , mice were sacrificed , muscles were dissected and visually inspected . Tissues were fixed overnight with 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) . Sections ( 12 μ m ) of gastrocnemius and diaphragm muscles were analyzed using an Olympus BX50WI epifluorescence microscope . Measurements of creatine kinase ( CK ) levels from blood samples of 6 - to 7 - month - old mice were performed by Antech Diagnostics ( Irvine , CA ) . To evaluate EBD uptake after exercise , 5 - month - old Tln1HSA - CREko and wild - type mice ( 4 - 5 per genotype ) were injected with EBD solution and 1 hour later subjected to exercise . Mice were allowed to warm up by running at 10 meters / minute on a 0° incline for 5 minutes . After a 5 minute rest , mice were run at 17 meters / minute on a 0° incline for 30 minutes . Animals were returned to their cages and sacrificed 24 hours after exercise , muscles were dissected and EBD incorporation evaluated as described above . Cardiotoxin experiments 50 μ l of 10 μ M cardiotoxin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) were injected into the calf muscles of 8 - to 12 - week - old mice . The controlateral leg was injected with 50 μ l PBS as a control . Muscles were isolated at 5 , 10 and 21 days following injection , fixed with 4 % PFA and embedded in paraffin . Sections were prepared and stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin and morphology of myofibers evaluated for regeneration . Isometric and eccentric contraction cycles Mice were sacrificed and the fifth EDL ( extensor digitorum longus ) muscle was dissected in Ringer’s solution ( 137 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCl , 1 mM NaH 2 PO 4 , 24 mM NaHCO 3 , 2 mM CaCl 2 , 1 mM MgSO 4 , 11 mM glucose , 10 mg / l curare ) . Using 8 - 0 silk sutures , the muscle origin was secured by the tendon at a rigid post and the insertion was secured by the tendon to the arm of a dual - mode ergometer ( model 300B , Aurora Scientific ) . Muscle was bathed in Ringer’s solution , which was determined to be 10°C during measurements . Muscle length ( ML ) was measured , increased by 10 % , and sarcomere length was measured by laser diffraction at 632 . 8 nm and adjusted to 3 . 0 μ m . The EDL muscle was subjected to three passive stretches , one every 3 minutes , each time stretched 10 % of ML at the velocity of 0 . 7 ML / second . Maximum isometric tension was measured by applying a 400 millisecond train of 0 . 3 millisecond pulses delivered at 100 Hz while ML was maintained constant . This measurement was repeated again after 5 minutes . The stimulation frequency chosen for these isometric contractions and the other contractions that follow was 100 Hz , as this frequency produced a fused tetanic contraction , but was low enough to prevent excessive fatigue . Each muscle underwent ten eccentric contractions ( ECs ) , one every 3 minutes , each time stretched to 15 % of ML at the velocity of 2 ML / second . Following the EC cycle , the ML was returned to its initial value and post - eccentric isometric tension was measured by applying a 400 millisecond train of 0 . 3 millisecond pulses , delivered at 100 Hz while ML was maintained constant . This measurement was repeated twice , at 5 minute intervals . Muscle weight was measured to determine the physiological cross - sectional area ( Sam et al . , 2000 ) . Data were acquired using a CA - 1000 data board and analyzed in LabVIEW 7 . 0 ( National Instruments , Austin , TX ) . RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 135 ( 11 ) D E V E L O P M E N T All force and displacement records were stored for offline analysis . Work was calculated from the force - time and displacement - time records by creating the force - displacement relationship and integrating this relationship according to the equation : where t 1 represents the time at which stretch began ( 100 milliseconds after stimulation began ) , t 2 represents the time at which stretch ended ( 400 milliseconds after stimulation began ) and x represents displacement . RESULTSSkeletal muscle - specific Tln1 knockout mice To study the function of talin 1 in skeletal muscle , we employed a conditional knockout approach using the CRE / lox system . A gene - targeting vector was generated in which exons 2 - 5 ( of which exon 2 is the first coding exon ) of the Tln1 gene were flanked by loxP sites ( Fig . 1A ) . A selection cassette containing a neomycin ( neo ) gene and a third loxP site was introduced upstream of the first loxP site . Mice were generated that transmitted the targeted allele through the W = F ( x ) • dx , t 1 t 2 ∫ germline . These mice were crossed with a CRE deleter mouse ( Schwenk et al . , 1995 ) . Mice with different recombination events were recovered . In one line , only the neo cassette was lost , maintaining floxed exons 1 - 4 ( referred to as conditional allele , Tln1 flox ) . In a second line , the floxed region including the neo cassette and exons 1 - 4 were removed ( referred to as deleted allele , Tln1 – ) ( Fig . 1A ) . Tln1 flox / flox mice showed no overt abnormality , demonstrating that the presence of loxP sites did not affect Tln1 function ( data not shown ) . Tln1 – / – embryos died at gastrulation ( 6 . 5 - 7 . 5 days post - coitum ) ( data not shown ) , thus phenocopying mice in which the Tln1 allele has been ablated ( Monkley et al . , 2000 ) . To abolish talin 1 expression in skeletal muscle , we took advantage of mice that express CRE under the control of the human skeletal α - actin ( HSA ; ACTA1 – Human Gene Nomenclature Database ) promoter ( HSA - CRE ) ( Leu et al . , 2003 ; Schwander et al . , 2003 ) . We have previously shown that the HSA - CRE transgene is expressed as early as embryonic day ( E ) 9 . 5 in somites , and throughout all muscle groups by E14 . 5 ( Schwander et al . , 2003 ) . Tln1 flox / flox were mated with Tln1 flox / + mice that also contained a HSA - CRE transgene ( Tln1 flox / + HSA - CRE + / – ) to obtain mutant ( HSA - CRE + / – Tln1 flox / flox , referred to as Tln1HSA - CREko mice ) and control ( HSA - CRE – / – Tln flox / flox or HSA - CRE – / – Tln flox / + referred to as wild type because their phenotype was indistinguishable from C57Bl / 6 mice ) offspring . To confirm recombination of the Tln1 flox allele in Tln1HSA - CREko mice , we performed PCR analysis of DNA extracted from skeletal muscle of E14 . 5 and postnatal day ( P ) 2 mice ; Tln1 flox / flox and Tln1 flox / + mice that lacked the HSA - CRE transgene were analyzed in parallel as controls . A 707 bp band corresponding to the recombined Tln1 flox allele was detected in skeletal muscle of Tln1HSA - CREko mice as early as E14 . 5 ( Fig . 1B ) , but not in non - muscle tissue ( data not shown ) or control mice ( Fig . 1B ) . Talin 1 expression is abolished in skeletal muscle To confirm that we had inactivated Tln1 in Tln1HSA - CREko mice , we raised in rabbits antibodies that are specific for talin 1 and for talin 2 ( see Materials and methods ) and analyzed protein expression in muscles including gastrocnemius , tibialis and diaphragm . At late embryonic and early postnatal ages when skeletal muscle fibers are actively forming , talin 1 expression was detected at the sarcolemma of wild - type mice but not in the mutants ( Fig . 2A , B , arrows ) . Some cells in the mutants expressed talin 1 ( Fig . 2A , B arrowheads ) , but we identified them by morphology and co - staining with antibodies to VE - cadherin ( cadherin 5 ) as endothelial cells ( Fig . 2E ) . Similarly , in muscle from 6 - month - old mice , talin 1 expression was not detectable in muscle fibers ( Fig . 2C , D ) and only persisted in blood vessels ( Fig . 2D , arrowhead ) . Western blot analysis carried out with extracts obtained from skeletal muscle of P2 and P8 Tln1HSA - CREko mice further confirmed that talin 1 expression was essentially abolished ( Fig . 2F ) . Residual expression was likely to be due to talin 1 expressed in blood vessels . In addition , we detected talin 2 expression by western blot ( Fig . 2F ) and immunohistochemistry ( Fig . 6M , N ) , but we failed to detect compensatory talin 2 upregulation upon removal of talin 1 ( Fig . 2F , Fig . 6M , N ) . The expression levels of the Tln1 and Tln2 transcripts in gastrocnemius muscle were also determined by real - time PCR . Expression levels for Tln2 were 4 - to 5 - fold higher than for Tln1 in both 5 - day - old ( Tln1 , 1 . 03±0 . 16 ; Tln2 , 4 . 70±0 . 44 ; P = 0 . 004 ) and 6 - month - old muscle ( Tln1 , 1 . 00±0 . 06 ; Tln2 , 4 . 1±0 . 31 ; P = 0 . 002 ) ( Fig . 2G ) . This analysis corroborates earlier findings indicating that Tln2 mRNA is the predominant isoform expressed in skeletal muscle ( Monkley et al . , 2001 ; Senetar et al . , 2007 ) . 2045 RESEARCH ARTICLE Talin 1 and skeletal muscle Fig . 1 . Generation of the talin 1 conditional allele . ( A ) Scheme of the targeting strategy . Homologous recombination of the targeting construct into the Tln1 gene introduced a loxP site ( triangle ) downstream of coding exon 5 and a floxed pgk - neo cassette upstream of the first coding exon ( exon 2 ) . CRE expression induced three recombination events : ( 1 ) Type II deletion : removal of the neo cassette ( Tln1 fl / fl ) ; ( 2 ) Type III deletion : removal of exons 1 - 4 ( not shown ) ; ( 3 ) Type I deletion : removal of pgk - neo and exons 1 - 4 ( Tln1 – ) . Primers a , b and c were used for the PCR reactions shown in B . ( B ) Recombination pattern observed by PCR on DNA extracted from E14 . 5 and P2 wild - type ( WT ) and Tln1HSA - CREko mutant ( MT ) littermates . ( Top row ) A 707 bp band indicative of the recombined allele ( Rec ) was observed in samples from Tln1HSA - CREko mice . ( Middle row ) The presence of floxed ( fl ) and wild - type ( wt ) alleles was confirmed . ( Lower row ) The presence of CRE recombinase was confirmed . D E V E L O P M E N T 2046 Progressive accumulation of dysmorphic muscle fibers in Tln1HSA - CREko mice Tln1HSA - CREko mice were born at the expected Mendelian ratio , were viable and fertile , were indistinguishable in appearance from wild - type littermates ( data not shown ) , and grew at normal rates ( Fig . 2H ) . However , histological examination revealed progressive defects in muscle fiber morphology . We analyzed several muscle groups including gastrocnemius , soleus and diaphragm collected from animals between P15 and 6 months . At P15 and P60 , all muscle groups appeared normal ( Fig . 3A - H ; data not shown ) ; wild - type and Tln1 - deficient muscle fibers were regular in diameter . Morphological defects were obvious in muscle of Tln1 - deficient mice by 6 months of age , and were more commonly observed in the diaphragm . In contrast to wild - type mice ( Fig . 3I , K ) , muscle fibers in mutant animals appeared less regular in diameter and were enlarged ( Fig . 3J , L ) and distorted ( Fig . 3M ) . Dysmorphic fibers were also evident close to the MTJs of diaphragm muscle ( Fig . 3O , P ) . Centrally located nuclei and an accumulation of interstitial cells were occasionally detectable . However , unlike the situation in mice lacking expression of the integrin α 7 - subunit ( Mayer et al . , 1997 ) , a diffuse centronuclear myopathy was not observed in the Tln1 - deficient mice . Integrins and talin 1 have been implicated in myoblast proliferation and differentiation ( Senetar et al . , 2007 ) . In postnatal muscle , non - proliferating myoblasts are localized between myofibers and the basal lamina , where they constitute the satellite cell population . Upon muscle injury , satellite cells proliferate , fuse and regenerate new myofibers , which are characterized by variable size and centrally located nuclei ( Shi and Garry , 2006 ) . Immunohistochemical analysis did not provide clear evidence for talin 1 expression in satellite cells ( data not shown ) . However , satellite cells may express low levels of talin 1 that were difficult to detect with our antibodies . Therefore , to evaluate whether the absence of a centronuclear myopathy was caused by defects in satellite cell function , we injected gastrocnemius muscles of 2 - month - old mice with cardiotoxin and analyzed muscle fiber morphology 5 , 10 and 21 days later . At all time points Tln1HSA - CREko and wild - type mice presented signs of effective muscle regeneration . Five days after toxin injection , necrotic fibers and small fibers with centrally located nuclei , indicative of regenerating fibers , were evident and immune cell infiltrate was noted ( see Fig . S1A - D in the supplementary material ) . After 10 days , affected fibers presented with central located nuclei , but muscle architecture was largely restored ( see Fig . S1E , F in the supplementary material ) . By 21 days , regeneration was complete ( see Fig . S1G , H in the supplementary material ; data not shown ) . We conclude that the absence of a centronuclear myopathy in Tln1HSA - CREko mice is not caused by an impaired capacity of mutant muscle to regenerate . Talin 1 is not essential to maintain sarcolemmal integrity An increase in the fragility of the sarcolemma is observed in several forms of muscular dystrophy ( Carpenter and Karpati , 1979 ; Schmalbruch , 1975 ; Straub et al . , 1997 ; Weller et al . , 1990 ) . To evaluate damage to the sarcolemma , Evans Blue Dye ( EBD ) was injected into 6 - month - old Tln1HSA - CREko and wild - type mice , and muscles were dissected after 5 hours to evaluate dye incorporation . Whereas connective tissue presented a blue coloration , muscles including the diaphragm ( Fig . 3Q , R ) , gastrocnemius and soleus ( Fig . 3S , T ; data not shown ) failed to accumulate EBD . Occasionally , a few EBD - stained fibers were evident , independent of the genotype of the mice ( Fig . 3U , arrow ) . Histologically , these EBD - positive fibers appeared damaged , possibly in response to normal muscle usage . This , together with the positive coloration of interstitial tissue , validated successful circulation of the dye . EBD - positive fibers in damaged muscle appeared fluorescent by light microscopy ( Fig . 3X ) . In both wild - type and Tln1 - deficient muscle , fluorescence was only observed in tendons and interstitial tissue , and not in muscle fibers ( Fig . 3V , W ) . A more sensitive indication of membrane integrity is gained by evaluating the efflux of intracellular proteins from damaged muscle fibers ( Rosalki , 1989 ) . In 6 - month - old Tln1HSA - CREko mice , RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 135 ( 11 ) Fig . 2 . Characterization of Tln1HSA - CREko mice . ( A - E ) Cross - sections of wild - type and Tln1HSA - CREko mutant muscle were stained with antibodies to talin 1 at P8 ( A , B ) and 6 months ( C , D ) . Talin 1 expression was detected at the sarcolemma in wild - type ( A , C ) but not mutant mice ( B , D ) . In the mutants , talin 1 expression remained in cells between skeletal muscle fibers ( B , D , arrowheads ) that were identified as blood vessels by staining with antibodies to VE - cadherin ( E ) . ( F ) Western blots with extracts from P2 and P8 gastrocnemius and soleus muscle , respectively . Expression of talin 1 was markedly reduced in Tln1HSA - CREko mice . Residual protein levels were likely to be due to talin 1 expression in endothelial cells . Talin 2 expression was detected in muscle extracts , but no compensatory upregulation was evident . Membranes were probed for tubulin ( α - tub ) as a loading control . ( G ) Analysis of Tln1 and Tln2 transcript levels in gastrocnemius muscle by quantitative real - time PCR . Data are plotted relative to Tln1 mRNA levels ( n = 3 ; mean ±s . e . ; * P = 0 . 004 at P5 ; P = 0 . 002 at 6 months ) . ( H ) Growth curve of wild - type and Tln1HSA - CREko mice up to 60 weeks of age revealed no differences between the two genotypes . Scale bars : 25 μ m in A - D ; 50 μ m in E . D E V E L O P M E N T serum creatine kinase was elevated ~ 3 - fold compared with levels in wild - type mice ( 1526 . 20±151 . 44 U / l and 593 . 85±154 . 23 U / l , respectively ) ( Fig . 3Y ) . This increase is mild when compared with other mouse models of muscular dystrophy ( Sonnemann et al . , 2006 ) . Finally , we evaluated whether talin 1 - deficient muscles were more susceptible to muscle fiber damage when subjected to exercise , as has been observed in other models for muscular dystrophy ( Armstrong et al . , 1983 ; Hamer et al . , 2002 ; McNeil and Khakee , 1992 ; Vilquin et al . , 1998 ) . EBD was injected into 5 - to 6 - month - old mice and , 1 hour after injection , mice were run on a treadmill for 30 minutes . No major dye incorporation was observed in diaphragm and gastrocnemius muscle from wild - type ( n = 4 ) ( see Fig . S2A , C , F in the supplementary material ) or Tln1HSA - CREko ( n = 4 ) ( see Fig . S2B , D in the supplementary material ) mice . Mild EBD accumulation was only observed in one gastrocnemius muscle in one mutant mouse ( see Fig . S1E in the supplementary material ) , and in the paraspinalis muscles of a second mouse ( see Fig . S1G in the supplementary material ) , but the damage was mild in comparison with what has been observed in mice carrying mutations affecting DGC proteins ( Sonnemann et al . , 2006 ) . Collectively , these data suggest that sarcolemmal integrity is mildly defective when the function of talin 1 is perturbed . Mild damage to the sarcolemma was also observed in patients and mice with mutations in the gene for the integrin α 7 - subunit ( Hayashi et al . , 1998 ; Rooney et al . , 2006 ) . Talin 1 is not essential for the assembly of integrin complexes at costameres Talin binds to proteins that are localized to costameres , including β 1 integrins , vinculin , actin and FAK ( Critchley , 2000 ) . Since defects in muscle fiber morphology could result from altered assembly of costameres , we assessed whether talin 1 ablation impaired costamere assembly in vivo . We analyzed the distribution of costameric proteins in 6 - month - old mice by immunohistochemistry , but observed no obvious defects . β 1 integrins and α - actinin were localized normally , forming a regular array ( Fig . 4A - D ) . Talin 1 directly binds to vinculin , but vinculin was still localized to costameres in Tln1 - deficient skeletal muscle fibers ( Fig . 4E , F ) . Consistent with the lack of extensive sarcolemmal damage ( Fig . 3 ) , localization of dystrophin was also unaffected ( Fig . 4G , H ) . Morphological defects of muscle fibers could be caused by defects in the basement membrane around muscle fibers , but no obvious 2047 RESEARCH ARTICLE Talin 1 and skeletal muscle Fig . 3 . Skeletal muscle defects in Tln1HSA - CREko mice . ( A - P ) Muscle sections from wild - type and mutant animals were stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin . Longitudinal sections from gastrocnemius ( gast ) and diaphragm ( diap ) muscles at P15 ( A - D ) and P60 ( E - H ) revealed no defects in the mutants . At 6 months , defects were observed in gastrocnemius and diaphragm muscles in mutants ( J , L - N , P ) , but not in wild types ( I , K , O ) . Pathological changes included enlarged ( J , L , arrows ) and bent ( M , arrow ) muscle fibers , and centrally located nuclei ( L , N , P , arrowheads ) . Abnormal muscle fiber morphology was also evident in proximity to MTJs ( compare O with P ) . ( Q - X ) Six - month - old mice were injected with Evans Blue Dye ( EBD ) and analyzed for dye uptake by bright field illumination of whole - mount tissue . Wild - type diaphragm ( Q ) and gastrocnemius muscle ( S ) did not show dye uptake , unless the muscle fibers were damaged ( U ) ( damage was occasionally observed in wild - type and mutant mice ) . No dye was incorporated in mutant fibers ( R , T ) . ( V - X ) Dye uptake was analyzed in sections using immunofluorescence microscopy . Tendon ( t ) but not muscle ( m ) in wild type ( V ) and mutants ( W ) had incorporated dye . In control damaged muscle from wild types ( X ) , dye uptake was observed . ( Y ) At 6 months of age , a mild increase in serum creatine kinase levels was observed in the mutants ( n (cid:4) 4 ; mean ± s . e . ) . Scale bars : 250 μ m in A - P ; 200 μ m in V - X . D E V E L O P M E N T 2048 defects were apparent in the localization of collagen type IV or laminin ( Fig . 4I - L ) . Sarcomere integrity was also evaluated by electron microscopy . In both wild - type and Tln1 - deficient skeletal muscle fibers , the sarcomeres were well organized , with Z - lines evident in both 1 - month - old ( Fig . 4M , N ) and 6 - month - old ( Fig . 4O , P ) mice . In Tln1 - deficient muscle fibers , the sarcomeres occasionally appeared hypercontracted and M - bands were not always evident ; the Z - line , which includes β 1 - integrin - containing complexes and corresponds to costameres , was always visible ( Fig . 4O , P ) . Talin 1 directly associates with FAK ( Chen et al . , 1995 ) . Integrin binding to ECM ligands leads to activation of FAK by autophosphorylation at Tyr397 , creating a binding site for Src , which phosphorylates focal adhesion components and activates MAPK signaling ( Mitra et al . , 2005 ) . In Tln1HSA - CREko mice , expression levels and phosphorylation of FAK at Tyr397 were comparable to those of wild - type mice ( Fig . 5A , D ) . Phosphorylation levels of Erk1 / 2 ( Mapk3 / Mapk1 – Mouse Genome Informatics ) were also normal ( Fig . 5B , D ) . Finally , western blot analysis with antibodies to vinculin and the integrin β 1 - subunit revealed that expression levels of these proteins were unchanged in muscle from Tln1HSA - CREko mice ( Fig . 5C , D ) . Taken together , these data indicate that loss of talin 1 in skeletal muscle does not lead to major defects in the assembly of costameres , or in FAK and MAPK signaling . Talin 1 is essential for the maintenance of the connection between integrins and myofilaments at MTJs Alterations in muscle fiber morphology could result from defects at MTJs . Ultrastructural analysis showed that the structure of the lamina densa at MTJs , which is absent in mice with genetic ablation of β 1 integrins and altered in α 7 integrin mutants ( Miosge et al . , 1999 ; Schwander et al . , 2003 ) , was still visible in Tln1HSA - CREko mice ( Fig . 6A , B ) . Immunostaining of sections from 6 - month - old RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 135 ( 11 ) Fig . 4 . Talin 1 is not essential for costamere assembly . ( A - D ) Longitudinal and ( E - L ) cross - sections of muscle from 6 - month - old wild - type and Tln1HSA - CREko mice were stained with antibodies to costameric proteins and ECM glycoproteins and analyzed by immunofluorescence microscopy . The integrin β 1 - subunit , α - actinin , vinculin , dystrophin , collagen type IV and laminin were localized normally in the mutants . ( M - P ) Analysis of muscle by transmission electron microscopy . Sarcomere organization was not affected in Tln1HSA - CREko mice ( M , N ) , but sarcomeres occasionally appeared hypercontracted ( O , P ) . The Z - band was always detectable ( O , P , arrows ) , but the A band ( O , P , asterisk ) was sometimes not evident in contracted muscle fibers . Scale bars : 200 μ m in A - L ; 2 μ m in M , N ; 1 μ m in O , P . Fig . 5 . Expression and phosphorylation of talin 1 - associated proteins . ( A - C ) Extracts from wild - type and Tln1 mutant gastrocnemius muscle were analyzed by western blotting . No changes were observed in levels of FAK ( A ) , Erk1 / 2 ( B , ERK ) , β 1 integrin and vinculin ( C ) . Phosphorylation of FAK at Tyr397 ( A , P - FAK ) and of Erk1 / 2 ( B , P - ERK ) were unaffected . Membranes were probed with α - tubulin antibodies as a loading control . ( D ) Protein expression was quantified by densitometry ( n (cid:4) 3 ; relative expression levels ±s . e . ) . No statistically significant difference was observed in expression ( P - values : β 1 integrin , 0 . 238 ; vinculin , 0 . 146 ; FAK , 0 . 223 ; P - FAK , 0 . 153 ; ERK , 0 . 892 ; P - ERK , 0 . 165 ) . D E V E L O P M E N T mice demonstrated that the distribution of collagen IV and laminin was normal at MTJs in Tln1 mutant animals ( Fig . 6C - F ) . In addition , α 7 integrin , vinculin and integrin - linked kinase ( Ilk ) localized at the MTJ , suggesting that the integrin complexes at MTJs assemble in the absence of talin 1 and are largely functional to mediate adhesive interactions ( Fig . 6G - L ) . We also observed that talin 2 is localized at the MTJs without any obvious upregulation in the mutants ( Fig . 6M , N ) . Taken together , these data provide strong evidence that integrin - dependent adhesion complexes still form at MTJs in the absence of talin 1 . Further ultrastructural analysis of skeletal muscle in 1 - and 6 - month - old animals revealed that the attachment of myofilaments at MTJ progressively failed in Tln1HSA - CREko mice . At the MTJs of wild - type mice , the sarcolemma was extensively folded ( Fig . 7A , D ) . Myofilaments displayed a regular sarcomeric structure and were connected to the subsarcolemmal electron - dense plaque at the basement membrane ( Fig . 7A , D , F ; arrowheads ) . In Tln1HSA - CREko mice , myofilaments failed to connect to the basement membrane and were retracted ( Fig . 7C , E , G ) . Necrotic material accumulated between the myofilaments and the basement membrane ( Fig . 7C , E , G , asterisks ) and included vacuoles and membranous debris . The subsarcolemmal plaque was present in Tln1HSA - CREko mice , but its thickness was reduced and , in particular , it was discontinuous in areas were myofilaments failed to attach ( arrows in Fig . 7G ) . The interdigitations of muscle fibers with the tendon were also perturbed ( Fig . 7C , E , G ) . Defects were noted in different muscles , including tibialis ( Fig . 7A - C ) , diaphragm ( Fig . 7D - G ) and gastrocnemius ( not shown ) . Ultrastructural analysis of extrajunctional areas revealed additional abnormalities that are commonly observed in dystrophic muscles , including the presence of structures that resembled vacuoles ( Fig . 7E , G , I , J ) , suggesting some degree of degeneration . Upon closer inspection , some vacuoles could be identified as morphologically abnormal mitochondria ( data not shown ) . These were unlikely to be artefacts of sample preparation , as normal and abnormal mitochondria were found closely juxtaposed to each other ( white arrows in Fig . 7I ) . In some areas , excessive accumulation of mitochondria was noted ( Fig . 7K , L ) . Collectively , our findings show that in the absence of talin 1 , integrin adhesion complexes still form at MTJs and connect to the muscle fiber cytoskeleton . However , with progressive age , myofilaments detach , suggesting that talin 1 is required for maintaining their interaction with integrin adhesion complexes during mechanical strain . Altered mechanical properties of skeletal muscle fibers in Tln1HSA - CREko mice Defects in MTJs are likely to affect the ability of skeletal muscle fibers to generate force and to resist mechanical damage during contraction . To test this hypothesis , we applied defined length changes to muscles using an ex vivo experimental setup . The fifth toe extensor digitorum longus ( EDL ) muscle was isolated from 2 - to 3 - month - old and 6 - to 7 - month - old mice and subjected to cyclic isometric or eccentric contractions . Isometric contractions are performed by stimulating muscle fibers to contract while keeping the length of the muscle constant , and provide a measure of the force the muscle is able to exert ( Fig . 8B ) . Eccentric contractions are performed by lengthening the muscle while at the same time stimulating contraction ( Fig . 8C ) and induce damage in muscle fibers ( Armstrong et al . , 1983 ; Lieber et al . , 1991 ) . The difference in isometric stress produced by muscle fibers before and after the eccentric contraction cycle provides a measure of susceptibility to mechanical damage ( Sam et al . , 2000 ) . No significant difference was observed in the length and mass of isolated wild - type and Tln1 - deficient muscles ( Fig . 8A ) , and all force values were normalized against the physiological cross - sectional area ( Fig . 8A ) , which takes into account differences in muscle mass , length and in the orientation of muscle fibers ( see Materials and methods ) . At 2 to 3 months of age , the isometric stresses produced by Tln1 - deficient muscle fibers were comparable to those of wild - type muscle fibers 2049 RESEARCH ARTICLE Talin 1 and skeletal muscle Fig . 6 . Integrin complexes are maintained at the MTJ . ( A , B ) MTJs in diaphragm muscle from wild - type and Tln1 mutant mice were analyzed by transmission electron microscopy to reveal the lamina densa . A continuous basement membrane ( arrowheads ) was present at the MTJ in mutants . ( C - N ) Localization of collagen IV , laminin , integrin α 7 β , vinculin , Ilk and talin 2 at MTJs ( arrowheads ) was analyzed by immunofluorescencemicroscopy . All analyzed proteins were present at MTJs in wild - type and mutant animals . t , tendon , m , muscle . Scale bars : 500 nm in A , B ; 100 μ m in C - F ; 200 μ m in G - N . D E V E L O P M E N T 2050 ( P = 0 . 413 pre - eccentric , P = 0 . 892 post - eccentric ) ( Fig . 8D ) . By contrast , force production was markedly impaired in muscle obtained from 6 - to 7 - month - old Tln1HSA - CREko mice ( Fig . 8E ) . In an eccentric contraction cycle , mutant mice showed a significant reduction in maximum pre - eccentric ( P = 0 . 0276 ) and post - eccentric ( P = 0 . 0358 ) isometric stress ( Fig . 8F , G ) . Additionally , for older Tln1 - deficient muscles , the peak stresses exerted during the eccentric contraction were significantly reduced from wild - type values in every eccentric contraction except the initial one , which showed greater variability ( see Fig . S3B in the supplementary material ) . Similarly , the work performed on the muscle normalized by muscle mass was decreased in the 6 - to 7 - month - old Tln1HSA - CREko mice for each eccentric contraction when compared with the wild type ( see Fig . S3D in the supplementary material ) . Values of peak stress RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 135 ( 11 ) Fig . 7 . Detachment of myofilaments at the MTJ . Electron micrographs of tibialis ( A - E ) , diaphragm ( F - J ) and soleus ( K , L ) muscles collected from 1 - month - old ( A - C , H , I ) and 6 - month - old ( D - G , J - L ) wild - type ( WT ) and Tln1 mutant ( MT ) mice . In wild - type mice , myofilaments connected to junctional electron - dense plaques are visible ( arrowheads in A , D , F ) . In 1 - month - old Tln1HSA - CREko mice , most MTJs were intact ( B ) , but detachment of myofibers from MTJs was occasionally observed ( C ) . In 6 - month - old mutant animals , detachment of the myofibers was observed very frequently ( E ) . Necrotic material was present where myofibers detached ( asterisks in C , E , G ) . The thickness of the junctional plaque was reduced , and gaps were present where myofilaments failed to attach ( arrows in G ) . Degeneration ( I ) and accumulation ( K , L ) of mitochondria were observed . Necrotic areas were observed in mutant fibers ( J , K , asterisk ) next to abnormal myofilaments ( K , arrows ) . Scale bars : 3 μ m in A - E , H , I ; 1 μ m in F , G ; 10 μ m in J - L . Fig . 8 . Impaired force generation by Tln1 - deficient muscles . ( A ) The length , mass and physiological cross - sectional area ( PCSA ) are similar in the fifth EDL muscle from wild - type and Tln1HSA - CREko mice . ( B , C ) Sample curves representing a single isometric and eccentric contraction , respectively . ( D - H ) Isometric and eccentric contractile properties of the fifth EDL muscle isolated from 2 - and 7 - month - old mice . ( D ) No significant difference was observed in stress exerted by 2 - month - old muscles from wild - type and Tln1HSA - CREko mice in the eccentric contraction protocol . ( E ) Example of force profile of the first isometric contraction in 7 - month - old mice . Tln1 - deficient muscles exert reduced isometric stress . ( F , G ) In an eccentric contraction protocol , muscles from 7 - month - old Tln1HSA - CREko mice showed a significant reduction in peak stress exerted in the pre - eccentric ( P = 0 . 0276 ) and post - eccentric ( P = 0 . 0358 ) isometric contractions as compared with wild - type controls ( n (cid:4) 4 per genotype per time point ) . ( H ) Even though Tln1 - deficient muscles generated less force than controls , the force drop was comparable between genotypes , suggesting enhanced susceptibility to damage in the mutants . All force values were normalized against the PCSA of the muscle ( mean ±s . e . ) . D E V E L O P M E N T and work were not significantly different between the muscles obtained from 2 - month - old wild - type and mutant mice ( see Fig . S3A , C in the supplementary material ) . The forces generated by wild - type and mutant fibers decreased during the eccentric contraction protocol ( Fig . 8D , F ) . At both 2 and 7 months , the force drop was comparable between wild - type and Tln1 - deficient muscles ( Fig . 8H ) . However , because 7 - month - old mutant muscles exerted considerably less force during the contraction protocol , reduced damage and fatigue and consequently a smaller force drop were expected . The greater than expected force drop in mutant muscle suggests that Tln1 - deficient muscle was susceptible to eccentric - contraction - induced damage . These data are consistent with a failure in the attachment of skeletal muscle fibers at MTJs . Overall , we conclude that ablation of talin 1 causes a progressive impairment of the capacity of muscle to generate and to bear force . DISCUSSION We show here that talin 1 is crucial for the maintenance of integrin attachment sites at MTJs . Tln1HSA - CREko mice were viable and fertile , but suffered from a progressive myopathy . Whereas integrins and some of their effectors such as FAK , Ilk and vinculin still were localized to muscle attachment sites at costameres and MTJs , MTJs showed structural abnormalities . Defects in the ultrastructure of MTJs , such as decreased interdigitations of muscle and tendon and retraction of myofilaments from electron - dense plaques at the plasma membrane , indicate that in the absence of talin 1 the mechanical connection of actin filaments and integrins at the MTJ was compromised . By contrast , sarcolemmal integrity was largely maintained . Defects in skeletal muscle were prominent in 6 - to 7 - month - old mice , and were only occasionally noted in 1 - to 2 - month - old animals , suggesting that the defects were caused by mechanical failure of MTJs under duress . In agreement with this finding , isolated muscle fibers from 7 months but not 2 months were severely compromised in their ability to generate force . Previous studies have shown that in invertebrates , talin is essential to mediate interactions between integrins and the muscle fiber cytoskeleton ( Brown et al . , 2002 ; Cram et al . , 2003 ) , but the mechanism of talin function has remained unclear . By taking advantage of a vertebrate model system that provides greater access to study the biophysical properties of muscle , we now provide evidence that talin 1 has an important biomechanical role in muscle . Studies with cells in culture have shown that talin 1 localizes to focal adhesions , where it interacts with β 1 integrins , FAK , vinculin and actin ( Borowsky and Hynes , 1998 ; Critchley , 2000 ) , and with layilin in membrane ruffles ( Borowsky and Hynes , 1998 ) . The assembly of adhesion complexes at focal adhesions is controlled by mechanical force . Forces that are applied to nascent integrin adhesion sites induce a strengthening of the integrin - cytoskeleton interaction , initiating focal adhesion formation and promoting maturation ( Balaban et al . , 2001 ; Choquet et al . , 1997 ; Galbraith et al . , 2002 ; Riveline et al . , 2001 ) . Mechanical force accelerates the localization of vinculin to focal adhesions , which depends on talin 1 ( Giannone et al . , 2003 ) . Our findings now show an important mechanical function for talin 1 in vertebrate skeletal muscle in vivo . At MTJs , integrin adhesion complexes containing the integrin α 7 - and β 1 - subunits , Ilk and vinculin assembled in the absence of talin 1 . However , talin 1 - deficient MTJs showed greater susceptibility to mechanical stress - induced damage . MTJs in muscle such as diaphragm that is under constant workload showed the most prominent defects . Mechanical measurements on isolated muscle fibers demonstrated that talin 1 - deficient fibers generated less force than wild - type muscle fibers . MTJs in Tln1HSA - CREko mice still contained talin 2 but were unstable , suggesting that talin 1 and talin 2 are not entirely functionally interchangeable . Previous studies have shown that talin 1 is of central importance for integrin function , regulating interactions of the β 1 integrin with the cytoskeleton and with ECM ligands ( Calderwood , 2004b ; Campbell and Ginsberg , 2004 ; Ginsberg et al . , 2005 ; Nieswandt et al . , 2007 ; Petrich et al . , 2007 ) . Ablation of the gene encoding the integrin β 1 - subunit during skeletal muscle development leads to defects in myoblast fusion and sarcomere assembly ( Schwander et al . , 2003 ) . We were surprised that we did not observe similar defects in Tln1HSA - CREko mice . The migration and fusion of myoblasts was not obviously perturbed , and immunohistochemical and ultrastructural analysis revealed no defects in the assembly of costameres and integrin complexes . How can these findings be reconciled ? Talin 1 might still have essential functions early in skeletal muscle development , for example in myoblast migration , that have escaped detection because gene inactivation using HSA - CRE might have been incomplete at early ages . Furthermore , talin 2 may compensate for some talin 1 functions . In agreement with previous findings ( Monkley et al . , 2001 ; Senetar and McCann , 2005 ; Senetar et al . , 2007 ) , we observed prominent talin 2 expression in skeletal muscle . However , our findings as well as previous studies suggest that talin 2 and talin 1 are not entirely interchangeable . First , genes for talin 1 and talin 2 have been identified in all available vertebrate genomes , indicating that evolutionary pressure has maintained two talin genes . Second , Tln1 - null mice are embryonically lethal ( Monkley et al . , 2000 ) indicating that Tln2 cannot compensate for Tln1 in early mouse development . Third , although talin 1 and 2 share a high degree of identity , amino acid differences in functionally important domains such as FERM and I / LWEQ ( actin - binding ) domains have been maintained throughout evolution ( Senetar and McCann , 2005 ) . These differences might confer specific functions to each protein . Consistent with this interpretation , talin 1 and 2 have different affinities for F - actin ( Senetar et al . , 2004 ) . Fourth , talin 1 and talin 2 have distinct binding partners in skeletal muscle ( Senetar and McCann , 2005 ) . Finally , the two - piconewton slip bond between fibronectin and the cytoskeleton depends on talin 1 . Talin 2 cannot compensate for the function of talin 1 in this process ( Jiang et al . , 2003 ) . The latter finding suggests that talin 1 has a specialized function in force coupling , which could be especially important in maintaining MTJs under mechanical duress . Talin 2 is likely to be sufficient for the assembly of integrin adhesion complexes at MTJs , but in the absence of talin 1 , MTJs progressively fail . Our data suggest that the functions of talin 1 in the regulation of integrin activation might be tissue - specific . Unlike the situation in megakaryocytes and platelets , in which a rapid and discrete modulation of integrin affinity for the ECM is required for proper function ( Calderwood , 2004a ; Campbell and Ginsberg , 2004 ; Nieswandt et al . , 2007 ; Petrich et al . , 2007 ) , affinity modulation may be less crucial at more stable adhesion complexes at MTJs . Importantly , integrin activation by talin was evaluated only for the integrin β 1A splice variant , whereas adult skeletal muscle expresses integrin β 1D , which provides a stronger mechanical link to the actin cytoskeleton . Finally , our findings have implications for understanding disease mechanisms . Mutations that affect talin 1 and integrin α 7 β 1 cause fragility of MTJs , but membrane damage is mild ( Hayashi et al . , 1998 ; Mayer et al . , 1997 ) . By contrast , MTJs are maintained when the DGC is affected , but plasma membrane damage is prominent ( Straub et al . , 1997 ) . Collectively , these findings suggest that ECM 2051 RESEARCH ARTICLE Talin 1 and skeletal muscle D E V E L O P M E N T 2052 receptors of the integrin family and their effectors control MTJ stability , whereas the DGC has a major function in maintaining the integrity of the sarcolemma . We thank Ulrike Mayer ( University of East Anglia ) and Cary Wu ( University of Pittsburgh ) for generously providing us with antibodies to the integrin α 7 - subunit and Ilk , respectively . We thank Dusko Trajkovic for help with histology . This research was funded with support from the National Institute of Health to U . M . ( NS046456 ) and R . L . ( AR40050 ) and from the Wellcome Trust to D . R . C . ( O77532 ) . Supplementary material Supplementary material for this article is available at http : / / dev . biologists . org / cgi / content / full / 135 / 11 / 2043 / DC1 ReferencesArmstrong , R . B . , Ogilvie , R . W . and Schwane , J . A . ( 1983 ) . Eccentric exercise - induced injury to rat skeletal muscle . J . Appl . Physiol . 54 , 80 - 93 . Balaban , N . Q . , Schwarz , U . S . , Riveline , D . , Goichberg , P . , Tzur , G . , Sabanay , I . , Mahalu , D . , Safran , S . , Bershadsky , A . , Addadi , L . et al . ( 2001 ) . Force and focal adhesion assembly : a close relationship studied using elastic micropatterned substrates . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 466 - 472 . Borowsky , M . L . and Hynes , R . O . ( 1998 ) . Layilin , a novel talin - binding transmembrane protein homologous with C - type lectins , is localized in membrane ruffles . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 429 - 442 . Brabant , M . C . , Fristrom , D . , Bunch , T . A . and Brower , D . L . ( 1996 ) . Distinct spatial and temporal functions for PS integrins during Drosophila wing morphogenesis . Development 122 , 3307 - 3317 . Brown , N . H . ( 1994 ) . Null mutations in the alpha PS2 and beta PS integrin subunit genes have distinct phenotypes . Development 120 , 1221 - 1231 . Brown , N . H . , Gregory , S . L . , Rickoll , W . L . , Fessler , L . I . , Prout , M . , White , R . A . and Fristrom , J . W . ( 2002 ) . Talin is essential for integrin function in Drosophila . Dev . Cell 3 , 569 - 579 . Calderwood , D . A . ( 2004a ) . Integrin activation . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 657 - 666 . Calderwood , D . A . ( 2004b ) . Talin controls integrin activation . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 32 , 434 - 437 . Campbell , I . D . and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 2004 ) . The talin - tail interaction places integrin activation on FERM ground . Trends Biochem . Sci . 29 , 429 - 435 . Carpenter , S . and Karpati , G . ( 1979 ) . Duchenne muscular dystrophy : plasma membrane loss initiates muscle cell necrosis unless it is repaired . Brain 102 , 147 - 161 . Chen , H . C . , Appeddu , P . A . , Parsons , J . T . , Hildebrand , J . D . , Schaller , M . D . and Guan , J . L . ( 1995 ) . Interaction of focal adhesion kinase with cytoskeletal protein talin . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 16995 - 16999 . Choquet , D . , Felsenfeld , D . P . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1997 ) . Extracellular matrix rigidity causes strengthening of integrin - cytoskeleton linkages . Cell 88 , 39 - 48 . Cram , E . J . , Clark , S . G . and Schwarzbauer , J . E . ( 2003 ) . Talin loss - of - function uncovers roles in cell contractility and migration in C . elegans . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 3871 - 3878 . Critchley , D . R . ( 2000 ) . Focal adhesions – the cytoskeletal connection . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 133 - 139 . Davies , K . E . and Nowak , K . J . ( 2006 ) . Molecular mechanisms of muscular dystrophies : old and new players . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 762 - 773 . Durbeej , M . and Campbell , K . P . ( 2002 ) . Muscular dystrophies involving the dystrophin - glycoprotein complex : an overview of current mouse models . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 12 , 349 - 361 . Durbeej , M . , Henry , M . D . and Campbell , K . P . ( 1998 ) . Dystroglycan in development and disease . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 , 594 - 601 . Frenette , J . and Tidball , J . G . ( 1998 ) . Mechanical loading regulates expression of talin and its mRNA , which are concentrated at myotendinous junctions . Am . J . Physiol . 275 , C818 - C825 . Galbraith , C . G . , Yamada , K . M . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2002 ) . The relationship between force and focal complex development . J . Cell Biol . 159 , 695 - 705 . Geiger , B . , Bershadsky , A . , Pankov , R . and Yamada , K . M . ( 2001 ) . Transmembrane crosstalk between the extracellular matrix - cytoskeleton crosstalk . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 793 - 805 . Gettner , S . N . , Kenyon , C . and Reichardt , L . F . ( 1995 ) . Characterization of beta pat - 3 heterodimers , a family of essential integrin receptors in C . elegans . J . Cell Biol . 129 , 1127 - 1141 . Giannone , G . , Jiang , G . , Sutton , D . H . , Critchley , D . R . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2003 ) . Talin1 is critical for force - dependent reinforcement of initial integrin - cytoskeleton bonds but not tyrosine kinase activation . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 409 - 419 . Ginsberg , M . H . , Partridge , A . and Shattil , S . J . ( 2005 ) . Integrin regulation . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 , 509 - 516 . Gullberg , D . , Velling , T . , Lohikangas , L . and Tiger , C . F . ( 1998 ) . Integrins during muscle development and in muscular dystrophies . Front . Biosci . 3 , D1039 - D1050 . Hamer , P . W . , McGeachie , J . M . , Davies , M . J . and Grounds , M . D . ( 2002 ) . Evans Blue Dye as an in vivo marker of myofibre damage : optimising parameters for detecting initial myofibre membrane permeability . J . Anat . 200 , 69 - 79 . Hayashi , Y . K . , Chou , F . L . , Engvall , E . , Ogawa , M . , Matsuda , C . , Hirabayashi , S . , Yokochi , K . , Ziober , B . L . , Kramer , R . H . , Kaufman , S . J . et al . ( 1998 ) . Mutations in the integrin alpha7 gene cause congenital myopathy . Nat . Genet . 19 , 94 - 97 . Hynes , R . O . ( 1992 ) . Integrins : versatility , modulation , and signaling in cell adhesion . Cell 69 , 11 - 25 . Jiang , G . , Giannone , G . , Critchley , D . R . , Fukumoto , E . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2003 ) . Two - piconewton slip bond between fibronectin and the cytoskeleton depends on talin . Nature 424 , 334 - 337 . Lee , M . , Cram , E . J . , Shen , B . and Schwarzbauer , J . E . ( 2001 ) . Roles for beta ( pat - 3 ) integrins in development and function of Caenorhabditis elegans muscles and gonads . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 36404 - 36410 . Leptin , M . , Bogaert , T . , Lehmann , R . and Wilcox , M . ( 1989 ) . The function of PS integrins during Drosophila embryogenesis . Cell 56 , 401 - 408 . Leu , M . , Bellmunt , E . , Schwander , M . , Farinas , I . , Brenner , H . R . and Muller , U . ( 2003 ) . Erbb2 regulates neuromuscular synapse formation and is essential for muscle spindle development . Development 130 , 2291 - 2301 . Li , F . , Zhang , Y . and Wu , C . ( 1999 ) . Integrin - linked kinase is localized to cell - matrix focal adhesions but not cell - cell adhesion sites and the focal adhesion localization of integrin - linked kinase is regulated by the PINCH - binding ANK repeats . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 4589 - 4599 . Lieber , R . L . , Woodburn , T . M . and Friden , J . ( 1991 ) . Muscle damage induced by eccentric contractions of 25 % strain . J . Appl . Physiol . 70 , 2498 - 2507 . Liu , S . , Calderwood , D . A . and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 2000 ) . Integrin cytoplasmic domain - binding proteins . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 3563 - 3571 . Livak , K . J . and Schmittgen , T . D . ( 2001 ) . Analysis of relative gene expression data using real - time quantitative PCR and the 2 ( - Delta Delta C ( T ) ) method . Methods 25 , 402 - 408 . Mayer , U . , Saher , G . , Fassler , R . , Bornemann , A . , Echtermeyer , F . , von der Mark , H . , Miosge , N . , Poschl , E . and von der Mark , K . ( 1997 ) . Absence of integrin alpha 7 causes a novel form of muscular dystrophy . Nat . Genet . 17 , 318 - 323 . McCann , R . O . and Craig , S . W . ( 1997 ) . The I / LWEQ module : a conserved sequence that signifies F - actin binding in functionally diverse proteins from yeast to mammals . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 5679 - 5684 . McCann , R . O . and Craig , S . W . ( 1999 ) . Functional genomic analysis reveals the utility of the I / LWEQ module as a predictor of protein : actin interaction . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 266 , 135 - 140 . McNeil , P . L . and Khakee , R . ( 1992 ) . Disruptions of muscle fiber plasma membranes . Role in exercise - induced damage . Am . J . Pathol . 140 , 1097 - 1109 . Miosge , N . , Klenczar , C . , Herken , R . , Willem , M . and Mayer , U . ( 1999 ) . Organization of the myotendinous junction is dependent on the presence of alpha7beta1 integrin . Lab . Invest . 79 , 1591 - 1599 . Mitra , S . K . , Hanson , D . A . and Schlaepfer , D . D . ( 2005 ) . Focal adhesion kinase : in command and control of cell motility . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 , 56 - 68 . Monkley , S . J . , Zhou , X . H . , Kinston , S . J . , Giblett , S . M . , Hemmings , L . , Priddle , H . , Brown , J . E . , Pritchard , C . A . , Critchley , D . R . and Fassler , R . ( 2000 ) . Disruption of the talin gene arrests mouse development at the gastrulation stage . Dev . Dyn . 219 , 560 - 574 . Monkley , S . J . , Pritchard , C . A . and Critchley , D . R . ( 2001 ) . Analysis of the mammalian talin2 gene TLN2 . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 286 , 880 - 885 . Nieswandt , B . , Moser , M . , Pleines , I . , Varga - Szabo , D . , Monkley , S . , Critchley , D . and Fassler , R . ( 2007 ) . Loss of talin1 in platelets abrogates integrin activation , platelet aggregation , and thrombus formation in vitro and in vivo . J . Exp . Med . 204 , 3113 - 3118 . Petrich , B . G . , Marchese , P . , Ruggeri , Z . M . , Spiess , S . , Weichert , R . A . , Ye , F . , Tiedt , R . , Skoda , R . C . , Monkley , S . J . , Critchley , D . R . et al . ( 2007 ) . Talin is required for integrin - mediated platelet function in hemostasis and thrombosis . J . Exp . Med . 204 , 3103 - 3111 . Riveline , D . , Zamir , E . , Balaban , N . Q . , Schwarz , U . S . , Ishizaki , T . , Narumiya , S . , Kam , Z . , Geiger , B . and Bershadsky , A . D . ( 2001 ) . Focal contacts as mechanosensors : externally applied local mechanical force induces growth of focal contacts by an mDia1 - dependent and ROCK - independent mechanism . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 1175 - 1186 . Rooney , J . E . , Welser , J . V . , Dechert , M . A . , Flintoff - Dye , N . L . , Kaufman , S . J . and Burkin , D . J . ( 2006 ) . Severe muscular dystrophy in mice that lack dystrophin and alpha7 integrin . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 2185 - 2195 . Rosalki , S . B . ( 1989 ) . Serum enzymes in disease of skeletal muscle . Clin . Lab . Med . 9 , 767 - 781 . Sam , M . , Shah , S . , Friden , J . , Milner , D . J . , Capetanaki , Y . and Lieber , R . L . ( 2000 ) . Desmin knockout muscles generate lower stress and are less vulnerable to injury compared with wild - type muscles . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 279 , C1116 - C1122 . Schmalbruch , H . ( 1975 ) . Segmental fibre breakdown and defects of the plasmalemma in diseased human muscles . Acta Neuropathol . 33 , 129 - 141 . RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 135 ( 11 ) D E V E L O P M E N T Schwander , M . , Leu , M . , Stumm , M . , Dorchies , O . M . , Ruegg , U . T . , Schittny , J . and Muller , U . ( 2003 ) . Beta1 integrins regulate myoblast fusion and sarcomere assembly . Dev . Cell 4 , 673 - 685 . Schwenk , F . , Baron , U . and Rajewsky , K . ( 1995 ) . A cre - transgenic mouse strain for the ubiquitous deletion of loxP - flanked gene segments including deletion in germ cells . Nucleic Acids Res . 23 , 5080 - 5081 . Senetar , M . A . and McCann , R . O . ( 2005 ) . Gene duplication and functional divergence during evolution of the cytoskeletal linker protein talin . Gene 362 , 141 - 152 . Senetar , M . A . , Foster , S . J . and McCann , R . O . ( 2004 ) . Intrasteric inhibition mediates the interaction of the I / LWEQ module proteins Talin1 , Talin2 , Hip1 , and Hip12 with actin . Biochemistry 43 , 15418 - 15428 . Senetar , M . A . , Moncman , C . L . and McCann , R . O . ( 2007 ) . Talin2 is induced during striated muscle differentiation and is targeted to stable adhesion complexes in mature muscle . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 64 , 157 - 173 . Shi , X . and Garry , D . J . ( 2006 ) . Muscle stem cells in development , regeneration , and disease . Genes Dev . 20 , 1692 - 1708 . Sonnemann , K . J . , Fitzsimons , D . P . , Patel , J . R . , Liu , Y . , Schneider , M . F . , Moss , R . L . and Ervasti , J . M . ( 2006 ) . Cytoplasmic gamma - actin is not required for skeletal muscle development but its absence leads to a progressive myopathy . Dev . Cell 11 , 387 - 397 . Straub , V . , Rafael , J . A . , Chamberlain , J . S . and Campbell , K . P . ( 1997 ) . Animal models for muscular dystrophy show different patterns of sarcolemmal disruption . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 375 - 385 . Taverna , D . , Disatnik , M . H . , Rayburn , H . , Bronson , R . T . , Yang , J . , Rando , T . A . and Hynes , R . O . ( 1998 ) . Dystrophic muscle in mice chimeric for expression of alpha5 integrin . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 849 - 859 . Tidball , J . G . , O’Halloran , T . and Burridge , K . ( 1986 ) . Talin at myotendinous junctions . J . Cell Biol . 103 , 1465 - 1472 . Vilquin , J . T . , Brussee , V . , Asselin , I . , Kinoshita , I . , Gingras , M . and Tremblay , J . P . ( 1998 ) . Evidence of mdx mouse skeletal muscle fragility in vivo by eccentric running exercise . Muscle Nerve 21 , 567 - 576 . Volk , T . , Fessler , L . I . and Fessler , J . H . ( 1990 ) . A role for integrin in the formation of sarcomeric cytoarchitecture . Cell 63 , 525 - 536 . Weller , B . , Karpati , G . and Carpenter , S . ( 1990 ) . Dystrophin - deficient mdx muscle fibers are preferentially vulnerable to necrosis induced by experimental lengthening contractions . J . Neurol . Sci . 100 , 9 - 13 . Ziegler , W . H . , Liddington , R . C . and Critchley , D . R . ( 2006 ) . The structure and regulation of vinculin . Trends Cell Biol . 16 , 453 - 460 . 2053 RESEARCH ARTICLE Talin 1 and skeletal muscle D E V E L O P M E N T