Multiple GTP - binding Proteins Participate in Clathrin - coated Vesicle - mediated Endocytosis Laura L . Carter , Thomas E . Redelmeier , Leslie A . Woollenweber , and Sandra L . Sehmid Department of Cell Biology , The Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla , California 92037 Abstract . We have examined the effects of various agonists and antagonists of GTP - binding proteins on receptor - mediated endocytosis in vitro . Stage - specific assays which distinguish coated pit assembly , invagina - tion , and coat vesicle budding have been used to dem - onstrate requirements for GTP - binding protein ( s ) in each of these events . Coated pit invagination and coated vesicle budding are both stimulated by addition of GTP and inhibited by GDP / SS . Although coated pit invagination is resistant to GTP ' yS , A1F4 - , and mas - toparan , late events involved in coated vesicle budding are inhibited by these antagonists of G protein func - tion . Earlier events involved in coated pit assembly are also inhibited by GTP - yS , A1F4 - , and mastoparan . These results demonstrate that multiple GTP - binding proteins , including heterotfimeric G proteins , partici - pate at discrete stages in receptor - mediated endocyto - sis via clathrin - coated pits . I NTRACELLULAR membrane trafficking is mediated by transport vesicles which bud from one organelle and then fuse with an appropriate target organelle . Vesicle formation occurs at specialized regions of the membrane dis - tinguished by an underlying protein coat . There are now two recognized classes of coat structures which function in trans - port vesicle formation . The best studied of these are clathrin - coated pits and coated vesicles ( CCV ) 1 which are involved in receptor - mediated endoeytosis and transport from the Golgi complex to lysosomes ( reviewed by Brodsky , 1988 ; Pearse and Robinson , 1990 ) . The major coat constituents of CCVs are clathrin triskelions and adaptors ( reviewed by Pearse and Crowther , 1987 ) . Clathrin triskelions are com - posed of three 180 - kD heavy chains and three tightly associ - ated (cid:127)30 - kD light chains . Adaptor complexes are hetero - tetramers composed of two * 100 - 110 - kD adaptin molecules and two smaller subunits of 47 - 50 and 17 - 19 kD ( reviewed by Pearse and Robinson , 1990 ; Keen , 1990 ) . More recently a second class of transport vesicles , re - ferred to as " nonclathdn - coated vesicles " or " COP - coated vesicles " has been shown to mediate vesicular traffic along the exoeytic pathway ( Orci et al . , 1986 ) . The coat constitu - ents of nonclathrin - coated vesicles include polypeptides of 160 ( or - cop ) , 110 ( t - cop ) , 98 ( ' t - cop ) , and 68 kD ( & cop ) , smaller subunits of 36 and 35 kD ( Maholtra et al . , 1989 ) , as well as ADP - ribosylation factor ( ARF ) , a 20 - kD GTP - binding protein ( Serafini et al . , 1991 ) . Sequence analysis has demonstrated that 13 - cop is distantly related to 13 - adaptin ( 17 % homology in the NH2 - terminal half of the molecule ) 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : BFA , brefeldin A ; CCV , clathrin - coated vesicle ; COP . . CV , nonclathrin - coated vesicle ; GDP ~ S , guanosine - 5 ' - o - ( 2 - thiodiphosphate ) ; GTP3 , S , guanosine - 5 ' - o - ( 3 - thiotriphosphate ) ; MESNa , mercaptoethane sulfonic acid . suggesting some functional relationship between these two coat proteins ( Duden et al . , 1991 ) . Both classes of coated pits assemble from a cytosolic pool of coat proteins . Clathrin and adaptors exist as distinct solu - ble pools which appear to assemble sequentially to form clathrin - coated pits ( Mahaffey et al . , 1990 ; Smythe et al . , 1992b ) . In contrast , COPs are present in the cytosol as a large multimeric precursor termed a " coatomer " which pre - sumably self - assembles onto membranes to form COP - coated pits ( Waters et al . , 1991 ) . Whereas clathrin - coated pits act as selective membrane filters that concentrate specific receptor - ligand complexes for inclusion into a bud - ding transport vesicle ; COP - coated pits appear to be non - selective , mediating ~ bulk - flow " transport events . A growing body of genetic and biochemical evidence has established that multiple classes of GTP - binding proteins participate in COP - CV - mediated membrane transport events . In addition to ARF ( Serafini , 1991 ) , several members of the rab family of ms - related small GTP - binding proteins also participate in vesicular transport events , although their exact function remains unknown ( reviewed by Balch , 1990 ; Goud and McCaffrey , 1991 ) . More recent evidence has sug - gested the involvement of heterotrimeric G proteins in vesic - ular transport along both the exoeytic pathway and the endo - some / lysosome pathways ( Donaldson et al . , 1991 ; Stow et al . , 1991 ; Barr et al . , 1991 ; Columbo et al . , 1992 ; reviewed by Balch , 1992 ; Barr et al . , 1992 ) . For both the large and small G proteins , GTP is believed to act as a molecular switch such that the G protein is activated in the GTP - bound form and inactive when GDP is bound ( reviewed by Bourne et al . , 1990 ) . To date no evidence exists for the involvement of either of these classes of GTP - binding proteins in clathrin - coated vesicle formation . However , recent genetic evidence has (cid:14)9 The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 93 / 01 / 37 / 9 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , Number 1 , January 1993 37 - - 45 37 implicated a role for dynamin , a microtubule - sfimulated GTPase ( Schpetner and Vallee , 1992 ; Collins , 1991 ) in this process . Dynamin has been identified as the mammalian homologue to the gene product responsible for the tempera - ture - sensitive shibire mutation in Drosophila ( van der Bliek and Meyerowitz , 1991 ; Chen et al . , 1991 ) . At the non - per - missive temperature the shibire mutation results in a pleio - tropic defect in endocytosis which leads to an accumulation of elongated coated pits at the cell surface ( Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983 ) . Biochemical evidence for dynamin function in endocytosis is lacking and paradoxically there exists no evi - dence for the involvement of microtubules in coated vesicle formation ( Morgan and Iacopetta , 1987 ; Hunziker et al . , 1990 ) . Ironically , although there exists a considerably greater amount of structural and biochemical information on the protein constituents of the clathrin coat as compared to the recently identified COP - CV constituents , mechanistic stud - ies on CCV - mediated transport have lagged behind ( reviewed by Schmid , 1992 ) . Much of our understanding of COP - CV - mediated transport events has been derived from bio - chemical studies of cell - free assay systems which reconsti - tute these processes ( reviewed by Rothman and Orci , 1992 ) . Therefore , to begin to dissect the molecular mechanisms of CCV - mediated endocytosis , we have developed stage - spe - cific assays which biochemically distinguish three sequential events leading to coated vesicle formation . These sequential stages are coated pit assembly , coated pit invagination , and coated vesicle budding ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ; Smythe et al . , 1992a , b ) . Using these assays we have begun biochem - ical studies on the mechanism of CCV - mediated endocytosis . Here we present evidence that multiple GTP - binding pro - teins participate in CCV - mediated endocytosis and that dis - tinct classes of GTP - binding proteins are differentially in - volved in coated pit assembly , invagination , and coated vesicle budding . The ability to measure discrete events in the process of coated vesicle formation provides a unique and powerful tool for identifying and functionally characterizing the GTP - binding proteins involved . Materials and Methods Cells and Reagents A431 cells were cultured as previously described ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ) . Nucleotides and analogs were obtained from Boehringer - Mannheim Biochemicals ( Indianapolis , IN ) . Stock solutions ( 10 mM nucleotide in 50 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 5 ) were aliquoted , stored at - 70 ~ and were used within 2 wk . A stock solution of mastoparan ( 1 mg / mi in H20 ; Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , MO ) was stored for several weeks at - 20oc . For use in the assay , mastoparan was diluted in KSHM buffer ( 100 mM K - Acetate , 85 mM sucrose , 20 mM Hepes , 1 mM MgAcetate , pH 7 . 4 ) containing 0 . 2 % BSA . Peptide analogues of mastoparan were generously provided by T . Higashijima ( University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , TX ) , arf 26 was from R . Kahn ( National Cancer Institute , Bethesda , MD ) and 1CS4 was from R . Ghadiri ( The Scripps Research Institute , La JoHa , CA ) . Bovine brain and transducin fl ~ , subunits were generous gifts of G . Bokoch ( The Scripps Research Institute ) and Y . - K . Ho ( University of Chicago , Chicago , IL ) . All other chemicals were reagent grade . Preparation of ELISA Plates ELISA plates were prepared as described elsewhere ( Smythe et al . , 1992a ) . Briefly , rabbit anti - human transferrin IgG ( Boehringer Mannheim Bio - chemicals ) was plated onto Maxisorb Immuno - module strips ( Nunc Inter - Lab , Thousand Oaks , CA ) at a 1 / 1 , 000 dilution in 50 mM Na2HCO3 , pH 9 . 6 . Plates were incubated for 3 h at 37 ~ or overnight at 4 ~ and then washed three times in PBS and incubated for 30 min at 37 ~ in blocking buffer ( 1 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 1 % SDS , 0 . 2 % BSA , 50 mM NaC1 , 1 mM EDTA , 10 mM Tris , pH 7 . 4 ) . Plates were stored in blocking buffer at 4oc and used within 2 wk . Immediately before using , the strips were washed three times in PBS , incubated for 5 min in blocking buffer and washed three times in PBS ( this is referred to as a wash cycle ) . 0 . 1 mi of blocking buffer was then added to each well . Assays for Ligand Sequestration and Internalization The assays are shown schematically in Fig . I . Perforated A431 cells were prepared essentially as de ~ ribed with the exception that the perforated cell pellet was resuspended in " , , 0 . 5 ml KSHM for each 15 - cm plate scraped ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ; Smythe et al . , 1992a ) . Human diferric transfer - fin ( Boehringer - Mannheim Biochemicals ) was biotinylated via a cleavable disulphide bond using NHS - SS - biotin ( Pierce Chemical Co . , Rockford , IL ) as previously described except that it was not radiolabeled ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ; Smythe et al . , 1992a ) . This reagent , referred to as " BSST , ~ served as the llgand for following transferrin receptor - mediated endocyto - sis . Gel - filtered cytosol was used in all experiments . The cytosol was pre - pared from bovine brain as previously described ( Schmid and Smythe , 1992 ) except that it was immediately gel filtered by chromatography using a Sephadex ( 325 column equilibrated with KSHM . Gel - filtered cytosol preparations were rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in aliquots at - 70 ~ Bovine brain adaptors were prepared exactly as described by Smythe et al . ( 1992b ) . Internalization and sequestration assays were per - formed exactly as previously described ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ; Smythe et al . , 1992a ) . Duplicate samples were run for each experimental point . Briefly , assay components including KSHM , an ATP - regenerafing ( contain - ing 800 / ~ M ATP , creatine pbospbokinase and 5 mM creatine phosphate ) or an ATP - depleting system ( containing hexokinase and 5 mM glucose ) , gel - filtered cytosol and the reagent ( s ) of interest were added to 1 . 5 - ml Ep - pendorf tubes ( Brinkman Instruments Inc . , Westbury , NY ) ( 30 ~ , 1 total vol - ume ) at 4 ~ Next , 10 / ~ 1 of perforated cells ( , , o2 X 105 cells ) resuspended in 4(cid:141) BSST were added , the tubes were gently mixed , and transferred to 37 ~ The final concentration of BSST in the reaction was 2 - 3 t ~ g / ml . After 30 rain , the tubes were returned to 4 ~ and pelleted in a refrigerated Eppen - doff centrifuge for 20 s at 14 k rpm . The supernatants were carefully aspi - rated and the pellets were subjected to internalization or sequestration as - says described briefly below and in detail elsewhere ( Smythe et al . , 1992a ) . Internalization Assay . The internalization of BSST was measured by its acquisition of resistance to the small ( 150 tool wt ) membrane impermeant reducing agent , MesNa ( ~ - mereaptoethane sulfonate , sodium salt ; Sigma Chemical Co . ) , which occurs as a result of its inclusion into sealed coated vesicles . The cell pellets were resuspended in 50 / ~ 1 of 10 mM MesNa . The tubes were agitated at 4oc . At 30 rain 12 . 5 / ~ 1 of 50 mM MesNa was added to each tube , and at 60 min this was supplemented with 16 / ~ 1 of 50 mM MesNa . The MesNa solutions were prepared just before each addition in 100 mM NaC1 , 1 mM EDTA , 50 mM Tris , 0 . 2 % BSA , pH 8 . 6 . After 90 rain , the MesNa was oxidized by the addition of 25 # 1 of 500 mM iodoacetic acid ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) . After a final 10 rain agitation , the membranes were solubllized by adding 0 . I ml blocking buffer to each tube and vortexing briefly . For each tube , 0 . I ml was plated into a well on the ELISA plate which contained 0 . 1 ml blocking buffer . Total cell - associated BSST was de - termined from cells incubated at 37 ~ in the absence of cytosol or ATP , by plating 100 # l of a cell lysate which had been subjected to the same buffer additions without MesNa . The plates were incubated overnight at 4oc . Sequestration Assay . The sequestration of BSST which occurs either as a result of its inclusion into sealed , coated vesicles or its inclusion into deeply invaginated coated pits was determined by its acquisition of inacces - sibility to the large ( 68 kD ) probe , avidin . A stock solution of avidin ( Cana - dian Lysozyme Inc . , Vancouver , Canada ) was prepared weekly in water and the concentration determined by A280 ( EI ~ ffi 15 . 5 ) . The cell pellets were resuspendad in 0 . 1 mi of 50 ~ g / ml avidin which was diluted daily in KSHM + 0 . 2 % BSA . The tubes were agitated at 4 ~ for at least 1 h . Biocytin ( Sigma Chemical Co . , 20 mg / mi in H20 ) was then added to a final concen - tration of 50 ~ g / ml , and agitation was continued for 10 rain . The cells were lysed by the addition of 0 . 1 ml of blocking buffer . After a brief vortex , 0 . 1 nd from each tube was plated per well on the ELISA plates to which 0 . 1 ml blocking buffer had been added . Total cell - associated BSST was deter - mined from cells incubated at 37 ~ in the absence of cytosol or ATP , by plating 100 ~ 1 of a cell lysate which had been subjected to the same bUffer additions without avidin . The plates were incubated overnight at 4 ~ ELISA . based Detection of Internalized and / or Sequestered BSSZ . Af - ter the overnight incubation of either avidin - and MesNa - treated cell lysates , The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 38 the plates underwent a wash cycle . Streptavidin - HRP ( Boehringer - Mann - helm Biochemicals ) was diluted I / 5 , 000 in blocking buffer and 0 . 2 ml was added to each well . The plates were incubated fDr at least 60 rain at room temperature . After another wash cycle , 0 . 2 ml of substrate solution ( 10 nag o - phenylenecliamiae , 10 / A HzOz in 25 ml of 50 mM NazHPO4 , 27 mM ci - trate , pH 5 ) was added to each well and the incubation allowed to proceed until sufficient color was developed , typically 2 - - 4 min . This reaction was terminated by the addition of 50 ~ 1 per well of 2 M H2SO4 . The A490 was read on an ELISA plate reader ( Bio - Rad Laboratories , Cambridge , MA ) and corrected for the A655 . Results Sensitive ELISA - based Assays for Coated Pit Assembly , Invagination , and Coated Vesicle Budding We have recently developed stage - specific assays which en - able measurement of three biochemically distinct events in - volved in receptor - mediated endocytosis in vitro ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ; Smythe et al . , 1992a , b ) . These events which sequentially lead to coated vesicle formation are : ( a ) de novo coated pit assembly ; ( b ) coated pit invagination ; and ( c ) coated vesicle budding . The assays , diagrammed in Fig . 1 , are performed using " perforated " human A431 cells which are prepared by scraping them from their substratum so as to fenestrate the plasma membrane enabling removal of en - dogenous cytosol and allowing full access to the cytoplasmic surface of the remaining plasma membrane . Transferrin which has been biotinylated via a cleavable disulphide bond ( BSST ) binds to the transferrin receptor and is constitutively internalized via clathrin - coated pits . Perforated A431 cells are incubated at 37 ~ in the presence of cytosol , ATP , and BSST to allow receptor - mediated endocytosis to occur . Dis - tinct stages involved in CCV - mediated endocytosis are mea - sured by the acquired inaccessibility of BSST to small and large probes . Thus , the " internaliTation " of BSST into sealed vesicles occurs as a result of coated vesicle budding and is measured by its acquired resistance to cleavage by ~ - mer - captoethane sulfonate ( MesNa ) , a small membrane imper - meant reducing agent . The % equestration " of BSST from exogenously added avidin , a high molecular weight probe , can occur as a result of its inclusion into both sealed coated vesicles and into deeply invaginated coated pits which re - main plasma membrane associated . The extent of " internal - ization " and / or % equestration " of BSST is quantitated by capturing the transfcrrin on microtitre wells coated with anti - transferrin antibodies . The number of biotin residues on BSST remaining unmasked by avidin or uncleaved by MesNa are quantitated using streptavidin - HRP ( Fig . 1 ) . This ELISA - based assay is a modification of our previously published procedure offering several advantages : it is nonradioactive , more sensitive , more readily applicable to other ligands , and 1 . Prepare perforated A431 2 . Resuspend in : cells free of cytosol , cytosol , (cid:127) adaptors , L ATP , BSST , _ _ ~ . . . . . . . . . d ; . si . , . oo . ' 1 ( Measures Coated Vesicle Budding ) J m , . 4 iiiiii1 ~ w 3 . Incubate at 37 ~ j 4 . Return to ice 5 . ELISA - based Assay for : Avidin - inecce ssibility I or ( Measures Coated Pit Invagination I and Costed Vesicle Budding ) I a ) Cleave accessible / , - - lr ~ - - ~ r - N biotins with MesNa b ) Quench excess MesNa with IAA c ) Solubilize . L ~ J d ) Plate cell h / sates on anti - translofrin coated microtitre plates a ) Mask accessible biotin with avidin b ) Quench excess avidin with biocylin c ) Solubilize . co ~ # ro v o ) Ouantitate e ) Ouanltmte i = : x i . ~ . . . . d sssT I ~ ~ ~ . ( ~ ~ ~ Sequestered BSST using straptavidin - HRP using stroptavidin - HRP ? ' ; " r ' r , i71 Figure L ELISA - based assay for receptor - mediated endo - cytosis into perforated A431 cells . Perforated A431 cells are prepared as described in Materials and Methods . Tram - ferrin which is used as a li - gand for receptor - mediated endocytosis is biotinylated via a cleavable disulphide bond and referred to as BSST . As - says were performed as de - scribed in Materials and Meth - ods . Endocytic events are scored by either the inability of MesNa , a membrane im - permeant reducing agent , to cleave accessible biotin resi - dues or the inability of avi - din to mask accessible biotin residues . BSST is captured on anfibody - coau ~ i microtitre wells and remaining and / or unmasked biotin residues are quantitated using streptavidin - conjugated HRP ( SA - HRP ) . As diagrammed , the inacces - sibility to MesNa measures only internalization of BSST into se ~ ed , coated vesicles , Inaccessibility of BSST to ex - ogenously added avidin mea - sures both internalization into sealed coated vesicles and its sequestration in deeply invaginated coated pits . The quantitative difference in signals obtained with the two assays provides a selective measurement of the sequestration of BSST into deeply invaginated coated pits . In this example , one of the five cell - associated BSST is internalized into a sealed , coated vesicle and becomes resistant to MesNa . Three of five BSST become sequestered from avidin . The difference in signals ( two of five cell - associated BSST ligands ) have been sequestered into deeply invaginated coated pits . Carter r aL Multiple GTP - binding Proteins Participate in RME 39 70 ~ A AvRtln4r ~ cces ~ lblll ' ~ i ! " 40 30 0 30 - B M ~ sNa - res ~ stanee 10 . - ~ o ' ' 2o " 6 ' o " 1o / ? 29o GTP ( ~ M ) Figure 2 . GTP stimulates both coated pit invagination and coated vesicle budding . Per - forated A431 cells were incu - bated for 30 rain at 37 ~ in 40 ~ 1 KSHM containing gel - ill - tered bovine brain eytosol ( 2 . 6 mg / ml ) , an ATP - regenerating system , 2 / ~ g / ml BSST and increasing concentrations of GTP as indicated . Cells were returned to ice and processed for either avidin inaccessibil - ity ( A ) or MesNa resistance ( B ) as described in Materials and Methods . The data are ex - pressed as the percent of total cell - associated BSST which became inaccessible to either probe in an ATP and cytosol - dependent manner . Untreated cell lysates obtained following an incubation of cells in the presence of 2 / tg / ml BSST but in the absence of ATP and cytosol were plated onto microtitre wells in serial dilutions to determine total ceU - associated BSST and to ensure that the binding capacity of the wells for BSST was not exceeded . backgrounds due to incomplete reduction of surface - bound BSST are reduced . Extensive biochemical and morphological characteriza - tion of this assay system ( Smythe et al . , 1989 ; Schrnid and Smythe , 1991 ; Smythe et al . , 1992b ) has shown that coated vesicles which form during the in vitro reaction are largely derived from pre - existing coated pits . As a result , MesNa - resistance selectively measures late events which correspond to coated vesicle budding and lead to the internalization of BSST . In contrast , the sequestration of BSST from avidin provides a measure of the sum of two biochemically distinct events , coated vesicle budding and coated pit invagination . Of the avidin signal , typically ~ , , 60 % derives from coated pit invagination while ~ , 40 % derives from coated vesicle bud - ding . For example , in the experiment illustrated in Fig . 2 at maximum efficiency , 65 % of the total cell associated BSST became inaccessible to avidin ( Fig . 2 a ) . In the same experi - ment , 25 % of BSST became resistant to MesNa ( Fig . 2 b ) . The extent of coated pit invagination is reflected by the quan - titative difference between the avidin and MesNa signals . Thus , using this example , 40 % of cell associated BSST be - came sequestered in deeply invaginated coated pits . We have recently shown that adaptor proteins are limiting under our assay conditions so that even at high cytosol con - centrations , the principal event resulting in the sequestration of BSST is the invagination of preformed coated pits ( Smythe et al . , I992b ) . To directly measure de novo coated pit assem - bly , assays are performed in the presence of limiting concen - trations of cytosol supplemented with purified adaptor pro - teins . When perforated A431 cells are incubated under these conditions adaptors specifically stimulate coated pit assem - bly which increases the extent of sequestration of BSST into deeply invaginated pits ( Smythe et al . , 1992b ) . Thus , adap - tor - stimulated sequestration of BSST provides a measure - ment of the de novo assembly of functionally active coated pits ( Smythe et al . , 1992b ) . Using these three stage - specific assays to measure the biochemically distinct events of coated pit assembly , invagination and coated vesicle budding we have sought evidence for the role of GTP - binding proteins in clathrin - coated vesicle formation . GTP Stimulates Coated Pit Invagination and Coated Vesicle Budding Receptor - mediated endocytosis of BSST into perforated A431 cells requires both an ATP - regenerating system and added cytosol ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ; Smythe et al . , 1992a ) . Gel - filtration of the cytosolic fraction resulted in a reduction of its ability to support BSST internalization in vitro . This treatment removed > 97 % of the total perchloric acid extractable nucleotide pool ( data not shown ) . Addition of GTP to an assay mixture containing perforated A431 cells , BSST , an ATP - regenerating system and gel - filtered cytosol resulted in an almost twofold stimulation of both the sequestration and internalization of BSST ( Fig . 2 , a and b ) . The GTP - dependent stimulation of sequestration was quan - titatively greater than its effect on internalization indicating that both coated pit invagination and coated vesicle bud - ding were affected . In both cases maximal stimulation was achieved at " - , 50 / ~ M added GTP . Stimulation was specific to GTP since neither UTP nor CTP had any effect ( data not shown ) and since assays were routinely performed in the presence of 800 / zM ATE Nonhydrolyzable Analogues of GTP Inhibit Endocytosis of BSST Given that GTP stimulated receptor - mediated endocytosis in vitro , the involvement of GTP - binding proteins was further investigated by examining the effects of nonhydrolyzable ana - logues of GTP on coated vesicle formation . The data in Fig . 3 A shows that coated vesicle budding , leading to the inter - nalization of BSST was markedly inhibited by GTP ~ r Half - maximal inhibition required < 5 ~ M GTP ? S and could be fully protected by 1 mM GTP ( data not shown ) . In contrast , the extent of inhibition of BSST sequestration from avidin ( < 50 % ) could be largely accounted for by the selective inhi - bition of coated vesicle budding . Thus , coated pit invagina - tion , itself , appeared to be relatively resistant to inhibition by GTP3 ~ S . Further , since GTP ( Fig . 2 ) but not GTP ? S stimulated invagination and coated vesicle budding , these results suggest that GTP hydrolysis was required for each of these events . We next examined the effect of GDP / ~ S on coated pit in - vngination and coated vesicle formation . In addition to serv - ing as a potential competitive inhibitor for GTP binding , this guanine - nucleotide analogue cannot be phosphorylated and should therefore lock regulatory G - proteins in their GDP - bound state . In contrast to their differential sensitivity to GTP3 , S , the data in Fig . 3 B shows that GDP ~ S equally in - hibits both coated vesicle budding and coated pit invagina - tion ( > 70 % inhibition , half - maximal at < 25 / xM ) . Evidence for the Involvement of Heterotrimeric G Proteins in Clathrin - coated Vesicle Formation To further characterize the GTP - binding proteins involved in endocytosis , AIF4 - and mastoparan , more selective inhibi - tots of heterotrimeric G proteins , were examined . The first The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 40 ~ oo I | g 4 o . ' 6 O 1 GTPTS ( p . M ) ~ 4o " g . ~ n = 3 0 50 100 150 G DP3S ( , uM ) # . 8o (cid:1)84 4O AICI 3 ( u . M ) 120 ( ~ 100 2 o : ~ , 2o 4O 10 20 30 40 50 50 70 Mastoparan ( pM ) Figure 3 . Differential effects of GTP - binding protein antagonists and agonists on coated pit invagination and coated vesicle budding . ( A and B ) Perforated A431 cells were incubated as described in Fig . 2 except in the presence of increasing concentrations of GTP3 , S ( A ) or GDP / ~ s ( B ) as indicated . ( C ) Incubations were as above except that the buffer contained 5 mM NaF and increasing concentrations of AtC13 as indicated . ( D ) Assays were as described in Fig . 2 ex - cept that the volume was doubled . Cytosot , ATP , and BSST concen - trations were maintained at standard levels , but the cells were at twofold lower concentration . Mastoparan was added at the indi - cated concentrations . After 30 min incubations at 37 ~ cells were returned to ice and assayed for either avidin inaccessibility ( e ) or MesNa resistance ( o ) . Signals obtained are expressed as the per - centage of the ATP and cytosol - dependent signal obtained for un - treated control cells . Points from three or four independent experi - ments ( as indicated ) + SD are shown . of these was AIF ~ - . Complete assay mixtures containing perforated A431 cells , cytosol and an ATP - regenerating sys - tem were incubated at 37 ~ in the presence of 5 mM NaF and increasing concentrations of A1C13 . These conditions result in the formation of A1F4 - , which interacts with GDP in the nucleotide binding site of heterotrimer G proteins mimicking the - y - phosphate and converting the G protein to its active " GTP " - bound form ( Chabre , 1990 ) . Recent results have shown that while both G ~ i and G , o subunits of hetero - trimeric G proteins are activated by A1F4 - , ARF , and sev - eral members of the low molecular weight ras - related GTP - binding proteins are unaffected ( Kahn , 1991 ) . The data in Fig . 3 C shows that both assays were partially inhibited by 5 mM NaF alone . Addition of AIC13 further inhibited the internalization of BSST by 80 - 85 % . In contrast , the seques - tration of BSST was only inhibited an additional 30 % in the presence of AIC13 . For both reactions , half - maximal inhibi - tion occurred at " , , 10 / zM A1C13 , A1CI3 alone ( up to 50 / zM ) had no effect and identical results were obtained using either gel - filtered or nongel - filtered cytosol ( data not shown ) . Since ' ~ , 40 % of BSST sequestration results from coated vesicle budding , as was the case with GTP ' yS inhibition , these results suggested that coated pit invagination was resistant to A1F4 - . Mastoparan Specifically Inhibits Coated Vesicle Budding Mastoparan is a cationic amphiphilic , a - helical peptide with ~ 0 Ji none GTP CTP UTP NO cleotl ~ l ( l Added Figure 4 . Mastoparan inhibi - tion is prevented by addition of GTP . Perforated A431 cells were incubated in 80 / 4 of KSHM containing gel - filtered cytosol ( 2 . 6 mg / ml ) , an ATP - regenerating system ( 800 / ~ M ATP ) , 2 / zg / ml BSST with ( m ) or without ( = ) 10 # M masto - paran and with the following nucleotides , as indicated : GTP ( 50 / zM ) , CTP ( 500 # M ) , and UTP ( 500 # M ) . Internalization of BSST was determined by its inaccessibility to MesNa . The data are presented as the percent of cell associated BSST internalized in an ATP and cytosol - dependent manner . the well - characterized property of interacting with the a - sub - units of heterotrimeric G proteins to activate them by mimick - ing their interaction with G protein - coupled receptors . ( Higashijima et al . , 1990 ; Mousli et al . , 1990 ; Weingarten et al . , 1990 ) . To test the effect of mastoparan on receptor - mediated endocytosis , perforated A431 cells were incubated in a complete assay mixture containing gel - filtered cytosol , an ATP - regenerating system , BSST , and increasing concen - trations of mastoparan . The data in Fig . 3 D shows that al - though mastoparan was a potent and effective inhibitor of coated vesicle budding , coated pit invagination appeared more resistant . Internalization of BSST into sealed coated vesicles was completely inhibited in the presence of 20 - 30 / xM mastoparan ( note the expanded scale used in Fig . 3 D ) . Half - maximal inhibition occurred at < 10 # M , concentra - tions consistent with its specific interaction with G ~ - subunits ( Higashijima et al . , 1990 ; Mousli et al . , 1990 ) . In contrast , the sequestration of BSST was significantly less sensitive to mastoparan ( Fig . 3 D ) . At 20 tzM mastoparan , internalization was inhibited by ~ 90 % while sequestration is only reduced by ~ , 20 % . The biphasic nature of the curve seen for inhibition of sequestration may reflect nonspecific effects of mastoparan at higher concentrations . These data were quantitatively consistent with those obtained using both GTPq , S and A1F4 - and further supported the model that heterotrimeric G proteins participate in coated vesicle budding , but not in coated pit invagination . Since mastoparan is an amphiphilic a - helical peptide , its interaction with membranes may result in nonspecific inhibi - tion of vesicular transport events . Specific inhibition by mastoparan should be related to its activity in increasing guanine - nucleotide exchange on G ~ - subunits . Mastoparan stimulates the dissociation of bound guanine nucleotides from G ~ - subunits , but does not directly affect GTP hydroly - sis ( Higashijima et al . , 1990 ) . We therefore tested the effect of GTP on mastoparan inhibition . The data in Fig . 4 shows that in the presence of 10 # M mastoparan ( Fig . 4 , stippled bars ) and in the absence of added nucleotides coated vesicle budding was inhibited by ~ 65 % . Mastoparan inhibition was blocked in the presence of 50 / xM GTP . This protection was specific to GTP since UTP and CTP ( both at 500 / zM ) and ATP ( present at 800 / ~ M ) were much less effective . The active inhibitory species of mastoparan is believed to be the a - helical conformation induced by binding to mem - branes ( Higashijima et al . , 1990 ) . The effect of mastoparan on isolated G ~ - subunits decreases with increasing concen - trations of liposomes in the reaction mixture , presumably as Carter et al , Multiple GTP - binding Proteins Participate in RME 4t Table L Effect of Mastoparan and Its Analogues on Coated Vesicle Budding and Coated Pit lnvagination Coated vesicle Coated pit budd ~ invagination ( Percent of control ) ( Percent of control ) Pcptide t ~ M - GTP + GTP - GTP + GTP None - 100 132 100 134 Mastoparan 12 . 5 65 96 96 114 i NLKALAALAKK I L 25 22 40 70 111 Mast 7 12 . 5 66 99 81 128 I NLKALAALAKALL 25 25 66 59 70 Mast 11 50 40 56 86 104 I NLKALAALKKKLL 100 21 41 71 89 Mast 17 50 69 111 98 115 I NLKAKAALAKKLL 100 62 78 81 106 1 CS4 50 89 97 98 133 GLAQKLLEALQKALLA 100 54 68 85 97 Arf 26 25 55 119 86 121 GN I FANLFKGLFGKKE 50 46 85 88 108 Assays were performed in 80 / ~ 1 of KSHM containing perforated A431 cells , 2 / ~ g / ml BSST , 2 . 6 rng / ml gel - filtered cytosol , an ATP - resanerating system , the indicated concentrations of peptides with or without 50 / ~ M GTP . Data are expressed as the percent of ATP and eytosol dependent internalization or sequestration obtained in a control incubation in the absence of either peptide or GTP . a result of partitioning of mastoparan between the solution and the competing lipid vesicles ( Higashijima et al . , 1990 ) . The effectiveness of mastoparan in our system was similarly dependent on the concentration of cellular membranes pres - ent ( data not shown ) . To further explore the specificity of mastoparan inhibition , other cationic amphiphilic , or - helical peptides and analogues of mastoparan were tested for their ability to inhibit both coated pit invagination and coated vesi - cle budding . The results are summarized in Table I . An ac - tive analogue of mastoparan , mast 7 , inhibited coated vesicle budding at levels comparable to wild - type mastoparan . As with mastoparan , coated pit invagination was less affected . In contrast , mast 11 and mast 17 , mastoparan analogues with mutations which disrupt their ability to adopt an c ~ - helical conformation at the membrane surface ( Higashijima et al . , 1990 ) were four - to tenfold less potent inhibitors of BSST internalization . 1CS4 , an unrelated peptide which is none - theless cationic and c ~ - helical in structure was also found to be at least 10 - fold less effective than mastoparan . Peptide an - alogues corresponding to the amino - terminus of ARF are potent inhibitors of vesicular transport along the exocytic pathway ( Katm et al . , 1992 ; Balch et al . , 1992 ) . We therefore tested an amino terminal 16 - mer peptide analogue of ARF for its ability to inhibit CCV - mediated endoeytosis . The data in Table I shows that arf26 inhibited coated vesicle formation with an EC ~ 0 of ~ 30 t ~ M . As with mastoparan , coated pit invagination was resistant to arf26 . Since ARF is presently not recognized to be a major coat protein of CCVs it was pos - sible that this observed inhibition by the arf26 peptide was a reflection of its mastoparan - like structural properties . The arf26 is also a cationic , amphiphilic peptide capable of as - suming an a - helical conformation at a membrane surface ( Kahn et al . , 1992 ) . This possibility was supported by the finding that as with mastoparan , the presence of GTP reduces the observed inhibition by arf26 ( Table I ) . Involvement of GTP - binding Proteins in Coated lh ' t Assembly Our results have so far suggested that distinct GTP - binding proteins participate in coated pit invagination and coated vesicle budding and that heterotrimeric G proteins may be selectively involved in coated vesicle budding . Work by others has demonstrated a role for heterotrimerie G proteins in regulating the assembly of / 3 - COP , ARE and ~ - adaptins onto Golgi membranes ( Ktiskakis et al . , 1992 ; Robinson and Kries , 1992 ; Wong and Brodsky , 1992 ) . Therefore , to directly measure whether GTP - binding proteins might also be involved in coated pit assembly at the cell surface , we ex - amined the effects of these GTP - binding protein antagonists on adaptor - stimulated sequestration of BSST . Perforated A431 cells were incubated in a complete assay mixture in the presence of limiting amounts of gel - filtered cytosol , with or without purified adaptors and in the presence of various GTP - binding protein antagonists . The results shown in Fig . 5 indicate that the effects of GTP and its antagonists on BSST sequestration measured at low cytosol levels ( ~ , 0 . 7 mg / ml , Fig . 5 , stippled bars ) were in agreement with those obtained in the presence of high cytosol ( ' ~ 2 . 6 mg / ml , cf . Fig . 3 ) . The effect of the various GTP analogues and of mastoparan on adaptor - slimulated sequestration of BSST can be seen by comparing the stippled bars ( - adaptors ) with the solid bars ( + adaptors ) in each case . Adaptor - stimulated sequestration of BSST was inhibited by G ' I ' P ' yS and mastoparan ( Fig . 5 ) . As with inhibition of internalization , half - maximal inhibi - tion of coated pit assembly required < 5 ILM GTP . yS and < 10 ~ M mastoparan ( data not shown ) . Adaptor - dependent se - questration appeared to be unaffected by either GTP or GDP ~ S , although both these reagents altered the overall se - questration presumably by affecting invagination . Discussion Novel cell - free assays which enable measurement of three biochemically distinct stages of coated vesicle formation have been employed to demonstrate that multiple GTP - binding proteins are required for receptor - mediated endocy - tosis . These results along with a model are shown in Fig . 6 which summarizes the effect of various antagonists and The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 42 Figure 5 . GTP - binding pro - teins participate in adaptor stimulated early events in coated pit assembly . Perforated A431 cells were incubated in 40 / zl KSHM ( or 80 # 1 for mastoparan experiment ) con - taining 0 . 7 mg / ml gel - filtered cytosol , 2 # g / ml BSST , an ATP - regenerating system , the indicated concentration of guanine nucleotide or mastoparan with ( = ) or without ( ~ ) 0 . 25 mg / ml bovine brain adaptors . Sequestration of BSST was deter - mined by its inaccessibility to avidin . The data are presented as the percent of cell associated BSST sequestered in an ATP and cytosol - dependent manner . agonists of GTP - binding proteins on coated pit assembly , coated pit invagination , and coated vesicle budding . We have demonstrated elsewhere that adaptor - stimulated sequestration of BSST measures a very early event in coated vesicle formation , that it is supported by plasma membrane specific adaptors ( referred to as AP2 ) but not by Golgi - specific adaptors ( referred to as AP1 ) and that it requires cytosolic clathrin ( Smythe et al . , 1992b ) . These properties suggest that adaptor - stimulated sequestration of BSST mea - sures the assembly of functionally active coated pits . This reaction was strongly inhibited by GTP3 , S and by mastopa - ran ( Fig . 6 ) , suggesting the involvement of heterotrimeric G protein ( s ) in clathrin - coated pit assembly . This result is in - triguing given recent evidence for the involvement of tri - meric G proteins in regulating the assembly of the coat constituents of COP - CVs . GTP ' vS and A1F4 - promote asso - ciation of ARF and / 3 - COP onto Golgi membranes ( Donald - son et al . , 1991 ) and are antagonistic to the actions of brefel - din A , a fungal metabolite which inhibits transport along the exocyric pathway . BFA disrupts the membrane association of Stimulated by Ligand becomes Ligand becomes purified inaccessibleto resistantto adaptors avidin MesNa . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1 l t " Early Events " [ ' " I " Late Eveats " . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . l Principal Event Detected ( Assay ) Coated Pit Assembly / nvagination Coated Vesicle Budding PROPERTY ( Adaptor - s ~ im ~ Jlated Avldim ( MesNa - resist ance ) sequestration ) r b I ~ ) Stimulated by GTP no ? yes yes Inhibited by G DP ~ S no ? yes yes Inhibited by GTP " ~ yes ro yes inhibited by AfF 4 " nd no yes inhibited by mastoparan yes no yes Figure 6 . A model for the participation of GTP - binding proteins in biochemically distinct events involved in receptor - mediated endo - cytosis . Stage - specific assays for receptor - mediated endoc3 , tosis of transferrin detect three biochemically distinct events in vitro . These are coated pit assembly , coated pit invagination , and coated vesicle budding . These events are differentially sensitive to antagonists of GTP - binding protein activity , suggesting the involvement of multi - ple GTP - binding proteins in the overall process of receptor - mediated endocytosis via clathrin coated pits . both ARF and / ~ - COP ( Orci et al . , 1991 ; reviewed by Klaus - net et el . , 1992 ) . However , this effect of BFA is blocked by A1F4 - , GTPyS and by activation of a pertussis toxin - sensitive G protein ( Ktiskakis et al . , 1992 ) . Two recent reports have extended these observations and demonstrated that BFA also causes the rapid dissociation of 3 / and / 3 ' - adaptins ( the ~ 100 - kD subunits of AP1 adaptors ) from Golgi - associated clathrin - coated pits . As for COP - CV coat constituents , A1F4 - and GTP ~ / S block the BFA effect and appear to enhance the binding of the AP1 adaptors to the Golgi membrane ( Robinson and Kries , 1992 ; Wong and Brodsky , 1992 ) . Interestingly , in these studies , the mem - brane association ofcr and / 3 adaptins ( the , x , 100 - kD subunits of plasma membrane - specific AP2 adaptors ) were unaffected . This finding was consistent with observations that BFA ap - pears not to inhibit receptor - mediated endocytosis ( Hun - ziger et al . , 1991 ; Wood et al . , 1991 ; Damke et al . , 1991 ) . Here we report that GTP3 , S and mastoparan strongly inhibit adaptor - stimulated sequestration of BSST , suggesting that these reagents interfere with de novo coated pit assembly at the plasma membrane . This result indicates an important mechanistic difference between COP - CV or Golgi CCV for - marion and plasma membrane CCV formation . The invagination of preformed coated pits appeared resis - tant to GTP ' rS , mastoparan and AIF4 - , suggesting that this event was independent of trimeric G proteins . However other GTP - binding proteins were clearly implicated in coated pit invagination since the sequestration of BSST into deeply in - vaginated pits was stimulated by GTP and inhibited by GDP / 3S ( Fig . 6 ) . We did not examine whether GTP ' yS was able to inhibit GTP - stimulated invagination , since the assays for GTP3 , S inhibition shown here were performed using gel - filtered cytosol in the absence of added GTP . It remains to be demonstrated which GTP - binding protein ( s ) is involved in this event , however it is of interest to note that coated pit invagination is inhibited in mitotic cells both in vivo ( Pypaert et al . , 1987 ) and in vitro ( Pypaert et at . , 1991 ) and therefore this event appears to be regulatable . What , if any , role GTP - binding proteins play in the regulation of invagination re - quires further investigation . The data also suggests that multiple GTP - binding proteins participate in the final stage of receptor - mediated endocyto - sis : coated vesicle budding ( Fig . 6 ) . As for invagination , coated vesicle budding was stimulated by GTP and inhibited by GDP / 3S . In addi ' tion , coated vesicle budding was inhibited by GTP3 , S , mastoparan and A1F4 - , suggesting the involve - ment of heterotrimeric G protein ( s ) . Inhibition of clathrin - coated vesicle budding by GTP ' yS again contrasts with results obtained for COP - coated vesicle formation . Addition of GTP ' , / S to in vitro intraGolgi transport assays causes ac - cumulation of COP - coated vesicles ( Maholtra et al . , 1989 ) . Similarly , vesicle budding from the ER in digitonin perme - abilized mammalian cells appears to occur in the presence of GTP ' rS ( Schwaninger et at . , 1992 ) . In contrast , GTP ' yS appears to inhibit vesicle release from the ER in a yeast cell - free assay system ( Rexach and Schekman , 1991 ) . These results suggest additional mechanistic differences between CCV formation at the plasma membrane and COP - CV for - marion along the exocytic pathway . The observed inhibition of coated vesicle budding by GTP - yS differs from results obtained by Lin et at . ( 1991 ) using an indirect assay for coated vesicle formation based on Carter et el . Multiple GTP - binding Proteins Participate in RME 43 the measurement of the loss of clathrin from isolated plasma membrane fragments . In this system 1 mM GTP7S failed to inhibit clathrin loss . Two other major differences in the bio - chemical requirements for coated vesicle budding observed in our system distinguish this process from that leading to clathrin loss as measured by Lin et al . ( 1991 ) . First , ATP hy - drolysis is absolutely required for coated vesicle budding in perforated A431 cells ( Smythe et al . , 1989 ; Smythe et al . , 1992b ) but not for clathrin loss from isolated plasma mem - branes ( both ATP ' yS and ADP will fulfill the ~ ATP - require - merits " for clathrin loss ) . Secondly , whereas 150 - 500 ~ M Ca 2 + is required for clathrin loss from isolated membranes , coated vesicle budding in perforated A431 cells does not re - quire Ca 2 + ( Smythe et al . , 1989 , 1992b ; LaMaze , C . , T . Redelmeier , and S . Schmid , manuscript in preparation ) . Given these differing biochemical properties , the clathrin loss detected by Lin et al . ( 1991 ) may not reflect coated vesi - cle formation . The data demonstrates that multiple GTP - binding proteins participate in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Which GTP - binding proteins participate in which events and whether in - dividual GTP - binding proteins might participate in more than one event remains to be determined . The observed inhi - bition of coated pit assembly and coated vesicle budding by AIF4 - and mastoparan suggests that heterotrimeric G pro - teins participate in at least two stages of receptor - mediated endocytosis . The specificity of these reagents for heterotri - meric G proteins is supported by our results that the concen - trations required for inhibition were well within the range seen both for inhibition of other intraceUular transport events ( see for example Columbo et al . , 1992 ) and for activation of isolated Go - subunits in other reconstituted systems ( see for example Higashijima et al . , 1990 ; Kahn , 1991 ) . Further - more , inhibition by mastoparan was blocked in the presence of GTP . This result adds further support to the importance of GTP hydrolysis in these events . Although these specificity controls strengthen a model for the participation of trimeric G proteins in endocytosis , the data falls short of directly demonstrating their involvement . Several attempts were made to examine the effects of isolated bovine brain / ~ subunits on endocytosis in vitro . In systems reconstituted with purified components , / ~ 7 subunits inacti - vate Ga subunits when present in the 10 - 1 , 000 pM range , Addition of up to 250 nM bovine brain ~ 7 subunits had no effect on our in vitro endocytosis assay . Detergent effects prevented testing at higher concentrations . Isolated f17 subunits have been shown to inhibit endosome fusion at ~ 400 nM ( Columbo et al . , 1992 ) and / 3 - COP association with Golgi membranes at 3 / ~ M ( Donaldson et al . , 1991 ) . The effect of purified transducin / ~ / subunits ( 50 - 500 nM ) were also tested in an effort to bypass the detergent require - merits . Although the results obtained using these subunits were suggestive of stimulating intern ' _ ahzation , they were poorly reproducible for as yet unexplained reasons . The pos - sibility therefore remains that the effects of mastoparan and AiF , - reflect the involvement of a G protein coupled sig - nalling pathway which regulates endocytosis rather than the direct involvement of G proteins as constitutive participants in this process . Both coated pit invagination and coated vesicle budding were stimulated by GTP , suggesting that it was an important limiting component in gel - filtered cytosol . To our knowl - edge , the GTP requirement observed in this system has not been reported for other in vitro membrane transport systems , despite the well - documented involvement of multiple GTP - binding proteins in COP - coated vesicle mediated transport events ( Balch , 1990 ) . Given the nucleoside diphosphotrans - ferase activity present in the crude cytosolic fractions and the presence of high ATP levels , low concentrations of GTP are undoubtedly present in each of these assay systems . Therefore our ability to detect a GTP requirement may reflect the involvement of a GTP - binding protein with a higher turnover rate for GTP and / or a lower a ~ nity for GTP than either small or large regulatory G proteins . One candi - date for such a protein might be dynamin . Work is in prog - ress to directly demonstrate a role for dynamin in clathrin - coated vesicle formation . A third class of GTP - binding proteins implicated in vesic - ular trafficking events are the rab - related family of low mo - lecular weight GTP - binding proteins . This class of proteins have to date been implicated in vesicle targeting and fusion events but not in vesicle formation ( Balch , 1990 ; Goud and McCaffrey , 1991 ) . Recent studies have demonstrated that coated vesicles carry at least one to two molecules of the small GTP - binding protein rab5 and that this protein regu - lates endocytic vesicle fusion ( Bucci et al . , 1992 ) . Whether rab5 or another small - GTP binding protein participates in coated vesicle formation remains to be determined . In summary , we have provided several lines of evidence for the participation of multiple GTP - binding proteins in clathrin - coated vesicle formation . These findings provide new insight into the processes involved in receptor - mediated endocytosis and suggest that COP - CV - mediated transport events and CCV - mediated transport events are in some ways mechanistically related and in others , mechanistically dis - tinct . The identification of the GTP - binding proteins which participate in these processes now becomes essential . In con - trast to more complex assay systems which require vesicle formation or both vesicle formation and consumption , the assays used here dissect vesicle formation into three bio - chemically distinct events , coat assembly , invagination and coated vesicle budding . Thus the stage - specific assays used here provide valuable tools for the detailed biochemical dis - section of the involvement of identified GTP - binding pro - teins in the sequential events leading to clathrin - coated vesi - cle formation . We are grateful to William Balch and Gary Bokoch for helpful discussions and critical reading of the manuscript . This work was supported by the LuciUe P . Markey Charitable Trust and by National Institutes of Health grants GM42445 and CA27489 to S . L . Sehmid . S . L . Sehmid is a Lucille P . Markey fellow . This is TSRI manu - script No . 7479 - CB . Received for publication 30 June 1992 and in revised form l0 September 1992 . References Belch , W . E . 1990 . Small GTP - bindin8 proteins in vesicular transport . Trends in Biochem . 5ci . 15 : 473 - - 477 . Balch , W . E . 1992 . From G minor to G major . Curt . Biol . 2 : 157 - 160 . Belch , W . E . , R . A . Kahn , and R . Schwaninger . 1992 . ADP - ribesylation factor ( ARF ) is required for vesicular trafficking between the endoplasmic reticu - lure ( ER ) and the cis Golgi compartment . J . Biol . Chem . 267 : 13053 - 13061 . Barr , F . A . , A . Leyte , S . Moiler , T . Pfcofer , S . A . Tooze , and W . B . Huttner . 1991 . Trimeric G - proteins ofthe tmns - Golgi network are involved in the for - marion of constitutive secretory vesicles and imn ~ ture secretory granules . FEB $ ( Fed . Eur . Biochem . Soc . ) Lett . 293 : 1 - 5 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 44 Barr , F . A . , A . Leyte , and W . B . Hutmer . 1992 . Trimeric G proteins and vesi - cle formation . Trends Cell Biol . 2 : 91 - 94 . Bourne , H . R . , D . A . Sanders , and F . McCormick . 1990 . The GTPase super - family : a conserved switch for diverse cell functions . Nature ( Lend . ) . 348 : 125 - 132 . Branlke , T . , S . Tippmer , E . Neber , and K . yon Figura . 1989 . Regulation of the mannose 6 - phosphate / IGF - lI receptor expression at the cell surface by mannose 6 - phosate , insulin like growth factors and epidermal growth factor . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 8 : 681 - 686 . Brodsky , F . M . 1988 . Living with clathrin : its role in intracellular membrane traffic . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 242 : 1396 - 1402 . Chabre , M . 1990 . Ainminofluoride and beryllofluoride complexes : new phos - phate analogs in enzymology . Trends Biochem . Sci . 15 : 6 - 10 . Cben , M . S . , R . A . Obar , C . C . Schroeder , T . W . Austin , C . A . Poodry , S . C . Wadsworth , and R . B . Vallee . 1991 . Multiple forms ofdynamin are encoded by Shibire , a Drosophila gene involved in endocytosis . Nature ( Lend . ) . 351 : 583 - 586 . Collins , C . 1991 . Dynamin : a novel microtubule associated GTPase . Trends Cell Biol . 1 : 57 - 60 . Columbo , M . I . , L . S . Mayorga , P . J . Casey , and P . D . Stahl . 1992 . Evidence of a role for heterotrimeric GTP - binding proteins in endosome fusion . Science ( Wash . DC ) . In press . Damke , H . , J . Kinmperman , K . yon Figura , and T . Braulke . 1991 . Effects of Brefeldin A on the endocytic route . J . Biol . Chem . 266 : 24829 - 24833 . Donaldson , J . G . , R . A . Kalm , J . Lippincott - Schwartz , and R . D . Klausner . 1991 . Binding of ARF and / ~ - COP to Golgi membranes : possible regulation by a trimeric G protein . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 254 : 1197 - 1199 , Duden , R . , G . Grifliths , R . Frank , P . Argos , and T . E . Kries . 1991 . / ~ - COP , a 110 kD protein associated with non - clathrin - coated vesicles and the Golgi complex , shows homology to / ~ - adaptin . Cell . 64 : 649 - 665 . Goud , B . , and M . McCaffrey . 1991 . Small GTP binding proteins and their role in transport . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 3 : 626 - 633 . Higashijima , T . , J . Burnier , and E . M . Ross . 1990 . Regulation of Gi and Go by mastoparan , related amphiphllic peptides , and hydrophobic amines . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 14176 - 14186 . Hunziker , W . , P . Male , and I . Mellman . 1990 . Differential microtubule re - qulremetns for transcytosis in MDCK cells . EMBO ( Fur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 9 : 3515 - 3525 . Hunziker , W . , J . A . Whitney , and I . Mellman . 1991 . Selective inhibition of transcytosis by Brefeldin A in MDCK cells . Cell . 67 : 617 - 627 . Kahn , R . A . 1991 . Fluoride is not an activator of the smaller ( 20 - 25 kDa ) GTP - binding proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 266 : 15595 - 15597 . Kahn , R . A . , P . Randazzo , T . Serefini , O . Weiss , C . Rulka , J . Clark , M . Am - herdt , P . Roller , L . Orci , and J . E . Rothman . 1992 . The amino terminus of ADP ribosylation factor ( ARF ) is a critical determinant of ARF activities and is a potent and specific inhibitor of protein transport . J . Biol . Chem . 267 : 13039 - 13046 . Keen , J . H . 1990 . Clathrin and associated assembly and disassembly proteins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 59 : 415 - 438 . Klausner , R . D . , J . G . Donaldson , and J . Lippincott - Schwartz . 1992 . Brefeldin A : insights into the control of membrane traffic and organelle structure . J . Cell Biol . 116 : 10171 - 1080 . Kosaka , T . , and K . Ikeda . 1983 . Reversible blockage of membrane retrieval and endocytosis in the garland cell of the temperature - sensitive mutant of Drosophila melanogaster , shibire . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 499 - 507 . Ktistakis , N . T . , M . E . Linder , and M . G . Roth . 1992 . Action of brefeldin A blocked by activation of a pertussis - toxin - sensitive G protein . Nature ( Lend . ) . 356 : 344 - 346 . Lin , H . C . , M . S . Moore , D . A . Sanan , andR . G . W . Anderson . 1991 . Recon - stitution of clathrin - coated pit budding from plasma membranes . J . Cell Biol . 114 : 881 - 891 . Mahaffey , D . T . , J . S . Peeler , F . M . Brodsky , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1990 . Clathrin - coated pits contain an integral membrane protein that binds the AP2 subunit with high affinity . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 16514 - 16520 . Maholta , V . , T . Serafini , L . Orci , J . C . Shepherd , and J . E . Rothman . 1989 . Purification of a novel class of coated vesicles mediating biosynthetic protein transport through the Golgi stack . Cell . 58 : 329 - 336 . Morgan , E . H . , and B . J . Iacopetta . 1987 . Vinblastine but not other micrombule inhibitors block transferrin endocytosis and iron uptake by reticulocytes . Clin . Exp . Pharmacol . Phys . 14 : 119 - 126 . Mousli , M . , J . - L . Bueb , C . Brenner , B . Roudot , and Y . Landry . 1990 . G pro - tein activation : a receptor - independent mode of action of cationic am - phiphilic neuropeptides and venom peptides . Trends Biochem . Sci . 1 I : 358 - 364 . Orci , L . , B . S . Glick , and / . E . Rothman . 1986 . A new type of coated vesicular carrier that appears not to contain clathrin : its possible role in protein trans - port within the Golgi stack . Cell . 46 : 171 - 184 . Omi , L . , M . Tagaya , M . Amherdt , K . Perrelet , J . G . Donaldson , J . Lippincott - Schwartz , R . D . Klansner , and J . E . Rothman . 1991 . Brefeldin A , a drug that blocks secretion , prevents the assembly of non - clathrin - coated buds on Golgi cisternae . Cell . 64 : 1183 - 1195 . Pearse , B . M . F . , and R . A . Crowtber . 1987 . Structure and assembly of coated vesicles . Ann . Rev . Biophys . Chem . 16 : 49 - 68 . Pearse , B . M . F . , and M . S . Robinson . 1990 . Clathrin , adaptors and sorting . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 6 : 151 - 171 . Pypaert , M . , J . M . Lucocq , and G . Warren . 1987 . Coated pits in interphase and mitotic A431 cells . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 45 : 23 - 29 . Pypaert , M . , D . Mundy , W . Sourer , J . - C . Labb ~ , and G . Warren . 1991 . Mi - totic cytosol inhibits invagination of coated pits in broken mitotic ceils . J . Cell Biol . 114 : 1159 - 1166 . Rexach , M . F . , and R . W . Schekrnan , 1991 . Distinct biochemical requirements for budding , targeting and fusion of ER - derived transport vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 114 : 219 - 229 . Robinson , M . S . , and T . J . Kreis . 1992 . Recruitment of coat proteins onto Golgi membranes in intact and permeabflized ceils : effects of brefeldin A and G protein activators . Cell . 69 : 129 - 138 . Rothman , J . E . , and L . Omi . 1992 . Molecular dissection of the secretory path - way . Nature ( Lend . ) . 355 : 409 - - 415 . Schmid , S . L . 1992 . The mechanism of receptor - mediated endocytosis : more questions than answers . BioEssays . 14 : 581 - 588 . Schmid , S . L . , and E . Smythe . 1991 . Stage - specific assays for coated pit forma - tion and coated vesicle budding in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 114 : 860 - 880 . Schwaninger , R . , H . Plutoer , G . M . Bokoch , and W . E . Balch . 1992 . Multiple GTP - b ' mding proteins regulate vesicular transport from the endoplasmic reticulum to Gulgi membranes . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 1077 - 1096 . Serafini , T . , L . Orci , M . Amherdt , M . Brunner , R . A . Kahn , andJ . E . Roth - man . 1991 . ADP - ribosylation factor is a subunit of the coat of Golgi - derived COP - coated vesicles : a novel role for a GTP - binding protein . Cell . 67 : 239 - 253 . Shpetner , H . S . , and R . B . Vallee . 1989 . Identification of dy ~ amin , a novel mechanochemical enzyme that mediates interactions between microtubulas . Cell . 59 : 421 - 432 . Smythe , E . , M . Pypaert , J . Lucocq , and G . Warren . 1989 . Formation of coated pits from coated vesicles in broken A431 cells . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 843 - 853 . Smythe , E . , T . E . Redelmeier , and S . L . Schmid , 1992a . Receptor - mediated endocytosis in semi - intact cells . In Methods in Enzymology ~ Reconstitotion of Intracellular Transport . " J . E . Rothman , editor . Vol . 219 . 223 - 234 . Smythe , E . , L . L . Carter , and S . L . Sehmid . 1992b . Cytosol - and clathrin - dependent stimulation of endocytosis in vitro by purified adaptors . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 1163 - 1172 . Stow , J . L . , J . B . De Almeida , N . Narula , K . J . Hotzrr ~ , L . Ercolani , and S . A . Ansiello . ( 1991 ) . A heterotrimeric G protein , G ~ , on Golgi mem - branes regulates the secretion of a heparan sulfate proteoglycan in LLC - PK epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 114 : 1113 - 1124 . van der Bliek , A . M . , and E . M . Meyerowitz . 1991 . Dynamin - like protein en - coded by the Drosophila shibire gene associated with vesicular traffic . Nature ( Lend . ) . 351 : 411 - 414 . Waters , M . G . , T . Serafini , and J . E . Rothman . 1991 . ' Coatomer ' : a cytosolic protein complex containing subunits of non - clathrin - coated Golgi transport vesicles . Nature ( Lend . ) . 349 : 248 - 251 . Weingarten , R . , L . Ransnas , H . Mueller , L . A . Sklar , and G . M . Bokoch . 1990 . Mastoparan interacts with the carboxyl terminus of the c ~ subunit of Gi . J . Biol . Otem . 265 : 11044 - 11049 . Wong , D . H . , andF . M . Brodsky . 1992 . 100 kD proteins of Golgi - and trans - Golgi network - associated coated vesicles have related by distinct membrane binding properties . J . Cell Biol . 117 : 1171 - 1179 . Wood , S . A . , J . E . Park , and W . J . Brown . 1991 . Brefeldin A causes a micrombule - mediated fusion of the trans - Golgi network and early endo - seines . Cell . 67 : 591 - 600 . Carter et al . Multiple GTP - binding Proteins Participate in RME 45