249 Managing emerging and conflicting groupware use in organisations Hanne Westh Nicolajsen Assistant professor CMI , Aalborg University Lautrupvang 15 , DK - 2750 Ballerup ( + 45 ) 4480 5136 Westh @ cmi . aau . dk ABSTRACT In this paper , the need for management of emerging groupware use is proposed . It is argued that allowing for distributed innovation in use is needed to get the best out of a new groupware system . However , allowing for distributed and thus local innovations of groupware use necessitates management to support the emergent use forms and to design solutions ( technical configurations and / or organizational changes ) that allow for application that may otherwise be in conflict . Categories and Subject Descriptors K . 4 . 3 . Computers and Society . Organizational impacts – computer supported collaborative work . General Terms Management , Design , Theory . Keywords Groupware , implementation , communication genres , configuration , technology frames , technology mediation and case - study . 1 . INTRODUCTION The use of new media such as groupware systems presents a lot of challenges . These challenges are closely related to the characteristics of groupware being networked and open for interpretation , which makes the organizational implementation highly complex . In this article , I want to focus on the specific problem of conflicting applications when groupware systems are being used in large groups with many different groupings and needs . When implementing new media , new understanding is needed if the “full potential” of the new media is to be developed . Such developments are often initiated based on single users or smaller groups of users seeing and pursuing innovative use in relation to their own work . Such developments may be supported by tailoring , gardening or technology mediating to explore and create mutual fit between technology and organization Networked systems are challenging because they interrelate users and groups of users creating so - called network effects , which happen when the employment of one user ( or a group of users ) effects the usefulness of the system to other users either positively or negatively . The possible negative network effects of distributed innovations demand some level of coordination and settlement . Meaning the distributed innovations in large groupware systems are in need of centralised management in order to reconcile and / or balance in between local needs . In this article it is argued that there is a need to manage and redesign groupware and groupware use to secure that emerging groupware use is not conflicting with already established applications . The concept of organizational communication genre is applied to create an understanding of ProjectWebs role and place within the communication in development projects . Learning from experiences implementing the same groupware platform in different development projects , it is well known that local and distributed innovations are taking place as people make sense of new communication technologies . Such local and distributed innovations may conflict with the existing use if nothing is done to find new and more sophisticated integration solutions . The research question asked is how best to support the distributed and evolving usage of new communication technologies in organizations ? Part of the answer is already given as earlier studies [ 1 , 2 ] have shown that technology mediating , as a central mechanism to design - in - use , is needed in order to support exploitation of new media in organizations . This is pursued through supporting emergent use forms 1 ) by allowing for distributed innovations of use , and 2 ) by manipulating the technology along with changes in the organizational communication norms to support distributed innovations . However , in this article we want to argue that a third activity of technology mediating is needed , which is 3 ) supporting emerging use through redesign to allow for otherwise conflicting types of use . 2 . IMPLEMENTATION OF NEW COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES Attempts to introduce new groupware technologies for communication in organizations often fail , because managers Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . SIGDOC ' 08 , September 22 - 24 , 2008 , Lisbon , Portugal . Copyright 2008 ACM 978 - 1 - 60558 - 083 - 8 / 08 / 0009 . . . $ 5 . 00 . . 250 and technologists underestimate the time and effort it takes to successfully incorporate a new communication medium into the existing “information ecology , ” i . e . the system of people , practices , genres , and information and communication technologies in the local environment . This is so not at least because change in an ecology is systemic and therefore difficult to predict [ 3 ] . The ecology metaphor draws attention to the fact that no communication medium or act of communication exists in the workplace in isolation [ 3 , 4 ] . When introduced in an organization , a new communication medium must “compete” with existing media , either displacing one or more existing technologies ( such as telephone and fax have done to the telegraph ) or fitting into a niche that can ensure its “survival” alongside the existing media . In other words , potential users must perceive the new technology as reliable and useful , and they must be both willing and able to adjust their work practices and communication patterns to exploit the new opportunities provided by the technology . Other studies have shown that when a new electronic medium is introduced in an organization , , it sometimes transforms the entire organization and the ways in which work is conducted [ 5 ] . In other cases it may have only marginal impact or fail completely , because people stick to their old familiar media and habitual modes of communication [ 6 , 7 ] . Another reason given why groupware is difficult to implement successfully is due to these systems being what has been termed technology as equivoque [ 8 ] , meaning these types of systems are open for interpretation . Groupware systems can be used in many different ways , meaning their technical configuration along with their social interpretation is highly important to make them valuable in context . The different functionalities or services of a groupware application mean that the groupware can be used for a variety of purposes . Even specific functionalities provide for certain types of communication such as document sharing , static information pages etc . [ 9 ] these can be arranged differently and support different purposes dependent on the organization and the users [ 7 , 10 , 11 ] . The network effects of groupware is yet another reason complicating the implementation . Critical mass with respect to enough users and the right users is needed to make the system valuable [ 12 , 13 ] . On the other hand negative network externalities as when other users’ application reduces the usefulness [ 14 ] . Differences between groupings within a firm may raise difficulties in developing transverse systems . [ 6 ] and [ 15 ] have documented the difficulties of making networked systems span different organizational groups due to differences in existing practices and power issues . To make groupware work well [ 16 ] found that there is a fundamental imbalance between the ones served by the groupware and the ones who need to do additional work to make the groupware work . Later research has recognized that technology - mediators [ 2 ] also known as “gardeners” [ 17 ] or “super users” [ 18 ] are highly important for the implementation and development of these communication technologies ( whether formally recognized or not ) . [ 2 ] argue for directing and supporting use by making changes in the organizational context or the technology . This is done through ongoing meta - structuring activities aiming at establishing , facilitating , adjusting and periodically reestablish use of groupware technology . The different activities include setting up scenarios and rules on use , configuring the technology to support use , facilitating and encouraging use as well as making adjustments on the way small or big . The need to create fit between technology and practice is seen as an ongoing activity fundamental to successful groupware implementation . In the following , we expand upon the concepts of technology mediation and organizational communication genres and use them to explain important aspects of technology adaptation especially adapting technology by adjusting technology to emerging practices in the user environment . 2 . 1 . Conventions , Genres and Configurations Social conventions are essential for governing communication and guiding the use of communication media . There are , for instance , widespread social conventions about the use of one medium rather than another for specific purposes ( e . g . you do not send your condolences to a bereaved person by email or SMS ) . When a new communication medium is introduced in an organization , people need to develop appropriate conventions for when and how to use it . As has pointed out , people cannot just be given a new CMC technology ( e . g . a groupware system ) and “be expected to optimally use it without some common agreements on the means of operation” [ 6 ] ( p . 351 ) . Rather , conventions must evolve to regulate behavior so as to provide a “ modus vivendi for making interactions proceed smoothly” ( p . 351 ) . In the context of computer - mediated communication , genres constitute a particularly important type of conventions . Organizational communication genres – such as the business letter , meeting minutes , or project plan – are social conventions that both structure and are structured by people’s communicative practices . Genres are important because they help people make sense of interactions and guide them both in how to communicate and how to interpret the communicative actions of others . [ 19 ] have defined genres as “distinctive type [ s ] of communicative action , characterized by a socially recognized communicative purpose and common aspects of form” ( p . 543 ) . Genres both enable and constrain action without determining it : “A genre established within a particular community serves as an institutionalized template for social interaction – an organizing structure – that influences the ongoing communicative action of members through their use of it within and across their community . Genres as organizing structures shape , but do not determine , how community members engage in everyday interaction . ” [ 20 ] , p . 15 Genres are produced , reproduced or changed through the everyday communicative practices of people . That is , even though genres structure the communicative actions , they are not fixed and unchangeable . On the contrary , when engaging in communication and enacting established genres , people sometimes advertently or inadvertently challenge and modify elements of existing genre rules [ 21 ] . These modifications may be triggered by social or technological changes in the organizational context , for instance by the introduction of a new electronic communication medium , which possesses new affordances and thus offers new opportunities for action . For 251 example , [ 22 ] have shown that the World Wide Web has led to the emergence of new genres that exploit the features of hypermedia linking provided by the web technology . What typically happens when a new communication medium is introduced in an organization is that people draw on existing genres in their efforts to make sense of the medium and to figure out how to use it [ 19 , 21 , 23 ] . In many instances , and especially in the beginning , they simply reproduce familiar genres in the new medium , adapting them slightly to fit the technology , but without substantially departing from the existing genre rules . However , over time , as people learn more about the new affordances of a technology and introduce more significant changes and modifications to the established genre rules , new genres may emerge . [ 23 ] suggest that these “processes of genre structuring are ongoing , and do not just occur at the initial implementation of the new medium” ( p . 96 ) . They distinguish between implicit and explicit genre structuring . Implicit structuring comprises the unreflective and unintentional shaping of genres and communicative practices , which take place through people’s mundane , day - to - day interactions , e . g . when familiar genres inadvertently spread from one medium or community to another . Two types of implicit structuring can be identified , namely migration and variation . Migration is the transfer of established genres from one medium or community to another , while variation denotes a change in existing genres that emerges tacitly from use of the technology over time . Explicit structuring applies when individuals or groups deliberately try to either reinforce or change established patterns of communication , e . g . by adapting existing genres to the new medium . Explicit structuring includes planned replication , planned modification and opportunistic modification . Planned replication aims to reproduce existing genres within a new medium with minimal changes . In contrast , planned modification aims to alter the genres rules , for instance by changing the purpose and the intended audience or readership . The last type , opportunistic modification , “involves purposeful changes introduced in response to some unexpected occurrence , condition , or request” ( p . 98 ) , for instance as a result of prior actions intended to either replicate or modify existing genres . It is , however , important to stress that communication genres are social conventions and that they therefore cannot be designed like technologies can . One may attempt to influence the communicative practices of a community in various ways , e . g . by codifying genre rules or by sanctioning “inappropriate” behavior , but one can never control the outcome . When using genre theory in relation to communication technologies , it is also important to stress that genre is not bound to technologies or media [ 24 ] . However , technologies poses some internal functionalities and characteristics that act as structuring devices and may therefore better serve some genres and not others . The materiality of technology is however also subtle and changeable due to the possibilities of configuration which is an important element of technology mediation . Configuration or tailoring is a process taking place in the user environment when a given technology is changed by adding some modules or deciding between given choices [ 25 ] . These choices affect the functionality or usefulness trough naming conventions , the graphical design , structure of content , etc . , which influence the affordances of the technology [ 26 ] . Configuration may be defined as “design - in - use” as it is neither design nor use , but “further development of an application to adapt it to complex work situations” [ 27 ] . The perceived usefulness of a given technology to users may also have historical or social roots rather than being based on the technical functionality , as media also hold symbolic values [ 28 ] . Most media may serve a number of different communication genres and most communication genres may work across a number of different communication technologies . However , new media may also provide changes in genres as will be seen in the following case on implementing a new groupware system in large development projects . 3 . THE CASE During a number of four years , the implementation of an internally developed project web platform used for development projects in an international pharmaceutical company was followed . These product development projects are best characterized as complex , large - scale and long - term endeavours . A typical project lasts 9 - 10 years and involves up to 500 people from many different functional areas within the company . A growing number of medicinal drugs are developed in close collaboration with external partners , which further adds to the distributed and complex nature of development projects . The development processes are regulated by the health authorities in various countries to secure approval ( refer to e . g . the Hoffman LaRoche pharmaceutical case in [ 29 ] ) , which requires highly structured processes . In addition pharmaceutical development in general demands high levels of confidentiality ( to protect the innovations ) , which affects the security demands regarding communication . In the development projects investigated a standardised management structure is followed . The project director and his assistant have the daily responsibility ; they form the core group together with the working group leaders taking care of the coordination and long term management of the project . The working group leaders are responsible for different sub - deliveries . Usually there are around 10 working groups representing different areas , e . g . clinical research and regulatory affairs . The working groups consist of both clerks and highly educated experts . The computer literacy of members is quite varied representing diversified understandings and thus diversified use of computer based tools . ProjectWeb , the groupware application studied , is a web - based application of the virtual workspace type [ 30 ] similar to systems such as BSCW or Lotus Team Workplace . ProjectWeb offers facilities for sharing documents , exchanging files , publishing information , event notifications , group management , etc . A default structure for projects has been developed . The default structure provides the needs for simple usage , where the system administrator just needs to add users and content . However , the template allows for changes in the default version ; each system administrator can change colors and graphics of the site and he can make changes in the structure as well as of the names used in the existing folder structure . Handling of user rights can also be managed in a more elaborated way such as differentiated user rights ; the administrator can distribute rights of authoring and she can define specific groupings that may be used to restrict access . Use of restricted access applies to each document and it 252 is thus for the individual author to decide , if restrictions are to be used . The generic template thus allows for different forms of configuration opening for material differences across projects using it , which is documented in [ 31 ] . At the time of inquiry , all development projects were requested at a minimum to operate ProjectWeb to support communication and file sharing at the level of the Core Group . Each project assistant was given the duty as a system administrator . To ease the implementation process project assistants received an operating manual along with a general introduction to the system . A person with technical skills and insight into the domain of project management was dedicated to provide ongoing support and supervision in ProjectWeb use . 3 . 1 . Methodology In this article the focus is on a small excerpt of a large research study . During a number of years we were 5 researchers investigating the development , implementation and use of ProjectWeb . We focused on a limited number of cases ( three development projects ) to make it possible to compare and pinpoint differences between dissimilar configurations and related use [ 32 ] and at the same time to go into particularities of each case [ 33 ] . To establish a rich ground of analysis multiple sources of material was used [ 32 ] ; including interviews , demonstrations of the tool , workshop participation as well as secondary material in the form of guidelines for project web use , a memo on access rights , a project development manual , usage statistics and annual reports . A total of 30 interviews were conducted with various actors such as project directors , project assistants , the main IT - developer of the ProjectWeb application , members of the core management group and employees from the working groups . Interviews lasted ½ hour to 2 hours each . All interviews were tape recorded and transcribed . The initial interviews were semi - structured around themes ; later on these were combined with specific questions informed by earlier interviews . All interviews were analysed using the framework for qualitative interviews by [ 34 ] , moving between different types of interpretation including an immediate one , a critical one and a theoretical one . At a late stage I started analysing the examples of use by using the concept of genre . We did not use this wording during the interviews as eg . recommended by [ 4 ] the reason being we focused on the organizational communication genre rather than individual ones . However , we have collected rich material describing work and communication more broadly and different ways of thinking , configuring and using ProjectWeb along with limited usage , problems and barriers encountered over time . Thus we tried both to follow the ball and read the larger game to the extent possible as recommended in [ 4 ] and as part of the ecology understanding . In two earlier articles a broader picture of the different genre within and across projects is given [ 35 , 36 ] . Here I want to use a very limited part of the material to demonstrate the need of technology mediating to include management of conflicts arising from local and distributed developments of ProjectWeb use . However to provide a bit of context an introduction on the communication genre developed in the development projects is given . Afterwards material on the ( lack of / limited ) technology mediating and restructuring of two genres are given . In one project these genres are in conflict , whereas in another they are handled eliminating the potential conflict . 3 . 2 . Implementation of ProjectWeb Initially ProjectWeb was thought of as a smart and easy way to both communicate and secure documentation of the formal communication within the Core group in each development project . This “minimum of use” was a top management decision , but any further use of ProjectWeb was to be decided in the individual development project . In all development projects the project assistant was given the role as technology - mediator . Besides the obligation as system administrators the project assistants were regarded as responsible for the adaptation of ProjectWeb . To make the project assistants qualified to fulfil the job they were given introductions , training and ongoing support in understanding and using ProjectWeb . As documented elsewhere [ 1 , 37 ] , project assistants fulfil the role as technology - mediators quite differently and with different degrees of success . The degree of success was found related to a number of different factors such as the experience of the project assistant using the technology , the project assistant’s enthusiasm rolling out new technology , and not at least the degree to which the project director allowed resources spent , especially time to work with ProjectWeb . In the three development projects followed , ProjectWeb was used beyond Core group level . In all three projects all active project members were given access allowing them reading rights . Writing rights were distributed on a more unequal basis either to everybody or to an exclusive , yet a growing group of requesting members . The project assistants began using ProjectWeb where it made sense in relation to their own work . In all projects the so - called “project development plan” ( PDP ) was transferred through a simple act of planned replication of the existing paper based genre to an electronic version . No changes in responsibility , purpose or content took place . The transfer provided huge advantages for the project assistant . Updated versions were required either half yearly or when important changes were around . Using ProjectWeb made it easier to replace outdated sections in the shared document . Providing the PDP on ProjectWeb reduced cost of distributing and reassuring a shared version , which furthermore released project members from keeping track of their own version of the document . Later on new genres of publishing not earlier found within the development projects were copied ( and further developed ) from other organizational entities . These genres were , e . g . background information , personal news and current news . According to genre theory this can be described as planned modification , but it also involved elements of migration and variation . Other media ( newsletters and news lists ) had been tested for such purposes without success . ProjectWeb was found ideal to communicate these genres due to the possibilities of several content categories , graphical overview and use of pictures . The content of these “new” communication genres within development projects , provided project members with a better understanding and overview of the project , status on different parts and colleagues participating . This was reported to support development projects as organisational entities and even as communities , despite the distributed organisation of development projects crossing departments and locations , having no physical boundaries . There were also examples of transcending changes in existing genres . In two of the projects ProjectWeb was employed to grant access to the Core group minutes ( and working group minutes ) 253 to a larger group than before ( when it was handled on e - mail ) . This openness broke partly or fully with the existing norms on confidentiality ; and can be seen as planned modification of an existing genre . The minutes genre changed to include an additional purpose of informing more broadly and thereby supporting better understanding , coordination and collaboration across the project . This use was also possible earlier , however , there was caution about creating information overload using e - mail to distribute material to the users . Placing the minutes in ProjectWeb made the material available , however , the individual users had to look it up themselves . Opening up minutes within the project group resulted ( on rare occasions ) in limited content and an additional email with confidential material to a narrow group . A whole new genre on confidential material was identified [ 35 ] . In project three opening up meeting minutes was handled differently than in the two other groups . Here extended groups were made , opening up minutes to a broader group than before , preventing making the material accessible to all project members . At a later stage the extended groups in project three showed to be problematic in relation to the introduction of other communication genres in ProjectWeb . 3 . 2 . 1 . Drafts for commenting – an emerging use form Beside the initial initiatives copying and developing easily transferred genres we encountered examples of opportunistic genre modification at a later stage . An example of this was “drafts for commenting” . Communicating documents in process back and forth did not match the initial idea on how to use ProjectWeb in development projects and demanded quite an effort to work . ProjectWeb includes none of the well - known functionalities to facilitate online collaborative writing . First of all you are not working ON the system , but have to up - and download the changed documents to work on them ; this also implies that there are no multi - user facilities like locking part of a document while others are working on it . Even the lack of these facilities were expected to discount ProjectWeb for collaboration , it was still found to be the most suitable technology available within the development projects for close collaboration with external companies . ProjectWeb’s usefulness in this area can to a large extent be explained by other communication technologies deficiencies in the particular situation . Emails with attachments are problematic to use here for a number of reasons ; it is difficult to keep track of the distributed contributions and the newest version . Moreover limitations on the attachments size from an external partner prohibited exchange of collaboration documents over email . Finally attachment of confidential material was required to be encrypted , whereas the security level of ProjectWeb was found acceptable . Another communication technology often used for collaboration in the project is local area networks ( LAN ) . LANs support one central document and provide multi user facilities , but in some situations they are useless as they are departmental or geographically limited in reach . To make ProjectWeb support collaboration , configuration of member rights in support hereof was required . Distributed authorship is essential , however , well suited groupings to support restricted access were also seen as a need . The restricted access was considered essential for two sets of reasons ; keeping unfinished material closed and reducing overload . It was argued that most people have a psychological need to keep things tight until it reaches a certain and publishable state . Another problem was if unfinished material was being used by others before contents were verified or if used out of the context leading to misuse . One informant stated it very clearly in the following statement : “I believe there is a psychological barrier towards uploading things that are not quite finished , or if having discussion between people , it needs to be kind of private . This is one aspect . You do not wish that someone reads documents that are not correct . You could go in and cite data that might even be incorrect because the work is unfinished . This is the other risk . A third risk is creating a mess if everybody has got hundreds of unfinished documents out there . ” Birgitte , project member Reducing the information overload as well as the confidentiality could be supported , if specific groups were granted access to restricted areas , it made the entries not only inaccessible but also invisible to the ones denied access . The use of ProjectWeb for collaboration was found in the two projects with external partners . In these projects there was overall a more open attitude towards who should and could provide contents to ProjectWeb . In these two projects the project assistants granted reading and author rights to either all or an extended group . However , making it technically possible was not enough . The default contents structure of ProjectWeb did not invite for uploading of unfinished material . In order to break with the very profound understanding of webpages only being used for finished material , a folder named “drafts for commenting” was made in the contents structure signalling the status of the document as being unfinished and only for the collaborating group to work on . “It can be documents in draft versions or documents for commenting . I have made a folder called “drafts for commenting” , here they upload it , send an e - mail to people , that it is there and they have a week to comment , if not you assume they do not have any comments” Helle , project assistant . Reading rights to limited groupings were worked out . Initially the groups were made mirroring the working groups from the organisational structure . The combination of reading and divided access rights made people start using ProjectWeb for drafts and collaboration . “It ( ProjectWeb ) becomes a place where you place a document . Then you send an email saying “it is there , take it down , look at it , upload it again and give a comment , then we’ll take it down again” . It is simply a substitution for the working directory ( LAN ) . It is the only way for us to exchange documents in a fast and secure way . ” Eric , working group leader “I do put in content . I have a possibility to go in and give access , and decide if it is something everybody needs to know or if it is only this group . ” Nina , working group leader The use of the working groups as entities for closed collaboration was a start , however , it turned out to be a limited approach without awareness and acknowledgement of the diversity of collaboration relations . Many collaborating groups 254 cross working groups . As a consequence some of the working groups were expanded to allow for collaboration . Some people felt that this tool was not supporting their needs and just refrained from using it despite specific and unmet needs . Further support of collaboration developed when a working group leader asked the project assistant for certain groupings . This happened in project 2 . “ … I correspond with the project assistant about which people I want in . The project assistant gives access to the people and I make sure that documents are restricted” Nina , working group leader In project 3 , people complained over an ever extending amount of drafts and lacking agreements on who should remove old drafts . The heavy use reduced the usefulness of the folder “drafts for commenting” as it became difficult to overview the documents . Only one category of drafts for commenting was created in ProjectWeb , despite the fact that many groups make drafts and different kinds of drafts can be found . The result was a messy collection of many different genres of unfinished material across the different areas . The problem and solution were pointed out , however , despite acknowledging the problem , nothing was done : “Some groups have requested their own drafts for commenting under their own section instead of one overall category . CMC and QA have got many documents and it has become difficult to find anything at all . ” Else , project assistant Another part of the problem was the configuration of groups made to support the extended reading rights to meeting minutes . The extended groupings collided with the use of restricted groups to reduce the amount of contents . Some of the working group leaders were members of several numbers of extended working groups and as a result they could access drafts from all working groups making it even messier . Different solutions were proposed like creating more sub folders , another suggestion could be more groups , or another technical solution for combining more groups or adding / removing some group members making the system more flexible . The fundamental problem of solving the conflict in “drafts for commenting” in project 3 was found to be the lack of management support . The project assistant had too limited resources to deal with the problem and did not do the needed changes . She was reluctant to spend time on ProjectWeb as her project director found ProjectWeb a waste of time . 4 . DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION When implementing new communication technologies such as groupware systems , some applications are not and cannot be foreseen from the outset . These uses develop as people get more experience with the technology and learn to see how it may support their communication needs . This study supports the idea that new communication technology needs to be learned through practice . The theory on technology frames by [ 38 ] provides a good explanation hereof . They argue that our existing experiences and understanding of technology are restricting how we may use a given technology . However , our technology frames may change as we gain new experiences , which may then open our eyes seeing new possibilities of technology use . Another study has likewise found that evolving and more sophisticated use demands maturation , which has been found to follow stages of increasing complexity [ 12 ] . The ideas and inventions on how to use ProjectWeb grow to a large extent from the use of other technologies in other situation , providing ideas on how to use this new technology . These ideas or needs can be seen as a result of a lot of different factors coming together ( the information ecology ) . The need for “drafts for commenting” did arise partly because both email and LAN were not useful under the specific conditions , which thus acted as an active driver for adopting this new media . The current study further adds to the existing knowledge by documenting that more application types may develop when allowing for more distributed innovations . This seems evident as different stakeholders , presents different needs , which are best represented by themselves . However at the same time there is a need to secure that different types of use are not in conflict . The study thus emphasise a need to support close collaboration between users and technology - use - mediators if more local needs are to be developed and supported within the same groupware system without creating negative network externalities . It could be argued that technology - use - mediation be given free , but this would most likely result in problems of incompatible uses , as seen when the extended groups for broader communication of minutes inhibited or reduced the use of restricted groups to prevent information overload and overview . There is thus a need for some kind of central managing and design of a more overall strategic solution aiming at integrating different uses that might otherwise be incompatible . Supporting different local needs turned out to be quite demanding as new ways of designing the system , configuring it to new needs in different genres and still supporting existing ones required more complicated solutions and additional work . In some of the projects the management was not prepared to invest the needed time to manage and support these local needs which then made the groupware system turn into a messy and confusing communication tool . In such instance it would be recommendable to stick to more simple and restricted employment . The lens of genre gave more awareness to the norms and conventions at play when communicating and making sense of communication technologies . It was found that the design of the communication technology in terms of the configuration may invite for certain types of genres and at the same time hinder the communication of other through the naming conventions and the configuration of rights . In the small example given it was seen that it was necessary to explicitly state areas of unfinished material to distinguish between genres belonging to either one or the other . Secondly , supporting and framing the audience closely through groupings were found highly important as an important part of genre is the audience which is highly interrelated with the purpose of a genre . 5 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I’m grateful to the members of the project groups who participated in this research . I also want to express my thank to Dixi Strand , Jens Pors , Erling Havn and Jørgen Bansler for their assistance in the fieldwork and ongoing collaboration . This study was supported in part by a grant from the Danish research council . 255 6 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Nicolajsen , H . W . 2008 . Innovation and the creative process . Towards innovation with care , in Intrapreneurship : differences in innovations is a matter of perspective and understanding , L . Fulgsang , Editor , Edward Elgar Publishing : Cheltenham , UK . p . 275 - 295 . [ 2 ] Orlikowski , W . , et al . 1995 . Shaping Electronic Communication : The metastructuring of Technology in the Context of Use . Organization Science , 6 ( 4 ) : p . 423 - 444 . [ 3 ] Nardi , B . A . and V . O ' Day . 1999 . Information Ecologies , Cambrigde , MA : MIT Press . [ 4 ] Spinuzzi , C . , W . Hart - Davidson , and M . Zachry . 2006 . Chains and Ecologies : Methodological Notes toward a Communicative - Mediational Model of Technologially Mediated Writing . in SIGDOC . Myrtle Beach , South Carolina , USA : ACM . [ 5 ] Sproull , L . and S . Kielser . 1991 . Computers , networks and work . Scientific American , 272 ( 3 ) : p . 128 - 139 . [ 6 ] Mark , G . 2002 . Conventions and Commitments in Distributed CSCW Groups . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 11 : p . 349 - 387 . [ 7 ] Ciborra , C . 1996 . Introduction : What does Groupware Mean for the Organizations Hosting it ? , in Groupware and Teamwork , C . Ciborra , Editor , John Wiley & Sons : New York . p . 1 - 19 . [ 8 ] Weick , K . E . 1990 . Technology as Equivoque : Sensemaking in New Technologies , in Technology and Organizations , P . S . Goodman and L . Sproull , Editors , Jossey - Bass : San Francisco . p . 1 - 44 . [ 9 ] Ngwenyama , O . K . and K . J . Lyytinen . 1997 . Groupware environments as Action Constitutive Resources : A Social Action Framework for Analzing Groupware Technologies . Computer Supported Cooperative work : The journal of Collacorative Computing , 6 : p . 71 - 93 . [ 10 ] Syri , A . 1997 . Tailoring Cooperation Support through Mediators . Proccedings of the fifth European Conference of Computer Supported Cooperative Work : p . 157 - 172 . [ 11 ] Lamb , R . and E . Davidson . 2000 . The new computing archipelago : intranet islands of practice . IFIPTC8 WG8 . 2 International Working Conference on the Social and Organizational Perspective on Research and Practice in Information Technology : p . 255 - 274 . [ 12 ] Damsgaard , J . and R . Scheepers . 1999 . Power , influence and intranet implementation . A safari of South African organizations . Information Technology and People , 12 ( 4 ) : p . 333 - 358 . [ 13 ] Markus , L . M . , J . Fulk , and C . W . Steinfield . 1990 . Toward a " Critical Mass " Theory of Interactive Media , in Organizations and Communication Technologies , Sage Publications : California . p . 194 . [ 14 ] Markus , L . M . and T . Connolly . 1990 . Why CSCW applications fail : Problems in the adoption of interdependent work tools . Proccedings of Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work : p . 371 - 380 . [ 15 ] Newell , S . , H . Scarbrough , and J . Swan . 2001 . From Global Knowledge Management to Internal Electronic Fences : Contradictory Outcomes of Intranet Development . British Journal of Management , 12 : p . 97 - 111 . [ 16 ] Grudin , J . 1989 . Why groupware applications fail : problems in design and evaluation . Office : Technology and people , 4 ( 3 ) : p . 245 - 264 . [ 17 ] Nardi , B . A . 1999 . Cultivating Gardeners : The Importance of Homegrown Expertise , in Information Ecologies : using technology with heart , Massachusetts Institute of Technology . p . 139 - 151 . [ 18 ] Trigg , R . and S . Bødker . 1994 . From Implementation to Design : Tayloring and the Emergence of Systematization in CSCW . Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . [ 19 ] Orlikowski , W . and J . Yates . 1994 . Genre repertoire : the structuring of communicative practices in organizations . Administrative Science Quaterly , 39 : p . 541 - 574 . [ 20 ] Yates , J . and W . Orlikowski . 2002 . Genre Systems : Structuring Interaction through Communicative Norms . Business communication , 39 ( 1 ) : p . 13 - 35 . [ 21 ] Yates , J . and W . Orlikowski . 1992 . Genres of Organizational Communication : A Structural Approach to Studying Communication and Media . Academy of management review , 17 ( 2 ) : p . 299 - 318 . [ 22 ] Crowston , K . and M . Williams . 2000 . Reproduced and Emergent Genres of Communication on the World Wide Web . Information Society , 16 ( 3 ) : p . 201 - 215 . [ 23 ] Yates , J . , W . Orlikowski , and K . Okamura . 1999 . Explicit and Implicit Structuring of Genres in Electronic Communication : Reinforcement and Change of Social Interaction . Organization Science , 10 ( 1 ) : p . 83 - 103 . [ 24 ] Clark , D . 2007 . Content Management and the Production of Genres . in SICDOC . El Paso , Texas , USA : ACM . [ 25 ] Mørch , A . 1997 . Three Levels of End - User Tailoring : Customization , Integration , and Extension , in Computers and Design in Context , M . Kyng and L . Matthiassen , Editors , MIT Press : Cambrigde , MA . p . 51 - 76 . [ 26 ] Hutchby , I . 2001 . Technologies , Texts and Affordances . Sociology , 35 ( 441 ) : p . 456 . [ 27 ] Kahler , H . , et al . 2000 . Introduction . Computer Supported Cooperative work : The journal of Collaborative Computing , 9 : p . 1 - 4 . [ 28 ] Fulk , J . , et al . 1990 . A Social Influence Model of Technology Use , in Organizations and communication technology , Sage Publications : California . p . 117 - 140 . [ 29 ] Ciborra , C . 1996 . Mission Critical : Challenges for Groupware in a Pharmaceutical Company , in Groupware and Teamwork , C . Ciborra , Editor , John Wiley & Sons : New York . p . 91 - 120 . [ 30 ] Grudin , J . and S . Poltrock . 1997 . Computer - supported cooperative work and groupware . Advances in computers , 45 : p . 269 - 320 . [ 31 ] Henriksen , D . , H . W . Nicolajsen , and J . Pors . 2002 . Towards Variation or Uniformity Comparing Technology - 256 use Meditations of Web - based Groupware . Proceedings of ECIS , 5 - 8 June , Gdansk , Poland , 2002 . [ 32 ] Yin , R . K . 2003 . Case Study Research : Design and Methods . Third ed , Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications . [ 33 ] Cavaye , A . L . M . 1996 . Case study research : a multi - faceted research approach for IS . Information Systems Journal , 6 ( 3 ) : p . 227 - 242 . [ 34 ] Kvale , S . 1990 . Det Kvalitative Interview , in Valg af Organisationssociologiske Metoder - et Kombinationsperspektiv , I . Andersen , Editor , Samfundslitteratur : København . p . 215 - 240 . [ 35 ] Nicolajsen , H . W . and J . Bansler . 2007 . Evolving Information Ecologies : The Appropriation of New Media in Organizations , in Designing for Networked Communications , S . B . Heilesen and S . S . Jensen , Editors , Idea Group Publishing : Hershey PA . p . 1 - 25 . [ 36 ] Nicolajsen , H . W . and R . Scheepers . forthcoming 2008 . Communicating Content through Configurable Media : a Theoretical Framework . Scandinavian journal of information systems . [ 37 ] Henriksen , D . , H . W . Nicolajsen , and J . Pors . 2002 . Towards Variation or Uniformity ? Comparing Technology - use Mediations of Web - based Groupware . in European Conference of Information Systems ( ECIS ) . Gdansk . [ 38 ] Orlikowski , W . and D . Gash . 1994 . Technological Frames : Making Sense of Information Technology in Organizations . ACM Transactions on Information Systems , 12 ( 2 ) .