A Review of Tele - collaboration Technologies with Respect to Closely Coupled Collaboration ∗ Robin Wolff † , Dave J . Roberts † , Anthony Steed ◦ and Oliver Otto † † The Centre for Virtual Environments , University of Salford , UK ◦ Department of Computer Science , University College London , UK Abstract Globalisation and an increasingly multi - disciplinary collaboration drive the need for ef - ﬁcient ways to collaborate within distant teams . Although existing computer - supported cooperative work ( CSCW ) systems , such as collaborative video - conferencing and shared desktops , are suitable for certain tasks , most of these systems have two major deﬁciencies . First they support the situation of face to face meetings poorly . With a few exceptions , they use a desktop metaphor and this metaphor loses many of the subtleties of interper - sonal communication since this does not model or represent the spatial relationships of the participants . Second , again because of the imposition of a desktop metaphor , many systems deal badly with data sets and workspaces that are inherently 3D in nature . What is missing is the ability to naturally gesture towards and manipulate the objects of discus - sion , and to observe the body language of the collaborators in the spatial context that it is responsive to . Thus , we lose subtle gestures such as gaze being drawn to an object of common interest , or gaze being used by a speaker to indicate whom they want to speak next as they ﬁnish speaking . This article serves two purposes . Firstly , it outlines the requirements for a class of CSCW tools that would focus on supporting closely coupled collaborative activity around shared ∗ Wolff , R . , Roberts , D . J . , Steed , A . & Otto , O . , “A Review of Tele - collaboration Technologies with Respect to Closely Coupled Collaboration . ” To appear in International Journal of Computer Applications in Technology ( IJCAT ) , Special Issue on : ”Collaborative Multimedia Applications in Technology” , Inder - science Publishers , Geneve , Switzerland , ISSN 0952 - 8091 , 2005 , ( in press ) . 1 objects . These requirements include the ability to refer to a common model of the shared space through speech and gesture and for each person to be able to manipulate objects within that space . Secondly , this article describes the current state of the art in collab - orative technologies with a critique of how well they support the required collaborative activities . These technologies span the range from audio conferencing through to spa - tially immersive ( CAVE TM - like ) displays ( SID ) . Essentially the article suggests that as of today only through collaborative virtual environment ( CVE ) based on SIDs are we close to being able to achieve the seamless collaboration that exists in a face to face meeting . 1 Introduction The need for greater efﬁciency within and between both research and industrial teams leads many organisations to deploy one or more computer - supported collaborative work ( CSCW ) tools , such as groupware or video - conferencing . Supporting collaboration , how - ever , is very complex . A group of people may need to interact in a number of ways . Ellis et al . ( 42 ) categorised group interactions according to a time / location matrix , illustrated in Figure 1 . Within this matrix , a distinction is made between same time ( synchronous ) and different times ( asynchronous ) , and between same place ( face - to - face ) and different places ( distributed ) . The taxonomy reﬂects the diversity of closeness of coupling and of geographical spread within teamwork . This article particularly focuses on distributed synchronous teamwork . Figure 1 : Group interaction time / location matrix by Ellis et al . ( 42 ) . synchronous distributedinteraction face−to−faceinteraction asynchronousinteraction distributed interaction asynchronous Different Places Same Time Different Times Same Place 2 Tele - collaboration technologies have greatly reduced the need for co - located team meet - ings . Many teamwork tasks , however , rely on spatially oriented interactions around shared physical artefacts . Although some technologies , such as video - conferencing , can commu - nicate the existence of gesture , posture and facial expression , they do not accurately reﬂect the potential target of the action or the relationship of the target to the viewer . For exam - ple , someone may gesture to a target that is off screen , as such systems do not usually integrate shared data within the collaborative space . Other systems , such as AccessGrid ( AccessGrid ) , combine video streaming of participants with shared data applications , but people and data are separated and it is impossible to reference them without reverting to a shared cursor , thus losing some of the naturalness of the conversation . Many issues have been studied extensively in the CSCW domain ( 58 ; 89 ; 103 ; 141 ) . Re - search interests within this domain concern multi - user interfaces , concurrency control , shared information space and the support of a heterogeneous , open environment which integrates existing single - user applications . The primary key issues of CSCW are com - munication and coordination within the group , and group awareness ( 125 ) . A persistent and important problem when collaborating over a distance is the delay or interruption within collaborative sessions ( 41 ; 64 ; 106 ) . Recent work has additionally indicated sig - niﬁcant deﬁciencies and problems in supporting social awareness between collaborators ( 23 ; 110 ; 116 ; 126 ; 136 ) . This article reviews work related to close collaboration over a distance in the scope of shared object manipulation . Current technologies are reviewed and compared with respect to their support offered for the two key factors of close collaboration : synchronous object sharing and the communication of references . In the following section we describe the requirements for closely coupled collaboration . In Section 3 , we review the technologies that support such collaborations , which is followed by a discussion and the conclusion of the article . 3 2 Closely Coupled Collaboration around Shared Object Interaction Much of collaborative work is based on conversational tasks or simple transactions of data , while others may require complex interaction between the team member and shared data . Some tasks may even explicitly require the team to tightly interact with shared physical artefacts . Often , it is not only necessary for the team to work closely around the objects , but also to communicate efﬁciently which object attribute is under discussion . The task may require object attributes to be explored through shared manipulations in real - time . It may take several iterations of manipulations and discussions to reach a com - mon objective opinion . Throughout this process it is often necessary for the participants to build trust , to see nuances of how people react to changes due to the manipulation , to ef - ﬁciently communicate their own opinion and to collaboratively interact with objects until agreement is found . In order to satisfy such needs for a distributed team , it seems reason - able that tele - collaboration technology should convey attention , interaction and emotion with reference to others , shared objects and the environment . Whilst CSCW deals with collaboration in general , where key issues are communication , coordination and group awareness ; this article focuses particularly on the situation of close collaboration around shared objects between team members at remote locations , where these key issues map to communication of references , coordination of shared object manipulation and a feeling of co - presence . 2 . 1 Communication of References A large part of communication between humans occurs verbally , but in a co - located sce - nario , facial expressions , gaze , pointing , posture , gestures , and physical distance to oth - ers provide additional communication channels ( 119 ) . Furthermore , shared objects and the environment around the participants can be used for communication . When collab - orating , individuals rely on the gathering , incorporation and utilisation of environmental 4 information to help them combine their unique knowledge and achieve their goals ( 126 ) . Observational studies in the design sector found that thinking often depends upon and exploits physical artefacts ( 24 ; 77 ) . People use objects to inspire , explain , demonstrate or evaluate . These objects may be handled directly or simply referred to through verbal and non - verbal means . Gergle et al . ( 54 ) present an empirical study that demonstrates how action replaces explicit verbal communication in a shared visual workspace . They found the communication of references to be essential for ﬁnding common ground when working with objects . Communication may occur between two peers or in one - to - many or many - to - many re - lations ( 100 ) . Instruction , for example , is primarily a one - to - many communication with real - time feedback . An instructor needs to communicate concepts and respond to ques - tions and feedback while doing so , whereas the students consciously or unconsciously indicate their level of awareness or understanding . Democratic decision making in a boardroom meeting , on the other hand , occurs through many - to - many communication , where each of the participants must be able to demonstrate strength of opinion to all other participants . The most intense communication often occurs between two individuals . Many collaborations will combine these relations across the duration of the collaboration process . 2 . 2 Shared Object Manipulation Shared object manipulation is the simultaneous action of modifying an object through its attributes , such as position or colour . Margery et al . ( 81 ) categorised cooperative tasks within virtual environments into three levels : users perceiving and communicating with each other within a shared environment ; individual manipulations of the contents of a scene ; and simultaneous manipulations on a shared object . Considering the timing of interactions , one can identify two classes of shared object manipulation : sequential and concurrent manipulation . Sequential manipulation occurs when attributes are modiﬁed in sequence , whereas concurrent manipulation occurs when attributes are modiﬁed simulta - 5 neously . Ruddle et al . ( 105 ) and Roberts et al . ( 101 ) distinguish further between scenarios where simultaneous actions are independent and co - dependent . Independent actions are those where distinct object attributes are modiﬁed . Co - dependent actions are modiﬁca - tions of the same object attribute . An example of independent action is when two people are together painting an object where one person controls the position attribute by hold - ing the material in place , while another controls the colour attribute by painting it . An example of concurrent manipulation is the joint lifting of heavy object where the position attribute is dependent on both participants’ actions . To coordinate shared manipulation of common objects , it is essential to get a feedback of the effects of interactions with the objects , as well as of the actions and intentions of other participants . In many cases , a visual feedback that reﬂects the modiﬁcation and can be perceived by all participants is sufﬁcient as a response to an action . An aural feedback is often supportive , as it relaxes the requirement for visually focusing on the area of action ( 140 ) . Recent studies , have shown that haptic ( force ) feedback signiﬁcantly improves task performance and feeling of co - presence of the participants during shared object ma - nipulation in virtual environments ( 12 ; 108 ) . Shared object manipulation puts also high requirements on real - time response and consistency on the mediating tele - collaboration system . 2 . 3 Shared Context Sharing the manipulation of objects requires a level of proximity between collaborators and objects within a shared workspace . Often , a level of mobility within the workspace is necessary in order to manipulate objects , or to reference towards attributes in a cluttered scene , in particular when working around large objects . In CSCW this is often echoed in the discussions of sharing of " place " , rather than space , to emphasise in particular the sharing of context ( 94 ) . In CSCW , it has long been recognised that an awareness of the action of other participants is a fundamental feature in supporting cooperative work ( 38 ; 59 ; 104 ; 125 ) . A commonly 6 applied model for formalising awareness between objects and people is the spatial model using focus and nimbus ( 13 ; 104 ) . Focus refers to the perception of actions and intentions of other people , as well as objects and the environment . In contrast , nimbus refers to the effect oneself has towards others through communication and articulation of actions , intentions or opinions , as well as the effects on objects or the environment . Thus , within scenarios of close collaboration around shared objects , awareness is supported by sharing both social context between collaborators , and spatial context between collaborators and the shared objects and environment . Literature in the ﬁeld of tele - collaboration often mentions the notion of presence and co - presence ( 111 ; 147 ) . Although clear deﬁnitions and metrics for presence and co - presence have not yet been found ( 115 ; 128 ; 48 ) , the term co - presence is often used to refer to the extent to which people have a feeling of “being there with them together” and that the interface becomes transparent , rather than their interaction being mediated by a computer interface ( 122 ) . In this article , co - presence is seen as the perception of spatial and social togetherness between remote people when collaborating around shared objects . 2 . 4 Challenges In order to satisfy the above needs of closely coupled collaboration around shared objects , tele - collaboration technology must convey interaction , attention and awareness with ref - erence to others , shared objects and the environment . State of the art technologies should further offer a way of synchronously manipulating shared objects , as well as communi - cating references towards object attributes . The ultimate goal is to bring people together and to allow close collaboration as natural as in a co - located meeting . 2 . 4 . 1 Togetherness When manipulating objects together , such as moving a large table , objects are synchro - nously shared . These objects must be both perceivable and reachable for all collaborators 7 at the same time . This requires a level of spatial proximity within the environment be - tween the participants and the manipulated object in a way that either collaborators are brought close to the objects or vice versa . Benford et al . ( 14 ) characterised shared - space systems in terms of the degree of spatiality , as it indicates the level of detail of mutual referencing between remote people . Additionally , the requirement for natural commu - nication of referencing and pointing towards object attributes , implies a level of freedom and mobility , and thus the ability to move around objects and access them from any angle . Furthermore , efﬁcient collaboration relies upon the two collaborators having compatible mental models of the task . The richness and utility of this model will be limited by the communication medium . Togetherness can be assessed on the extent of which success - ful exploitation of both social context ( collaborator to collaborator ) and spatial context ( collaborators to objects and environment ) can be achieved . 2 . 4 . 2 Naturalness Naturalness of interactions is likely to increase performance , because people do not need to compensate for the technology , allowing the users to concentrate more on the task , not the interface . In some cases , speciﬁc interactions with objects and between team members may be enhanced through abstract interaction techniques or may be guided by pre - deﬁned work - ﬂows . On the other hand , mediating every - day groupwork tasks through tele - collaboration technology is likely to be more efﬁcient when the task can be performed as natural and intuitively as in a co - located scenario . Poston and Serra ( 95 ) illustrate how natural referencing is intuitively preferred : “In the abstract , a mouse cursor seems far better than a ﬁnger , pointing more precisely at a point in the monitor screen . In practice , every screen has ﬁn - germarks . ” ( 95 , p 39 ) 8 3 Tele - collaboration Technologies Many technologies have been established to support distant teamwork . To gain a bet - ter overview of the ﬁeld , this section will provide an introductory review of current tele - collaboration technologies within the scope of closely coupled collaboration around shared objects . This survey does not intend to cover all the types of technologies in detail . The aim is to estimate to what extent the various technologies actually support closely coupled collaboration of a distributed group cooperating through shared objects . Partic - ular interest is put towards the clariﬁcation of the extent to which shared , natural object manipulation is supported ; to what extent natural non - verbal communication is supported ; and ﬁnally , to what extent the sharing of spatial and social context can be perceived . 3 . 1 Audio - conferencing The telephone is the most ubiquitous tool for communication today . Audio - conferencing technologies ( 2 ) span both ﬁxed and mobile telephony services and Internet - based audio tools . Figure 2 a ) illustrates an example scenario . Audio - only media are known to show limitations in supporting essential social cues ( 82 ; 118 ) . As illustrated in Figure 2 b ) , peo - ple cannot see each other , and thus , interactions and social awareness are limited to what can be communicated verbally . Gestures and other non - verbal cues , such as posture , facial expressions and proxemics , are not transmitted . Conversations are difﬁcult without estab - lished or agreed mechanisms for managing turn - talking . Additionally , audio - conferencing does not offer direct sharing of anything , but the audio properties of objects . ‘Sharing’ occurs only mentally through verbal discussion of the object properties . Therefore , the shared manipulation of objects , other than abstract ideas , is not supported . Although , the participants are aware of each other , the feeling of being together is very low . 9 Figure 2 : Tele - collaboration through audio - conferencing . ( a ) Two participants in an audio - conference . Mentally shared object Collaborator A Collaborator B ( b ) Concept of sharing space and data . 3 . 2 Groupware With the term groupware ( 42 ) we refer to window - based collaborative applications used on desktop computers . Groupware commonly provides a form of shared 2D desktop ac - cessible for a group of people over a network . Conversational interaction is supported via text messages and sometimes live audio channels . Examples include application soft - ware , such as BSCW ( 137 ) , JASMINE ( 37 ; 107 ) , as illustrated in Figure 3 a ) , or Meeting Central ( 145 ) . The primary advantage over phone - conferencing is that groupware allows the sharing of objects . This is achieved through methods such as shared document handling and transactions or shared whiteboards . The concept of collaborating through groupware is illustrated in Figure 3 b ) . Two primary problems have been identiﬁed : Firstly , groupware appears to commonly force the user’s work into a " work - ﬂow " ( 1 ) scheme . This is useful for guidance and coordination based on speciﬁc processes . However , it does not allow informal interac - tions or object manipulations that may be necessary to react to irregular actions within the team ( 4 ; 83 ) . Most systems allow only asynchronous manipulations , which are often unnatural interactions through the desktop interface . Synchronous object manipulation is rarely supported . Secondly , users of groupware have noted limitations in perceiving an 10 Figure 3 : Tele - collaboration through groupware . ( a ) The JASMINE multimedia tele - collaboration system ( Oliveira et al . , 2003 ) . Collaborator A Collaborator B Object in shared desktop ( b ) Concept of sharing space and data . awareness of the actions of others ( 18 ; 104 ; 110 ) . While collaborating through group - ware , actions of the participants can be tracked in change - logs or visualised in real - time with a shared cursor on the shared desktop . A limitation of groupware , however , is that communication of non - verbal cues is not well supported . Although some methods exist to capture a set of gesturing in shared desktops ( 43 ; 84 ) , many studies and evaluations have shown limitations in a natural communication between remote people . In summary , when collaborating through groupware systems , the feeling of working to - gether is often low and natural communication , as well as natural object manipulations are very limited . Recent developments attempt to provide an understanding of awareness requirements within groupware systems ( 59 ) , as well as add features for better communi - cating awareness , through gaze for example ( 139 ) . 3 . 3 Video - conferencing Video - conferencing allows multiple remote people to participate in a tele - conference by exchanging live audio and video data between remote sites ( 68 ; 88 ) . Nowadays , many in - stant messaging software integrates audio and video transmission features free of charge . Together with low - cost web - cameras , tele - conferences can be set up quickly on any desk - top computer in an ofﬁce . A popular video - conferencing in the scientiﬁc area is Access - 11 Grid ( AccessGrid ) , illustrated in Figure 4 a ) . The sharing of data and objects may be provided by merging groupware tools with video - conferencing technology ( 27 ; 53 ) . The shared data is commonly displayed along with the video of remote collaborators in adja - cent windows on one display . Additionally , physical objects may be located on one side , so that remote people may observe through video how a collaborator naturally demon - strates or references attributes of the actual object . Figure 4 b ) illustrates this concept . Figure 4 : Tele - collaboration through video - conferencing . ( a ) Typical AccessGrid session . Window into other place Collaborator A Collaborator B video real object ( b ) Concept of sharing space and data . The transmission of video signals enables face - to - face conversations between partici - pants . Non - verbal cues , such as gesturing , can be transmitted via video , as long it is in the viewing ﬁeld of the camera . This feature showed clear improvement over audio - only conferencing for acquiring common ground and trust ( 67 ; 72 ) . Gaver ( 51 ) , however , notes that the shared place in video - conferencing is signiﬁcantly different than that from actual face - to - face meetings . The feeling of co - presence is low in that collaborators do not spatially share a space . Video - conferencing technology can be described as a ‘window’ into remote places occupied by other group members . Another problem often experienced is turn - taking in conversations . This is known already from audio - conferencing and often caused by delays in the transmission ( 106 ) . As remote collaborators are often arranged on a single screen , the lack of gaze contributes to this problem ( 47 ) . Furthermore , when compared to face - to - face meetings , many users have found difﬁculties in noticing peripheral cues , pointing towards things or manipulating real - world objects 12 ( 67 ; 75 ; 76 ) . The support for natural pointing or referencing of object details through non - verbal communication is limited , and is often only possible by holding objects into the camera . Efforts have been made to set up several cameras pointing at workspaces and artifacts forming so - called media - spaces ( 50 ) . However , conventional video does not offer depth perception through stereo - vision and few cameras capture a high enough level of detail over a wide enough ﬁeld of view to support a broad range of possible depth cues over a wide space . Cameras are mostly ﬁxed in position and orientation and , thus , only offer limited range of exploration and mobility within the workspace ( 143 ) . Recent development efforts in the ﬁeld of video - conferencing try to increase the support of gesturing , for example by drawing gestures on tablet PCs ( 91 ) , and gaze , for example through additional interfaces , such as head - mounted cameras with eye - tracker and scene oriented video ( 47 ) or separate cameras and windows per collaborator ( 113 ) . One can also see a trend focusing toward 3D , as for example AGJuggler ( 56 ) , a toolkit on top of AccessGrid , in which spatial information about participants is considered . A promising approach are semi - immersive tele - conferencing systems such as the “Ofﬁce of the Future” by Raskar et al . ( 97 ) and variations ( 10 ; 34 ; 71 ; 127 ; 144 ) , in which video is captured from various angles and integrated into a graphical three - dimensional environment . 3 . 4 Tele - presence A related technology to video - conferencing is tele - operation , or tele - presence . The aim of tele - presence is to ‘teleport’ a person to a remote place , rather than providing a ﬁxed ‘window’ as in conventional video - conferencing ( 31 ; 66 ) . Sheridan ( 114 ) describes tele - presence as a “sense of being physically present with virtual objects at the remote tele - operator site . ” Tele - presence was initially developed for application areas , such as haz - ardous exploration or remote inspection and operation , for example ( 3 ) . Some develop - ments concentrate on the support for human communication and interaction , and thus are suitable for remote collaboration . This is often achieved through a mobile platform with bi - directional audio and video support , as a tele - embodiment of the remote opera - 13 tor ( 69 ; 93 ) , as illustrated in Figure 5 a ) . This is achieved by merging video - conferencing technology with tele - robotics , so that a local machine acts on behalf of the remote control - ling person ( 146 ) . One could describe this as a mobile ‘window with hands’ . Figure 5 b ) shows a sketch of the concept of how the space and objects are shared . Figure 5 : Tele - collaboration through tele - presence . ( a ) Tele - presence using PRoP ( Paulos and Canny , 2001 ) Collaborator B Teleport into other place Collaborator A video real object ( b ) Concept of sharing space and data . Along with verbal communication via audio channels , non - verbal communication in form of gestures or gaze , may be realised through either video or controlled movements of parts of the robot ( 76 ) . However , although a spatial context may be shared through tele - operation technology , and thus peripheral interaction with shared objects is given , the the level of sharing the manipulation of artifacts offered to the remote operator is limited and depend on the features of the robot . In summary , the social separation , and thus co - presence , is lower than the previous tech - nologies in respect to a spatial context . However , the naturalness of interaction with the remote participants is limited by the human realism of the robot . Apart from using robots to represent a remote human , other approaches make use of actuated environments to create a level of ambient presence and informal awareness about remote people through physical , “smart” objects integrated within the local workspace ( 17 ; 52 ; 96 ; 134 ) . 14 3 . 5 Collaborative Mixed Reality Milgram and Fumio ( 85 ) use the term “Mixed Reality” ( MR ) to refer to a large class of display technologies that span a continuum between completely real and completely vir - tual . A completely real environment solely consists of real objects that may be perceived either directly or through a window or ( video ) display . In contrast , a completely virtual environment consists solely consists of synthetic objects , such as computer graphics . A MR environment in which real and virtual objects may be perceived lies somewhere in between these extremes , for example ( 14 ; 29 ) . The following sections will look closer at augmented and virtual reality . 3 . 5 . 1 Distributed Collaborative Augmented Reality Augmented reality ( AR ) , aims to enhance the real world with virtual objects ( 8 ; 86 ) . A user of AR usually wears a see - through head - mounted display ( HMD ) perceiving syn - thetic 3D objects overlaid on the surrounding real environment . In conjunction with mo - tion tracking interfaces , this technology allows natural interactions with synthetic objects . A group of co - located people may share a set of projected virtual objects in a common place and manipulate them together ( 26 ; 109 ) . Collaboration between remote people is commonly enabled through additional video - conferencing technology ( 11 ; 20 ) . The advantage of using AR technology is that remote collaborators and shared objects can be integrated into the actual workplace , and thus the remote is merged with the local workplace , as illustrated in Figures 6 a ) and b ) . A stronger effect of co - presence can be achieved . However , limits in supporting non - verbal commu - nication are inherited from videoconferencing , if not captured otherwise by a tracking system . 15 Figure 6 : Tele - collaboration through augmented reality . ( a ) Remote participants projected into local workspace ( Billinghurst and Kato , 2002 ) . Synthetic objects in local workplace Collaborator B Collaborator A ( b ) Concept of sharing space and data . 3 . 5 . 2 Collaborative Desktop - based Virtual Reality Virtual reality ( VR ) can be deﬁned as a set of interfaces providing the sensory expe - rience , which immerses the user in a completely synthetic environment ( 85 ) . Such a " virtual " environment usually consists of computer generated geometric objects or other media , such as documents or video , inhabiting a three - dimensional space and may pro - vide spatial sound or haptic ( touch ) feedback . Distributed VR system endpoints may be inter - connected with a collaborative virtual environment ( CVE ) software system and audio - conferencing tools . CVE systems allow a number of remote people to share the context of the virtual environment and to interact with each other and the inhabiting ob - jects ( 15 ; 35 ; 120 ) . Well documented CVE systems include : DIVE ( 33 ; 46 ; 45 ) , NPSNET ( 80 ) and MASSIVE ( 57 ) . The difference to groupware and video - conferencing systems is that CVE systems offer " space - based presence " , as they bring remote people together into a spatial proximity ( 21 ; 44 ) . Typically , a human - like synthetic character ( avatar ) represents each remote participant within a CVE ( 16 ) , as illustrated in Figure 7 a ) . This is seen to create a feeling of presence ( 39 ; 60 ; 124 ) . Figure 7 b ) shows the concept of collaborating through desktop CVE systems . Many users of CVE systems who interact through desktop interfaces , however , still ex - 16 Figure 7 : Tele - collaboration through desktop virtual reality . ( a ) The Virtual Gazebo ( Roberts , 2003 ) on a desktop system . Collaborator A Window into synthetic shared world Collaborator B ( b ) Concept of sharing space and data . perienced limitations in the support of non - verbal communication due to the limited ﬁeld of view and the lack of natural avatar representation , as well as the lack of naturalness of object interactions ( 102 ; 129 ) . Hindmarsh et al . ( 65 ) linked this to the fragmentation of activity caused by the low ﬁeld of view offered by desktop interfaces and difﬁculties in communicating referencing towards objects . 3 . 5 . 3 Collaborative Immersive Virtual Reality In the VR ﬁeld , there exist two primary classes of immersive displays : head mounded dis - play ( HMD ) and spatially immersive display ( SID ) . In contrast to desktop display systems and large ﬂat or curved screens that may display three - dimensional graphics based on a user’s tracked viewpoint , immersive displays provide a surrounding imagery of a virtual environment . The difference is that users are inside , rather than in front of the 3D environ - ment ( 74 ) . Body movement , often just head and dominant hand , is continuously tracked , allowing both conscious and subconscious non - verbal communication to be captured and mapped onto the tracked person’s avatar . Figure 8 a ) shows an example of a local user ( left ) collaborating with a remote participant ( avatar on the right ) , while b ) illustrates the concept of sharing space and objects using collaborative immersive VR technology . Traditionally , HMDs have offered a low ﬁeld of view that has been associated with motion 17 Figure 8 : Tele - collaboration through immersive virtual reality . ( a ) The Virtual Gazebo ( Roberts , 2003 ) in a SID . Collaborator A Collaborator B Immersed in synthetic shared world ( b ) Concept of sharing space and data . sickness ( 6 ; 70 ) , and reduction in the feeling of presence ( 63 ) . This is likely to impact on observing and following the awareness , attention and actions in the periphery of view . The other class of immersive displays are those that spatially surround the user with ﬁxed screens , rather than following the head movement . The most common form of SID is based on the CAVE TM ( 36 ) principle . It has been shown that within a tracked , stereo , real - time environment , a user’s ability to comprehend large - scale data is substantially improved ( 92 ; 135 ; 138 ) . Several stud - ies have investigated the effect of linking various combinations of display systems for collaboration . Leigh et al . ( 79 ) present an overview of collaboration in immersive tele - collaboration ( tele - immersion ) applications . Many of these applications have had a sig - niﬁcant impact on their respective ﬁelds and provided effective collaboration . In a study by Mortensen et al . ( 87 ) , where a pair of remote participants was required to negotiate the task of handling a stretcher object together and moving a few meters into a building , it was found that co - presence was signiﬁcantly and positively correlated with task per - formance . Heldal et al . ( 63 ) showed in a comparative study that SID devices seem to support object - focused interaction in a very efﬁcient manner . Very few disturbances of the form as reported by Hindmarsh et al . ( 65 ) were seen . Another study by Heldal et al . ( 61 , 62 ) the authors investigated the effect of display type on collaboration through com - binations of SID , HMD and desktop systems , and compared this to a face - to - face setting . 18 The primary ﬁnding was that immersed users felt more present and were more effective than non - immersed users , as well as that asymmetric settings can lower these beneﬁts . In related studies ( 7 ; 121 ; 132 ) , based on a similar experimental task , it has been found that immersed users naturally adopted dominant roles versus desktop users . Steed et al . ( 133 ) conducted a study , in which subjects collaborated over an extended period of time through cubic surround screens . The authors found that subjects collaborated intuitively and the networked environment lent itself particularly well to highly spatial and highly interactive tasks . Roberts et al . ( 101 ) have demonstrated an increased task performance within closely coupled collaborative tasks when interacting through a SID device . The natural interaction has enabled novice users to adapt their task performance of that expert users within just three test runs . 4 Discussion The previous section has reviewed a number of tele - collaboration technologies . All have shown advantages and disadvantages in regard to supporting close interaction . The fea - tures reached by means from simply ‘connecting remote people’ , over ‘projecting people into remote sites’ , up to ‘placing people into a common virtual space’ . As documented in the sections above , failures and limits of these technologies for supporting distant work have long been noted . Many studies have shown limitations in supporting highly interac - tive tasks in a natural manner . A common critique of users is the lack of social and situa - tional awareness within the collaborating team . Two primary problems can be identiﬁed : a spatial separation between team and data when sharing the manipulation of objects ; and limitations in communicating mediating non - verbal communication . An overview of the extent of supporting closely coupled collaboration that may be achieved using the reviewed technologies is summarised in Table 1 . Conventional video - conferencing is commonly found to naturally support aspects of face - to - face communication , as it communicates a high ﬁdelity and highly faithful image of 19 Table 1 : Extent of supporting closely coupled collaboration through tele - collaboration technologies . Technology Shared Object Ma - nipulation Communi - cation of references Shared spatial context Shared social context Mobility within the shared space Audio - conferencing not supported not supported separated separated not supported Groupware unnatural unnatural separated separated not supported Video - conferencing unnatural natural separated partially shared limited Tele - presence unnatural unnatural fully shared partially shared unlimited Augmented Reality natural natural partially shared partially shared unlimited Desktop - based CVE unnatural unnatural fully shared partially shared unlimited Immersive CVE natural natural fully shared partially shared unlimited the face . However , these systems show limitations in close collaboration around shared objects , in that they suffer from a spatial separation between collaborators and shared ob - jects , and they restrict movement within the space . Collaborative virtual environments bring shared objects and remote people together into a spatial and social proximity by means of VR interfaces . This can increase closeness and naturalness within interactions , and thus allows better communicating awareness , attention and interaction in an uncon - strained space . In the presented review of related work , it has been shown that linking im - mersive VR interfaces enables the communication of important cues such as referencing , gestures or proxemics . Leigh et al . ( 78 ) note that , relative to other tele - collaborative tech - nologies , such as groupware and video - conferencing , using immersive VR technology for remote collaboration is found to provide the closest emulation of physical co - location possible . Very strong scientiﬁc evidence supports this view that VR works ( induces pres - ence ) , because it triggers exactly the same perceptive mechanisms as reality ( 123 , p . 26 ) . 20 The primary advantage of using SID systems is that the user is aware of his own body movement in relation to the environment through the linked senses of vision , propriocep - tion ( the feeling of one’s body state ) , and sometimes haptics ( force feedback ) implying self - haptics , which matches proprioception . While users of desktop or HMD interfaces see only a virtual body ( if represented at all ) , users of SID interfaces feel and see their own body . Hence , linking of vision and proprioception is not affected by technology , as it is in other display types ( 5 ; 30 ; 63 ) . Additionally , spatially surrounding the users in data , not only improves the sense of immersion , but enables the use of both their focal ( or central ) vision and their peripheral vision . The wide ﬁeld of view encourages natu - ral head and body movement for both focused and general observation . This allows for a better understanding of the three - dimensional structure of the dataset , as well as the spatial scale of features within it . Further , natural body movement may be used to walk around an object , move the body and head to examine it from every angle , manipulate it with the hand and interact naturally with remote users . A signiﬁcant characteristic is that subconscious gestures , such as gaze or gesturing with the hand during conversations , are also communicated between distributed team members ( 99 ) . Nevertheless , a particular technology may not necessarily be the best choice for all types of applications . A study by Axelsson et al . ( 7 ) , for example , showed in a collabora - tive molecular visualisation task that , although the perceived co - presence was higher and communication found to be slightly more natural within a SID , collaboration between the pairs was found to be higher when using desktop display systems . Bowman et al . ( 22 ) found that HMD may be better suited than SID systems in applications involving naviga - tion through enclosed spaces and frequent turning , as the direct mapping of surrounding imagery head movements detected by head tracking increases efﬁciency and spatial ori - entation to users . Steed and Parker ( 130 ) found that performance on selection tasks is much better on a SID than a HMD , while manipulation tasks show only little differences between the two immersive display technologies . Brooks noted in his review of the state of the art in virtual environments , an important task in the ﬁeld of VR is “choosing which display best ﬁts each application” ( 28 , p 27 ) . 21 5 Conclusion Remote collaboration and distant teamwork have become a strategic factor for many or - ganisations . Supporting social awareness about the actions of others within closely cou - pled collaboration is an important feature that many tele - collaboration technologies miss . Conventional technologies lack effective support for close collaboration around shared objects between remote people . The essential requirements of close collaboration , shared object manipulation and natural communication of references , are often limited or not supported . The overview we have presented suggests that linked immersive display technology will be of great beneﬁt to spatially unconstrained tele - collaboration , especially where users collaborate around shared information artefacts . Immersive display devices place a user in a spatial and social context allowing natural ﬁrst person observations of remote users while interacting with objects . This is shown to improve human communication and the collaborative work within such an environment . It has been shown that , especially in spatially immersive surround screen displays ( SID ) , the remote users increase their feeling of co - presence and team performance , compared to those of HMD and desktop displays . Much research has been done in the sector of remote collaboration through SID interfaces . Many have recognised the advantages of using this technology . There are , however , still issues that need to be addressed . The four most signiﬁcant challenges that remain for in future systems are ( 1 ) supporting consistent synchronous object manipulations between remote sites ; ( 2 ) the feeling of touch when interacting with virtual objects ; ( 3 ) a more re - alistic representation of human embodiments ; and ( 4 ) integrating tele - collaboration tech - nology into workplaces . Early research ( 25 ) has shown that concurrent remote interaction with a shared object was not possible with CVE technology in 1995 , as sharing the manipulation of objects over a distance put high requirements on the underlying software platform maintaining 22 responsive interaction and a consistent shared state . Clearly , consistency control affects the responsiveness , as well as throughput in terms of ﬁdelity , of a distributed interactive system . This problem is well known as the " consistency - throughput trade - off " ( 19 ; 120 ) . Hence , the ultimate goal is to ﬁnd a sufﬁcient balance between throughput and consistency above user requirements . A study of the characteristics of supporting shared object ma - nipulation and communication of references ( 142 ) have shown how immersion increases the processing load for the underlying software platform . Shirmohammadi and Georganas ( 117 ) present an architecture that allows timely - reliable communication of vital key mes - sages within the interaction stream while supporting tightly - coupled collaborative tasks . Task - oriented consistency control ( 98 ) may help to better balance the requirements of both responsiveness and consistency based on situational requirements . The sense of touch obviously plays a unique and important role in human interaction . Many people complain about the lack of feeling weight or other forms of force feed - back when manipulating objects in virtual environments . It further appears that touching and manipulating objects in virtual environments increases the general sense of presence ( 12 ; 40 ) . Kim et al . ( 73 ) successfully demonstrate a handshake with force feedback over a network connection across the Atlantic . A related study ( 90 ) documents the techni - cal challenges related to supporting responsive interaction with haptic devices and noted performance issues when implementing force feedback in a conventional CVE system . Seelig et al . ( 112 ) have shown how some of these issues may be overcome by using dedi - cated resources for haptic rendering and the virtual environment . Steed et al . ( 131 ) suggest that much more of the subtle non - verbal behaviour of users needs to be captured or simulated in order to have collaborative interactions that are more similar to those in the real world . Most of the current immersive tele - collaboration sys - tems represent the participants as a computer generated character ( avatar ) within the vir - tual environment , as it is difﬁcult to map live video of a participant into a dynamic 3D environment . Increasing the realism in representing synthetic humans is found to have an impact on proxemics , and thus the way how people deal with avatars ( 9 ; 122 ) . Artic - ulated human - like ﬁgures have proven well in representing the actions of remote people 23 ( 32 ) . Additionally , facial impressions or eye gaze may be represented through an avatar to increase realism , which is found to impact on the user’s impression ( 49 ) . In the next few years we expect that advances in real - time computer vision capture sys - tems will rapidly remove the problem of realistic representations . Video avatars can pro - vide high level of detail and realism to faithfully reﬂect actions and emotions of partici - pants and their interactions with objects . The required mobility and accuracy when ma - nipulating objects , however , makes it difﬁcult to capture live video of collaborators and mapping this into a dynamic 3D environment in real - time without disturbing the interac - tion itself . Using multiple cameras , as for example the Blue - C ( 127 ) , behind a switching semi - transparent screen of an immersive display in a way so that the interacting user is captured from various angles . Besides the advantages , current SID systems are expen - sive , large and time - consuming to set up . Future systems eventually have to be cheap and deployable in the ofﬁce environment . Examples of pioneering research in this area are the “Ofﬁce of the Future” system ( 97 ) or the TelePort system ( 55 ) that make use of full - wall display surfaces , " merging " of real and virtual environments , viewer tracking , and real - time compositing of live video with synthetic backgrounds and surfaces within the actual workspace . Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Emmanuel Frécon at the Swedish Institute of Computer Science and Information Technology in Sweden for fundamental ideas and thoughts . Spe - cial thanks to Dieter Kranzlmüller and Christoph Anthes at the Institute of Graphics and Parallel Processing of the Johannes Kepler University in Linz , Austria , as well as Vassil Alexandrov and Ali Al - Khalifah at the Department of Computer Science of the Univer - sity of Reading in UK for collaboration and discussions . Special thanks also to Ralph Schroeder at the Department of Technology and Society at Chalmers University in Swe - den for fruitful discussions . Thanks also to Maria Limniou of the Chemistry Department of Aristotle University of Thessaloniki , Greece . 24 References [ 1 ] Abbott , K . R . and Sarin , S . K . ( 1994 ) . Experiences with workﬂow management : issues for the next generation . In CSCW ’94 : Proceedings of the 1994 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work , pages 113 – 120 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ AccessGrid ] AccessGrid . http : / / www . accessgrid . org . [ 2 ] Ackerman , M . S . , Starr , B . , Hindus , D . , and Mainwaring , S . D . ( 1997 ) . Hanging on the ’wire : A ﬁeld study of an audio - only media space . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( ToCHI ) , 4 ( 1 ) : 39 – 66 . [ 3 ] Ansar , A . , Rodrigues , D . , Desai , J . P . , Daniilidis , K . , Kumar , V . , and Campos , M . F . ( 2001 ) . Visual and haptic collaborative tele - presence . Computers and Graphics , 25 ( 5 ) : 789 – 798 . [ 4 ] Antunes , P . , Guimarães , N . , Segovia , J . , and Cardenosa , J . ( 1995 ) . Beyond formal processes : Augmenting workﬂow with group interaction techniques . In COCS ’95 : Proceedings of Conference on Organizational Computing Systems , pages 1 – 9 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 5 ] Arnold , P . and Farrell , M . J . ( 2003 ) . Embodiment and spatial behavior in virtual en - vironments : Comments on durlach et al . ( 2000 ) . Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 12 ( 6 ) : 658 – 662 . [ 6 ] Arthur , K . ( 1996 ) . Effects of ﬁeld of view on task performance with head - mounted displays . In Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 29 – 30 , Vancouver , Canada . [ 7 ] Axelsson , A . - S . , Abelin , Å . , Heldal , I . , Nilsson , A . , Schroeder , R . , and Wideström , J . ( 1999 ) . Collaboration and communication in multi - user virtual environments : A com - parison of desktop and immersive virtual reality systems for molecular visualization . In Sixth UKVRSIG Conference , pages 107 – 117 , Salford University . Terence Fernando ( ed . ) . [ 8 ] Azuma , R . T . ( 1997 ) . A survey of augmented reality . Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 6 ( 4 ) : 1 – 38 . [ 9 ] Bailenson , J . , Beall , A . , Blascovich , J . , Weisbuch , M . , and Raimmundo , R . ( 2001 ) . Intelligent agents who wear your face : Users reactions to the virtual self . In Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 86 – 99 . [ 10 ] Baker , H . H . , Bhatti , N . , Tanguay , D . , Sobel , I . , Gelb , D . , Goss , M . E . , MacCormick , J . , Yuasa , K . , Culbertson , W . B . , and Malzbender , T . ( 2003 ) . Computation and perfor - mance issues in coliseum : An immersive videoconferencing system . In MULTIMEDIA ’03 : Proceedings of the eleventh ACM international conference on Multimedia , pages 470 – 479 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 11 ] Barakony , I . , Frieb , W . , and Schmalstieg , D . ( 2003 ) . Augmented reality video - conferencing for collaborative work . Presented at the 2nd Hungarian Conference on Computer Graphics and Geomtery , Budapest , Hungary , May . 25 [ 12 ] Basdogan , C . , Ho , C . - H . , Srinivasan , M . A . , and Slater , M . ( 2000 ) . An experimen - tal study on the role of touch in shared virtual environments . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( ToCHI ) , 7 ( 4 ) : 443 – 460 . [ 13 ] Benford , S . and Fahlén , L . E . ( 1993 ) . A spatial model of interaction in large vir - tual environments . In 3rd European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Working , Millan , Italy . [ 14 ] Benford , S . , Greenhalgh , C . , Reynard , G . , Brown , C . , and Koleva , B . ( 1998 ) . Under - standing and constructing shared spaces with mixed - reality boundaries . ACM Trans - actions on Computer - Human Interaction ( ToCHI ) , 5 ( 3 ) : 185 – 223 . [ 15 ] Benford , S . , Greenhalgh , C . , Rodden , T . , and Pycock , J . ( 2001 ) . Collaborative vir - tual environments . Communications of the ACM , 44 ( 7 ) : 79 – 85 . [ 16 ] Benford , S . D . , Bowers , J . M . , Fahlén , L . E . , Greenhalgh , C . M . , and Snowdon , D . N . ( 1997 ) . Embodiments , avatars , clones and agents for multi - user , multi - sensory virtual worlds . Multimedia Systems , 5 ( 2 ) : 93 – 104 . [ 17 ] Bentley , F . , Tollmar , K . , Demirdjian , D . , Koile , K . , and Darrell , T . ( 2003 ) . Perceptive presence . IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications , 23 ( 5 ) : 26 – 36 . [ 18 ] Berlage , T . and Sohlenkamp , M . ( 1999 ) . Visualizing common artefacts to support awareness in computer - mediated cooperation . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 8 ( 3 ) : 207 – 238 . [ 19 ] Bhola , S . , Banavar , S . , and Ahmad , M . ( 1998 ) . Responsiveness and consistency tradeoffs in interactive groupware . In the seventeenth annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing , pages 324 – 334 , Puerto Vallarta , Mexico . ACM Press New York , NY , USA . [ 20 ] Billinghurst , M . and Kato , H . ( 2002 ) . Collaborative augmented reality . Communi - cations of the ACM , 45 ( 7 ) : 64 – 70 . [ 21 ] Bowers , J . , O’Brien , J . , and Pycock , J . ( 1996 ) . Practically accomplishing immer - sion : Cooperation in and for virtual environments . In CSCW ’96 : Proceedings of the 1996 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work , pages 380 – 389 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 22 ] Bowman , D . , Datey , A . , Ryu , Y . , Farooq , U . , and Vasnaik , O . ( 2002 ) . Empirical comparison of human behavior and performance with different display devices for virtual environments . In Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting , pages 2134 – 2138 . [ 23 ] Bradner , E . and Mark , G . ( 2002 ) . Why distance matters : effects on cooperation , persuasion and deception . In CSCW ’02 : Proceedings of the 2002 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pages 226 – 235 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . isbn 1 - 58113 - 560 - 2 . [ 24 ] Brereton , M . and McGarry , B . ( 2000 ) . An observational study of how objects sup - port engineering design thinking and communication : Implications for the design of tangible media . In CHI ’00 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 217 – 224 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . 26 [ 25 ] Broll , W . ( 1995 ) . Interacting in distributed collaborative virtual environments . In VRAIS ’95 : Proceedings of the Virtual Reality Annual International Symposium , pages 148 – 155 , Washington , DC , USA . IEEE Computer Society . [ 26 ] Broll , W . , Meier , E . , and Schardt , T . ( 2000 ) . The virtual round table - a collaborative augmented multi - user environment . In CVE ’00 : Proceedings of the Third Interna - tional Conference on Collaborative virtual Environments , pages 39 – 45 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 27 ] Brooke , J . , Eickermann , T . , and Woessner , U . ( 2003 ) . Application steering in a collaborative environment . In SC ’03 : Proceedings of the 2003 ACM / IEEE conference on Supercomputing , page 61 , Washington , DC , USA . IEEE Computer Society . [ 28 ] Brooks , F . P . ( 1999 ) . Whats real about virtual reality ? IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications , 19 ( 6 ) : 16 – 27 . [ 29 ] Brown , B . , MacColl , I . , Chalmers , M . , Galani , A . , Randell , C . , and Steed , A . ( 2003 ) . Lessons from the lighthouse : Collaboration in a shared mixed reality system . In CHI ’03 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 577 – 584 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 30 ] Burns , E . , Razzaque , S . , Panter , A . T . , Whitton , M . C . , McCallus , M . R . , and Freder - ick P . Brooks , J . ( 2005 ) . The hand is slower than the eye : A quantitative exploration of visual dominance over proprioception . In VR ’05 : IEEE Virtual Reality , pages 3 – 10 . IEEE . [ 31 ] Buxton , W . A . S . ( 1992 ) . Telepresence : Integrating shared task and person spaces . In Proceedings of the Conference on Graphics Interface ’92 , pages 123 – 129 , San Fran - cisco , CA , USA . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc . [ 32 ] Capin , T . K . , Pandzic , I . S . , Magnenat - Thalmann , N . , and Thalmann , D . ( 1999 ) . Avatars in Networked Virtual Environments . Wiley . [ 33 ] Carlsson , C . and Hagsand , O . ( 1993 ) . Dive - a platform for multi - user virtual envi - ronments . Computers and Graphics , 17 ( 6 ) : 663 – 669 . [ 34 ] Chen , W . - C . , Towles , H . , Nyland , L . , Welch , G . , and Fuchs , H . ( 2000 ) . Toward a compelling sensation of telepresence : Demonstrating a portal to a distant ( static ) ofﬁce . In VIS ’00 : Proceedings of the Conference on Visualization ’00 , pages 327 – 333 , Los Alamitos , CA , USA . IEEE Computer Society Press . [ 35 ] Churchill , E . F . , Snowdon , D . , and Munro , A . J . ( 2001 ) . Collaborative Virtual Envi - ronments . Digital Places and Spaces for Interaction . Springer Verlag . [ 36 ] Cruz - Neira , C . , Sandin , D . J . , and DeFanti , T . A . ( 1993 ) . Surround - screen projection - based virtual reality : The design and implementation of the cave . In SIG - GRAPH ’93 : Proceedings of the 20th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques , pages 135 – 142 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 37 ] de Oliveira , J . C . , Hosseini , M . , Shirmohammadi , S . , Malric , F . , Nourian , S . , Sad - dik , A . E . , and Georganas , N . D . ( 2003 ) . Java multimedia telecollaboration . IEEE MultiMedia , 10 ( 3 ) : 18 – 29 . 27 [ 38 ] Dourish , P . and Bellotti , V . ( 1992 ) . Awareness and coordination in shared workspaces . In CSCW ’92 : Proceedings of the 1992 ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pages 107 – 114 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 39 ] Draper , J . V . , Kaber , D . B . , and Usher , J . M . ( 1998 ) . Telepresence . Human Factors , 40 ( 3 ) : 354 – 375 . [ 40 ] Durlach , N . and Slater , M . ( 2000 ) . Presence in shared virtual environments and virtual togetherness . Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 9 ( 2 ) : 214 – 217 . [ 41 ] Egido , C . ( 1988 ) . Video conferencing as a technology to support group work : a review of its failures . In CSCW ’88 : Proceedings of the 1988 ACM conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pages 13 – 24 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 42 ] Ellis , C . A . , Gibbs , S . J . , and Rein , G . ( 1991 ) . Groupware : Some issues and experi - ences . Communications of the ACM , 34 ( 1 ) : 39 – 58 . [ 43 ] Everitt , K . M . , Klemmer , S . R . , Lee , R . , and Landay , J . A . ( 2003 ) . Two worlds apart : Bridging the gap between physical and virtual media for distributed design col - laboration . In CHI ’03 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 553 – 560 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 44 ] Fahlén , L . E . , Brown , C . G . , Ståhl , O . , and Carlsson , C . ( 1993 ) . A space based model for user interaction in shared synthetic environments . In CHI ’93 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 43 – 48 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 45 ] Frècon , E . ( 2003 ) . DIVE : A programming architecture for the prototyping of IIS . In Snowdon , D . and Churchill , E . F . , editors , Inhabited Information Systems , pages 211 – 231 . Springer - Verlag . [ 46 ] Frécon , E . , Smith , G . , Steed , A . , Stenius , M . , and Ståhl , O . ( 2001 ) . An overview of the coven platform . Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 10 ( 1 ) : 109 – 127 . [ 47 ] Fussell , S . R . , Setlock , L . D . , and Kraut , R . E . ( 2003 ) . Effects of head - mounted and scene - oriented video systems on remote collaboration on physical tasks . In CHI ’03 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human factors in Computing Systems , pages 513 – 520 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 48 ] Garau , M . ( 2003 ) . The impact of avatar ﬁdelity on social interaction in virtual envi - ronments . PhD thesis , University College London . [ 49 ] Garau , M . , Slater , M . , Vinayagamoorthy , V . , Brogni , A . , Steed , A . , and Sasse , M . A . ( 2003 ) . The impact of avatar realism and eye gaze control on perceived quality of communication in a shared immersive virtual environment . In CHI 2003 , volume 5 ( 1 ) , Ft . Lauderdale , Florida , USA . [ 50 ] Gaver , W . , Sellen , A . , Heath , C . , and Luff , P . ( 1993 ) . One is not enough : Multiple views in a media space . In InterCHI ’93 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 335 – 341 , New York . ACM Press . 28 [ 51 ] Gaver , W . W . ( 1992 ) . The affordances of media spaces for collaboration . In CSCW ’92 : Proceedings of the 1992 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pages 17 – 24 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 52 ] Gellersen , H . - W . and Beigl , M . ( 1999 ) . Ambient telepresence : Colleague awareness in smart environments . In Nixon , P . , Lacey , G . , and Dobson , S . , editors , MANSE ’99 : International Workshop on Managing Interactions in Smart Environments , pages 80 – 88 . Springer Verlag , London . [ 53 ] George Chin , J . and Lansing , C . S . ( 2004 ) . Capturing and supporting contexts for scientiﬁc data sharing via the biological sciences collaboratory . In CSCW ’04 : Pro - ceedings of the 2004 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pages 409 – 418 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 54 ] Gergle , D . , Kraut , R . E . , and Fussell , S . R . ( 2004 ) . Action as language in a shared visual space . In CSCW ’04 : Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pages 487 – 496 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 55 ] Gibbs , S . J . , Arapis , C . , and Breiteneder , C . J . ( 1999 ) . Teleport - towards immersive copresence . Multimedia Systems , 7 ( 3 ) : 214 – 221 . [ 56 ] Gonzalez , D . A . ( 2005 ) . Agjuggler : An architecture for virtual reality within a collaboration environment . Master’s thesis , Purdue University , West Lafayette , IN 47907 , USA . [ 57 ] Greenhalgh , C . M . and Benford , S . D . ( 1995 ) . Massive : A virtual reality system for tele - conferencing . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( ToCHI ) , 2 ( 3 ) : 239 – 261 . [ 58 ] Greif , I . ( 1988 ) . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : A Book of Readings . Morgan Kaufmann . [ 59 ] Gutwin , C . and Greenberg , S . ( 2002 ) . A descriptive framework of workspace aware - ness for real - time groupware . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 11 ( 3 ) : 411 – 446 . [ 60 ] Heeter , C . ( 1992 ) . Being there : the subjective experience of presence . Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 1 ( 2 ) : 262 – 271 . [ 61 ] Heldal , I . , Schroeder , R . , Steed , A . , Axelsson , A . , Spante , M . , and Wideström , J . ( 2005a ) . Immersiveness and symmetry in copresent scenarios . In VR ’05 : Presented at the IEEE Virtual Reality 2005 Conference , pages 171 – 178 . [ 62 ] Heldal , I . , Steed , A . , and Schroeder , R . ( 2005b ) . Evaluating collaboration in dis - tributed virtual environments for a puzzle - solving task . Presented at HCI International 2005 , the 11th International Conference on Human Computer Interaction , Las Vegas . Heldal I . , Steed A . , Schroeder R . , " Evaluating Collaboration in Distributed Virtual En - vironments for a Puzzle - solving Task " , HCI International 2005 , the 11th International Conference on Human Computer Interaction , 22 - 27 July 2005 , Las Vegas . [ 63 ] Heldal , I . , Steed , A . , Spante , M . , Schroeder , R . , Bengtsson , S . , and Partanan , M . ( 2005c ) . Successes and failures in co - present situations . Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 14 ( 5 ) : ( in press ) . 29 [ 64 ] Herbsleb , J . D . , Mockus , A . , Finholt , T . A . , and Grinter , R . E . ( 2000 ) . Distance , dependencies , and delay in a global collaboration . In CSCW ’00 : Proceedings of the 2000 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pages 319 – 328 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 65 ] Hindmarsh , J . , Fraser , M . , Heath , C . , Benford , S . , and Greenhalgh , C . ( 2000 ) . Object - focused interaction in collaborative virtual environments . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( ToCHI ) , 7 ( 4 ) : 477 – 509 . [ 66 ] Hollan , J . and Stornetta , S . ( 1992 ) . Beyond being there . In CHI ’92 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 119 – 125 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 67 ] Isaacs , E . and Tang , J . C . ( 1994 ) . What video can and cannot do for collaboration . Multimedia Systems , 2 : 63 – 73 . [ 68 ] Johansen , R . ( 1984 ) . Teleconferencing and Beyond : Communications in the Ofﬁce of the Future . McGraw - Hill . [ 69 ] Jouppi , N . P . ( 2002 ) . First steps towards mutually - immersive mobile telepresence . In CSCW ’02 : Proceedings of the 2002 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pages 354 – 363 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 70 ] Kalawsky , R . S . ( 1993 ) . Physiology of visual perception . In The Science of Virtual Reality and Virtual Environments , pages 44 – 68 . Addison - Wesley . [ 71 ] Kauff , P . and Schreer , O . ( 2002 ) . An immersive 3d video - conferencing system using shared virtual team user environments . In CVE ’02 : Proceedings of the 4th Interna - tional Conference on Collaborative Virtual Environments , pages 105 – 112 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 72 ] Kethers , S . , Hargreaves , D . , and Wilkinson , R . ( 2004 ) . Remote meetings between farmers and researchers : A case study on asymmetry . In CSCW ’04 : Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pages 624 – 627 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 73 ] Kim , J . , Kim , H . , Tay , B . K . , Muniyandi , M . , Srinivasan , M . A . , Jordan , J . , Mortensen , J . , Oliveira , M . , and Slater , M . ( 2004 ) . Transatlantic touch : a study of haptic collaboration over long distance . Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environ - ments , 13 ( 3 ) : 328 – 337 . [ 74 ] Kjeldskov , J . ( 2001 ) . Interaction : Full and partial immersive virtual reality displays . In IRIS24 , pages 587 – 600 . [ 75 ] Kraut , R . E . , Miller , M . D . , and Siegel , J . ( 1996 ) . Collaboration in performance of physical tasks : Effects on outcomes and communication . In CSCW ’96 : Proceedings of the 1996 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pages 57 – 66 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 76 ] Kuzuoka , H . , Oyama , S . , Yamazaki , K . , Suzuki , K . , and Mitsuishi , M . ( 2000 ) . Ges - tureman : a mobile robot that embodies a remote instructor’s actions . In CSCW ’00 : Proceedings of the 2000 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work , pages 155 – 162 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . 30 [ 77 ] Larsson , A . ( 2003 ) . Making sense of collaboration : The challenge of thinking to - gether in global design teams . In GROUP ’03 : Proceedings of the 2003 International ACM SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work , pages 153 – 160 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 78 ] Leigh , J . , Johnson , A . , Brown , M . , Sandin , D . J . , and DeFanti , T . A . ( 1999a ) . Visu - alization in teleimmersive environments . Computer , 32 ( 12 ) : 66 – 73 . [ 79 ] Leigh , J . , Johnson , A . , and DeFanti , T . ( 1999b ) . A review of tele - immersive ap - plications in the cave research network . In IEEE VR ‘99 , pages 180 – 187 , Houston , TX . [ 80 ] Macedonia , M . R . , Zyda , M . J . , Pratt , D . R . , Barham , P . T . , and Zeswitz , S . ( 1994 ) . Npsnet : A network software architecture for large - scale virtual environment . Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 3 ( 4 ) : 265 – 287 . [ 81 ] Margery , D . , Arnaldi , B . , and Plouzeau , N . ( 1999 ) . A general framework for co - operative manipulation in virtual environments . In Gervautz , M . , Hildebrand , A . , and Schmaltsieg , D . , editors , Virtual Environments ’99 , pages 169 – 178 . Springer Verlag . [ 82 ] Mark , G . , Grudin , J . , and Poltrock , S . E . ( 1999 ) . Meeting at the desktop : An em - pirical study of virtually collocated teams . In ECSCW’99 : Sixth European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperateive Work . Kluwer Academic Publishers . [ 83 ] Markus , M . L . and Connolly , T . ( 1990 ) . Why cscw applications fail : Problems in the adoption of interdependent work tools . In CSCW ’90 : Proceedings of the 1990 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pages 371 – 380 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 84 ] Matsushita , N . and Rekimoto , J . ( 1997 ) . Holowall : designing a ﬁnger , hand , body , and object sensitive wall . In UIST ’97 : Proceedings of the 10th annual ACM sympo - sium on User interface software and technology , pages 209 – 210 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 85 ] Milgram , P . and Fumio , K . ( 1994 ) . A taxonomy of mixed reality displays . IEICE Transactions on Information Systems , E77 - D ( 12 ) . [ 86 ] Milgram , P . , Takemura , H . , Utsumi , A . , and Kishino , F . ( 1995 ) . Augmented reality : A class of displays on the reality - virtuality continuum . In Proceedings of SPIE Volume : 2351 , Telemanipulator and Telepresence Technologies , pages 282 – 292 . Hari Das , Jet Propulsion Lab . [ 87 ] Mortensen , J . , Vinayagamoorthy , V . , Slater , M . , Steed , A . , Lok , B . , and Whitton , M . C . ( 2002 ) . Collaboration in tele - immersive environments . In Proceedings of the workshop on Virtual environments 2002 , pages 93 – 101 , Barcelona , Spain . Eurograph - ics Association Aire - la - Ville , Switzerland , Switzerland . [ 88 ] Nardi , B . A . , Schwarz , H . , Kuchinsky , A . , Leichner , R . , Whittaker , S . , and Sclabassi , R . ( 1993 ) . Turning away from talking heads : The use of video - as - data in neurosurgery . In CHI ’93 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 327 – 334 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . 31 [ 89 ] Neale , D . C . , Carroll , J . M . , and Rosson , M . B . ( 2004 ) . Evaluating computer - supported cooperative work : Models and frameworks . In CSCW ’04 : Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pages 112 – 121 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 90 ] Oliveira , M . , Mortensen , J . , Jordan , J . , Steed , A . , and Slater , M . ( 2002 ) . The pitfalls in system design for distributed virtual environments : A case study . Presented at the International Workshop on Immersive Telepresence , Juan Les Pin . [ 91 ] Ou , J . , Fussell , S . R . , Chen , X . , Setlock , L . D . , and Yang , J . ( 2003 ) . Gestural com - munication over video stream : Supporting multimodal interaction for remote collabo - rative physical tasks . In ICMI ’03 : Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces , pages 242 – 249 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 92 ] Patrick , E . , Cosgrove , D . , Slavkovic , A . , Rode , J . A . , Verratti , T . , and Chiselko , G . ( 2000 ) . Using a large projection screen as an alternative to head - mounted displays for virtual environments . In CHI ’00 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 478 – 485 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 93 ] Paulos , E . and Canny , J . ( 2001 ) . Social tele - embodiment : Understanding presence . Autonomous Robots 11 , pages 87 – 95 . [ 94 ] Pekkola , S . ( 2002 ) . Critical approach to 3d virtual realities for group work . In NordiCHI ’02 : Proceedings of the Second Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction , pages 129 – 138 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 95 ] Poston , T . and Serra , L . ( 1996 ) . Dextrous virtual work . Communications of the ACM , pages 37 – 45 . issn 0001 - 0782 , publisher ACM Press . [ 96 ] Prante , T . , Stenzel , R . , Röcker , C . , van Alphen , D . , Streitz , N . A . , Magerkurth , C . , and Plewe , D . A . ( 2004 ) . Connecting remote teams : Cross - media integration to support remote informal encounters . Presented at the Sixth International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing ( UBICOMP ’04 ) , Nottingham , England , September 7 - 10 . [ 97 ] Raskar , R . , Welch , G . , Cutts , M . , Lake , A . , Stesin , L . , and Fuchs , H . ( 1998 ) . The ofﬁce of the future : A uniﬁed approach to image - based modeling and spatially im - mersive displays . In SIGGRAPH ’98 : Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques , pages 179 – 188 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 98 ] Roberts , D . and Wolff , R . ( 2004 ) . Controlling consistency within collaborative vir - tual environments . In The Eighth IEEE International Symposium on Distributed Sim - ulation and Real Time Applications , DS - RT 2004 , pages 46 – 52 . [ 99 ] Roberts , D . , Wolff , R . , Otto , O . , Kranzlmueller , D . , Anthes , C . , and Steed , A . ( 2004 ) . Supporting social human communication between distributed walk - in displays . In ACM , editor , VRST 2004 , pages 81 – 88 . [ 100 ] Roberts , D . J . ( 2003 ) . Communication infrastructures for inhabited information spaces . In Snowdon , D . and Churchill , E . F . , editors , Inhabited Information Systems , pages 233 – 268 . Springer - Verlag . 32 [ 101 ] Roberts , D . J . , Wolff , R . , and Otto , O . ( 2003 ) . Constructing a gazebo : Supporting team work in a tightly coupled , distributed task in virtual reality . Presence : Teleoper - ators and Virtual Environments , 12 ( 6 ) : 644 – 668 . [ 102 ] Robinson , M . , Pekkola , S . , Korhonen , J . , Hujala , S . , Toivonen , T . , and Saarinen , M . - J . ( 2001 ) . Extending the Limits of Collaborative Virtual Environments , pages 21 – 42 . Springer Verlag . [ 103 ] Rodden , T . ( 1991 ) . A survey of cscw systems . Interacting with Computers , 3 ( 3 ) : 319 – 353 . [ 104 ] Rodden , T . ( 1996 ) . Populating the application : A model of awareness for co - operative applications . In CSCW ’96 : Proceedings of the 1996 ACM conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pages 87 – 96 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 105 ] Ruddle , R . , Savage , J . , and Jones , D . ( 2002 ) . Symmetric and asymmetric action in - tegration during cooperative object manipulation in virtual environments . ACM Trans - actions on Computer - Human Interaction ( ToCHI ) , 9 ( 4 ) : 285 – 308 . [ 106 ] Ruhleder , K . and Jordan , B . ( 1999 ) . Meaning - making across remote sites : How delays in transmission affect interaction . In Proceedings of the Sixth European Confer - ence on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pages 411 – 429 , Norwell , MA , USA . Kluwer Academic Publishers . [ 107 ] Saddik , A . E . , Shirmohammadi , S . , Georganas , N . D . , and Steinmetz , R . ( 2000 ) . Jasmine : Java application sharing in multiuser interactive environments . In Proceed - ings of the 7th International Workshop on Interactive Distributed Multimedia Systems and Telecommunication Services , pages 214 – 226 . [ 108 ] Sallnäs , E . - L . , Rassmus - Gröhn , K . , and Sjöström , C . ( 2000 ) . Supporting pres - ence in collaborative environments by haptic force feedback . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( ToCHI ) , 7 ( 4 ) : 461 – 476 . [ 109 ] Schmalstieg , D . , Fuhrmann , A . , Hesina , G . , Szalavári , Z . , Encarnação , L . M . , Ger - vautz , M . , and Purgathofer , W . ( 2002 ) . The studierstube augmented reality projects . Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 11 ( 1 ) : 33 – 54 . [ 110 ] Schmidt , K . ( 2002 ) . The problem with ’awareness’ : Introductory remarks on ’awareness in cscw’ . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 11 ( 3 ) : 285 – 298 . [ 111 ] Schuemie , M . , der Straaten , P . , M . Krijn , and der Mast , C . ( 2001 ) . Research on presence in VR : a survey . Cyberpsychology and Behavior , 4 ( 2 ) : 183 – 202 . [ 112 ] Seelig , M . , Roberts , D . , Harwin , W . , Otto , O . , and Wolff , R . ( 2004 ) . A haptic interface for linked immersive and desktop displays : Maintaining sufﬁcient frame rate for haptic rendering . In 17th International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Computing Systems ( PDCS 2004 ) , pages 478 – 483 , San Francisco , CA , USA . [ 113 ] Sellen , A . , Buxton , B . , and Arnott , J . ( 1992 ) . Using spatial cues to improve video - conferencing . In CHI ’92 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 651 – 652 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . 33 [ 114 ] Sheridan , T . B . ( 1992 ) . Musings on telepresence and virtual presence . Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 1 ( 1 ) : 120 – 126 . [ 115 ] Sheridan , T . B . ( 2000 ) . Interaction , imagination and immersion some research needs . In VRST ’00 : Proceedings of the ACM symposium on Virtual reality software and technology , pages 1 – 7 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 116 ] Shirmohammadi , S . , de Oliveira , J . C . , and Georganas , N . D . ( 1998 ) . Applet - based telecollaboration : A network - centric approach . IEEE Multimedia , 5 ( 2 ) : 64 – 73 . [ 117 ] Shirmohammadi , S . and Georganas , N . ( 2001 ) . An end - to - end communication architecture for collaborative virtual environments . Computer Networks Journal , 35 ( 2 - 3 ) : 351 – 36 . [ 118 ] Short , J . , Williams , E . , and Christie , B . ( 1976 ) . The Social Psychology of Telecom - munications . Wiley , New York . [ 119 ] Short , J . , Williams , E . , and Christie , B . ( 1993 ) . Visual Communication and Social Interaction , pages 153 – 164 . Morgan Kaufmann . [ 120 ] Singhal , S . and Zyda , M . ( 1999 ) . Networked Virtual Environments : Design and Implementation . ACM Press . [ 121 ] Slater , M . , Sadagic , A . , Usoh , M . , and Schroeder , R . ( 2000 ) . Small group be - haviour in a virtual and real environment : A comparative study . Presence : Teleopera - tors and Virtual Environments , 9 ( 1 ) : 37 – 51 . [ 122 ] Slater , M . and Steed , A . ( 2002 ) . Meeting people virtually : Experiments in shared virtual envrionments . In Schroeder , R . , editor , The Social Life of Avatars , pages 145 – 171 . Springer - Verlag . [ 123 ] Slater , M . , Steed , A . , and Chrysanthou , Y . ( 2001 ) . Computer Graphics and Virtual Environments : From Realism to Real - Time . Addison Wesley Publishers . [ 124 ] Slater , M . and Usoh , M . ( 1993 ) . The inﬂuence of a virtual body on presence in immersive virtual environments . In Virtual Reality International 93 : Proceedings of the third annual conference on Virtual Reality , pages 34 – 42 . Meckler . [ 125 ] Sohlenkamp , M . and Chwelos , G . ( 1994 ) . Integrating communication , cooperation , and awareness : The diva virtual ofﬁce environment . In CSCW ’94 : Proceedings of the 1994 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pages 331 – 343 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 126 ] Sonnenwald , D . H . , Maglaughlin , K . L . , and Whitton , M . C . ( 2004 ) . Designing to support situation awareness across distances : an example from a scientiﬁc collabora - tory . Information Processing & Management , 40 ( 6 ) : 989 – 1011 . [ 127 ] Spagno , C . P . and Kunz , A . M . ( 2003 ) . Construction of a three - sided immersive telecollaboration system . In IEEE Virtual Reality 2003 , page 37 , Los Angeles , CA . [ 128 ] Spante , M . , Heldal , I . , Axelsson , A . S . , and Schroeder , R . ( 2003 ) . Is there a trade - off between presence and copresence ? Presented at the 6th International Workshop on Presence , Aalborg , Denmark , October 6 - 8 . 34 [ 129 ] Ståhl , O . ( 1999 ) . Meetings for real - experiences from a series of vr - based project meetings . In VRST ’99 : Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Soft - ware and Technology , pages 164 – 165 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 130 ] Steed , A . and Parker , C . ( 2005 ) . Evaluating effectiveness of interaction techniques across immersive virtual environment systems . Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 14 ( 5 ) : ( in press ) . MIT Press . [ 131 ] Steed , A . , Roberts , D . , Schroeder , R . , and Heldal , I . ( 2005 ) . Interaction between users of immersion projection technology systems . Presented at HCI International 2005 , the 11th International Conference on Human Computer Interaction , Las Vegas . A . Steed , D . Roberts , R . Schroeder , I . Heldal , " Interaction Between Users of Immer - sion Projection Technology Systems " , HCI International 2005 , the 11th International Conference on Human Computer Interaction , 22 - 27 July 2005 , Las Vegas . [ 132 ] Steed , A . , Slater , M . , Sadagic , A . , Tromp , J . , and Bullock , A . ( 1999 ) . Leadership and collaboration in virtual environments . In IEEE Virtual Reality , pages 112 – 115 . IEEE Computer Society . [ 133 ] Steed , A . , Spante , M . , Schroeder , R . , Heldal , I . , and Axelsson , A . ( 2003 ) . Strangers and friends in caves : An exploratory study of collaboration in networked ipt systems for extended periods of time . In ACM SIGGRAPH 2003 Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics , Monterey , California , USA . [ 134 ] Streitz , N . , Prante , T . , Rd’˙z˝ker , C . , van Alphen , D . , Magerkurth , C . , Stenzel , R . , and Plewe , D . A . ( 2003 ) . Ambient displays and mobile devices for the creation of so - cial architectural spaces : Supporting informal communication and social awareness in organizations . In O’Hara , K . , Perry , M . , Churchill , E . , and Russell , D . , editors , Public and Situated Displays : Social and Interactional Aspects of Shared Display Technolo - gies , pages 387 – 409 . Kluwer . [ 135 ] Tan , D . S . , Gergle , D . , Scupelli , P . G . , and Pausch , R . ( 2004 ) . Physically large dis - plays improve path integration in 3d virtual navigation tasks . In CHI ’04 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 439 – 446 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 136 ] Tollmar , K . , Sandor , O . , and Schömer , A . ( 1996 ) . Supporting social awareness @ work design and experience . In CSCW ’96 : Proceedings of the 1996 ACM confer - ence on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pages 298 – 307 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 137 ] Trevor , J . , Koch , T . , and Woetzel , G . ( 1997 ) . Metaweb : Bringing synchronous groupware to the world wide web . In John F . Hughes , Wolfgang Prinz , K . S . , editor , Proceedings of the Fifth European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pages 65 – 80 . Kluwer Academic Publishers . [ 138 ] Tyndiuk , F . , Lespinet - Najib , V . , Thomas , G . , and Schlick , C . ( 2004 ) . Impact of large displays on virtual reality task performance . In AFRIGRAPH ’04 : Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Computer Graphics , Virtual Reality , Visualisation and Interaction in Africa , pages 61 – 65 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . 35 [ 139 ] Vertegaal , R . ( 1999 ) . The gaze groupware system : Mediating joint attention in multiparty communication and collaboration . In CHI ’99 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 294 – 301 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 140 ] Watts , J . C . , Woods , D . D . , Corban , J . M . , Patterson , E . S . , Kerr , R . L . , and Hicks , L . C . ( 1996 ) . Voice loops as cooperative aids in space shuttle mission control . In CSCW ’96 : Proceedings of the 1996 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pages 48 – 56 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 141 ] Wilson , P . ( 1991 ) . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : An Introduction . In - tellect Books , Oxford , England Norwell , MA . [ 142 ] Wolff , R . , Roberts , D . , and Otto , O . ( 2004 ) . A study of event trafﬁc during the shared manipulation of objects within collaborative virtual environments . Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 13 ( 3 ) : 251 – 262 . [ 143 ] Yamaashi , K . , Cooperstock , J . R . , Narine , T . , and Buxton , W . ( 1996 ) . Beating the limitations of camera - monitor mediated telepresence with extra eyes . In CHI ’96 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 50 – 57 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 144 ] Yang , R . , Nashel , A . , and Towles , H . ( 2004 ) . Interactive 3d teleconferencing with user - adaptive views . In ETP ’04 : Proceedings of the 2004 ACM SIGMM Workshop on Effective Telepresence , pages 50 – 51 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 145 ] Yankelovich , N . , Walker , W . , Roberts , P . , Wessler , M . , Kaplan , J . , and Provino , J . ( 2004 ) . Meeting central : Making distributed meetings more effective . In CSCW ’04 : Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pages 419 – 428 , New York , NY , USA . ACM Press . [ 146 ] Zhai , S . and Milgram , P . ( 1992 ) . Human - robot synergism and virtual telerobotic control . Published in Proc . Annual Meeting of Human Factors Association of Canada . [ 147 ] Zhao , S . ( 2003 ) . Toward a taxonomy of copresence . Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 12 ( 5 ) : 445 – 455 . 36