Neuron Article Deafening Drives Cell - Type - Speciﬁc Changes to Dendritic Spines in a Sensorimotor Nucleus Important to Learned Vocalizations Katherine A . Tschida 1 and Richard Mooney 1 , * 1 Department of Neurobiology , Duke University School of Medicine , Durham , NC 27710 , USA * Correspondence : mooney @ neuro . duke . edu DOI 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2011 . 12 . 038 SUMMARY Hearing loss prevents vocal learning and causes learned vocalizations to deteriorate , but how vocali - zation - related auditory feedback acts on neural circuits that control vocalization remains poorly understood . We deafened adult zebra ﬁnches , which rely on auditory feedback to maintain their learned songs , to test the hypothesis that deafening modiﬁes synapses on neurons in a sensorimotor nucleus important to song production . Longitudinal in vivo imaging revealed that deafening selectively decreased the size and stability of dendritic spines on neurons that provide input to a striatothalamic pathway important to audition - dependent vocal plasticity , and changes in spine size preceded and predicted subsequent vocal degradation . Moreover , electrophysiological recordings from these neurons showed that structural changes were accompanied by functional weakening of both excitatory and inhib - itory synapses , increased intrinsic excitability , and changes in spontaneous action potential output . These ﬁndings shed light on where and how auditory feedback acts within sensorimotor circuits to shape learned vocalizations . INTRODUCTION Auditory feedback is critical for learning and maintaining complex motor skills ranging from musical performance to speech . For example , hearing loss prevents speech learning in children and degrades speech in adults ( Petitto , 1993 ; Wald - stein , 1990 ) . Despite the central role of auditory feedback in these vocal processes , where and how auditory feedback acts on neural circuits for vocal learning and maintenance remain poorly understood . Birdsong provides a highly tractable system for understanding the neural mechanisms by which auditory feedback affects vocalization . Juvenile songbirds use auditory feedback to learn their songs ( Konishi , 1965 ; Marler , 1970 ; Scharff and Nottebohm , 1991 ) , and the adults of some species use feedback to maintain stable songs ( Leonardo and Konishi , 1999 ; Nordeen and Nordeen , 1992 ) . Indeed , deafening adult zebra ﬁnches , which sing highly stereotyped songs , causes the spectral and temporal features of their songs to degrade over days to weeks ( Horita et al . , 2008 ; Lombardino and Nottebohm , 2000 ; Nordeen and Nordeen , 1992 ) . Thus , the stereotypy of adult song enables precise quantiﬁcation of the vocal effects of deafening , and the delayed effects of deafening on adult song allow for resulting neural changes to be temporally correlated with either initial removal of feedback or later changes to the vocal pattern . Songbirds are also advantageous for studying how feedback affects vocalization because the neural circuits for singing ( i . e . , the song system ) are well described . Although feedback must act on the song system to affect vocalization , the sites of this sensorimotor interaction remain unclear . One potential site of interaction is the song system nucleus HVC , which is necessary for singing ( Nottebohm et al . , 1976 ) , contains neurons that exhibit precisely time - locked activity when the bird is producing or passively listening to song ( Fujimoto et al . , 2011 ; Hahnloser et al . , 2002 : Prather et al . , 2008 ) and is the only song system nucleus known to receive direct projections from auditory areas ( Bauer et al . , 2008 ; Cardin et al . , 2005 ; Coleman and Mooney , 2004 ; Vates et al . , 1996 ) . Moreover , HVC includes two projection neuron ( PN ) types , one ( HVC RA ) that innervates the song premo - tor nucleus RA , and another ( HVC X ) that provides auditory and song motor - related input to the anterior forebrain pathway ( AFP ) , a striatothalamic circuit necessary for audition - dependent vocal plasticity in adult zebra ﬁnches ( Andalman and Fee , 2009 ; Brainard and Doupe , 2000 ; Williams and Mehta , 1999 ) . These features advance HVC PNs , and particularly HVC X neurons , as sites where feedback - related information could access circuitry important for song learning and maintenance . Despite the attractiveness of this idea , disrupting feedback with singing - triggered noise , which can drive song degradation over hours or days , fails to alter the singing - related activity of HVC X neurons , at least over tens of minutes ( Kozhevnikov and Fee , 2007 ; Prather et al . , 2008 ) . Interestingly , feedback perturba - tion in zebra ﬁnches immediately alters the singing - related activity of neurons that supply direct or indirect auditory input to HVC ( Keller and Hahnloser , 2009 ; Lei and Mooney , 2010 ) and , in Bengalese ﬁnches , can acutely suppress the singing - related activity of putative HVC interneurons ( Sakata and Brainard , 2008 ) , some of which may provide inhibitory input to HVC X neurons ( Mooney and Prather , 2005 ) . These different ﬁndings could be reconciled by a model in which HVC X neurons accumulate feedback information slowly ( hours to days ) and 1028 Neuron 73 , 1028 – 1039 , March 8 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . where feedback - driven changes in these cells ﬁrst appear as a subtle modiﬁcation of synaptic input , rather than changes in action potential output . Testing this model requires a way of longitudinally monitoring synapses on identiﬁed neurons before and after manipulation of auditory feedback changes song output , a goal currently impractical to achieve using electrophys - iological methods . In vivo , multiphoton imaging of ﬂuorescently labeled neurons can resolve individual dendritic spines , which are postsynaptic components of excitatory synapses in the vertebrate brain ( De Robertis and Bennett , 1955 ; Palay , 1956 ) , and this method has been used in a variety of longitudinal studies to measure experi - ence - dependent changes to synapses ( for reviews , see Alvarez and Sabatini , 2007 , and Holtmaat and Svoboda , 2009 ) . Recently , this method has also been used to show that auditory experience of a vocal model stabilizes and enlarges HVC dendritic spines in juvenile songbirds over a period of days ( Roberts et al . , 2010 ) , advancing it as a suitable method for detecting relatively slow feedback - related changes to synapses in the HVC of adult song - birds . Here , we used longitudinal in vivo two - photon imaging of dendritic spines in deafened adult zebra ﬁnches to test the idea that synapses on HVC PNs are sensitive to changes in audi - tory feedback . RESULTS Deafening Causes a Cell - Type - Speciﬁc Decrease in the Size of Dendritic Spines in HVC To label and identify HVC projection neurons for in vivo imaging , a GFP - lentivirus was injected into HVC , and differently colored retrograde tracers were injected into the two downstream targets of HVC , the striatal region Area X and the song premotor nucleus RA , in young adult male zebra ﬁnches ( Figure 1A and see Figure S1A available online ; 80 to 150 days posthatch ( dph ) , mean age was 97 ± 5 days , all reported errors are SEM unless otherwise noted ) . Birds were maintained on a reverse day - night cycle and imaging sessions were conducted during the birds’ subjective nighttimes , to minimize interference with singing behavior ( 2 sessions per night separated by a 2 hr interval ) . Images were obtained through a cranial window and collection of imaging data was restricted to neurons with dendritic spines , because both populations of HVC PNs are spinous ( Mooney , 2000 ) . Neurons were identiﬁed as either HVC X or HVC RA cells by the presence of blue or red retrograde label or , in the absence of retrograde label , by the measurement of soma size , which differed signiﬁcantly for the two PN types ( Figures 1A and S1B ) . After collecting 1 – 2 nights of baseline imaging data , birds were deafened by bilateral removal of the cochleae , and data collection was continued as long as possible ( 13 birds were imaged for an average of 7 . 2 ± 4 . 1 nights postdeafening ) . An initial assessment was made of the effects of deafening on the size of spines in HVC PNs , because changes in spine size often correlate with functional changes in synaptic strength ( Kopec et al . , 2006 ; Matsuzaki et al . , 2004 ; Okamoto et al . , 2004 ; Roberts et al . , 2010 ; Zhou et al . , 2004 ) . Size measurements were made from spines that were maintained across two nights of imaging ( over a 24 hr interval ) , and a size index was calculated for each measured spine ( time 24 size / time 0 size ) , with values greater than 1 indicating an increase in size and values less than 1 indicating a decrease in size . Prior to deafening , spines in HVC X neurons tended to increase slightly in size , while spines in HVC RA neurons tended not to change in size over 24 hr ( size index = 1 . 07 ± 0 . 03 for HVC X neurons : 106 spines , 10 cells , 9 birds ; size index = 1 . 00 ± 0 . 02 for HVC RA neurons : 94 spines , 9 cells , 8 birds ; p = 0 . 05 for difference between cell types , Mann - Whitney U test ) . Interestingly , comparing spine size A C B Figure 1 . Deafening Causes a Cell - Type - Speciﬁc Decrease in the Size of Dendritic Spines in HVC X Neurons ( A ) Examples of a lentivirally labeled HVC RA neuron ( top , arrowhead ) and HVC X neuron ( bottom ) , double - labeled with red and blue retrograde tracers , respectively . Scale bars , 20 m m . ( B ) Representative images showing spine size measure - ments ( see Experimental Procedures ) from an HVC X neuronbeforeandafterdeafening . Spinestendtoincrease insizeover24hrintervalspriortodeafening ( sizeindex > 1 ) and decrease in size following deafening ( size index < 1 ) . Scale bar , 5 m m . Note that image contrast has been enhanced for ﬁgure presentation ; adjustments to bright - ness and contrast were not made to images used for data analysis . Although the size of all clearly visible spines was scored , for clarity , the scores for only a few representative spines are indicated in this and subsequent ﬁgures . ( C ) Deafening causes a cell - type - speciﬁc decrease in spine size index in HVC X neurons ( p = 0 . 03 , Wilcoxon signed - ranks test ) but not in HVC RA neurons ( p = 0 . 67 ) . Numbers in parentheses indicate the total number of each PN type analyzed . See also Figure S1 . Neuron Imaging Deafening - Induced Changes to HVC Spines Neuron 73 , 1028 – 1039 , March 8 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 1029 measurements made in a subset of these cells during the ﬁrst 24 hr time window to those obtained in the last 24 hr time window following deafening ( 7 - 8 nights postdeafening on average ) re - vealed that spine size index decreased signiﬁcantly following deafening in HVC X but not HVC RA neurons ( example images in Figure 1B ; group data in Figure 1C ; HVC X : average of 10 . 8 ± 0 . 3 spines scored per cell in each 24 hr comparison , total of 152 spines from 7 cells in 6 birds , p = 0 . 03 , Wilcoxon signed - ranks test ; HVC RA : average of 11 . 3 ± 0 . 4 spines scored per cell in each 24 hr comparison , total of 146 spines from 8 cells in 6 birds , p = 0 . 67 ) . Thus , deafening causes a cell - type - speciﬁc decrease in the size of spines of HVC X neurons . Decreases in HVC X Neuron Spine Size Precede and Predict Vocal Changes following Deafening Establishing when these structural changes occur relative to deafening - induced song degradation depends on detecting initially subtle vocal changes following deafening . To this end , we analyzed two spectral features , Wiener entropy and entropy variance ( EV ) , of each syllable in a bird’s song over time ( see Experimental Procedures ) . These parameters respectively measure the uniformity of a sound’s power spectrum and intra - syllabic transitions from tonal to broadband sounds ( Tcherni - chovski et al . , 2000 ) and were chosen because they remain stable in hearing adults ( Figure S2A ) , change in predictable directions following deafening ( Figure S2B ) , and were found to be the earliest spectral features that changed following deaf - ening ( data not shown ) . This analysis detected subtle but signif - icant effects of deafening on syllable spectral features in nearly all birds ( 18 / 19 ) within the ﬁrst 4 days that they sang following deafening , with (cid:1) 50 % ( 10 / 19 ) of birds showing signiﬁcant degradation over the ﬁrst day of singing after deafening ( Figures 2A and 2C ) . Notably , the changes we detected occur days to weeks earlier than those reported in previous studies ( Brainard and Doupe , 2000 ; Horita et al . , 2008 ; Lombardino and Notte - bohm , 2000 ; Nordeen and Nordeen , 1992 ) , demonstrating that this analysis method is extremely sensitive to early deafening - induced song changes . The number of days to onset of this subtle degradation was not predicted by the age of the bird ( Fig - ure 2C ) , although older birds sang a larger number of motifs before their songs degraded ( Figure 2D ; see Supplemental Experimental Procedures ) . Finally , the effects of deafening on syllable sequencing occurred later than spectral changes in all birds ( data not shown ; see Experimental Procedures ) , indicating that measurement of spectral features serves as the most reli - able early marker of deafening - induced song degradation . The onset of song degradation estimated in this manner was used to temporally align in vivo imaging data collected from different birds . To facilitate comparison between HVC X and HVC RA neurons and take into account different predeafening values of spine size index , each cell’s last predeafening size index value was used to normalize its subsequent size index values ( Figure S3A , left and middle panels ) , and these normal - ized values were pooled separately for the two cell types ( Figures 3A and S3A , right panel ) . Interestingly , these pooled compari - sons revealed that spine size index of HVC X neurons decreased prior to the onset of song degradation , whereas spine size index of HVC RA neurons did not change before or after songs began to degrade ( Figure 3A ; HVC X : average of 11 . 2 ± 0 . 4 spines scored per 24 hr comparison , total of 495 spines from 7 neurons A B D C Figure 2 . Analysis of Song Spectral Features Reveals that Signiﬁcant Song Degradation Occurs within Several Days after Deafening ( A ) Example of syllable - by - syllable analysis carried out for a bird whose song contains four syllables , A – D . Although syllable entropy and EV were both analyzed , only EV is shown for clarity . Song behavior is shown for two pre - deafening days ( (cid:3) 2 and 0 ) and postdeafening days 1 , 2 , 4 , and 9 . Red arrowhead indicates the ﬁrst syllable to undergo signiﬁcant spectral degradation ( syllable C , shown in red , deﬁned as onset of degradation using one - way ANOVA ) . ( B ) Representative spectrograms of the same song analyzedinA . SyllableC ( redbars ) underwentdegradation starting at 2 days postdeafening . EV values are included below each rendition of the syllable . Frequency range ( y axis ) , 0 . 4 – 9 kHz , scale bar ( white bar , bottom spectro - gram ) , 150 ms . ( C ) The onset of song degradation ( day of postdeafening song ) was not related to the age at which birds were deafened ( p = 0 . 82 , linear regression ) . ( D ) Older birds sang a larger number of motifs before their songs underwent signiﬁcant degradation ( p < 0 . 01 , linear regression ) . These data come from a subset of the birds analyzed in ( C ) ( 8 / 19 ) . See also Figure S2 . Neuron Imaging Deafening - Induced Changes to HVC Spines 1030 Neuron 73 , 1028 – 1039 , March 8 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . in 6 birds ; HVC RA : average of 11 . 0 ± 0 . 3 spines scored per 24 hr comparison , total of 428 spines from 8 neurons in 6 birds , time > 0 is postdegradation ) . Although we also attempted to assess whether changes in HVC X neuron spine size occurred prior to the onset of song degradation on a bird - by - bird basis , size index data from individual neurons were noisy ( Fig - ure S3A ) , and decreases in size index were rarely signiﬁcantly different from baseline for individual cells . In summary , deafening causes a cell - type - speciﬁc decrease in the size of spines in HVC X neurons that on average precedes the onset of song degradation . The ﬁnding that deafening - induced decreases in HVC X neuron spine size precede the onset of song degradation raises the possibility that spine size changes are predictive of subsequent changes in vocal behavior . To test this idea , we calculated the correlation between postdeafening HVC X spine size index measurements and the amount of song degradation that occurred on the following day of singing ( ‘‘day + 1 , ’’ measured as % change from baseline entropy or EV of the ﬁrst syllable to degrade ) . This comparison revealed a signiﬁcant positive corre - lation , indicating that larger decreases in spine size index preceded more severe song degradation ( Figure 4A ; R = 0 . 57 , p < 0 . 001 , linear regression ) . In contrast , no signiﬁcant correla - tions were observed between spine size index and behavior when similar comparisons were made to song behavior recorded on the day preceding the 24 hr size index measurement ( day (cid:3) 1 ) , the intervening day between the two nights of imaging ( day 0 ) , or greater than day + 1 ( Figure 4B ) . These ﬁndings support the idea that decreases in HVC X neuron spine size index predict subse - quent behavioral change with an (cid:1) 12 hr time lag , rather than accompanying or following vocal changes . Various control measurements ensured that decreases in HVC X neuron spine size index were unrelated to imaging meth - odology . First , decreases in HVC X spine size index were not due to effects of longitudinal imaging , because HVC X spine size index never underwent a signiﬁcant decrease in longitudi - nally imaged , age - matched hearing birds ( Figure 3B ; control HVC X : average of 9 . 5 ± 0 . 3 spines scored per 24 hr comparison , total of 95 spines from 4 cells in 4 birds ; control HVC RA : average of 9 . 6 ± 0 . 5 spines scored per 24 hr comparison , total of 77 spines from 3 cells in 3 birds ) . Second , decreases in HVC X size index were unrelated to variable sampling of dendritic branches over time ( Figure S3B ) , ruling out the possibility that the spatial variability in spine sampling could account for decreases in HVC X neuron spine size index . Finally , spine size decreased in slightly more than half of the individual spines ( 20 / 35 ) that were tracked for multiple nights following deafening ( average of A B Figure 3 . Deafening - Induced Decreases in Spine Size in HVC X Neurons Precede Song Degradation ( A ) Deafening causes a cell - type - speciﬁc decrease in HVC X spine size index that occurs prior to the onset of song degradation ( time > 0 is post - degradation ) . Data are grouped into 4 time bins ( 2 bins before onset of song degradation and 2 bins after ) , the average time of deafening is just prior to night (cid:3) 2 , and asterisks indicate a signiﬁcant difference ( p < 0 . 05 , two - factor ANOVA ) between the two PN types for a particular time bin . Numbers in parentheses indicate the total number of each PN type analyzed . ( B ) SpinesfromHVC X neuronsandHVC RA neuronsfromlongitudinallyimaged , age - matched control birds do not exhibit decreases in size index . See also Figure S3 . A B Figure 4 . Decreases in HVC X Spine Size Index Predict the Severity of Song Degradation on the Subsequent Day of Singing ( A ) Normalized spine size index measurements from HVC X neurons were compared to the amount of song degradation on the following day of singing ( day + 1 ) . The amount of song degradation on each day was deﬁned for each birdbycalculatingthepercentagedecreasefromthebaselinevalueofentropy or EV for the syllable that degraded ﬁrst . This comparison reveals that larger decreases in spine size index predict a larger magnitude of song degradation on the subsequent day ( p < 0 . 001 , linear regression ) . ( B ) Comparisons were made between spine size index measurements from HVC X neurons and the amount of song degradation on days preceding , intervening , or following the 24 hr size index measurement , and correlation coefﬁcients for those comparisons are plotted . Only comparison of spine size changes to the following day’s song degradation yielded a signiﬁcant rela - tionship . Neuron Imaging Deafening - Induced Changes to HVC Spines Neuron 73 , 1028 – 1039 , March 8 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 1031 6 . 6 ± 0 . 5 nights ) , indicating that decreases in sizeindex were also unrelated to variable sampling of individual dendritic spines ( Fig - ure S3C ) . Interestingly , the change in size for individual spines was negatively and signiﬁcantly correlated with their initial , pre - deafening size , suggesting that deafening preferentially weakens stronger excitatory synapses ( Figure S3C ; R = (cid:3) 0 . 44 , p < 0 . 01 , linear regression ) . A similar relationship was not observed for individual spines tracked from longitudinally imaged HVC X neurons in hearing birds ( i . e . , a smaller proportion of tracked spines decreased in size , and there was no relationship between initial spine size and subsequent change in size , R = (cid:3) 0 . 06 , p = 0 . 81 , data not shown ) . These various measurements are consistent with the idea that deafening selectively weakens synapses on HVC neurons that innervate a striatothalamic circuit necessary for audition - dependent vocal plasticity . Deafening Causes a Cell - Type - Speciﬁc Decrease in Spine Stability Because spine stability is a structural correlate of synaptic strength ( De Roo et al . , 2008 ; Engert and Bonhoeffer , 1999 ; Hofer et al . , 2009 ; Maletic - Savatic et al . , 1999 ; Na¨gerl et al . , 2004 ) that can change in concert with spine size ( Roberts et al . , 2010 ) , we also examined whether deafening destabilizes spines in HVC . Stable spines were deﬁned as those that were maintained over a 2 hr interval ( within night , see Experimental Procedures ) . Spine stability was relatively high in both cell types prior to deafening ( HVC X : 92 . 0 % ± 1 . 6 % spines stable over 2 hr , average of 56 ± 6 spines scored per 2 hr comparison , total of 731 spines from 13 cells in 8 birds ; HVC RA : 93 . 9 % ± 1 . 0 % spines stable over 2 hr , average of 79 ± 13 spines scored per 2 hr comparison , total of 789 spines from 10 cells in 7 birds ; p = 0 . 33 for difference between PN types , Mann - Whitney U test ) . However , tracking spine stability before and after deafening revealed that spine stability decreased in HVC X but not HVC RA neurons ( Figures 5A and 5B ; HVC X : average of 55 ± 6 spines scored per 2 hr comparison , total of 3 , 562 spines from 14 cells in 9 birds ; HVC RA : average of 63 ± 6 spines scored per 2 hr comparison , total of 3 , 217 spines from 12 cells in 8 birds ) . This destabilization reﬂected increases in spine gain and loss ( Fig - ure 5C ; both measures tended to increase , albeit nonsigniﬁ - cantly ) , consistent with our observation that deafening did not affect spine density in HVC X neurons ( data not shown ) . In contrast to the more rapid effects of deafening on spine size , however , deafening destabilized spines only after the onset of song degradation ( Figure 5B ) . Decreases in spine stability were not attributable to effects of longitudinal imaging , because HVC X neurons from longitudinally imaged , age - matched hearing birds never underwent a signiﬁ - cant decrease in spine stability ( Figure 5D ; control HVC X : average of 74 ± 13 spines scored per cell in each 2 hr compar - ison , total of 1 , 964 spines from 6 cells in 4 birds ; control HVC RA : average of 51 ± 7 spines scored per cell in each 2 hr comparison , total of 1 , 168 spines from 7 cells in 4 birds ) . Further , although there was a slight negative relationship between the variability of dendritic sampling and levels of spine stability ( i . e . , postdeaf - ening measurements including dendritic segments that were not scored on the predeafening , baseline night tended to have lower stability values ) , subsequent resampling of the data to include A B D C Figure 5 . Deafening Causes a Cell - Type - Speciﬁc Decrease in Spine Stability that Follows the Onset of Song Degradation ( A ) Representative images showing spine stability measurements from an HVC X neuronbeforeandafterdeafening . ‘‘S’’indicatesspinesthatwerestable over 2hr , ‘‘ + ’’indicates spines that weregained , and ‘‘ (cid:3) ’’indicates spinesthat were lost . Although the stability of all clearly visible spines was scored , for clarity , the scores for only a few representative spines are indicated in this ﬁgure . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( B ) Deafening causes a cell - type - speciﬁc decrease in spine stability in HVC X neurons that occurs after the onset of song degradation ( time > 0 is post - degradation ) . Data are grouped into four time bins , the average time of deaf - ening is just prior to night (cid:3) 2 , and asterisks indicate a signiﬁcant difference ( p < 0 . 05 , two - factor ANOVA ) between the two PN types for a particular time bin . Numbers in parentheses indicate the total number of each PN type analyzed . ( C ) Spine gain and spine loss both tend to increase in HVC X neurons following deafening . ( D ) Spines from HVC X and HVC RA neurons in longitudinally imaged , age - matched controls do not exhibit decreases in stability . See also Figure S4 . Neuron Imaging Deafening - Induced Changes to HVC Spines 1032 Neuron 73 , 1028 – 1039 , March 8 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . only postdeafening measurements in which > 50 % of the dendritic segments sampled were the same as those sampled in the baseline measurement did not support the idea that vari - ability in spatial sampling accounts for decreased spine stability in HVC X neurons ( Figures S4A and S4B ) . Thus , deafening decreases HVC X spine size and stability , which are two structural correlates of synaptic weakening ( Na¨gerl et al . , 2004 ; Okamoto et al . , 2004 ; Zhou et al . , 2004 ) , but these structural changes differ in when they ﬁrst appear relative to the onset of song degradation . We also conducted a series of additional measurements to ensure that the effects of deafening on spine size and stability in HVC X neurons were not due to decreased levels of singing following deafening . First , in one bird that did not sing for the ﬁrst week following deafening , a single HVC X neuron that we imaged failed to undergo decreases in spine size and stability ( Fig - ure S4C ) . Thus , even a marked decrease in singing rate was not sufﬁcient to decrease HVC X neuron spine size and stability . Second , the correlation between HVC X neuron spine size index measurements from each bird and the total number of motifs sung during the intervening day of behavior revealed a small , nonsigniﬁcant negative correlation ( i . e . , following deafening , HVC X neuron spine size index was lower on days that birds sang more ; data not shown ) . Third , we observed that some birds did not sing for the ﬁrst 1 – 2 days following the deafening surgery . However , the mean spine size index of HVC X neurons measured across postdeafening days when birds didn’t sing was not signif - icantly different from the mean spine size index measured across baseline , predeafening 24 hr periods ( mean HVC X size index across postdeafening days without song , 1 . 03 ± 0 . 04 ; mean size index during predeafening baseline , 1 . 07 ± 0 . 03 ; p = 0 . 59 , Mann - Whitney U test ) . Additionally , alignment of the HVC X spine size index measurements with the ﬁrst day of postdeafening song ( as opposed to alignment with the onset of song degrada - tion , as shown in Figure 3A ) revealed that decreases in HVC X spine size index did not occur until after singing resumed following deafening ( data not shown ) . Finally , longitudinally imaged birds frequently exhibited decreased singing rates following the windowing surgery . Although this decrease was shorter - lived and reduced in magnitude as compared to birds that were also deafened ( data not shown ) , HVC X neurons imaged in these birds never showed decreases in spine size or stability ( Figures 3B and 5D ) . Thus , decreased singing rates cannot account for the structural changes to HVC X neuron dendritic spines following deafening . Deafening Functionally Weakens Synapses on HVC X Neurons To determine whether deafening - induced structural changes to HVC X dendritic spines reﬂect functional changes in the strength of excitatory synapses on these neurons , sharp intracellular current - clamp recordings were made from HVC X neurons in anesthetized adult male zebra ﬁnches several days after deaf - ening , within the time range when structural changes to HVC X dendritic spines were observed ( 16 HVC X cells from 5 birds , mean age of 97 dph , ranging from 88 – 114 dph , recorded on average at 2 . 8 ± 0 . 8 days postdeafening ) . Similar recordings were also carried out in a second group of age - matched , hearing control birds ( 22 HVC X cells from 14 birds , mean age of 105 dph , ranging from 88 – 143 dph ) . Tonic hyperpolarizing current injected into the impaled cell facilitated measurement of depolarizing postsynaptic potentials ( dPSPs ) without contamination from action potentials ( Figure 6A , example traces shown in top panel , V m = (cid:3) 87 . 5 ± 2 . 1 mV in deafened group , (cid:3) 85 . 8 ± 1 . 9 in control group , p = 0 . 78 for difference between groups , Mann - Whitney U test ) . Deafening signiﬁcantly decreased the amplitude but not the frequency of spontaneous dPSPs recorded in HVC X neurons ( amplitude : Figure 6A , lower left ; p < 0 . 0001 , KS test ; frequency : lower right , p = 0 . 30 , Mann - Whitney U test ) . The mean decrease in median dPSP amplitude ( 16 . 4 % ) was compa - rable to the mean decrease in HVC X spine size index observed between 1 and 4 nights postdeafening ( 11 . 2 % ) , consistent with the interpretation that deafening weakens excitatory synapses on HVC X neurons . However , because cells were hyperpolarized to values near or beyond the reversal potential for inhibitory synaptic currents ( (cid:1)(cid:3) 85 mV ; evidenced here by the lack of hyperpolarizing PSPs ) , the dPSPs we measured likely represent a mix of excitatory and inhibitory synaptic events , and thus one or both types of synapses may be affected by deafening . To resolve the effects of deafening on excitatory and inhibitory synapses on HVC X neurons , we made visualized whole - cell voltage - clamp recordings from retrogradely labeled HVC X neurons in brain slices prepared from 50 – 60 dph male zebra ﬁnches ( Figure 7A ; mean age was 53 ± 0 . 6 dph , 3 ± 0 . 0 days postdeafening ; 6 HVC X neurons from 3 control birds ; 6 HVC X from 2 deafened birds ; younger animals were used to ensure viable recordings ) . Recordings were made in pharmacological conditions that blocked voltage - gated sodium and potassium currents and at two different holding potentials ( (cid:3) 70 mV and 0 mV ) to isolate spontaneous miniature excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic currents ( mEPSCs and mIPSCs , respectively ; see Experimental Procedures ) . These measurements revealed that deafening decreased the amplitude of both mEPSCs and mIPSCs ( Figure 7 ; KS test : p < 0 . 01 for mEPSCs , p < 0 . 0001 for mIPSCs ; Mann - Whitney U test : p = 0 . 02 for mEPSCs , mean decrease in median value was 8 % ; p < 0 . 0001 for mIPSCs , mean decrease in median value was 7 % ) . In contrast , deafening had no effect on the frequency of mEPSCs or mIPSCs ( data not shown ) . These data from brain slices closely parallel those from in vivo current - clamp recordings , providing further evidence that synapses on HVC X neurons are weakened but not lost following deafening . Furthermore , the decrease in mEPSC amplitude following deafening was more pronounced for larger events ( Fig - ure 7B , left ) , consistent with our observation that larger spines were more likely to decrease in size following deafening ( Fig - ure S3C ) . These ﬁndings further support the idea that deafening weakens excitatory synapses on HVC X neurons and also reveal an effect of deafening on inhibitory synapses on these cells . In other systems , neurons have been shown to homeostati - cally modulate their intrinsic membrane properties and excit - ability in response to diminished synaptic input and sensory deafferentation ( for reviews , see Turrigiano and Nelson , 2004 , and Walmsley et al . , 2006 ) . To assess whether intrinsic proper - ties of HVC X neurons change following deafening , sharp intracel - lular current - clamp recordings were made from HVC X neurons in brain slices prepared at one week postdeafening , when both Neuron Imaging Deafening - Induced Changes to HVC Spines Neuron 73 , 1028 – 1039 , March 8 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 1033 structural and functional synaptic changes were evident . An additional set of recordings was conducted in brain slices prepared from age - matched , hearing control birds ( 33 HVC X neurons recorded in slices from 5 deafened birds , 93 – 98 dph , and 30 HVC X neurons recorded in slices from 4 control birds , 89 – 97 dph ) . Families of negative and positive currents were injected into neurons , and the resulting changes in membrane potential were used to calculate various intrinsic properties ( see Experimental Procedures ) . These measurements revealed that HVC X neurons from deafened birds exhibited several signif - icant changes associated with increased excitability , including increased action potential frequency in response to current injection , decreased action potential duration , decreased after hyperpolarization time - to - peak and increased resting mem - brane potential ( Figure S5 ) . However , deafening did not affect the input resistance of HVC X neurons ( 64 . 5 ± 4 . 7 M U for control A B Figure 6 . Deafening Decreases the Amplitude of Spontaneous Synaptic Activity and Alters Sponta - neous Action Potential Activity in HVC X Neurons ( A ) Top : Example traces of depolarizing postsynaptic potentials ( dPSPs ) from HVC X neurons recorded in current - clamp conﬁguration in anesthetized hearing control and deafened birds . Deafening drives a signiﬁcant decrease in the amplitude of spontaneous dPSPs ( bottom left , p < 0 . 0001 , KS test ) but has no signiﬁcant effect on dPSP frequency ( bottom right , p = 0 . 30 , Mann - Whitney U test ) . ( B ) Top : Example traces of spontaneous action potential activity from HVC X neurons recorded in anesthetized hearing control and deafened birds . Deafening drives a signiﬁcantdecreaseinISIduration ( bottomleft , p < 0 . 0001 , KStest ) buthasnosigniﬁcanteffectonmeanspontaneous action potential frequency ( bottom right , p = 0 . 25 , Mann - Whitney U test ) . Synaptic activity was measured while injecting tonic hyperpolarizing current into the recorded cell ; actionpotentialactivitywasmeasuredwithoutcurrent injection . See also Figure S5 . HVC X , 75 . 0 ± 5 . 1 M U for deafened HVC X , p = 0 . 17 , Mann - Whitney U test ) , a ﬁnding that , along with the lack of any effect of deafening on spine density , dPSP frequency , and mEPSC and mIPSC frequencies , suggests that deafening does not signiﬁcantly reduce the number of synapses on these cells . Changes in intrinsic excitability could poten - tially translate changes in synaptic strength to changes in action potential output . Consistent with this idea , sharp intracellular current - clamp recordings made in anesthetized male zebra ﬁnches revealed a signiﬁcant decrease in inter - spike intervals ( ISIs ) in HVC X neurons and a trend toward increased mean spontaneous action potential ﬁring rates ( Figure 6B ; ISIs , lower left , p < 0 . 0001 , KS test ; mean spike rates , lower right , p = 0 . 25 , Mann - Whitney U test ; 25 HVC X cells from 15 hearing control birds , 18 HVC X from 5 deafened birds ) . In summary , we observed structural changes to dendritic spines , functional weakening of excitatory and inhibitory synapses , increased intrinsic excitability , and alterations of the spontaneous action potential output of HVC X neurons following deafening . Taken together , these structural and functional changes indicate that the synapses onto and the action potential output of HVC X neurons are sensitive to deafening . DISCUSSION This study shows that deafening modiﬁes synapses on HVC neurons that provide input to a striatothalamic pathway impor - tant to audition - dependent vocal plasticity . Longitudinal , in vivo imaging of dendritic spines revealed that deafening induces two structural correlates of synaptic weakening in HVC X neurons , namely decreased spine size and stability . In contrast , deafening Neuron Imaging Deafening - Induced Changes to HVC Spines 1034 Neuron 73 , 1028 – 1039 , March 8 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . has no effect on spines on HVC RA neurons , the other HVC PN type . A sensitive method of behavioral analysis determined that spine shrinkage precedes deafening - induced vocal change and that the magnitude of these structural changes could be used to predict the severity of subsequent song degradation . Importantly , spine changes could not be attributed to the effects of longitudinal imaging , imaging methodology , or decreased singing rate following deafening . In vivo sharp electrode current - clamp recordings and in vitro whole - cell voltage - clamp recordings demonstrated that deafening weakens excitatory and inhibitory synapses in this same cell type over a similar time course . Finally , these structural and functional changes to synapses are accompanied by increased intrinsic excitability and alterations to the spontaneous action potential output of HVC X neurons . There are three important aspects to the current study . First , while previous studies in songbirds ( Keller and Hahnloser , 2009 ; Lei and Mooney , 2010 ) and marmosets ( Eliades and Wang , 2003 , 2005 , 2008 ) have detected neurons in auditory areas that are sensitive to perturbation of vocalization - related auditory feedback , this study provides the ﬁrst observation of sensitivity to deafening in any song sensorimotor area and , to our knowledge , offers the ﬁrst description of the synaptic effects of hearing loss in sensorimotor neurons important to vocal control . Second , deafening selectively affects spines on HVC X neurons , and changes in spine size precede and predict song degradation , implicating HVC X neurons in the processing of auditory feedback - related information . Third , structural changes to dendritic spines were accompanied by functional changes in synaptic strength , intrinsic excitability , and spontaneous action potential output of HVC X neurons , raising the possibility that deafening ultimately affects the singing - related action potential output of these cells . Taken together , these ﬁndings indicate that HVC X neurons are sensitive to deafening and implicate the input stage to the AFP in the processing of feedback - related information . Synapses on HVC X Neurons Are Sensitive to Deafening While previous studies employing chronic electrophysiological recordings failed to detect feedback - driven changes in the singing - related activity of HVC X neurons ( Kozhevnikov and Fee , 2007 ; Prather et al . , 2008 ) , in vivo imaging permitted detec - tion of subtle changes in HVC X dendritic spines within the ﬁrst few days of deafening . By tracking dendritic spines on single HVC neurons , it was possible to characterize the cell - type speciﬁcity and time course of deafening - induced changes in synapses with a degree of precision that would be difﬁcult to achieve using electrophysiological methods . However , these ﬁndings do not exclude the possibility that other cells and synapses within HVC are also affected by deafening . Indeed , a previous study in Bengalese ﬁnches found that the action potential output of putative HVC interneurons changes subtly and rapidly ( (cid:1) 20 ms ) following acute feedback perturbation ( Sakata and Brainard , 2008 ) , raising the possibility that synapses on this cell type are sensitive to deafening in zebra ﬁnches . Further , although the structural and functional measurements performed here support the idea that deafening weakens excitatory and inhibitory synapses on HVC X neurons , inhibitory synapses may also change on HVC RA neurons following deaf - ening . Finally , our ﬁndings support the idea that deafening - induced changes propagate into HVC but do not exclude the possibility that other song system neurons are sensitive to feed - back perturbation . Regardless of these additional possibilities , the fact that structural changes to dendritic spines occurred only in HVC X neurons supports the idea that synapses on this cell type are especially sensitive to deafening . Deafening Reduces the Size of Spines in HVC X Neurons Prior to Song Degradation The ﬁnding that deafening - induced changes in HVC X spine size index occur prior to the onset of song degradation links the observed changes in HVC spines to perturbation of auditory feedback rather than to changes in vocal output . Notably , the method of behavioral analysis employed here allowed us to detect changes to song days to weeks earlier than in prior deaf - ening studies ( Brainard and Doupe , 2000 ; Horita et al . , 2008 ; Lombardino and Nottebohm , 2000 ; Nordeen and Nordeen , 1992 ) , indicating that this analysis is sensitive to early changes to song . Additionally , the ﬁnding that deafening drives subtle song degradation within several days in older birds contrasts with an earlier study ( Lombardino and Nottebohm , 2000 ) and further supports the idea that the analysis used here is sensitive A B Figure7 . DeafeningDecreasestheAmplitudeofBothExcitatoryand Inhibitory Miniature Synaptic Currents in HVC X Neurons ( A ) Left : Confocal images of a retrogradely labeled HVC X neuron that was re - corded in whole - cell voltage - clamp conﬁguration in vitro and ﬁlled with Alexa 488 ( green ) . ArrowheadsinthelowerimageindicateretrogradelylabeledHVC X neurons ( red ) ; retrograde labeling underwent bleaching over the course of the experiment . Scalebar , 20 m m . Right : RepresentativemIPSCsandmEPSCsare shown for HVC X neurons recorded in brain slices from control and deafened birds . ( B ) Deafening signiﬁcantly decreases the amplitude of mEPSCs ( left ) and mIPSCs ( right ) in HVC X neurons ( KS test : p < 0 . 01 for mEPSCs , p < 0 . 0001 for mIPSCs ) . Numbers in parentheses indicate the total number of HVC X neurons analyzed in each experimental group . Neuron Imaging Deafening - Induced Changes to HVC Spines Neuron 73 , 1028 – 1039 , March 8 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 1035 to early deafening - induced changes to song . Finally , following deafening , decreases in HVC X neuron spine size were predictive of subsequent song degradation , supporting the idea that these structural changes were driven by altered auditory experience , rather than degradation of vocal performance . Central Effects of Deafening in Other Systems Although prior studies had not resolved synaptic level conse - quences of deafening in sensorimotor areas important to vocal control , previous studies in both humans and animal models indicate that hearing loss alters synaptic transmission in the auditory cortex . For example , imaging studies in humans reveal that deaf or hearing - impaired subjects exhibit larger ratios of gray to white matter in auditory cortical areas ( Emmorey et al . , 2003 ; Kim et al . , 2009 ; Shibata , 2007 ; Smith et al . , 2011 ) , sug - gesting that deafening reduces myelinated axonal connections in the auditory cortex . Additionally , auditory cortical neurons in deafened animals display increased levels of spontaneous activity and excitability ( Noren˜a and Eggermont , 2003 ; Seki and Eggermont , 2003 ; Kotak et al . , 2005 ) and decreased ampli - tudes of spontaneous and evoked inhibitory currents ( Kotak et al . , 2008 ) , consistent with the idea that hearing loss alters the balance of excitation and inhibition in the auditory cortex ( for a review , see Sanes and Bao , 2009 ) . Notably , this study is the ﬁrst demonstration that deafening alters synaptic strength and intrinsic excitability within a sensori - motor area important to learned vocal control , providing a frame - work to begin to understand how changes in auditory feedback drive changes in vocal output . More broadly , damage to the basal ganglia in adult humans can impair speech prosody , artic - ulation , and comprehension ( Damasio et al . , 1982 ) . In this light , the current ﬁnding that deafening drives changes to dendritic spines in HVC X neurons prior to the onset of song degradation suggests that altered auditory feedback permeates relatively quickly into the song sensorimotor network . Likewise , the effects of hearing loss in humans on sensorimotor neurons that control speech learning and production , including corticostriatal circuits , may be relatively rapid , even when speech deterioration is delayed in onset . Comparisons to Other Forms of Sensory Deprivation The deafening - induced spine changes in HVC observed here share many similarities with the effects of sensory deprivation on spine dynamics in other sensory domains . In the mouse somatosensory system , whisker trimming decreases the stability of dendritic spines in barrel cortex , by driving the loss of spines that were previously stable and stabilizing newly - formed spines ( Holtmaat et al . , 2006 ; Trachtenberg et al . , 2002 ) . In the visual system , focal lesions of the retina can dramatically decrease levels of spine stability , leading to an almost complete replace - ment of dendritic spines in the deafferented region of cortex ( Keck et al . , 2008 ) . Additionally , previous studies in barrel cortex found that whisker trimming has more pronounced effects on large , stable spines ( Holtmaat et al . , 2006 ; Zuo et al . , 2005 ) , similar to our ﬁnding that larger spines on HVC X neurons were more likely to shrink following deafening . Thus , the decreases in spine size and stability in HVC X neurons observed following deafening support the idea that increased spine dynamics leading to synaptic reorganization are an effect of sensory depri - vation that extends to sensorimotor as well as sensory brain regions . Direct versus Indirect Effects of Auditory Feedback Although the current set of experiments cannot resolve the iden - tity of the excitatory synapses on HVC X neurons that reorganize following deafening , several scenarios could account for the observed structural and functional changes to this cell type following deafening . First , excitatory synaptic inputs from audi - tory areas may relay feedback - related information selectively to HVC X neurons , and silencing these inputs by deafening could trigger changes to HVC X dendritic spines . One major source of auditory input to HVC is the sensorimotor nucleus interfacialis ( NIf ) ( Cardin and Schmidt , 2004 ; Coleman and Mooney , 2004 ) . However , NIf lesions do not trigger song degradation in adult zebra ﬁnches ( Cardin et al . , 2005 ) and do not block song degra - dation driven by vocal nerve cut ( Roy and Mooney , 2009 ) , a process that is thought to result from distorted auditory feed - back ( Williams and McKibben , 1992 ) . Additionally , strong and selective auditory responses persist in HVC following NIf lesions , indicating that HVC receives an alternate source of auditory information ( Roy and Mooney , 2009 ) . Interestingly , the caudal mesopallium ( CM ) , a secondary auditory telencephalic area , supplies an independent source of auditory drive to HVC and contains neurons whose singing - related activity is sensitive in real - time to feedback perturbation ( Bauer et al . , 2008 ; Keller and Hahnloser , 2009 ) . Although these ﬁndings hint that CM could convey auditory feedback information to HVC , a causal role for CM in feedback - dependent song degradation remains to be established , and the cell - type speciﬁcity of its projections to HVC await description . Thus , investigating the circuit basis for the cell - type selectivity of deafening - induced changes in HVC , with a particular focus on CM , is an important future direction . Another possibility is that HVC interneurons , which may act as acute sensors of auditory feedback ( Sakata and Brainard , 2008 ) , alter their singing - related activity immediately upon deafening and , via their inhibitory connections with HVC X cells , indirectly drive changes to excitatory synapses . In fact , whisker plucking in rodents can drive sprouting of inhibitory inputs from deprived to non - deprived regions of barrel cortex , followed by reciprocal sprouting of excitatory inputs from nondeprived to deprived areas , consistent with such a sequential process ( Marik et al . , 2010 ) . Similarly , retinal lesions drive a decrease in the density of inhibitory boutons in the visual cortex ( Keck et al . , 2011 ) that precedes increases in spine dynamics of excitatory cortical cells ( Keck et al . , 2008 ) . The idea that deafening , like other forms of sensory deprivation , could induce rapid alterations in inhibition followed by slower changes in excitatory synapses on HVC X neurons is especially appealing given that acute feedback perturbation alters the singing - related action potential output of putative interneurons in HVC of Bengalese ﬁnches ( Sakata and Brainard , 2008 ) . Although we have demonstrated that deafening alters the strength of both excitatory and inhibitory synapses on HVC X neurons , a full test of these ideas would require assessing the relative timing of the effects of feedback perturbation on excitatory and inhibitory inputs to HVC X neurons Neuron Imaging Deafening - Induced Changes to HVC Spines 1036 Neuron 73 , 1028 – 1039 , March 8 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . and investigating whether experimentally manipulating levels of inhibition can modify excitatory synapses on HVC X neurons . Finally , given the insensitivity of HVC X singing - related activity to feedback perturbation over short timescales , it remains plau - sible that HVC does not receive a direct feedback signal . In this scenario , feedback information would be acutely processed by areas upstream of HVC and transformed into a modulatory signal that acts more slowly to affect excitatory and inhibitory synapses on HVC X cells . Regardless of whether the selective remodeling of dendritic spines on HVC X neurons following deafening is driven by direct or indirect mechanisms , the current ﬁndings implicate this cell type in the processing or implementation of auditory feedback . Relevance of Structural and Functional Changes in HVC X Neurons to Vocal Output A major remaining issue is whether the structural and functional effects of deafening on HVC X neurons affect singing . The current ﬁndings show that deafening alters synapses on HVC X neurons while also increasing their intrinsic excitability , providing at least two ways that deafening could affect the singing - related action potential activity of these cells . First , deafening - induced weak - ening of synapses that are active during singing may diminish or alter the singing - related action potential output of HVC X neurons . Second , synapses on HVC X neurons that are active during singing and unaffected by deafening could act on these more intrinsically excitable cells to alter their singing - related action potential output . Indeed , the ﬁnding that deafening alters the spontaneous action potential output of HVC X neurons in anesthetized birds hints that the output of this cell type may also be altered during singing . Although the exact role of HVC X neuron output in singing awaits full elucidation , a recent study in Bengalese ﬁnches implicates the singing - related action potential activity of these cells in the encoding of syllable sequences ( Fujimoto et al . , 2011 ) , a song feature that is sensitive to feedback perturbation , including deafening ( Sakata and Brai - nard , 2006 ; Woolley and Rubel , 1997 ) . Ultimately , long - term measurements of the effects of deafening on the singing - related activity of HVC X neurons await the development of in vivo functional imaging techniques or improvements to single - unit recording methods in songbirds . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES All procedures were in accordance with a protocol approved by the Duke University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee . See also Supple - mental Experimental Procedures . Deafening Male zebra ﬁnches ( 85 to 150 dph ) were anesthetized by isoﬂurane inhalation ( 2 % ) and deafened by bilateral cochlear removal . Complete removal of each cochlea was conﬁrmed by visual inspection under a microscope . Quantiﬁcation of Deafening - Induced Song Degradation Standard parametric and nonparametric statistical analyses were used for all comparisons ( alpha = 0 . 05 ) ; reported errors are SEM unless otherwise noted . Undirected song was recorded continuously starting at least 2 days before deafening until at least 1 week postdeafening . To assess song degradation , spectral features of song were quantiﬁed by measuring the Wiener entropy and entropy variance ( EV ) of each syllable in a bird’s song using Sound Analysis Pro ( Tchernichovski et al . , 2000 ) . Thirty examples of each syllable were measured on each day of song , and values from two predeafening days were pooled to obtain a baseline distribution of entropy and EV values for each syllable . The onset of song degradation for each bird was deﬁned as the day on which the distribution of values for either the entropy or EV of any syllable differed signiﬁcantly from the baseline distribution and remained signiﬁcantly different on all subsequent days ( one - way ANOVA ) . Syllable sequence changes were measured using sequence consistency ( adapted from Scharff and Nottebohm , 1991 ) . The onset of temporal change to song was deﬁned as the ﬁrst day on which the mean sequence consistency was less than the lower bound of the 95 % conﬁdence interval for the mean sequence consistency measured on the last predeafening day . Fluorescent labeling of HVC Neurons Birdswereanesthetizedwithisoﬂuraneinhalation ( 2 % ) and placed inastereo - taxic apparatus . Injection sites were localized using stereotaxic coordinates and multi - unit neural recordings . A glass pipette attached to a Nanoject II ( Drummond Scientiﬁc ) was used to deliver GFP - lentivirus ( eGFP expressed under the control of the Rous Sarcoma Virus LTR [ FRGW ] ) to HVC or neuronal retrograde tracers to Area X and RA ( lentivirus : 32 . 2 nl / injection , total injection volume (cid:1) 1 m l ; tracers , FastBlueorAlexa - Fluor594conjugated dextranamine : 32 . 2 nl / injection , total injection volume of 64 – 160 nl ) . Lentivirus was injected twoweeksbeforeimaging , andtracerswereinjected4 – 7daysbeforeimaging . In Vivo Two - Photon Imaging Birds were placed on a reverse day - night cycle one week before the ﬁrst imaging session to minimize effects of imaging on their daytime behavior and were imaged longitudinally starting 1 – 2 nights prior to deafening . On the ﬁrst night of imaging , birds were anesthetized with isoﬂurane inhalation ( 2 % ) and placed in a stereotaxic apparatus . A headpost was afﬁxed to the skull using dental acrylic , and bilateral craniotomies 1 – 2 mm 2 were made over HVC . The dura was excised , and a custom - cut coverslip ( No . 1 thickness ) was placed over the pial surface and sealed in with dental acrylic . Birds were placed on a custom stage under a Zeiss Laser Scanning Two - Photon Microscope 510 . Only GFP - labeled neurons within a ﬁeld of retrogradely labeled neurons were classiﬁed as HVC neurons and imaged . Dendritic segmentsofidentiﬁedHVCneuronswereimagedtwicenightlyat2hrintervals at high resolution ( 1024 3 1024 pixels , 76 3 76 m m 2 image size , 3 . 2 m s / pixel , averaging 2 samples per pixel with 1 m m z steps , using a 40 3 / 0 . 8NA Zeiss IR - Archoplan immersion objective ) . Image Analysis Three - dimensional image stacks were smoothed using a Gaussian ﬁlter ( ImageJ ) ; brightness and contrast adjustments were not made for data analysis , although images were contrast enhanced for ﬁgure presentation . Dendritic segments to be analyzed were selected and identiﬁed in image stacks collected either 2 hr or 24hr apart . Spine size ( measured across nights , 24 hr interval ) was calculated by measuring the integrated optical density of each spine head ; these values were background - subtracted and normalized to the mean brightness of the adjacent dendritic shaft . Change in size for a single spine across 24 hr ( spine size index ) was calculated as ( time 24 size ) / ( time 0 size ) . Spine stability for each cell was calculated as the percentage of spines that were maintained ( as opposed to spines that were lost or gained ) within night ( 2 hr interval ) . In Vivo and In Vitro Sharp Intracellular Current - Clamp Recordings Sharp intracellular recordings were made in vitro and in vivo from HVC neurons , identiﬁed based on their intrinsic electrophysiological properties ( Mooney , 2000 ; Mooney and Prather , 2005 ) . Electrode impedances were 80 – 150 M U when ﬁlled with 2 M KAc . Recordings were ampliﬁed , low - pass ﬁltered at 3 kHz , and digitized at 10 kHz . For in vivo recordings , birds were anesthetized with diazepam ( 50 m l , 2 . 5 mg / ml ) . Mean spontaneous ﬁring rates and interspike intervals ( ISIs ) were measured from recordings of spontaneous activity , and the frequency and amplitude of depolarizing postsynaptic poten - tials ( dPSPs ) were measured during tonic injection of hyperpolarizing current , from median ﬁltered traces using custom event detection software ( Matlab , K . Hamaguchi ) . TocomparedistributionsofdPSPamplitudeandISIsbetween Neuron Imaging Deafening - Induced Changes to HVC Spines Neuron 73 , 1028 – 1039 , March 8 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 1037 deafened and control neurons , the HVC X neuron from each group with the smallest number of events was identiﬁed . The same number of data points was randomly sampled from all other neurons in that group , so each neuron in the group contributed the same number of dPSPs or ISIs to the group distri - bution . Sharp intracellular recordings were also made from electrophysiolog - ically identiﬁed HVC X neurons in 400 m m thick sagittal brain slices . Negative and positive current pulses were injected into impaled neurons , and resulting membrane potential changes were used to calculate a number of intrinsic membrane properties ( Matlab , K . Tschida ) . In Vitro Whole - Cell Voltage - Clamp Recordings Visualized whole - cell voltage - clamp recordings were carried out in retro - gradely labeled HVC X neurons in tissue from 50 – 60 dph birds . Three hundred micrometer thick sagittal brain slices were stored brieﬂy at 35 (cid:4) C and then allowedtocooltoroomtemperatureover45minpriortorecording . Electrodes had resistances of 2 – 6 M U and were ﬁlled with pipette solutions containing ( mM ) : 5 QX - 314 , 2 ATP , 0 . 3 GTP , 10 phosphocreatine , 0 . 2 EGTA , 2 MgCl 2 , 5 NaCl , 10 HEPES , 120 cesium methanesulfonate , 0 . 1 Alexa 488 . During recording , slicesweresuperfusedwithACSF containing1 m MTTX . Membrane potentialwasclampedat (cid:3) 70mVformeasurementsofspontaneousmEPSCs and at 0 mV for measurements of mIPSCs . Analyses of mEPSC and mIPSC amplitude were carried out using pCLAMP 10 ( Molecular Devices ) , and data from each HVC X neuron were randomly sampled so that each HVC X neuron within the deafened and control groups contributed the same number of PSCs to the group distribution . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes ﬁve ﬁgures and Supplemental Experi - mental Procedures and can be found with this article online at doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2011 . 12 . 038 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank I . Davison , F . Wang , M . Sommer , and T . Roberts for their helpful comments on the manuscript . K . A . T . was supported by a predoctoral award from NSF , and R . M . was supported by grants from NIDCD and NSF . Accepted : December 22 , 2011 Published : March 7 , 2012 REFERENCES Alvarez , V . A . , andSabatini , B . L . ( 2007 ) . Anatomicalandphysiologicalplasticity of dendritic spines . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 30 , 79 – 97 . Andalman , A . S . , and Fee , M . S . ( 2009 ) . A basal ganglia - forebrain circuit in the songbird biases motor output to avoid vocal errors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 12518 – 12523 . Bauer , E . E . , Coleman , M . J . , Roberts , T . F . , Roy , A . , Prather , J . F . , and Mooney , R . ( 2008 ) . A synaptic basis for auditory - vocal integration in the songbird . J . Neurosci . 28 , 1509 – 1522 . Brainard , M . S . , and Doupe , A . J . ( 2000 ) . Interruption of a basal ganglia - fore - brain circuit prevents plasticity of learned vocalizations . Nature 404 , 762 – 766 . Cardin , J . A . , and Schmidt , M . F . ( 2004 ) . Auditory responses in multiple sensorimotor song system nuclei are co - modulated by behavioral state . J . Neurophysiol . 91 , 2148 – 2163 . Cardin , J . A . , Raksin , J . N . , and Schmidt , M . F . ( 2005 ) . Sensorimotor nucleus NIf is necessary for auditory processing but not vocal motor output in the avian song system . J . Neurophysiol . 93 , 2157 – 2166 . Coleman , M . J . , and Mooney , R . ( 2004 ) . Synaptic transformations underlying highly selective auditory representations of learned birdsong . J . Neurosci . 24 , 7251 – 7265 . Damasio , A . R . , Damasio , H . , Rizzo , M . , Varney , N . , and Gersh , F . ( 1982 ) . Aphasiawithnonhemorrhagiclesionsinthebasalgangliaandinternalcapsule . Arch . Neurol . 39 , 15 – 24 . De Robertis , E . D . P . , and Bennett , H . S . ( 1955 ) . Somefeatures of the submicro - scopic morphology of synapses in frog and earthworm . J . Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . 1 , 47 – 58 . De Roo , M . , Klauser , P . , and Muller , D . ( 2008 ) . LTP promotes a selective long - term stabilization and clustering of dendritic spines . PLoS Biol . 6 , e219 . Eliades , S . J . , and Wang , X . ( 2003 ) . Sensory - motor interaction in the primate auditory cortex during self - initiated vocalizations . J . Neurophysiol . 89 , 2194 – 2207 . Eliades , S . J . , and Wang , X . ( 2005 ) . Dynamics of auditory - vocal interaction in monkey auditory cortex . Cereb . Cortex 15 , 1510 – 1523 . Eliades , S . J . , and Wang , X . ( 2008 ) . Neural substrates of vocalization feedback monitoring in primate auditory cortex . Nature 453 , 1102 – 1106 . Emmorey , K . , Allen , J . S . , Bruss , J . , Schenker , N . , and Damasio , H . ( 2003 ) . A morphometric analysis of auditory brain regions in congenitally deaf adults . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 10049 – 10054 . Engert , F . , and Bonhoeffer , T . ( 1999 ) . Dendriticspine changes associated with hippocampal long - term synaptic plasticity . Nature 399 , 66 – 70 . Fujimoto , H . , Hasegawa , T . , and Watanabe , D . ( 2011 ) . Neural coding of syntactic structure in learned vocalizations in the songbird . J . Neurosci . 31 , 10023 – 10033 . Hahnloser , R . H . , Kozhevnikov , A . A . , and Fee , M . S . ( 2002 ) . An ultra - sparse code underlies the generation of neural sequences in a songbird . Nature 419 , 65 – 70 . Hofer , S . B . , Mrsic - Flogel , T . D . , Bonhoeffer , T . , and Hu¨bener , M . ( 2009 ) . Experience leaves a lasting structural trace in cortical circuits . Nature 457 , 313 – 317 . Holtmaat , A . , and Svoboda , K . ( 2009 ) . Experience - dependent structural synaptic plasticity in the mammalian brain . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 10 , 647 – 658 . Holtmaat , A . , Wilbrecht , L . , Knott , G . W . , Welker , E . , and Svoboda , K . ( 2006 ) . Experience - dependent and cell - type - speciﬁc spine growth in the neocortex . Nature 441 , 979 – 983 . Horita , H . , Wada , K . , and Jarvis , E . D . ( 2008 ) . Early onset of deafening - induced song deterioration and differential requirements of the pallial - basal ganglia vocal pathway . Eur . J . Neurosci . 28 , 2519 – 2532 . Keck , T . , Mrsic - Flogel , T . D . , Vaz Afonso , M . , Eysel , U . T . , Bonhoeffer , T . , and Hu¨bener , M . ( 2008 ) . Massive restructuring of neuronal circuits during func - tional reorganization of adult visual cortex . Nat . Neurosci . 11 , 1162 – 1167 . Keck , T . , Scheuss , V . , Jacobsen , R . I . , Wierenga , C . J . , Eysel , U . T . , Bonhoeffer , T . , and Hu¨bener , M . ( 2011 ) . Loss of sensory input causes rapid structural changes of inhibitory neurons in adult mouse visual cortex . Neuron 71 , 869 – 882 . Keller , G . B . , and Hahnloser , R . H . ( 2009 ) . Neural processing of auditory feed - back during vocal practice in a songbird . Nature 457 , 187 – 190 . Kim , D . J . , Park , S . Y . , Kim , J . , Lee , D . H . , and Park , H . J . ( 2009 ) . Alterations of white matter diffusion anisotropy in early deafness . Neuroreport 20 , 1032 – 1036 . Konishi , M . ( 1965 ) . The role of auditory feedback in the control of vocalization in the white - crowned sparrow . Z . Tierpsychol . 22 , 770 – 783 . Kopec , C . D . , Li , B . , Wei , W . , Boehm , J . , and Malinow , R . ( 2006 ) . Glutamate receptor exocytosis and spine enlargement during chemically induced long - term potentiation . J . Neurosci . 26 , 2000 – 2009 . Kotak , V . C . , Fujisawa , S . , Lee , F . A . , Karthikeyan , O . , Aoki , C . , and Sanes , D . H . ( 2005 ) . Hearing loss raises excitability in the auditory cortex . J . Neurosci . 25 , 3908 – 3918 . Kotak , V . C . , Takesian , A . E . , and Sanes , D . H . ( 2008 ) . Hearing loss prevents the maturation of GABAergic transmission in the auditory cortex . Cereb . Cortex 18 , 2098 – 2108 . Kozhevnikov , A . A . , and Fee , M . S . ( 2007 ) . Singing - related activity of identiﬁed HVC neurons in the zebra ﬁnch . J . Neurophysiol . 97 , 4271 – 4283 . Lei , H . , and Mooney , R . ( 2010 ) . Manipulation of a central auditory representa - tion shapes learned vocal output . Neuron 65 , 122 – 134 . Neuron Imaging Deafening - Induced Changes to HVC Spines 1038 Neuron 73 , 1028 – 1039 , March 8 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . Leonardo , A . , and Konishi , M . ( 1999 ) . Decrystallization of adult birdsong by perturbation of auditory feedback . Nature 399 , 466 – 470 . Lombardino , A . J . , and Nottebohm , F . ( 2000 ) . Age at deafening affects the stability of learned song in adult male zebra ﬁnches . J . Neurosci . 20 , 5054 – 5064 . Maletic - Savatic , M . , Malinow , R . , and Svoboda , K . ( 1999 ) . Rapid dendritic morphogenesis in CA1 hippocampal dendrites induced by synaptic activity . Science 283 , 1923 – 1927 . Marik , S . A . , Yamahachi , H . , McManus , J . N . , Szabo , G . , and Gilbert , C . D . ( 2010 ) . Axonaldynamicsofexcitatoryandinhibitoryneuronsinsomatosensory cortex . PLoS Biol . 8 , e1000395 . Marler , P . ( 1970 ) . A comparative approach to vocal learning : song develop - ment in white - crowned sparrows . J . Comp . Physiol . Psychol . 71 , 1 – 25 . Matsuzaki , M . , Honkura , N . , Ellis - Davies , G . C . , andKasai , H . ( 2004 ) . Structural basisoflong - termpotentiationinsingledendriticspines . Nature 429 , 761 – 766 . Mooney , R . ( 2000 ) . Different subthreshold mechanisms underlie song selec - tivity in identiﬁed HVc neurons of the zebra ﬁnch . J . Neurosci . 20 , 5420 – 5436 . Mooney , R . , and Prather , J . F . ( 2005 ) . The HVC microcircuit : the synaptic basis for interactions between song motor and vocal plasticity pathways . J . Neurosci . 25 , 1952 – 1964 . Na¨gerl , U . V . , Eberhorn , N . , Cambridge , S . B . , and Bonhoeffer , T . ( 2004 ) . Bidirectional activity - dependent morphological plasticity in hippocampal neurons . Neuron 44 , 759 – 767 . Nordeen , K . W . , and Nordeen , E . J . ( 1992 ) . Auditory feedback is necessary for the maintenance of stereotyped song in adult zebra ﬁnches . Behav . Neural Biol . 57 , 58 – 66 . Noren˜a , A . J . , and Eggermont , J . J . ( 2003 ) . Changes in spontaneous neural activityimmediatelyafteranacoustictrauma : implicationsforneuralcorrelates of tinnitus . Hear . Res . 183 , 137 – 153 . Nottebohm , F . , Stokes , T . M . , and Leonard , C . M . ( 1976 ) . Central control of song in the canary , Serinus canarius . J . Comp . Neurol . 165 , 457 – 486 . Okamoto , K . , Nagai , T . , Miyawaki , A . , and Hayashi , Y . ( 2004 ) . Rapid and persistentmodulationofactindynamicsregulatespostsynapticreorganization underlying bidirectional plasticity . Nat . Neurosci . 7 , 1104 – 1112 . Palay , S . L . ( 1956 ) . Synapses in the central nervous system . J . Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . 2 ( 4 Suppl ) , 193 – 202 . Petitto , L . A . ( 1993 ) . On the ontogenetic requirements for early language acquisition . In Developmental Neurocognition : Speech and Face Processing in the First Year of Life , B . de Boysson - Bardies , S . de Schonen , P . Jusczyk , P . MacNeilage , and J . Morton , eds . ( Dordrecht , Netherlands : Kluwer ) , pp . 365 – 383 . Prather , J . F . , Peters , S . , Nowicki , S . , and Mooney , R . ( 2008 ) . Precise auditory - vocal mirroring in neurons for learned vocal communication . Nature 451 , 305 – 310 . Roberts , T . F . , Tschida , K . A . , Klein , M . E . , and Mooney , R . ( 2010 ) . Rapid spine stabilization and synaptic enhancement at the onset of behavioural learning . Nature 463 , 948 – 952 . Roy , A . , and Mooney , R . ( 2009 ) . Song decrystallization in adult zebra ﬁnches does not require the song nucleus NIf . J . Neurophysiol . 102 , 979 – 991 . Sakata , J . T . , and Brainard , M . S . ( 2006 ) . Real - time contributions of auditory feedback to avian vocal motor control . J . Neurosci . 26 , 9619 – 9628 . Sakata , J . T . , and Brainard , M . S . ( 2008 ) . Online contributions of auditory feed - back to neural activity in avian song control circuitry . J . Neurosci . 28 , 11378 – 11390 . Sanes , D . H . , andBao , S . ( 2009 ) . Tuning upthedeveloping auditory CNS . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 19 , 188 – 199 . Scharff , C . , and Nottebohm , F . ( 1991 ) . A comparative study of the behavioral deﬁcits following lesions of various parts of the zebra ﬁnch song system : implications for vocal learning . J . Neurosci . 11 , 2896 – 2913 . Seki , S . , and Eggermont , J . J . ( 2003 ) . Changes in spontaneous ﬁring rate and neural synchrony in cat primary auditory cortex after localized tone - induced hearing loss . Hear . Res . 180 , 28 – 38 . Shibata , D . K . ( 2007 ) . Differences in brain structure in deaf persons on MR imaging studied with voxel - based morphometry . AJNR Am . J . Neuroradiol . 28 , 243 – 249 . Smith , K . M . , Mecoli , M . D . , Altaye , M . , Komlos , M . , Maitra , R . , Eaton , K . P . , Egelhoff , J . C . , and Holland , S . K . ( 2011 ) . Morphometric differences in the Heschl’s gyrus of hearing impaired and normal hearing infants . Cereb . Cortex 21 , 991 – 998 . Tchernichovski , O . , Nottebohm , F . , Ho , C . E . , Pesaran , B . , and Mitra , P . P . ( 2000 ) . A procedure for an automated measurement of song similarity . Anim . Behav . 59 , 1167 – 1176 . Trachtenberg , J . T . , Chen , B . E . , Knott , G . W . , Feng , G . , Sanes , J . R . , Welker , E . , and Svoboda , K . ( 2002 ) . Long - term in vivo imaging of experience - dependent synaptic plasticity in adult cortex . Nature 420 , 788 – 794 . Turrigiano , G . G . , and Nelson , S . B . ( 2004 ) . Homeostatic plasticity in the devel - oping nervous system . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 5 , 97 – 107 . Vates , G . E . , Broome , B . M . , Mello , C . V . , and Nottebohm , F . ( 1996 ) . Auditory pathways of caudal telencephalon and their relation to the song system of adult male zebra ﬁnches . J . Comp . Neurol . 366 , 613 – 642 . Waldstein , R . S . ( 1990 ) . Effects of postlingual deafness on speech production : implications for the role of auditory feedback . J . Acoust . Soc . Am . 88 , 2099 – 2114 . Walmsley , B . , Berntson , A . , Leao , R . N . , and Fyffe , R . E . ( 2006 ) . Activity - depen - dent regulation of synaptic strength and neuronal excitability in central audi - tory pathways . J . Physiol . 572 , 313 – 321 . Williams , H . , andMcKibben , J . R . ( 1992 ) . Changesinstereotypedcentralmotor patternscontrollingvocalizationareinducedbyperipheralnerveinjury . Behav . Neural Biol . 57 , 67 – 78 . Williams , H . , and Mehta , N . ( 1999 ) . Changes in adult zebra ﬁnch song require aforebrain nucleus thatisnotnecessaryforsongproduction . J . Neurobiol . 39 , 14 – 28 . Woolley , S . M . , and Rubel , E . W . ( 1997 ) . Bengalese ﬁnches Lonchura Striata domestica depend upon auditory feedback for the maintenance of adult song . J . Neurosci . 17 , 6380 – 6390 . Zhou , Q . , Homma , K . J . , and Poo , M . M . ( 2004 ) . Shrinkage of dendritic spines associated with long - term depression of hippocampal synapses . Neuron 44 , 749 – 757 . Zuo , Y . , Yang , G . , Kwon , E . , and Gan , W . B . ( 2005 ) . Long - term sensory depri - vation prevents dendritic spine loss in primary somatosensory cortex . Nature 436 , 261 – 265 . Neuron Imaging Deafening - Induced Changes to HVC Spines Neuron 73 , 1028 – 1039 , March 8 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 1039