Seven Types Of Ambiguity PDF First published in 1930 , Seven Types of Ambiguity has long been recognized as a landmark in the history of English literary criticism . Revised twice since it first appeared , it has remained one of the most widely read and quoted works of literary analysis . Ambiguity , according to Empson , includes " any verbal nuance , however slight , which gives room for alternative reactions to the same piece of language . " From this definition , broad enough by his own admission sometimes to see " stretched absurdly far , " he launches into a brilliant discussion , under seven classifications of differing complexity and depth , of such works , among others , as Shakespeare ' s plays and the poetry of Chaucer , Donne , Marvell , Pope , Wordsworth , Gerard Manley Hopkins , and T . S . Eliot . Paperback : 256 pages Publisher : New Directions ( January 17 , 1966 ) Language : English ISBN - 10 : 081120037X ISBN - 13 : 978 - 0811200370 Product Dimensions : 5 . 3 x 0 . 8 x 8 inches Shipping Weight : 10 . 4 ounces ( View shipping rates and policies ) Average Customer Review : 4 . 1 out of 5 starsÂ Â See all reviewsÂ ( 14 customer reviews ) Best Sellers Rank : # 118 , 506 in Books ( See Top 100 in Books ) # 7 inÂ Books > Literature & Fiction > History & Criticism > Movements & Periods > Modern # 89 inÂ Books > Literature & Fiction > History & Criticism > Genres & Styles > Poetry # 157 inÂ Books > Literature & Fiction > History & Criticism > Regional & Cultural > European > British & Irish The art of close reading as a technique to glean meaning from a text involves the use of a myriad of critical reading skills that we like to think are taught in both secondary and higher education . I might have begun the next sentence with , " Alas . . . " but instead it might be useful to point out that the deficiencies of readers in comprehending texts is not limited to today . In the years following the end of the Great War , students then as now were increasingly slothful in their reading skills . Part of the problem was that the term " ambiguity " had received some bad press . Most readers assume that when they read a text that if they encounter a word , phrase , term , or idea that they deem ambiguous it must be the result of sloppy writing on the author ' s part . William Empson in Seven Types of Ambiguity rises to the defense of ambiguity by insisting that the rush to indict it as slothful thinking might just be premature . What , Empson asks , should a reader think if an ambiguous word or idea is deliberately so ? Does the mere fact that this word or idea might have more than one meaning suggest that the author does not supply any helpful hints ? Empson writes of ambiguity as if it were yet another close reading technique that when judiciously used induces the reader to peek under the patina of that ambiguity to uncover a richness of meaning that might otherwise lie dormant . Other New Critical writers prior to Empson have urged readers to be aware of the presence of ambiguities but mostly in the context of adversely judging the presence of an " organic unity " that might be forestalled by their presence . Ambiguities thus have a definite upside . Seven Types of Ambiguity Racial Ambiguity in Asian American Culture ( Asian American Studies Today ) Ambiguity in the Western Mind Alexander : The Ambiguity of Greatness Seven Natural Wonders of Australia and Oceania ( Seven Wonders ) Seven Concurrency Models in Seven Weeks : When Threads Unravel ( The Pragmatic Programmers ) Seven Years : Seven , Book 1 A Match for Magnolia ( Seven Suitors for Seven Sisters Book 1 ) The Seven Checkpoints for Student Leaders : Seven Principles Every Teenager Needs to Know Seven Databases in Seven Weeks : A Guide to Modern Databases and the NoSQL Movement Chalk - Style Holiday Coloring Book : Color with All Types of Markers , Gel Pens & Colored Pencils Buses for Kids : A Children ' s Picture Book about Buses : A Great Simple Picture Book for Kids to Learn about Different Types of Busses Motorcycles for Kids : A Children ' s Picture Book about Motorcycles : A Great Simple Picture Book for Kids to Learn about Different Types of Motorcycles Certified Programming with Dependent Types : A Pragmatic Introduction to the Coq Proof Assistant ( MIT Press ) Introduction to Abstract Data Types Using ADA More Bread Machine Magic : More Than 140 New Recipes From the Authors of Bread Machine Magic for Use in All Types of Sizes of Bread Machines Bread Machine Magic , Revised Edition : 138 Exciting Recipes Created Especially for Use in All Types of Bread Machines Leafy Greens : An A - to - Z Guide to 30 Types of Greens Plus More than 120 Delicious Recipes Knots : An Illustrated Practical Guide to the Essential Knot Types and Their Uses Corgis as Pets : Corgi Breeding , Where to Buy , Types , Care , Cost , Diet , Grooming , and Training all Included . The Ultimate Corgi Owner ' s Guide