RESEARCH ARTICLE 3221 Development 139 , 3221 - 3231 ( 2012 ) doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 082800 © 2012 . Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd INTRODUCTION Despite considerable research in the area , the issue of how organ size is regulated remains unanswered . A commonly used model system to study this is the wing imaginal disc of Drosophila . This is a larval structure that develops into the adult wing during metamorphosis . The size of the wing imaginal disc largely predetermines the size of the final wing ( Day and Lawrence , 2000 ) . Disc size appears to be regulated autonomously , as transplants into the female abdomen stop growing when they reach their normal final size ( Bryant and Levinson , 1985 ; Jursnich et al . , 1990 ) . Size regulation is tightly coupled to pattern formation , as major patterning genes are also involved in growth regulation . The most important patterning genes in the wing primordium encode the morphogens Decapentaplegic ( Dpp ) and Wingless ( Wg ) ( Fig . 1B ) . Dpp forms a gradient with highest concentrations along the anteroposterior compartment boundary and lowest concentrations in the lateral regions ( Basler and Struhl , 1994 ; Entchev et al . , 2000 ; Posakony et al . , 1990 ; Tabata and Kornberg , 1994 ; Teleman and Cohen , 2000 ) , whereas Wg forms a gradient perpendicular to the Dpp gradient with the highest concentrations at the dorsoventral compartment boundary ( Neumann and Cohen , 1997 ; Strigini and Cohen , 2000 ; Zecca et al . , 1996 ) ( Fig . 1B ) . Removing either of these morphogens leads to a severe reduction of wing disc growth ( Couso et al . , 1994 ; Neumann and Cohen , 1996a ; Ng et al . , 1996 ; Spencer et al . , 1982 ) . Notch ( N ) and Vestigial ( Vg ) are two other proteins that are involved in both patterning and growth . N is activated at the dorsoventral boundary , where it has been shown to induce growth directly ( Baonza and Garcia - Bellido , 2000 ; Go et al . , 1998 ) . Moreover , it promotes growth indirectly by inducing wg and vg expression ( Couso et al . , 1995 ; Diaz - Benjumea and Cohen , 1995 ; Kim et al . , 1995 ; Klein and Arias , 1998 ; Rulifson and Blair , 1995 ) . vg is regulated by two enhancers , the boundary enhancer ( BE ) and the quadrant enhancer ( QE ) . BE is induced by N activity , whereas QE is ( indirectly ) inhibited by the N and induced by the Dpp and Wg signaling pathways ( Certel et al . , 2000 ; Kim et al . , 1996 ; Neumann and Cohen , 1996b ; Williams et al . , 1994 ; Zecca and Struhl , 2007b ) ( Fig . 1A ) . Vg is crucial for the establishment of wing identity and vg - null mutants show severely reduced wing disc growth and do not form an adult wing blade ( Williams et al . , 1991 ) . Even though it is well established that patterning genes play an important role in growth regulation , it is not known how this is achieved and how growth termination is regulated . Several mechanisms have been proposed in this context . It has been proposed that a sufficiently steep morphogen concentration gradient induces growth ( Bohn , 1976 ; French et al . , 1976 ) . For the wing disc , it has been proposed that the Dpp gradient plays such a role ( Day and Lawrence , 2000 ; Rogulja and Irvine , 2005 ) , and is involved in size regulation ( Day and Lawrence , 2000 ) . In the most basic model , it is assumed that the Dpp concentrations are fixed at the anteroposterior boundary and at the most lateral edge of the disc . During growth , the Dpp concentration gradient decreases . Growth stops once the magnitude of the gradient drops below a specific threshold value ( Day and Lawrence , 2000 ) . On a molecular level , there is evidence suggesting that the Dpp gradient is converted into opposing gradients of Four - jointed ( Fj ) and Dachsous ( Ds ) ( Rogulja et al . , 2008 ) . Concentration differences of Fj and Ds have , in turn , been shown to control the growth regulating hippo pathway by changing the intracellular localization of the atypical myosin Dachs ( D ) . This then leads to activation of the protein Yorkie ( Yki ) , 1 Institute of Molecular Life Sciences , University of Zurich , CH - 8057 , Switzerland . 2 Institute for Plant Science , University of Bern , CH - 3013 , Switzerland . 3 Institute of Physics , University of Zurich , CH - 8057 , Switzerland . * Author for correspondence ( basler @ imls . uzh . ch ) Accepted 7 June 2012 SUMMARY The regulation of organ size constitutes a major unsolved question in developmental biology . The wing imaginal disc of Drosophila serves as a widely used model system to study this question . Several mechanisms have been proposed to have an impact on final size , but they are either contradicted by experimental data or they cannot explain a number of key experimental observations and may thus be missing crucial elements . We have modeled a regulatory network that integrates the experimentally confirmed molecular interactions underlying other available models . Furthermore , the network includes hypothetical interactions between mechanical forces and specific growth regulators , leading to a size regulation mechanism that conceptually combines elements of existing models , and can be understood in terms of a compression gradient model . According to this model , compression increases in the center of the disc during growth . Growth stops once compression levels in the disc center reach a certain threshold and the compression gradient drops below a certain level in the rest of the disc . Our model can account for growth termination as well as for the paradoxical observation that growth occurs uniformly in the presence of a growth factor gradient and non - uniformly in the presence of a uniform growth factor distribution . Furthermore , it can account for other experimental observations that argue either in favor or against other models . The model also makes specific predictions about the distribution of cell shape and size in the developing disc , which we were able to confirm experimentally . KEY WORDS : Drosophila , Computer simulations , Growth regulation , Mechanical forces , Wing imaginal disc Integrating force - sensing and signaling pathways in a model for the regulation of wing imaginal disc size Tinri Aegerter - Wilmsen 1 , Maria B . Heimlicher 1 , Alister C . Smith 1 , Pierre Barbier de Reuille 2 , Richard S . Smith 2 , Christof M . Aegerter 3 and Konrad Basler 1 , * D E V E L O P M E N T 3222 which results in the induction of growth ( Rogulja et al . , 2008 ; Willecke et al . , 2008 ) . Even though there is strong evidence in favor of aspects of this model , there are also data contradicting the proposed essential roles of the Dpp concentration gradient in establishing Fj and Ds gradients ( Schwank et al . , 2011 ) and in growth regulation ( Schwank et al . , 2008 ) . It has also been proposed that a Vg feed - forward mechanism has a large impact on final size . As described above , one of the vg enhancers , QE , is activated by Wg and Dpp . It has been shown , however , that these factors are not sufficient , but that QE is activated when , in addition , vg is expressed in neighboring cells ( Zecca and Struhl , 2007b ) . As for the induction of growth by the Dpp gradient , this mechanism has been shown to act via the Hippo pathway ( Zecca and Struhl , 2010 ) . This Vg feed - forward mechanism appears to have a large effect on the expansion of the wing primordium ( Zecca and Struhl , 2007a ) , but it has not yet been included into a model for final size regulation . Mechanical forces have also been proposed to play a role in growth regulation ( Shraiman , 2005 ) and wing disc size regulation ( Aegerter - Wilmsen et al . , 2007 ; Hufnagel et al . , 2007 ) . In these models , it is proposed that compression inhibits growth , and increases in the center of the wing disc during growth . Growth is terminated once the stimulatory effect of growth factors in the center of the disc can no longer overcome the inhibitory effect of mechanical compression . The role of mechanical forces in growth regulation has not yet been tested directly ; however , there is some indirect evidence in favor of this hypothesis ( Aegerter - Wilmsen et al . , 2010 ; Nienhaus et al . , 2009 ) . Even though , to our knowledge , the mechanical force models have not been contradicted by data , alone they cannot explain several observations that are used to support the other proposed mechanisms and thus the models may be missing crucial elements for final size determination . Here , we formulate a regulatory network of experimentally confirmed interactions , including the main components underlying the Vg feed - forward mechanism and the Dpp gradient model . In addition , we have added hypothetical interactions of specific network components with mechanical forces . We show that , as an emergent behavior of the regulatory network , different aspects of growth dynamics are reproduced . Furthermore , the network can reproduce a set of key experimental results that have been used to support or refute other existing models . Our model makes specific predictions about the distribution of cell shape and size in the developing disc . In order to test our predictions , we have developed a technique for analyzing cell geometry on the curved surface of the wing disc . We find that our data are in agreement with the predictions of the model . MATERIALS AND METHODS Modeling The modeling program consists of two parts that interact with each other . One part governs interactions within the regulatory network , the other governs changes in polygonal cell shapes . The regulatory network ( Fig . 1A ) has two different types of inputs : protein activity profiles of a selection of patterning genes ( Fig . 1B ; supplementary material Table S1 ) and mechanical compression . A measure for compression is calculated based on a weighted average of the area of a cell and its surroundings ( supplementary material Table S1 ) . Equations governing the protein activities in the network in the wild - type situation and in the different simulated mutants can be found in supplementary material Tables S2 and S3 , respectively . The network has two outputs that are relevant for the cell shape calculation part . The most important output concerns the growth rate , the rate at which a cell progresses through its cell cycle . Once a cell reaches the end of the cycle , it divides . The growth rate ( % cell cycle progression / hour ) for the  th cell is calculated as follows : G   ( cg 1 + cg 2 * [ Yki ]  + cg 3 * [ Vg ]  + cg 4 * [ N ]  – cg 5 * [ Brk ]  ) * cg 6 , ( 1 ) where cg 1  – 12 % / hour , cg 2  8 % / hour , cg 3  6 % / hour , cg 4  2 % / hour , cg 5  7 % / hour , cg 6  0 . 048 and [ Protein ]   concentration of active protein normalized for maximum N , and where it is assumed that the effect of Vg on growth is satisfied for normalized levels higher than 1 . We have set  t to be equal to the time that is required to go through mitosis ( ~ 20 minutes ) , so that the simulation should show the same percentage of mitotic cells as a still image of a growing disc . BrdU staining was simulated by marking cells as soon as they completed 70 % of the cell cycle . This marking was retained for three consecutive time steps ( corresponding to about 1 hour simulated time ) . The growth constant cg 6 was fitted in such a way that the minimum cell cycle time corresponds to roughly 6 hours . It is assumed that progression through the cell cycle does not affect cell shape directly , as no correlation has been found between cell volume and apical cell areas ( Aegerter - Wilmsen et al . , 2010 ) , which is modeled here . Therefore , the relevant output of the regulatory network is in fact the identity of cells which divide at a certain time point . The second output of the network concerns the asymmetric D localization , which is used as a factor that induces a bias in the direction of the cell division plane . If [ D ] is larger than 0 . 1 , the bias is implemented and the angle of the division plane is equal to the mean of a randomly chosen angle and the angle of a vertex perpendicular to the direction of the Ds / Fj gradient ( [ Xgradw , Ygradw ] ( supplementary material Table S2 ) . Cell division brings the tissue out of mechanical equilibrium . New apical cell shapes are found by using a vertex model , which assumes cell shapes to be polygonal ( Farhadifar et al . , 2007 ; Hufnagel et al . , 2007 ) . It defines the shape of a cell by the positions of its vertices , i . e . the positions where three cell sides ( edges ) meet . Cell shapes are calculated by minimizing the following energy function using a conjugate gradient method : The meanings of the terms and parameters are as previously described ( Farhadifar et al . , 2007 ) . In contrast to earlier implementations ( Aegerter - Wilmsen et al . , 2010 ; Farhadifar et al . , 2007 ) , we do not use periodic boundary conditions , thus not imposing any limitations on the development of overall disc shape . For non - boundary cells , we use parameter values that correspond to case I of Farhadifar et al . ( Farhadifar et al . , 2007 ) , where cells are identical and  (cid:2)  / ( KA ( 0 ) )  0 . 04 ( – ) and  (cid:2)  / ( KA ( 0 ) 3 / 2 )  0 . 12 ( – ) . For boundary cells ,  (cid:2) was set to 0 . 09 ( – ) . In order to prevent some artifacts arising from an irregular boundary , it was smoothened by multiplying the growth rates of its cells by 0 . 7 . Upon energy minimization , new cell areas serve as input for the regulatory network . The simulated disc generally contains 36 hexagons initially and is allowed to grow until 100 hours have been simulated . Experiments Phenotypic wild - type discs were dissected from larvae with genotypes y , w , hs - flp ; wg - lacZ / CyO or y . w , hs - flp ; Sp / CyO ; vg - QE - lacZ . Wing discs were fixed and prepared for immunocytochemistry using standard procedures . Primary antibodies used were chicken anti -  - galactosidase ( ICL , Portland , OR , USA , 1 : 1000 ) and mouse anti - Dlg ( Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank , Iowa City , IA , USA , 1 : 200 ) . Secondary antibodies were Alexa 594 goat - anti - chicken IgG and Alexa 488 goat - anti - mouse IgG ( Molecular Probes , Grand Island , NY , USA , 1 : 400 and 1 : 200 , respectively ) . Cell shape analysis Cell shapes were extracted from the curved pouch using MorphoGraphX ( Kierzkowski et al . , 2012 ) ( supplementary material Fig . S1 ) and analyzed with respect to their relative distance from the center . In order to compensate for curvature , we used polygonal fitting in combination with line integration . Elongation was calculated according to Asipauskas et al . ∑ ∑ ∑ = ∗ − + Λ + ∗ α α α α < > Γα α α E R A A l L ( ) ( ) . ( 2 ) i K ij ij i j 2 ( 0 ) 2 , 2 2 RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 139 ( 17 ) D E V E L O P M E N T ( Asipauskas et al . , 2003 ) . Curvature was compensated for in such a way that elongation along the z - axis was integrated into radial elongation . Mitotic cells were selected based on their size . RESULTSAssumptions The assumptions underlying the model are depicted in ( Fig . 1 ) . The model is formulated for the wing pouch , which eventually develops into the wing blade . The regulatory network contains the major growth regulators that closely interact with patterning . This is because we aimed to reproduce the principle underlying size regulation and considered it to be likely that such components are essential for this principle , in contrast to factors that modulate growth rates in all cells to a similar extent . Protein activity levels in the model result from the interactions within the network ( Fig . 1A ) , except for those of N , Dpp and Wg , which are implemented directly ( Fig . 1B ) . The Dpp gradient is assumed to adjust to the dimensions of the disc , whereas the Wg gradient is assumed to be fixed , in agreement with experimental observations ( Teleman and Cohen , 2000 ) . These assumptions about scaling , however , are not relevant for the principle behind growth termination in the model . All regulatory interactions in the signaling network have been confirmed experimentally ( Baonza and Garcia - Bellido , 2000 ; Campbell and Tomlinson , 1999 ; Go et al . , 1998 ; Goulev et al . , 2008 ; Halder et al . , 1998 ; Huang et al . , 2005 ; Jazwinska et al . , 1999 ; Kim et al . , 1997 ; Kim et al . , 1996 ; Kirkpatrick et al . , 2001 ; Mao et al . , 2006 ; Martín et al . , 2004 ; Minami et al . , 1999 ; Neumann and Cohen , 1996b ; Rogulja et al . , 2008 ; Willecke et al . , 2008 ; Williams et al . , 1991 ; Williams et al . , 1994 ; Zecca and Struhl , 2007a ; Zecca and Struhl , 2007b ; Zecca and Struhl , 2010 ) , except for those concerning mechanical forces ( drawn in orange in Fig . 1A ) . The first hypothetical interaction concerns the regulation of Armadillo ( Arm ) by compression . Arm has been shown to be activated by compression in the Drosophila embryo ( Desprat et al . , 2008 ; Farge , 2003 ) , but this has not been tested for the wing disc . The second hypothetical interaction concerns the regulation of Yki activity by mechanical forces . Very recently , this interaction has been shown to occur in mammalian cells ( Dupont et al . , 2011 ; Wada et al . , 2011 ) . There are some indirect indications that this regulation might also occur in the wing imaginal disc . First , it has been found that modulating F - actin organization , which may affect the mechanical forces exerted by cells , leads to changes in Yki activity ( Fernández et al . , 2011 ; Sansores - Garcia et al . , 2011 ) . Second , Zyxin has been identified as an upstream regulator of Yki in the wing disc ( Rauskolb et al . , 2011 ) , and this protein has previously been shown to change its intracellular localization upon exposure to mechanical tension in mammalian cells ( Lele et al . , 2006 ; Yoshigi et al . , 2005 ) . There is also some evidence suggesting that Zyxin reacts to forces in the Drosophila embryo ( Colombelli et al . , 2009 ) . The third hypothetical interaction concerns the inhibition of ds expression by mechanical forces . Such a link has not yet been shown to our knowledge . We note that this hypothesis is not essential for the principle behind growth termination in the model , but it improves the results . For example , the expression patterns of vg and ds are not completely complementary in the wing disc ( Rodríguez , 2004 ) , but they would be in our model if ds is only regulated by Vg . It would in principle also be conceivable that ds is regulated , for example , by a protein that is active in a ring surrounding the pouch . In the regulatory network , differences in Ds and Fj concentrations between neighboring cells are assumed to activate Yki via D , as has been shown experimentally ( Rogulja et al . , 2008 ; Willecke et al . , 2008 ; Zecca and Struhl , 2010 ) . Large differences in Ds and Fj concentrations appear to be detected over several cell diameters ( Willecke et al . , 2008 ) . Therefore , a weighted average of the gradient sensed by a cell and its neighbors was used in the model . In addition to the signaling network , the model also makes assumptions with respect to the mechanical properties of cells . It assumes that apical cell shapes can be well described by 3223 RESEARCH ARTICLE Model for disc size regulation Dpp Wg Arm Yki Fj Ds Notch Brk Growth Vg MechanicalCompression Fj D Ds Hypotheticalvg quadrant enhancer vg boundary enhancer A P DV B DppWgNotch A Fig . 1 . Main assumptions underlying the model . The regulatory network ( A ) represents protein activities and interactions that regulate these activities . The model does not distinguish between interactions at the transcriptional and protein activity level , but considers effects on net activities . All protein activities emerge from the network , except for those of Dpp , Wg and N , which are implemented in the model as depicted in B . In the regulatory network , differences in Ds and Fj concentrations between neighboring cells lead to activation of D by changing its intracellular localization . For simplicity , the resulting asymmetric localization is not depicted . In addition to the assumptions shown , it is assumed that apical cell shapes can be found by minimizing Eqn 2 , that a weighted average of the area of a cell and its neighbors is a good readout for mechanical stress , that cells do not rearrange when exposed to mechanical tension , and that the planar polarization of D imposes a bias on the direction of the division plane . The interactions shown in orange are hypothetical and form the main untested assumptions underlying the model . The regulation of ds by mechanical compression is dotted , as this regulation is not essential for the principle behind size regulation in the model , but improves the fit of simulation results with experimental data . AP , anteroposterior boundary ; DV , dorsoventral boundary . All discs in this paper have the same orientation as in B . D E V E L O P M E N T 3224 minimizing an energy function that was developed by Farhadifar et al . ( Farhadifar et al . , 2007 ) and that was fitted to different experimental data on the wing disc . This implies constant and identical mechanical properties across cells . Furthermore , it assumes that the cell area is a good readout for mechanical stress in such a model . Moreover , it assumes that the average mechanical stress present in a region also influences individual cells . This is because it has been shown that several components of the contracting actin - myosin network are recruited by mechanical stress ( Kasza and Zallen , 2011 ) . In addition , it assumes that cells do not rearrange , i . e . that they do not change neighbor contacts in response to tension . This assumption is supported by the general observation of contiguous cell lineage clones ( Resino et al . , 2002 ) , the absence of large - scale sorting and rearrangements upon visual inspection of movies of growing wing discs , and the maintenance of neighbor connections during mitosis , despite the associated profound changes in apical cell shape ( Gibson et al . , 2006 ) . Last , it is assumed that the direction of the division plane is influenced by the asymmetric intracellular localization of D , as has been shown experimentally ( Mao et al . , 2011 ) . For simplicity , the wing pouch is modeled as a flat tissue , even though it becomes folded towards the end of growth . The model fully integrates the Vg feed - forward mechanism , even though it does not explicitly include Vg autoregulation or the protein Fat ( Ft ) , an upstream regulator of the Hippo pathway , which has been shown to be essential for sending the feed - forward signal . These components have been left out of the model for simplicity , but can be added without any quantitative consequences . Size regulation mechanism The hypothetical interactions in Fig . 1A were not only added based on analogies in other tissues , but also in order to create a network that can account for growth termination . The envisioned size regulatory mechanism conceptually combines elements from existing models ( Aegerter - Wilmsen et al . , 2007 ; Day and Lawrence , 2000 ; Hufnagel et al . , 2007 ) and can be understood in terms of a compression gradient model . Compression builds up in the center , where growth ceases once the compression level reaches a certain threshold . In the rest of the disc , growth ceases when the compression gradient drops below a certain threshold level ( Fig . 2A ) . On a molecular level , the following is proposed to occur in the center of the disc ( Fig . 2B ) . Initially , the combined activity of growth factors is highest in this region . The negative regulator Brinker ( Brk ) is absent and the positive regulators Vg and N are present . Furthermore , no compression has built up yet , so that the activity of the positive growth regulator Yki is relatively high . As the combined growth factor concentration is highest in the center , this region will initially grow faster than the surrounding regions . As long as the disc stays flat , this will lead to a build up of compression in the center , which causes a decrease in Yki activity . When Yki levels become too low , the combined activity of Vg and N is no longer sufficient to induce growth . Because of the initial build up of compression in the center of the disc , the regions adjacent to the center become exposed to a steep compression gradient . This is proposed to induce growth via the following mechanism ( Fig . 2C ) : vg is assumed to be induced by a compression - dependent mechanism , whereas ds is assumed to RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 139 ( 17 ) Center Compression slope read - out Yki Notch Brk Growth Vg MechanicalCompression Yki Fj Ds Vg MechanicalCompression Fj D Ds Growth D Yki Vg Growth MechanicalCompression Large compression difference : Yki Notch Brk Growth Vg Mechanical Compression 1 2 Termination A B C Build - up of compression during growth Center Pouch edge C o m p r e ss i on Center Pouch edge Center Pouch edge 0 Compression > threshold Compression slope < threshold 1 2 Growth termination when : Fig . 2 . The size regulation mechanism can be understood in terms of a compression gradient model . ( A )  General principle : compression increases in the center during growth . Growth ceases when compression is higher than a certain threshold in the center and the compression gradient is lower than a threshold level in the rest of the disc . ( B , C )  The situations in the center and periphery are depicted in more detail in B and C , respectively . This explanation only involves part of the model and is thus a simplification of the size - regulating mechanism . D E V E L O P M E N T be inhibited by compression . Therefore , a steep compression gradient will result in a steep Vg gradient and an opposing steep Ds gradient . As Vg induces fj and inhibits ds , the steep Vg gradient then leads to a steep Fj gradient and it further increases the slope of the Ds gradient . The opposing Fj and Ds gradients cause an asymmetric intracellular localization of D , which induces growth via the activation of Yki . Growth ceases when the compression gradient is too shallow to activate sufficient Yki for growth induction . The above explanation involves only part of the network and the size - regulating mechanism in the model is more complicated . For example , the Vg - QE activation pattern is not only influenced by the distribution of mechanical stress , but also by the presence of Vg in the dorsoventral boundary and the distribution of Wg and Dpp . The precise effects of the different growth regulatory mechanisms are position and time dependent , and are also somewhat influenced by the exact parameter values used . Comparison of modeling results with available data We aimed to reproduce the most important dynamics of the system as well as a number of key experimental results that are used to argue for and against existing models . In the following section , we focus on these features . Growth dynamics The model was developed in order to explain wing disc size regulation . The most important feature it should therefore be able to reproduce is the large increase in cell cycle time , which has been observed experimentally ( Bryant and Levinson , 1985 ) . In the wing disc , growth first occurs roughly exponentially and then slows down ( Bittig et al . , 2009 ) . The model generates the growth curve as shown in Fig . 3A . Indeed , an exponential growth phase is followed by a large decrease in growth rates . The cell number doubling time increases from about 6 to about 150 hours , and the mitotic index decreases from about 6 to about 0 . 5 % , in agreement with the experimental data ( Bryant and Levinson , 1985 ; Wartlick et al . , 2011 ) . The decrease in growth rates in the model is predominantly caused by decreased Yki activity , as a result of increasing absolute compression levels and a decreasing compression gradient . It has been observed that growth occurs roughly uniformly throughout the disc , even though Dpp , one of the main growth factors , is present in a gradient ( Milán et al . , 1996 ; Schwank et al . , 2011 ) . Our model seems to yield roughly uniform growth in the presence of the Dpp gradient ( Fig . 3C ; supplementary material Movie 1 ) . We also quantified medial and lateral growth using an approach similar to that employed by Schwank et al . ( Schwank et al . , 2008 ) , and found that there is no significant difference in growth rates between these regions ( P  0 . 2 ; Fig . 3B ) . There are several feedback mechanisms responsible for the roughly uniform growth : increased growth leads to increased compression , which decreases growth , and it leads to a compression gradient that induces growth in regions with lower growth rates . Growth in a disc with experimentally induced uniform Dpp shows a non - uniform growth pattern , with high rates laterally and low rates medially ( Rogulja and Irvine , 2005 ; Schwank et al . , 2008 ) . Our model reproduces this pattern ( Fig . 3D ; supplementary material Movie 2 ) . Quantification shows that the growth rates are indeed 3225 RESEARCH ARTICLE Model for disc size regulation M L M L 0 5 10 15 A v e r a g e ce ll c y c l e p r og r e ss i on ( % / h r ) wt uniform DPP * * 0 20 40 60 80 100 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 Time ( hours ) N u m b e r o f ce ll s L M L A B C D L M L wt uniform Dpp Fig . 3 . Simulation data on growth dynamics . ( A )  The average growth curve is depicted in black , whereas the average growth curve ±s . d . is depicted in gray . ( B )  Quantification of growth rates ( ±s . e . m . ) in the lateral ( L ) and medial ( M ) parts of simulated wild - type discs and discs with uniform Dpp signaling , respectively . Different time points are used for analysis , as the discs with uniform Dpp grow considerably faster than wild - type discs . P values were obtained with a two - sided Student’s t - test ; * * P < 0 . 005 . ( C , D )  Simulated BrdU staining in wild - type discs and discs with uniform Dpp signaling . The indicated definitions of the lateral and medial regions were used for the quantification in B . D E V E L O P M E N T 3226 significantly different ( P < 0 . 005 ; Fig . 3C ) , as has been found experimentally ( Schwank et al . , 2008 ) . Similar results are obtained here for a brk - null mutant and for a dpp , brk double mutant ( data not shown ) , also in agreement with existing data ( Schwank et al . , 2008 ) . It has been shown experimentally that medial growth rates decrease when uniform Dpp signaling is induced ( Rogulja and Irvine , 2005 ; Schwank et al . , 2008 ) . However , medial growth levels are higher in the simulated disc with uniform Dpp signaling than in the simulated wild - type disc in Fig . 3B . This is partly because discs with different simulated ages are used , as discs with uniform Dpp signaling grow much faster than wild - type discs . In order to test whether uniform Dpp signaling decreases medial growth , we induced Dpp signaling during growth and compared growth levels before and after induction . In this case , medial growth levels did not change significantly ( 1 . 4 % cell cycle progression / hour before versus 1 . 5 % / hour after induction ; P  0 . 1 ) . Lateral growth levels still increased ( from 1 . 7 to 13 . 2 % / hour ; P < 0 . 005 ) . A possible explanation for this discrepancy will be discussed below ( see Discussion ) . The shapes of clones also give some information about growth dynamics . In the wild - type wing disc , clones are elongated along the proximodistal axis ( Baena - López et al . , 2005 ; Mao et al . , 2011 ) . A similar orientation is seen in our simulations ( supplementary material Fig . S2 ) . Experiments related to the Dpp gradient model A key experiment that has been used to argue in favor of the Dpp gradient model concerns the non - autonomous growth induction by clones in which Dpp signaling is increased ( Rogulja and Irvine , 2005 ) . As can be seen in Fig . 4A , the model reproduces this observation . Contrary to expectation of the Dpp gradient model , it has also been shown that this growth - inducing effect is transient ( Rogulja and Irvine , 2005 ) . In our model , the growth - inducing effect is transient ( compare Fig . 4A with 4A (cid:2) ) . Non - autonomous growth induction in the model is the consequence of a boundary effect caused by increased Vg activity within the clones . This effect is transient due to negative effects of increased compression resulting from additional growth . RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 139 ( 17 ) tkv QD clone ; BrdU staining Mutants without Vg gradient + 38 hrs tkv QD under spalt enhancer BrdU staining Dpp signalling Dpp signalling profile wt vg 0 unif . Vg 0 500 1000 1500 2000 N u m b e r o f ce ll s - 10 - 5 0 5 10 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 N o r m a li ze d [ D pp ] Normalized position on AP - axis * * * Dachs polarization A A’ B C C’ C’’ D E wild - type uniform Dpp Fig . 4 . Simulation results of experiments related to the Dpp gradient model . ( A )  A steep Dpp gradient is created by introducing high levels of Dpp signaling inside the clone . The same simulation is shown at a later time point ( A (cid:2) ) . ( B )  Comparison of final sizes in the wild type , a vg - null mutant and a mutant with high uniform levels of Vg ( ±s . e . m . ) . P values were obtained with a two - sided Student’s t - test ; * P < 0 . 01 , * * P < 0 . 0001 compared with wild type . ( C - C (cid:3) ) Simulation of an experiment where tkv QD was expressed under the spalt enhancer by creating a Dpp profile as shown in C (cid:2) and C (cid:3) . ( D , E )  The polarized intracellular localization of D in wild type and discs with uniform Dpp signaling , respectively . The arrows indicate the average directions of D polarization for small groups of cells . Arrows are included only if the polarization is sufficiently pronounced ( < Xgradw > 2 + < Ygradw > 2 ) 0 . 5 > 0 . 15 , see supplementary material Table S2 ) . Clones in this and other figures are outlined in white . D E V E L O P M E N T In favor of the gradient model , it has also been shown that disc size is decreased when the gradient of vg , which is a target of Dpp , is decreased by either overexpressing ( saturation of response ) or deleting vg ( Baena - Lopez and García - Bellido , 2006 ; Williams et al . , 1991 ) . In agreement with the experimental data , growth does not occur in a vg - null mutant in our model and is decreased in discs with uniform vg overexpression ( Fig . 4B ) . As further support for the Dpp gradient model , it has been shown that boundaries of Ds and Fj activity lead to growth induction ( Rogulja et al . , 2008 ; Willecke et al . , 2008 ) . As can be expected from the assumptions underlying our model , induction of either ds or fj in clones also leads to growth induction at the clone boundaries ( supplementary material Fig . S3 ) . As mentioned above , uniform Dpp signaling leads to increased lateral growth ( Rogulja and Irvine , 2005 ; Schwank et al . , 2008 ) , which contradicts an essential role for a Dpp signaling gradient in these lateral regions . In order to study the role of a Dpp signaling gradient in the medial part of the disc , an activated form of the Dpp receptor Thickveins , Tkv QD , was expressed under the spalt enhancer , which is activated by high levels of Dpp pathway activity ( Schwank et al . , 2008 ) . Such Tkv QD expression leads to the complete repression of brk in the medial region and thus to a flat Brk profile ( Schwank et al . , 2008 ) . As it has been shown that Dpp regulates growth exclusively via Brk ( Schwank et al . , 2008 ) , it would be predicted that growth is eliminated in the medial part of the disc if Dpp signaling differences are required for growth induction . However , growth was found to occur in this region , showing that a gradient of Dpp signaling is also not essential for medial growth induction ( Schwank et al . , 2008 ) . This experimental outcome is reproduced by our model ( Fig . 4C ) . It has been proposed that graded Dpp activity induces growth by influencing asymmetric subcellular D localization ( Rogulja et al . , 2008 ) . However , this polarization is not strongly altered in mutants with uniform Dpp signaling , which would have been expected based on this hypothesis ( Schwank et al . , 2011 ) . Our model reproduces the observed proximodistal polarization of D , as well as the somewhat shifted polarization pattern in discs with uniform Dpp signaling ( Mao et al . , 2006 ; Rogulja et al . , 2008 ; Schwank et al . , 2011 ) . It also reproduces the absence of clear polarization in the centers of these discs ( Fig . 4D , E ) . Experiments related to the Vg feed - forward mechanism The ability of Vg to induce its expression in neighboring cells has been shown most clearly by the following set of experiments ( Zecca and Struhl , 2007b ) : first , vg - QE activity was measured in discs that are mutant for apterous ( ap ) . In these mutants , the dorsoventral boundary is not formed and N is not activated ( Couso et al . , 1995 ; Diaz - Benjumea and Cohen , 1995 ; Williams et al . , 1993 ) . Consequently , vg - BE is not induced and wg expression is largely reduced . Furthermore , vg - QE is not activated and the pouch does not grow ( Zecca and Struhl , 2007b ) . When uniform wg expression is induced , Vg is still absent , showing that Wg ( and Dpp present in these discs ) are not sufficient to induce vg - QE . However , when a clone is induced to express vg , vg - QE is activated autonomously , as well as non - autonomously , in a position - dependent manner and the pouch is partially restored ( Zecca and Struhl , 2007b ) . Our model reproduces these results ( Fig . 5 ) . Experiments related to the mechanical force models In support of mechanical force models , it has recently been shown with birefringence measurements that compression in the center of the disc correlates with disc size ( Nienhaus et al . , 2009 ) . In discs with uniform Dpp signaling , compression also becomes high in the center , but more ridge shaped ( Nienhaus et al . , 2009 ) . The model reproduces these results ( supplementary material Fig . S4A ; see also Fig . 6A , B , C ) . Apical cell shapes in the wing disc epithelium resemble polygons with different numbers of neighbors . The polygon distribution was measured for the entire cell population as well as for mitotic cells only ( Aegerter - Wilmsen et al . , 2010 ; Farhadifar et al . , 2007 ; Gibson et al . , 2006 ) . These data had been reproduced only using models that contain a growth regulatory role for mechanical forces , which argued in favor of such a role ( Aegerter - Wilmsen et al . , 2010 ) . When evaluating the polygon distributions yielded by our model , we found them in agreement with the data ( supplementary material Fig . S4B ) . Parameter analysis In order to assess the effect of the 33 model parameters , we doubled and halved the values of each of them , respectively , and simulated the wild type as well as the different experimental situations ( supplementary material Tables S4 - S7 ) . This analysis reveals that most experimental results are reproduced by most parameter combinations , but that only a few combinations reproduce all of the results . Experimental test of a model prediction Our model predicts the formation of cell shape patterns over time . Akin to the compression gradient , it predicts the absence of a cell area gradient at the beginning of growth , followed by the formation of a cell area gradient with small cells in the center of the disc . Subsequently , this cell area gradient is predicted to become shallower . In order to test this prediction experimentally , we had to take into account the three - dimensional shape of the wing pouch , as the pouch becomes curved as it grows . The analysis is complicated 3227 RESEARCH ARTICLE Model for disc size regulation A C B ap 0 ap 0 + uniform Wg ; vg ↑ - clone ap 0 + uniform Wg vg - QE Fig . 5 . Simulation results of experiments related to the Vg feed - forward mechanism . ( A )  For the simulation of the ap mutant , N is removed and Wg levels are assumed to be constant at a low level . Because of the absence of N , no Vg is produced via the BE either . ( B )  Uniform high levels of Wg were added . In this case , all previously known regulators of vg - QE are present , except for vg expression in neighboring cells . ( C )  A clone with intermediate Vg levels is added that does not produce additional Wg . D E V E L O P M E N T 3228 further by the presence of the peripodial membrane , a thin epithelial layer that lies on top of the wing pouch . We therefore further developed open source software in order to facilitate this analysis ( supplementary material Fig . S1 ) . In order to assess whether there is initially no cell area gradient present , we analyzed discs in which the ring of wg expression has not yet formed . These discs show , on average , a shallow cell area gradient , but there is considerable variation ( Fig . 6D ) . Two out of three discs do not show a significant positive correlation between relative distance from the center of the pouch and cell area ( P  0 . 9 and P  1 . 0 , respectively , Spearman’s rank ) , whereas one disc does show a significant correlation ( P < 0 . 001 ) . One of the former discs even shows a negative correlation ( P < 0 . 05 ) . At the mid - third instar stage , the discs show a much steeper gradient ( Fig . 6E ) and there is indeed a highly significant correlation between relative distance from the center and cell area ( P < 10 – 5 for each disc ) . At the late third instar stage , the gradient is less steep ( Fig . 6F ) , but the correlations are still highly significant ( P < 10 – 5 for each disc ) and the variation among discs is smallest at this stage . Thus , the observed changes of the area gradient are similar to the ones predicted . In addition to the formation of a cell area gradient , the model also predicts a concurrent tangential elongation of peripheral cells . As shown in supplementary material Fig . S5 , the elongation direction of cells in young discs is almost random , whereas peripheral cells in later discs are preferentially elongated in the tangential direction . Even though the experimentally observed pattern seems to be more complex owing to the presence of compartment boundaries , the general trend in observed elongation directions is similar to that predicted . DISCUSSION We present a new model for the regulation of wing disc size . The model contains a rather complex regulatory network , which consists of a considerable number of interactions , receives non - uniform input of protein activities , and interacts with a mechanical stress pattern that emerges over time and space . Nevertheless , a qualitative understanding can be gained by considering it in terms of a compression gradient model . During growth , compression increases in the center of the disc . Growth ceases when compression in the center reaches a certain threshold and the RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 139 ( 17 ) 1 . 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Relativ distance from center 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 Relativ distance from center C e ll a r ea ( a . u . 2 ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 Relativ distance from center C e ll a r ea ( a . u . 2 ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 Relativ distance from center C e ll a r ea ( a . u . 2 ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 Relativ distance from center C e ll a r ea ( a . u . 2 ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 Relativ distance from center C e ll a r ea ( a . u . 2 ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 Relativ distance from center C e ll a r ea ( a . u . 2 ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 Relativ distance from center C e ll a r ea ( a . u . 2 ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 Relativ distance from center C e ll a r ea ( a . u . 2 ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 Relativ distance from center C e ll a r ea ( a . u . 2 ) 0 1 . 0 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 C e ll a r ea ( a . u . 2 ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 10 a . u . E x pe r i m en t M ode l 25 µm 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 C e ll a r ea ( a . u . 2 ) 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 C e ll a r ea ( a . u . 2 ) Rel . dist . center Relative distance from center Relative distance from center A B C D E F C e ll a r ea ( µ m 2 ) C e ll a r ea ( µ m 2 ) C e ll a r ea ( µ m 2 ) Rel . dist . center Relative distance from center Relative distance from center 0 0 Fig . 6 . Comparison of predicted and measured cell area distributions . ( A - C )  Our model predicts an initial build - up of a cell area gradient ( A , B ) , which is flattened at later stages ( C ) . ( D , F )  Initial conditions ( A ) are compared with wing discs in which the ring of wg expression has not yet formed ( D ) , and final simulated distributions ( C ) are compared with late third instar discs ( F ) . ( E )  The pouches of the mid third instar discs contain about one quarter the number of cells of those in the late third instar and are compared with simulated discs ( B ) that contain roughly the same factor - less cells than the final simulated disc . Average results ±s . e . m . of three discs are shown . Dotted lines are linear least square fits through the means . For better comparison of the different stages , the length of the x - axis was scaled with the square root of the area of the late respective discs . Cells were colored according to their area , ranging from 0 to 1 . 3 a . u . 2 for the simulated and from 0 to 16   m 2 for the experimental discs . Images were scaled such that the average cell areas of later simulated and experimental discs are approximately the same . Gray cells are in mitosis and were excluded from the analysis . The initial conditions of the model consist of hexagons only . In this case , cell areas obtained by the simulation are larger than in the case of irregular polygon numbers ( ~ 0 . 5 a . u . 2 ) . D E V E L O P M E N T gradient of the compression gradient drops below a certain threshold in the rest of the disc . Read - out of the compression gradient is accomplished by a mechanism that involves Vg and the Hippo pathway . We have used numerical simulations to show that the model can account for growth termination and that it reproduces a large range of additional data on growth regulation , including some emergent properties of the system . Based upon the principle underlying the model , predictions can be made with respect to cell shape patterns . In order to take into account the curved surface of the wing pouch , we further developed an open source image analysis program . Our results showed that the general dynamics of the formation of cell shape patterns is indeed similar to the one predicted by the model . This analysis is , however , based on images from different discs and , especially during the early stages , there is variation among discs . It would therefore be interesting to assess whether the predicted dynamics is also present in the temporal evolution of single discs . However , this first requires the development of experimental methods with which single discs can be followed over time . Even though the development of cell shape patterns constitutes a fundamental prediction of the model , it would be an interesting future experimental challenge to test the model’s basic assumptions directly , i . e . the regulation of Yki , Arm and ds by mechanical forces . The regulation of Yki by mechanical compression is most relevant for the model’s behavior and appears necessary to obtain growth termination in combination with roughly uniform growth . The regulation of Arm by compression seems to be involved in stabilizing the Vg gradient , which could be relatively unstable if it would be regulated by Vg autoregulation alone . In addition , this interaction smoothens the compression gradient , which might have implications for the 3D structure of the wing disc . Last , the regulation of ds by mechanical forces is not essential for the principle behind size regulation , but improves the modeling results and also contributes to smoothening of the compression gradient . While developing the model , we focused on its ability to reproduce specific features of growth dynamics , as well as a number of key experiments that are used to argue in favor and against current models . One of the latter results , the decrease of medial growth upon induction of uniform Dpp signaling , could not be reproduced ( Rogulja and Irvine , 2005 ; Schwank et al . , 2008 ) . In the simulations , these discs grow very fast . It is conceivable that such growth rates cannot be sustained in vivo because of a limited availability of nutrients and oxygen . When imposing a maximum total growth rate on disc growth , it is indeed possible to obtain growth rates in the medial part that are lower than those in wild - type discs , whereas lateral growth rates are higher , in agreement with experiments ( data not shown ) . Thus , with this additional assumption , the model can reproduce the results it was aimed to reproduce . There are currently no experimental data available on the parameters underlying the model and therefore they were fitted manually . As has become clear from the parameter analysis , there are only a few parameter combinations that can reproduce all results . However , it is not known whether this set is reproduced robustly in vivo and there is no natural selection on reproducing experimental manipulations robustly . Nevertheless , it is entirely possible that a larger set of parameter values should reproduce the results . In addition , even though the model can reproduce the selected set of experimentally observed features , there are related observations it cannot reproduce . For example , the final size reached in the model is too small , the experimentally observed non - autonomous growth induction by clones overexpressing brk ( Rogulja and Irvine , 2005 ) is nearly absent in our model , and growth induction along the boundary of ds overexpressing clones extends further inside the clone than measured experimentally . It would be interesting to study whether there are factors missing in the model , which would make the parameter space less strict . For example , the parameter space was strongly restricted by the stipulation to reproduce the absence of Vg - BE activity in ap 0 mutants upon ectopic wg expression . If it could be assumed that smaller discs have a different geometry in vivo than larger ones , the number of possible parameter combinations would increase . It will be interesting to assess the geometrical properties of discs in young larvae and evaluate whether the model should be adjusted in this respect . Very recently , another model has been formulated for growth regulation that assumes that growth is regulated by increases of Dpp signaling levels over time ( Wartlick et al . , 2011 ) . However , growth is increased in wing discs in which Brk and Dpp signaling are removed ( Schwank et al . , 2012 ) . This either contradicts this model or the current understanding of Dpp signaling needs to be revised . Our model reproduces increased growth in such mutants , including its non - uniformity . The adult wing is covered by bristles , which point towards the distal part of the wing . This orientation is regulated by planar polarity genes ( McNeill , 2010 ) . Regulation of planar polarity seems to be related to growth regulation . For example , Ds and Fj are not only important for growth regulation , but are also required for the development of a proximodistal polarity pattern ( Adler et al . , 1998 ; Zeidler et al . , 2000 ) . It is currently not clear whether Ds and Fj are directly involved in regulating planar polarity ( Ma et al . , 2003 ; Simon , 2004 ; Yang et al . , 2002 ) . If this were the case , then our model would suggest that planar polarity may , at least in part , arise from an interplay between morphogens and mechanical forces . The model presented here was developed for the wing imaginal disc of Drosophila . It would be interesting to see whether a similar model could also reproduce size regulation and additional experimental results in other systems . For other imaginal discs , it has been shown that their centers are also compressed at the end of growth ( Nienhaus et al . , 2009 ) . The precise regulatory networks involved in growth and size regulation are different for the different discs , but it would be interesting to see whether certain principles are conserved . In mammals , mechanical forces regulate growth in many tissues ( Mammoto and Ingber , 2009 ) . However , the situation is often very different from that in the wing disc in that most mammalian tissues reach their final size while they perform a biological function . Thus , it would be interesting to study whether principles similar to those described here apply for mammalian organs early during development . Acknowledgements We thank the high - performance computing team of the informatics services at UZH , in particular Raphael Graf , for support with the parameter analysis ; Maria Willecke and Sabine Schilling for useful discussions ; Gerald Schwank and George Hausmann for their comments on the manuscript ; and the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank for supplying antibodies . Funding We thank the Swiss National Science Foundation , the Roche Research Foundation , the Forschungskredit of UZH , and SystemsX . ch within the framework of the WingX and the Plant Growth RTD for funding . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . 3229 RESEARCH ARTICLE Model for disc size regulation D E V E L O P M E N T 3230 Supplementary material Supplementary material available online at http : / / dev . biologists . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 082800 / - / DC1 ReferencesAdler , P . N . , Charlton , J . and Liu , J . ( 1998 ) . Mutations in the cadherin superfamily member gene dachsous cause a tissue polarity phenotype by altering frizzled signaling . Development 125 , 959 - 968 . Aegerter - Wilmsen , T . , Aegerter , C . M . , Hafen , E . and Basler , K . ( 2007 ) . Model for the regulation of size in the wing imaginal disc of Drosophila . Mech . Dev . 124 , 318 - 326 . Aegerter - Wilmsen , T . , Smith , A . C . , Christen , A . J . , Aegerter , C . M . , Hafen , E . and Basler , K . ( 2010 ) . Exploring the effects of mechanical feedback on epithelial topology . Development 137 , 499 - 506 . Asipauskas , M . , Aubouy , M . , Glazier , J . , Graner , F . and Jiang , Y . ( 2003 ) . A texture tensor to qualify deformations : the example of two - dimensional flowing foams . Granul . Matter 5 , 71 - 74 . Baena - López , L . A . , Baonza , A . and García - Bellido , A . ( 2005 ) . The orientation of cell divisions determines the shape of Drosophila organs . Curr . Biol . 15 , 1640 - 1644 . Baena - Lopez , L . A . and García - Bellido , A . ( 2006 ) . Control of growth and positional information by the graded vestigial expression pattern in the wing of Drosophila melanogaster . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 13734 - 13739 . Baonza , A . and Garcia - Bellido , A . ( 2000 ) . Notch signaling directly controls cell proliferation in the Drosophila wing disc . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 2609 - 2614 . Basler , K . and Struhl , G . ( 1994 ) . Compartment boundaries and the control of Drosophila limb pattern by hedgehog protein . Nature 368 , 208 - 214 . Bittig , T . , Wartlick , O . , González - Gaitán , M . and Jülicher , F . ( 2009 ) . Quantification of growth asymmetries in developing epithelia . Eur . Phys . J . E Soft Matter 30 , 93 - 99 . Bohn , H . ( 1976 ) . Tissue interactions in the regenerating cockroach leg . In Insect Development , Vol . 8 ( ed . P . Lawrence ) , pp . 170 - 185 . Oxford , UK : Royal Entomological Society of London Symposium . Bryant , P . J . and Levinson , P . ( 1985 ) . Intrinsic growth control in the imaginal primordia of Drosophila , and the autonomous action of a lethal mutation causing overgrowth . Dev . Biol . 107 , 355 - 363 . Campbell , G . and Tomlinson , A . ( 1999 ) . Transducing the Dpp morphogen gradient in the wing of Drosophila : regulation of Dpp targets by brinker . Cell 96 , 553 - 562 . Certel , K . , Hudson , A . , Carroll , S . B . and Johnson , W . A . ( 2000 ) . Restricted patterning of vestigial expression in Drosophila wing imaginal discs requires synergistic activation by both Mad and the drifter POU domain transcription factor . Development 127 , 3173 - 3183 . Colombelli , J . , Besser , A . , Kress , H . , Reynaud , E . G . , Girard , P . , Caussinus , E . , Haselmann , U . , Small , J . V . , Schwarz , U . S . and Stelzer , E . H . ( 2009 ) . Mechanosensing in actin stress fibers revealed by a close correlation between force and protein localization . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 1665 - 1679 . Couso , J . P . , Bishop , S . A . and Martinez Arias , A . ( 1994 ) . The wingless signalling pathway and the patterning of the wing margin in Drosophila . Development 120 , 621 - 636 . Couso , J . P . , Knust , E . and Martinez Arias , A . ( 1995 ) . Serrate and wingless cooperate to induce vestigial gene expression and wing formation in Drosophila . Curr . Biol . 5 , 1437 - 1448 . Day , S . J . and Lawrence , P . A . ( 2000 ) . Measuring dimensions : the regulation of size and shape . Development 127 , 2977 - 2987 . Desprat , N . , Supatto , W . , Pouille , P . A . , Beaurepaire , E . and Farge , E . ( 2008 ) . Tissue deformation modulates twist expression to determine anterior midgut differentiation in Drosophila embryos . Dev . Cell 15 , 470 - 477 . Diaz - Benjumea , F . J . and Cohen , S . M . ( 1995 ) . Serrate signals through Notch to establish a Wingless - dependent organizer at the dorsal / ventral compartment boundary of the Drosophila wing . Development 121 , 4215 - 4225 . Dupont , S . , Morsut , L . , Aragona , M . , Enzo , E . , Giulitti , S . , Cordenonsi , M . , Zanconato , F . , Le Digabel , J . , Forcato , M . , Bicciato , S . et al . ( 2011 ) . Role of YAP / TAZ in mechanotransduction . Nature 474 , 179 - 183 . Entchev , E . V . , Schwabedissen , A . and González - Gaitán , M . ( 2000 ) . Gradient formation of the TGF - beta homolog Dpp . Cell 103 , 981 - 992 . Farge , E . ( 2003 ) . Mechanical induction of Twist in the Drosophila foregut / stomodeal primordium . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1365 - 1377 . Farhadifar , R . , Röper , J . C . , Aigouy , B . , Eaton , S . and Jülicher , F . ( 2007 ) . The influence of cell mechanics , cell - cell interactions , and proliferation on epithelial packing . Curr . Biol . 17 , 2095 - 2104 . Fernández , B . G . , Gaspar , P . , Brás - Pereira , C . , Jezowska , B . , Rebelo , S . R . and Janody , F . ( 2011 ) . Actin - Capping Protein and the Hippo pathway regulate F - actin and tissue growth in Drosophila . Development 138 , 2337 - 2346 . French , V . , Bryant , P . J . and Bryant , S . V . ( 1976 ) . Pattern regulation in epimorphic fields . Science 193 , 969 - 981 . Gibson , M . C . , Patel , A . B . , Nagpal , R . and Perrimon , N . ( 2006 ) . The emergence of geometric order in proliferating metazoan epithelia . Nature 442 , 1038 - 1041 . Go , M . J . , Eastman , D . S . and Artavanis - Tsakonas , S . ( 1998 ) . Cell proliferation control by Notch signaling in Drosophila development . Development 125 , 2031 - 2040 . Goulev , Y . , Fauny , J . D . , Gonzalez - Marti , B . , Flagiello , D . , Silber , J . and Zider , A . ( 2008 ) . SCALLOPED interacts with YORKIE , the nuclear effector of the hippo tumor - suppressor pathway in Drosophila . Curr . Biol . 18 , 435 - 441 . Halder , G . , Polaczyk , P . , Kraus , M . E . , Hudson , A . , Kim , J . , Laughon , A . and Carroll , S . ( 1998 ) . The Vestigial and Scalloped proteins act together to directly regulate wing - specific gene expression in Drosophila . Genes Dev . 12 , 3900 - 3909 . Huang , J . , Wu , S . , Barrera , J . , Matthews , K . and Pan , D . ( 2005 ) . The Hippo signaling pathway coordinately regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis by inactivating Yorkie , the Drosophila homolog of YAP . Cell 122 , 421 - 434 . Hufnagel , L . , Teleman , A . A . , Rouault , H . , Cohen , S . M . and Shraiman , B . I . ( 2007 ) . On the mechanism of wing size determination in fly development . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 3835 - 3840 . Jazwinska , A . , Kirov , N . , Wieschaus , E . , Roth , S . and Rushlow , C . ( 1999 ) . The Drosophila gene brinker reveals a novel mechanism of Dpp target gene regulation . Cell 96 , 563 - 573 . Jursnich , V . A . , Fraser , S . E . , Held , L . I . , Jr , Ryerse , J . and Bryant , P . J . ( 1990 ) . Defective gap - junctional communication associated with imaginal disc overgrowth and degeneration caused by mutations of the dco gene in Drosophila . Dev . Biol . 140 , 413 - 429 . Kasza , K . E . and Zallen , J . A . ( 2011 ) . Dynamics and regulation of contractile actin - myosin networks in morphogenesis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 23 , 30 - 38 . Kierzkowski , D . , Nakayama , N . , Routier - Kierzkowska , A . L . , Weber , A . , Bayer , E . , Schorderet , M . , Reinhardt , D . , Kuhlemeier , C . and Smith , R . S . ( 2012 ) . Elastic domains regulate growth and organogenesis in the plant shoot apical meristem . Science 335 , 1096 - 1099 . Kim , J . , Irvine , K . D . and Carroll , S . B . ( 1995 ) . Cell recognition , signal induction , and symmetrical gene activation at the dorsal - ventral boundary of the developing Drosophila wing . Cell 82 , 795 - 802 . Kim , J . , Sebring , A . , Esch , J . J . , Kraus , M . E . , Vorwerk , K . , Magee , J . and Carroll , S . B . ( 1996 ) . Integration of positional signals and regulation of wing formation and identity by Drosophila vestigial gene . Nature 382 , 133 - 138 . Kim , J . , Johnson , K . , Chen , H . J . , Carroll , S . and Laughon , A . ( 1997 ) . Drosophila Mad binds to DNA and directly mediates activation of vestigial by Decapentaplegic . Nature 388 , 304 - 308 . Kirkpatrick , H . , Johnson , K . and Laughon , A . ( 2001 ) . Repression of Dpp targets by binding of brinker to mad sites . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 18216 - 18222 . Klein , T . and Arias , A . M . ( 1998 ) . Different spatial and temporal interactions between Notch , wingless , and vestigial specify proximal and distal pattern elements of the wing in Drosophila . Dev . Biol . 194 , 196 - 212 . Lele , T . P . , Pendse , J . , Kumar , S . , Salanga , M . , Karavitis , J . and Ingber , D . E . ( 2006 ) . Mechanical forces alter zyxin unbinding kinetics within focal adhesions of living cells . J . Cell . Physiol . 207 , 187 - 194 . Ma , D . , Yang , C . H . , McNeill , H . , Simon , M . A . and Axelrod , J . D . ( 2003 ) . Fidelity in planar cell polarity signalling . Nature 421 , 543 - 547 . Mammoto , A . and Ingber , D . E . ( 2009 ) . Cytoskeletal control of growth and cell fate switching . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 21 , 864 - 870 . Mao , Y . , Rauskolb , C . , Cho , E . , Hu , W . L . , Hayter , H . , Minihan , G . , Katz , F . N . and Irvine , K . D . ( 2006 ) . Dachs : an unconventional myosin that functions downstream of Fat to regulate growth , affinity and gene expression in Drosophila . Development 133 , 2539 - 2551 . Mao , Y . , Tournier , A . L . , Bates , P . A . , Gale , J . E . , Tapon , N . and Thompson , B . J . ( 2011 ) . Planar polarization of the atypical myosin Dachs orients cell divisions in Drosophila . Genes Dev . 25 , 131 - 136 . Martín , F . A . , Pérez - Garijo , A . , Moreno , E . and Morata , G . ( 2004 ) . The brinker gradient controls wing growth in Drosophila . Development 131 , 4921 - 4930 . McNeill , H . ( 2010 ) . Planar cell polarity : keeping hairs straight is not so simple . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 2 , a003376 . Milán , M . , Campuzano , S . and García - Bellido , A . ( 1996 ) . Cell cycling and patterned cell proliferation in the wing primordium of Drosophila . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 640 - 645 . Minami , M . , Kinoshita , N . , Kamoshida , Y . , Tanimoto , H . and Tabata , T . ( 1999 ) . brinker is a target of Dpp in Drosophila that negatively regulates Dpp - dependent genes . Nature 398 , 242 - 246 . Neumann , C . J . and Cohen , S . M . ( 1996a ) . Distinct mitogenic and cell fate specification functions of wingless in different regions of the wing . Development 122 , 1781 - 1789 . Neumann , C . J . and Cohen , S . M . ( 1996b ) . A hierarchy of cross - regulation involving Notch , wingless , vestigial and cut organizes the dorsal / ventral axis of the Drosophila wing . Development 122 , 3477 - 3485 . Neumann , C . J . and Cohen , S . M . ( 1997 ) . Long - range action of Wingless organizes the dorsal - ventral axis of the Drosophila wing . Development 124 , 871 - 880 . Ng , M . , Diaz - Benjumea , F . J . , Vincent , J . P . , Wu , J . and Cohen , S . M . ( 1996 ) . Specification of the wing by localized expression of wingless protein . Nature 381 , 316 - 318 . RESEARCH ARTICLE Development 139 ( 17 ) D E V E L O P M E N T Nienhaus , U . , Aegerter - Wilmsen , T . and Aegerter , C . M . ( 2009 ) . Determination of mechanical stress distribution in Drosophila wing discs using photoelasticity . Mech . Dev . 126 , 942 - 949 . Posakony , L . G . , Raftery , L . A . and Gelbart , W . M . ( 1990 ) . Wing formation in Drosophila melanogaster requires decapentaplegic gene function along the anterior - posterior compartment boundary . Mech . Dev . 33 , 69 - 82 . Rauskolb , C . , Pan , G . , Reddy , B . V . , Oh , H . and Irvine , K . D . ( 2011 ) . Zyxin links fat signaling to the hippo pathway . PLoS Biol . 9 , e1000624 . Resino , J . , Salama - Cohen , P . and García - Bellido , A . ( 2002 ) . Determining the role of patterned cell proliferation in the shape and size of the Drosophila wing . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 7502 - 7507 . Rodríguez , I . ( 2004 ) . The dachsous gene , a member of the cadherin family , is required for Wg - dependent pattern formation in the Drosophila wing disc . Development 131 , 3195 - 3206 . Rogulja , D . and Irvine , K . D . ( 2005 ) . Regulation of cell proliferation by a morphogen gradient . Cell 123 , 449 - 461 . Rogulja , D . , Rauskolb , C . and Irvine , K . D . ( 2008 ) . Morphogen control of wing growth through the Fat signaling pathway . Dev . Cell 15 , 309 - 321 . Rulifson , E . J . and Blair , S . S . ( 1995 ) . Notch regulates wingless expression and is not required for reception of the paracrine wingless signal during wing margin neurogenesis in Drosophila . Development 121 , 2813 - 2824 . Sansores - Garcia , L . , Bossuyt , W . , Wada , K . , Yonemura , S . , Tao , C . , Sasaki , H . and Halder , G . ( 2011 ) . Modulating F - actin organization induces organ growth by affecting the Hippo pathway . EMBO J . 30 , 2325 - 2335 . Schwank , G . , Restrepo , S . and Basler , K . ( 2008 ) . Growth regulation by Dpp : an essential role for Brinker and a non - essential role for graded signaling levels . Development 135 , 4003 - 4013 . Schwank , G . , Tauriello , G . , Yagi , R . , Kranz , E . , Koumoutsakos , P . and Basler , K . ( 2011 ) . Antagonistic growth regulation by Dpp and Fat drives uniform cell proliferation . Dev . Cell 20 , 123 - 130 . Schwank , G . , Yang , S . F . , Restrepo , S . and Basler , K . ( 2012 ) . Comment on “Dynamics of dpp signaling and proliferation control” . Science 335 , 401 . Shraiman , B . I . ( 2005 ) . Mechanical feedback as a possible regulator of tissue growth . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 3318 - 3323 . Simon , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Planar cell polarity in the Drosophila eye is directed by graded Four - jointed and Dachsous expression . Development 131 , 6175 - 6184 . Spencer , F . A . , Hoffmann , F . M . and Gelbart , W . M . ( 1982 ) . Decapentaplegic : a gene complex affecting morphogenesis in Drosophila melanogaster . Cell 28 , 451 - 461 . Strigini , M . and Cohen , S . M . ( 2000 ) . Wingless gradient formation in the Drosophila wing . Curr . Biol . 10 , 293 - 300 . Tabata , T . and Kornberg , T . B . ( 1994 ) . Hedgehog is a signaling protein with a key role in patterning Drosophila imaginal discs . Cell 76 , 89 - 102 . Teleman , A . A . and Cohen , S . M . ( 2000 ) . Dpp gradient formation in the Drosophila wing imaginal disc . Cell 103 , 971 - 980 . Wada , K . , Itoga , K . , Okano , T . , Yonemura , S . and Sasaki , H . ( 2011 ) . Hippo pathway regulation by cell morphology and stress fibers . Development 138 , 3907 - 3914 . Wartlick , O . , Mumcu , P . , Kicheva , A . , Bittig , T . , Seum , C . , Jülicher , F . and González - Gaitán , M . ( 2011 ) . Dynamics of Dpp signaling and proliferation control . Science 331 , 1154 - 1159 . Willecke , M . , Hamaratoglu , F . , Sansores - Garcia , L . , Tao , C . and Halder , G . ( 2008 ) . Boundaries of Dachsous Cadherin activity modulate the Hippo signaling pathway to induce cell proliferation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 14897 - 14902 . Williams , J . A . , Bell , J . B . and Carroll , S . B . ( 1991 ) . Control of Drosophila wing and haltere development by the nuclear vestigial gene product . Genes Dev . 5 , 2481 - 2495 . Williams , J . A . , Paddock , S . W . and Carroll , S . B . ( 1993 ) . Pattern formation in a secondary field : a hierarchy of regulatory genes subdivides the developing Drosophila wing disc into discrete subregions . Development 117 , 571 - 584 . Williams , J . A . , Paddock , S . W . , Vorwerk , K . and Carroll , S . B . ( 1994 ) . Organization of wing formation and induction of a wing - patterning gene at the dorsal / ventral compartment boundary . Nature 368 , 299 - 305 . Yang , C . H . , Axelrod , J . D . and Simon , M . A . ( 2002 ) . Regulation of Frizzled by fat - like cadherins during planar polarity signaling in the Drosophila compound eye . Cell 108 , 675 - 688 . Yoshigi , M . , Hoffman , L . M . , Jensen , C . C . , Yost , H . J . and Beckerle , M . C . ( 2005 ) . Mechanical force mobilizes zyxin from focal adhesions to actin filaments and regulates cytoskeletal reinforcement . J . Cell Biol . 171 , 209 - 215 . Zecca , M . and Struhl , G . ( 2007a ) . Control of Drosophila wing growth by the vestigial quadrant enhancer . Development 134 , 3011 - 3020 . Zecca , M . and Struhl , G . ( 2007b ) . Recruitment of cells into the Drosophila wing primordium by a feed - forward circuit of vestigial autoregulation . Development 134 , 3001 - 3010 . Zecca , M . and Struhl , G . ( 2010 ) . A feed - forward circuit linking wingless , fat - dachsous signaling , and the warts - hippo pathway to Drosophila wing growth . PLoS Biol . 8 , e1000386 . Zecca , M . , Basler , K . and Struhl , G . ( 1996 ) . Direct and long - range action of a wingless morphogen gradient . Cell 87 , 833 - 844 . Zeidler , M . P . , Perrimon , N . and Strutt , D . I . ( 2000 ) . Multiple roles for four - jointed in planar polarity and limb patterning . Dev . Biol . 228 , 181 - 196 . 3231 RESEARCH ARTICLE Model for disc size regulation D E V E L O P M E N T