This article was downloaded by : [ Monash University Library ] On : 04 May 2015 , At : 08 : 18 Publisher : Routledge Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number : 1072954 Registered office : Mortimer House , 37 - 41 Mortimer Street , London W1T 3JH , UK The Information Society : An International Journal Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / www . tandfonline . com / loi / utis20 Making it work : A field study of a “CSCW Network” John Bowers a a Department of Psychology , University of Manchester , Oxford Road , Manchester , M13 9PL , United Kingdom E - mail : Published online : 26 Apr 2010 . To cite this article : John Bowers ( 1995 ) Making it work : A field study of a “CSCW Network” , The Information Society : An International Journal , 11 : 3 , 189 - 207 , DOI : 10 . 1080 / 01972243 . 1995 . 9960192 To link to this article : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01972243 . 1995 . 9960192 PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information ( the “Content” ) contained in the publications on our platform . However , Taylor & Francis , our agents , and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy , completeness , or suitability for any purpose of the Content . Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors , and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis . The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information . Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses , actions , claims , proceedings , demands , costs , expenses , damages , and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with , in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content . This article may be used for research , teaching , and private study purposes . Any substantial or systematic reproduction , redistribution , reselling , loan , sub - licensing , systematic supply , or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden . Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http : / / www . tandfonline . com / page / terms - and - conditions The Information Society , Volume 11 , pp . 189 - 207 0197 - 2243 / 95 J10 . 00 + . 00 Printed in ( he UK . All rights reserved . Making It Work : A Field Study of a " CSCW Network " JOHN BOWERS Department of Psychology University of Manchester Manchester , United Kingdom This article presents a field study of the procurement , implementation , and use of a local area network devoted to running computer - supported cooperative work ( CSCW ) related applications in a U . K . central government organization . In this particular case , the network ran into a number of difficulties , was resisted by its potential users for a variety of reasons , was faced with being withdrawn from service on a number of occasions , and remains only partly used . The study points to the kinds of problems that a project to introduce computer support for cooperative work to an actual orga - nization is likely to face , and a series of concepts is offered to help manage the com - plexity of these problems . In so doing , this article adds to and extends previous studies of CSCW tools in action but also argues that experience form the field should be used to reorganize the research agenda of CSCW . Keywords case study , CSCW , ethnography , groupware , networks , organizations , use studies It is now eight years since the first conference explicitly devoted to computer - supported cooperative work ( CSCW ' 86 , Austin , Tex . ) . In the interim , we have seen the maturing of a number of the applications described in developmental form at that conference and their commercial release . This has prompted some evaluation studies examining the use of CSCW - related or CSCW - inspired tools . However , while there are many studies of elec - tronic mail usage , investigations into more sophisticated CSCW or " groupware " tools re - main few in number . Furthermore , those that attempt to study CSCW applications in ac - tion in actual work settings rather than in the laboratory are even rarer . Those that do exist ( e . g . , Bullen & Bennett , 1990 ; Grudin , 1988 ; Harper , 1992 ; Markus & Connolly , 1990 ; Orlikowski , 1992 ) give the impression that CSCW tools , though promising great gains , can run into a series of severe problems in their situations of use . As the momen - tum of both CSCW research and commercial exploitation is undiminished , these findings may cause some concern . Received 15 January 1995 ; accepted 15 March 1995 . The support of the following is acknowledged : the European Communities ' ESPRIT Basic Re - search Action , COMIC ; Rank Xerox Research Centre Cambridge EuroPARC ; and CCTA : the Gov - ernment Centre for Information Systems . Tom Rodden , Graham Button , and Tom Dale are thanked for many helpful suggestions and other forms of help during the conduct of this research . This article originally appeared in the ACM 1994 Conference on Computer - Supported Coop - erative Work . Copyright © 1995 Association for Computing Machinery . Reprinted by permission . Address correspondence to John Bowers , Department of Psychology , University of Manches - ter , Oxford Road , Manchester M13 9PL , United Kingdom . E - mail : bowers @ hera . psy . man . ac . uk 189 D o w n l o a d e d by [ M on a s h U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y ] a t 08 : 18 04 M a y 2015 790 J . Bowers For example , in a well - known paper , Grudin ( 1988 ) tells of an electronic meeting scheduler that can automatically find free slots in the diaries of individuals within a group and inform those involved of meetings at those times . The problem with such an applica - tion is that each individual in the group in question would have to keep a personal diary for the meeting scheduler to work at all and would have to maintain it in an accurate and up - to - date condition for the scheduler to be useful . Grudin argues that while a manager might see the utility of such an application in alleviating the burden of trying to find time when everyone is free , those who are managed have to do extra work in keeping diaries they might not otherwise bother with . The discrepancy between who gets the benefit and who does the ( extra ) work is one of Grudin ' s three problems that can lead to " groupware failure . " Orlikowski ( 1992 ) reports a field study of the introduction of Lotus Notes to an organization she calls " Corporation Alpha . " The manner of the implementation of Lotus Notes , Orlikowski suggests , militated against users developing an appropriate understanding of the collaborative aspects of Lotus Notes . In the absence of such a " mental model , " Lotus Notes was assimilated to more familiar personal applications . This led to the usage of Lotus Notes being resisted and inadequately integrated into members ' working practices , as well as to some skepticism about Lotus Notes ' abili - ties . Furthermore , the reward systems , policies and procedures , culture , and " work norms " at large in Corporation Alpha made it difficult for members to see the worth of Lotus Notes in their work or how its use would be accounted for or how the time spent on the system would be charged . The impression one gets from Orlikowski ' s study is that a technology that is inconsistent with the form of an organization is likely to be rejected . Harper ( 1992 ) continues this theme of organizational form influencing the accept - ability of technology . In a comparison of the use of " active badges " in two research labo - ratories , Harper argues that their use and acceptance vary subtly both between the two or - ganizations and within an organization in relation to the roles and responsibilities associated with different jobs . Orlikowski ' s and Harper ' s work has implication for how we should see the organization / technology relation . They both argue that the extent to which a technology will be accepted is closely tied to the form and nature of the organi - zation it is implemented in . On the other hand , organizations are depicted explicitly in Harper ' s account ( and by implication in Orlikowski ' s ) as resistant to change—in particu - lar , change provoked by the introduction of new technologies . These and related " technological failures " ( if they are taken to be such ) have pro - voked a number of responses . Some researchers have criticized the manner in which computer - based tools are typically developed and imposed on users and have tried to re - orient the relations between designers and situations of use . This kind of critique and re - sponse is commonplace among those who advocate " participatory design . " For example , B0dker and Gr0nbsek ( 1991 ) argue for the rapid , cooperative prototyping of tools devel - oped in close collaboration with actual end users and evaluated in a work - like situation of use . Other researchers have argued that ethnographic study and related methods drawn from a sociological and anthropological tradition can help give researchers an in - depth knowledge of the work practices into which a new application may be inserted . While there now exist examples of ethnographers and computer scientists in long - standing col - laborations ( e . g . , Bentley et al . , 1992 ) , the precise way in which knowledge of a field site can be introduced to system development remains controversial ( Hughes et al . , 1992 , 1994 ) . Yet other researchers point to the relative immaturity of CSCW as a research field and reassure themselves that " it is early days yet . " D o w n l o a d e d by [ M on a s h U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y ] a t 08 : 18 04 M a y 2015 Making It Work 191 This article seeks to add to this literature on the examination of CSCW - related tools in action . However , the approach taken here and the kind of field site studied differ from the work of , for example , Harper and Orlikowski . One particularly interesting feature of the current study is that many of the users we encounter in it were very familiar with the aims , findings , and nature of CSCW research . Indeed , the network was introduced specifically and reflexively to study CSCW technologies and the relevance of CSCW re - search to the users ' own organization . In sociological terms , " CSCW " was itself a " member - category " for many of the people studied : They talked about what was and was not CSCW , and what were the interesting recent developments in the field . This de - gree of acquaintance presents an interesting contrast with the consultancy firm studied by Orlikowski . Also , in contrast to the study of " active badges " reported by Harper , the applications in use in the current study are not in development , they are widely available commercially , and the work setting is not a research laboratory responsible for the de - velopment of the applications , but an organization within the United Kingdom central government . Finally , the author is particularly interested in exploring the relation be - tween the social / organizational and the technical not just as a way of advancing work within CSCW but as a general issue within the social and computing sciences . Accord - ingly , this article toward the end avails itself of and points to connections between CSCW and areas such as the sociology of science and technology ( e . g . , Bijker et al . , 1987 ; Latour , 1987 ; Woolgar , 1991 ) and recent developments in organization theory ( e . g . , Bloomfield , 1991 ; Cooper , 1990 ) . The Organizational Setting The setting for the fieldwork reported in this article has been an organization within the United Kingdom central government . This organization , which can be called CGO , ' is re - sponsible for developing the standards , procurement policies , and specifications of best practice that central government organizations should observe with respect to government computing . Additionally , as—increasingly in the United Kingdom—private - sector orga - nizations often undertake work in contract with central government and indeed , as more government functions are " privatized , " the advice of CGO and its publications often find clients and readers outside of a central government context . For example , CGO has been responsible for developing a systems analysis and design methodology that has become very well known and is widely used in both government and the private sector . CGO ' s work also includes managing and maintaining the infrastructure of the government ' s telecommunications network , developing quality management and security procedures , and ( controversially ) taking a leading role in " market testing " ( exploring possibilities for the delegation of CGO ' s own services to the private sector ) . In March 1993 , CGO had 379 permanent staff members . Over the last 3 years , CGO has undergone an organizational change that members typically report as being extensive . According to an introductory brochure called " This Is CGO " that visitors can take from piles situated in public places around the CGO London and Norwich offices , the organization has become " streamlined " and " rationalized " so that it can be more " attuned to its clients ' needs . " Among other things , these changes have involved combining , renaming , and in some cases removing branches of the organi - zation , together with introducing a group of people ( account managers ) specifically re - sponsible for liaising between the organization and its customers and monitoring how work should be accounted and charged for . The culmination of these organizational changes was marked by two developments in 1992 - 1993 . First , CGO—formerly a divi - D o w n l o a d e d by [ M on a s h U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y ] a t 08 : 18 04 M a y 2015 192 J . Bowers sion of the Department of the Treasury—was transferred to the Office of Public Service and Science , and second , it was decided that CGO ' s entire operation should be concen - trated at its Norwich site in a new building . The move to Norwich is anticipated to be completed this year . The Future Technology Branch Among CGO ' s various branches , the Future Technology Branch ( FTB ) has the brief of exploring new computing developments and research in computer science and allied trades . Additionally , each year , FTB organizes a 2 - day conference and exhibition called " Developing Technologies . " Each of FTB ' s members is responsible for a number of re - search and development areas , and through commissioning consultants ' reports or through their own analysis work , among other activities , they assemble " Technology Briefs " that report on " the state of the art " for further dissemination through CGO . Antic - ipating that it may be of relevance to central government computing , FTB has conducted a number of studies of the emerging research field of computer - supported cooperative work ( CSCW ) , employing a series of consultants over the last 5 years who have among them written a review monograph on the subject and explored how recent research in the social and computing sciences may impact upon more established methods of systems analysis and design , such as those CGO has been associated with in the past . As a main part of this endeavor over the last 2 years , FTB members have themselves installed a local area network of computers that runs a variety of applications , all of which are in - tended to " supported cooperative working . " It is this network ( known to members as " the CSCW Network " ) , the issues involved in its construction and maintenance and in the use of the applications present , and how all of these matters are experienced in CGO that is the subject of the field work reported here . The CSCW Network : Hardware and Software At any one time , this network has consisted of about 20 Apple Macintosh computers con - nected together via Ethernet . During the lifetime of the project , the exact models of ma - chines have undergone change as older machines have been upgraded and faulty ma - chines replaced . Indeed , as discussed later , this changing constitution of the network has led to some problems in its management and use . Initially , the CSCW Network consisted of Macintoshes drawn from the Mac II range . At the time of writing ( February 1994 ) , the network mixes four Mac Centris ma - chines , two Quadras , and one LC Series I alongside the remaining Mac II machines . The network topology is a straight line connecting the machines , which are spread over the sixth , seventh , and eighth floors of CGO ' s London building . After much experimenta - tion , two machines ( a Quadra and a Mac Ilfx ) have been dedicated to running server ap - plications : one running the electronic mail server , one running all the other server appli - cations . Additionally , the Mac LC machine is now dedicated to running modem and remote access software . The remaining desktop machines reside in individuals ' offices and are used as personal , networked machines . In addition , 10 Apple Powerbooks have been purchased . Nearly all the commercially available applications for the Macintosh that permit multiple users or that have been explicitly promoted as supporting group work have been purchased for this network . This includes well - known applications such as Lotus Notes 2 and less well - known ones such as MarkUp—a tool for supporting commenting ( and D o w n l o a d e d by [ M on a s h U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y ] a t 08 : 18 04 M a y 2015 Making It Work 193 marking up ) of draft documents . However , only some of these are in regular use on the network . The most significant are ( in approximate order of frequency of usage ) : • Quickmail , which provides electronic mail • Meeting Maker , a shared electronic diary and meeting scheduling tool • Inforum , an electronic discussion tool that can also be used as a bulletin board • Timbuktu , a screen - sharing application • Information - sharing facilities provided under Apple ' s System 7 • AppleTalk Remote , which provides remote access to the CSCW Network • MarkUp , an electronic document annotation tool • Aspects , a shared authoring application In addition , multiuser , networkable versions of project management and database soft - ware have been purchased ( Mac Project Pro and Filemaker Pro ) . Day - to - day word - pro - cessing , spreadsheet , and graphical work is supported by Claris Works . It should be noted that Apple hardware and related software are nonstandard procure - ments for CGO . Indeed , CGO has a PC - based corporate standard network , TYSIM , which offers word processing , e - mail , diary management , and other tools , and which all CGO employees can have access to . However , Dan—the CSCW Network project manager— specifically argued for a more self - contained network so that ( 1 ) a larger range of CSCW - related and CSCW - inspired applications could be purchased and ( 2 ) their use and impacts could be studied in an experimental fashion . As we shall see , the practical sustainability ( or otherwise ) of Dan ' s attempts at " experimental control " and the relative isolation of one network from the other turn out to be critical to the fate of the CSCW Network project . The CSCW Network : The Users Over the lifetime of the CSCW Network , its constituency of users has changed as indi - viduals have been promoted , transferred , or , in one case , retired . 3 However , throughout , the intention of the CSCW Network has been to connect the members of two branches ( FTB and one other , the Designated Studies Branch , discussed later ) and those involved with the management " line " these branches are part of . This includes : Within the Future Technology Branch ( FTB ) : • Alan , the head of FTB ( retired March 1993 ) . • Dan , the project manager and FTB member with a particular interest in CSCW research . • Dave , the FTB member with a particular interest in Optical Character Recognition technologies and natural - language interfaces to databases . • Dwight , assistant to Alan , Dan , and Dave . Within the Designated Studies Branch ( DSB ) : • Will , the head of DSB ( and from March 1993 of FTB as well ) . • Terry , who is principally responsible for the DSB ' s work on compara - tive studies of operating systems and computing developments for the disabled . • Mike , a student on release to CGO , assistant to Terry . Jon , head of the Special Studies Department ( SSD ) , which contains DSB , FTB , and three other branches ( the heads of these branches also have access to the Net - work but are only occasional users ) , and his secretary . D o w n l o a d e d by [ M on a s h U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y ] a t 08 : 18 04 M a y 2015 194 J . Bowers Des , head of the division that contains the Special Studies Department . Jon reports to Des . Des ' s secretary is also on the Network . ( In August 1994 , Des was pro - moted to director of CGO . ) Two consultants : • Charlotte , contracted to FTB to provide training in the facilities on the Network . • Louise , contracted to FTB to organize the annual " Developing Tech - nologies " conference . In addition to these 16 users , who have had access to the network through most of the project ' s lifetime , 10 others have had usernames on the network at sometime or another . These have included one user who daily accessed the network by a remote call from CGO ' s Norwich office . Two further consultants ( Max and Tim ) have been employed to advise on the introduction and use of the network . These external consultants do not have usernames on the CSCW Network but have written a series of documents advising FTB on how the network might be best used and studied . Brief Outline of Fieldwork Methods Employed The author has had contact with CGO for nearly 6 years , including 2 years ( up to April 1994 ) that involved my undertaking a field study of the installation and early and mature use of the CSCW Network . In the period January - April 1992 , 1 undertook a series of detailed interviews with most of the personnel listed above . All interviews were tape - recorded , open - ended , and lasted up to 3 hours . On the basis of these inter - views , a series of field observation studies was planned , involving " shadowing " per - sonnel in their work . These were extended over an 18 - month period following initial interviews . From November 1993 until April 1994 , I engaged in another round of in - terviews with the principal network users . Most Network users , thus , have been the subject of two interview studies and extended periods of observation while at work . Over the whole period of my contact with CGO , I have also accumulated specimen re - ports and other documents , official CGO and Civil Service publications , some office memos , and archives of electronic communication . I have a complete " log " of 6 months of electronic mail usage as well as complete archives of bulletin boards and so forth . Throughout , my analysis of these materials has been attentive to the problems that network users have encountered in their use of the network and how these problems relate not only to the functionality of the technology but also to the nature of CGO as an organization and the form that the work of CGO members takes . I have been at par - ticular pains to characterize " the work to make the CSCW Network work " in all its various forms and the resistance the network has encountered . This has included at - tending to : • How the network and the usage of the applications that run on it become concerns that require management ( the network is not just used ; it and its use are managed ) . • The accounts members have of the network , their work , and how their work changes with the introduction of the network facilities ( e . g . , how is the network to be used for electronic document production and what problems does this raise ? ) . • How organizational concerns relate to the network , its usage , and its acceptability or otherwise . D o w n l o a d e d by [ M on a s h U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y ] a t 08 : 18 04 M a y 2015 Making It Work 195 CSCW and the Transition to Electronic Document Production : Cataloguing Difficulties Much of the work of the civil servants who use the CSCW Network is concerned with document production . In their work , researching developments in computing of possible relevance to government , writing business cases , reports , or technical briefs , or soliciting reports from consultants are central activities . The introduction of the network and the ap - plications that run on it has afforded the opportunity to study some of the issues raised when a paper - document - intensive work site faces the possible automation of its docu - ment production practices . In this section , I report on some of the issues I have observed as being pertinent for members . Changing Documents or Rejecting Technology Many of the debates I have observed surrounding the introduction of the CSCW Network can be expressed in terms of the choice between changing the existing form of documents or the practices surrounding their production on the one hand or rejecting the new tech - nology as being inconsistent with those existing practices on the other . For example , one of the applications procured by the FTB supports the production of " smart forms " where fields can be designed and constraints expressed over the kinds of material that can be placed in the fields . When combined with an appropriate mail system , this application could support the " intelligent " routing of messages . At one meeting , two consultants to the network project ( Max and Tim ) and Dan were exploring the possibility of using this application to support the production of business cases within FTB . According to Dan , fields could be defined mimicking the standard structure of CGO business cases , and the case—when complete—could be routed automatically to the appropriate person to give approval for the case . It became apparent , however , that the application placed limits on how large fields could be . This was taken as a reason by the consultants to reject the ap - plication for supporting business cases , as sections from existing business cases in FTB frequently exceeded the limits the application would impose . In contrast , Dan took this as an advantage of the use of " smart forms " as it would encourage the writing of more con - cise business cases , indeed , ones that were more strictly compliant with CGO ' s guide - lines for their production . This is an example of a recurrent phenomenon in the use of CSCW technologies and the transition to electronic document production at CGO . The acceptability of new tech - nical possibilities is not so much a matter of how well a new possibility allows the mim - icking of existing paper - based practices but of whether existing paper - based practices are regarded as legitimate in the first place . Thus , the introduction of new technical possibili - ties for future work provokes debates about past practices . Conducting and managing these debates or anticipating their possibility has been an overhead in exploring possibili - ties for automating document production . This overhead can become significant if prima facie the argument could go either way ( as with the example mentioned earlier ) . The Unfeasibility of Total Automation and the Counterproductiveness of Partial Automation Providing automated support for all aspects of a document production practice is often unfeasible . If a document is to be sent to someone not on the CSCW Network , then it has to be printed out and put in the internal mail . Here , electronic mail will obviously not do as a complete solution . It turned out that the " smart forms " mentioned earlier could not D o w n l o a d e d by [ M on a s h U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y ] a t 08 : 18 04 M a y 2015 196 J . Bowers import text from a word - processing package or be integrated with e - mail in the manner hoped for . Thus , the total automation of the business case production and approval cycle ( i . e . , conducting it entirely with electronic documents and related communication ) turned out to be unfeasible . However , it often appeared to FTB members that partially auto - mated solutions with the applications available to them were also objectionable . If the work of translating in or out of an electronic medium [ through , say , optical character recognition ( OCR ) or retyping ] was seen to exceed the benefit of using the automated fa - cilities , then cases could be produced for resisting the new facilities altogether . Electronic Documents , Trust , and Awareness Several members reported that they did not " trust " the CSCW Network and the applica - tions implemented on it . For example , after a number of early delivery failures , Dave took to printing out a copy of all e - mail sent and received . Occasionally he took a by - hand copy as well . While , of course , one can debate the appropriateness of this reaction , it nevertheless provides a stark example of the lengths workers are prepared to go to if a technology does not command their trust—lengths that add to the work they are doing . In a related fashion , several users of the network reported that they were frequently unaware of events on the network . The e - mail package used did not have an alerting mechanism . The computer conferencing package did but , naturally , its alert was—as one member put it— " vanilla flavored " : Important arrivals were not any differently signaled than trivial ones . Once alerted or once a period of time had elapsed when a user suspected that im - portant e - mail might have arrived , members would often interrupt their ongoing work to consult e - mail and / or the conferencing facilities . Persistent " to - ing and fro - ing " from one application to another was reported by several users as annoying and—at times when time - critical work was being undertaken—as counterproductive . Members often con - trasted the delivery of e - mail with the delivery of internal mail where delivery times were fixed and commonly understood , and the physical presence of correspondence of varying shapes , sizes , and appearances in an in - tray constituted a more robust and " seeable - at - a - glance " mechanism for alerting recipients . Electronic Documents and Their Mobility In principle , electronic documents are highly mobile from one CSCW Network node to another . However , reading and annotating documents are activities that senior civil ser - vants often have to perform at locations far removed from the network and under cir - cumstances that make the use of even a portable computer unfeasible ( e . g . , on crowded commuter trains ) . For Des , one of the more senior civil servants on the Network , this proved to be a substantial complaint over the pertinence of the CSCW Network facilities to his work . Much of Des ' s working life was spent in meetings at various locations in the United Kingdom and Europe or in transit between them . On the occasions when Des would work over weekends , he would often do this at sea aboard his yacht ( which had no CSCW Network access ! ) . There was no point in having documents and related com - munication in electronic form for him if the majority of his opportunities for work would be in " hostile " environments militating against the use of computing technology . Even the overhead involved in printing out a document ( especially if it was lengthy ) would be , for him , excessive . Accordingly , this worker often asked for hard copy of documents intended for his attention . Under certain circumstances , knowing that this would be his preference , authors of documents for Des in turn bypassed the use of elec - D o w n l o a d e d by [ M on a s h U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y ] a t 08 : 18 04 M a y 2015 Making It Work 197 tronic document production or transmission facilities as—if the end product was always going to be treated as hard copy—there was no point in using any document technology more advanced than a standard word processor . In this way , the case for resisting some of the CSCW - related applications and document production facilities " trickled down " the line . Sharing Electronic Documents and Dilemmas of Responsibility Another " in principle benefit " of electronic document production , transmission , and stor - age is that it affords easier " shareability " of data . This , naturally , is a ubiquitous theme of the CSCW literature . Indeed , CGO ' s CSCW Network offered several ways of sharing data ( e . g . , file sharing under Macintosh System 7 , shared database applications ) . How - ever , sharing data can often bring about dilemmas of responsibility and ownership . On several occasions , workers reported an unwillingness to share data lest it be updated inap - propriately or otherwise altered by some one else . The significance and practical use of various fields in a database record , for example , may have been developed " privately " by a single user . To allow others " in " would involve ( at the very least ) engaging in extra work annotating the database or explaining use conventions to others , and this would still not eliminate the risk that the database might be modified in ways that the initial user would find confusing . Additionally , database and other electronic document modifica - tions may not be automatically notified . Thus , a group of users sharing data may not be aware of changes made since they last used the shared document or data and so forth . Again , alerting other users to changes became an overhead to the sharing of documents and data , which—on some occasions—was solved by , for example , affixing yellow Post - it notes to the screens of other users who shared the data . On other occasions , the over - head involved in sharing was anticipated in advance as involving prohibitive risks or extra work , leading to data being kept privately or to Louise printing out versions that she annotated by hand and took to be the database as it was the only secure and up - to - date version . Ironically , under these circumstances , the electronic and shareable version be - comes but " a pale shadow of the real one . " Electronic Documents : Are They a Form of Writing or a Form of Speech ? Several members reported dilemmas over how electronic documents should be under - stood pragmatically . For example , in some members ' accounts , there is a difference in the Civil Service between spoken interaction and the written word . Spoken interaction , I was told by Dave , is likely to be cordial , consensual , and less critical than how written texts are taken . Writing , because written / printed documents are the medium for policy and its interpretation—practices that are frequently governed by law—is treated with a skeptical orientation , small details are noted and criticized , and exact wordings come to be impor - tant . According to these accounts , text in an electronic medium is profoundly indetermi - nate pragmatically . Should a bulletin board contribution be taken as akin to " consensual , corridor conversation " or more like fragments of policy requiring debate and analysis ? Two infrequent users of the Network gave me this as their account for their relative reluc - tance to engage with the new facilities : They were unsure about how their words were going to be taken and ( in their words ) " had their fingers burnt already . " Several authors have argued that electronic writing has this ambiguous location between speech and writ - ing . In these accounts , this is not only oriented toward by members but it is given a spe - cific inflection in the light of a formulation of the culture of their organization . D o w n l o a d e d by [ M on a s h U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y ] a t 08 : 18 04 M a y 2015 198 J . Bowers Rationales and Accountability The bulletin board and computer conferencing technologies in place on the CSCW Net - work aroused a degree of controversy from members over the accountability of their con - tributions . In many ways , this relates to several aspects of the point just made about the " pragmatics " of electronic text . For some members on some occasions , the accumulating contributions to a discussion on a conferencing system provided an automatically cap - tured , emerging rationale for decisions taken , an argument one can also find in the CSCW literature . Will and Jon were especially attracted to the use of conferencing technologies to assist in this manner in the discussion of issues in the management of FTB and SSD . However , for other members and / or on other occasions , there was a concern that contri - butions to the conferencing system would make decision making visible and hence ac - countable in ways that otherwise would not occur . As contributions were indelibly stamped with the time and the name of the individual author in question , several mem - bers felt that sending messages to a computer conference was a dangerous thing to do and that quite serious and unanticipatable ramifications of such an action might lie in wait in the future . For some members , especially when combined with the points made earlier about speech / writing dilemmas and differences , this constituted a reason for either not using the technology or for using it in a self - consciously safe and mundane way—an out - come that contradicts the accounts one sometimes reads in the CSCW literature about the usefulness of conferencing and allied technologies for creative or problem - solving work or for exploring the available possibilities in decision making . In contrast to relaxed cre - ativity , using conferencing technologies was for Louise ( in her words ) " sticking my head up above the parapet . " In this way , ironically , the " real work " of decision making re - mained off the network and unsupported by it . Changing the Temporality of Work One of the earliest applications for the electronic document production facilities on the CSCW Network that was foreseen by members concerned computer - based support for the writing of monthly reports . FTB and DSB are responsible for the production of monthly reports of their activities , including accounts of meetings attended , deliverables produced , in - line work - planning changes , and a whole section concerning financial man - agement and expenditure in the previous calendar month . The production of these re - ports—prior to the introduction of the network ' s facilities—involved the soliciting of in - dividual contributions from FTB and DSB members by respective branch heads , who would then edit the ( often handwritten contributions ) into an appropriately organized re - port together with contributions of their own . The branch head of DSB , Will , reported that this whole process would typically take him 2 solid days of work . On Alan ' s retire - ment , Will took over the management of FTB as well and was not relishing the potential irony of spending a substantial portion of a month reporting on what the branches did in the rest of it ! Will was particularly hopeful that the CSCW Network might help him in his part of the work of writing monthly branch reports . The facilities of the network were investigated to see how they might be employed to assist the electronic production of these documents . Ultimately , a number of facilities were put in place : a computer conference in which members would commit to and report on their completion of contributions , a series of named and shared " drop folders " where members would deposit raw text for inclusion , templates for use in preparing contribu - tions and giving an overall organization to each report , and a shared archive of past re - ports . After 2 or 3 months of usage , Will reported only partial gains in the production of D o w n l o a d e d by [ M on a s h U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y ] a t 08 : 18 04 M a y 2015 Making It Work 199 monthly reports . They were still taking him about 2 days to do . Part of the problem was that he was unaware of when contributions were being deposited in the drop folders and had to search periodically ( in his words ) " on the off - chance of something new having ar - rived . " Another aspect was that it was hard to start work on the report before knowing the overall shape that it was going to take . Members were not using the computer conference that had been set up to indicate what their contributions would be or to notify when they had been written . Branch members , on the other hand , could not clearly see the value of using the computer conference . It seemed to add unnecessarily to their work . Accordingly , Will began to suggest new methods for producing monthly reports electronically . Instead of submitting contributions in a brief period after the relevant month had been completed , members were to report on their activities as and when they occurred , sending outlines to the conference and full text accounts to the drop folders . In this way , not only would the branch head be able to anticipate the shape of the following month ' s report , but he would also become more aware of the activities of members as they would be of each other ' s activities . In this use of electronic document production fa - cilities , the temporality of the work of writing a report has been changed from something done " in a blast " after the reporting period was complete to something done throughout the reporting period . However , several branch members were unhappy about this solution too . As it suggested to them that they had to report on all their activities as and when they did them , there were concerns that this marked a lack of trust in how members spent their time . Additionally , the use of conferencing technology was resisted : Members said , " Why should I tell everyone what I ' ve been doing when it ' s just a matter between me and the branch head ? " Electronic Documents and the Visibility of Document Production Practices The case of the impact of CSCW technologies on monthly reporting practices has another aspect that is worth bringing out , as this has been observed in other uses of such tech - nologies at CGO . Producing documents in an electronic medium on a network allows not just the products ( the documents themselves ) of practices to be available but also allows the practices by which those products are created to be visible , inspectable , and manage - able . Assembling material for monthly reports is now to be spread over the month . Not only is the monthly report to be produced , it is to be produced in the right kind of way . This change—for Des and Jon , two of the senior managers at CGO—meshes with the aim to become a " quality organization " where the processes by which work is done are as open to quality inspection as are the products of that work . In this picture , electronic doc - ument and CSCW technologies may support total quality reviewing and inspection be - cause the practices of document production leave as legible traces as the products them - selves . By having a " peek in " at the status of work , Jon could ensure that work was being done according to approved " quality methods " and was on schedule and so forth . Re - viewing , commenting , and business case approval procedures have all been discussed in relation to the CSCW Network in this way at CGO . Appreciating these opportunities for increased management and inspection of the day - to - day texture of work , there have been debates about how the network should be used : whether the aim of total visibility of work should be pursued or whether the current practices of , for example , working on documents and only at exact , clear moments hand - ing them over , moving them from the private to the public domain , should continue to be honored . At the time of writing , these two orientations make an uneasy peace between them . While the practices of monthly report writing are being made increasing visible to D o w n l o a d e d by [ M on a s h U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y ] a t 08 : 18 04 M a y 2015 200 J . Bowers the branch head , his line manager ( Jon ) , though also on the CSCW Network , cannot peek into the drop folders and the monthly report conference . This has been done quite bluntly by not giving Jon access to these sources . Will suspects that this arrangement cannot go on for very long and that Jon may well be offended if he finds out this arrangement . In - deed , Jon has complained to me that " I am not being included in using the Network for monthly branch reports . " On the other hand , several branch members have instructed me that they may not prepare their contributions online if their preliminary drafts are now going to be inspectable by not only the branch head but also his line manager . Simulating line management through access controls has its dilemmas , then , while facilitating the visibility of all aspects of document production practices is not clearly satisfactory or even always possible . Anticipating that the preliminary or " in progress " nature of their work might be misunderstood and perhaps inappropriately censured , some members have made their current work " invisible " to their managers . Again ironically , in this way , the " real work " of document production often remained off the network and unsupported by it . As before , the artful management of these dilemmas has been a substantial overhead in the implementation and use of the network . The CSCW Network in the End 4 Ultimately , the CSCW Network has settled into a fairly stable pattern of usage in the 6 months up to April 1994 . Person : to - person electronic mail is extensively used on a day - to - day basis by a " hard core " of six network users . However , usage is heavily " skewed " toward these six , who between them have been responsible for over 85 % of the Net - work ' s mail traffic . My final interviews with users ( which can only be briefly discussed here ) reveal a continued reluctance to use or experiment with the other applications on the network , except in a casual fashion . Certainly , for many users , it has only been the electronic mail facilities that have even come close to being part of their daily working lives . The applications more closely related to or inspired by CSCW research have re - mained , as one user put it , " exotica . " From the earlier " catalogue of difficulties , " one can see how this situation has emerged . The individualized division of labor that exists in CGO does not make it obvi - ous to CSCW Network users why they should share data or collaborate on document pro - duction . Dave has different areas of interest in his work from Dan , Will , and Terry . He is interested in following the relevance of OCR technologies for central government com - puting , Dan is not . Dave , then , is content to inform others of his work via e - mail on a " need to know basis " and sees little use for joint authoring and computer conferencing technologies . Sharing data , reporting on one ' s own work , and engaging in electronic rather than spoken communication all lead to organizational dilemmas that require extra time and effort to deliberate over , debate , manage , or work around . Similarly , the net - work ' s facilities have been resisted when dilemmas over how they fit into the organiza - tion ' s line management structure have not been solved . In contrast with Orlikowski ' s ( 1992 ) claims in her study of Corporation Alpha , the CGO workers are not resisting the CSCW " exotica " through lack of an understanding of what CSCW is about . As noted in the introduction to this article , CSCW and collabora - tive computing were certainly familiar to CGO workers . Even with this understanding , CSCW tools may be resisted if they do not relate to members ' work practices . Does this mean that the CSCW Network has been a failure ? Well , this is not as clear . Indeed , members themselves are divided on this issue . Dan , the project manager , has char - acterized the network as " a failure but an instructive one . " In interview , however , most D o w n l o a d e d by [ M on a s h U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y ] a t 08 : 18 04 M a y 2015 Making It Work 20 ] other users characterize the network as a success when asked . But this is largely due to ei - ther ( 1 ) drawing comparisons between the corporate standard network TYSIM that reflect well on the CSCW Network ( " it ' s much easier to use than TYSIM " ) , and / or ( 2 ) focusing particularly on the electronic mail facilities ( " Quickmail is easy to use and much more flexible than TYSIM ' s e - mail " ) . Jon , by contrast , characterizes the CSCW Network as having failed because ( 1 ) nobody used what he takes to be " the CSCW facilities , e - mail doesn ' t really count , " and ( 2 ) the whole CSCW Network project has not offered demon - strable gains over what was already available on TYSIM , which remains after all the cor - porate standard , and for an organization devoted to developing standards for others to fol - low , the use of a nonstandard Apple network without clear advantages is " too dangerous . " Equally , Jon is concerned that " from the outside " it will seem strange that—even allowing for the use of Apple technology—a well - known application like Lotus Notes was not specifically used . The facts that Lotus Notes was not fully available at the outset of the project and that Dan argues that Lotus Notes does not yet match the full functionality of the suite of applications purchased will seem inadequate defenses " from the outside . " What these different accounts of the CSCW Network ' s success or failure suggest is that this judgment is not only variable among members but also contingent upon : • Just what in members ' accounts the Network and , indeed , CSCW itself are taken to be ( as an e - mail platform , it ' s a success ; as a CSCW experiment , it ' s an instructive failure ) . • Just what comparisons are made with other available or known technical solutions ( Is it better than TYSIM ? than Lotus Notes ? ) . • For how long the suspension of existing organizational standards and policies can be argued for especially under anticipated pressure from " outsiders " to whom a " client - centered " organization should be increasingly accountable . Thus , I would maintain it is important that the current account should not be read as an - other failure story . For one thing , given that the CGO members between them are quite nuanced and flexible in their understanding of the terms " success " and " failure , " I ( as an - alyst ) should certainly match them ! But in addition , for us to classify the CSCW Network one way or another may be to crudely simplify and direct attention away from the series of practical problems that need to be addressed when moving CSCW out of the labora - tory and into the outside world . The next section offers some concepts inspired by the foregoing fieldwork that may help us negotiate this transition . Understanding CSCW in Action I want to conclude by picking out a number of general points to make about the fieldwork reported here . In so doing , I want to introduce some concepts that may have some general utility in helping understand the complex issues surrounding the " real world " implemen - tation of CSCW technologies . Design , Debate , and Boundary Objects First , it is important to realize the debated significance of the technologies I have ex - amined . A technology for documenting decision - making rationale may equally appear to be a device for increasing the accountability that workers have for all aspects of their work . A technology that may support the transformation of work may seem to another party to be inadequately sensitive to existing practices . What Max and Tim , the consul - D o w n l o a d e d by [ M on a s h U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y ] a t 08 : 18 04 M a y 2015 202 J . Bowers tants , described as " routine computer conferencing with a bit of fancy structure thrown in " was presented in the manual as an " electronic meeting tool . " What was to Dan and Terry a " screen - sharing application " was to Louise " Big Brother . " In design , we must ( somehow ) anticipate that the significance of what we produce is likely to be a debated and often unsettled affair as soon as our products fall into the hands of others . Star sug - gests on the basis of a series of studies ( e . g . , Star & Griesemer , 1989 ) that this dilemma is often resolved through the creation of " boundary objects , " entities that can , in some sense , be shared across different social worlds , yet have a variable significance be - tween them . Boundary objects have the dual nature of being both abstract and concrete . Perhaps , if we recognize the variable significance of CSCW technologies when they are put into action in actual organizational settings , we should make the development of boundary objects an aim of design . Admittedly , this is a speculative suggestion , but it does indicate that a " requisite ambiguity " in technology may be a desirable feature of design . Network Implementation , Management , and Use as Heterogeneous Engineering It does not seem analytically justified to classify the problems and issues we have en - countered as being either purely social / organizational on the one hand or purely technical on the other . Most of the phenomena are composites and materially heterogeneous . They are sociotechnical . Client - server architectures , the pragmatic status of electronic writing , the mobility ( or otherwise ) of electronic documents , and questions of data sharing are all issues with human and nonhuman components . The management and use of a CSCW net - work will require the solution of a range of problems , be they economic or electronic , or - ganizational or computational . In proposing the CSCW Network , procuring it , and man - aging it , Dan has had to follow and anticipate markets for computing products , learn about client server architectures , and orient to the sensitivities of his co - workers , as well as get down on his hands and knees to repair cabling . But this is a mundane multidiscipli - narity , an everyday flexibility geared toward solving day - to - day problems as best one can . Those involved with the maintenance and use of a CSCW network have to be - come—in Law ' s ( 1987 ) phrase— " heterogeneous engineers . " The Organizational Significance of CSCW Technologies Clients and servers , electronic writing , data sharing , and the rest also all have an organi - zational inflection , often a quite explicit one in terms of the " culture " of the civil service or the changing role of central government organizations and so forth . Additionally , while organizational standards are not an " iron cage " of rules that members must operate within ( their suspension can be argued for ) , they can return with vengeance if things go wrong . In this way , what seems in prospect like an interesting experiment can be in retro - spect a dangerous fragmentation of " how we should do things " or of the organization it - self . Accounts of what the organization has been , is , or should be , enter in as resources to resolving questions surrounding what should be done and with what technology . Thus , CSCW research also has to be organizational research—but organizational research , I would suggest , of a new sort : one that takes seriously the variable identity of organiza - tions , how accounts of organizations operate performatively as both enablements and constraints , and how technologies do not so much exist in an organizational " context " but are part of what organizations actually turn out to be ( Bloomfield , 1991 ; Cooper , 1990 ; Jirotka et al . , 1992 ) . D o w n l o a d e d by [ M on a s h U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y ] a t 08 : 18 04 M a y 2015 Making It Work 203 Neither Organizational nor Technological Determinism but the " Gradient of Resistance " These last points about organization / technology relations can be illustrated further . I have noted that the individualized division of labor in CGO , as it is understood by FTB and DSB members , militates against their use of CSCW technology . Indeed , it seems that only those technologies that " mesh " with this ( e . g . , person - to - person e - mail ) are used and accepted . These findings make it tempting to tell an " organizational determinist " story : Only those technologies consistent with the form of an organization will be accepted . However , Jon ( and occasionally Des and Will ) has suggested that this division of labor is a fault with CGO and should not be taken for granted . Indeed , Jon laments the lack of teamwork in the British Civil Service in general and suggests that " forward - looking peo - ple " are anticipating this changing . In the early days of the CSCW Network project , Jon looked to the technology to provoke this organizational change . Jon on that occasion was himself offering a kind of technological determinism : Organizations will change in re - sponse to technology . Similarly , the discussion between the consultants and Dan over the use of " smart forms " for business cases saw the consultants being organizational deter - minists ( rejecting the technology because of how business cases were done ) and Dan being a kind of technological determinist ( using the technology to try to encourage new forms of business case ) . That members themselves can vary in their own accounts of the organization / tech - nology relation suggests that it would be ill - advised to opt for any simplified account . Jon and Dan might have achieved the transformation of organizational form through technol - ogy . But it turned out that the former was the stronger force . One can imagine other cases where the relation might be reversed or more complex . Simplified accounts of the rela - tionship between organizations and technology only become available once the story has been told . The CGO case only seems amenable to an organizational determinist reading now and retrospectively ; then and prospectively , it was unclear which would be the stronger " force " or exert the greatest " resistance " to change—preexisting work practices and organizational form , or the CSCW technologies themselves . Bowers and Pycock ( 1994 ) introduce the image of the " gradient of resistance " to help us understand issues in technological development and implementation . At any mo - ment , some aspects of a " sociotechnical complex " will tend to resist change more than others . What actually changes depends in turn on the forces that can be amassed to pro - voke it . What matters is what ' s Tesilient and what isn ' t and the distribution of forces , not whether one element is human ( or social ) and one nonhuman ( or technical ) . 5 In the cur - rent case , CGO ' s division of labor resisted change just as much as the maximum field size of the " smart forms . " In contrast , the practices surrounding the production of monthly branch reports can be varied a little more easily , as can which machine operates as a mail server . Understanding and managing change is a matter of sorting out what re - sists and what doesn ' t and what are the available resources that can be mobilized as forces for change . An image of this sort should encourage us to look at the details of cases and not argue for grand theories that relate technological cause to organizational ef - fect ( or vice versa ) in crude ways . The Productivity Paradox Several authors have claimed that the computerization of the workplace often leads to at best modest productivity gains and often losses , in spite of the promises that accrue to au - tomation ( e . g . , Thurow , 1991 ) . While the meaning of " productivity " and questions of D o w n l o a d e d by [ M on a s h U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y ] a t 08 : 18 04 M a y 2015 204 J . Bowers measurement remain highly controversial , this finding should not surprise us . One way of reading the " catalogue of difficulties " noted earlier is in terms of how they all contribute to a significant management overhead for the network studied . All the matters discussed are ones that require a degree of management . Some seem to provoke well - nigh in - tractable problems . Some seem to touch on quite profound questions about the legitimacy of current and past practices and ( even ) the destiny of the organization itself . " The work to make the network work " is considerable . There are a large number of ( quite heteroge - neous ) problems that require solution or management . Thus , I would contend that there is no grand , general explanation of the productivity paradox ( in spite of the efforts of some theoreticians ) , just a multiplicity of mundane , day - to - day troubles , which together can be enough to make any technical innovation grind to a halt . The Work to Make the Network Work I have been at pains to emphasise the unanticipated overhead that came with the introduc - tion of the CSCW Network to CGO : the work required to make the network work . This is for two reasons . First , it is easy to miss such work or dismiss it as merely " oiling the wheels , " but in this case , the many and varied ways in which introducing CSCW tools has led to extra work have at various times threatened the viability of the whole project . Second , the phrase " the work to make IT [ information technology ] work " I suggest as a general characterization of the phenomenon Grudin ( 1988 ) observes some specific mani - festations of . For example , Grudin argues that one reason why " groupware fails " is that who gets the benefit and who has to do extra work are often discrepant . While this can be true , discrepancies between the beneficiaries and the ( extra ) workers is not a necessary condition for failure . Extra work—no matter who does it or how it relates to benefit—can sometimes be reason enough for abandoning technologies or certain courses of action . And sometimes not . For extra work can sometimes pass undetected or at other times might be regarded as " a good job for a junior to do to find out what goes on here " and so forth . Furthermore , what counts as a benefit and what counts as significant extra work is not always agreed upon in a work site , and this discord itself can be problematic for CSCW tools . In short , there are a multitude of ways in which the work to make IT work may manifest itself . Grudin ' s story of the electronic meeting scheduler is an elegant , though particular , example of one way in which this work can be recognized and distrib - uted . One should not be so naive 6 as to think that " groupware success " is guaranteed if those who get the benefit and those who work for it are the same . Some Futures for CSCW Research It was remarked earlier that one should resist reciting the CGO case as a failure story . I also want to circumvent a pessimistic reading of this article with respect to CSCW re - search itself . While studies like the current one and others ( Grudin , 1988 ; Harper , 1992 ; Orlikowski , 1992 ; Zuboff , 1988 ) indicate that CSCW ( or groupware ) tools are likely to face tough problems when they get implemented in actual work settings , this should not be taken as an argument for abandoning CSCW research . Indeed , the opposite is so . A field study like the one reported can be a valuable source of information about what re - search issues should be prioritized and what is less crucial . This need not match how we normally see research priorities , and in this way we can learn from the field . 7 For exam - ple , in this field site , the utility of a shared authoring tool hinged on whether sharing itself was desirable , not on which protocol for cursor control it implemented ! D o w n l o a d e d by [ M on a s h U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y ] a t 08 : 18 04 M a y 2015 Making It Work 205 Clearly , a study like the one at CGO points to the importance of formulating imple - mentation and change management strategies appropriate for CSCW . But it may also re - organize our technological research agenda . Specifically , the CGO experience has led to three particular issues being identified by me and my colleagues involved in the develop - ment of new applications . More detailed accounts of our development ideas appear in other articles in this journal and elsewhere . Here , just a simple overview is given by way of conclusion . More sophisticated awareness mechanisms are required for CSCW . The applications installed on the CSCW Network did not always incorporate mechanisms for alerting users to relevant events and when they did , the mechanisms were not always informative . Accordingly , users often reported problems to do with their " awareness " of what was happening on the network and what the current state of their work was . A beep is too blunt an awareness tool . More sophisticated access mechanisms are required for CSCW . The Civil Servants studied worked with a line management organizational structure . Relating " the line " to the Network proved problematic , especially when attempts were made to simulate the line management structure through access controls . Just like beeps , access controls are blunt tools . In response to observations like these , Benford et al . ( 1994 ) reports on work developing a model of awareness and access for guiding the development of both virtual - reality - based CSCW technologies and more traditional shared databases . More support should be available for CSCW network management . Network and sys - tem management is an often neglected art . However , the management of CGO ' s CSCW Network and the multiplicity of tasks involved in it proved to be a substantial source of extra , unanticipated work . If anything , the complexity of CSCW tools may lead to an even greater management overhead than with more conventional tools . Indeed , the practical fea - sibility of many CSCW implementation attempts may stand or fall on the basis of whether system management will be a tractable task . Accordingly , management issues should not be relegated to being a mundane issue of lesser research interest , but tools that actually support this task should be explored . Bowers et al . ( 1994 ) make a start on developing ap - plications that give users views on the very networks and tools that they use . Whatever the outcome of our current technological development endeavors , as more and more applications develop a maturity that takes them out of laboratories and into or - ganizations , for CSCW , implementation studies will be where the action ' s at . Notes 1 . To maintain anonymity , all proper names of persons , organizations and branches within or - ganizations , and corporate networks have been changed . 2 . Though Lotus Notes was not fully implemented across the CSCW Network . 3 . Identifying users in the field is problematic ! For one thing , the extent to which an individu - al ' s work involves computer use at all and , for another , whether using the CSCW Network consti - tutes an individual ' s main encounter with computers are highly variable matters across the people named in the text . Observations like this make employing the concept of " user " straightforwardly to refer to people in a field setting somewhat tricky . For example , one person rejected my charac - terization of him as " a CSCW Network user " in an interview ! To be a user or not , for this person , was not an innocent matter . It concerned how I should regard his allegiance to the network . As a nonuser , he could not be held responsible for what went on there . Thus , " user " can be a " member category " with particular patterns of usage ( ! ) open to empirical study . This , however , would take us away from the focus of the current article , where I continue to refer to users while being mindful of the term ' s problematic status ; see Cooper and Bowers ( in press ) , who make a start at analyzing D o w n l o a d e d by [ M on a s h U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y ] a t 08 : 18 04 M a y 2015 206 J . Bowers how the term " user " has emerged in HCI to set HCI apart as a new research field potentially dis - tinct from traditional ergonomics with its concern for " the operator . " 4 . My intensive contact with CGO and the study of the Network came to a close in April 1994 . " In the end " can , therefore , only mean " at the time my contact ended . " I cannot know whether there were any further , decisive developments after I left the scene . This is one of the limits of field research . One might want to tell definitive stories about technologies , but field re - search ( like any other method , I would want to add ) can only yield provisional results and inter - pretations . 5 . It is important to realize that this is not an implicit advocacy of an antihuman moral or po - litical philosophy . It may certainly matter to those humans involved whether they are being forced to change or not ! However , I argue elsewhere ( Bowers , 1992 ) that a view about human / technology relations like that in the text is actually of more use to humans in addressing the politics of technol - ogy than any view that makes either technology to be an irresistible force or organizations to be im - movable objects . 6 . And naturally Grudin isn ' t—as he makes plain in Grudin ( 1990 ) , which contains points similar to some of those made here . 7 . Of course , this is not the only way in which we can learn from the field . Field study can also give us the detailed knowledge of work practice required for the motivated development of tools for those practices . On the many ways in which field study can relate to design and develop - ment , see , for example , Hughes et al . ( 1992 , 1994 ) . References Benford , S . , J . Bowers , L . Fahlen , and T . Rodden . 1994 . Realising a spatial model for virtual envi - ronments . In Proceedings of ERCIM : European Research Consortium for Information and Mathematics , eds . B . Pehrson and E . Skarbäck , June 1994 . Stockholm : Swedish Institute of Computer Science . Bentley , R . , J . Hughes , D . Randall , T . Rodden , P . Sawyer , D . Shapiro , and I . Sommerville . 1992 . Ethnographically informed systems design for air traffic control . In Proceedings of CSCW ' 92 , eds . J . Turner and R . Kraut . New York : ACM Press . Bijker , W . , T . Hughes , and T . Pinch , eds . 1987 . The social construction of technological systems . Cambridge , Mass . : MIT Press . Bloomfield , B . 1991 . Information systems in the U . K . NHS . Social Studies of Science 21 : 701 - 734 . Bødker , S . , and K . Grønbæk . 1991 . Cooperative prototyping studies—Users and designers envision a dental case record system . In Studies in computer supported cooperative work , eds . J . M . Bowers and S . D . Benford . North Holland : Elsevier . Bowers , J . M . 1992 . The politics of formalism . In Contexts of computer mediated communication , ed . M . Lea . Brighton : Harvester . Bowers , J . , and J . Pycock . 1994 . Talking through design : Requirements and resistance in coopera - tive prototyping . In Proceedings of CHI ' 94 , Boston , April . New York : ACM Press . Bowers , J . M . , J . Pycock , G . Dean , and T . Rodden . 1994 . Running the network : Supporting cooper - ative systems . Information Technology and People 7 ( 2 ) : 7 - 28 . Bullen , C , and J . Bennett . 1990 . Groupware in practice : An interpretation of work experience . In Proceedings of CSCW ' 90 . New York : ACM Press . Cooper , G . , and J . Bowers . In press . Representing the user : Notes on the disciplinary rhetoric of HCI . In Social and interactional dimensions of human - computer interfaces , ed . P . Thomas . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Cooper , R . 1990 . Organization / disorganization . In The theory and philosophy of organizations , eds . J . Hasard and D . Pym . London : Routledge . Grudin , J . 1988 . CSCW applications fail : Problems in design and evaluation of organization inter - faces . In Proceedings of CSCW ' 88 . New York : ACM Press . Grudin , J . 1990 . Groupware and cooperative work : Promises and problems . In The art of human computer interface design , ed . B . Laurel . Reading , Mass . : Addison - Wesley . D o w n l o a d e d by [ M on a s h U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y ] a t 08 : 18 04 M a y 2015 Making It Work 207 Harper , R . 1992 . Looking at ourselves : An examination of the social organisation of two research laboratories . In Proceedings of CSCW ' 92 , eds . J . Turner and R . Kraut . New York : ACM Press . Hughes , J . , D . Randall , and D . Shapiro . 1992 . Faltering from ethnography to design . In Proceed - ings of CSCW ' 92 , eds . J . Turner and R . Kraut . New York : ACM Press . Hughes , J . , V . King , T . Rodden , and H . Andersen . 1994 . Moving out from the control room : Ethnography in system design . In Proceedings of CSCW ' 94 . New York : ACM Press . Jirotka , M . , G . N . Gilbert , and P . Luff . 1992 . On the social organisation of organisations . Computer Supported Cooperative Work 1 : 95 - 118 . Latour , B . 1987 . Science in action . Milton Keynes , Pa . : Open University Press . Law , J . 1987 . Technology and heterogeneous engineering : The case of Portugese expansion . In The social construction of technological systems , eds . W . Bijker , T . Hughes , and T . Pinch . Cam - bridge , Mass . : MIT Press . Markus , M . L . , and T . Connolly . 1990 . Why CSCW applications fail : Problems in the adoption of interdependent work tools . In Proceedings of CSCW ' 90 . New York : ACM Press . Orlikowski , W . 1992 . Learning from Notes : Organizational issues in groupware implementation . In Proceedings of CSCW ' 92 , eds . J . Turner and R . Kraut . New York : ACM Press . Star , S . L . , and J . Griesemer . 1989 . Institutional ecology , " translations , " and coherence : Amateurs and professionals in Berkeley ' s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 - 1939 . Social Studies of Science 19 : 387 - 420 . Thurow , L . C . 1991 . Foreword . In The Corporation in the 1990s , ed . M . S . Scott Morton . New York : Oxford University Press . Woolgar , S . 1991 . Configuring the user : The case of usability trials . In A sociology of monsters : Es - says on power , technology and domination , ed . J . Law . Sociological Review Monograph 38 . London : Routledge and Kegan Paul . Zuboff , S . 1988 . In the age of the smart machine . New York : Basic Books . D o w n l o a d e d by [ M on a s h U n i v e r s it y L i b r a r y ] a t 08 : 18 04 M a y 2015