Sustaining a Networked Community Resource : Findings from a Longitudinal Situated Display Deployment Stuart Nicholson Clara Crivellaro Adrian K . Clear s . a . nicholson @ swansea . ac . uk clara . crivellaro @ newcastle . ac . uk adrian . clear @ nuigalway . ie Computational Foundry Open Lab School of Computer Science Swansea University Newcastle University NUI Galway Swansea , Wales , UK Newcastle upon Tyne , Tyne and Wear Galway , Ireland UK Dan Jackson Rob Comber Vasilis Vlachokyriakos dan . jackson @ newcastle . ac . uk rcomber @ kth . se vasilis . vlachokyriakos1 @ newcastle . ac . uk Open Lab Media Technology and Interaction Open Lab Newcastle University Design Newcastle University Newcastle upon Tyne , Tyne and Wear Royal Institute of Technology Newcastle upon Tyne , Tyne and Wear UK Stockholm , Sweden UK Patrick Olivier patrick . olivier @ monash . edu Action Lab Monash University Melbourne , Australia ABSTRACT Confguring community technology to ensure its sustainability has proved challenging . We present a 3 - year longitudinal study and evaluation of two independent situated community display networks in rural contexts . We describe how the design of the display systems evolved to refect the needs and desires of the community . We report on the way stakeholders’ perceptions of the displays changed over time , and examine the community dynamics involved in the administration , maintenance and moderation of the systems . Drawing from our fndings , we further explore the role of the community champion and their impact on sustainability and scalability . We provide recommendations for the design of community network display technology that supports democratic inter - community politics and governance , and is sensitive to the hidden emotional labor and social resources that are required from communities to fully adopt and sustain display technology . KEYWORDS pervasive displays ; community resource ; social inclusion ; rural community Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan © 2021 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 8096 - 6 / 21 / 05 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445693 ACM Reference Format : Stuart Nicholson , Clara Crivellaro , Adrian K . Clear , Dan Jackson , Rob Comber , Vasilis Vlachokyriakos , and Patrick Olivier . 2021 . Sustaining a Networked Community Resource : Findings from a Longitudinal Situated Display Deployment . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’21 ) , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 13 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445693 1 INTRODUCTION The design and deployment of display technologies within public spaces is a longstanding area of research and experimentation in human - computer interaction ( HCI ) [ 19 ] . Examples include diverse projects from billboards [ 26 ] , situated digital posters [ 9 ] , adapted monitors [ 29 , 36 , 38 , 43 ] and projections [ 30 ] . However , most public displays have been deployed in urban or indoor environments with far fewer examples of public displays being utilized within rural environments ( e . g . [ 11 , 41 ] ) . While previous research has indicated the potential for public displays to be a meaningful community re - source [ 37 , 41 ] that can enrich the social function of public spaces , [ 40 ] community displays still present signifcant challenges . Davies et al . [ 10 ] highlighted issues associated with the limited lifespan of hardware and the implications of this for their sustainability once systems are ‘handed back’ to the community . Similarly , the high levels of initial engagement required from enthusiastic stakeholders to self - organize and appropriate the technology is a key factor in ensuring community ownership and adoption [ 39 ] . Despite calls for longitudinal in - the - wild studies in human - computer interaction more generally [ 1 ] , there remain only a small number of longer - term , real - world evaluations of public display systems . Previous work , such as Taylor et al’s Wray Display [ 39 ] , has called atten - tion to the skills and resources that are required at a community level to maintain and administer situated displays to make them CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Nicholson , et al . sustainable once the researcher has left ; with problems ranging from the intermittent maintenance of equipment to the sourcing and moderation of community - generated content . In this paper , we draw on this body of literature to inform and refect on a longitudinal deployment of two networks of community displays in separate rural communities . Our results are relevant to human - computer interaction research concerned with the design , development , and in particular , the sustainability of community technologies . Working in collaboration with Glendale Gateway Trust ( GGT ) – a charitable trust located in the rural town of Wooler , Northumberland , in the North East of England that focuses on promoting business and culture within the surrounding area – the frst author was commissioned to develop and deploy a network of 8 situated displays in 2015 as part of a successful funding grant secured by the Trust . The primary aim , as set out by the Trust , was to mitigate the social exclusion of young people through better sup - port for the sharing of information in the community . The displays were used as a tool for distributing more personalized and tailored information aimed at highlighting local opportunities surrounding transport , social clubs , events , and employment . Following an ac - tion research [ 13 ] approach , the display networks have been in - situ since their initial installation in July 2015 . In this paper , we present the results of our research surrounding the use of the primary sys - tem over 3 years , as well as those of the redesign and redeployment of another network of 8 additional displays later in 2017 in another rural Northumberland town called Rothbury . Our study contributes new insights into the design of community deployed rural display networks for sustainability and scalability , adding to existing work in the HCI community that addresses the balance between researcher involvement and community partici - pation in their design and deployment . More specifcally , we con - tribute results from two longitudinal deployments of networked display technologies in rural contexts in collaboration with commu - nity partners . We present new understandings of how networked displays are appropriated and governed over the longer - term and the implications that diferent approaches can have for the accep - tance and sustainability of the technology in the community . We contrast the two diferent deployments to highlight how difer - ent forms of governance impact residents’ perceptions of owner - ship and participation over time . We refect on the contrasting approaches to community - led development of governance frame - works for the display networks , and draw on recent work that explores and conceptualises the collaborative governance of such technological platforms as commons , to discuss implications for the design of future rural community technologies . Our study il - lustrates the nuances of the role of community champions for new technology deployments and we conclude by highlighting the need for further research to better understand these . 2 RELATED WORK Public displays are a core part of Weiser’s founding vision for ubiq - uitous computing [ 44 ] , and research has focused on the technical and social elements of their design . For example , Clinch et al . [ 6 ] ex - plored the technological implications of running an open , scalable display network with no centralized control through the Yarely software player . Alt et al . [ 1 ] highlighted issues of privacy and public sharing of personal data in their display deployment within two urbanized public spaces within Oulu , Finland and Peltonen et al . [ 30 ] investigated how social roles emerge through interaction with their multi - touch CityWall display . In this paper , we are con - cerned with both the social and technical aspects of the design of public display networks and how these evolve and interact over the time from initial researcher engagement with civic communities , through to the appropriation and domestication of the technology as it becomes established ‘in the wild’ . While earlier public display research focused on the use of digi - tal displays in workplace environments [ 4 , 5 , 12 ] , similar literature in this area has predominantly focused on displays in urban envi - ronments . Digifeds allowed people to create , publish and retrieve content via touch screen or mobile application and was deployed within two urban public spaces in Oulu , Finland [ 1 ] . Much less research has concentrated on the rural context , which is our con - cern in this paper . Some of the few exceptions to this are Nnub [ 34 ] , which allows neighborhoods to upload classifed advertise - ments ; BigBoard [ 21 ] , which supports free media sharing for users at a " Learn to Earn " facility ; StoryBank [ 18 ] which enables users to upload audio - visual content for rural digital storytelling and that explored how the design and implementation of digital notice - boards could bridge the gap between rural aboriginal culture and western society [ 35 ] . The StoryBank study is particularly signifcant as it’s one of the frst studies that highlighted participants’ concerns over the longer - term moderation of content and technical support once the research study concluded . Since the StoryBank deployment , issues concerning sustainable engagement and use have been taken up more widely in the literature . For example , with their Wray Photo Display deployment [ 36 , 37 ] , Taylor et al . specifcally aimed at de - signing for the sustained use of community - run public displays following their eventual handover to the community [ 39 ] . In their study , they describe how the short - term nature of the research project was a barrier to sustainability , resulting in poor software robustness and reliability , which demanded skills that were unavail - able in the local community . In this regard , making use of commer - cially available products rather than designing bespoke technology can reduce the digital literacy and skillset requirements for long - term use and maintenance . Nevertheless , fnancial resources can also be a barrier to sustainability [ 39 ] whereby things like on - going server subscriptions and replacement hardware [ 28 ] can become unmanageable in the absence of a formal arrangement for funding once research projects end . Some of these issues can arise due to a mismatch between the researcher’s goals and those of the research participants [ 37 ] . Therefore , to overcome challenges to sustainable use , technologies should be iteratively developed with communities through long - term engagements [ 23 , 39 ] . Community ownership of a digital infrastructure is important to its sustainability . Building a technology for community ownership demands an understanding of existing behavior and practice [ 2 , 28 ] as well as consistent use , enthusiasm and engagement from the community once it has been deployed . Research has demonstrated that outlining a clear purpose [ 7 ] and promoting the launch of community technology [ 23 ] is benefcial to its acceptance . Hearn et al . [ 14 ] identifed the need to consider the social infrastructure for ensuring sustainability . Engaging with enthusiastic and motivated Sustaining a Networked Community Resource : Findings from a Longitudinal Situated Display Deployment CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan community participants to play key roles in the management and use of the technology can aid in sparking wider community interest [ 16 ] . Although this might be efective in the short term , the transfer of responsibility and upkeep to a single individual who has the necessary skills is not sustainable due to the risk of ‘burning out’ [ 33 ] . While stakeholder support is undoubtedly benefcial , the over - all workload should be distributed within the community [ 39 ] to ease the management burden and enhance community involvement . Here , research has investigated ways that this might be achieved , for example through the development of relevant skills within the community [ 25 ] , or by applying lessons learned from how content is generated by online communities on social media platforms [ 24 ] . Our study builds on the growing body of rural public display research by examining questions about sustainable design through a longitudinal deployment of two rural display networks . We docu - ment the design , redesign , and debugging required for establishing display networks in communities and how the design responded to shifting expectations and requirements . We unpack the interac - tions that occur as these technologies are taken on , appropriated , and scaled out by the two communities with diferent levels of researcher involvement and support . We contribute new considera - tions for designing technology to support the long - term sustain - ability of community displays once they have been left to grow ‘in the wild’ . 3 STUDY CONTEXT 3 . 1 Rural communities in Northumberland We worked with two rural communities based in the county of Northumberland in the North East of England . The area is the least densely populated in England with approximately 319 , 000 inhabi - tants whilst spanning a vast area of 5000 square kilometers which comprises of small towns , villages , farmland and open space . Rural areas , such as Northumberland , are typically characterized by sev - eral factors ; the large physical distances between work , education , welfare and leisure options are compounded by the poor availability of reliable public transport as well as the high fnancial implications of running privately - owned cars . The above issues typically impact more signifcantly on younger people who live in Northumberland ; for example , employment op - portunities typically extend to agriculture , livestock , transport and retail . Afordable housing is in short supply within Northumberland and there is little nearby access to further and higher education institutions . Whilst many young people possess devices such as phones , tablets and computers , there is typically poorer access to fast and reliable communication within rural areas ; however , this has signifcantly improved in recent years with the narrowing of the digital divide [ 37 ] . GGT and the community felt a problem emerging , particularly for young people ; they were leaving the area in search of better opportunities in larger cities . 3 . 2 Glendale Gateway Trust ( GGT ) At the center of Northumberland sits the town of Wooler , which is home to GGT , a charitable community development trust which acts as the central hub for many of the residents that live in the area . This includes residents of Wooler itself and those in the wider area around Wooler , known as Glendale , for whom Wooler is their closest and largest town . GGT operates from a community center located in the heart of Wooler which provides free internet , access to library services as well as hosting a diverse range of interactive remote learning sessions . The GGT is highly engaged in projects that can bolster local start - up businesses , as well as those that provide advice and guidance for job seekers . The Trust is also responsible for organizing key events and workshops which address the needs of the community , typically working to address rural isolation and to encourage social and physical activity as well as mental well - being . GGT is also particularly active in renovating and re - purposing properties in Wooler to provide more afordable housing opportuni - ties ; they also have several initiatives that aim to tackle the lack of sustainable employment , recreational activities , reliable transport and perceived lack of community initiatives for young people . The Trust was a key stakeholder in driving a study and report called ‘Stayin’ Alive’ that unearthed signifcant insights into youth rural - urban fight — departure of young people from Northumberland to larger cities such as Newcastle upon Tyne and Berwick - upon - Tweed in search of opportunities . Some issues presented in the report appeared to be specifcally tied to rural living where fewer opportunities are available to youth , including the lack of digital connectivity compared to more urban locations that are typically prioritized for the renewal and upgrad - ing of digital services . Yet , the report also highlighted that young people were largely unaware of existing services , and the majority of activities in the local area . In fact , most major news and media outlets prioritise news and opportunities from urban settings , thus limiting access to local news . These insights prompted the Trust to develop and adopt a new strategy for how they reach out to and engage with young people . They developed and launched a suite of situated digital photo frames as public displays to better distribute local information and opportunities . These commercially available digital photo frames were in place before we started our engage - ments within this context , and as GGT played a crucial role in shaping the undertaken research ( a key characteristic of the Action Research approach employed ) , these acted as a point of departure for the design and development of the community display network . 4 DESIGN AND DEPLOYMENT Our study consists of two phases . The frst phase involves our ini - tial engagement with GGT , the co - designing of a simple prototype leading to Glendale’s display deployment ( nicknamed GleNet ) and includes its evaluation . The second phase of our study encompasses a refection on the feedback received from Phase 1 and the re - design and redeployment of GleNet in Wooler . Phase 2 , also includes an additional deployment of the re - design within Rothbury , named CoNet , that was launched as a parallel study that allowed us to observe another example of rural community technology adop - tion . Both display systems were evaluated thereafter as part of our iterative design cycle . Before our involvement , the GGT had managed to secure funding for a follow - up initiative to their ‘Stayin’ Alive’ report [ 17 ] that would explore the barriers to social inclusion experienced by young people . At this time , GGT was using digital photo frames in a range of publicly accessible locations to display more general content and they had found that by tailoring the content more towards CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Nicholson , et al . Figure 1 : Three - year timeline of Phase 1 and Phase 2 deployments . recreational activities , they were more successful in reaching out to young people . As part of their initiative , a small amount of funding ( £500 GBP ) was set aside to further develop the digital photo frame display approach into a more robust and manageable display system . Our involvement with GGT began when they approached us in 2015 with an idea for the development of a network of displays that would build on their initial photo - frame deployment and that would directly respond to the issues highlighted in the Stayin’ Alive report . We later deployed a second separate display network within Rothbury . In the next sections , we describe in more detail the process of working with GGT and how our involvement and the design of the display network evolved . Throughout our study , we maintained an action research ap - proach [ 8 , 13 ] whereby we iteratively designed , deployed and eval - uated our work . Action research was a suitable method for working within the rural community context as it enabled us to collabora - tively design and develop prototype systems alongside GGT . As such , our point of departure was GGT’s already identifed aim to disseminate local information about services and opportunities to younger populations of the community . We used the already ex - isting photo frames that GGT has been using before the start of this project as a starting point , and collaboratively developed the display network based on understandings of this already existing information infrastructure , while operating within , and navigating community constraints ( e . g . lack of funding and technical expertise ) . As we know from previous work [ 16 , 18 , 22 , 36 ] , co - creating digital systems with the community is a critical step towards community acceptance . To better understand this , after initial deployments , we supported and maintained the display networks whilst taking feld notes during observations , conducting interviews , and collecting usage data from system logs . 4 . 1 Phase 1 : GleNet design and installation The photo frames that GGT already had in place were approximately 12 - inches in size and had been deployed in 6 publicly accessible locations in and around Wooler . The photo frames needed updating manually using SD cards which held a series of screenshot images . Each image was an informative presentation - styled slide that ran in a continuous carousel with 30 seconds between transitions . GGT staf were responsible for updating the photo frames which required a member of staf to drive to each location ; a signifcant expense for a small organization ( i . e . fuel , time and salary costs ) . Therefore , the frst requirement for the display network communicated to us from our initial engagements with GGT was to alleviate the need for these physical content updates ; however , further engagement led to the development of three agreed requirements : ( i ) low - cost infrastructure ; ( ii ) consistent content format that could be remotely updated ; and ( iii ) robustness in the context of intermittent network connectivity . It is worth mentioning that even though other types of technologies could have been introduced at this initial stage to open - up the solution space , our action research approach which included GGT staf in research decision - making processes led to a strong emphasis being put on the existing approach ( i . e . using photo frames as public displays ) as a starting point to develop an information infrastructure for the community . Due to the Trust’s limited fnancial resource ( i . e . their small grant ) there were tight constraints on both the initial cost of hardware and the longer - term running costs of the system , in particular beyond the horizon of the funding for the one - year project . As a result , we chose one of many low - cost DIY electronics options which are available of - the - shelf : A Raspberry Pi 2 mini - computer with a standard USB Wi - Fi dongle . Visual display units are typically the most expensive part of a display network and so we upcycled used Sustaining a Networked Community Resource : Findings from a Longitudinal Situated Display Deployment CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan computer TFT monitors due for electrical waste disposal . The Pi’s were mounted to the rear of the monitors with additional cabling for video signal and power . We refer to each Pi and monitor as a node . From our early discussions with GGT , and our observation of the use of the existing photo frames , it was clear that a wide range of formats and layouts were being used to display information . Therefore , prompted by the Trust , our second objective for the design of the display network was not only that it had to be possible to update the content remotely , but also that it would be presented in a variety of fxed and consistent formats , which would make it easier for stakeholders and community members to contribute to it . We developed a simple content management system ( CMS ) that provided a range of 12 HTML templates where information could be " dropped " into . The styling and colors used for the templates were chosen by GGT . Each node worked by attempting a connection to a remote server and used synchronization software to copy over the contents of a designated folder . The folder contained the templated content that was intended for a particular node . Content was then automatically loaded into a full - screen web browser ( kiosk mode ) on the node . Additional scripts were used to set the display time of each slide as well as the order in which content appeared . The system also had to be stable enough to handle intermittent internet dropouts . For this , we used a series of scripts to store fetched content locally on the node so that there was always a copy of the most up to date content that could be loaded , should there be an internet drop out . GleNet was deployed in the summer of 2015 ; deployment en - tailed the frst author traveling to Glendale weekly and physically installing each node within the host locations . Each node was then confgured in - situ , which sometimes proved difcult due to the public use of these locations ; for example , access to power sockets , installation points and accessible Wi - Fi sometimes meant waiting until members of the public left , such as when we installed a node in a local cafe . Each node had a ’host’ who took responsibility for turning the display on and of , as well as reporting any issues back to GGT . In total , 8 nodes were deployed ; 6 were used to replace the original photo frames in their public locations with an addi - tional 2 deployed in new locations . The installation period took approximately two months to complete . 4 . 2 Phase 1 : GleNet evaluation Within the summer of 2016 , the display network underwent a one - year evaluation which considered the diferent perspectives of the range of stakeholders who engaged with the project . Our questions focused on the design of nodes themselves , their content and more generally people’s thoughts on GleNet as a community resource . Within Phase 1’s evaluation , our participants consisted of GGT stakeholders , node hosts , youth and local residents . In total , 34 people were approached during Phase 1 : • GGT : primary stakeholders of the display network . • Hosts : operators of premises hosting displays : e . g . shop keep - ers , cafe owners , store managers , etc . • Youth : the intended primary audience ; typically aged 16 - 22 years old . • Residents : the wider community of Glendale . Phase 1’s evaluation took the form of audio recorded one - to - one interviews , observational notes , questionnaire surveys and feld notes . GGT , node hosts and youth were approached for interviews . Local residents were randomly surveyed and observed within public spaces surrounding node installation sites . General feld notes were taken throughout the evaluation process as well as usage logs and 185 pieces of uploaded content . 4 . 3 Phase 2 : CoNet design and installation The display architecture of GleNet was redesigned [ 27 ] in the early months of 2017 taking into account the insights and refections gained from the evaluation process of Phase 1 . Between March and July , the newly designed nodes and architecture were redeployed for GleNet as a direct replacement . As part of this study , we also chose one additional area of Northumberland ; a small town named Rothbury about 20 miles from Wooler , which became host to a network of 8 nodes placed in similar publicly accessible places . Rothbury is a small rural town and civil parish ; It has a popula - tion of approximately 2 , 900 residents and sits within the Coquet Valley . Unlike Wooler , there is not a central organization , such as GGT , for the area ; there is instead a range of pro - active groups that each concentrate on smaller projects and initiatives within the area . The re - designed and re - deployed network had two fundamental diferences . Firstly , the technology : each node no longer required a multitude of scripts to run in the background for content synchro - nization to the server . Instead , each node could now be directed towards a custom URL with the web browser caching the content appropriately for ofine use . This allowed for the node to be more easily maintained and meant that they now had less scope for potential failure points . By switching to browser caching , it now allowed any device capable of running a web browser to easily be integrated into the display network within the future , e . g . an old Windows - based laptop . We also revised the CMS and simplifed it so it only uploaded static images . The underlying hardware for the nodes now used the Raspberry Pi 3 . Secondly , in the interests of sustainability , the deployment of the display network in Rothbury was conducted in a more hands - of manner by the frst author . Through initial engagement with proac - tive stakeholders within the community , the frst author passed responsibility to the residents of Rothbury to generate community interest in having their own network in a bid to increase awareness and boost the visibility and identity of the network . Stakeholders ran a school competition to establish an emblem and a name for the Rothbury display network ; it was subsequently named CoNet . Stakeholders proceeded to publish promotional material with ar - ticles appearing in the local newsletter ‘Over the Bridges’ ( OTB ) , which explained the purpose of the display network and gave a brief overview of how it worked , where the individual nodes would be visible as well as who within the community could be contacted to publish content on the nodes . CoNet was ofcially launched and trialed at the annual tradi - tional music festival where it was administered and managed by one of the highly - involved stakeholders . CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Nicholson , et al . Table 1 : Overview of data collection . Data source Phase 1 : GleNet Phase 2 : GleNet and CoNet Field Notes Notes Notes Interviews 13 Hours ( 7 Participants ) 19 Hours ( 11 Participants ) System Usage Logs 185 pieces of content 1083 pieces of content 4 . 4 GleNet and CoNet evaluation Between late 2017 and early 2018 , the GleNet and CoNet display net - works were evaluated to gain further insights into community and stakeholders’ perceptions surrounding network management , visi - bility and content . Both ( GleNet and CoNet ) evaluations consisted of one - to - one , semi - structured interviews with 5 key stakeholders and 4 displays’ hosts . 4 . 5 Data collection and analysis Over the course of three years , we collected predominantly qual - itative data comprising of ethnographic observations , feld notes and interviews across the two phases and the respective evalua - tions . Semi - structured interviews [ 20 ] were carried out with those directly involved with the deployments and people in in the com - munity who used the displays in various ways . Phase 1 interviews focused on the main functions and content of the displays during its deployment . In the second phase , questions were formulated using feld observations and primarily focused on issues of ownership , access and governance , perceived value , impact , branding , content , and the general perceptions of the system and its functionality . A total of 32 hours of interviews were recorded across Phase 1 ( 7 participants , 13 hours ) and Phase 2 ( 11 participants , 19 hours ) . All interviews were audio - recorded and transcribed . Interview tran - scripts were read by the frst author and 11 hours of data were considered relevant for analysis . The remaining data consisted of more general conversation between the frst author and partici - pants that was not considered relevant to the interview agenda . Therefore , in this paper , we draw our fndings from the 3 years of feld notes and 11 hours of interview data from both Phase 1 and Phase 2 . A thematic approach was taken in the data analysis [ 3 ] ; the data were coded inductively and summarized with short codes , which were then grouped into larger candidate themes . These were discussed with the co - authors for validation and to generate the fnal set of themes . Table 1 shows the total amount of data collected from each evaluation phase . 5 FINDINGS Our fndings are presented under three themes ; in Woolercentricity we explain how diferent stakeholders perceived and articulated the benefts of the community displays as well as how these perceptions changed over time . In Maintenance , administration and moderation , we examine the challenges faced by our stakeholders to upkeep the network over the course of three years , and how each network was governed . Finally , in Tensions over control we uncover how the community display networks were integrated within the daily practices and routines of the communities and stakeholders , as well as the social and emotional demands that they introduced . 5 . 1 Woolercentricity Our stakeholders’ and residents’ perceptions of the benefts and utility of the displays shifted over the duration of the study . For example , during the evaluation in Phase 1 , GGT and node hosts were excited about the installation of the display network . It was perceived as a novel piece of technology for Wooler and participants expressed positive feedback in anticipation of its deployment and subsequent potential benefts for the local community . GGT was also initially pleased with the new and additional functionality it provided compared to their original system that was based on digital photo frames , despite the administrator having to spend a signifcant amount of time learning how to use the new CMS . Ultimately , once having learned to use it , they found it reduced the time needed to update content and allowed GGT to arrange the content easily into the range of templates provided . This , in turn , reduced the expenses incurred by the administrator for fuel for traveling between nodes , as well as the extra time required for this . At the time of installation , the Trust understood the display net - work to be a community resource , built for the purpose of reaching out to young people ( in line with the funding secured to support its development ) to better inform them about local opportunities . They felt it was working well for this purpose : " I feel as if there’s been positive reaction to them , so through word of mouth people are very positive about it . " [ Host ] . Despite the fact that neither the hosts of individual nodes , nor residents , could upload content for themselves , they still perceived the displays to be a positive community resource that fulflled the interests of the wider community : " I see it as a community resource which is , at this point in time , focused largely on young people [ . . . ] " [ Host ] . Parents of young people also expressed that they also used the display network intermittently to remind themselves of the scheduled time for activities : " Even I check because I’ve got a younger child I look after and it’s like the Cubs , we forget what time they’re on , so it’s got times to remind us . " [ Host ] . Young people , as the primary intended audience of the GleNet’s frst phase of deployment , found value from keeping up to date with what was going on in the area and successfully sought leisure opportunities : " I’ve seen something about swimming , which I actually went for . . . I followed that up , it was really good actually . I got most of the information of the display [ . . . ] " [ Young Person ] . Furthermore , there were anecdotes about young people securing employment through the display deployed within the local youth club : " Those lads who actually found an apprentice - ship of that screen now work down at [ a company ] " [ Young Person ] . More generally , young people used the display like a television and perused content within the social space of the club : " It’s around the bar , obviously , so when people are sat round they’re always looking at it " [ Young Person ] . Sustaining a Networked Community Resource : Findings from a Longitudinal Situated Display Deployment CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Figure 2 : Visualisation of content across both phases spanning the three year deployment . Phase one ( left side ) shows the typical content which was on display and how it was pitched to young people up until the point where funding expired for the network in 2016 . Phase two ( right side ) shows the two separate deployments ( CoNet and GleNet ) and their diferent presentation style , as well as typical GleNet content which mainly centered on or around Wooler . After one year , the funding previously secured for addressing issues associated with the social exclusion of youth ended . As a requirement of the grant , the Trust had to conduct an evaluation of the display network as well as assess its impact . While conducting a quantitative analysis of the uses of the network proved quite challenging for the Trust , anecdotal and qualitative data indicated a positive reaction from the wider community . Furthermore , it was noted by GGT trustees that because of the low - cost nature of the project , the displays could be " written of " as a " fre and forget " initiative which held intrinsically positive value for the community , whether it was utilized to its full potential or not . After the network’s frst year of operations and the end of the funding that was secured to develop it , content began to diver - sify refecting that young people were not the sole audience of the initiative . Content now catered towards tourists , local residents and youth , respectively , with a range of information about events , general information and attractions . However , over time content became increasingly seen by some as prosaic . Residents seemed to disengage with the displays . Some of the hosts stopped switching on their displays , covering them up , and even asking for them to be removed completely . When we asked one host who had opted to remove their display , they remarked : " It’s not getting looked at anymore and I think it could be used somewhere else " [ Host ] . Resi - dents of neighboring villages began to comment about the display network as another ‘Woolercentric " initiative ; a term they used to criticize how content published by GGT ( based in Wooler ) focused on events and activities predominantly based in or closely around that geographic area . Some of the other hosts , located outside of Wooler , commented that GGT had appropriated the display network and were starting to promote only what they saw as important to Wooler . Despite the tensions arising from the residents and hosts outside of Wooler , stakeholders from these sub - communities were happy to leverage the initiative for their own purposes such as securing small localized funding opportunities where the display network was documented as an ongoing community initiative . At this point , local youth still found the community display useful as they regarded the content still relevant to them . However , they were growing concerned about the dilution of youth specifc content . Across the frst and second phases of the study , curation of the display network content changed , so did perceptions of its value and benefts for diferent stakeholder and resident groups . The display network appears to have blended into the landscape of rural life and is still perceived as an asset for the " greater good " of the community which encapsulates the feeling that having a networked display is generally a good thing , despite an unawareness of who fnds it useful . Yet , interestingly , having content that catered for diferent audiences was not always perceived positively by all groups , begin - ning to raise questions and show tensions regarding its governance , and where that governance stemmed from geographically . CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Nicholson , et al . 5 . 2 Maintenance , administration and moderation During the frst phase of GleNet’s deployment , several issues emerged , which were promptly addressed to ensure the system was ft for purpose . After the initial two - month installation period , issues concerning hardware and software maintenance of nodes kept re - occurring , demanding the attention of the frst author to repeat the 100 - mile round journey every week from Newcastle upon Tyne to upper Glendale . As the more technical issues were resolved and the system stabilized , the GleNet administrator took it upon herself to maintain the system , wherever she could . The common issues that afected the display network were network outages and , in some cases , complete removal of Wi - Fi infrastructure from some loca - tions . The administrator was keen to ensure each node was updated regularly and would update the node manually by sharing her per - sonal mobile data as a network hotspot . In other instances , where the owner of the premises where the node was located ( e . g . local cafe ) removed Wi - Fi capability , the administrator would physically unplug the node and bring it back to the central hub to connect it to an accessible Wi - Fi network . Once updated , she would then return it to the location to reinstall it . Attempts were made by the administrator and frst author to engage with node hosts and other local residents to initiate them as local champions of their respective areas : reporting of node problems , ensuring nodes were turned on and functioning correctly as well as operating as a more localized source of information for smaller communities outside of Wooler . Despite the GleNet administrator and the frst author’s eforts , local champions were not appointed due to coordination difculties . This resulted in two of the authors and administrator having to make frequent visits throughout Phase 1 to help with the upkeep of the display network . In this way , the frst author had inadvertently taken the role of a supporting stakeholder in maintaining , installing and updating the technical infrastructure , as well as removing and relocating nodes from time to time . In contrast , during Phase 2 of our study , CoNet was maintained , managed and administered by a single proactive stakeholder . They had " a technical background " as well as being involved in several other technical community initiatives and projects within the town . Since the installation of the display network within Rothbury , this person had been the single point of contact responsible for anything concerning CoNet . This sole responsibility has fltered down from a small group of stakeholders who initially combined their eforts to establish the network . In comparison to GleNet , there were fewer teething problems with the installation of CoNet resulting in a far quicker hand over process . It was made clear that the network should be driven by community stakeholders , rather than the frst author , which allowed the frst author to further distance them - selves from the network implementation to see if the community could run it themselves . At present , both display networks are now being administered , maintained and sustained by a single person who inherited the role from the initial point of contact , without intervention or involvement from the research team . To date , these individuals take the role of gatekeepers whereby content has to pass through them , in most instances , before it can be displayed throughout the network . During Phase 1 , GleNet’s administrator’s time was predomi - nantly used for updating display content and developing other initiatives for tackling social exclusion ; this work was remunerated by the funding grant . When funding ran out , the once full - time GleNet administrator was tasked with other work , placing clear restrictions on the amount of time she could now spend updating the displays’ content , causing some tension between herself and the GGT director . Yet , despite this on - going tension , the administrator has continued to be the single point of contact for GleNet as well as regularly updating the displays with the belief that content " is useful for someone out there ! " . While in their words , " it only takes 5 minutes " to update content , in practice , it can take far longer ( as other trustees noticed ) ; and the administrator herself observed that as more people get to know about it and see it as a means for free advertising , the more time she will need to update content for them . The administrator’s dedication to the display network means that she still spent a signifcant amount of time on updating the displays , despite ongoing tension with her employer . When interviewing a trustee of GGT ( the employer of the GleNet administrator ) , they commented : " Yes , whenever anyone asks her how long it should take she says no more than fve minutes and that’s kind of the standard re - sponse now . Obviously , I have had a chat with her [ the administrator ] and she sees the value in it . " . Given the underlying tensions from within GGT surrounding management and content moderation ; we noted many within both Wooler and Rothbury communities voicing mixed feelings concern - ing the longer - term sustainability of the display networks . While some people presented strong arguments suggesting that the role of a single person in charge of the display network is critical to its longevity and consistency , enabling a more manageable workload for an organization ; others argued for sharing the workload among community members and more democratic control over the content . Both of the current network’s administrators are seen as experts given their skills and experience of being in charge of the networks for a long while ; they are also seen as providing consistency over the content and its style , which both respective communities have become accustomed to . However , administrative tensions , particularly from within GGT , and complaints about the lack of democratic control among commu - nity members and display hosts , led to envisioning the possibility of adopting alternative models of management and governance . The idea of potentially transferring the governance of the display networks to trusted community champions has been discussed with sub - communities in both of the deployment areas . From the GGT perspective , distributing governance to communities surrounding Wooler would help reduce the community perception that their display network is " Woolercentric " ( e . g . displaying content that is primarily about Wooler ) . Furthermore , distributing governance would also help reinforce the network’s image as a community resource and not just a public relations tool . With the eventual handover of GleNet and CoNet to their respective communities and administrators , we noted concerns surrounding trust , content consistency and the appropriation of the display networks by in - dividuals to simply further personal agendas rather than to the beneft of everyone in the community . Sustaining a Networked Community Resource : Findings from a Longitudinal Situated Display Deployment CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan 5 . 3 Tensions around control When we introduced the display networks in each area , unsur - prisingly maybe , the systems generated enthusiasm due to their novelty . With Phase 1’s GleNet deployment , the display network generated great expectations as it was seen as a potentially sustain - able solution to the social exclusion experienced by youth within the area . Such enthusiasm was exemplifed by the node hosts’ will - ingness to absorb electricity running costs from the outset . Yet , while most hosts were generally happy to provide content directly to GGT for the display , some hosts did opt to remove their nodes due to frustrations surrounding their inability to publish their own content ( within Phase 1 ) , the dilution of content and the perceived ‘Woolercentric’ content . These nodes were subsequently re - located by the frst author to new hosts within similar areas , as specifed by GGT . In sharp contrast , the idea and deployment of Rothbury’s CoNet was created and launched from within the heart of the community with minimal input from the frst author . Before the implementa - tion of CoNet , the primary stakeholders deliberated extensively and deeply considered how the network could be optimally deployed and integrated into the community of Rothbury . This included sev - eral activities surrounding CoNet that explicitly aimed to foster community ownership and that directly involved the local resi - dents and communities in a number of ways . For example , before the installation of the network , stakeholders launched a school competition inviting local pupils to suggest names , branding and a logo for the display network , which primary stakeholders them - selves judged . Articles were written in anticipation of the network installation and published as monthly newsletters in Rothbury’s ‘Over the Bridges’ ( OTB ) . Furthermore , the launch of the network itself was carefully planned to coincide with the weekend of the towns’ annual traditional music festival – a very popular event that attracts thousands of residents and visitors . Following its success - ful launch and three months of up - time , the CoNet administrator began drafting policies surrounding the long - term management of the system . The policy document included information about the display network’s aims , objectives and clarifcation centered around certain roles and responsibilities . These included those of the administra - tor and node hosts , as well as guidelines on publishing content , advertising and editorial principles . Other elements of the policy served more as a defnitive and concrete response to frequently asked questions . The existence of the policy document in the frst instance demonstrates a diferent approach to that which GleNet’s administrator adopted . CoNet is run like a newspaper which is inde - pendently controlled . The administrator believed it was necessary to have a policy document because the displays exist within the public domain whereby the administrator is open to public scrutiny . The policy itself does not take into account the transfer of roles and responsibilities , nor does it outline details surrounding the design of governance for CoNet . CoNet has been in continuous use since it’s launch in July 2017 . The administrator has become increasingly involved with the net - work’s upkeep and is now the sole gatekeeper for the system despite the great lengths they went to in promoting it to local residents and other community stakeholders . Along the journey , they have secured additional small grant funding to expand the network based on the ever - increasing demand for new nodes from new hosts in the community , within and surrounding area of Rothbury . However , what surprised us even more was that the CoNet administrator recently started promoting the network’s use at external events and community meetings in other towns and villages . For this they created their own copy of a node by attaching a raspberry Pi to a small 9 " TFT monitor and portable battery pack as a demonstra - tion node . Through their perseverance and passion for the project , another rural community in Northumberland has since deployed its own display network . With residents opting to be a part of the network as well as the dedication of CoNet’s administrator , we wholeheartedly believe the network has been adopted and is today integrated within the local community of Rothbury . The CoNet administrator’s time , passion and dedication to the aims and objectives of the initiative has undeniably brought many successes , including a seemingly increased involvement and sus - tainable integration of the displays into the community’s day to day life . Conversely , the involvement of the administrator also meant that over time , their role turned into that of a gatekeeper and the ultimate judge of which content is or isn’t allowed on the display network . Thus , even if virtually all content is consistently published by hosts , community tensions persist with hosts in particular who voice their discontent over gatekeepers’ reluctance to authorize host publishing rights . At the time of writing , CoNet and GleNet’s administrators are in the process of negotiating full administrative publishing rights for hosts , yet there are concerns over the amount of trust this may require , specifcally in terms of the violation of display network policies . 6 DISCUSSION Our fndings highlighted intra - community tensions that surfaced around access and governance , and the signifcant efort and work that was required to sustain and scale up community display net - works . In light of our fndings , we discuss considerations surround - ing the development of governance and operational planning for rural community display networks . We do this by focusing on how the governance of the display networks and operational procedures were developed in the two contexts for which these were deployed : on the one hand the research - led and ‘Woolercentric’ governance and operation of GleNet and on the other , the community - led and scalable CoNet . As the technologies that we used in both deploy - ments for the display networks are the same , we bring our attention to the governance of such display networks and their content in rural communities and contribute considerations for their design , community appropriation and ownership . 6 . 1 The development of governance and operational planning Refecting on both GleNet and CoNet’s frst year of operation , we observed two diferent ways in which the display networks were established in the communities . For GleNet in particular , this had signifcant implications on community acceptance and adoption . GleNet received signifcantly more support from the frst author throughout its deployment in Phase 1 . The frst author was highly CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Nicholson , et al . engaged in installing nodes , establishing infrastructure and promot - ing the use of the network . This was partly because the technology was at an earlier stage of design , but also because we , and the community , were still learning how the technology could be used , and the logistics required for operating a display network . To date , GleNet remains a static display network which has not grown in scale ( in terms of the number of hosts or display nodes ) , and engage - ment with it has reduced over time . Its purpose became less clear once its focus was broadened beyond content solely targeted at youth . Intra - community tensions , stemming from perceived ‘Wool - ercentricity’ , resulted in neighboring communities distancing them - selves from the network as they perceived display content to be less inclusive . A consensus emerged that the network had transitioned into a GGT marketing tool that propagated the same perceived inequality and imbalance between Wooler and neighboring towns and villages , echoing concerns raised about the amplifying efect of technologies on inequalities [ 42 ] . When we frst introduced the display networks in each area , the systems were anticipated with enthusiasm , in large part due to their novelty . With Phase 1 of GleNet’s deployment , the display network was seen as a potentially sustainable solution to the social exclusion experienced by youth within the area . Such enthusiasm was exem - plifed by the node hosts’ willingness to absorb electricity running costs from the outset . However , while most hosts were generally happy to provide content directly to GGT for the display , some hosts did opt to remove their nodes due to frustrations surrounding their inability to publish their own content ( within Phase 1 ) , the dilution of content , and the perceived ’Woolercentricity’ of content . These nodes were subsequently re - located by the frst author to new hosts within similar areas , as specifed by GGT . In contrast , the launch and development of CoNet was more community - led , as it required far less involvement of the frst au - thor . From the initial point of contact with interested stakeholders from Rothbury , the community stakeholders took responsibility and ownership of the display network and drove its deployment . Stakeholders committed a large amount of efort to advertising , pro - duction of promotional materials and community engagement in preparation for the launch of CoNet . Longer - term management poli - cies created by CoNet’s administrator helped to defne the network as a piece of embedded community technology that was backed up by rules , guidelines and documentation . Although the policies did not outline detailed governance mechanisms , they outlined channels for community members to become involved within the decision - making processes relating to CoNet . As such , the trans - parency of the policies and processes served to scafold a form of community activism , which bolstered CoNet’s acceptance as a community resource . This contrasts starkly with lack of trans - parency of GleNet , which ofered little contingency for community involvement through participation in operational decision - making processes . In contrast to GleNet , CoNet now operates as an embedded and dynamic community display network that frequently receives posi - tive feedback and recognition from the community it is perceived to serve . It has continued to grow and demonstrated that it can be fnancially self - sustaining . The diference between GleNet and CoNet is primarily the community stakeholders themselves , both their drive and also their technical and operational competence . Indeed , another key factor in the success of CoNet , during its frst year , was the eclectic skillset of the initial stakeholders and their drive to establish the network . These initial stakeholders took a bare display system and transformed it into what now represents CoNet . These contrasting deployments illustrate two distinct levels of skill - set utilization , maturity and drive from the core stakeholders . CoNet’s administrator possessed a far deeper capacity to man - age the technical aspects of initiating , establishing and running a display network . More importantly , this capacity extended to an understanding of the longer - term operational intricacies of how the display system , as community infrastructure , requires governance , regulation , and consistent and transparent operational processes . CoNet’s operational policies and guidelines underpin such aspects within the outlined role descriptors and working model and serve to demonstrate a sense of accountability and professionalism . In addition to CoNet’s stakeholders having the necessary techni - cal and operational capacity to establish and govern a distributed display network , there is a further depth and maturity to this capac - ity . CoNet’s administrator recognized that the operational policies were not fnal and adapted them to the emerging needs within the community , based on feedback received . Refecting on the opera - tionality of CoNet , in contrast to GleNet , we can see the benefts of core stakeholders possessing both technical and operational understanding , but also a depth of maturity within that understand - ing to confdently make future iterations of operating policies for the longer - term management of the display network . Moving be - yond how technical capacities can be bridged through instructional how - to guides leaves us with the more important issue of how governance is introduced and incorporated as part of a community display deployment . Given our comparative study is of only two such deployments , we cannot be sure if it is the process of stake - holder engagement in governance confguration , or the presence and adaption of a governance structure , which is the critical ele - ment in the development process and medium - term success of a community display network . 6 . 2 Designing for governance , operational planning and appropriation Our longitudinal study has unearthed how tensions and politics be - tween communities and organizations concerned with the display networks can unfold over time . This was refected in the mod - eration of content and the way authority over this was asserted and re - claimed . In both deployments , governance responsibilities were ultimately transferred to a single individual who has taken on the responsibility for the long - term management , maintenance , sourcing and coordination of content for each network . In this re - spect , our fndings contrast with the more romantic view of the community champion presented within the Wray Photo Display ( comprising 2 displays ) by Taylor , et al . [ 39 ] . While , as discussed , GleNet sufered as a result of not having a governance framework with genuine community acceptance . Even CoNet’s success is de - pendent on a single community champion who has the technical know - how , time and enthusiasm to run the display network . This in turn solidifes their position of authority and infuence within the community by growing their portfolio of enterprise . In this Sustaining a Networked Community Resource : Findings from a Longitudinal Situated Display Deployment CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan respect , the sustainability of such systems appears to depend on how the role of the administrator fts with existing community roles and their respective capacity ; in this respect it is a more com - plex matter than simply having a willing volunteer or community champion . Whilst a single person in control can be benefcial for maintain - ing consistent operation across a display network , this can prove to be a bottleneck when the network is scaled up . Pritchard et al . [ 32 ] highlighted the hidden emotional labor that technology can impose on individuals ; the responsibility of balancing a diverse adminis - trative role proves stressful and tiring due to fuctuations in work - load , time constraints and other personal demands . Administrators presenting themselves as the gatekeepers also inadvertently open themselves up as a point of contact for receiving praise , queries and requests , as well as complaints that can be a precursor to confict . Similarly , there are hidden fnancial implications associated with the role of administration that are incurred , such as travel and other costs stemming from engagement with other stakeholders . Our work confrms the conclusions of previous studies as to the importance of designing for intra - community organizational rela - tionships [ 37 ] ( i . e . between GGT , businesses and community groups ) . It also points to a need to take a more explicit account of governance design , including identifcation and resolution of ‘content conficts’ as well as other longer - term implications of running display net - works , such as : how administration roles and content moderation functions can be distributed between stakeholders who are not co - located ; who could and should be the responsible person ( s ) for node maintenance ; and who is responsible if inappropriate content is published to a node . Prior literature has recommended a focus on the " human and social infrastructure " [ 14 ] and with this in mind , we recommend designing with governance to both distribute the range of roles of management ; but also as a means of spreading the emotional cost from a single individual to a core group to mitigate the hidden and emotional costs of administration and support . Such refec - tions relate to Poderi’s recent work in HCI on sustaining platforms as commons [ 31 ] , which highlight the importance of designed - in governance for the community appropriation and operationalisa - tion of such systems and platforms . In Poderi’s work , the concept is grounded in open source software communities and their par - ticipation in the governance of such platforms . In this work , we contribute empirical insights for the ‘commons’ participation of people within rural communities that lack the technological exper - tise to participate in technically complex governance procedures ( as in open - source software communities ) . For our case , one approach to alleviate problems of emotional labor and allow for distributed governance would be to provide stakeholders with a template ap - proach to the organization of display network operation . This would provide an exemplar structure that communities could adopt and adapt . The template would serve to outline role profles and respon - sibilities to illustrate how governance can be distributed across a core group of community stakeholders . However , the distribution of roles across multiple stakeholders can sometimes lead to tensions and disagreements in itself , but these can be addressed in part by adopting democratic practices alongside policies of conduct for confict management and resolution . However , a templated approach to outlining organization and governance could lead to unintended issues surrounding percep - tions of ownership . With the rise of ‘Woolercentricity’ , and GleNet being considered less of a community resource , one must recog - nize the needs of smaller outlying communities . These smaller sub - communities that exist within neighboring areas received little opportunity to participate in consultation relating to the deploy - ment of the display network . Outside of Wooler , GleNet sufered from a lack of community ownership and adoption as these com - munities perceived the display network to be something imposed on them by Wooler . An alternative approach is to scafold stakeholder engagement to facilitate intra - community discussion and the collaborative con - fguration of organization and governance in a place - based manner . Although this , in turn , raises questions about when is the appropri - ate time during a deployment to address such matters . Engaging stakeholders during the initial stages could be seen as benefcial for establishing governance processes in the longer - term , however , it carries the risk of deterring interested stakeholders in a potentially heavy bureaucratic deliberation process , as well trying to engage stakeholders without them fully comprehending how the technol - ogy is going to be used going forward . Engaging stakeholders at a later stage allows people to understand how the technology will be used and to confgure governance accordingly . However , as we saw with both GleNet and CoNet , at a later stage there can be far fewer stakeholders willing to engage . Such refections , namely the need to be attentive to governance and ownership and to engage stakeholders in intra - community dis - cussions by designing for a " human and social infrastructure " [ 14 ] surrounding the technological system ( the display networks in our study ) , also point to the importance of exploring the potential inter - actions of participatory design processes with broader institutions , for example in terms of creating ‘new institutions’ [ 15 ] . Building on such recent calls for design approaches that bring local initiatives and communities in dialogue with institutional framing processes [ 15 ] , our insights point to the need for designers and researchers to be proactive in either creating novel institutional processes , for our case especially in relation to ownership , governance and operations , or bringing such community oriented projects in ( critical ) dialogue with already existing ones . 7 CONCLUSION Within our three - year evaluation , which consisted of two sepa - rate deployments , we have highlighted a number of factors that impact the efectiveness of display networks and the nature of their embedding within rural communities . The deployment of two such systems in related contexts has allowed us to uncover sub - tle diferences , such as the contrasting approaches of the network administrators , which surfaced insights in relation to the gover - nance of such community display networks in rural settings . In contrast to GleNet , CoNet is a responsive deployment that has been harmoniously integrated within its local community by engaging residents in the design process that helped in the construction of its identity . CoNet supported the distribution of material relevant to its introduction and purpose as a piece of community technology , CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Nicholson , et al . and has consistently broadcast updates through local media chan - nels . Its administrator is an enthusiast who has the time , efort and motivation to dedicate to running the display system . The same individual also has the technical knowledge , and understanding of the system , local area and the community it serves . As an already an established member of society who has strong relationships with other community enthusiasts , he was engaged through a multitude of provincial responsibilities , roles and projects . While both GleNet and CoNet were led by enthusiasts , diferences in their capability and commitment have a signifcant impact of their sustainability . There is a deeper understanding required of what we currently recognize as the role of a community champion . We present two ex - amples of champions who present diferent experiences , approaches and agendas in the administration of each network . Current liter - ature surrounding community champions does not consider the depth or breadth of this role in relation to networked displays , or wider civic technologies . There is an unexplored and far richer land - scape of champions and an expanded understanding of this role is needed . With this , we have also identifed the need not just for fur - ther longitudinal studies , but longitudinal comparative studies that more holistically explore the spectrum of complex roles involved in supporting rural display networks and civic technologies more broadly . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Our research was funded by EPSRC’s Center for Doctoral Training in Digital Civics ( EP / L016176 / 1 ) and Digital Economy Research Cen - ter ( EP / M023001 / 1 ) . Data supporting this publication is available at : https : / / digitalinteraction . github . io / showboater / . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Florian Alt , Thomas Kubitza , Dominik Bial , Firas Zaidan , Markus Ortel , Björn Zurmaar , Tim Lewen , Alireza Sahami Shirazi , and Albrecht Schmidt . 2011 . Digi - feds : insights into deploying digital public notice areas in the wild . In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia . ACM , 165 – 174 . [ 2 ] Florian Alt , Nemanja Memarovic , Ivan Elhart , Dominik Bial , Albrecht Schmidt , Marc Langheinrich , Gunnar Harboe , Elaine Huang , and Marcello P Scipioni . 2011 . Designing shared public display networks – implications from today’s paper - based notice areas . In International Conference on Pervasive Computing . Springer , 258 – 275 . [ 3 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2006 . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative research in psychology 3 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 77 – 101 . [ 4 ] Elizabeth F Churchill , Les Nelson , and Laurent Denoue . 2003 . Multimedia fiers : Information sharing with digital community bulletin boards . In Communities and technologies . Springer , 97 – 117 . [ 5 ] Elizabeth F Churchill , Les Nelson , and Gary Hsieh . 2006 . Café life in the digital age : augmenting information fow in a café - work - entertainment space . In CHI’06 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 123 – 128 . [ 6 ] Sarah Clinch , Nigel Davies , Adrian Friday , and Graham Clinch . 2013 . Yarely : a software player for open pervasive display networks . In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM International Symposium on Pervasive Displays . ACM , 25 – 30 . [ 7 ] Sarah Clinch , Nigel Davies , Adrian Friday , and Christos Efstratiou . 2011 . Re - fections on the long - term use of an experimental digital signage system . In Proceedings of the 13th international conference on Ubiquitous computing . ACM , 133 – 142 . [ 8 ] David Coghlan . 2019 . Doing action research in your own organization . SAGE Publications Limited . [ 9 ] Nigel Davies , Sarah Clinch , and Florian Alt . 2014 . Pervasive displays : under - standing the future of digital signage . Synthesis Lectures on Mobile and Pervasive Computing 8 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 1 – 128 . [ 10 ] Nigel Davies , Marc Langheinrich , Rui Jose , and Albrecht Schmidt . 2012 . Open display networks : A communications medium for the 21st century . Computer 45 , 5 ( 2012 ) , 58 – 64 . [ 11 ] Paul Dietz , Ramesh Raskar , Shane Booth , Jeroen Van Baar , Kent Wittenburg , and Brian Knep . 2004 . Multi - projectors and implicit interaction in persuasive public displays . In Proceedings of the working conference on Advanced visual interfaces . ACM , 209 – 217 . [ 12 ] Saul Greenberg and Michael Rounding . 2001 . The notifcation collage : posting in - formation to public and personal displays . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . ACM , 514 – 521 . [ 13 ] Gillian R Hayes . 2011 . The relationship of action research to human - computer interaction . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 18 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 15 . [ 14 ] Greg Hearn , Megan Kimber , June Lennie , and Lyn Simpson . 2005 . A way for - ward : sustainable ICTs and regional sustainability . The Journal of Community Informatics 1 , 2 ( 2005 ) . [ 15 ] Liesbeth Huybrechts , Henric Benesch , and Jon Geib . 2017 . Institutioning : Partici - patory Design , Co - Design and the public realm . CoDesign 13 , 3 ( 2017 ) , 148 – 159 . [ 16 ] Shahram Izadi , Geraldine Fitzpatrick , Tom Rodden , Harry Brignull , Yvonne Rogers , and Siân Lindley . 2005 . The iterative design and study of a large display for shared and sociable spaces . In Proceedings of the 2005 conference on Designing for User eXperience . AIGA : American Institute of Graphic Arts , 59 . [ 17 ] Tom Johnston , Alison Hilston , Patsy Healey , Carmine Nigro , and Kath Lofnk . 2013 . Stayin’ Alive in Glendale . ( 2013 ) . [ 18 ] Matt Jones , Will Harwood , David Bainbridge , George Buchanan , David Frohlich , Dorothy Rachovides , Maxine Frank , and Mounia Lalmas . 2008 . Narrowcast yourself : Designing for community storytelling in a rural Indian context . In Proceedings of the 7th ACM conference on Designing interactive systems . ACM , 369 – 378 . [ 19 ] Vassilis Kostakos and Timo Ojala . 2013 . Public displays invade urban spaces . IEEE Pervasive Computing 12 , 1 ( 2013 ) , 8 – 13 . [ 20 ] Steinar Kvale . [ n . d . ] . Interviews : An Introduction to Qualitative Research Interview - ing . Sage Publications . [ 21 ] Andrew Maunder , Gary Marsden , and Richard Harper . 2011 . Making the link—providing mobile media for novice communities in the developing world . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 69 , 10 ( 2011 ) , 647 – 657 . [ 22 ] Joseph F McCarthy , Tony J Costa , and Edy S Liongosari . 2001 . Unicast , outcast & groupcast : Three steps toward ubiquitous , peripheral displays . In International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing . Springer , 332 – 345 . [ 23 ] Nemanja Memarovic , Marc Langheinrich , Keith Cheverst , Nick Taylor , and Flo - rian Alt . 2013 . P - LAYERS – A layered framework addressing the multifaceted issues facing community - supporting public display deployments . ACM Transac - tions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 20 , 3 ( 2013 ) , 17 . [ 24 ] Nemanja Memarovic , Marc Langheinrich , Elisa Rubegni , Andreia David , and Ivan Elhart . 2012 . Designing interacting places for a student community using a com - municative ecology approach . In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia . ACM , 43 . [ 25 ] Cecelia B Merkel , Lu Xiao , Umer Farooq , Craig H Ganoe , Roderick Lee , John M Carroll , and Mary Beth Rosson . 2004 . Participatory design in community com - puting contexts : Tales from the feld . In Proceedings of the eighth conference on Participatory design : Artful integration : interweaving media , materials and practices - Volume 1 . ACM , 1 – 10 . [ 26 ] Daniel Michelis and Miriam Meckel . 2009 . Why do we want to interact with electronic billboards in public space . In 1st Workshop on Pervasive Advertising @ Pervasive . Citeseer , 2 – 7 . [ 27 ] Stuart Nicholson , Dan Jackson , Adrian Clear , and Patrick Olivier . 2019 . Show - boater : insight into sustainable rural community display networks from a longi - tudinal study . In Proceedings of the 8th ACM International Symposium on Pervasive Displays . ACM , 12 . [ 28 ] Kent O’Hara , Mark Perry , and Simon Lewis . 2003 . Social coordination around a situated display appliance . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . ACM , 65 – 72 . [ 29 ] Timo Ojala , Vassilis Kostakos , Hannu Kukka , Tommi Heikkinen , Tomas Linden , Marko Jurmu , Simo Hosio , Fabio Kruger , and Daniele Zanni . 2012 . Multipurpose interactive public displays in the wild : Three years later . Computer 45 , 5 ( 2012 ) , 42 – 49 . [ 30 ] Peter Peltonen , Esko Kurvinen , Antti Salovaara , Giulio Jacucci , Tommi Ilmonen , John Evans , Antti Oulasvirta , and Petri Saarikko . 2008 . It’s Mine , Don’t Touch ! : interactions at a large multi - touch display in a city centre . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . ACM , 1285 – 1294 . [ 31 ] Giacomo Poderi . 2019 . Sustaining platforms as commons : perspectives on partic - ipation , infrastructure , and governance . CoDesign 15 , 3 ( 2019 ) , 243 – 255 . [ 32 ] Gary Pritchard , John Vines , Pam Briggs , Lisa Thomas , and Patrick Olivier . 2014 . Digitally driven : how location based services impact the work practices of Lon - don bus drivers . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 3617 – 3626 . [ 33 ] Fiona Redhead and Margot Brereton . 2006 . A qualitative analysis of local commu - nity communications . In Proceedings of the 18th Australia conference on Computer - Human Interaction : Design : Activities , Artefacts and Environments . ACM , 361 – 364 . [ 34 ] Fiona Redhead and Margot Brereton . 2009 . Designing interaction for local com - munications : An urban screen study . In IFIP Conference on Human - Computer Interaction . Springer , 457 – 460 . Sustaining a Networked Community Resource : Findings from a Longitudinal Situated Display Deployment CHI ’21 , May 8 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan [ 35 ] Alessandro Soro , Anita Lee Hong , Grace Shaw , Paul Roe , and Margot Brereton . 2015 . A Noticeboard in Both Worlds Unsurprising Interfaces Supporting Easy Bi - Cultural Content Publication . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2181 – 2186 . [ 36 ] Nick Taylor and Keith Cheverst . 2009 . Social interaction around a rural com - munity photo display . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 67 , 12 ( 2009 ) , 1037 – 1047 . [ 37 ] Nick Taylor and Keith Cheverst . 2010 . Creating a rural community display with local engagement . In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems . ACM , 218 – 227 . [ 38 ] Nick Taylor and Keith Cheverst . 2012 . Supporting community awareness with interactive displays . Computer 45 , 5 ( 2012 ) , 26 – 32 . [ 39 ] Nick Taylor , Keith Cheverst , Peter Wright , and Patrick Olivier . 2013 . Leaving the wild : lessons from community technology handovers . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 1549 – 1558 . [ 40 ] Nick Taylor , Justin Marshall , Alicia Blum - Ross , John Mills , Jon Rogers , Paul Egglestone , David M Frohlich , Peter Wright , and Patrick Olivier . 2012 . Empow - ering communities with situated voting devices . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 1361 – 1370 . [ 41 ] Nicholas Craig Taylor . 2011 . Supporting village community through connected situated displays . Ph . D . Dissertation . Lancaster University . [ 42 ] Kentaro Toyama . 2011 . Technology as Amplifer in International Development . In Proceedings of the 2011 IConference ( iConference ’11 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 75 – 82 . [ 43 ] Vasilis Vlachokyriakos , Rob Comber , Karim Ladha , Nick Taylor , Paul Dunphy , Patrick McCorry , and Patrick Olivier . 2014 . PosterVote : expanding the action repertoire for local political activism . In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Designing interactive systems . ACM , 795 – 804 . [ 44 ] Mark Weiser , Rich Gold , and John Seely Brown . 1999 . The origins of ubiquitous computing research at PARC in the late 1980s . IBM systems journal 38 , 4 ( 1999 ) , 693 – 696 .