17 / 10 / 12Data Scientist : The Sexiest Job of the 21st Century - Harvard Business Review 1 / 5 hbr . org / 2012 / 10 / data - scientist - the - sexiest - job - of - the - 21st - century / ar / pr Data Scientist : The Sexiest Job of the 21st Century by Thomas H . Davenport and D . J . Patil Artwork : Tamar Cohen , Andrew J Buboltz , 2011 , silk screen on a page from a high school yearbook , 8 . 5 " x 12 " When Jonathan Goldman arrived for work in June 2006 at LinkedIn , the business networking site , the place still felt like a start - up . The company had just under 8 million accounts , and the number was growing quickly as existing members invited their friends and colleagues to join . But users weren’t seeking out connections with the people who were already on the site at the rate executives had expected . Something was apparently missing in the social experience . As one LinkedIn manager put it , “It was like arriving at a conference reception and realizing you don’t know anyone . So you just stand in the corner sipping your drink—and you probably leave early . ” Goldman , a PhD in physics from Stanford , was intrigued by the linking he did see going on and by the richness of the user profiles . It all made for messy data and unwieldy analysis , but as he began exploring people’s connections , he started to see possibilities . He began forming theories , testing hunches , and finding patterns that allowed him to predict whose networks a given profile would land in . He could imagine that new features capitalizing on the heuristics he was developing might provide value to users . But LinkedIn’s engineering team , caught up in the challenges of scaling up the site , seemed uninterested . Some colleagues were openly dismissive of Goldman’s ideas . Why would users need LinkedIn to figure out their networks for them ? The site already had an address book importer that could pull in all a member’s connections . Luckily , Reid Hoffman , LinkedIn’s cofounder and CEO at the time ( now its executive chairman ) , had faith in the power of analytics because of his experiences at PayPal , and he had granted Goldman a high degree of autonomy . For one thing , he had given Goldman a way to circumvent the traditional product release cycle by publishing small modules in the form of ads on the site’s most popular pages . Through one such module , Goldman started to test what would happen if you presented users with names of people they hadn’t yet connected with but seemed likely to know—for example , people who had shared their tenures at schools and workplaces . He did this by ginning up a custom ad that displayed the three best new matches for each user based on the background entered in his or her LinkedIn profile . Within days it was obvious that something remarkable was taking place . The click - through rate on those ads was the highest ever seen . Goldman continued to refine how the suggestions were generated , incorporating networking ideas such as “triangle closing”—the notion that if you know Larry and Sue , there’s a good chance that Larry and Sue know each other . Goldman and his team also got the action required to respond to a suggestion down to one click . It didn’t take long for LinkedIn’s top managers to recognize a good idea and make it a standard feature . That’s when things really took off . “People You May Know” ads achieved a click - through rate 30 % higher than the rate obtained by other prompts to visit more pages on the site . They generated millions of new page views . Thanks to this one feature , LinkedIn’s growth trajectory shifted significantly upward . A New Breed Goldman is a good example of a new key player in organizations : the “data scientist . ” It’s a high - ranking professional with the training and curiosity to make discoveries in the world of big data . The title has been around for only a few years . ( It was coined in 2008 by one of us , D . J . Patil , and Jeff Hammerbacher , then the respective leads of data and analytics efforts at LinkedIn and Facebook . ) But thousands of data scientists are already working at both start - ups and well - established companies . Their sudden 17 / 10 / 12Data Scientist : The Sexiest Job of the 21st Century - Harvard Business Review 2 / 5 hbr . org / 2012 / 10 / data - scientist - the - sexiest - job - of - the - 21st - century / ar / pr appearance on the business scene reflects the fact that companies are now wrestling with information that comes in varieties and volumes never encountered before . If your organization stores multiple petabytes of data , if the information most critical to your business resides in forms other than rows and columns of numbers , or if answering your biggest question would involve a “mashup” of several analytical efforts , you’ve got a big data opportunity . Much of the current enthusiasm for big data focuses on technologies that make taming it possible , including Hadoop ( the most widely used framework for distributed file system processing ) and related open - source tools , cloud computing , and data visualization . While those are important breakthroughs , at least as important are the people with the skill set ( and the mind - set ) to put them to good use . On this front , demand has raced ahead of supply . Indeed , the shortage of data scientists is becoming a serious constraint in some sectors . Greylock Partners , an early - stage venture firm that has backed companies such as Facebook , LinkedIn , Palo Alto Networks , and Workday , is worried enough about the tight labor pool that it has built its own specialized recruiting team to channel talent to businesses in its portfolio . “Once they have data , ” says Dan Portillo , who leads that team , “they really need people who can manage it and find insights in it . ” Who Are These People ? If capitalizing on big data depends on hiring scarce data scientists , then the challenge for managers is to learn how to identify that talent , attract it to an enterprise , and make it productive . None of those tasks is as straightforward as it is with other , established organizational roles . Start with the fact that there are no university programs offering degrees in data science . There is also little consensus on where the role fits in an organization , how data scientists can add the most value , and how their performance should be measured . The first step in filling the need for data scientists , therefore , is to understand what they do in businesses . Then ask , What skills do they need ? And what fields are those skills most readily found in ? More than anything , what data scientists do is make discoveries while swimming in data . It’s their preferred method of navigating the world around them . At ease in the digital realm , they are able to bring structure to large quantities of formless data and make analysis possible . They identify rich data sources , join them with other , potentially incomplete data sources , and clean the resulting set . In a competitive landscape where challenges keep changing and data never stop flowing , data scientists help decision makers shift from ad hoc analysis to an ongoing conversation with data . Data scientists realize that they face technical limitations , but they don’t allow that to bog down their search for novel solutions . As they make discoveries , they communicate what they’ve learned and suggest its implications for new business directions . Often they are creative in displaying information visually and making the patterns they find clear and compelling . They advise executives and product managers on the implications of the data for products , processes , and decisions . Given the nascent state of their trade , it often falls to data scientists to fashion their own tools and even conduct academic - style research . Yahoo , one of the firms that employed a group of data scientists early on , was instrumental in developing Hadoop . Facebook’s data team created the language Hive for programming Hadoop projects . Many other data scientists , especially at data - driven companies such as Google , Amazon , Microsoft , Walmart , eBay , LinkedIn , and Twitter , have added to and refined the tool kit . What kind of person does all this ? What abilities make a data scientist successful ? Think of him or her as a hybrid of data hacker , analyst , communicator , and trusted adviser . The combination is extremely powerful—and rare . Data scientists’ most basic , universal skill is the ability to write code . This may be less true in five years’ time , when many more people will have the title “data scientist” on their business cards . More enduring will be the need for data scientists to communicate in language that all their stakeholders understand—and to demonstrate the special skills involved in storytelling with data , whether verbally , visually , or—ideally—both . But we would say the dominant trait among data scientists is an intense curiosity—a desire to go beneath the surface of a problem , find the questions at its heart , and distill them into a very clear set of hypotheses that can be tested . This often entails the associative thinking that characterizes the most creative scientists in any field . For example , we know of a data scientist studying a fraud problem who realized that it was analogous to a type of DNA sequencing problem . By bringing together those disparate worlds , he and his team were able to craft a solution that dramatically reduced fraud losses . Perhaps it’s becoming clear why the word “scientist” fits this emerging role . Experimental physicists , for example , also have to design equipment , gather data , conduct multiple experiments , and communicate their results . Thus , companies looking for people who can work with complex data have had good luck recruiting among those with educational and work backgrounds in the physical or social sciences . Some of the best and brightest data scientists are PhDs in esoteric fields like ecology and systems biology . George Roumeliotis , the head of a data science team at Intuit in Silicon Valley , holds a doctorate in astrophysics . A little less surprisingly , many of the data scientists working in business today were formally trained in computer science , math , or economics . They can emerge from any field that has a strong data and computational focus . 17 / 10 / 12Data Scientist : The Sexiest Job of the 21st Century - Harvard Business Review 3 / 5 hbr . org / 2012 / 10 / data - scientist - the - sexiest - job - of - the - 21st - century / ar / pr It’s important to keep that image of the scientist in mind—because the word “data” might easily send a search for talent down the wrong path . As Portillo told us , “The traditional backgrounds of people you saw 10 to 15 years ago just don’t cut it these days . ” A quantitative analyst can be great at analyzing data but not at subduing a mass of unstructured data and getting it into a form in which it can be analyzed . A data management expert might be great at generating and organizing data in structured form but not at turning unstructured data into structured data—and also not at actually analyzing the data . And while people without strong social skills might thrive in traditional data professions , data scientists must have such skills to be effective . How to Find the Data Scientists You Need 1 . Focus recruiting at the “usual suspect” universities ( Stanford , MIT , Berkeley , Harvard , Carnegie Mellon ) and also at a few others with proven strengths : North Carolina State , UC Santa Cruz , the University of Maryland , the University of Washington , and UT Austin . 2 . Scan the membership rolls of user groups devoted to data science tools . The R User Groups ( for an open - source statistical tool favored by data scientists ) and Python Interest Groups ( for PIGgies ) are good places to start . 3 . Search for data scientists on LinkedIn—they’re almost all on there , and you can see if they have the skills you want . 4 . Hang out with data scientists at the Strata , Structure : Data , and Hadoop World conferences and similar gatherings ( there is almost one a week now ) or at informal data scientist “meet - ups” in the Bay Area ; Boston ; New York ; Washington , DC ; London ; Singapore ; and Sydney . 5 . Make friends with a local venture capitalist , who is likely to have gotten a variety of big data proposals over the past year . 6 . Host a competition on Kaggle or TopCoder , the analytics and coding competition sites . Follow up with the most - creative entrants . 7 . Don’t bother with any candidate who can’t code . Coding skills don’t have to be at a world - class level but should be good enough to get by . Look for evidence , too , that candidates learn rapidly about new technologies and methods . 8 . Make sure a candidate can find a story in a data set and provide a coherent narrative about a key data insight . Test whether he or she can communicate with numbers , visually and verbally . 9 . Be wary of candidates who are too detached from the business world . When you ask how their work might apply to your management challenges , are they stuck for answers ? 10 . Ask candidates about their favorite analysis or insight and how they are keeping their skills sharp . Have they gotten a certificate in the advanced track of Stanford’s online Machine Learning course , contributed to open - source projects , or built an online repository of code to share ( for example , on GitHub ) ? Roumeliotis was clear with us that he doesn’t hire on the basis of statistical or analytical capabilities . He begins his search for data scientists by asking candidates if they can develop prototypes in a mainstream programming language such as Java . Roumeliotis seeks both a skill set—a solid foundation in math , statistics , probability , and computer science—and certain habits of mind . He wants people with a feel for business issues and empathy for customers . Then , he says , he builds on all that with on - the - job training and an occasional course in a particular technology . Several universities are planning to launch data science programs , and existing programs in analytics , such as the Master of Science in Analytics program at North Carolina State , are busy adding big data exercises and coursework . Some companies are also trying to develop their own data scientists . After acquiring the big data firm Greenplum , EMC decided that the availability of data scientists would be a gating factor in its own—and customers’—exploitation of big data . So its Education Services division launched a data science and big data analytics training and certification program . EMC makes the program available to both employees and customers , and some of its graduates are already working on internal big data initiatives . As educational offerings proliferate , the pipeline of talent should expand . Vendors of big data technologies are also working to make them easier to use . In the meantime one data scientist has come up with a creative approach to closing the gap . The Insight Data Science Fellows Program , a postdoctoral fellowship designed by Jake Klamka ( a high - energy physicist by training ) , takes scientists from academia and in six weeks prepares them to succeed as data scientists . The program combines mentoring by data experts from local companies ( such as Facebook , Twitter , Google , and LinkedIn ) with exposure to actual big data challenges . Originally aiming for 10 fellows , Klamka wound up accepting 30 , from an applicant pool numbering more than 200 . More organizations are now lining up to participate . “The demand from companies has been phenomenal , ” Klamka told us . “They just can’t get this kind of high - quality talent . ” Why Would a Data Scientist Want to Work Here ? 17 / 10 / 12Data Scientist : The Sexiest Job of the 21st Century - Harvard Business Review 4 / 5 hbr . org / 2012 / 10 / data - scientist - the - sexiest - job - of - the - 21st - century / ar / pr Even as the ranks of data scientists swell , competition for top talent will remain fierce . Expect candidates to size up employment opportunities on the basis of how interesting the big data challenges are . As one of them commented , “If we wanted to work with structured data , we’d be on Wall Street . ” Given that today’s most qualified prospects come from nonbusiness backgrounds , hiring managers may need to figure out how to paint an exciting picture of the potential for breakthroughs that their problems offer . Pay will of course be a factor . A good data scientist will have many doors open to him or her , and salaries will be bid upward . Several data scientists working at start - ups commented that they’d demanded and got large stock option packages . Even for someone accepting a position for other reasons , compensation signals a level of respect and the value the role is expected to add to the business . But our informal survey of the priorities of data scientists revealed something more fundamentally important . They want to be “on the bridge . ” The reference is to the 1960s television show Star Trek , in which the starship captain James Kirk relies heavily on data supplied by Mr . Spock . Data scientists want to be in the thick of a developing situation , with real - time awareness of the evolving set of choices it presents . Considering the difficulty of finding and keeping data scientists , one would think that a good strategy would involve hiring them as consultants . Most consulting firms have yet to assemble many of them . Even the largest firms , such as Accenture , Deloitte , and IBM Global Services , are in the early stages of leading big data projects for their clients . The skills of the data scientists they do have on staff are mainly being applied to more - conventional quantitative analysis problems . Offshore analytics services firms , such as Mu Sigma , might be the ones to make the first major inroads with data scientists . But the data scientists we’ve spoken with say they want to build things , not just give advice to a decision maker . One described being a consultant as “the dead zone—all you get to do is tell someone else what the analyses say they should do . ” By creating solutions that work , they can have more impact and leave their marks as pioneers of their profession . Care and Feeding Data scientists don’t do well on a short leash . They should have the freedom to experiment and explore possibilities . That said , they need close relationships with the rest of the business . The most important ties for them to forge are with executives in charge of products and services rather than with people overseeing business functions . As the story of Jonathan Goldman illustrates , their greatest opportunity to add value is not in creating reports or presentations for senior executives but in innovating with customer - facing products and processes . LinkedIn isn’t the only company to use data scientists to generate ideas for products , features , and value - adding services . At Intuit data scientists are asked to develop insights for small - business customers and consumers and report to a new senior vice president of big data , social design , and marketing . GE is already using data science to optimize the service contracts and maintenance intervals for industrial products . Google , of course , uses data scientists to refine its core search and ad - serving algorithms . Zynga uses data scientists to optimize the game experience for both long - term engagement and revenue . Netflix created the well - known Netflix Prize , given to the data science team that developed the best way to improve the company’s movie recommendation system . The test - preparation firm Kaplan uses its data scientists to uncover effective learning strategies . There is , however , a potential downside to having people with sophisticated skills in a fast - evolving field spend their time among general management colleagues . They’ll have less interaction with similar specialists , which they need to keep their skills sharp and their tool kit state - of - the - art . Data scientists have to connect with communities of practice , either within large firms or externally . New conferences and informal associations are springing up to support collaboration and technology sharing , and companies should encourage scientists to become involved in them with the understanding that “more water in the harbor floats all boats . ” Data scientists tend to be more motivated , too , when more is expected of them . The challenges of accessing and structuring big data sometimes leave little time or energy for sophisticated analytics involving prediction or optimization . Yet if executives make it clear that simple reports are not enough , data scientists will devote more effort to advanced analytics . Big data shouldn’t equal “small math . ” The Hot Job of the Decade Hal Varian , the chief economist at Google , is known to have said , “The sexy job in the next 10 years will be statisticians . People think I’m joking , but who would’ve guessed that computer engineers would’ve been the sexy job of the 1990s ? ” If “sexy” means having rare qualities that are much in demand , data scientists are already there . They are difficult and expensive to hire and , given the very competitive market for their services , difficult to retain . There simply aren’t a lot of people with their combination of scientific background and computational and analytical skills . Data scientists today are akin to Wall Street “quants” of the 1980s and 1990s . In those days people with backgrounds in physics and math streamed to investment banks and hedge funds , where they could devise entirely new algorithms and data strategies . Then a variety of universities developed master’s programs in financial engineering , which churned out a second generation of talent that was more accessible to mainstream firms . The pattern was repeated later in the 1990s with search engineers , whose rarefied skills soon came to be taught in computer science programs . 17 / 10 / 12Data Scientist : The Sexiest Job of the 21st Century - Harvard Business Review 5 / 5 hbr . org / 2012 / 10 / data - scientist - the - sexiest - job - of - the - 21st - century / ar / pr One question raised by this is whether some firms would be wise to wait until that second generation of data scientists emerges , and the candidates are more numerous , less expensive , and easier to vet and assimilate in a business setting . Why not leave the trouble of hunting down and domesticating exotic talent to the big data start - ups and to firms like GE and Walmart , whose aggressive strategies require them to be at the forefront ? The problem with that reasoning is that the advance of big data shows no signs of slowing . If companies sit out this trend’s early days for lack of talent , they risk falling behind as competitors and channel partners gain nearly unassailable advantages . Think of big data as an epic wave gathering now , starting to crest . If you want to catch it , you need people who can surf . Thomas H . Davenport is a visiting professor at Harvard Business School , a senior adviser to Deloitte Analytics , and a coauthor of Judgment Calls ( Harvard Business Review Press , 2012 ) . D . J . Patil is the data scientist in residence at Greylock Partners , was formerly the head of data products at LinkedIn , and is the author of Data Jujitsu : The Art of Turning Data into Product ( O’Reilly Media , 2012 ) .