Leading Edge Minireview Cell 124 , March 10 , 2006 ©2006 Elsevier Inc . 897 Although the existence of different endocytic routes is well known , their exact biological impacts are only beginning to be understood . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) has traditionally attracted the most experimental attention ; however , it is now clear that clathrin - independent endocy - tosis also plays important roles . One form of clathrin - inde - pendent endocytosis relies on cholesterol - rich membrane domains , such as lipid rafts and caveolae . Herein , we refer to this form of endocytosis as raft / caveolar endocytosis ( RCE ) . In this review , we provide snapshots of complex situations , in which different endocytic routes orchestrate biochemical pathways and biological behavior . This work indicates that endocytosis is a fundamental organizer of the cell , which coordinates the core variables in cell signal - ing—duration , intensity , integration , and spatial distribu - tion—to control such processes as cell fate determination and cell migration . Endocytosis Integrates and Attenuates Signaling Some plasma - membrane receptors are internalized through CME , some through RCE , and some through both . The question is why and under what circumstances . The answer may be that the two routes serve different pur - poses . As an example , when the TGF - β receptor is internal - ized through CME , it is routed to “canonical” endosomes , where it signals through the Smad - dependent pathway . Conversely , the fraction of receptors internalized through RCE is delivered instead to a degradative compartment ( Di Guglielmo et al . , 2003 ) . Work on the epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) suggests a mechanism by which the choice between CME and RCE is made . When stimulated with low doses of ligand , EGFRs are almost exclusively internalized through CME . However , at higher doses of EGF , RCE is also used . This shift at higher doses of EGF correlates with the monoubiq - uitination of EGFR . Moreover , chimeric proteins , harboring ubiquitin ( Ub ) as the sole intracellular signal , are internal - ized through RCE ( Chen and De Camilli , 2005 ; Sigismund et al . , 2005 ) . One might speculate that CME is preferred under conditions of scarce ligand because it sustains pro - longed endosomal signaling , whereas , when abundant ligand is present , excess stimulation might be avoided by routing part of the receptor population to a degrada - tive ( RCE ) pathway . This scenario finds support in math - ematical simulations showing that receptor internalization and endosomal signaling are critical for signal output only at low doses of EGF ( Liu et al . , 2005 ) . Cumulatively , this work suggests that the net outcome for signaling events is dependent on the ratio of CME to RCE . However critical questions remain . For instance , how does RCE direct receptors to degradation ? Is signaling by receptors other than EGFR and TGF - β receptor also inte - grated by the decision between CME versus RCE ? Also , in those cases in which CME functions as a “signaling route , ” is the cargo receptor eventually targeted for degradation ? At least in the case of the TGF - β receptor , evidence sug - gests that CME sustains continuous shuttling of the recep - tor between the plasma membrane and the signaling endo - some rather than leading to degradation ( Di Guglielmo et al . , 2003 ) . “Endocytomics” and Cellular Organization A recent paper inaugurated the era of functional genomics of endocytosis in mammalian cells ( Pelkmans et al . , 2005 ) . By RNA interference of the human kinome , an unexpectedly high number of kinases were implicated in endocytosis . Two different viruses ( VSV and SV40 , which are internalized via CME and RCE , respectively ) were used to probe dis - tinct endocytic routes . Surprisingly , the majority of kinases regulate only one of the two endocytic pathways , and , of the 36 kinases that affect both , 23 have opposing effects , enhancing one pathway while suppressing the other . Also , many of the “endocytic kinases” connect endocytosis to other aspects of cellular activity , such as the cell cycle , adhesion , and metabolism . For example , a significant neg - ative correlation is scored between cell proliferation and Endocytosis Conducts the Cell Signaling Orchestra Simona Polo 1 , 2 , * and Pier Paolo Di Fiore 1 , 2 , 3 , * 1 IFOM , Istituto FIRC di Oncologia Molecolare , Via Adamello 16 , 20134 Milan , Italy 2 Istituto Europeo di Oncologia , 20141 Milan , Italy 3 University of Milan Medical School , 20122 Milan , Italy * Contact : simona . polo @ ifom - ieo - campus . it ; pierpaolo . difiore @ ifom - ieo - campus . it DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2006 . 02 . 025 Endocytosis is used by eukaryotic cells to regulate nutrient internalization , signal transduction , and the composition of the plasma membrane . However , a more complex picture is emerging , in which endocytic pathways integrate diverse signals , thereby contributing to a higher level of cellular and organismal organization . In this way , endocytosis and cell signaling are inter - twined in many biological processes , such as cell motility and cell fate determination . 898 Cell 124 , March 10 , 2006 ©2006 Elsevier Inc . the RCE pathway . Moreover , the RCE pathway requires kinases of the integrin pathway , such as FAK , underscoring a connection between cell adhesion and RCE . Conversely , a number of kinases that control the CME pathway , such as Mylk and PKC ζ , are involved in cytoskeleton - dependent transport and cell polarity . Future “omics” studies will likely define different sub - groups within CME and RCE . A recent study analyzed the impact of six regulatory kinases on the caveolar pathway ( Pelkmans and Zerial , 2005 ) . This revealed two modali - ties of caveolar dynamics , whereby individual caveolae undergo rapid cycles of fusion and internalization whereas multicaveolar assemblies are static and connected to the extracellular space . Interestingly , the two categories may be regulated by different kinases , and stimulation of RCE by SV40 infection could induce rapid exchange between these two pools of structures . From a wider viewpoint , these studies unveil an unex - pectedly vast regulation of endocytosis by signaling and argue that the two programs might be so deeply inter - twined that they in fact constitute a single system . Theoret - ical modeling has already paved the way for such thinking . For instance , the association of signaling molecules with biological membranes is predicted to increase the num - ber ( and / or the average lifetime ) of signaling complexes ( Kholodenko , 2003 ) . In addition , trafficking membranes could represent an efficient way to deliver messages to biologically relevant locations , such as the nucleus ( Kholodenko , 2003 ) . In this framework , the kinases that control both cytoskeleton - dependent traffic and CME ( Pelkmans et al . , 2005 ) could deliver signals to appropri - ate subcellular locations . Thus , theoretical modeling and experimental evidence ( Miaczynska et al . , 2004 ) strongly suggest that endocytosis provides necessary spatial and temporal dimensions to signaling . How this idea relates to the “real” biological world is illustrated by recent discover - ies in the fields of cell motility and cell fate determination . Endocytosis and Cell Motility Cell motility has traditionally been regarded as a plasma - membrane - based signaling process in which the engage - ment of cell - surface receptors leads to actin rearrange - ments and the formation of motile structures such as lamellipodia and dorsal ruffles . However , there is emerg - ing evidence that endocytosis is an essential component of cell motility . For instance , in migrating border cells of the fruit fly Drosophila , endocytosis is used to shuttle the receptors that interact with guidance cues to specific regions of the plasma membrane ( Jekely et al . , 2005 ) . In this way , endocytosis redirects molecules to regions of “high signaling . ” Similarly , studies of the GTPases Rac and Rho , which regulate cell motility , suggest that the recruit - ment and retention of signaling molecules at specific loca - tions of the plasma membrane may be facilitated by the differential regulation of endocytic pathways ( Figure 1 ) . Upon integrin - mediated cell adhesion , high - affinity binding sites for Rac become available at the plasma membrane . Signaling downstream of active Rac promotes the forma - tion of lamellipodia , which are characteristic of the leading edge of migrating cells . Integrins act locally to prevent the internalization of lipid rafts by RCE , which serve as anchor - age points for Rac . This process maintains active Rac near sites of integrin - mediated signaling ( del Pozo et al . , 2004 , 2005 ) . A similar mechanism , but involving different molec - ular effectors , might also be responsible for localizing Rho ( Palazzo et al . , 2004 ) . In addition to RCE , macropinocytosis is another form of non - clathrin - mediated endocytosis , in which mem - brane protrusions fuse back with the plasma membrane to produce large vesicles . Membrane bound Rac is also internalized by macropinocytosis . If this process is inhib - ited , lamellipodia are lost and active Rac accumulates in aberrant membrane ruffles , which could be aborted mac - ropinosomes ( Schlunck et al . , 2004 ) . Taken together , a complex trafficking pattern emerges : Rac is internalized through macropinosomes and then recycled to specific regions of the plasma membrane where integrin - mediated inhibition of RCE makes rafts ( and their components ) avail - able for binding to Rac ( Figure 1 ) . This circuitry requires that opposing effects on two endocytic pathways be coordinated , a concept that also emerged from the recent genomic studies ( Pelkmans et al . , 2005 ) . Endocytosis also contributes to the migratory and inva - sive behavior characteristic of transformed cells . Invasive Figure 1 . Endocytosis Regulates Cell Motility and Invasiveness Rac is internalized via macropinosomes and recycled to rafts ( 1 ) . The internalization of Rac at rafts is inhibited by integrin signaling ( 2 ) through the relocalization of phosphocaveolin to focal adhesions ( del Pozo et al . , 2005 ) . A similar mechanism ( 3 ) , but requiring FAK ( Palazzo et al . , 2004 ) , targets Rho to rafts . In Src - transformed cells ( 4 ) , FAK acts as a scaffold to promote the phosphorylation of en - dophilin - A2 by Src ( Wu et al . , 2005 ) . Phosphorylation of endophilin disrupts its association with dynamin . This event may inhibit endo - cytosis of the matrix metalloproteinase MT1 - MMP and thereby con - tribute to tumor invasiveness . Cell 124 , March 10 , 2006 ©2006 Elsevier Inc . 899 tumor cells degrade the extracellular matrix through mem - brane - anchored metalloproteinases , such as MT1 - MMP . In Src - transformed cells , a FAK - dependent mechanism is activated , which attenuates endocytosis of MT1 - MMP . This results in increased degradation of the extracellular matrix , which could contribute to tumor invasion and metastasis ( Wu et al . , 2005 ) ( Figure 1 ) . Endocytosis and Cell Fate Determination Upon engagement by membrane bound ligands of the DSL ( Delta / Serrate / Lag2 ) family , the plasma - membrane receptor Notch is cleaved in the extracellular region ( the S2 cut ) , followed by a cleavage in the transmembrane region ( the S3 cut ) . The liberated intracellular domain translocates to the nucleus , where it acts as a transcriptional regula - tor ( Figure 2A ) . Genetic evidence in Drosophila shows that endocytosis of both DSL and Notch is required for Notch activation ( Figure 2A ; Le Borgne et al . , 2005 ) . Endocyto - sis of DSL follows at least two routes , one dependent on ubiquitination ( Le Borgne et al . , 2005 ) and the other rely - ing on canonical endocytic motifs ( Wang and Struhl , 2005 ) ( Figure 2A ) . Whether the two pathways represent RCE and CME , and how they are integrated , is uncertain . Notch also undergoes at least two different kinds of internalization , both dependent on ubiquitination ( Figure 2A ) . Unliganded Notch is continuously endocytosed , probably to prevent its sporadic activation . Conversely , ligand - engaged Notch requires endocytosis for its activation . How ubiquitination couples Notch to both a degradation / recycling route ( when not bound by ligand ) and activation ( when ligand bound ) is presently debated ( Le Borgne et al . , 2005 ) . How all of these endocytic pathways converge to execute a multifaceted biological program is exemplified by studies of cell fate determination . In asymmetric cell division , fate determinants are differentially partitioned between daugh - ter cells . In the genesis of the sensory organ of Drosophila , the precursor cell ( SOP ) divides asymmetrically , generat - ing a pIIa and a pIIb cell ( Figure 2B ) , which have distinct fates because Notch signaling is activated only in pIIa . This is due to asymmetric partitioning of Numb ( an endocytic Figure 2 . Endocytosis and Cell Fate ( A ) The endocytosis of Notch and its ligands , Delta , Serrate , and Lag2 ( DSL ) , is required for Notch activity . Internalization of DSL ( in Drosophila and zebrafish ) depends on ubiquitination by the E3 ligases Neuralized and Mind bomb . Downstream events require the Ub binding protein epsin / lqf ( Le Borgne et al . , 2005 ) . Models to explain why DSL endocytosis is required for Notch activation are shown . ( 1 ) Inactive DSLs are endocytosed , “activated” in endosomes , and recycled to the surface . ( 2 ) Endocytosis of DSLs generates conditions ( by mechanical “pulling” forces ) that unmask the Notch S2 site . ( 3 ) Ligand - engaged Notch requires endocytosis ( possibly dependent on ubiquitination by Deltex ) for its activation . ( 4 ) Unliganded Notch is con - tinuously endocytosed , through ubiquitination by the E3 ligases , Su ( dx ) / AIP4 and Nedd4 , to prevent sporadic activation . This might route Notch to an endosomal compartment where it can interact with presenilin , an effector of the S3 cut ( Le Borgne et al . , 2005 ) . ( B ) Creation of asymmetry in pIIa and pIIb cells in Drosophila is regulated by endocytosis . The SOP cell is shown with relevant molecules ( dashed line , mitosis ) . ( 1 ) Notch is nonfunctional in pIIb cells because it is internalized / degraded or because Sanpodo is internalized . A working model ( Hutterer and Knoblich , 2005 ) attempts to reconcile these two possibilities . Sanpodo itself regulates Notch endocytosis . In the absence of Numb ( pIIa ) , Sanpodo might route Notch to an “activating” endosomal compartment ( the “liganded” pathway in [ A ] ) . In the presence of Numb ( pIIb ) , Sanpodo might partici - pate in Notch downregulation ( the “unliganded” pathway in [ A ] ) . The E3 ligase Neuralized is asymmetrically partitioned in pIIb , allowing endocytosis of Delta . ( 2 ) Following endocytosis , Delta is routed to a Rab11 endosome , and then to the plasma membrane ( 3 ) . ( 4 ) In pIIa , this pathway is blocked , possibly because a critical Rab11 partner ( Nuclear fallout / Arfophilin 1 ) is inactivated ( Emery et al . , 2005 ) . How Delta is internalized in pIIa in the absence of Neuralized is not clear , although there may also be Neuralized - independent mechanisms of Delta internalization ( Wang and Struhl , 2005 ) . Delta might also be internalized before mitosis of the SOP cell ; in pIIb , it could be recycled to the plasma membrane , whereas in pIIa cells , it might be destined to a degradative pathway ( Emery et al . , 2005 ) . The events shown need not be all or none , but still occur in both cells but be biased in favor of one . 900 Cell 124 , March 10 , 2006 ©2006 Elsevier Inc . protein and an antagonist of Notch ) in the pIIb cell . Mutants of α - adaptin , a component of the endocytic adaptor AP - 2 , mimic Numb loss of function ( Le Borgne et al . , 2005 ) . Because Numb binds to α - adaptin and Notch , it might induce Notch endocytosis in pIIb . An alternative possibil - ity is suggested by studies of Sanpodo , a protein required for Notch signaling . Although Sanpodo is not asymmetri - cally partitioned , its subcellular localization is different in pIIa and pIIb cells . In pIIa , Sanpodo is at the plasma mem - brane , whereas in pIIb , Sanpodo is internalized through Numb / α - adaptin - dependent endocytosis ( Hutterer and Knoblich , 2005 ) . Thus , Numb might regulate endocytosis of Sanpodo , making it inaccessible to Notch , thereby sup - pressing Notch signaling ( Figure 2B ) . The endocytosis of Delta is also involved in pIIa / pIIb specification ( Figure 2B ) . Once internalized , Delta passes through Rab11 - positive recycling endosomes ( Emery et al . , 2005 ) . The Rab11 endosome should recycle Delta to the plasma membrane of pIIb , allowing engagement of Notch . This possibility is corroborated by findings that Sec15 , a putative effector of Rab11 , is critical in this pathway ( Jafar - Nejad et al . , 2005 ) . Sec15 is a component of the exocyst in the secretory pathway , which mediates tethering of vesicles to the plasma membrane . In pIIa , the Rab11 - based mecha - nism is suppressed ( Emery et al . , 2005 ) , thereby hindering recycling of Delta and generating asymmetry . Outlook As our understanding comes into focus , endocytosis and signaling appear as two sides of the same coin . This raises interesting questions to be tackled in the future . For instance , can the same biochemical pathways achieve dif - ferent biological outcomes simply by being constrained by different configurations of membrane organelles and having different patterns of endocytosis ? Similarly , given the high degree of overlap between the pathways that are activated by diverse signaling receptors , is “coincidence detection” on endomembranes a mechanism to resolve these many inputs into specific signals ? There is already strong evidence that this happens in phosphoinositide ( PI ) signaling—PIs and PI binding proteins adopt a restricted configuration on cellular membranes through a series of signaling - mediated events ( Carlton and Cullen , 2005 ) . Also , the need for increased signaling complexity in the course of evolution might have been met , at least in part , by increasing the complexity of the endocytic membrane system . An opportunity to test this possibility is offered by studies of the GTPase dynamin ( Elde et al . , 2005 ) . The primordial function of dynamins is related to mitochondrial inheritance . During evolution , some of the dynamins were “recruited” to the endocytic pathway , where they execute the fission of vesicles . The study by Elde et al . , ( 2005 ) shows that the acquisition of an endocytic role by dynamin occurred independently during the ciliate and metazoan radiations . If convergent evolution of this “endocytic” event is related to the independent acquisition of the same sig - naling - related properties or phenotypes , this would consti - tute a spectacular demonstration of the concept . Finally , the increasing understanding of the link between endocytosis and signaling raises the possibility that tar - geted interference of endocytosis might alter disease - linked phenotypes , especially those that are associated with aberrant cell specification . This might lead to new ways of manipulating stem cells and could increase our understanding of pathological conditions such as cancer . ACknOwlEdgMEntS We thank P . De Camilli and M . Gonzales Gaitan for discussions . The authors’ work is supported by the AIRC , the AICR , the EC , the Italian Ministry of Education and University , and the Monzino Foundation . REFEREnCES Carlton , J . G . , and Cullen , P . J . ( 2005 ) . Trends Cell Biol . 15 , 540 – 547 . Chen , H . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2005 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 2766 – 2771 . del Pozo , M . A . , Alderson , N . B . , Kiosses , W . B . , Chiang , H . H . , Anderson , R . G . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Science 303 , 839 – 842 . del Pozo , M . A . , Balasubramanian , N . , Alderson , N . B . , Kiosses , W . B . , Grande - Garcia , A . , Anderson , R . G . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2005 ) . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 901 – 908 . Di Guglielmo , G . M . , Le Roy , C . , Goodfellow , A . F . , and Wrana , J . L . ( 2003 ) . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 410 – 421 . Elde , N . C . , Morgan , G . , Winey , M . , Sperling , L . , and Turkewitz , A . P . ( 2005 ) . PLoS Genet . 1 , e52 . Published online November 4 , 2005 . 10 . 1371 / journal . pgen . 0010052 . Emery , G . , Hutterer , A . , Berdnik , D . , Mayer , B . , Wirtz - Peitz , F . , Gaitan , M . G . , and Knoblich , J . A . ( 2005 ) . Cell 122 , 763 – 773 . Hutterer , A . , and Knoblich , J . A . ( 2005 ) . EMBO Rep . 6 , 836 – 842 . Jafar - Nejad , H . , Andrews , H . K . , Acar , M . , Bayat , V . , Wirtz - Peitz , F . , Meh - ta , S . Q . , Knoblich , J . A . , and Bellen , H . J . ( 2005 ) . Dev . Cell 9 , 351 – 363 . Jekely , G . , Sung , H . H . , Luque , C . M . , and Rorth , P . ( 2005 ) . Dev . Cell 9 , 197 – 207 . Kholodenko , B . N . ( 2003 ) . J . Exp . Biol . 206 , 2073 – 2082 . Le Borgne , R . , Bardin , A . , and Schweisguth , F . ( 2005 ) . Development 132 , 1751 – 1762 . Liu , G . , Swihart , M . T . , and Neelamegham , S . ( 2005 ) . Bioinformatics 21 , 1194 – 1202 . Miaczynska , M . , Pelkmans , L . , and Zerial , M . ( 2004 ) . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 400 – 406 . Palazzo , A . F . , Eng , C . H . , Schlaepfer , D . D . , Marcantonio , E . E . , and Gundersen , G . G . ( 2004 ) . Science 303 , 836 – 839 . Pelkmans , L . , and Zerial , M . ( 2005 ) . Nature 436 , 128 – 133 . Pelkmans , L . , Fava , E . , Grabner , H . , Hannus , M . , Habermann , B . , Krausz , E . , and Zerial , M . ( 2005 ) . Nature 436 , 78 – 86 . Schlunck , G . , Damke , H . , Kiosses , W . B . , Rusk , N . , Symons , M . H . , Wa - terman - Storer , C . M . , Schmid , S . L . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 256 – 267 . Sigismund , S . , Woelk , T . , Puri , C . , Maspero , E . , Tacchetti , C . , Transidico , P . , Di Fiore , P . P . , and Polo , S . ( 2005 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 2760 – 2765 . Wang , W . , and Struhl , G . ( 2005 ) . Development 132 , 2883 – 2894 . Wu , X . , Gan , B . , Yoo , Y . , and Guan , J . L . ( 2005 ) . Dev . Cell 9 , 185 – 196 .