The “Three - Legged Stool " : Designing for Equitable City , Community , and Research Partnerships in Urban Environmental Madeleine I . G . Daepp ∗ Microsoft Research Redmond , WA , USA mdaepp @ microsoft . com Raed Mansour Chicago Department of Public Health Chicago , IL , USA raed . mansour @ cityofchicago . com Chuck Needham Microsoft Research Redmond , WA , USA chuck . needham @ microsoft . com Sensing Alex Cabral ∗ Harvard University Cambridge , MA , USA acabral @ g . harvard . edu Charlie Catlett University of Chicago and Argonne National Laboratory Chicago , IL , USA catlett @ anl . gov Nneka Udeagbala University of California Irvine Irvine , CA , USA nudeagba @ uci . edu Tifany M Werner Environmental Law & Policy Center Chicago , IL , USA tifwerner @ outlook . com Asta Roseway Microsoft Research Redmond , WA , USA astar @ microsoft . com Scott Counts Microsoft Research Redmond , WA , USA counts @ microsoft . com ABSTRACT Urban environmental monitoring campaigns depend on expertise from city agencies , residents , and researchers . Deployment eforts rarely include all three stakeholders , typically leading to initia - tives that struggle to produce credible , actionable data . We describe the implementation of a large - scale , long - term air quality sens - ing network in Chicago Illinois ; detail stakeholder interviews and meetings ; and present three interfaces— – a website accessible via in - situ QR codes , APIs , and a mobile , mixed - media experience . We show how a collaborative approach created a more equitable sensor distribution compared to crowdsourced or regulatory designs . We highlight shared goals of education , engagement , and empower - ment despite the diversity of tool and analytics needs across stake - holder groups . Refecting on our work , we develop a “three - legged stool” framework representing the criticality of balanced partici - pation from three key stakeholder groups—city , community , and research—in deploying novel urban technologies . This approach can help HCI researchers facilitate more democratic technology deployments in urban spaces . CCS CONCEPTS • Applied computing → Environmental sciences ; • Human - centered computing → Visualization design and evaluation methods ; ∗ Denotes equal contribution . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . Collaborative interaction ; Web - based interaction ; HCI theory , con - cepts and models ; Empirical studies in ubiquitous and mobile com - puting . KEYWORDS Collaborative Design , Smart Cities , Environmental Monitoring , User Interfaces , Design Frameworks ACM Reference Format : Madeleine I . G . Daepp , Alex Cabral , Tifany M Werner , Raed Mansour , Char - lie Catlett , Asta Roseway , Chuck Needham , Nneka Udeagbala , and Scott Counts . 2023 . The “Three - Legged Stool " : Designing for Equitable City , Com - munity , and Research Partnerships in Urban Environmental Sensing . In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’23 ) , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 19 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581289 1 INTRODUCTION Promoting environmental justice and fostering equitable climate adaptation are critical environmental challenges for 21st century cities [ 20 , 110 ] . Dense networks of novel sensing technologies promise needed hyperlocal and real - time information [ 21 , 43 , 100 ] , but success requires providing data that are both credible—achieving levels of accuracy and completeness needed to provide insight—and actionable , or aligned with local priorities and advocacy needs . For deployments of novel environmental monitoring networks to meet these aims , three key stakeholder groups are critical [ 52 ] . First , researchers are essential to ensure data meet needed thresholds for accuracy , completeness , and usability , and to provide scien - tifc context for the work [ 91 ] . Second , city and government agen - cies are needed to provide authority for deployments [ 84 ] and to CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany ofer insight on how the data can inform decisions and existing © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . or new regulations [ 80 , 108 ] . Third , local communities—residents ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9421 - 5 / 23 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581289 who share geographic proximity and thus share environmental CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Daepp and Cabral , et al . concerns—must be meaningfully involved , especially those com - munities who have been historically marginalized and those most afected by environmental harms . Local communities provide crit - ical expertise and insights from lived experience that can ensure projects target relevant issues , engage a broader set of residents , and ultimately produce locally actionable results [ 6 , 41 , 62 ] ; and their inclusion is essential to achieving environmental justice ( EJ ) , equal protection under and enforcement of environmental laws and regulations [ 20 , 54 ] . Without engagement from all three of these groups , projects will fall short [ 33 , 62 ] . Among the open problems in creating innovative environmental monitoring campaigns that adequately serve all stakeholders are two directly relevant to the HCI community : 1 ) the design of sensor networks ( to create credible measurements ) , and 2 ) the design of data interfaces ( to make measurements informative and thus ac - tionable ) . Network design determines what is to be measured and where sensor nodes are placed in a city , dictating the set of possi - ble comparisons and their integrity , which in turn constrains the questions that the resulting data can answer [ 62 ] . Data interfaces facilitate all stakeholders’ ability to access , understand , and use the results of the network , thus serving as the key constraint on who can ask what question [ 75 ] . In this paper , we examine these problems using the case of a citywide network of low - cost air quality sensors—Project Eclipse— deployed through a collaboration between public , private , and com - munity stakeholders . We describe our qualitative data collection processes including stakeholder interviews , community meetings , and project team observations . We further compare three unique interfaces—a website accessible via in - situ QR codes , an API for data access , and a mobile , mixed - media pop - up lab . Through this work , we make four key contributions : ( 1 ) We show how stakeholder collaboration created a more eq - uitable distribution of sensors in comparison with crowd - sourced ( community - only ) or federal regulatory ( government - only ) approaches . ( 2 ) We characterize the motivations and resulting needs of key stakeholders , identifying shared aims around education , en - gagement , and empowerment , which can help bridge difer - ences between city and community stakeholders . ( 3 ) We highlight the degree to which diferent data interfaces serve each stakeholder group , showing the benefts of inter - faces that are situated in the relevant social as well as spatial context . ( 4 ) Refecting on our work , we develop a “three - legged stool” design framework in which designers seek to facilitate the eq - uitable participation of city , community , and research stake - holders . This work builds on growing literatures on the collaborative deployment and long - term management of urban sensing technolo - gies [ 7 , 27 , 31 , 51 , 57 , 139 ] , as well as recent research surfacing the tensions inherent in design for community and civic initia - tives [ 23 , 89 , 117 ] . We adopt a phased and participatory approach that draws upon prior frameworks [ 7 , 57 ] ; however , we contribute two new insights—inherent in the metaphor of the three - legged stool—in ( 1 ) identifying the three critical stakeholders for deploy - ments in shared urban spaces and ( 2 ) emphasizing a balanced rather than hierarchical or deferential team structure and approach . We further describe our data interfaces in the context of prior work on urban - embedded visualizations [ 15 , 16 , 99 ] , exploring the potential of in - situ visualizations that engage and empower people as part of social and spatial communities [ 25 , 68 , 89 , 145 ] . Finally , our work responds to calls for research on sustainable HCI , which recognizes sustainability as broadly inclusive of economic and social as well as environmental concerns [ 8 , 49 , 118 , 128 ] . By developing a frame - work for the collaborative design of urban air quality monitoring campaigns—a case of the environmental smart city—our approach is consistent with the ideals of “smart - enough” cities where tech - nologies solve real problems , as identifed by real residents [ 61 ] , and reafrms the importance of participatory approaches to ensure that equity is prioritized along with or even over efciency as a design ideal [ 46 ] . 2 DESIGN FRAMEWORKS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING The deployment of environmental monitoring campaigns comprises three parts : ( 1 ) the key stakeholders to be included ; ( 2 ) the design of the sensing campaign ; and ( 3 ) the interfaces that enable stakehold - ers to act on the resulting data . In this section , we frst examine the stakeholders commonly involved in similar urban and environmen - tal sensing eforts . We then look at the approaches used to select monitoring sites across the environmental smart cities literature as well as in participatory or community - led initiatives . Finally , we describe common approaches to the design of user interfaces for environmental sensor networks . 2 . 1 Stakeholders in Smart City and Environmental Monitoring Campaigns In environmental monitoring campaigns , professional scientists , government agents , and local communities tend to be the most commonly involved primary stakeholders [ 3 , 52 , 93 , 139 ] . Smart city initiatives also include government agents , sometimes in collab - oration with university partners [ 92 , 111 ] , but more commonly in partnership with private actors such as technology companies [ 81 , 92 , 97 , 123 , 148 ] and real estate developers [ 148 , 149 ] . Communities of afected residents , though they are key stakeholders , are often engaged only through limited processes of public consultation , if at all [ 148 ] . Across constellations of stakeholders , facilitating alignment poses a challenge . In a study of two large - scale smart city initiatives , Zuzul [ 149 ] fnds that diferences in technical languages hampered communication between technologists and real estate developers , undermining the projects . Examining participatory environmental sensing eforts , Aoki et al . [ 3 ] observe that collaboration between academic and community scientists 1 was complicated by diferences in motivations : although professional scientists were interested in producing insights that could generalize from one city to another , community scientists sought data with the aim of producing lo - cal change or raising awareness of shared environmental concerns . With respect to EJ concerns in particular , needed investigations may 1 On the recommendation of community partner organizations , we use the term “com - munity science” rather than “citizen science” to recognize that all engaged actors are members of the local community regardless of citizenship status . The " Three - Legged Stool " : Designing for Equitable City , Community , and Research Partnerships CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany remain “undone science” , areas of research that receive limited at - tention from professional scientists or government agencies despite being identifed by afected communities as critical ( and harmful ) knowledge gaps [ 58 ] . Finally , initiatives including both government and community organizations can be complicated by past inter - actions and ongoing mistrust ; the process of collaboration thus also becomes a process of building or repairing inter - stakeholder relationships [ 37 , 38 , 67 ] . 2 . 2 Common Approaches to the Collection of Environmental Data We identify four main approaches that have been used to design and deploy environmental and smart city sensor networks : 1 ) Public - Private Partnerships , 2 ) Crowdsourced , 3 ) Community - driven , 4 ) Participatory . 2 . 2 . 1 Public - Private Partnerships . Environmental monitoring ini - tiatives as an instance of environmental “smart cities” are commonly convened by private actors such as technology companies or real estate developers in conjunction with city leaders [ 135 , 148 , 149 ] . The promise is that bureaucracies can use data fows to optimize ser - vices , producing sustainability through efciency [ 46 , 71 ] . However , many of these smart city networks , although convened with gov - ernment support , lack the buy - in—and thus the expertise [ 40 ] —of residents , leaving little room for political participation or resident agency [ 49 , 61 , 71 , 96 ] . In the context of innovative environmental monitoring , threads of the smart city narrative are observed in eforts to track every street [ 28 , 133 ] and to build full - scale “urban observatories” that collect data on arrays of parameters [ 129 ] . The tacit assumption is that data are all that is needed to “fx” environmental problems , but cities are complex systems and environmental hazards often have no single solution on which all stakeholders will agree [ 114 , 136 ] . In this sense , although monitoring environmental hazards may be a technical problem , acting on them is what urban scholars have long recognized as a “wicked problem”—a challenge that lacks clear or simple solutions , where any particular approach may lead to new problems , and where diferent stakeholders may not even agree on the problem’s formulation [ 115 ] . In recognition of the wicked na - ture of challenges in environmental justice and climate adaptation , designers are increasingly turning to participatory and community - based methods , in which the data collection process is recognized as a mechanism for civic engagement and community empowerment as well as a means of gathering scientifc information [ 75 , 85 ] . 2 . 2 . 2 Crowdsourced Environmental Sensor Networks . Crowdsourc - ing ofers a compromise between top - down and participatory ap - proaches to the creation of environmental sensor networks . In this framework , professional scientists or commercial organizations make sensing and data collection technologies available directly to residents . The approach has the beneft of scaling across cities and continents : Academia Sinica Taiwan’s AirBox project [ 31 ] has over 10 , 000 units across Taiwan and elsewhere , and there are over 30 , 000 consumer PurpleAir air quality sensors now operating around the world [ 22 , 112 ] . Compared to public - private partnerships , these eforts cede power to residents in that network designers no longer control the sampling design . The scale of these projects , however , makes it difcult for residents to be involved as collaborators , in some cases leaving communities feeling more like data sources than partners [ 3 ] . Crowdsourcing also limits opportunities for two - way feedback . Although residents’ local expertise or priorities may inform where they collect data , researchers generally lack ways to surface these motivations—and , in fact , the results frequently manifest as bi - ases . In the United States , for example , crowd - sourced networks of air pollution sensors are disproportionately sited in places that are wealthier and Whiter than average , and that have lower air pollution than levels observed in satellite or regulatory data [ 45 ] . Deployments can also be subject to malfunctions and missing data , which residents may not have the time , funding , or skills to ad - dress [ 101 , 125 ] . Finally , when deployments do contribute to policy - relevant research , it is often because a professional scientist fnds a particular addressable question—but such questions are unlikely to line up with the priorities for which residents originally deployed the devices [ 3 ] , particularly in the absence of ongoing and iterative collaboration between researchers and residents [ 42 ] . As a result , such an approach is unlikely to make meaningful inroads on the “undone science” of EJ research and advocacy agendas . 2 . 2 . 3 Community - Driven Sensor Networks . Seeking approaches that directly address the power dynamics underlying EJ problems , a number of scholars across HCI , public health , and urban plan - ning lift up community - driven initiatives , where community - based or EJ organizations initiate and lead the design and implementa - tion of new monitoring initiatives [ 3 , 40 ] . When communities are able to recruit professional researchers or to build relationships with local regulatory agencies , these projects can have major bene - fts , including the incorporation of local knowledge , targeting of locally actionable questions , and higher levels of community en - gagement [ 6 , 52 , 75 ] . However , community - driven sensor networks can also be limited by a lack of the personnel , fnancial resources , or authority to deploy sensors on public property across a city . A design approach of deference to local knowledge can lead to the unintended efect of creating an extra burden for communities— efectively placing the burden of managing data access and even of solving environmental harms on the most afected communi - ties [ 50 , 132 ] . If the aim of a project is to facilitate civic engagement , or to enable residents to take collective action on a problem of shared public concern [ 39 , 67 ] , the exclusion of government per - spectives may be particularly counterproductive : “use and perceived value of civic engagement technologies remains low” Harding et al . argue [ 67 ] , “because the design space is poorly understood by system developers who focus almost exclusively on empowering citizens rather than adopting an informed , inclusive approach that addresses the needs of both citizens and civic authorities , and helps establish trusted relationships between these stakeholders . ” In a balanced rather than deferential approach , then , designers would seek to facilitate collaboration between stakeholders across sectors in recognition that , in addition to ensuring the campaign has all needed forms of expertise , the process of collaboration can also serve to facilitate relationship - building critical to actually empow - ering communities [ 67 , 124 , 132 ] . 2 . 2 . 4 Participatory Designed Sensor Networks . Seeking collabo - rative approaches that balance diferent stakeholders’ skills and CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Daepp and Cabral , et al . capacities , HCI and urban planning researchers are increasingly us - ing participatory approaches , engaging residents in the co - design of environmental smart city projects [ 7 , 46 , 57 , 60 , 70 , 71 , 140 ] . Through methods such as workshops [ 7 , 57 , 71 ] and community mapping exercises [ 1 , 107 ] , sensor network designers seek to create spaces where residents become collaborators in the design pro - cess [ 7 , 68 ] . Similarly , common public consultation processes from urban planning , such as the creation of environmental justice coun - cils [ 103 , 127 ] and the use of community meetings [ 59 ] ofer a means of gathering advisory feedback early in the process . Chicago’s Array of Things ( AoT ) network , for example , held community meetings that led to the development of three siting criteria : ( 1 ) the site needed was relevant to a community concern raised by residents , local organizations , or elected ofcials ; ( 2 ) professional scientists expressed the interest and ability to conduct scientifc research with the data ; and ( 3 ) a city agent or ofcial stated a willingness to act on the results [ 27 ] . To assuage concerns regarding surveillance , moreover , AoT convened an independent privacy and security com - mittee ; held a series of public meetings regarding the project ; and released an early draft of its privacy policy for public comment [ 61 ] . Done well , such participatory approaches have the major beneft of assuaging mistrust between community and city stakeholders and thus can create networks that better meet multiple stakeholders’ needs [ 61 , 67 ] . These methods have their limits , however . In focusing on net - work design , meetings and mapping approaches can “front - load” participation in the design phase , making it rare for communities to have feedback throughout the analysis and interpretation stages as well [ 143 ] . Excluding communities from later research stages can cost researchers the benefts of local expertise in annotation and interpretation [ 42 , 144 ] . It is also rare for participatory processes to include all stakeholders ; in HCI , in particular , the prioritization of residents has led to projects without feedback from government agents [ 67 ] ; to the extent that these agents are , in many cases , the back - end users of the system being designed , their exclusion can result in a lack of authority to deploy in public spaces—as in one participatory sensor deployment that resulted in the deploy - ment of a city bomb squad [ 84 ] —as well as missed opportunities to build trust [ 38 , 67 ] . Finally , the way in which participation is facilitated is key : because both participatory design methods and planning processes are often devised and implemented separately by the research or city stakeholders , they can reinforce rather than remediate power hierarchies [ 4 , 23 , 68 ] . Recognizing these challenges , several HCI research teams have developed design frameworks to facilitate more efective and eq - uitable deployments . In the “city commons” framework for com - munity sensing , for example , Balestrini et al . [ 7 ] apply a phased , Participatory Action Research framework to the development of a community - managed pool of environmental sensing resources ; applying a “middle - out design” approach , Fredericks et al . [ 57 ] em - phasize the role of the researcher as drawing out insights from the " top " ( government ) and " bottom " ( residents ) throughout the design , implementation and deployment phases . We build on these frameworks with similar phasing , but we note two important , dif - ferentiating insights inherent in the metaphor the the three - legged stool . First , while the city commons framework could apply to many arrays of stakeholders , our choice of three legs emphasizes the importance of including three key groups ( city , community , and re - search ) given the shared nature of the public spaces in which urban environmental sensing projects are deployed . Second , in contrast with the hierarchical framing of middle - out design , we emphasize balance between the three legs as critical to mitigate known prob - lems in urban research including the tendency of government - and private - led eforts to reinforce rather than redistribute power [ 4 , 23 ] , the history of researcher - led eforts becoming extractive [ 116 ] , and the risk of community - led eforts reducing public service provision and overburdening residents [ 50 ] . 2 . 3 User Interfaces and Engagement Strategies for Environmental Sensor Networks The design of a novel environmental sensing network afects the set of questions it can answer , but the design of data interfaces is further critical in determining who can ask what questions . Existing air quality sensor networks are commonly accompanied by map - ping platforms [ 31 , 66 , 84 , 112 ] and timelines [ 31 , 84 , 112 ] , which enable residents to mentally overlap their understanding of local geographic context and to check for events over time , respectively ; APIs make raw data available to researchers . Dashboarding ap - proaches can further enable users to conduct more sophisticated comparisons of sensor data with co - temporaneous or co - located phenomena . The AirVis tool models and visualizes the transport of air pollution to support domain experts in identifying propaga - tion patterns [ 44 ] ; the AirBox project ofers an anomaly detection framework that enables , for example , targeted inspections by reg - ulators [ 30 ] . But dashboards , especially in the context of urban informatics , have been critiqued for representing a limited under - standing of power in cities—emphasizing an underlying idea of a command center that bears little resemblance to true resource allo - cation processes [ 96 ] . This critique is mitigated when dashboards are co - designed with communities as a narrative , rather than direc - tive , tool : Willett et al . [ 144 ] , for example , work with community scientists to re - imagine the dashboard as an analytics support tool that enables users to annotate , validate , and synthesize sensor data ; similarly , Hsu et al . [ 75 ] devise an interface that enables users to pinpoint pollution events across multiple data sources including sensor readings as well as video , complaint , and wind direction data . In this case , the interface turned raw data into a source of empower - ment by afording residents the legitimacy of data - driven insights in their advocacy , building credibility that served as a source of “power - over” government ofcials in getting the ofcials to act on community concerns [ 124 ] . In studies of interfaces for urban data in the HCI literature , re - searchers have highlighted the value of physically situating data representations within the relevant urban context [ 35 , 99 ] . For air pollution sensing , specifcally , researchers share data in the loca - tions where it is collected through methods including spatially targeted messaging [ 73 ] , lights [ 74 ] , audio [ 74 ] , and wearables [ 82 ] . We contribute to this literature by deploying and comparing three interfaces—QR codes , placed beneath the sensors , that linked to a web - based data visualization ; data APIs ; and a pop - up environmen - tal laboratory outftted with interactive screens as well as white - boarding tools and demo sensors , which we deployed at events The " Three - Legged Stool " : Designing for Equitable City , Community , and Research Partnerships CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany with community partners . Although studies highlight the bene - fts of interactive interfaces for stimulating community conversa - tions [ 16 , 83 ] , limited research has presented mobile , mixed - media solutions for situating data in contexts that are relevant socially ( events ) as well as spatially ( locations ) [ 57 ] . We further show how a diversity of tooling better serves a diverse stakeholder ecology— including the core groups in our framework , but also by drawing in the unanticipated new users ( e . g . local media ) that are key to expanding and transforming civic projects over the long term [ 117 ] . 3 RESEARCH CONTEXT 3 . 1 Setting This research was conducted in Chicago , Illinois , USA . Chicago has been subject to air quality concerns in part due to its status as one of North America’s busiest freight hubs : the metropolitan area serves over 500 freight trains each day and houses intermodal facilities that can serve as many as 30 , 000 trucks daily [ 32 ] . As shown in Figure 1 , it is also among the most racially segregated cities in the United States [ 122 ] . The city has recently prioritized EJ legislation , engaging in a health impact assessment to inform air permitting priorities [ 104 ] and committing to the development of a cumulative hazards ordinance to address historical and ongoing inequities in environmental exposures between neighborhoods [ 29 ] . These advancements are impeded by a lack of air quality data at fne spatial scales , in part because of the sparse federal regulatory network : in 2021 , there were just four sites collecting data on fne particulate matter across a city of almost 600 km 2 and over 2 . 5 mil - lion inhabitants [ 79 , 137 ] . Recognizing this gap , Chicago has been a leading site for innovative environmental monitoring campaigns including : the Array of Things ( AoT ) , an early scientifc smart city network that established a foundation of technology , policy , and partnerships for work with novel sensors [ 26 ] ; the EPA - funded Shared Air / Shared Action initiative , which fostered the capacity of community organizations to work with low - cost sensors [ 63 ] ; and Air Quality Chicago ( AQChicago ) , a summer monitoring program that provided hand - held monitors and training for local groups to collect fne particulate matter readings along city streets [ 88 ] . At the start of this project , however , there was no real - time air quality sensing network with the citywide coverage necessary to enable insights at small spatial scales . 3 . 2 Forming Initial Partnerships In keeping with recognition , in the HCI literature , of the “work that occurs before the work”—that is , of the critical importance of building partnerships across personal and institutional barriers [ 89 ] —this section describes the process through which we formed the initial partnerships for this project and several prior initiatives that provided key foundations for our project . We built on previous initiatives in the city by forming a team that included : the research team engaged in sensor design and deployment ; a city lead referred through Chicago Department of Public Health ; and a community lead from Environmental Law & Policy Center . All partners in the original project team are authors on this paper , and we will refer to the city lead , community lead , and research team to clarify roles throughout this paper . Figure 1 : The fgure shows the demographic makeup of cen - sus blocks across the 77 community areas commonly used to delineate neighborhoods in Chicago , Illinois , USA . Data are from the 2020 decennial census [ 94 ] . Building on Array of Things . AoT was an experimental urban sensing project designed to monitor various environmental features including air quality , trafc , and noise . The project deployed over 150 nodes throughout Chicago between 2016 and 2019 . AoT was scientist - led but required the development of deep partnerships with many city agencies and departments , who provided the autho - rization ( and skilled technicians ) needed for sensor deployments on city streetlights . In 2018 , AoT began collaborating with JCDecaux Chicago , the local afliate of the world’s largest outdoor advertising agency , to explore the possibility of deploying a low - cost sensor to bus shelters that JCDecaux Chicago maintains as part of their procurement contract with the city . Early in the formation of this project , the research team connected with AoT leadership , who then facilitated initial relationships with the city lead ( from the Chicago Department of Public Health ) through both their existing partnerships and via JCDecaux Chicago . Building on Air Quality Monitoring in Chicago . The Envi - ronmental Law & Policy Center ( ELPC ) , an environmental legal advocacy center based in Chicago , developed a local air quality monitoring program called AQChicago based on the organization’s work supporting communities’ neighborhood - level clean air ad - vocacy campaigns [ 88 ] . Two insights emerged : ( 1 ) communities and their advocates struggled to fnd localized air quality data ; and ( 2 ) government agencies became more motivated to address CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Daepp and Cabral , et al . air quality concerns after community groups , working with the local advocacy center , threatened to install monitors that could track local sources [ 141 , 142 ] . With this air quality monitoring pro - gram , the local advocacy center aimed to develop a monitoring strategy that would provide hyperlocal data , but that could also ft within community members’ daily lives [ 141 ] . The team developed an approach using mobile monitoring that included : purchasing multiple low - cost sensors to be loaned to community partners ; providing training in the sensors’ use ; and engaging communities and a local cooperative web design frm in the co - design of a data platform where residents can view and download their data [ 88 ] . By conducting this work over four summers in Chicago , the commu - nity science organizer leading AQChicago built relationships with community - based organizations and concerned residents across the city . As the research and city team began developing the project , a local civic technology organization convened a citywide round ta - ble on air quality concerns . As is common when research teams enter new sites [ 89 ] , the convening encountered skepticism and several well - respected community - based EJ organizations declined to attend . The aforementioned local air quality monitoring team , who did attend the convening , expressed serious concern regarding this gap in included stakeholders and urged the research team to pause their project roll - out . Through the process of collecting data with communities , the air quality monitoring team noted , they had learned that local organizations and residents are not merely seek - ing better data but also ownership in shaping the research done in their communities . Thus , connecting with local organizations on the ground before the roll - out was critical to ensure that the work could feed into existing monitoring programs and that the data could help ongoing advocacy campaigns . Based on this feed - back , the research team began a “listening tour”—setting up a series of small meetings with many of the community - based organiza - tions that had participated in the local air quality monitoring or Shared Air / Shared Action projects to learn about needs and pri - orities . These conversations strongly confrmed the importance communities placed on shaping research in their neighborhoods , and thus the research team asked the lead of the local air qual - ity monitoring program to join the project as a community lead who could facilitate the inclusion of communities throughout the project . 3 . 3 Positionality and Research Ethics Each member of the project team contributed to the network’s design , supported the research , and aided in drafting the manu - script , and thus all are included as authors . The experiences and positionality of each project team member infuenced the work ; we note as particularly important the roles of location , institution , identity , and discipline . The city lead , community lead , and one ( academic ) researcher live and work in Chicago , while the remain - ing researchers ( afliated with an industry research lab ) reside elsewhere in the United States . The external research team was limited in its prior understanding of the city’s context ; however , we also benefted from the relative lack of a history of extractive research that historically marginalized Chicago residents associate with many of the city’s academic institutions [ 69 ] . The research team was predominantly White , but the project team included Black , brown and mixed - race members as well as immigrant members . Black team members , in particular , were likely able to better build relationships and to gather more frank responses from Black com - munity members , but also faced implicit bias when working with other groups . The team’s lack of a Latine 2 / Hispanic or bilingual ( in Spanish ) member , however , impeded our ability to build long - term trust with several important community - based EJ organizations in Chicago that are Latine - led . On the request of community groups , we hired a translator to make the website and QR codes available in Spanish ; however , we were unable to provide a bilingual ( in Spanish ) experience for the EcoPod , which limited interest among the Latine - led groups . The project benefted from members with wide - ranging expertise in disciplines including human - computer interaction , urban planning , public health , design , computer science and engineering , and computational social science . One research team member has asthma , which amplifed her sensitivity to small changes in air quality and contributed to her interest in enabling others to become “more sensitive” to their environments . Several other project team members grew up in EJ neighborhoods or currently live in areas with high levels of air pollution . We acknowledge , however , the privilege of many members of the research team , in particular , in living outside of EJ neighborhoods and not having known respiratory vulnerabilities to air pollution . 4 THE SENSOR NETWORK 4 . 1 Network Design Methods The frst task for the community lead , city lead , and research team was to collaborate in selecting the placement of sensors ( Eclipse nodes ) across the city . In this sense , the design of the network served as an important opportunity to solidify partnerships and understand key needs , providing a “boundary object” or a concrete represen - tation that enabled diferent stakeholders to express diferences in priorities in ways that others could understand ( and address ) despite diferences of technical language or worldview [ 9 , 24 , 102 , 130 , 149 ] . The team’s initial meetings with city and community organizations highlighted two diferent priorities . In particular , the network de - sign had to be adequately fexible to serve diferent research needs— some of which might not surface until years after the project’s original deployment—but also needed to prioritize EJ , in particular by providing coverage in neighborhoods and for communities that have been historically underserved by environmental monitoring technologies . To achieve these aims , we developed a network design focused on two priorities : ( 1 ) citywide coverage that was representative of the air the population breathed and ( 2 ) oversampling in EJ neigh - borhoods . To provide citywide coverage , the research team frst allocated sensors using a stratifed random sampling design adapted from the approach of the New York City Community Air Sur - vey [ 95 ] . To enable adequate coverage in EJ neighborhoods , the community lead implemented a mini - grant program that supported community groups in selecting additional sites beyond the citywide network . This created the challenge of identifying the community 2 We use Latine instead of Latinx based on feedback that Latinx is difcult for native speakers to pronounce . The " Three - Legged Stool " : Designing for Equitable City , Community , and Research Partnerships CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany organizations with which to work . The community lead reached out to Chicago community - based organizations that had ( 1 ) a need for air quality monitoring , as demonstrated by their having reached out to the local air quality monitoring program described in Section 3 . 2 for sensor loans or monitoring support in the past ; and ( 2 ) interest in using air quality and sensor data to advocate for change in their neighborhood and / or the city , as demonstrated by responses to the mini - grant request for proposals . Finally , the research team presented the network at city and community meetings , which resulted in the selection of a small number of additional sites where partners identifed continued gaps . Throughout the frst year of the deployment , the community lead and research team further worked together to add sensors whenever local community - based organizations reached out regarding gaps in their neighborhoods . The deployment was enabled through purpose - built wireless de - vices that communicate over existing cellular networks and sustain on solar - harvested energy ; additional detail on the hardware and network design is provided elsewhere [ 43 , 55 ] . 4 . 2 Network Design Results : Distribution of Sensor Nodes In comparison with existing crowd - sourced or regulatory networks , we identify three major advantages of our approach . First , the inclu - sion of a citywide ‘skeleton” network ensured adequate coverage to enable neighborhood - level estimation—a priority for city and academic stakeholders—and to ensure that residents viewing the network could easily fnd a sensor near their home or workplace , which emerged as a common use case when Chicago residents viewed the network for the frst time ( See Section 6 . 3 ) . Examining the distribution of monitors for fne particulate matter , a common and concerning pollutant [ 87 ] , we observe that the average Chicago resident lived 3 . 3 miles from an EPA sensor or 1 . 6 miles from a crowdsourced sensor—versus 0 . 65 miles for an Eclipse node . When we implement common quality assurance / quality control protocols for environmental monitoring ( Figure 2 ) , this diference is more pronounced : the average Chicago resident lived within 0 . 83 miles of a long - term operational Eclipse node versus within 4 . 15 miles of an Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) regulatory monitor or 4 . 01 miles of a crowdsourced sensor . The inclusion of community - selected sites led to improvements in coverage for racial and ethnic groups historically underserved by environmental monitoring relative to White residents . When we compare access stratifed by race and ethnicity , using block - level data from the 2020 census [ 94 ] , we fnd that Black residents lived within 0 . 64 miles of sensor in the citywide site versus 0 . 59 miles when community - selected sites were included ( in comparison with 2 . 3 miles for crowdsourced sensors or 3 . 8 miles for EPA moni - tors ) . Latine / Hispanic residents lived within 0 . 72 miles of a site in the citywide Eclipse network versus 0 . 63 miles when community - selected sites were included ; these groups lived , on average , 1 . 21 miles from crowdsourced sensors and 2 . 59 miles from EPA monitors . Finally , White residents were within 0 . 75 miles and 0 . 72 miles of the citywide sites and of sites in the full network , respectively , and 3 Although the EPA monitors produce highly accurate data with minimal missingness , several sites collect data only every 6th day and thus did not produce 75 % coverage . within 1 . 38 miles of crowdsourced sites and 3 . 43 miles of regulatory monitors . 4 Table 1 : Characteristics of the areas within 1 / 2 mile of se - lected sensor locations . Variable SRS CS p - value Zoning  Residential ( % ) 53 . 5 47 . 1 0 . 215 Commercial ( % ) 13 . 2 9 . 3 0 . 051 Manufacturing ( % ) 12 . 2 33 . 3 < 0 . 001 ∗∗∗ Open Space ( % ) 8 . 6 4 . 0 0 . 083 Other ( % ) 12 . 5 6 . 3 0 . 065 Trafc  Interstate Highway ( Miles ) 0 . 4 0 . 4 0 . 743 Rail ( Miles ) 1 . 9 3 . 7 < 0 . 001 ∗∗∗ Facilities  Distance to TRI Sites ( Miles ) 1 . 0 0 . 6 0 . 003 ∗∗ N 80 23 ∗ =  < 0 . 01 ; ∗∗∗ =  < 0 . 05 ; ∗∗ =  < 0 . 001 Data Sources :  Chicago Open Data Portal [ 34 ] ;  Illinois Department of Transportation [ 77 ] ;  U . S . Environmental Protection Agency [ 53 ] . SRS : Sites selected through stratifed random sampling ; CS : Community - selected sites . Third , our approach enabled community organizations to self - identify EJ areas , which is important because the defnition and boundaries of what is considered an EJ neighborhood is contested [ 72 , 146 ] . This method also had the secondary beneft of highlighting some of the key characteristics of such neighborhoods ; in particu - lar , Table 1 shows that , in comparison with sites selected through stratifed random sampling , community - selected sites had nearly 3 times more nearby land zoned for manufacturing , nearly double the meters of rail , and were approximately 1 / 3 mile closer to an industrial facility ( as monitored by the USEPA Toxic Release Inven - tory [ 53 ] ) . The stated motivations of community groups as well as these diferences suggest an important divergence in monitor - ing priorities between academic or government and community organizations : while the former were interested in or , in the case of government agents , required by federal regulations to produce generalizeable and citywide insights , the latter’s requests were more consistent with what regulators defne as “fenceline monitor - ing” or the use of sensors to track emissions at particular facilities 4 Again , diferences are amplifed after quality assurance / quality control . When we examine just sites collecting valid data across at least 75 % of days , Black residents live an average of 0 . 97 miles from the citywide Eclipse network and 0 . 86 miles when community - selected sites are included versus 5 . 92 miles from crowdsourced sites and 4 . 42 miles from a regulatory monitor . White residents , by contrast , live an average of 0 . 88 miles from the citywide Eclipse network and 0 . 87 miles when community - selected sites are included versus 3 . 17 miles from crowdsourced sites and 4 . 41 miles from regulatory monitors . Latine / Hispanic residents live an average of 0 . 80 miles from the citywide Eclipse network and 0 . 76 miles when community - selected sites are included versus 3 . 49 miles from crowdsourced sites and 3 . 40 miles from a regulatory monitor . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Daepp and Cabral , et al . Figure 2 : The fgure shows monitoring sites for fne particulate matter , a common and health - hazardous pollutant [ 87 ] , across the 77 community areas commonly used to delineate neighborhoods in Chicago , Illinois , USA . We include all sites operating at any time between July 1 , 2021 and June 30 , 2022 ; to better characterize the usefulness of each network for dense and long - term monitoring , we use blue points to indicate sites that produced data for more than 75 % of days , after we applied commonly - used quality assurance / quality control procedures . The left panel shows Illinois Environmental Protection Agency’s federal regulatory network [ 78 ] . 3 The middle panel shows crowdsourced sensor locations across the city [ 113 ] ; and the right - most panel shows the Eclipse network . Community - selected sites in the Eclipse network are outlined in red . or likely sources [ 134 ] . Because our network was somewhat con - strained by the requirement that sensors be placed on bus shelters ( though the bus shelter network included thousands of sites across all geographic sectors of the city ) , these diferences might be fur - ther amplifed if communities had the ability to place sensors on a broader range of urban infrastructure . 5 SURFACING STAKEHOLDER PERSPECTIVES To understand the diferent stakeholders and their unique data and infrastructural needs , we conducted a number of meetings and interviews with individuals and groups . In this section we describe those various eforts and highlight the main fndings . 5 . 1 Community and City Meetings To ensure that community groups’ insights would inform the project throughout the analysis and usage phase , as well the design phase , the mini - grants included support for multiple meetings . These com - prised an initial kick - of meeting convened to share the project and ensure that all groups had access to the Urban Air site , a user interface showing recent data from sensors deployed in this project , as further described in Section 6 . 1 ; recorded individual meetings with each group to discuss data and early fndings ; and a fnal large - group convening focused on next steps . The community lead convened these meetings , which were held virtually . Throughout the deployment , the city lead also convened monthly meetings with ofcials working on air quality . In these meetings , the research team shared early fndings and presented proposed interfaces including the Urban Air site and the planned EcoPod ( a mixed - media community - based interface described in Section 6 . 3 ) . These meetings also served as a space for coordination and com - munication between the city lead , the community lead , and the research team . 5 . 2 Interviews In August 2021 , after the initial deployment of the network and website , the research team set up a series of semi - structured in - terviews to learn more about each stakeholder group’s data and visualization needs . The interviews began with participants view - ing the Urban Air website and providing feedback on the interface . Participants then discussed their work , needs , and views of air quality in Chicago through an open - ended storyboarding activity . We recruited 11 diferent participants for the interviews : six from community groups , three from city organizations , and two from academic research institutions . Participants were recruited from partner organizations and community groups that had established The " Three - Legged Stool " : Designing for Equitable City , Community , and Research Partnerships CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Figure 3 : Themes within and across each stakeholder group in the storyboard interviews . All stakeholder groups mentioned the importance of data for health risks and to identify sources of air pollution . There is also considerable overlap between city and community stakeholders , particularly around using data to educate and engage as well as to empower residents to catalyze policy change . relationships with the research team as part of the larger project . The research team recorded the interviews and transcribed the text using otter . ai . The interviews , recorded individual - group meetings , and partic - ipant observation at additional meetings or events were deemed exempt by the IRB at the lead authors’ institution . 5 . 3 Interview Results : Defning Stakeholder Priorities To identify the priorities of our three stakeholder groups , two mem - bers of the research team individually coded each participant’s interview by identifying key words and phrases using a grounded theory approach , and then selecting the codes agreed upon by both researchers . We noted the recurring themes within and across each group of stakeholders ( city , community , research ) by tallying how many interviews in each stakeholder group contained the theme , and selecting those that were mentioned by more than half of each stakeholder group ( 2 city , 4 community , and 2 research participants ) , as shown in Figure 3 . Quotations are anonymized for privacy , but linked to stakeholder type—City Ofcial ( CO ) , Community Member ( CM ) , Researcher ( R ) —to highlight the priorities of each stakeholder group . 5 . 3 . 1 Shared Motivations : Promoting Health and Addressing Emis - sions Sources . All three stakeholder groups shared two similar dri - vers behind their interest in air pollution monitoring : health and emissions sources . One community member , for example , high - lighted that “We approach air quality from the perspective of want - ing a healthy community , wanting healthy environments for fami - lies to enjoy time outside ( CM2 ) . " Using broader terms , a city ofcial highlighted “the relationship between air quality and health ( CO1 ) ” and researchers emphasized the network’s beneft regarding “what is the current science telling us about the health efects of exposure to PM 2 . 5 and how can we reduce our exposures ( R2 ) . ” Understanding health efects and targeting emissions sources to reduce exposures emerged as widely shared motivations . Stakeholders did difer in the spatial scale in which they were most interested . Community members tended to focus on efects at the community level or on themselves and their families ; city ofcials highlighted citywide exposures or comparisons of partic - ular neighborhoods to the city as a whole ; and researchers were interested in generalizeable as well as local health efects . These distinct views on health risks highlight important diferences in the relative scales of data collection needed—for individual - and community - level versus citywide monitoring—that aligned with the two priorities we identifed in designing our sensor network . Similarly , although members of all three groups expressed a shared interest in identifying and addressing sources of air pollution , interviewees again difered in the scale of monitoring they sought . Community members discussed the need for monitoring of specifc polluters including an asphalt plant , trucking routes , and idling vehicles . This is a notable diference in the priorities described by the city and the researchers , who discussed emissions sources as an aggregated phenomenon and problem ( also noted by community groups ) . This specifcity on the part of community members refects a key type of local expertise—lived experience of daily pollution exposures at hyperlocal scales – that residents may uniquely be able to bring to inform conversations about monitoring priorities . 5 . 3 . 2 Overlapping Themes : Education and Engagement . Both city and community interviewees stressed the importance of the air quality monitoring campaign to educate and engage prospective collaborators . Many community interviewees , in particular , pointed to the use of the data for education as a pathway to efect change on EJ issues : “One of the biggest problem areas that we have is be - cause we lack a human capacity to be able to educate our community onto what’s going on , that convolutes our aim to try to really afect change , because since we don’t have resources that we need to fght , we have to utilize the resources of people . But we have to get the people to be at that point of understanding so we can afect those changes and it becomes challenging because most EJ groups that you fnd are very small or medium size . " ( CM4 ) In this sense , education was seen as a means of organizing the community , or of building awareness of environmental issues in order to engage more residents in EJ advocacy . City interviewees highlighted the potential of data to educate and encourage action amongst other city employees . Better under - standing the location and impact of environmental issues would , according to one interviewee , help city ofcials “understand local air to promote environmental justice " and know if they “needed to prioritize where we did certain interventions ( CO1 ) . ” As a com - munity member noted regarding inequities in air quality , ”that’s important for us too , make the connections as to how poor the air quality is , so that city departments and state agencies , and also our elected ofcials , can see this information and help us fgure out solutions to best protect our environment and the well being of our families . ( CM1 ) . " Education and engagement are , in the literature , commonly used with a focus on residents [ 67 ] ; these interviews CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Daepp and Cabral , et al . show that city ofcials can also be the targets of education and engagement campaigns . Although the researchers did not directly bring up themes of education and engagement , they did highlight the importance of reaching diferent audiences , including the public as well as city stakeholders . ‘There are so many audiences " ( R1 ) , and informa - tion “needs to be tailored to the needs of the specifc community " ( R2 ) . These insights are consistent with prior literature showing the diferent data needs of stakeholders [ 3 , 149 ] , suggesting that interface design would need to be targeted separately to each of these stakeholder groups . We note an important limitation in that we interviewed just two researchers ; however , through our partici - pant observation in numerous meetings and research talks , we also found limited voiced interest in education and engagement from researchers across diferent disciplines—which may be one reason why researchers were often viewed with skepticism by city and community groups . 5 . 3 . 3 Overlapping Themes : Empowerment . For both city and com - munity interviewees , the research team identifed a second and important overlapping theme of empowerment . For community members , this theme emerged in the widespread motivation of us - ing the sensor network data to enforce existing regulations and to catalyze new policies . “Communities of color , our black and brown people are constantly being targeted by dirty industry , be - cause they know that we’re very vulnerable , in order for us to really make any case or organize around these issues . They know that it’s hard for us , it’s very challenging for us to do that . Not to mention a lot of our people of color are also working for the very same industry that we’re pushing against . But the point here is that when it comes to air quality , I think that that is important because it’ll make that connection to the racist practices and the irresponsible behavior that that the city and the state is allowing heavy in - dustry to be basically redirected to communities on the south side . " ( CM1 ) Community members viewed environmental sensing data as a means for community empowerment [ 124 ] to help the disempowered— residents disproportionately burdened by environmental racism and disparate policy enforcement—make a more credible case with regulators when confronting pollutors with more fnancial and legal power . As another community member called out : “The mindset of these industries is that they want to operate in the same way that they did in the 70s and 80s and don’t have no accountability to the harms that they create , right ? But because we have better technology and we get more access to better tools to monitor , those practices can no longer be imple - mented without some kind of repercussion from the regulatory agencies . ” ( CM4 ) Statements from city interviewees afrmed the idea that con - cerns would be taken more seriously if confrmed quantitatively : “It becomes harder to ignore when you can say like , we actually have this really robust and reliable network of sensors that are giving us these important insights . And now we have to take action based on it . I think it also brings a degree of credibility that allows us to say this isn’t just people complaining or folks who are misrepresenting facts for their purposes . " ( CO1 ) One researcher also supported this idea , stating “Data is more powerful than an anecdote or a call to 311 or what have you , or a series of public outcries . Data is much more powerful " ( R1 ) . The actionability , then , of the network’s data is in part a product of its credibility . Robustness and reliability require ongoing sensor monitoring and strategies for calibration and missing data—work commonly led by research teams—but for a network to actually empower communities to address environmental injustices again requires all three stakeholders to be involved . 6 INTERFACING WITH ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING DATA 6 . 1 Real - Time Visualization with In - Situ Access : Urban Air Website and QR Codes In early meetings with community groups , members expressed concerns regarding research that had been conducted without the community’s knowledge or engagement ; in some cases , residents became aware of projects only when a new dashboard of data and fndings was released—after the project had ended . To ensure that residents could engage throughout the project , our team thus prioritized making data immediately available in tandem with the sensor deployment . The research team developed a web interface called Urban Air , which depicts a map of Chicago with the location of every sensor , the most recent reading for each sensor in the network , and historical data for each sensor for the past seven days . We posted QR codes at every bus shelter with a sensor ( Figure 4 ) that residents could scan to access the Urban Air website . QR code stickers also included the full URL to the website for residents who could not scan QR codes or did not want to use mobile data . Despite expressed widespread interest in air quality data in Chicago prior to the deployment [ 109 ] , we observed low access via QR codes for the frst several months of the project [ 43 ] . Although there was initial usage , likely due to both the network’s novelty and to summer wildfre smoke that produced noticeably poor air quality in July 2021 , we also observed declining access to the web - site overall , as shown in Figure 5 . This limited usage highlights two possible limitations to the usefulness of such interfaces for urban environmental sensing networks : • Limited Relevance . A lack of fexibility to interpolate , ag - gregate , or otherwise manipulate the data limits the ques - tions that community groups or city ofcials can answer using the interface . In general , stakeholders sought support for analytic as well as descriptive insight , as highlighted by one city stakeholder : “So I do like the maps because I fnd that it does two things for me . One is it allows me to kind of make these spatial comparisons and I do have kind of like a mental model for places in the city that I’m you know , thinking about most strongly when I’m worrying about air qual - ity and what kinds of policies solutions we need . And I The " Three - Legged Stool " : Designing for Equitable City , Community , and Research Partnerships CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Figure 4 : The three distinct data interfaces created in the frst year of the air quality monitoring campaign . A ) The mobile version of the Urban Air website , accessible via scanning a QR code at a bus shelter with a sensor . B ) A screenshot of the website providing access to the API . C ) A research team member sharing the Urban Air website at an EcoPod event . think it’s also just a way to convey a lot of information fast without having to kind of sift through the data . But what I do think these maps kind of obscure is like mag - nitude of diference and to your point some of the like statistical signifcance of that diference . " ( CO1 ) Community stakeholders similarly wanted tooling includ - ing : “the chance to dial in more specifcally on particular , like , time ranges , or geographic areas a little bit " ( CM2 ) and support for combining the sensor network data with demo - graphic , health , trafc , and other relevant secondary data . Academic stakeholders similarly requested historic data , and city ofcials requested raw data for their own analyses as well as data products—i . e . interpolated maps—that would be more immediately understandable . • Lack of Awareness or Access . Residents who hesitate to scan the QR code or who do not use a bus stop with a sensor may simply not know about the project , limiting the set of stakeholders who engage with the data . Residents may also lack internet access or smartphones , making it difcult for them to visit the Urban Air website . As one community member stated : “We have a lot of community events and so I feel like the best way to probably inform the community is by pointing out where the sensors are . I wish there was an easier way aside from scanning a QR code to see the data on a phone . Because most of our residents again , who are outside are the older people [ . . . ] and maybe they don’t have internet in their homes and are going to the library and all of these other like senior gathering places that have air conditioning . So I feel like maybe if there was somewhere that had a display of what the inequality readings are like across these couple of sensors would probably be the most engaging , but aside from that , I feel like tabling at all of the like community events and sharing the data is probably the only other way to do it . " ( CM6 ) Community stakeholders and the community lead suggested building on their commonly used method of tabling at events as a better way to educate and engage residents regarding the project . In seeking additional tools to address each of these needs , we discuss two additional interfaces : ( 1 ) an API that allows full access to the raw air pollution and sensor data and ( 2 ) a mobile , mixed - media pop - up where the project team could engage communities directly in discussing the sensors and data . 6 . 2 Flexible Data Access : A Public API To address stakeholder needs around fexibility in using the data for more relevant applications , the research team created a public API . The API allows users to download air quality and other device readings for the entire time span of network deployment . Access is publicly available upon request . The API’s availability surfaced new stakeholders beyond the community , academic , and policy groups initially identifed . In particular , local news organizations generated their own reports on air quality . This data journalism catalyzed increased interest in the project , as shown by the uptick in website visitors in Fig . 5 , as well as a new round of iteration and feedback with city and community partners based on the external fndings . Important limitations remained , however . In particular , although several community groups requested raw or minimally processed data , none had the time or capacity to work with large amounts of raw data via a programming interface . Similarly , few city stake - holders engaged with the raw data . Both media and new research stakeholders emerged to fll this gap , creating data products and visualizations with these end users in mind [ 36 , 64 ] , but the need remains for an interface that would enable community and city CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Daepp and Cabral , et al . Figure 5 : Estimated daily website visitors to the Urban Air website . The top panel shows website trafc over the frst year of the deployment ( July 1 , 2021 to June 30 , 2022 ) ; the bottom panel shows increased engagement in the last three months associated with media coverage and EcoPod events . Visits from phones ( blue ) are more likely to indicate users scanning QR codes in comparison with visitors using computers ( red ) . To protect privacy , the website did not use cookies ; to obtain a lower bound for trafc , we considered a new visitor each time the device type and browser combination was either unique or not seen for more than 30 minutes prior . stakeholders to more easily manipulate data in a low - code or no - code environment . Based on our experience , we highlight three important priorities for designers to consider : ( 1 ) The interface needs to be explicitly spatiotemporal , enabling easy aggregation across timescales as well as interpolation across spatial scales . These tasks emerged as necessary frst steps for many of the questions city , community , and aca - demic stakeholders raised ; they were also the major factor limiting the usefulness of existing dashboarding interfaces . ( 2 ) Data streams need to be interoperable with city open data platforms or other common sources of urban spatial data , because city , community , and research users all commonly sought to situate air quality readings in the context of other local data . ( 3 ) Analytical toolkits should provide support for causal model - ing . City and community stakeholders commonly expressed causal questions—for example , identifying and quantifying particular sources of particulate matter emissions—for which simple correlational analysis or predictive modeling would ofer limited insight . The creation of such an environment is , for this project , an important direction for future work . 6 . 3 Education and Engagement : The EcoPod Pop - Up Lab In community meetings as well as in interviews , stakeholders high - lighted education and engagement as priorities for the project : “The end goal is to always do something so that we are not vulnerable to particulate pollution . But in or - der to do something , we kind of need to educate the community frst " – Community Group 2 “The challenge is always like how do we get the info to community members in a way that is meaningful and makes sense . And that’s always the challenge . " – Community Group 3 However , after initial excitement , we saw declining usage of the website , as shown in Fig . 5 . 5 The lack of engagement continued as the project progressed , and researchers learned that few residents were aware of the project , website , or available data . Moreover , the QR code and websites were designed for individual end users , but the interviews suggested that people sought to engage with this information as part of communities and , in particular , in neighbor - hood groups with shared pollution challenges given geographic proximity [ 25 , 68 ] . Thus community groups sought a data interface that would enable them to engage people with the data both in the spaces where the data were collected and at events where people involved in the project could facilitate conversations around the fndings . To facilitate engagement and foster community - level inclusion , the research team designed the “EcoPod " . The design vision was to create a mobile , mixed - media pop - up laboratory that could present hyperlocal environmental data at events in neighborhoods where the data were collected . To this end , the research team engaged a design frm to re - fabricate a used trailer , adding roof - mounted solar panels that provided power for features including : two computers with attached monitors to show Urban Air and community or city partner - determined content ; WiFi connections to enable visitors to view sensor data on their own devices ; and pop - out demo stations for public interaction . The EcoPod was also outftted with two demo sensors , readings from which were included in the Urban Air web - site shown on the attached monitor ( Figure 4C ) , and a whiteboard with which the community lead solicited attendee feedback . The EcoPod thus provided a visualization that was spatially situated in the relevant urban context [ 99 , 145 ] through its real - time visualiza - tions of data collected at the deployment site , and socially situated 5 For the frst four months of the deployment , we are able to diferentiate between QR code scans and direct usage of the website . A change to the QR codes , however , limits our ability to make this distinction in more recent months ; we use phone access as the best available proxy , but note that only a subset of phone users were scanning the QR codes versus accessing the site directly . The " Three - Legged Stool " : Designing for Equitable City , Community , and Research Partnerships CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Figure 6 : Rendering of the EcoPod , a sensor network inter - face designed for community engagement and education . The re - fabricated trailer was designed for engagement in com - munities with environmental sensing projects , with screens , sensors , and an option to include a stage for speakers and other presentations . in relevant events [ 57 , 99 ] through its mobility—which enabled inclusion in local events—as well as through community partners’ usage of its additional screens and demo stations to share their own work . For the community lead , for whom tabling at local events was a common engagement activity , the EcoPod was efectively legible as a digitally augmented tabling mechanism . The research team worked with community groups who had been involved in selecting deployment locations to fnd existing events or to convene events in their neighborhoods . The EcoPod was presented at four public events across Chicago between April 23rd and May 21st , 2022 . These included : ( 1 ) a long - standing neigh - borhood Earth Day celebration ; ( 2 ) a community event , convened by a local business incubator , to support recycling ; ( 3 ) a standalone “Green City Day” event convened by the research team ; and ( 4 ) an annual plant sale at a local urban farm . Members of the research team as well as the community lead noted high levels of interest and engagement in participant observa - tion of the EcoPod events . Over the course of a single event , EcoPod staf listened to personal stories about environmental issues with adults living in the neighborhood , discussed data science with uni - versity students , and demonstrated the evolution of the enclosure design to numerous children . Of particular note was the engagement of residents across a wide range of ages , especially youth . Many community groups have existing projects and programs for children and teens to help collect environmental data ; in meetings , groups asked “How do we involve the youth in this in these conversations and in this process of this ? " ( Community Group 2 ) —further highlighting the desire to include young people across phases of the environmental monitor - ing campaign . The interest shown by young people at the EcoPod events suggests that physical spaces and tactile experiences can be an entry point to involving youth in environmental monitoring at more junctures than simply data collection . Although the data visualization was the same as that available online ( the Urban Air website ) the EcoPod , as well as the site as ac - cessed through QR codes , was diferentiated by its situation within the relevant spatial context . This had the beneft of minimizing spa - tial indirection , or the distance between the visualization and the phenomenon it represented , better facilitating comprehension and relevance [ 35 , 99 , 105 , 145 ] . The EcoPod—unlike the QR codes—was also socially situated within community events where people were already engaging with environmental issues , further ensuring its relevance [ 105 , 106 ] . These events were not uniformly efective , however : existing and longstanding community events facilitated more engagement across a broader set of residents than did the standalone event , highlighting the importance of local partners in facilitating engagement and access . Diferences in engagement , both between QR codes and events as well as between stand - along and long - standing events , are thus consistent with honeypot ef - fects [ 16 ] , in which existing trafc encourages additional observers to engage . The inclusion of the EcoPod at local events also facilitated com - munity sensemaking . Working through the website with groups of people from nearby neighborhoods enabled multi - directional feedback , educating the project team in the lived experiences res - idents had with air pollution in addition to educating residents about the project . In this sense , the EcoPod can be considered a case of community computing where , as defned by Carroll [ 25 ] , “the distinguishing feature is that the collaborators are neighbors and that computer support supplements diverse opportunities to interact face - to - face . ” A mixed - media mobile interface that could be embedded in events in the neighborhoods most afected by air qual - ity challenges , shaping neighbor - to - neighbor conversations , thus ofered important advantages over the Urban Air and API interfaces that served residents as individual users disconnected from the rel - evant urban and social context . As in prior research , then , our work emphasizes the importance of considering space for social interac - tion when designing situated urban visualizations [ 16 , 56 , 99 , 105 ] . 7 DISCUSSION This paper describes the collaborative work of three key groups— researchers , city agents , and communities—to design , deploy , and interface with a large - scale and long - term environmental sens - ing network . We show how a citywide network combined with community - selected sites improved equity in monitoring coverage . We further surface similar goals , with respect to environmental monitoring , between community leaders , city agents , and external researchers—but also note important diferences in these groups’ motivations and tooling needs . Our comparison of interfaces fur - ther emphasizes key diferences in data access needs across stake - holder groups , and shows the benefts of socially and spatially situating visualizations to further the key shared aims of education and engagement . In this section , we propose a “three - legged stool” framework collectively developed , in refecting on this work , by the research leads , community lead , and city lead . This framework builds upon the phased and participatory frameworks in prior re - search [ 7 , 57 ] , but is diferentiated by its metaphor of balanced collaboration between the three key stakeholders needed for suc - cessful urban technology deployments . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Daepp and Cabral , et al . 7 . 1 Urban Innovation as a Three - Legged Stool For large - scale , innovative environmental monitoring campaigns in shared urban spaces , we propose a “three - legged stool” design framework characterized by the equitable partnership of city , re - search , and community stakeholders throughout the process of the campaign’s deployment . The key insights inherent in the metaphor of the three - legged stool are in the set of stakeholders to be in - cluded and in the importance of balance across these stakeholder groups . Though other stakeholders can and did emerge , we empha - size that city , community , and research were consistently necessary across phases specifcally because our deployment was done at a large - scale ( citywide ) —which necessarily requires the authority and buy - in of city leaders [ 84 ] ; our work required innovation ( in hardware , network design , and interface development ) , and thus required researchers ; and the project ultimately sought to improve environmental equity , and thus required the meaningful involve - ment of the most afected communities [ 20 , 54 ] . In forming the project team , the research team recruited city and community partners by reaching out to leaders of prior initiatives in this space . Our initiative benefted from the Chicago Department of Public Health having a relatively unique position of “Director of Innovation , ” specifcally scoped to support novel health - relevant re - search . Similarly , our community lead held the title of “Community Science Organizer , ” which corresponded to substantial prior experi - ence building relationships with local communities through data collection . We were fortunate to fnd collaborators in these unique and specifc roles but , as design justice practitioners remind us , “Wherever there is a problem , there are already people acting on the problem in some fashion” [ 2 , 41 ] . Foundational to our framework is the practice of identifying such people and bringing them on , ideally early , as full collaborators with decision - making authority in relevant aspects of the project . Building on prior frameworks [ 7 , 57 ] , our work required a phased approach comprising : forming initial partnerships , co - designing the network , surfacing stakeholder perspectives , developing data interfaces , and refection . Collaboration and participation by all three key stakeholder groups , in these phases , was key to surfacing and addressing diferences . In designing the network , for exam - ple , the proposed sites served as a boundary object , an artifact that made concrete the diferences in stakeholders’ needs [ 102 , 130 , 149 ] . Turning over a subset of sensors to community groups helped the community lead prioritize equity in coverage . This contrasts with efciency - focused frameworks , e . g . if researchers had simply op - timized site selection to maximize the variation captured . Simi - larly , in developing interfaces for the network , limited usage of the early tooling made evident difering needs across stakeholder groups . Interviews with city and community highlighted a com - mon emphasis on education and engagement that provide valuable design aims that led us to emphasize socially as well as spatially situated visualizations [ 145 ] , which fostered engagement via hon - eypot efects [ 16 ] as well as by ensuring the visualization’s rel - evance [ 105 , 106 ] , and enabled education by anchoring a shared space for community sensemaking [ 35 , 99 ] . We also found a strong , shared emphasis on empowerment , consistent with prior work in civic computing [ 39 , 89 , 124 ] and sustainable HCI [ 70 , 75 ] , which further highlights the need for researchers to engage in iterative collaboration towards interfaces that are community - facing but city - actionable [ 67 , 75 , 144 ] . 7 . 2 Role of the HCI Researcher in the “Three - Legged Stool " In this framework , the role of the designer is to maintain the bal - ance of the stool—that is , to use each of the campaign phases to facilitate knowledge sharing and the development of mutual respect amongst collaborators from diferent stakeholder groups . This role contrasts with common HCI and CSCW frameworks in which the designer breaks down problems and assigns their components to diferent actors [ 90 ] , which have limited relevance for wicked urban problems [ 85 ] . Instead , consistent with the recommendations by Balestrini et al . [ 7 ] and Fredericks et al . [ 57 ] , we describe a role closer to that of a facilitator , as in frameworks of design justice [ 41 ] and community - based participatory design [ 47 , 68 ] . In our project , members of the research team frequently played this role ; the city and community lead each also sought to build respect and under - standing in the sections of the project that they facilitated . An important insight of our framework , as emphasized by the metaphor of balance , is in ceding elements of design authority to community and city partners . Surfacing stakeholder priorities through interviews and meetings provided insight into shared goals that could form a stronger foundation for consensus between diverse stakeholders—but we also observed that interviews and recorded meetings introduced a researcher - subject dynamic that felt , to the research team , as counter to the aim of building more equitable relationships . In bringing on the city and community lead as full collaborators , by contrast , and deploying the EcoPod to community - run events , we came closer to the ideal of balance and gained new insights that educated all parties , including the researchers . Research teams could further mitigate power dynam - ics by , for example , allocating funds for community groups or other local partners to design and implement their own interviews or co - design workshops , as has become increasingly common in community - based participatory research [ 14 ] . Such an approach would recognize that we are not , in this work , seeking to solve resi - dents or governments as problems ; rather , we are seeking to build a framework in which designers support residents and governments in ways that build their capacity to address shared problems [ 48 , 61 ] . Design for empowerment requires that designers cede power . 7 . 3 Refecting on Missteps : Tensions , Conficts , and the Imbalanced Stool Although it is tempting to view the need for the involvement of multiple stakeholders as simple “common sense , ” many urban sens - ing initiatives remain wobbly two - legged ( or one - legged ! ) stools . Indeed our work , though promising , was often far from our ide - alized , balanced stool . Both the community lead and the city lead described the project as multiple sets of related two - legged stools on several occasions . Upon refection , the project team concluded that tensions with respect to pacing , trust , and power are key to explaining why so many initiatives produce a wobbly stool . The three key stakeholders of the three - legged stool tend to work at diferent paces and on diferent timelines . In our project , many meetings included just two groups—research and community , The " Three - Legged Stool " : Designing for Equitable City , Community , and Research Partnerships CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany or research and city—due in part to difering capacity for regular meetings and bureaucratic restrictions , but also because of the dif - fering time commitments and paces of work among key stakeholder groups . The research team was subject to a relatively tight deploy - ment timeline , but community groups often required months - long notice for the convening of a meeting . This tension limited our ability to , for example , conduct extensive , iterative co - design exer - cises together . However , the research team’s urgency also helped to avoid the years - long phases of pre - project meetings that commonly derail city initiatives . Tensions also emerged because of mistrust on the part of commu - nity members regarding the intentions of city agencies , based on his - torical relations between residents and local governments [ 13 , 147 ] , and the inherent mistrust of EJ communities grounded in long - standing histories of environmental racism [ 19 , 68 ] . Mistrust also stems from concerns regarding prior failures , by researchers , to produce actionable data . Trust - building requires time and inten - tionality [ 38 , 67 , 89 ] , which were difcult to achieve based on the diferent stakeholder paces , and could be difcult to maintain as government personnel can change with each election . We sought to address these challenges , as well as concerns about a lack of long - term commitment from the research team , through thoughtful collaborations with city leaders and local researchers who were committed to working in Chicago for the long term . However , these collaborations introduced new conficts related to the internecine struggles of Chicago’s nonproft ecosystem [ 119 ] and the legacy of mistrust between city and community [ 18 ] . Achieving balance in the three - legged stool framework is fur - ther made difcult by the power hierarchies that emerge in the researcher - community and city - community relationships . Our project could possibly be improved by the use of a broader set of participa - tory methods [ 46 , 50 ] , but the research team hesitated to use this full toolkit in part because of the risk of making participants feel like subjects rather than collaborators [ 17 ] and the associated impo - sition of afective demands [ 49 ] . Empowering community groups to co - lead workshops or design and implement interviews would help to mitigate these concerns , though such work would have to occur at the relatively slower and long - term time frames at which those groups operate . Although our work responds to calls in the HCI literature to recognize government agents as well as communities as stakeholders to be considered in design [ 67 , 98 ] , our framework is nevertheless similar to community - driven frameworks where government agents see themselves as servants of residents’ needs . This is not the case for all governments : that we could collaborate with both city and community partners was at least in part due to a relatively recent change in political context in which govern - ment agents at all levels could and did lift up concerns regarding racial disparities in pollution . When there is less alignment be - tween the needs of communities and the mandates disseminated by political leaders , less collaborative , and perhaps more agonis - tic [ 11 ] , approaches may again become appropriate . Our framework should thus be seen as one of a suite of possible approaches to be selected based on the particular political and social context in which a project is undertaken . The complex political ecology of contem - porary cities makes confict inevitable [ 131 ] , and thus successful application of the three - legged stool framework requires an ability on the part of all parties to stumble and regroup . 7 . 4 Refecting on Successes : Towards Education , Engagement , and Empowerment In Section 1 , we defne “success” in environmental monitoring ini - tiatives as occurring when the efort produces data that are both credible and actionable . The research team played a critical role in achieving credibility by ensuring that key data streams met accu - racy thresholds recommended for educational usage and hotspot detection [ 43 , 55 ] . The city lead contributed to an early example of actionability when city stakeholders identifed a previously un - noticed heavy industrial trafc location after sending an inspector to investigate an area with elevated sensor readings . Although these results are promising , it should be noted that the impacts of long - term civic initiatives are rarely evident in immediate or easily measurable ways , and thus it is important to consider the unexpected efects that emerge over time as new stakeholders adapt projects for their own aims [ 117 ] . This phenomenon occurred , for our project , when local media requested access to the data for inves - tigative work [ 64 ] . The efort led to front - page newspaper coverage of air pollution disparities [ 64 , 65 ] that signifcantly amplifed local engagement ( Figure 5 ) . The journalists recently shared their GitHub repository publicly to empower new users to conduct their own investigations [ 10 ] . Additional relevant parameters for measuring success emerged in the shared emphasis , amongst the three key stakeholder groups represented in our framework , on education , engagement , and em - powerment . Although many of the interviewees in this project suggested that education , engagement , and empowerment would occur as end products of the deployment , our experience is more con - sistent with research showing that education , engagement , and em - powerment emerge through the collaborative process of knowledge generation [ 5 , 120 , 121 , 126 , 138 ] . The deployment of the EcoPod , in particular , helped to facilitate community groups’ and residents’ engagement with the data by deploying to spaces where residents were already engaging with environmental topics [ 16 , 105 ] , and supported community sensemaking processes [ 99 , 105 ] that edu - cated researchers about community priorities in addition to educat - ing community members about air pollution concerns . Just as our project built on the foundations of prior eforts [ 27 , 63 , 88 ] , there is now a need for a new array of city , research , and community part - ners to emerge who can focus the next round of work on building and bolstering these capacities . Recognizing this need , members of the project team contributed to the successful application , led by Argonne National Laboratory in partnership with several com - munity groups , to receive a 5 - year , $ 25M project funded by the U . S . Department of Energy to understand the impact of climate change on Chicago neighborhoods [ 76 , 86 ] ; and , through the Part - nership for Healthy Cities , supported revitalized collaboration on additional environmental monitoring work between city ofcials and community - based EJ organizations [ 12 ] . 8 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK In this paper , we present a collaborative efort to implement a long - term , citywide environmental monitoring campaign . We discuss how we built key needed initial partnerships , document the bene - fts of network co - design in improving coverage and equity , and discuss three unique interfaces to present environmental sensor CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Daepp and Cabral , et al . data . Based on our fndings , successes , and missteps throughout the process , we propose a “three - legged stool” design framework that emphasizes the equitable collaboration of city , community , and research stakeholders in environmental smart city campaigns . Through this work , we contribute to an important , growing HCI literature that seeks “to move from working in the city to working with the city” [ 98 ] . Our project surfaced key aims of education , engagement , and empowerment that were shared by city and community groups . Education , engagement , and empowerment , in the case presented here , were not end products of a functioning sensing network but rather processes fostered in the act of collaborating , consistent with the three - legged stool framework’s emphasis on ongoing inclusion and collaboration . Done well , the collaborative efort to develop new environmental monitoring technologies can actually improve the quality of the science [ 6 ] and contribute to more efective poli - cymaking and enforcement [ 52 , 75 ] . This is , we believe , a unique and important feature of new technology deployments in cities : innovating for the public good in shared public spaces not only requires but actively benefts from public buy - in , in this case both through direct collaboration with communities most afected by the problem and collaboration with representatives for city residents more generally . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Gavin Jancke , Vaishnavi Ranganathan , Bichlien Nguyen , Vikram Iyer , Lex Story , Darren Gehring , Pallavi Choudhury , Marah Abdin , and Keri Mallari for technical support . We are also grateful to Chicago’s community - based organizations for their insights and expertise , and to Gabrielle Brussel , Nicolas Clochard - Bossuet , Pavol Rehus , and the JCDecaux leadership and maintenance team for their support . Thank you as well to Adam Hecktman , Precious Esie , Nicole Sullivan , and Anastasia Montgomery for thoughtful discussion and feedback . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Water Aid . 2005 . Community Mapping – A Tool for Community Organising . [ 2 ] Allied Media Projects . [ n . d . ] . Network Principles . https : / / alliedmedia . org / network - principles . [ 3 ] Paul Aoki , Allison Woodruf , Baladitya Yellapragada , and Wesley Willett . 2017 . Environmental protection and agency : Motivations , capacity , and goals in par - ticipatory sensing . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 3138 – 3150 . [ 4 ] Sherry R Arnstein . 1969 . A ladder of citizen participation . Journal of the American Institute of planners 35 , 4 ( 1969 ) , 216 – 224 . [ 5 ] Alexander Aylett . 2015 . Institutionalizing the urban governance of climate change adaptation : Results of an international survey . Urban Climate 14 ( 2015 ) , 4 – 16 . [ 6 ] Carolina L Balazs and Rachel Morello - Frosch . 2013 . The three Rs : How community - based participatory research strengthens the rigor , relevance , and reach of science . Environmental justice 6 , 1 ( 2013 ) , 9 – 16 . [ 7 ] Mara Balestrini , Yvonne Rogers , Carolyn Hassan , Javi Creus , Martha King , and Paul Marshall . 2017 . A city in common : a framework to orchestrate large - scale citizen engagement around urban issues . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2282 – 2294 . [ 8 ] Oliver Bates , Vanessa Thomas , Christian Remy , Lisa P Nathan , Samuel Mann , and Adrian Friday . 2018 . The Future of HCI and Sustainability : Championing En - vironmental and Social Justice . . In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 4 . [ 9 ] Beth A Bechky . 2003 . Sharing meaning across occupational communities : The transformation of understanding on a production foor . Organization science 14 , 3 ( 2003 ) , 312 – 330 . [ 10 ] Dillon Bergin and Karen Wang . 2022 . ’this is really concerning : ’ Chicago air quality sensors show disparities across the city - and unexplained spikes in pollution . https : / / www . muckrock . com / news / archives / 2022 / nov / 30 / chicago - air - pollution - data - release / [ 11 ] Erling Björgvinsson , Pelle Ehn , and Per - Anders Hillgren . 2012 . Agonistic partic - ipatory design : working with marginalised social movements . CoDesign 8 , 2 - 3 ( 2012 ) , 127 – 144 . [ 12 ] Bloomberg . [ n . d . ] . The Partnership for Healthy Cities . https : / / partnershipforhealthycities . bloomberg . org / [ 13 ] Richard C Box . 1993 . Resistance to professional managers in American local government . The American Review of Public Administration 23 , 4 ( 1993 ) , 403 – 418 . [ 14 ] Hilary Bradbury . 2015 . The Sage handbook of action research . Sage . [ 15 ] Nathalie Bressa , Jo Vermeulen , and Wesley Willett . 2022 . Data Every Day : Designing and Living with Personal Situated Visualizations . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 18 . [ 16 ] Harry Brignull and Yvonne Rogers . 2003 . Enticing people to interact with large public displays in public spaces . . In Interact , Vol . 3 . 17 – 24 . [ 17 ] Barry Brown , Alexandra Weilenmann , Donald McMillan , and Airi Lampinen . 2016 . Five provocations for ethical HCI research . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 852 – 863 . [ 18 ] Max Budovitch . 2018 . Acting Up : how community organizations work with , around , and against city hall for housing justice in Chicago . Ph . D . Dissertation . Massachusetts Institute of Technology . [ 19 ] Robert D Bullard . 2018 . Dumping in Dixie : Race , class , and environmental quality . Routledge . [ 20 ] Robert D Bullard and Glenn S Johnson . 2000 . Environmentalism and public policy : Environmental justice : Grassroots activism and its impact on public policy decision making . Journal of social issues 56 , 3 ( 2000 ) , 555 – 578 . [ 21 ] Alex Cabral , Asta Roseway , and Paul Johns . 2021 . Design and Implementation of A Mobile Urban Low - Cost Environmental Sensor Network . In 2021 IEEE Sensors . IEEE , 1 – 4 . [ 22 ] Cori Cadige . 2021 . Purpleair’s 30 , 000 citizen scientists across the world give communities real - time information about the air they breathe . https : / / www . businesswire . com / news / home / 20210921005311 / en / PurpleAir % E2 % 80 % 99s - 30000 - Citizen - Scientists - Across - the - World - Give - Communities - Real - Time - Information - About - the - Air - They - Breathe [ 23 ] Paolo Cardullo and Rob Kitchin . 2019 . Being a ‘citizen’in the smart city : Up and down the scafold of smart citizen participation in Dublin , Ireland . GeoJournal 84 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 1 – 13 . [ 24 ] Paul R Carlile . 2002 . A pragmatic view of knowledge and boundaries : Boundary objects in new product development . Organization science 13 , 4 ( 2002 ) , 442 – 455 . [ 25 ] John M Carroll . 2001 . Community computing as human - computer interaction . Behaviour & Information Technology 20 , 5 ( 2001 ) , 307 – 314 . [ 26 ] Charlie Catlett , Pete Beckman , Nicola Ferrier , Michael E Papka , Rajesh Sankaran , Jef Solin , Valerie Taylor , Douglas Pancoast , and Daniel Reed . 2022 . Hands - On Computer Science : The Array of Things Experimental Urban Instrument . Computing in Science & Engineering 24 , 1 ( 2022 ) , 57 – 63 . [ 27 ] Charlie Catlett , Peter Beckman , Rajesh Sankaran , and Kate Kusiak Galvin . 2017 . Array of Things : A scientifc Research Instrument in the Public Way : Plat - form Design and Early Lessons Learned . In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Science of Smart City Operations and Platforms Engineering . ACM , 26 – 33 . [ 28 ] Sarah E Chambliss , Carlos PR Pinon , Kyle P Messier , Brian LaFranchi , Crys - tal Romeo Upperman , Melissa M Lunden , Allen L Robinson , Julian D Marshall , and Joshua S Apte . 2021 . Local - and regional - scale racial and ethnic disparities in air pollution determined by long - term mobile monitoring . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118 , 37 ( 2021 ) , e2109249118 . [ 29 ] Brett Chase . 2021 . Unwatched pollution : The efect of intermittent monitoring on air quality . ( May 2021 ) . https : / / chicago . suntimes . com / 2021 / 5 / 11 / 22431325 / general - iron - lori - lightfoot - cumulative - pollution . [ 30 ] Ling - Jyh Chen , Yao - Hua Ho , Hsin - Hung Hsieh , Shih - Ting Huang , Hu - Cheng Lee , and Sachit Mahajan . 2017 . ADF : An anomaly detection framework for large - scale PM2 . 5 sensing systems . IEEE Internet of Things Journal 5 , 2 ( 2017 ) , 559 – 570 . [ 31 ] Ling - Jyh Chen , Yao - Hua Ho , Hu - Cheng Lee , Hsuan - Cho Wu , Hao - Min Liu , Hsin - Hung Hsieh , Yu - Te Huang , and Shih - Chun Candice Lung . 2017 . An open framework for participatory PM2 . 5 monitoring in smart cities . Ieee Access 5 ( 2017 ) , 14441 – 14454 . [ 32 ] Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning . 2020 . Freight and Data Resources ( from On to 2050 ) . https : / / www . cmap . illinois . gov / mobility / freight / freight - data - resources . [ 33 ] Cisco . 2017 . Cisco Survey Reveals Close to Three - Fourths of IoT Projects Are Failing . https : / / newsroom . cisco . com / c / r / newsroom / en / us / a / y2017 / m05 / cisco - survey - reveals - close - to - three - fourths - of - iot - projects - are - failing . html . Ac - cessed : 2022 - 08 - 22 . [ 34 ] City of Chicago . 2018 . Boundaries - zoning districts ( current ) : City of Chicago : Data Portal . https : / / data . cityofchicago . org / Community - Economic - Development / Boundaries - Zoning - Districts - current - / 7cve - jgbp [ 35 ] Sandy Claes , Karin Slegers , and Andrew Vande Moere . 2016 . The bicycle barom - eter : design and evaluation of cyclist - specifc interaction for a public display . In The " Three - Legged Stool " : Designing for Equitable City , Community , and Research Partnerships CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 5824 – 5835 . [ 36 ] ChiVes Contributors . [ n . d . ] . Chives . https : / / chichives . com / [ 37 ] Eric Corbett and Christopher Le Dantec . 2019 . Towards a design framework for trust in digital civics . In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference . 1145 – 1156 . [ 38 ] Eric Corbett and Christopher Le Dantec . 2021 . Designing civic technology with trust . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 17 . [ 39 ] Eric Corbett and Christopher A Le Dantec . 2018 . The problem of community en - gagement : Disentangling the practices of municipal government . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1 – 13 . [ 40 ] Jason Corburn . 2005 . Street science : Community knowledge and environmental health justice . ( 2005 ) . [ 41 ] Sasha Costanza - Chock . 2020 . Design justice : Community - led practices to build the worlds we need . The MIT Press . [ 42 ] Madeleine IG Daepp , Andrew Binet , Vedette Gavin , Mariana C Arcaya , and Healthy Neighborhoods Research Consortium . 2022 . The moving mapper : Participatory action research with big data . Journal of the American Planning Association 88 , 2 ( 2022 ) , 179 – 191 . [ 43 ] Madeleine IG Daepp , Alex Cabral , Vaishnavi Ranganathan , Vikram Iyer , Scott Counts , Paul Johns , Asta Roseway , Charlie Catlett , Gavin Jancke , Darren Gehring , et al . 2022 . Eclipse : An End - to - End Platform for Low - Cost , Hyperlocal Environmental Sensing in Cities . In 2022 21st ACM / IEEE International Conference on Information Processing in Sensor Networks ( IPSN ) . IEEE , 28 – 40 . [ 44 ] Zikun Deng , Di Weng , Jiahui Chen , Ren Liu , Zhibin Wang , Jie Bao , Yu Zheng , and Yingcai Wu . 2019 . AirVis : Visual analytics of air pollution propagation . IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics 26 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 800 – 810 . [ 45 ] Priyanka deSouza and Patrick L Kinney . 2021 . On the distribution of low - cost PM2 . 5 sensors in the US : demographic and air quality associations . Journal of exposure science & environmental epidemiology 31 , 3 ( 2021 ) , 514 – 524 . [ 46 ] Carl DiSalvo . 2017 . What Else Might a Smart City Be . Connected Seeds ( 2017 ) , 24 – 25 . [ 47 ] Carl DiSalvo , Ann Light , Tad Hirsch , Christopher A Le Dantec , Elizabeth Good - man , and Katie Hill . 2010 . HCI , communities and politics . In CHI’10 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 3151 – 3154 . [ 48 ] Carl DiSalvo , Phoebe Sengers , and Hrönn Brynjarsdóttir . 2010 . Mapping the landscape of sustainable HCI . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1975 – 1984 . [ 49 ] Paul Dourish . 2010 . HCI and environmental sustainability : the politics of design and the design of politics . In Proceedings of the 8th ACM conference on designing interactive systems . 1 – 10 . [ 50 ] Andy Dow , Rob Comber , and John Vines . 2018 . Between grassroots and the hierarchy : Lessons learned from the design of a public services directory . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 13 . [ 51 ] Prabal Dutta , Paul M Aoki , Neil Kumar , Alan Mainwaring , Chris Myers , Wesley Willett , and Allison Woodruf . 2009 . Common sense : participatory urban sensing using a network of handheld air quality monitors . In Proceedings of the 7th ACM conference on embedded networked sensor systems . 349 – 350 . [ 52 ] Paul B English , Luis Olmedo , Ester Bejarano , Humberto Lugo , Eduardo Murillo , Edmund Seto , Michelle Wong , Galatea King , Alexa Wilkie , Dan Meltzer , et al . 2017 . The Imperial County Community Air Monitoring Network : a model for community - based environmental monitoring for public health action . Environ - mental health perspectives 125 , 7 ( 2017 ) , 074501 . [ 53 ] Environmental Protection Agency . 2020 . Toxics Release Inventory ( TRI ) Pro - gram . https : / / www . epa . gov / toxics - release - inventory - tri - program [ 54 ] Environmental Protection Agency . 2022 . Environmental Justice | US EPA . https : / / www . epa . gov / environmentaljustice [ 55 ] Precious Esie , Madeleine IG Daepp , Asta Roseway , and Scott Counts . in press . Neighborhood composition and air pollution in Chicago : Monitoring inequities with a dense , low - cost sensing network . In American Journal of Public Health . [ 56 ] Patrick Tobias Fischer and Eva Hornecker . 2012 . Urban HCI : spatial aspects in the design of shared encounters for media facades . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 307 – 316 . [ 57 ] Joel Fredericks , Glenda Amayo Caldwell , and Martin Tomitsch . 2016 . Middle - out design : collaborative community engagement in urban HCI . In Proceedings of the 28th Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction . 200 – 204 . [ 58 ] Scott Frickel , Sahra Gibbon , Jef Howard , Joanna Kempner , Gwen Ottinger , and David J Hess . 2010 . Undone science : Charting social movement and civil society challenges to research agenda setting . Science , Technology , & Human Values 35 , 4 ( 2010 ) , 444 – 473 . [ 59 ] Archon Fung . 2007 . Minipublics : Deliberative designs and their consequences . In Deliberation , participation and democracy . Springer , 159 – 183 . [ 60 ] Daniel Gooch , Matthew Barker , Lorraine Hudson , Ryan Kelly , Gerd Kortuem , Janet Van Der Linden , Marian Petre , Rebecca Brown , Anna Klis - Davies , Hannah Forbes , et al . 2018 . Amplifying quiet voices : Challenges and opportunities for participatory design at an urban scale . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 25 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 1 – 34 . [ 61 ] Ben Green . 2019 . The smart enough city : putting technology in its place to reclaim our urban future . MIT Press . [ 62 ] Sara E Grineski , Timothy W Collins , and Casey J Mullen . 2022 . When Not Implemented Communally , Citizen Science Eforts May Refect , Reinforce , and Potentially Exacerbate Environmental Injustice . , 348 – 350 pages . [ 63 ] Wendy Griswold , Larry E . Erickson , Ronaldo Maghirang , Serap Erdal , Cheryl Johnson , Gail Merritt , Margaret Renas , Peggy Salazar , Kim Wasserman , Brian Urbaszewski , and et al . 2020 . Final Report : Shared Air / Shared Action ( SA2 ) : Community Empowerment through Low - cost Air Pollution Moni - toring . https : / / cfpub . epa . gov / ncer _ abstracts / index . cfm / fuseaction / display . abstractDetail / abstract _ id / 10739 / report / F [ 64 ] Smarth Gupta , Dillon Bergin , and Derek Kravitz . 2022 . What we did to analyze Chicago’s air pollution hotspots . https : / / www . muckrock . com / news / archives / 2022 / may / 16 / how - we - analyzed - chicago - air - pollution - hotspots / [ 65 ] Smarth Gupta , Dillon Bergin , Charmaine Runes , Brett Chase , and María Inés Zamudio . 2022 . The dangers in our air : Mapping Chicago’s air pollution hotspots . https : / / chicago . suntimes . com / 2022 / 5 / 16 / 23069860 / dangerous - air - we - breathe - mapping - chicago - air - pollution - hotspots - pm2 - 5 - particulate - matter [ 66 ] HabitatMap . [ n . d . ] . HabitatMap makes environmental technology accessible . https : / / www . habitatmap . org / about [ 67 ] Mike Harding , Bran Knowles , Nigel Davies , and Mark Rouncefeld . 2015 . HCI , civic engagement & trust . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2833 – 2842 . [ 68 ] Christina Harrington , Sheena Erete , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Deconstructing community - based collaborative design : Towards more equitable participatory design engagements . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 1 – 25 . [ 69 ] Christina N Harrington , Katya Borgos - Rodriguez , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Engaging low - income African American older adults in health discussions through community - based design workshops . In Proceedings of the 2019 chi conference on human factors in computing systems . 1 – 15 . [ 70 ] Sara Heitlinger , Nick Bryan - Kinns , and Rob Comber . 2018 . Connected seeds and sensors : co - designing internet of things for sustainable smart cities with urban food - growing communities . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Situated Actions , Workshops and Tutorial - Volume 2 . 1 – 5 . [ 71 ] Sara Heitlinger , Nick Bryan - Kinns , and Rob Comber . 2019 . The right to the sustainable smart city . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 13 . [ 72 ] Ryan Holifeld . 2001 . Defning environmental justice and environmental racism . Urban geography 22 , 1 ( 2001 ) , 78 – 90 . [ 73 ] Ben Hooker , William W Gaver , Anthony Steed , and John Bowers . 2007 . The pollution e - sign . In Workshop on Ubiquitous Sustainability . Ubicomp . [ 74 ] Torin Hopkins , S Sandra Bae , Julia Uhr , Amy Banić , Clement Zheng , and Ellen Yi - Luen Do . 2020 . User interfaces in smart cities . Handbook of smart cities ( 2020 ) , 1 – 33 . [ 75 ] Yen - Chia Hsu , Paul Dille , Jennifer Cross , Beatrice Dias , Randy Sargent , and Illah Nourbakhsh . 2017 . Community - empowered air quality monitoring system . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1607 – 1619 . [ 76 ] Marguerite Huber . 2022 . Argonne puts climate impact in cities under the micro - scope with new collaborative study . https : / / www . anl . gov / article / argonne - puts - climate - impact - in - cities - under - the - microscope - with - new - collaborative - study [ 77 ] Illinois Department of Transportation . 2018 . Illinois Department of Transporta - tion : District 1 roads - 2017 . https : / / gis - idot . opendata . arcgis . com / datasets / IDOT : : district - 1 - roads - 2017 / about [ 78 ] Illinois Environmental Protection Agency . 2020 . Illinois Ambient Air Monitoring 2021 Network Plan . https : / / www2 . illinois . gov / epa / topics / air - quality / outdoor - air / air - monitoring / Documents / 2021 % 20Network % 20Plan . pdf . [ 79 ] Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Bureau of Air . 2021 . Illinois Ambient Air Monitoring 2022 Network Plan . https : / / www2 . illinois . gov / epa / topics / air - quality / outdoor - air / air - monitoring / Documents / Illinois % 20Ambient % 20Air % 20Monitoring % 202022 % 20Network % 20Plan . pdf [ 80 ] MRSC Insight . 2022 . Knowing Your Roles : City and Town Govern - ments . https : / / mrsc . org / Home / Stay - Informed / MRSC - Insight / February - 2022 / Knowing - Your - Roles - City - Town - Government . aspx [ 81 ] Soile Juujärvi and Kaija Pesso . 2013 . Actor roles in an urban living lab : What can we learn from Suurpelto , Finland ? ( 2013 ) . [ 82 ] Sunyoung Kim , Eric Paulos , and Mark D Gross . 2010 . WearAir : expressive t - shirts for air quality sensing . In Proceedings of the fourth international conference on Tangible , embedded , and embodied interaction . 295 – 296 . [ 83 ] Lisa Koeman , Vaiva Kalnikaité , and Yvonne Rogers . 2015 . " Everyone Is Talking about It ! " A Distributed Approach to Urban Voting Technology and Visuali - sations . In Proceedings of the 33rd annual ACM conference on human factors in computing systems . 3127 – 3136 . [ 84 ] Stacey Kuznetsov , George Davis , Jian Cheung , and Eric Paulos . 2011 . Ceci n’est pas une pipe bombe : authoring urban landscapes with air quality sensors . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Daepp and Cabral , et al . In Proceedings of the sigchi conference on human factors in computing systems . 2375 – 2384 . [ 85 ] Stacey Kuznetsov and Martin Tomitsch . 2018 . A study of urban heat : Under - standing the challenges and opportunities for addressing wicked problems in HCI . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 13 . [ 86 ] Argonne National Laboratory . [ n . d . ] . About CROCUS . https : / / www . anl . gov / crocus / about [ 87 ] Francine Laden , Lucas M Neas , Douglas W Dockery , and Joel Schwartz . 2000 . Association of fne particulate matter from diferent sources with daily mortality in six US cities . Environmental health perspectives 108 , 10 ( 2000 ) , 941 – 947 . [ 88 ] Environmental Law and Policy Center . [ n . d . ] . https : / / airqualitychicago . org / [ 89 ] Christopher A Le Dantec and Sarah Fox . 2015 . Strangers at the gate : Gaining access , building rapport , and co - constructing community - based research . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on computer supported cooperative work & social computing . 1348 – 1358 . [ 90 ] Charlotte P Lee and Drew Paine . 2015 . From The matrix to a model of coordi - nated action ( MoCA ) A conceptual framework of and for CSCW . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on computer supported cooperative work & social computing . 179 – 194 . [ 91 ] Alastair Lewis and Peter Edwards . 2016 . Validate personal air - pollution sensors . Nature 535 , 7610 ( 2016 ) , 29 – 31 . [ 92 ] Loet Leydesdorf and Mark Deakin . 2013 . The triple - helix model of smart cities : A neo - evolutionary perspective . In Creating Smart - er Cities . Routledge , 53 – 63 . [ 93 ] EB Mackay , ME Wilkinson , Christopher JA Macleod , K Beven , Barbara J Percy , MG Macklin , Paul F Quinn , Marc Stutter , and Philip Matthew Haygarth . 2015 . Digital catchment observatories : A platform for engagement and knowledge exchange between catchment scientists , policy makers , and local communities . Water Resources Research 51 , 6 ( 2015 ) , 4815 – 4822 . [ 94 ] Steven Manson , Jonathan Schroeder , David Van Riper , Tracy Kugler , and Steven Ruggles . 2022 . IPUMS National Historical Geographic Information System : Version 17 . 0 [ dataset ] . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 18128 / D050 . V17 . 0 . Minneapolis , MN : IPUMS . Accessed : 2022 - 09 - 10 . [ 95 ] Thomas D Matte , Zev Ross , Iyad Kheirbek , Holger Eisl , Sarah Johnson , John E Gorczynski , Daniel Kass , Steven Markowitz , Grant Pezeshki , and Jane E Clougherty . 2013 . Monitoring intraurban spatial patterns of multiple com - bustion air pollutants in New York City : design and implementation . Journal of exposure science & environmental epidemiology 23 , 3 ( 2013 ) , 223 – 231 . [ 96 ] Shannon Mattern . 2021 . A city is not a computer : Other urban intelligences . Vol . 2 . Princeton University Press . [ 97 ] Lidia Mayangsari and Santi Novani . 2015 . Multi - stakeholder co - creation analysis in smart city management : an experience from Bandung , Indonesia . Procedia Manufacturing 4 ( 2015 ) , 315 – 321 . [ 98 ] Donald McMillan , Arvid Engström , Airi Lampinen , and Barry Brown . 2016 . Data and the City . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2933 – 2944 . [ 99 ] Andrew Vande Moere and Dan Hill . 2012 . Designing for the situated and public visualization of urban data . Journal of Urban Technology 19 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 25 – 46 . [ 100 ] Casey Mullen , Sara Grineski , Timothy Collins , Wei Xing , Ross Whitaker , Tofgh Sayahi , Tom Becnel , Pascal Gofn , Pierre - Emmanuel Gaillardon , Miriah Meyer , et al . 2020 . Patterns of distributive environmental inequity under diferent PM2 . 5 air pollution scenarios for Salt Lake County public schools . Environmental Research 186 ( 2020 ) , 109543 . [ 101 ] MINP Munasinghe , GIUS Perera , JKWDB Karunathilaka , BCS Cooray , and KGD Manupriyal . 2017 . Air pollution monitoring through crowdsourcing . 111th Annual Sessions of the IESL , Colombo , Sri Lanka ( 2017 ) . [ 102 ] Davide Nicolini , Jeanne Mengis , and Jacky Swan . 2012 . Understanding the role of objects in cross - disciplinary collaboration . Organization science 23 , 3 ( 2012 ) , 612 – 629 . [ 103 ] Commonwealth of Massachusetts . 2022 . Environmental Justice Council . https : / / www . mass . gov / orgs / environmental - justice - council [ 104 ] Chicago Department of Public Health . 2020 . City of Chicago Air Quality and Health Report . https : / / www . chicago . gov / content / dam / city / depts / cdph / statistics _ and _ reports / Air _ Quality _ Health _ doc _ FINALv4 . pdf . [ 105 ] Callum Parker , Martin Tomitsch , Nigel Davies , Nina Valkanova , and Judy Kay . 2020 . Foundations for designing public interactive displays that provide value to users . In Proceedings of the 2020 chi conference on human factors in computing systems . 1 – 12 . [ 106 ] Callum Parker , Martin Tomitsch , and Judy Kay . 2018 . Does the public still look at public displays ? A feld observation of public displays in the wild . Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive , Mobile , Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 2 , 2 ( 2018 ) , 1 – 24 . [ 107 ] Chris Perkins . 2007 . Community mapping . The Cartographic Journal 44 , 2 ( 2007 ) , 127 – 137 . [ 108 ] Jennifer L Pomeranz . 2011 . The unique authority of state and local health departments to address obesity . , 1192 – 1197 pages . [ 109 ] Jamie Ponce and Meera Raja . 2021 . In pursuit of breathable cities . https : / / www . citytech . org / in - pursuit - of - breathable - cities [ 110 ] Hans - Otto Pörtner , Debra C Roberts , H Adams , C Adler , P Aldunce , E Ali , R Ara Begum , R Betts , R Bezner Kerr , R Biesbroek , et al . 2022 . Climate change 2022 : Impacts , adaptation and vulnerability . IPCC Sixth Assessment Report ( 2022 ) . [ 111 ] Benjamin Joshua Preis . 2019 . A study on city - university partnerships for smart city technologies . Ph . D . Dissertation . Massachusetts Institute of Technology . [ 112 ] PurpleAir . [ n . d . ] . https : / / www . purpleair . com / . [ 113 ] PurpleAir . [ n . d . ] . Data from PurpleAir . https : / / www . purpleair . com / . [ 114 ] Michiel A Rijsberman and Frans HM Van de Ven . 2000 . Diferent approaches to assessment of design and management of sustainable urban water systems . Environmental Impact Assessment Review 20 , 3 ( 2000 ) , 333 – 345 . [ 115 ] Horst W Rittel and Melvin M Webber . 1974 . Wicked problems . Man - made Futures 26 , 1 ( 1974 ) , 272 – 280 . [ 116 ] Paul Robbins . 2014 . 32 . Research is Theft : Environmental Inquiry in a Postcolo - nial World . Approaches to Human Geography : Philosophies , Theories , People and Practices ( 2014 ) , 400 . [ 117 ] Chiara Rossitto . 2021 . Political ecologies of participation : Refecting on the long - term impact of civic projects . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 , CSCW1 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 27 . [ 118 ] Chiara Rossitto , Rob Comber , Jakob Tholander , and Mattias Jacobsson . 2022 . Towards Digital Environmental Stewardship : the Work of Caring for the Environ - ment in Waste Management . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 16 . [ 119 ] Carlo Rotella . 2019 . The World Is Always Coming to an End . In The World Is Always Coming to an End . University of Chicago Press . [ 120 ] Danya Rumore . 2014 . Building the Capacity of Coastal Communities to Adapt to Climate Change through Participatory Action Research . Carolina Planning 39 ( 2014 ) , 16 – 12 . [ 121 ] Danya Rumore , Todd Schenk , and Lawrence Susskind . 2016 . Role - play simula - tions for climate change adaptation education and engagement . Nature Climate Change 6 , 8 ( 2016 ) , 745 – 750 . [ 122 ] Robert J . Sampson . 2012 . Great American City : Chicago and the Enduring Neigh - borhood Efect . University of Chicago Press , Chicago , IL . [ 123 ] Lill Sarv , Kristel Kibus , and Ralf - Martin Soe . 2020 . Smart city collaboration model : a case study of university - city collaboration . In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance . 674 – 677 . [ 124 ] Hanna Schneider , Malin Eiband , Daniel Ullrich , and Andreas Butz . 2018 . Em - powerment in HCI - A survey and framework . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 14 . [ 125 ] Philipp Schneider , Nuria Castell , Matthias Vogt , Franck R Dauge , William A Lahoz , and Alena Bartonova . 2017 . Mapping urban air quality in near real - time using observations from low - cost sensors and model information . Environment international 106 ( 2017 ) , 234 – 247 . [ 126 ] Linda Shi , Eric Chu , Isabelle Anguelovski , Alexander Aylett , Jessica Debats , Kian Goh , Todd Schenk , Karen C Seto , David Dodman , Debra Roberts , et al . 2016 . Roadmap towards justice in urban climate adaptation research . Nature Climate Change 6 , 2 ( 2016 ) , 131 – 137 . [ 127 ] Saba Siddiki and Graham Ambrose . 2022 . Evaluating Change in Representa - tion and Coordination in Collaborative Governance Over Time : A Study of Environmental Justice Councils . Environmental Management ( 2022 ) , 1 – 21 . [ 128 ] M Six Silberman , Lisa Nathan , Bran Knowles , Roy Bendor , Adrian Clear , Maria Håkansson , Tawanna Dillahunt , and Jennifer Mankof . 2014 . Next steps for sustainable HCI . interactions 21 , 5 ( 2014 ) , 66 – 69 . [ 129 ] Luke Smith and Mark Turner . 2019 . Building the Urban Observatory : Engineer - ing the largest set of publicly available real - time environmental urban data in the UK . . In Geophysical Research Abstracts , Vol . 21 . [ 130 ] Susan Leigh Star and James R Griesemer . 1989 . Institutional ecology , translations’ and boundary objects : Amateurs and professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 - 39 . Social studies of science 19 , 3 ( 1989 ) , 387 – 420 . [ 131 ] Erik Swyngedouw , Maria Kaika , and Esteban Castro . 2002 . Urban water : a political - ecology perspective . Built Environment ( 1978 - ) ( 2002 ) , 124 – 137 . [ 132 ] Olúfémi O Táíwò . 2022 . Elite capture : How the powerful took over identity politics . ( and everything else ) . Haymarket Books . [ 133 ] Minmeng Tang and Deb A Niemeier . 2020 . Using big data techniques to better understand high - resolution cumulative exposure assessment of trafc - related air pollution . ACS ES & T Engineering 1 , 3 ( 2020 ) , 436 – 445 . [ 134 ] Eben D Thoma , Michael C Miller , Kuenja C Chung , Nicholas L Parsons , and Brenda C Shine . 2011 . Facility fence - line monitoring using passive samplers . Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association 61 , 8 ( 2011 ) , 834 – 842 . [ 135 ] Anthony M Townsend . 2013 . Smart cities : Big data , civic hackers , and the quest for a new utopia . WW Norton & Company . [ 136 ] Billie Lee Turner , Pamela A Matson , James J McCarthy , Robert W Corell , Lindsey Christensen , Noelle Eckley , Grete K Hovelsrud - Broda , Jeanne X Kasperson , Roger E Kasperson , Amy Luers , et al . 2003 . Illustrating the coupled human – environment system for vulnerability analysis : three case studies . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 100 , 14 ( 2003 ) , 8080 – 8085 . [ 137 ] U . S . Census Bureau . 2021 . U . S . Census Bureau quickfacts : Chicago City , Illinois ; United States . https : / / www . census . gov / quickfacts / fact / table / chicagocityillinois , The " Three - Legged Stool " : Designing for Equitable City , Community , and Research Partnerships CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany US / PST045221 [ 138 ] Maarten K Van Aalst , Terry Cannon , and Ian Burton . 2008 . Community level adaptation to climate change : The potential role of participatory community risk assessment . Global environmental change 18 , 1 ( 2008 ) , 165 – 179 . [ 139 ] Lucy Van Kleunen , Brian Muller , and Stephen Voida . 2021 . " Wiring a City " A Sociotechnical Perspective on Deploying Urban Sensor Networks . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 , CSCW1 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 22 . [ 140 ] Peter van Waart , Ingrid Mulder , and Cees de Bont . 2016 . A participatory ap - proach for envisioning a smart city . Social Science Computer Review 34 , 6 ( 2016 ) , 708 – 723 . [ 141 ] Tifany Werner . 2019 . Air Quality Monitoring Kicks of for Summer 2019 . https : / / elpc . org / blog / air - quality - monitoring - kicks - of - summer - 2019 / [ 142 ] Tifany Werner . 2020 . EPA refuses to strengthen air pollution standards during global respiratory pandemic . https : / / elpc . org / blog / epa - refuses - to - strengthen - air - pollution - standards - during - global - respiratory - pandemic / [ 143 ] Madisson Whitman , Chien - yi Hsiang , and Kendall Roark . 2018 . Potential for participatory big data ethics and algorithm design : a scoping mapping review . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Situated Actions , Workshops and Tutorial - Volume 2 . 1 – 6 . [ 144 ] Wesley Willett , Paul Aoki , Neil Kumar , Sushmita Subramanian , and Allison Woodruf . 2010 . Common sense community : scafolding mobile sensing and analysis for novice users . In International Conference on Pervasive Computing . Springer , 301 – 318 . [ 145 ] Wesley Willett , Yvonne Jansen , and Pierre Dragicevic . 2016 . Embedded data representations . IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics 23 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 461 – 470 . [ 146 ] Robert W Williams . 1999 . The contested terrain of environmental justice re - search : community as unit of analysis . The social science journal 36 , 2 ( 1999 ) , 313 – 328 . [ 147 ] Jennifer Wolak and Christine Kelleher Palus . 2010 . The dynamics of public confdence in US state and local government . State Politics & Policy Quarterly 10 , 4 ( 2010 ) , 421 – 445 . [ 148 ] Bianca Wylie . 2018 . Searching for the smart city’s democratic future . https : / / www . cigionline . org / articles / searching - smart - citys - democratic - future / . Centre for International Governance Innovation 13 ( 2018 ) . Accessed : 2022 - 08 - 25 . [ 149 ] Tiona White Zuzul . 2019 . “Matter battles” : Cognitive representations , bound - ary objects , and the failure of collaboration in two smart cities . Academy of Management Journal 62 , 3 ( 2019 ) , 739 – 764 .