Bootstrapping & the Origin of Concepts The Harvard community has made this article openly available . Please share how this access benefits you . Your story matters Citation Carey , Susan E . 2004 . Bootstrapping & the origin of concepts . Daedalus 133 ( 1 ) : 59 - 68 . Published Version doi : 10 . 1162 / 001152604772746701 Citable link http : / / nrs . harvard . edu / urn - 3 : HUL . InstRepos : 5109360 Terms of Use This article was downloaded from Harvard University’s DASH repository , and is made available under the terms and conditions applicable to Other Posted Material , as set forth at http : / / nrs . harvard . edu / urn - 3 : HUL . InstRepos : dash . current . terms - of - use # LAA A ll animals learn . But only human beings create scienti½c theories , mathe - matics , literature , moral systems , and complex technology . And only humans have the capacity to acquire such cultur - ally constructed knowledge in the nor - mal course of immersion in the adult world . There are many reasons for the differ - ences between the minds of humans and other animals . We have bigger brains , and hence more powerful infor - mation processors ; sometimes differ - ences in the power of a processor can create what look like qualitative differ - ences in kind . And of course human beings also have language – the main medium for the cultural transmission of acquired knowledge . Comparative studies of humans and other primates suggest that we differ from them as well in our substantive cognitive abilities – for example , our capacity for causal anal - ysis and our capacity to reason about the mental states of others . Each of these factors doubtless contributes to our prodigious ability to learn . But in my view another factor is even more important : our uniquely human ability to ‘bootstrap . ’ Many psycholo - gists , historians , and philosophers of science have appealed to the metaphor of bootstrapping in order to explain learning of a particularly dif½cult sort – those cases in which the endpoint of the process transcends in some qualitative way the starting point . The choice of metaphor may seem puzzling – it is self - evidently impossible to pull oneself up by one’s own bootstrap . After all , the process I describe below is not impos - sible , but I keep the term because of its historical credentials and because it seeks to explain cases of learning that many have argued are impossible . Sometimes learning requires the cre - ation of new representational resources that are more powerful than those pres - ent at the outset . Early in the cultural history of mathematics , for instance , the concept of the number included only positive integers : with subsequent de - velopment the concept came to encom - pass zero , rational numbers ( fractions ) , negative numbers , irrational numbers like pi , and so on . Dædalus Winter 2004 59 Susan Carey Bootstrapping & the origin of concepts Susan Carey , professor of psychology at Harvard University , has played a leading role in transform - ing our understanding of cognitive development . A Fellow of the American Academy since 2001 , she is the author of numerous articles and essays and the book “Conceptual Change in Childhood” ( 1985 ) . © 2004 by the American Academy of Arts & Sciences Bootstrapping is the process that un - derlies the creation of such new con - cepts , and thus it is part of the answer to the question : What is the origin of con - cepts ? Individual concepts are the units of thought . They are constituents of larger mental structures – of beliefs that are formed out of them and of systems of representation such as intuitive theories . Concepts are individuated on the basis of two kinds of considerations : their ref - erence to different entities in the world and their role in distinct mental systems of inferential relations . How do human beings acquire con - cepts ? Logic dictates three parts to any explanation of the origin of concepts . First , we must specify the innate repre - sentations that provide the building blocks of the target concepts of interest . Second , we must describe how the target concepts differ from these innate repre - sentations – that is , we must describe de - velopmental change . And third , we must characterize the learning mechanisms that enable the construction of new con - cepts out of the prior representations . Claims about all three parts of the ex - planation of the origin of concepts are highly controversial . Many believe that innate representations are either percep - tual or sensory , while others ( including myself ) hold that humans and other ani - mals are endowed with some innate rep - resentations with rich conceptual con - tent . Some researchers also debate the existence , even the possibility , of quali - tative changes to the child’s initial repre - sentations . One argument for the impos - sibility of such radical changes in the course of development is the putative lack of learning mechanisms that could explain them . This is the gap that my appeal to bootstrapping is meant to ½ll . To make clear both what the problem is , and what role bootstrapping may play in solving it , I will examine how children acquire one speci½c set of concepts : the positive integers – i . e . , concepts such as one , two , three , nine , eighteen , etc . B efore they acquire language , infants form several different types of represen - tation with numerical content , at least two of which they share with other ver - tebrate animals . One , described by Stanislas Dehaene in his delightful book The Number Sense , uses mental symbols that are neural magnitudes linearly related to the num - ber of individuals in a set . Because the symbols get bigger as the represented entity gets bigger , they are called analog magnitudes . Figure 1 gives an external analog magnitude representation of number , where the symbol is a line , and length is the magnitude linearly related to number . Mental computations using these symbols include comparison , to establish numerical difference or equal - ity , and also addition and subtraction . Mental analog magnitudes represent many dimensions of experience – for example , brightness , loudness , and tem - poral duration . In each case as the physi - cal magnitudes get bigger , it becomes increasingly harder to discriminate be - tween pairs of values that are separated by the same absolute difference . You can see in ½gure 1 that it is harder to tell that the symbol for seven is different from ( and smaller than ) that for eight than it is to tell that the symbol for two is dif - ferent from ( and smaller than ) that for three . Analog magnitude representa - tions follow Weber’s law , according to which the discriminability of two values is a function of their ratio . You can con½rm for yourself that you have an analog magnitude system of rep - resentation of number that conforms to Weber’s law . Tap out as fast as you can without counting ( you can prevent your - 60 Dædalus Winter 2004 Susan Carey on learning self from counting by thinking ‘the’ with each tap ) the following numbers of taps : 4 , 15 , 7 , and 28 . If you carried this out several times , you’d ½nd the mean num - ber of taps to be 4 , 15 , 7 , and 28 , with the range of variation very tight around 4 ( usually 4 , occasionally 3 or 5 ) and very great around 28 ( from 14 to 40 taps , for example ) . Discriminability is a function of the absolute numerical value , as dic - tated by Weber’s law . Since you were not counting , some other numerical repre - sentation must have been guiding your tapping performance – presumably ana - log magnitudes , as your adherence to Weber’s law , again , would seem to indi - cate . Space precludes my reviewing the ele - gant evidence for analog magnitude rep - resentations of number in animals and human infants , but let me give just one example . Fei Xu and Elizabeth Spelke showed infants arrays of dots , one dot array at a time , until the infants got bored with looking at them . All other variables that could have been con - founded with number ( total array size , total volume of dots , density of dots , and so on ) were controlled in these stud - ies , such that the only possible basis for the infants’ discrimination was numeric . Seven - month - old infants were habituat - ed either to arrays of eight or sixteen dots . After habituation they were pre - sented with new displays containing ei - ther the same number of dots to which they had been habituated or the other number . Xu and Spelke found that the infants recovered interest to the new number , and so concluded that they are capable of representing number . Xu and Spelke also found evidence for Weber’s law : infants could discriminate eight from sixteen and sixteen from thirty - two , but not eight from twelve or six - teen from twenty - four . 1 Infants and animals can form analog magnitude representations of fairly large sets , but these representations are only approximate . Analog magnitude repre - sentations of number fall short of the representational power of integers ; in this system one cannot represent exactly ½fteen , or ½fteen as opposed to fourteen . Nonetheless , analog magnitude repre - sentations clearly have numerical con - tent : they refer to numerical values , and number - relevant computations are de½ned over them . A second system of representations with numerical content works very differently . Infants and nonhuman pri - mates have the capacity to form sym - bols for individuals and to create men - tal models of ongoing events in which each individual is represented by a single symbol . Figure 2 shows how , in this sys - tem , sets of one , two , or three boxes might be represented . The ½gure repre - sents three different possibilities for the format and content of the symbols . Dædalus Winter 2004 61 Bootstrapping & the origin of concepts Figure 1 Analog magnitude models Number represented by a quantity linearly related to the cardinal value of the set one : – – two : – – – – three : – – – – – – seven : – – – – – – – – – – – – – – eight : – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – 1 For an overview of the evidence for analog magnitude representations of number in both nonhuman animals and human adults , see Stanislas Dehaene , The Number Sense ( Oxford : Oxford University Press , 1997 ) . For evidence in human infants , see Fei Xu and Elizabeth S . Spelke , “Large Number Discrimination in 6 - Month - Old Infants , ” Cognition 74 ( 2000 ) : B1 – B11 . There is one symbol for each box , so number is implicitly represented ; the symbols in the model stand in one - one correspondence with the objects in the world . To give you a feel for the evidence that infants indeed employ such models , dis - tinct from the analog magnitude repre - sentations sketched above , consider the following experiment from my laborato - ry . Ten - to fourteen - month - old infants are shown a box into which they can reach to retrieve objects , but into which they cannot see . If you show infants three objects being placed , one at a time or all at once , into this box , and then allow them to reach in to retrieve them one at a time , they show by their pattern of reaching that they expect to ½nd ex - actly three objects there . If the infant has a mental representation of a set of two objects ( e . g . , object , object ) that are hidden from view , and the infant sees a new object being added to the set , the infant creates a mental representation of a set of three ( object , object , object ) . Further , computations of one - one corre - spondence carried out over these models allow the child to establish numerical equivalence and number order ( e . g . , Have I got all the objects out of the box or are there more ? ) So far , this is just another demon - stration that infants represent number . However , an exploration of the limits on infants’ performance of this task im - plicates a different system of representa - tion from the analog magnitude system sketched above . Performance breaks down at four objects . If the infants see four objects being placed into the box and are al - lowed to retrieve two of them , or even just one of them , they do not reach per - sistently for the remaining objects . Re - member that in the analog magnitude system of representation , success at numerical comparison is a function of the ratios of the numbers being com - pared , and that the representations can handle sets of objects at least as big as thirty - two . But in this reaching task , infants succeed at ratios of 2 : 1 and 3 : 2 , but fail at 4 : 2 and even 4 : 1 ; as soon as the set exceeds three , infants cannot hold a model of distinct items in their short - term memory . 2 I n sum , human infants ( and other pri - mates ) are endowed with at least two distinct systems of representation with numerical content . Both take sets of in - dividuals as input . One creates a summa - ry analog representation that is a linear function of the number of individuals in the set . This process is noisy , and the noise is itself a linear function of the set size , with the consequence that the rep - resentations are merely approximate . For several reasons , this system is too weak to represent the positive integers . For one , there is likely an upper bound to the set sizes that can be represented by analog magnitudes . More importantly , 62 Dædalus Winter 2004 Susan Carey on learning 2 For evidence of the set - size limits on in - fants’ representations of small numbers of objects , see Lisa Feigenson and Susan Carey , “Tracking Individuals Via Object Files : Evi - dence from Infants’ Manual Search , ” Develop - mental Science 6 ( 2003 ) : 568 – 584 . Figure 2 Parallel individuation models 1 box (cid:1) obj box 2 boxes (cid:1)(cid:1) obj obj box box 3 boxes (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) obj obj obj box box box Note : one symbol for each individual ; no symbols for integers . Number of boxes Image Abstract Speci½c animals and infants cannot discriminate adjacent integer values once the sets contain more than three or four individ - uals ; that is , they cannot represent exact - ly ½fteen or twenty - ½ve or forty - nine , or any other large exact integer . Finally , analog magnitude representations obscure one of the foundational rela - tions among successive integers – that each one is exactly one more than the one before . It is this relation , called the successor relation , that underlies how counting algorithms work and provides the mathematical foundation of integer concepts . Since discriminabilty of ana - log magnitudes is a function of the ratio between them , the relation between two and three is not experienced as the same as that between twenty - four and twenty - ½ve ; indeed , the latter two values cannot really even be discriminated within this system of representation . The second system – one symbol for each individual – falls even shorter as a representation of integers . There are no symbols for number in this system at all ; the symbols in ½gure 2 each represent an individual object , unlike those in ½gure 1 , which represent an approximate cardi - nal value . Furthermore , what can be rep - resented in this system is limited in number to sets of one , two , and three . T he count list ( ‘one , two , three . . . ’ ) is a system of representation that has the power to represent the positive integers , so long as it contains a generative sys - tem for creating an in½nite list . When deployed in counting , it provides a rep - resentation of exact integer values based on the successor function . That is , when applied in order , in one - one correspon - dence with the individuals in a set , the ordinal position of the last number word in the count provides a representation of the cardinal value of the set – of how many individuals it contains . Successive symbols in the list refer to cardinal val - ues exactly one apart : 5 is 4 plus 1 , 6 is 5 plus 1 , and so on . I have argued so far that the count - list representation of number transcends the representational power of both of the representational systems with nu - merical content that are available to pre - verbal infants , for these precursors lack the capacity to represent integers . If this is so , it should be dif½cult for children to come to understand the numerical func - tion of counting . And so , indeed , it is dif½cult for chil - dren to learn how counting represents number , and details about the partial understanding they achieve along the way constrain our theories of the learn - ing process . In the United States ( and every other place where early counting has been studied , including Western Europe , Russia , China , and Japan ) children learn to recite the count list as young two - year - olds , and at this age can even engage in the routine of count - ing – touching objects in a set one by one as they recite the list . But it takes anoth - er year and a half before they work out how counting represents number , and in every culture yet studied , children go through similar stages in working out the meanings of the number words in the count list . First , children learn what ‘one’ means and take all other words in the list to contrast with ‘one , ’ meaning ‘more than one’ or ‘some . ’ The behaviors that dem - onstrate this are quite striking . If you present young two - year - olds with a pile of pennies and ask them to give you one penny , they comply . If you ask for two pennies or three pennies or ½ve pennies , they grab a bunch , always more than one , and hand them over . They do not create a larger set for ‘½ve’ than for ‘two . ’ You might suppose that the plural in ‘pennies’ is doing the work here , but Dædalus Winter 2004 63 Bootstrapping & the origin of concepts the same phenomenon is observed in China and Japan , even though Chinese and Japanese do not have a singular - plural distinction , and also in the United States when the contrast is between ‘one ½sh , ’ ‘two ½sh , ’ and ‘½ve ½sh . ’ Let us call children at this stage of working out the meanings of number words ‘one - knowers . ’ Many other tasks provide additional evidence that one - knowers truly know only the meaning of the word ‘one’ among all the words in their count list . For example , if you ask a one - knower to tell you what’s on a series of cards that contain one , two , or three ½sh ( up to eight ½sh ) , they say ‘a ½sh’ or ‘one ½sh’ for the card with one , and ‘two ½sh’ or ‘two ½shes’ or ‘two ½shies’ for all of the other cards . This again indi - cates a single cut between the meaning of ‘one , ’ which they grasp , and words for the number of individuals in larger sets , which they do not . After having been one - knowers for about six to nine months , children learn what ‘two’ means . At this point they can correctly give you two objects if you ask for ‘two , ’ but they still just grab a bunch ( always greater than two ) , if you ask for ‘three , ’ ‘four , ’ ‘½ve , ’ or ‘six . ’ After some months as two - knowers , they become three - knowers , and some months later induce how counting works . The performance of children who have worked out how counting works is quali - tatively different from that of the one - , two - , and three - knowers in a variety of ways that reflect the conceptual under - standing of counting . To give just one example , in the task in which children are asked to give the ex - perimenter a certain number of items , say four , one - , two - , and three - knowers usually give the wrong number , and the young counters also sometimes make an error . When asked to check by counting and then to ½x the set , counters invari - ably adjust the set in the right direction , taking an object away if the set is too large or adding one if it is too small . One - , two - , and three - knowers , in con - trast , almost always add more to the set – even if they had counted to ½ve or six or seven when they were checking whether it had four – con½rming that they really do not understand how counting determines the meaning of number words . These data suggest that the partial meanings of number words seem to be organized initially by the semantics of quanti½ers – the singular - plural distinc - tion and the meanings of words like ‘some’ and ‘a . ’ If this is right , then we might expect that children learning lan - guages with quanti½er systems that mark numerical contrasts differently from English would entertain different hypotheses concerning the partial mean - ings of number words . They might break into the system differently . And indeed they do . Consider ½rst classi½er languages such as Chinese and Japanese that do not mark the distinction between singu - lar and plural in nouns , verbs , or adjec - tives . Two independent studies have found that although children in China and Japan learn the count list as young as English - speaking children do , they become one - knowers several months later and are relatively delayed at each stage of the process . Conversely , Russian has a complex plural system in which the morphological markers for sets of two , three , and four differ from those for ½ve through ten . Two independent studies have shown that even Russian one - and two - knowers distinguish between the meanings of the number words ‘two , ’ ‘three , ’ and ‘four , ’ on the one hand , and ‘½ve , ’ ‘six , ’ ‘seven , ’ and ‘eight , ’ on the other . Unlike the one - and two - knowers 64 Dædalus Winter 2004 Susan Carey on learning described above , Russian children in the early stages of working out how count - ing works grab smaller sets when asked to give the experimenter ‘two , ’ ‘three , ’ or ‘four’ than when asked to give the ex - perimenter ‘½ve’ or more , and use larger numbers for larger sets in the what’s - on - this - card task . 3 These phenomena concerning young children’s partial understanding of the meanings of number words support three interrelated conclusions . First , that it is so dif½cult for children to learn what ‘two’ means , let alone what ‘½ve’ and ‘eight’ mean , lends support to the claims that preverbal number represen - tations are not representations of inte - gers , at least not in the format of an inte - ger list . Young children – for a full six to nine months before they work out what ‘two’ means , and a full year and a half before they work out how the count list represents integers – know how to count , know what ‘one’ means , and know that ‘two , ’ ‘three , ’ ‘four , ’ ‘½ve , ’ ‘six , ’ ‘seven , ’ and ‘eight’ represent num - bers larger than ‘one . ’ Second , coming to understand how the count list repre - sents numbers reflects a qualitative change in the child’s representational capacities ; I would argue that it does nothing less than create a representa - tion of the positive integers where none was available before . Finally , a third pos - sible developmental source of natural number representations , in addition to the preverbal systems described above , may be the representations of numbers within natural language quanti½er se - mantics . Of course , natural language quanti½ers , other than the number words in the count list itself , do not have the power to represent natural numbers either . T he problem of the origin of the posi - tive integers arises at two different time scales – historical and ontogenetic . At the dawn of modern anthropology , when colonial of½cers went out into the French and English colonial worlds , they discovered many systems of explicit number representation that fell short of a full representation of natural number . They described languages that marked number on nouns , adjectives , and verbs , and which had quanti½ers like the Eng - lish ‘one , ’ ‘two , ’ ‘many , ’ ‘some , ’ ‘each , ’ ‘every , ’ and ‘more , ’ but which had no count list . In this vein , the psychologist Peter Gordon has described the language of the Piraha , an isolated Amazonian people . He has shown that in addition to linguistic quanti½ers meaning ‘one , ’ ‘two , ’ and ‘many , ’ the Piraha also have access to the nonverbal systems de - scribed above ( parallel individuation of small sets and analog magnitude rep - resentations of large numerosities ) . Gor - don con½rms that they have no repre - sentations of large exact numerical val - ues . Anthropologists and archeologists have described intermediate systems of integer representation , short of integer lists , and these intermediate systems provide evidence for a process of cultur - al construction over generations and centuries of historical time . 4 Here I con - centrate on ontogenetic time . How do three - year - olds do it ? How do they cre - ate a representational system with more Dædalus Winter 2004 65 Bootstrapping & the origin of concepts 3 For a characterization of the early stages of counting in English , see Karen Wynn , “Chil - dren’s Acquisition of the Number Words and the Counting System , ” Cognitive Psychology 24 ( 2 ) ( 1992 ) : 220 – 257 . 4 I would recommend the linguist James Hur - ford’s review of this literature to any reader in - terested in this process . James Hurford , Lan - guage and Number ( Oxford : Basil Blackwell , 1987 ) . For work on the Piraha , see Peter Gor - don , “The Role of Language in Numerical Cog - nition : Evidence from Amazonia” ( under re - view ) . power than any on which it is built ? 5 In answering this question , I would appeal to bootstrapping processes . Bootstrapping processes make essen - tial use of the human capacity for creat - ing and using external symbols such as words and icons . Bootstrapping capital - izes on our ability to learn sets of sym - bols and the relations among them di - rectly , independently of any meaning assigned to them in terms of anteced - ently interpreted mental representa - tions . These external symbols then serve as placeholders , to be ½lled in with richer and richer meanings . The processes that ½ll the placeholders create mappings between previously separate systems of representation , drawing on the human capacity for analogical reasoning and inductive in - ference . The power of the resulting sys - tem of concepts derives from the com - bination and integration of previously distinct representational systems . Let’s see how this might work in the present case . We must allow the child one more prenumerical capacity – that of representing serial order . This is no problem – young children learn a vari - ety of meaningless ordered lists , such as ‘eeny , meeny , miney , mo . ’ We seek to explain how the child learns the meanings of the number words – what ‘two’ means , what ‘seven’ means – and how the child learns how the list itself represents number – that the cardinal value of a set enumerated by counting is determined by the order on the list , and that successive numbers on the list are related by the arithmetic successor relation . As described above , the child learns the meanings of the ½rst number words as natural language quanti½ers . Children learn the meaning of ‘one’ just as they learn the meaning of the singular deter - miner ‘a’ ( indeed , in many languages , such as French , they are the same lexi - cal item ) . Some months later , ‘two’ is learned , just as dual markers are in languages that have singular / dual / plural morphology . Languages with dual markers have a dif - ferent plural af½x for sets of two than the af½x for sets greater than two . It is as if English nouns were declined ‘box’ ( sin - gular ) , ‘boxesh’ ( dual ) , ‘boxeesh’ ( plu - ral ) . In this system , the suf½x ‘esh’ would apply just when the set referred to contained exactly two items . By hypoth - esis , children would learn the meaning of the word ‘two’ just as they would learn the morphological marker ‘esh’ – if English plural markers worked that way . By extension , some months later , ‘three’ is learned just as trial markers are in the rare languages that have sin - gular / dual / trial / plural morphology . In the early stages of being a one - , two - , or three - knower , the child repre - sents other number words as quanti½ers , meaning ‘many , ’ where ‘many’ is more than any known number word . As I will argue below , it is likely that the nonver - bal number representations that support the meanings of the known words is the system of parallel individuation ( ½gure 2 ) , with natural language quanti½cation articulation in terms of notions like ‘set’ and ‘individual . ’ Meanwhile , the child has learned the count list , which initially has no seman - tic content other than its order . The child knows one must recite ‘one , two , three , four , ½ve , ’ not ‘two , three , one , ½ve , four , ’ just as one must say ‘a , b , c , d , e , ’ not ‘c , a , e , d , b . ’ 66 Dædalus Winter 2004 Susan Carey on learning 5 In a forthcoming book I argue that the same bootstrapping process underlying this marvel - ous feat in childhood also accounts for the de - velopment in historical time , but that argument is beyond the scope of this brief paper . The stage is now set for a series of mappings between representations . Children may here make a wild analo - gy – that between the order of a particu - lar quantity within an ordered list , and that between this quantity’s order in a series of sets related by additional indi - viduals . These are two quite different bases of ordering – but if the child recog - nizes this analogy , she is in the position to make the crucial induction : For any word on the list whose quanti½cational meaning is known , the next word on the list refers to a set with another individ - ual added . Since the quanti½er for single individuals is ‘one , ’ this is the equivalent to the following induction : If number word X refers to a set with cardinal value n , the next number word in the list re - fers to a set with cardinal value n + 1 . This bootstrapping story provides dif - ferent answers for how the child learns the meaning of the word ‘two’ than for how she learns the meaning of ‘½ve . ’ According to the proposal , the child ascertains the meaning of ‘two’ from the resources that underlie natural lan - guage quanti½ers , and from the system of parallel individuation , whereas she comes to know the meaning of ‘½ve’ through the bootstrapping process – i . e . , that ‘½ve’ means ‘one more than four , which is one more than three . . . ’ – by integrating representations of natu - ral language quanti½ers with the exter - nal serial ordered count list . I began by sketching two systems of preverbal representation with numerical content : the analog magnitude system and the system of parallel individuation . You may have noticed that the analog magnitude system played no role in my bootstrapping story . It would be quite possible to imagine a role for this system in a slightly different bootstrapping pro - posal , and it may be that such a proposal would be empirically correct , at least for some children . We do know that chil - dren come to integrate their integer list with analog magnitudes , such that ‘½ve’ comes to mean both ‘one more than four , which is one more than three . . . ’ and ‘ – – – – – – – – – – , ’ the analog magnitude symbol for the cardinality of a set of ½ve individuals . This integration is undoubt - edly very important ; bootstrapping pro - vides richer representations precisely through integration of previously dis - tinct systems of representation . As important as the integration of the integer list representation with analog magnitude representations may be , there is good reason to believe that this integration is not part of the bootstrap - ping process through which the concept of positive integers is ½rst understood . Research suggests that it is not until after children have worked out how the count list represents number – in fact some six months later – that they know which analog magnitudes correspond to which numbers above ½ve in their count list . That ½nding – along with the fact that the precise meanings of number words are learned in the order ‘one , ’ then ‘two , ’ then ‘three , ’ followed by the induction of how the count list works – leads me to favor the bootstrapping proposal above . I doubt that anybody would deny that language helps us occupy the distinctive cognitive niche that we human beings enjoy . It is obvious that culturally con - structed knowledge is encoded in lan - guage and can then be passed on to new generations through verbal communica - tion – you can tell your children some - thing , saving them from having to dis - cover it themselves . Still , this account misses the equally obvious point that children are often unable to understand what we tell them , because they lack the concepts that underlie our words . The problem then becomes accounting for Dædalus Winter 2004 67 Bootstrapping & the origin of concepts how they acquire the relevant concepts they need to understand what we are telling them . I have argued that bootstrapping mechanisms provide part of the solution to this problem . In thinking about how bootstrapping might work , we are led to a fuller appreciation of the role of language in supporting the cultural transmission of knowledge . We cannot just teach our children to count and ex - pect that they will then know what ‘two’ or ‘½ve’ means . Learning such words , even without fully understanding them , creates a new structure , a structure that can then be ½lled in by mapping rela - tions between these novel words and other , familiar concepts . And so eventu - ally our children do know what ‘½ve’ means : through the medium of language and the bootstrapping process sketched here they have acquired a new concept . 68 Dædalus Winter 2004 Susan Carey on learning This article has been cited by : 1 . R . Cohen Kadosh , N . Muggleton , J . Silvanto , V . Walsh . 2010 . Double Dissociation of Format - Dependent and Number - Specific Neurons in Human Parietal Cortex . Cerebral Cortex . [ CrossRef ] 2 . Helen Cruz , Johan Smedt . 2010 . The Innateness Hypothesis and Mathematical Concepts . Topoi . [ CrossRef ] 3 . Jessica F . Cantlon , Sara Cordes , Melissa E . Libertus , Elizabeth M . Brannon . 2009 . Numerical abstraction : It ain ' t broke . Behavioral and Brain Sciences 32 : 3 - 4 , 331 . [ CrossRef ] 4 . Roi Cohen Kadosh , Vincent Walsh . 2009 . Non - abstract numerical representations in the IPS : Further support , challenges , and clarifications . Behavioral and Brain Sciences 32 : 3 - 4 , 356 . [ CrossRef ] 5 . R . Rugani , L . Fontanari , E . Simoni , L . Regolin , G . Vallortigara . 2009 . Arithmetic in newborn chicks . Proceedings of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences 276 : 1666 , 2451 - 2460 . [ CrossRef ] 6 . Nancy C . Jordan , Susan C . Levine . 2009 . Socioeconomic variation , number competence , and mathematics learning difficulties in young children . Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews 15 : 1 , 60 - 68 . [ CrossRef ] 7 . Rafael Núñez . 2009 . Numbers and Arithmetic : Neither Hardwired Nor Out ThereNumbers and Arithmetic : Neither Hardwired Nor Out There . Biological Theory 4 : 1 , 68 - 83 . [ Abstract ] [ PDF ] [ PDF Plus ] 8 . Susan Carey . 2009 . Math schemata and the origins of number representations . Behavioral and Brain Sciences 31 : 06 , 645 . [ CrossRef ] 9 . Stella F . Lourenco , Susan C . Levine . 2009 . Early numerical representations and the natural numbers : Is there really a complete disconnect ? . Behavioral and Brain Sciences 31 : 06 , 660 . [ CrossRef ] 10 . Lance J . Rips , Amber Bloomfield , Jennifer Asmuth . 2009 . From numerical concepts to concepts of number . Behavioral and Brain Sciences 31 : 06 , 623 . [ CrossRef ] 11 . Lance J . Rips , Amber Bloomfield , Jennifer Asmuth . 2009 . Dissonances in theories of number understanding . Behavioral and Brain Sciences 31 : 06 , 671 . [ CrossRef ] 12 . Justin Halberda , Michèle M . M . Mazzocco , Lisa Feigenson . 2008 . Individual differences in non - verbal number acuity correlate with maths achievement . Nature 455 : 7213 , 665 - 668 . [ CrossRef ] 13 . B . Butterworth , R . Reeve , F . Reynolds , D . Lloyd . 2008 . Numerical thought with and without words : Evidence from indigenous Australian children . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105 : 35 , 13179 - 13184 . [ CrossRef ] 14 . Teresa Iuculano , Joey Tang , Charles W . B . Hall , Brian Butterworth . 2008 . Core information processing deficits in developmental dyscalculia and low numeracy . Developmental Science 11 : 5 , 669 - 680 . [ CrossRef ] 15 . Charles Stafford . 2008 . Linguistic and cultural variables in the psychology of numeracy . Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 14 : s1 , S128 - S141 . [ CrossRef ] 16 . Véronique Izard , Ghislaine Dehaene - Lambertz , Stanislas Dehaene . 2008 . Distinct Cerebral Pathways for Object Identity and Number in Human Infants . PLoS Biology 6 : 2 , e11 . [ CrossRef ] 17 . Felicia Hurewitz , Anna Papafragou , Lila Gleitman , Rochel Gelman . 2006 . Asymmetries in the Acquisition of Numbers and Quantifiers . Language Learning and Development 2 : 2 , 77 - 96 . [ CrossRef ] 18 . Sid Kouider , Justin Halberda , Justin Wood , Susan Carey . 2006 . Acquisition of English Number Marking : The Singular - Plural Distinction . Language Learning and Development 2 : 1 , 1 - 25 . [ CrossRef ] 19 . Jessica F . Cantlon , Elizabeth M . Brannon , Elizabeth J . Carter , Kevin A . Pelphrey . 2006 . Functional Imaging of Numerical Processing in Adults and 4 - y - Old Children . PLoS Biology 4 : 5 , e125 . [ CrossRef ] 20 . Ara Norenzayan , Steven J . Heine . 2005 . Psychological Universals : What Are They and How Can We Know ? . Psychological Bulletin 131 : 5 , 763 - 784 . [ CrossRef ] 21 . Irene M . Pepperberg , Jesse D . Gordon . 2005 . Number Comprehension by a Grey Parrot ( Psittacus erithacus ) , Including a Zero - Like Concept . Journal of Comparative Psychology 119 : 2 , 197 - 209 . [ CrossRef ]