Chromatin Mechanics Dictates Subdiffusion and Coarsening Dynamics of Embedded Condensates Daniel S . W . Lee 1 , 2 , 3 , Ned S . Wingreen 1 , 3 , Clifford P . Brangwynne 1 , 2 , 4 * 1 Lewis - Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics , Princeton University , Princeton , New Jersey 08544 , USA 2 Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering , Princeton University 3 Department of Molecular Biology , Princeton University 4 The Howard Hughes Medical Institute * Corresponding author , cbrangwy @ princeton . edu Abstract DNA is organized into chromatin , a complex polymeric material which stores information and controls gene expression . An emerging mechanism for biological organization , particularly within the crowded nucleus , is biomolecular phase separation into condensed droplets of protein and nucleic acids . However , the way in which chromatin impacts the dynamics of phase separation and condensate formation is poorly understood . Here , we utilize a powerful optogenetic strategy to examine the interplay of droplet coarsening with the surrounding viscoelastic chromatin network . We demonstrate that droplet growth dynamics are directly inhibited by the chromatin - dense environment , which gives rise to an anomalously slow coarsening exponent , 𝛽 ~ 0 . 12 , contrasting with the classical prediction of 𝛽 ~ 1 3⁄ . Using scaling arguments and simulations , we show how this arrested growth can arise due to subdiffusion of individual condensates , predicting 𝛽 ~ 𝛼 / 3 , where 𝛼 is the diffusion exponent . Tracking the fluctuating motion of condensates within chromatin reveals a subdiffusive exponent , 𝛼 ~ 0 . 5 , which explains the anomalous coarsening behavior and is also consistent with Rouse - like dynamics arising from the entangled chromatin . Our findings have implications for the biophysical regulation of the size and shape of biomolecular condensates , and suggest that condensate emulsions can be used to probe the viscoelastic mechanical environment within living cells . Introduction Liquid - liquid phase separation ( LLPS ) has emerged as a common assembly mechanism within living cells 1 , 2 . LLPS drives formation of a multitude of biomolecular condensates such as nucleoli 3 , stress granules 4 , and P granules 5 . Phase separation of proteins typically relies on multivalent interactions , and many efforts have been made to understand the role of self - interactions via intrinsically disordered protein regions ( IDRs ) 6 , and heterotypic interactions , often mediated by folded protein - protein interaction domains and oligomerized RNA ( or other substrate ) binding domains . The condensates that result from these interactions are multicomponent structures , which range from compositionally homogeneous liquid - like structures , to multiphase liquids and kinetically arrested gel states 7 – 9 . Their structural features and material properties are thought to enable a diversity of functions , ranging from increasing reaction rates by concentrating reactants , to inhibiting reactivity through sequestration , and even structurally rearranging their environment 1 , 10 . Many phase - separated condensates appear to exhibit stable sizes dependent on cell type 11 , 12 . It is unclear how these sizes are maintained , since liquid compartments should not have an intrinsic size scale . Rather , given enough time , individual liquid condensates should coalesce to form a single , large droplet . In general , following a full quench of the system , i . e . , after nucleation and depletion of the dilute phase , the mean droplet radius is expected to evolve as a power law with exponent 𝛽 , such that 〈𝑅〉 ~ 𝑡 𝛽 where 𝛽 = 1 3⁄ . Two distinct processes identically predict this exponent : Lifshitz - Slyozov Wagner ( LSW ) theory describes growth by Ostwald ripening 13 , and Brownian - motion driven coalescence ( BMC ) describes how individual droplets collide and fuse 14 . Droplet growth obeying this 1 / 3 power law has been observed in a variety of biological systems , including lipid membranes 15 , in vitro protein droplets , and nucleoli in C . elegans embryos 16 , but distinguishing between the two mechanisms is not always possible . In addition to the ambiguity in distinguishing these two processes , our understanding of the physics governing condensate coarsening within living cells is further complicated by the strongly viscoelastic nature of the intracellular environment . Indeed , droplet movements and interactions are expected to be strongly impacted by their viscoelastic environment . A particularly striking example of this interplay is found in Xenopus laevis oocytes , whose nuclei contain hundreds of nucleoli , which are strongly constrained by an F - actin scaffold that only relaxes on very long time scales , giving rise to a broad power - law distribution of nucleolar sizes 3 . Upon actin disruption , the nucleoli sediment under gravity and undergo large scale coalescence into a single massive nucleolus 17 . In human cell lines , nucleoli exhibit liquid - like properties of formation and fusion but vary in their shapes and sizes 18 . Interestingly , these size and shape variations are tied to nuclear processes such as transcription and chromatin condensation 19 , suggesting that active processes can influence the properties and distribution of phase separated condensates . Taken together , these findings are consistent with the shapes and sizes of nuclear condensates being strongly influenced by their physical environment . In addition to nucleoli , the nucleus contains dozens of different types of condensates , including Cajal bodies , paraspeckles , PML bodies , and nuclear speckles , each of which is intimately associated with the surrounding chromatin network . Chromatin is the active polymeric material into which DNA and its associated proteins assemble and is packed into the nucleus at dense volume fractions , with measurements ranging from 12 to 52 % 20 . Chromatin can be considered a continuous material on the length scale of microscopically visible droplets : electron microscopy images 20 , as well as experiments utilizing microinjected fluorescent dextrans 21 , both suggest an average chromatin pore size of less than 100 nm 22 , although chromatin exhibits significant heterogeneity on micron length scales 23 . Micromanipulation of extracted nuclei has also revealed that chromatin exhibits its own force response independent of the nuclear lamina , which has been the focus of most nuclear mechanics studies . The mechanical response of chromatin appears to depend on its epigenetic modifications and degree of compaction 24 , although chromatin’s frequency - dependent viscoelastic response has not been studied in detail . Despite the clear functional importance of understanding the link between the dynamics of phase separation and the surrounding viscoelastic genetic material , very few studies have examined this connection . Most studies to date have relied on simplified in vitro systems using purified components in an aqueous buffer . As a result , the impact of the cellular milieu on phase separation has generally been unexplored , partly due to a lack of tools for interrogating phase separation in living cells 25 . However , recent advances have led to the development of optogenetic approaches , which utilize light to control intracellular phase separation through oligomerization of disordered and substrate binding domains 7 , 22 , 26 , 27 . Experiments using these systems have suggested that nuclear condensates preferentially form in relatively chromatin - poor regions and tend to exclude chromatin as they grow 22 . However , the physics governing the relationship between chromatin’s material properties , and the formation , mobility , growth , and ultimate size distribution of embedded condensates , remains unclear . Here , we utilize the biomimetic Corelet system 27 to generate model IDR - based condensates and examine their coarsening dynamics and interactions with chromatin in living cells . We demonstrate that coarsening in the nucleus is significantly slower than classical theory predicts , and occurs primarily via coalescence , rather than via Ostwald ripening . Using particle tracking experiments , we show that this slow coarsening results from strongly subdiffusive condensate motion , in quantitative agreement with a theoretical prediction relating the coarsening and diffusive exponents . The growth dynamics of embedded condensates are thus sensitively dependent on the viscoelasticity of the surrounding chromatin , representing a novel emulsion - based readout of the mechanical environment within living cells . Results Optogenetically engineered condensates exhibit slow coarsening dynamics . To study interactions between proteinaceous condensates and chromatin , we utilized the two - component Corelet system 27 ( Fig . 1 ) , to control condensate formation in living cells . Corelets are based on a ferritin core composed of 24 subunits each fused to an iLiD domain , and a phase separation - driving IDR fused to sspB , iLiD’s optogenetic heterodimerization partner . Here , we used the IDR from the Fused in Sarcoma ( FUS ) protein , a member of the FET family of transcription factors 28 . We expressed these constructs in human osteosarcoma ( U2OS ) cells , which contain nuclei typical of mammalian cells , and yet are experimentally tractable , particularly for microscopy studies . Consistent with previous work 27 , upon blue light activation , iLiD and sspB bind , resulting in oligomerized IDR assemblies that phase separate above a threshold of concentration and valence ( degree of oligomerization ) . These model phase - separated nuclear condensates are visible within seconds of blue light activation , providing a powerful platform for spatially and temporally interrogating the impact of the viscoelastic environment on their dynamic coarsening behavior . We first sought to characterize droplet coarsening in live nuclei , by activating cells and measuring Corelet droplets over the course of 105 minutes . At very early times , coarsening could be convoluted with nucleation and growth , initially driven by the supersaturated dilute phase , with an early - stage growth exponent predicted to be ½ 29 . We found that the dilute - phase intensity rapidly decreased and began stabilizing after roughly 3 minutes of activation ; a slow subsequent linear decrease is likely due to photobleaching ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . We thus wait until after this transient dilute - phase equilibration and then probe the coarsening dynamics by determining the mean radius of droplets over time ( Fig . 1d ) . Averaging over cells , we find a consistent power - law exponent of 𝛽 = 0 . 12 ± 0 . 01 ( Fig . 1e ) . This low exponent is surprising , given that both Ostwald ripening and Brownian motion coalescence - dominated coarsening predict 𝛽 = 0 . 33 , which is commonly observed in nonliving systems 15 . Our results are not an artifact of the small size of droplets , as similar results were found by using integrated intensity as a proxy for size ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . Moreover , the observed heterogeneity across cells in initial droplet sizes is accounted for by variation in the expression of protein constituents ; individual fits on a per - cell basis show that scaling behavior follows a similar exponent , with more noise at low volume fraction ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . Droplet coarsening is dominated by coalescence events . To elucidate the mechanism underpinning this anomalously slow growth , we investigated the relevance of two possible scenarios of droplet coarsening , Ostwald ripening ( i . e . LSW ) and Brownian - motion - driven coalescence ( BMC ) ( Fig . 2a , b ) . While both mechanisms are driven by the minimization of surface energy , Ostwald ripening would occur via continuous growth / shrinkage of droplets , while a merger - dominated process would take place via discrete jumps in size associated with collision events . Consequently , we tracked pairs of droplets that merged , finding that their sizes were stable for minutes before merger , at which point the resulting merged droplet attained the size predicted by volume conservation and remained that size for minutes in the absence of further collisions ( Fig . 2c ) . This behavior was consistent over 29 apparent mergers analyzed across 18 cells , based on single bookending frames independently segmented before and after identified in - plane merger events ( Fig . 2d ) , suggesting that growth over the entire bookended time interval ( 648±62 seconds on average ) was accounted for by coalescence . These data are consistent with BMC - dominated coarsening , albeit with an anomalously low exponent . However , we reasoned that Ostwald ripening could also play a role , but would manifest relatively infrequently , in shrinkage and growth of unequal - sized droplets . To create a particularly polydisperse distribution , we activated nuclei with a low - intensity spatial gradient of blue light for 30 seconds , resulting in nuclei with droplets accumulated on one side and a local enrichment of protein in the dilute phase on the activated side , consistent with previously observed ‘diffusive capture’ of core molecules 9 . Switching to uniform blue light stimulation resulted in fast equilibration of the dilute phase ( < 10 seconds , Supplementary Fig . 3 ) and therefore a uniform influx of newly - activated molecules . Within minutes , we observed nucleation and growth of droplets on the previously unactivated side ( Fig . 2e , f ) . We reasoned that if Ostwald ripening played an important role in the growth of our droplets , any small , newly nucleated droplets would quickly vanish since ripening would favor the preexisting ones , which are on the order of 3 - 5 fold larger in radius . However , we observed the opposite , finding that the new droplets grew to a similar size as the preexisting ones . Thus , we conclude that late - stage growth of our droplets is primarily driven by droplet coalescence events . Coarsening exponent is predicted to depend on diffusive exponent . Having empirically concluded that the coarsening of droplets is primarily driven by coalescence , we sought to quantitively explain the anomalously slow coarsening exponent . We therefore revisited scaling arguments from the literature 15 which assume ordinary diffusion of droplets . More generally , the rate at which droplets collide should depend on their mean squared displacement ( MSD ) , i . e . 〈𝑥 2 〉 ~ 𝐷 𝑟 Δ𝑡 𝛼 where α is the diffusion exponent ( α = 1 for ordinary diffusion , α < 1 for subdiffusive motion , e . g . in a viscoelastic environment ) . At fixed droplet volume fraction ( i . e . , having reached a steady - state dilute - phase concentration ) , the typical spacing 𝑙 between droplets is related to their typical radius 𝑟 by 𝑙 ~ 𝑟 . Then , assuming that droplets collide over a time scale at which their mean - squared displacement equals their typical spacing , i . e . 〈𝑥 2 〉 ~ 𝑙 2 , and assuming a diffusion coefficient 𝐷 𝑟 ~ 𝑟 −1 as in Stokes drag , we find that 𝑟 ( 𝑡 ) ~ 𝑡 𝛼 3⁄ , i . e . , 𝛽 = 𝛼 3⁄ , confirming our intuition that subdiffusing droplets should coarsen slowly . Note that , in the case of ordinary diffusion ( 𝛼 = 1 ) , we recover the expected 𝛽 = 1 3 ⁄ . To examine the validity of this scaling argument , we performed simulations on the coarsening of subdiffusing droplets . We generated 500 droplets of identical initial radius , randomly placed in a 3D continuous space with periodic boundary conditions at a volume fraction of 5 % . Droplets diffused according to fractional Brownian motion ( fBM ) , with a step size inversely proportional to their radius such that 𝐷 𝑟 ~ 𝑟 −1 . After initial placement and subsequently after each timestep , overlapping droplets were merged with volume conserved and the new droplet placed at their center of mass . Unsurprisingly , the more subdiffusive the motion , the slower the coarsening of the droplet size distribution ( Fig . 3a ) . The average droplet radius over time was calculated for each simulation ( Fig . 3b ) , and the coarsening exponent 𝛽 was obtained by fitting a power law starting at t = 10 2 . We found that 𝛽 ≈ 0 . 3𝛼 , in good agreement with our scaling argument . Droplets exhibit subdiffusive motion due to constraints from surrounding chromatin . Our simulations and scaling argument suggest that the surprisingly small coarsening exponent 𝛽 could arise from subdiffusive droplet dynamics . Since the nucleus contains a dense chromatin network , we reasoned that droplets may indeed exhibit subdiffusive dynamics due to the presence of chromatin . We therefore first examined the physical interactions between the droplets and chromatin . To generate droplets of a size significantly above the diffraction limit we applied a local light activation protocol . We illuminated an approximately 2 - micron diameter circular region for 10 minutes , in cells stained with Hoechst 33342 , a marker of bulk DNA density . Consistent with previous experiments using the related CasDrop system , we observed depletion of the DNA marker from the droplet , suggesting that chromatin is largely excluded from the droplets ( Fig . 4a , b ) . We found that IDRs from several transcriptionally relevant proteins , including those from HNRNPA , TAF15 , and BRD4 , show a similar chromatin - exclusion effect ( Fig . 4c ) . Qualitatively , all these large droplets moved relatively little , over minutes of observation . Likewise , following global activation for well over an hour , smaller droplets remained distributed throughout the nucleus , with their spatial position changing very little ( Fig . 1c ) . We therefore surmised that droplets are constrained by the surrounding chromatin network . To quantitatively test the predicted relationship between the coarsening and diffusive exponents , i . e . 𝛽 = 𝛼 / 3 , we performed particle tracking on individual droplets to characterize their motion . Droplets were tracked over two timescales , at a rate of 60 ms / frame for 2 minutes and later at a rate of 3 seconds / frame for 100 minutes . The plotted MSDs were calculated by first time averaging within trajectories and then ensemble averaging over all droplets for multiple cells . Over long timescales ( several minutes ) , we found that bulk translation of the nucleus appeared to increase the MSD ; the diffusive exponent was therefore taken from the early times . We find that droplets do , in fact , exhibit subdiffusive motion : from a fit over lag times Δ𝑡 ranging from 60ms to 12s , we obtain an exponent of approximately 𝛼 = 0 . 48 ± . 08 . This anomalous exponent 𝛼 was calculated using ensemble - averaged MSDs taken from droplets generated with a global activation protocol and relatively low variation in size . Since 𝛼 could depend on size , for example if droplet size were comparable to the chromatin mesh size , we sought to examine this aspect further . We applied local activation as described above to generate droplets of greatly varying sizes ( ranging from approximately 200 to 1000 nm in radius ) ( Fig . 6a inset ) . After switching to global activation , the sizes of these droplets were estimated , and they were tracked for 5 minutes at a frequency of 60 ms . Trajectories were binned based upon size and MSDs , were ensemble averaged , and then fit ( Fig . 6a ) . The subdiffusive exponent α was approximately 0 . 5 for all sizes ( Fig . 6b ) , consistent with a chromatin mesh size below the radius of all interrogated droplets , in agreement with previous estimates 22 . This data also allows us to examine the dependence of the anomalous diffusive coefficient on droplet size ( Fig 6c ) . Interestingly , rather than exhibiting the usual Stokes dependence , 𝐷 𝑟 ~ 𝑟 −1 , the best fit power - law yields 𝐷 𝑟 ~ 𝑟 −0 . 44±0 . 18 with a coefficient of determination of 𝑅 2 = 0 . 45 , compared to a 𝑅 2 = −0 . 26 for a power - law slope of - 1 . Discussion In this study , we sought to understand how the size distribution of intracellular condensates is impacted by their local mechanical environment . We utilized a model system comprised of light - activated condensates , nucleated within the dense viscoelastic chromatin environment in the nucleus of living cells . Consistent with prior results 22 , we found that droplets assembled using intrinsically disordered protein regions ( IDRs ) from transcriptional proteins tend to localize within chromatin - poor regions , and exclude chromatin as they grow . We found that these model condensates remain relatively stable , even over the span of hours , failing to coarsen into a single large domain , which would be expected for a simple phase - separating system . We find that the viscoelastic chromatin network appears to underlie subdiffusive motion of droplets , which hinders droplet coalescence , giving rise to an anomalously small coarsening exponent . The two primary mechanisms for droplet coarsening are droplet coalescence ( BMC ) and Ostwald ripening ( LSW ) , both of which predict a coarsening exponent of 𝛽 = 1 3⁄ , significantly larger than our measurement of 𝛽 = 0 . 12 ± 0 . 01 . We provide evidence that Ostwald ripening does not strongly contribute to the coarsening of droplets . We attribute the lack of Ostwald ripening to a low surface tension , which is expected to be on the order of 𝛾 ~ 𝑘𝑇 / ℓ 2 where ℓ is a characteristic molecular length scale 30 , which for macromolecules ( i . e . biomolecules ) is relatively large . Indeed , previous work on nucleolar protein condensates in and out of cells suggest that their surface tension is on the order of 10 - 7 N / m 18 , 31 ; considering parameters for FUS N Corelets 27 , we estimate that Ostwald ripening should drive droplet growth at a rate of 𝑑𝑅 𝑑𝑡 ~ 10 −9 µm / s for droplets with an initial radius of 300nm . By contrast , we estimate a significantly larger initial growth rate due to subdiffusive merger : based on an average initial droplet spacing of 1 . 3 µm ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ) , and our tracking data ( Fig . 5b ) , we obtain an approximate growth rate of 6 × 10 −6 µm / s ( Supplementary Note ) . Calculating the average growth rate from our coarsening data ( Fig . 1d ) , we obtain an average growth rate of 2 . 4 ± 0 . 3 × 10 −5 µm / s , within an order of magnitude of this latter , independent estimate . Ostwald ripening is thus minimal , and instead the coarsening dynamics clearly appear to be dominated by droplet coalescence events , which we reasoned may be retarded by chromatin viscoelasticity . Indeed , from scaling arguments , and our simulation of a fractional Brownian walk , the classic 𝛽 = 1 / 3 prediction for BMC can be extended to subdiffusive random walks , yielding 𝛽 = 𝛼 / 3 , where 𝛼 is the anomalous diffusion exponent . Consistent with this picture , tracking the motion of our model condensates reveals a high degree of subdiffusive constraint , with 𝛼 = . 48 . From this measurement , the 𝛽 = 𝛼 / 3 prediction of 𝛽 ~ 0 . 16 , is relatively close to the measured value of 𝛽 = 0 . 12 . The 30 % deviation between these numbers could reflect additional physics which we do not account for . For example , the dependence of the diffusive prefactor on droplet size may be non - Stokesian . However , our best fit yields 𝐷 𝑟 ~ 𝑟 −0 . 5 , which invites a correction of the scaling argument to 𝛽 = 𝛼 / 2 . 5 ( which was confirmed in simulation , Supplementary Fig . 4 ) , increasing the deviation from theory . Instead , we attribute the lower value of the ripening exponent 𝛽 to caging : on very long timescales , we anticipate that the MSD should saturate , due to the presence of boundaries ( e . g . heterochromatic domains ) , further slowing the merger process . This saturation of the MSD may take place on very long timescales which were not captured here due to drift of the nuclei and stage ; it is also possible that drift contributed to a small overestimation of the MSD even after correction by image registration . We also note that we tracked condensates and considered them to be entirely independent , while local compressive stresses could cause droplets to slow down when in the vicinity of one another but still merge rapidly when the cavities they induce in the chromatin meet , explaining correlated motions observed in endogenous organelles immediately preceding merger 19 , 32 . Interestingly , while the strongly viscoelastic nature of the surrounding chromatin thus appears to retard droplet coalescence , it may also underlie our finding that droplet coalescence is dominant compared to Ostwald ripening . Previous work on synthetic ( nonbiological ) systems has demonstrated that Ostwald ripening can be suppressed by elastic constraints , stabilizing small droplets even in the presence of large ones 33 , 34 . Though surface tension drives a preference for the growth of larger droplets , when embedded in a porous elastic matrix , smaller droplets result in smaller deformations and therefore potentially lower energetic costs , dependent on the relative magnitudes of surface tension and matrix elasticity . It has also been shown that the spring constant of chromatin for micron - scale perturbations is ~ 10 −3 N / m , four orders of magnitude larger than its surface tension , suggesting that elastic forces could further slow Ostwald ripening in the nucleus . The intimate link between droplet coarsening dynamics and chromatin viscoelasticity underscores the potential for utilizing these model condensates as passive microrheological probes . Nucleoli and other endogenous condensates have been proposed as probes in a similar fashion 19 , but their dynamics are confounded by essential biological processes , such as nucleation at specific sites and nonequilibrium activity , and by their multicomponent nature . By contrast , our engineered optogenetic droplets can be assembled from IDRs lacking specific interaction domains , and the resulting probe ( droplet ) size can be controlled using local activation protocols . Within the nucleus , our optogenetic droplets report on the viscoelastic nature of the entangled chromatin matrix . We find strongly subdiffusive dynamics , with 𝛼 = 0 . 48 and 𝐷 𝑟 = 𝑟 −0 . 44±0 . 18 , roughly consistent with the Rouse polymer model , which predicts 𝛼 = 0 . 5 and 𝐷 𝑟 = 𝑟 −0 . 5 . The Rouse model describes the dynamics of a polymer of beads connected by springs and has been used to describe subdiffusion in other biological systems 35 ; we speculate that a droplet immersed in a viscoelastic gel and far above the mesh size should exhibit similar dynamics . Future studies will apply this technique to interrogate the mechanical properties of chromatin under varying perturbations . Our findings also have implications for the assembly of endogenous membraneless organelles . Cajal bodies and nucleoli , associated with relatively chromatin - poor regions , have also been shown to exhibit subdiffusive dynamics , which , moreover , are sensitive to drug treatment , e . g . , ATP depletion and transcriptional inhibition 36 , 37 . Similarly , nuclear speckles display increased mobility as well as increased merger frequency upon transcriptional inhibition and subsequent chromatin condensation . Thus , chromatin condensation and mechanics likely influence the sizes of endogenous membraneless organelles . Future studies will investigate the roles of nonequilibrium biological processes and of specific interactions in the interplay between chromatin mechanics and phase separation . Acknowledgements This work was supported by the NIH 4D Nucleome Program ( U01 DA040601 , C . P . B . ) , the Howard Hughes Medical Institute ( C . P . B . ) , and the National Science Foundation , through the Center for the Physics of Biological Function ( PHY - 1734030 ) and the Graduate Research Fellowship Program ( DCE - 1656466 , D . S . W . L . ) . We thank Joshua Riback , Pierre Ronceray , Shunsuke Shimobayashi , Amy Strom , Yaojun Zhang , and the rest of the Brangwynne and Wingreen groups for constructive comments on this work . We also thank Sarah Keller ( University of Washington , Department of Chemistry ) for useful discussions . We acknowledge Evangelos Gatzogiannis for microscopy assistance and Katherine Rittenbach and the Molecular Biology Flow Cytometry Resource Facility , which is partially supported by the Cancer Institute of New Jersey Cancer Center Support Grant ( P30CA072720 ) , for assistance with cell - sorting experiments . Methods Cell culture U2OS ( a kind gift from Mark Groudine lab , Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center ) and Lenti - X 293T ( Takara ) cells were cultured in growth medium consisting of Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium ( GIBCO ) , 10 % fetal bovine serum ( Atlanta Biologicals ) , and 10 U / mL Penicillin - Streptomycin ( GIBCO ) , and incubated at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 in a humidified incubator . Lentiviral transduction Lentivirus was produced by transfecting the transfer plasmids , pCMV - dR8 . 91 , and pMD2 . G ( 9 : 8 : 1 , mass ratio ) into LentiX cells grown to approximately 80 % confluency in 6 - well plates using FuGENE HD Transfection Reagent ( Promega ) per manufacturer’s protocol . A total of 3 μg plasmid and 9 μL of transfection reagent were delivered into each well . After 60 - 72 hours , supernatant containing viral particles was harvested and filtered with 0 . 45 μm filter ( Pall Life Sciences ) . Supernatant was immediately used for transduction or aliquoted and stored at −80°C . U2OS were seeded at 10 % confluency in 96 - well plates and 20 - 200 μL of filtered viral supernatant was added to the cells . Media containing virus was replaced with fresh growth medium 24 hr post - infection . Infected cells were imaged no earlier than 72 hr after infection . Cell line generation To generate a population of cells stably expressing H2B - miRFP670 , cells were infected in a 6 - well plate , transferred to 60mm plate , and finally sorted with a flow cytometer ( BD Biosciences ) , with gating for single - cells intermediate to high levels of miRFP670 . The sorted cell line was then infected with viral supernatant as described above to express Corelet components . Gradient activation experiments were performed in this cell line so that the entire nucleus was visible at all times . Hoechst Staining Media was removed from 96 well plate and replaced with fresh media containing 1ug / mL Hoechst 33542 ( Thermo ) and incubated for 20 minutes prior to imaging . Cell fixation Cells infected with lentivirus and plated on a 96 well plate as described above were placed on an 96 well plate LED array ( Amuza ) for 15 minutes , after which media was aspirated and 4 % paraformaldehyde ( Electron Microscopy Sciences , diluted in PBS ) was added and the plate remained on the LED array for 15 more minutes . Cells were then imaged and droplets tracked as otherwise described . MSDs were calculated and used to reflect systematic experimental error in the live - cell data . Microscopy All images were taken with a spinning - disk ( Yokogawa CSU - X1 ) confocal microscope with a 100X oil immersion Apo TIRF objective ( NA 1 . 49 ) and an Andor DU - 897 EMCCD camera on a Nikon Eclipse Ti body . A 488nm laser for imaging GFP and global activation , and a 561 was used laser for imaging mCherry . The imaging chamber was maintained at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 ( Okolab ) with a 96 well plate adaptor . Local activation was performed by using a Mightex Polygon digital micromirror device ( DMD ) to pattern blue light ( 488nm ) stimulation from a Lumencor SpectraX light engine . All image acquisition was performed using Nikon Elements Advance Research software . Image Analysis Image Segmentation All images were analyzed in Fiji ( ImageJ 1 . 52p ) 38 and MATLAB 2019b ( Mathworks ) . Individual cells were cropped by hand and saved as . tifs , which were analyzed in MATLAB . Briefly , droplets were segmented in the GFP channel by using Otsu’s algorithm to identify the nucleus in the first frame ; an intensity threshold was defined as two standard deviations above the mean of the initial nuclear GFP intensity . This threshold was applied to all following frames to identify droplets ; regions 4 pixels and smaller were discarded . Then , r egionprops was used to identify individual domains and calculate their area . Radii were calculated by dividing the area by π and taking the square root . To calculate volume fraction , the dilute phase of the nucleus was identified by applying a threshold at 3 standard deviations above background concentration ( characterized by imaging a sample with no fluorescence ) . In instances where no initial , pre - activation green channel was available ( e . g . , local activation experiments ) , Otsu’s method ( imbinarize in MATLAB ) was used to determine an intensity threshold for droplets . For gradient activation experiments , Otsu’s method was used to segment nuclei in the miRFP channel , and again applied to pixels identified as being inside the nuclei to identify droplets on a per - frame basis . All results were validated by manual inspection . Analysis in Figures 1c , 1d , 2c , 2d , and 5 utilized the same raw data . Particle Tracking and Registration To track particles image registration was first performed to correct for rigid body motion using the StackReg plugin in Fiji . Subpixel tracking was then performed in Trackmate 39 using a Laplacian of Gaussians filter - based detector and a blob diameter of 500nm ( or an appropriate size for local activation experiments with large droplets ) , a threshold of 250 . Trajectories were then constructed using the simple LAP tracking with max linking and gap - closing distances of 500nm and no frame gap accepted . Only trajectories spanning the entire movie ( or in the case of the 100 minute movies , at least half the movie ) were accepted . Coordinates were then loaded into MATLAB to calculate MSD and cross - correlations . Simulations Simulations were performed in MATLAB on the Della cluster ( Princeton Research Computing ) . First , 500 droplets of identical radius ( 1AU ) were generated in 3D with periodic boundary conditions . Box size was set based on the volume fraction ( generally set at 5 % ) . Overlapping droplets were then merged . Droplet merger was implemented by randomly selecting a pair of overlapping droplets and replacing them with one new droplet centered at their center of mass . The size of the new droplet was size determined by volume conservation of the original pair . This was iterated until no pairs of overlapping droplets remained . Then , for each droplet , a fractional Brownian motion trajectory with the appropriate 𝛼 was synthesized ( wfbm ) for the appropriate number of timesteps ( generally set to 10 4 ) . The step size was set such that a droplet of radius 1 AU would diffuse an average of 1AU in 3D per timestep . At each timepoint , each droplet proceeded one step along the synthesized trajectory , scaled by the inverse of the droplet size in the case of 𝐷 𝑟 ~ 1 / 𝑟 . Droplets were merged as previously described . Merged droplets ‘inherited’ the predetermined trajectory from one of their parent droplets ( chosen arbitrarily ) , moving with the appropriate step size . This was repeated for the duration of the synthesized trajectories . Data Availability All data from this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request . Code Availability All custom code used in this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request . Figure 1 Fig . 1 : Coarsening dynamics of light - activated protein condensates in living cells . a , In the presence of blue light , the Corelet system recruits IDRs ( red ) to the ferritin cores ( green ) , to drive phase separation in the nucleus of living cells . b , Within seconds of exposure to blue light , droplets nucleate and grow . c , Top images show snapshots of FUS Corelet condensates at indicated times . Main plot shows average droplet radii for 18 cells calculated over 105 minutes and plotted starting 3 minutes after activation . The size distribution for 8 cells with similar supersaturation ( mean supersaturation of 0 . 77 with standard deviation 0 . 08 ) was taken at timepoints of 5 , 45 , and 105 minutes . d , The average radius of droplets per cell 〈𝑅 / 𝑅 0 〉 was plotted over time , after normalizing by the radius 𝑅 0 of each droplet at the defined t 0 of 3 minutes , revealing a power law with exponent approximately 0 . 12 ( solid red line ) . Error was propagated as standard error of the mean ( SEM ) . Dashed red lines have slopes of 0 . 15 and 0 . 10 , respectively . Figure 2 Fig . 2 : Droplet growth is dominated by coalescence . a , b , Emulsions generally coarsen by Ostwald ripening or by mergers , respectively characterized by continuous and discrete growth . c , Example ( plot with select corresponding images ) showing condensates are stable over long timescales , remaining the same size for minutes and then coming into contact ( cyan and green points ) , merging , and settling at a stable size consistent with volume conservation ( black line shows predicted conserved volume of final droplet ; uncertainty of prediction is propagated from standard errors of the time - averaged means of the original two droplets ) . d , Volume conservation accounts for size changes over many collisions ( n = 29 ) . e , Gradient activations were used to generate polydisperse droplets . Following 30 seconds of activation with an intensity gradient of blue light , droplets formed primarily on the high intensity side of the nucleus . After switching to global activation , new smaller droplets nucleated and grew on the other side of the nucleus . f , Quantification of the experiment described in e over 10 cells . Droplets were segmented and binned by location along the axis of the nucleus ; droplet size was normalized for each cell and averaged over cells . Error bars are SEM . Figure 3 Fig . 3 : Simulations quantitatively demonstrate the scaling relation between the diffusive exponent and the coarsening exponent . a , 500 droplets were placed in a three dimensional box at a volume fraction of 0 . 05 and allowed to diffuse with a specified subdiffusive exponent 𝛼 , and merge upon collision . b , Values of α were chosen ranging from 0 . 3 to 1 ; for each of twenty replicates per condition , the average radius of the droplets was calculated , normalized to the average at t = 0 . Shaded region indicates standard error of the mean . c , For each simulation condition , the coarsening exponent was calculated by fitting a power law starting at t = 10 2 and plotted against the input diffusive exponent 𝛼 . Figure 4 Fig . 4 : Droplets occupy chromatin - poor regions . a , Droplets can be locally ‘written’ in specific locations by patterning blue light stimulation . Co - staining with Hoechst 33342 demonstrates that droplets are generally associated with chromatin - sparse regions . b , Radially averaged intensity profiles of the Hoechst and droplet channels demonstrate that the chromatin is depleted within the droplet ( averaged over 5 droplets ) . c , Identical analyses on droplets formed using three other IDRs ( BRD4dN , TAF15 N , HNRNPA C ) reveal similar exclusion of chromatin . Error bars show SEM over 5 , 7 , and 5 droplets respectively . Figure 5 Fig . 5 : Droplets within the nucleus exhibit strongly subdiffusive motion . a , FUS Corelet condensates were tracked at a framerate of 60ms per frame for two minutes ( starting 3 minutes after activation ) . They were then tracked for the following 100 minutes at 3s / frame . Only droplets with continuously visible trajectories were tracked , with a minimum duration of 2 minutes in the short phase and 50 minutes in the long phase . b , Mean squared displacements for the short and long tracking phases are shown in blue and magenta respectively , ensemble averaged over 18 cells . Shaded region indicates standard error of the mean . The magenta MSD follows a similar slope but demonstrates nonlinear increase , likely due to stage and whole - nucleus drift . Noise floor ( black data points ) was estimated to be ~ 30𝑛𝑚 by applying the same tracking protocol on fixed cells , which exhibited similar long - term increases ; fitting the MSD of the fixed condensates gave an exponent of . 07 which was used as a conservative estimate of the uncertainty for the diffusive exponent . Figure 6 Fig . 6 : Condensates can be used as microrheological probes of the cellular environment . a , Local activation protocols generate size - selectable stable droplets ( inset image ) . After initial stimulation , droplets were imaged for 5 minutes at 60ms / frame and tracked for the entire movie . Trajectories were binned by droplet size and time - and ensembled - averaged to produce an MSD for each size bin . Shaded region indicates standard error of the mean . b , Subdiffusive exponent versus droplet size . Horizontal error bar is standard deviation of droplet sizes in each bin ; vertical error bar is 95 % CI of mean diffusive exponent from power - law fits . c , The effective diffusion coefficient decreases with droplet size . Best fit line ( solid ) is 𝐷 𝑟 ~ 𝑟 - 0 . 44±0 . 18 ( standard error of the fit ; 𝑅 2 = 0 . 45 ) ; a 𝐷 𝑟 ~ 𝑟 −1 reference line is also shown ( dashed line ; 𝑅 2 = −0 . 26 ) . Horizontal error bar is standard deviation of droplet sizes in each bin ; vertical error bar is 95 % CI of effective diffusion coefficient from power - law fits . For this fit , the smallest point (  𝑅  = 0 . 13 ± 0 . 3𝜇𝑚 ; plotted in grey ) was excluded because its standard deviation overlapped with the diffraction limit significantly . References 1 . Shin , Y . & Brangwynne , C . P . Liquid phase condensation in cell physiology and disease . Science 357 , eaaf4382 ( 2017 ) . 2 . Banani , S . F . , Lee , H . O . , Hyman , A . A . & Rosen , M . K . Biomolecular condensates : organizers of cellular biochemistry . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 18 , 285 – 298 ( 2017 ) . 3 . Brangwynne , C . P . , Mitchison , T . J . & Hyman , A . A . Active liquid - like behavior of nucleoli determines their size and shape in Xenopus laevis oocytes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 108 , 4334 – 4339 ( 2011 ) . 4 . Ivanov , P . , Kedersha , N . & Anderson , P . Stress Granules and Processing Bodies in Translational Control . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 11 , a032813 ( 2019 ) . 5 . Brangwynne , C . P . et al . Germline P granules are liquid droplets that localize by controlled dissolution / condensation . Science 324 , 1729 – 32 ( 2009 ) . 6 . Brangwynne , C . P . , Tompa , P . & Pappu , R . V . Polymer physics of intracellular phase transitions . Nat . Phys . 11 , 899 – 904 ( 2015 ) . 7 . Sanders , D . W . et al . Competing Protein - RNA Interaction Networks Control Multiphase Intracellular Organization . Cell 181 , 306 - 324 . e28 ( 2020 ) . 8 . Li , L . et al . Real - time imaging of Huntingtin aggregates diverting target search and gene transcription . Elife 5 , ( 2016 ) . 9 . Patel , A . et al . A Liquid - to - Solid Phase Transition of the ALS Protein FUS Accelerated by Disease Mutation . Cell 162 , 1066 – 1077 ( 2015 ) . 10 . Bergeron - Sandoval , L . - P . et al . Endocytosis caused by liquid - liquid phase separation of proteins . bioRxiv 145664 ( 2018 ) . doi : 10 . 1101 / 145664 11 . Brangwynne , C . P . Phase transitions and size scaling of membrane - less organelles . J . Cell Biol . 203 , 875 – 881 ( 2013 ) . 12 . Weber , S . C . & Brangwynne , C . P . Inverse Size Scaling of the Nucleolus by a Concentration - Dependent Phase Transition . Curr . Biol . 25 , 641 – 646 ( 2015 ) . 13 . Lifshitz , I . M . & Slyozov , V . V . The kinetics of precipitation from supersaturated solid solutions . J . Phys . Chem . Solids 19 , 35 – 50 ( 1961 ) . 14 . Siggia , E . D . Late stages of spinodal decomposition in binary mixtures . Phys . Rev . A 20 , 595 – 605 ( 1979 ) . 15 . Stanich , C . A . et al . Coarsening Dynamics of Domains in Lipid Membranes . Biophys . J . 105 , 444 – 454 ( 2013 ) . 16 . Berry , J . , Weber , S . C . , Vaidya , N . , Haataja , M . & Brangwynne , C . P . RNA transcription modulates phase transition - driven nuclear body assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 112 , E5237 - 45 ( 2015 ) . 17 . Feric , M . & Brangwynne , C . P . A nuclear F - actin scaffold stabilizes ribonucleoprotein droplets against gravity in large cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 , 1253 – 9 ( 2013 ) . 18 . Caragine , C . M . , Haley , S . C . & Zidovska , A . Surface Fluctuations and Coalescence of Nucleolar Droplets in the Human Cell Nucleus . Phys . Rev . Lett . 121 , 148101 ( 2018 ) . 19 . Caragine , C . M . , Haley , S . C . & Zidovska , A . Nucleolar dynamics and interactions with nucleoplasm in living cells . Elife 8 , ( 2019 ) . 20 . Ou , H . D . et al . ChromEMT : Visualizing 3D chromatin structure and compaction in interphase and mitotic cells . Science ( 80 - . ) . 357 , eaag0025 ( 2017 ) . 21 . Görisch , S . M . , Wachsmuth , M . , Tóth , K . F . , Lichter , P . & Rippe , K . Histone acetylation increases chromatin accessibility . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 5825 – 34 ( 2005 ) . 22 . Shin , Y . et al . Liquid Nuclear Condensates Mechanically Sense and Restructure the Genome . Cell 175 , 1481 - 1491 . e13 ( 2018 ) . 23 . Zidovska , A . , Weitz , D . A . & Mitchison , T . J . Micron - scale coherence in interphase chromatin dynamics . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 110 , 15555 – 15560 ( 2013 ) . 24 . Stephens , A . D . , Banigan , E . J . , Adam , S . A . , Goldman , R . D . & Marko , J . F . Chromatin and lamin A determine two different mechanical response regimes of the cell nucleus . Mol . Biol . Cell 28 , 1984 – 1996 ( 2017 ) . 25 . Bracha , D . , Walls , M . T . & Brangwynne , C . P . Probing and engineering liquid - phase organelles . Nat . Biotechnol . 37 , 1435 – 1445 ( 2019 ) . 26 . Shin , Y . et al . Spatiotemporal Control of Intracellular Phase Transitions Using Light - Activated optoDroplets . Cell 168 , 159 - 171 . e14 ( 2017 ) . 27 . Bracha , D . et al . Mapping Local and Global Liquid Phase Behavior in Living Cells Using Photo - Oligomerizable Seeds . Cell 175 , 1467 - 1480 . e13 ( 2018 ) . 28 . Schwartz , J . C . , Cech , T . R . & Parker , R . R . Biochemical Properties and Biological Functions of FET Proteins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 84 , 355 – 379 ( 2015 ) . 29 . Radke , L , Voorhees P . Growth and coarsening : Ripening in material processing . Engineering Materials and Processes . ( Springer International Publishing , 2002 ) . 30 . Aarts , D . G . A . L . , Schmidt , M . & Lekkerkerker , H . N . W . Direct Visual Observation of Thermal Capillary Waves . Science ( 80 - . ) . 304 , 847 – 850 ( 2004 ) . 31 . Feric , M . et al . Coexisting Liquid Phases Underlie Nucleolar Subcompartments . Cell 165 , 1686 – 1697 ( 2016 ) . 32 . Kim , J . , Han , K . Y . , Khanna , N . , Ha , T . & Belmont , A . S . Nuclear speckle fusion via long - range directional motion regulates speckle morphology after transcriptional inhibition . J . Cell Sci . 132 , ( 2019 ) . 33 . Style , R . W . et al . Liquid - Liquid Phase Separation in an Elastic Network . ( 2018 ) . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevX . 8 . 011028 34 . Rosowski , K . A . et al . Elastic ripening and inhibition of liquid – liquid phase separation . Nat . Phys . ( 2020 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41567 - 019 - 0767 - 2 35 . Weber , S . C . , Spakowitz , A . J . & Theriot , J . A . Bacterial Chromosomal Loci Move Subdiffusively through a Viscoelastic Cytoplasm . Phys . Rev . Lett . 104 , 238102 ( 2010 ) . 36 . Platani , M . , Goldberg , I . , Lamond , A . I . & Swedlow , J . R . Cajal Body dynamics and association with chromatin are ATP - dependent . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 502 – 508 ( 2002 ) . 37 . Gorisch , S . M . et al . Nuclear body movement is determined by chromatin accessibility and dynamics . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 101 , 13221 – 13226 ( 2004 ) . 38 . Schindelin , J . et al . Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat . Methods 9 , 676 – 682 ( 2012 ) . 39 . Tinevez , J . - Y . et al . TrackMate : An open and extensible platform for single - particle tracking . Methods 115 , 80 – 90 ( 2017 ) .