Form Follows Data The Symbiosis between Design & Information Visualization VANDE MOERE Andrew Key Centre of Design Computing & Cognition School of Architecture , Design Science & Planning University of Sydney Keywords : information aesthetics , information visualization , design , information architecture Abstract : This paper analyzes the relationships between creative design and the field of information visualization , with a focus on historical connotations and newest developments that show great potential . Examples show how designers often employ information visualization as a creative concept capable of significantly determining the design outcome , and vice versa , how information visualization can be enhanced by exploring interdisciplinary concepts , such as design cognition , user engagement , aesthetics and art . Some of the earliest symbiotic dependencies are explained and demonstrated , including the first conceptual cyberspace and information architecture definitions . This analysis proves that it is useful to consider the role of creative design when developing effective data representations . Vice versa , it is also demonstrated how designers should be more aware of the basic principles and newest developments in information visualization . Finally , several interdisciplinary disciplines are described that show great symbiotic potential in the near future , especially in the fields of ambient displays , informative art and location - based information awareness . 1 INTRODUCTION Several research approaches demonstrate the close but complex relationships between the disciplines of design and information visualization . On one side , some novel information visualization techniques are emerging that seem to be significantly influenced by creative design , either by artists that attempt to penetrate the field , or by visualization researchers that assimilate insights from related disciplines such as design cognition and art . On the other side , artists and designers increasingly incorporate information collections in their works , as data representations are transformed into new media art , presentation tools and even physical architecture . Accordingly , this paper investigates several directions that demonstrate highly symbiotic dependencies . This research does not attempt to be exhaustive , but instead concentrates on historical connotations and newest developments that show great promise and potential . Notably , this paper solely focuses on the graphical representation of abstract data . This drastically differs from the notion of design visualization , which mainly deals with the exact simulation of CAADFutures 2005 Full Paper Submission : A Formatting Guideline 2 real - world artefacts . In particular , this paper will demonstrate how creative information visualization is generally more concerned with the emotional state and the engagement of users , using insights of human cognition and perception , rather than to concentrate on task metrics or performance issues . 1 . 1 Information Visualization Visualization , the representation of data graphically rather than textually , uses the high - bandwidth human perceptual and cognitive capabilities to detect patterns and draw interferences from visual form . Information visualization has emerged over the past fifteen years as a distinct academic field that is inspired by the fields of computer science , psychology , semiotics , graphic design , cartography and art . Information visualization ( also coined ‘infovis’ ) merges and addresses various research topics , which all circle around the same problem : the use of visual metaphors for representing the structure of and the relationships within abstract datasets and the interaction paradigms that enable effective navigation inside the resulting representations . Abstract data is characterized by its lack of a natural notion of position in space , and its visualization examples include financial models , textual analysis , transaction data , network traffic simulations and digital libraries . Information visualization thus clearly differs from ( scientific ) visualization of physical data , which implicitly carries the spatial lay - out that can be simulated by graphical reproduction , such as geographic lay - outs , architectural plans or medical imaging . As the data is non - spatial and lacks natural representation , the challenge for information visualization is thus “…how to invent new visual metaphors for presenting information and developing ways to manipulate these metaphors to make sense of the information” ( Eick 2001 ) , clearly a creative design question . 1 . 2 Cyberspace The original cyberspace concept can be considered as the early predecessor of the symbiosis between design and information visualization . Due to its rapid success throughout many disciplines , the concept of cyberspace became linked to many other imaginative synonyms such as the metaverse , dataspace , matrix , electropolis , cyburbia and cybertecture , rendering the actual term technically unimportant . During the conceptual rise of the cyberspace phenomenon , many researchers were convinced that the field of architecture and design , with its vast expertise in areas such as space perception , history and function organization , was the ideal professional and academic field to conceive cyberspace according to cultural and public needs . So - called cyberspace architects , schooled both in art and computer sciences , were destined to develop virtual , social spaces in which humans could meet , work and play . Notably , the first cyberspace definition foresaw that these cyberspace architects were not solely responsible for the static lay - out , appearance , functionalities or three - dimensional design of the virtual worlds . Instead , early cyberspace explorers ( Benedikt 1991 , Negroponte 1996 ) described these designers as creative software architects that program sophisticated software simulation 3 algorithms , capable of translating any abstract data , and all interactions with it , into interpretable visual forms . As the virtual worlds were completely built - up out of data , they thus created ‘inhabitable information visualizations’ . In fact , the earliest cyberspace definition mentions the most fundamental principles of information visualization , such as the believable mathematical translation of data into graphical counterparts , the generation of meaningful data clusters and the metaphors required to interact with it : “Cyberspace , a consensual hallucination , experienced daily by billions of legitimate operators , in every nation , by children being taught mathematical concepts . A graphic representation of data abstracted from the banks of every computer in the human system . Unthinkable complexity . Lines of light ranged in the nonspace of the mind , clusters and constellations of data . . . . . ” ( Gibson 1984 , 67 ) . Obviously , this cyberspace definition can be interpreted as a predecessor of imaginary , user - engaging information visualization : an immersive environment consisting of experiential data structures , offering users a believable , comprehensible model for interactive data and information - organizing aesthetics . 2 INFORMATION VISUALIZATION IN DESIGN 2 . 1 Presentation & Analysis One of the earliest stages of a traditional design process consists of preparation , investigation and analysis , in which the designer typically locates relevant data and facts to have a better overview of the design problem and to frame possible end solutions . Often , the resulting data collection contains information in different media types , and includes many contextual parameters that surround the design question . Some designers use this dataset to analyze special features or explore possible remarkable relationships that might be hidden within , to determine and contextualize design decisions . As shown in Figure 1 , typical examples include site investigations , in which several abstract features ( activities , flows , planning restrictions , etc . ) are traced , recorded and interpreted , or electronic project management environments , which enable the organization of document collections ( timelines , reports , images , etc . ) . Often , these datasets become visually represented using the core principles of information visualization , as the goals closely overlap . Many of these design - oriented representations differ from traditional information visualization approaches in the careful attention on visual design and aesthetical quality , the exploration of new visual and interaction metaphors , or the careful attention to user engagement . 2 . 2 Information Architecture Since the first use of the term ‘architecture of information’ in 1976 by Richard Saul Wurman at the national conference of the American Institute of Architects ( AIA ) , many conceptual connections between architecture , design and information handling have emerged . Currently , information architecture mainly denotes a professional CAADFutures 2005 Full Paper Submission : A Formatting Guideline field that deals with the functional , technical and content specifications of multimedia applications such as websites and information interfaces . It conceptually differs from information design as it focuses on structural rather than presentation issues , although both fields attempt to communicate complex ideas with clarity , precision and efficiency . Consequently , the popular definition of information architecture neglects the architectural meaning in the classical sense , which points to the skilful designer of social spaces who received a background in theory , history and functionality of issues such as presentation , interaction and form interpretation . However , some computer - literate architects still consider the term information architecture to denote the usage of ‘architectural principles’ to design and structure data in such a way that the retrieval and exploration of information becomes more effective ( Engeli 2001 ) . Notably , this definition comes close to both that of information visualization , and the analysis / presentation applications and goals mentioned in Section 2 . 1 , although takes into account spatial architectural design knowledge , instead of focusing on task efficiency and algorithmic optimization . Figure 1 . Infovis for design presentation & analysis . Left : programmatic site analysis ( van Berkel and Bos 1999 ) , right : project management ( Stouffs 2001 ) . 2 . 3 Physical Design Architects have to be competent in both structuring buildings and preparing effective presentations of space , so that people are able to experience the carefully designed qualities of well - considered architectural compositions . Both physical architecture and information architecture have the wish to create liveable , workable and attractive environments . Both fields consider all functional requirements , often referred to as constraints , which a design has to fulfil . These are collected into a so - called program , a term that started to play an important role in the architectural movement towards functionalism , following Louis Henry Sullivan’s concept of ‘form follows function’ and Le Corbusier’s comparison of a house with ‘a machine for living’ . Just like architects have to be aware of the occupant’s needs , organize those needs in a coherent pattern , and design a space that meets these expectations , information architects gather , organize and present information to serve a well - defined purpose . Consequently , information architecture is not that different in that respect : it addresses the structural organization and effective presentation of data into valuable and meaningful information . Similar to the original cyberspace definition , this implies that information is considered to be a raw material and the 4 only reality is a virtual one , turning the computer into an instrument , infrastructure and design environment . Next to physical reality and time , information can be declared the 5th dimension of architecture , consisting of architectural knowledge , building regulations , design information and sensory data ( Schmitt 1999 ) . Architecture is then considered as a synonym of structure , and information architecture as the field that organizes and presents the ordered , accumulated data . Consequently , one can imagine the concept of ‘form follows data’ , or the use of bits as virtual bricks , not only in the context of exploring formalistic data - mapping principles , but also to detect and aesthetically translate inherent structures hidden inside abstract datasets , and to learn the qualities of new visual languages that represent these . The concept of ‘forms follows data’ can even be uncovered within physically built architecture , demonstrating how far information visualization can influence both the concept and formality of inhabitable designs . Examples include , next to information - displaying dynamic facades , displays , billboards and lighting effects found within modern buildings , van Berkel and Bos’ Moebius House and MvRdV’s Dutch Pavilion at the World Expo 2000 , both depicted in Figure 2 . Both buildings are examples how analytical data can be literally translated into an architectural program and interesting formality , shaping perpetual daily activities , or layering the essential features of a country as a human - scale information visualization . Figure 2 . Real - world buildings as information visualizations . Left : Moebius House ( van Berkel and Bos 1999 ) , right : Dutch Pavilion ( MVRDV ) 3 DESIGN IN INFORMATION VISUALIZATION Currently , most information visualization research efforts are mainly focused on task metrics measurements , usability enhancements and organization algorithms for massive amounts of raw data . As research increasingly dealt with such efficiency and convenience considerations , assimilation of insights taken from other disciplines , such as interaction design , art and computer graphics seem to have been neglected . However , this section will demonstrate how design is slowly but increasingly influencing significant aspects of information visualization , and demonstrates how spatial designers can apply their knowledge and experience to create engaging , aesthetic and meaningful data representations . 5 CAADFutures 2005 Full Paper Submission : A Formatting Guideline 3 . 1 Design Cognition Figure 3 . Design cognition in infovis . Left : paint - inspired color mixing ( Gosset and Chen 2004 ) , right : art - inspired weather chart ( Healey and Enns 2002 ) . Some information visualization researchers attempt to incorporate insights from design - oriented cognitive studies to enhance the effectiveness of specific data representation techniques . For instance , Gosset and Chen ( 2004 ) developed a novel colour compositing technique that makes colour blending more intuitively understandable for chart - based visualizations ( Figure 3 ) . As most visual designers might notice , and although no real acknowledgements are mentioned , their contributions seem to be , maybe unconsciously , influenced by advancements from colour theory and human visual perception . Other researchers strongly believe that effectiveness and aesthetics may not be as independent as they initially seem . Healey et al . ( 2002 ) have investigated artistic insights from disciplines such as human psychophysics , art theory and history to learn how people perceive the world , and how artistic designers capture people’s attention by evoking emotional responses . As a result , they propose effective and engaging weather data visualizations ( Figure 3 ) that vary along an emotional dimension while tracing the changes in effectiveness to represent data . 3 . 2 Design Metaphor Figure 4 . The city as a data mapping metaphor . Left : file system representation ( Russo Dos Santos et al . 2000 ) , right : Data Town ( Maas and MvRdV 1999 ) Metaphors in visualizations are used to help user understand systems in term of 6 concepts they already know , appealing to initial familiarity and experience . Spatial metaphors try to exploit the unique human ability to organize objects in space , using spatial cognition and perception . Since long , visualization experts have incorporated known theories of space perception and way - finding to present users with data representations that attempt to be immediately understandable and easy to navigate . Accordingly , many data representations are known that use a city structure to spatially organize data , made by both visualization researchers as well as designers , such as Cybernet’s file system representation or MvRdV’s Data Town ( Figure 4 ) . Other visualization experts argue that familiar data - mapping metaphors hide useful information , are different to scale up and inherently imply certain levels of real - world interaction methods that are difficult to implement . As shown in Figure 5 , data can be presented using very abstract metaphors , which appeal to eye , are user engaging and provoke novel ways of exploration . We propose that such data representations need to be assessed using fundamentally different evaluation criteria that move away from traditional efficiency considerations : maybe users need more time to fully understand them , but enjoy this time more , learn unknown insights , retain information longer or explore them repeatedly through unforeseen paths . Figure 5 . Creative information visualization . Left : USA Interactive statistical data ( Rashid and Couture 2000 ) , right : TextArc ( Paley 2002 ) . 3 . 3 Information Aesthetics New media has lead to the translation of all existing media into numerical data accessible through computers , resulting in graphics , moving images , sounds , shapes , spaces and texts that have become computable . New media art in turn uses the computer as a medium , generating art objects that are inherently programmable . In this field the connection between content and form , or content and the interface , becomes always motivated and merges into one single , undividable entity . Consequently , this concept calls for an appropriate translation of content into specific interpretable forms , a need that is also identified by information visualization . However , instead of focusing on the structural and effective representation of datasets , new media artists rather deal with the aesthetics and the emotional qualities that can be conveyed to users . These insights have led to the conception of info - aesthetics , which analyzes the aesthetics of information access as well as the creation of new media objects that aestheticize information processing 7 CAADFutures 2005 Full Paper Submission : A Formatting Guideline ( Manovich 2001 ) . Info - aesthetics even considers existing computer interfaces , often not designed by artists or interaction experts , as true forms of art , calling them the modernistic , monumental artefacts of the contemporary information society . This concept suggests that a specific form of aesthetics exists in everyday information tools and interfaces . More importantly , it argues that computer applications employed in industry and science , such as simulation , visualization and databases , are new cultural forms of the information society . Accordingly , we would propose that these software tools should not only be designed by interaction engineers and software experts , but that designers are required to create novel forms of information art , that appeal also to user engagement and aesthetics and provoke long and enjoyable usages , rather than to focus solely on task metrics and effectiveness . 3 . 4 Informative Art & Ambient Displays The informative art movement consists of specially designed , computer - augmented or - amplified , works of art that are not only aesthetical objects but also information displays , in as much as they dynamically reflect information about their environment ( Redström et al . 2000 ) . The employed visual metaphors typically include the manipulation of known art styles or works of art , mapping parts or properties of the composition to different sources of data , and letting it change over time . In a similar way , the concept of ambient displays ports information visualization to the built environment . Ambient displays are abstract and aesthetic displays portraying non - critical information in the periphery of a user’s attention . Following the concept of morphing architectural spaces and surfaces into interactive ‘interfaces’ , such displays are capable to present information within a space through subtle changes in light , sound and movement , which can be processed in the background of awareness ( Ishii and Ullmer 1997 ) . Consequently , this research ports several aspects of information visualization into new realms of design , hereby incorporating the concepts of aesthetics , architectural space experience and multimodal interaction metaphors . Similarly , Figure 6 shows wind - generating pinwheels that represent flows of electronic data in blows of wind , and a projected ‘wallpaper’ that is both a public , aesthetic painting as well as a slowly changing representation of activity levels captured by non - intrusive microphones . Figure 6 . Ambient infovis . Left : Phinweels ( Dahley et al . 1998 ) , right : Activity Wallpaper ( Skog 2004 ) 8 9 4 FUTURE A general tendency exists to combine newest computer science technologies , such as virtual reality , tangible interfaces , or computer vision techniques , for creative design processes , or to combine aspects of user engagement and user experience , as seen in game and multimedia design , with modern software applications . However , mainly due out of a strong focus on task effectiveness considerations and the multitude of unpredictable influential factors when employing cutting - edge technology , information visualization has been assimilating these insights remarkably slowly . Nevertheless , in the information society of today , users tend to enter the digital realm either for social activities or to perform some sorts of information processing , and this over longer periods of time , requiring new forms of information architecture design . In addition , we can perceive a current trend in portable input and output devices that trace , store and make users aware of a rich set of informational sources . So - called ubiquitous computing is moving into the direction of location - based information awareness , so that users can both access and author dynamic datasets based upon a geographical context through several electronic media . Many people are unaware of these invisible , but ever - present abstract data layers that trace our everyday presence in several dimensions , including shopping habits , communication and transportation activities or even our emotional states . It is only a question of time before other design research fields , such as urban planning , want to visually represent and analyze this location - based knowledge by adding user experiential and sensor - tracked datasets to their otherwise lifeless and static urban models . On a smaller scale , as an increasing number of non - intrusive input devices are installed in our everyday world , even rooms are becoming aware of people’s presence , wishes , demands and activities . Building automation services enable spaces to react to dynamic , physical conditions or external data sources in real time . Currently , these interactions are typically programmed by engineers , and imply simple action - reaction rules , such as the control of lights , security or climate control : what would be possible if these tools are offered to designers , concerned with the emotional state of people ? Consequently , as the built environment and our physical body are converted into information interfaces , designers are becoming the ideal experts to interpret the collection of spatial , abstract datasets and to develop suitable data representation metaphors that create ambient , spatial and inhabitable experiences . 5 DISCUSSION This paper has collected several contemporary movements in which design influences information visualization , or vice versa , in which data representation significantly determines conceptual design . We have demonstrated that design is starting to force information visualization approaches to consider interdisciplinary issues , such as the engagement and mental immersion of users , the use of design cognition insights and the role of aesthetics in the effectiveness of data representations . Vice versa , the design field should be more aware of the principles and developments in information visualization , as these would significantly render CAADFutures 2005 Full Paper Submission : A Formatting Guideline 10 them more effective . Evidently , more research is required to detect and predict how theories , historical analysis and experiences taken from artistic disciplines such as design can support further developments in the field of information visualization . REFERENCES Benedikt , M . , 1991 . Cyberspace : First Steps . MIT Press , London . Dahley , A . , Wisneski , C . , Ishii , H . , 1998 . Water Lamp and Pinwheels : Ambient Projection of Digital Information into Architectural Space , Conference on Human Factors and Computing Systems ( CHI ' 98 ) , ACM , pp . 269 - 270 . Eick , S . G . , 2001 . Visualizing Online Activity . Communications of the ACM 44 ( 8 ) , 45 - 50 . Engeli , M . , 2001 . Bits and Spaces : Architecture and Computing for Physical , Virtual , Hybrid Realms 33 - Projects by Architecture and Caad , Eth Zurich . Birkhauser , Basel . Gibson , W . , 1984 . Neuromancer . Ace Books . Gosset , N . , Chen , B . , 2004 . Paint Inspired Color Mixing and Compositing for Visualization , IEEE Information Visualization ( Infovis 2004 ) , IEEE , pp . 113 - 117 . Healey , C . G . , Enns , J . T . , 2002 . Perception and Painting : A Search for Effective , Engaging Visualizations . IEEE Computer Graphics & Applications 22 ( 2 ) , 10 - 15 . Ishii , H . , Ullmer , B . , 1997 . Tangible Bits : Towards Seamless Interfaces between People , Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 97 ) , ACM , pp . 234 - 241 . Maas , W . , MvRdV , 1999 . Metacity / Datatown . 010 Publishers , Rotterdam . Manovich , L . , 2001 . Information and Form . http : / / www . manovich . net / ia / . Negroponte , N . , 1996 . Being Digital . Knopf , New York . Paley , W . B . , 2002 . Textarc . http : / / www . textarc . org / . Rashid , H . , Couture , L . A . , 2000 . USA Interactive . In : Wurman , S . R . ( Ed . ) , Understanding . Ted Conferences , pp . 324 . Redström , J . , Skog , T . , Hallnäs , L . , 2000 . Informative Art : Using Amplified Artworks as Information Displays , Designing Augmented Reality Environments ( DARE 2000 ) , ACM Press , pp . 103 - 114 . Russo Dos Santos , C . , Gross , P . , Abel , P . , Loisel , D . , Trichaud , N . , Paris , J . P . , 2000 . Mapping Information onto 3d Virtual Worlds , International Conference on Information Visualisation ( IV2000 ) , pp . 379 - 388 . Schmitt , G . N . , 1999 . Information Architecture Basis and Future of Caad . Birkhäuser , Basel . Skog , T . , 2004 . Activity Wallpaper : Ambient Visualization of Activity Information ( Poster ) , Proceedings from Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ) , ACM . Stouffs , R . , 2001 . Visualizing Information Structures and Its Impact on Project Teams : An Information Architecture for the Virtual Aec Company . Building Research & Information 29 ( 3 ) , 218 - 232 . van Berkel , B . , Bos , C . , 1999 . Move - UN Studio . Architectura & Natura .