WHAT IS NOT A REAL OPTION : CONSIDERING BOUNDARIES FOR THE APPLICATION OF REAL OPTIONS TO BUSINESS STRATEGY RON ADNER INSEAD DANIEL A . LEVINTHAL The Wharton School , University of Pennsylvania We argue that the greater the extent to which choice sets evolve as a consequence of firms’ exploration activities , the less structured the firms’ abandonment decisions become and , in turn , the less distinguishable a real option is from more generic notions of path dependence—a sequential stream of investment in and of itself does not constitute a real option . While organizational adaptations can extend the appli - cability of real options , they impose tradeoffs that may lead to the underutilization of discoveries made in the course of exploration . The concept of real options has created con - siderable excitement in the management litera - ture in recent years ( Kogut & Kulatilaka , 2001 ; McGrath , 1997 ) . The appeal of real options is quite natural . Firms face uncertain futures , and the investment opportunities they face are , to an important degree , a function of their prior in - vestment commitments . Thus , at a surface level , the real options framework appears to precisely fit firms’ strategic challenges by linking current actions to uncertain futures . In addition , relative to other justifications for exploration , such as rationales for slack search ( March & Simon , 1958 ) , real options provide a rhetoric that com - fortably fits the standard language of corporate finance . Less obvious than the benefits offered by the real options framework but equally im - portant are its inherent limitations in guiding organizations’ decision making under uncertainty . The underlying logic of the real options frame - work is based on the realization that future in - vestment opportunities are contingent on prior investment commitments . Thus , in contrast to net present value analysis , real options analysis accounts for the sequential nature of choice pro - cesses . Such an observation is not alien to re - searchers working within the tradition of the behavioral theory of the firm ( Cyert & March , 1963 ) or evolutionary economics ( Dosi , 1982 ; Nel - son & Winter , 1982 ; Penrose , 1959 ) who have long been sensitive to path dependence . What is dis - tinctive about the use of real options as both an analytic tool ( Dixit & Pindyck , 1994 ; Trigeorgis , 1997 ) and a strategic heuristic ( Luehrman , 1998 ; McGrath , 1997 ) is that the real options logic of - fers the prospect of assigning actual values ( car - dinal in the former case or ordinal in the latter case ) to stage - setting investments . However , while the logic can always be used to generate values and orderings , the validity of these results depends on some key assumptions . The technical violations of strict real options assumptions and the methods for their accom - modation are , by now , well known ( e . g . , Cope - land & Antikarnov , 2001 ) . More subtle , however , and more limiting to the validity of real options as a tool in organizational decision making are violations that stem from organizational pro - cesses in the face of different modes of uncer - tainty resolution . The real options framework is intended to ex - ploit the flexibility inherent in sequential in - vestments . We argue that this flexibility stems from the possibility of abandoning investment initiatives , rather than from the simple substitu - tion of a stream of smaller payments for a larger lump sum payment . This implies that the effec - tive management of real options requires a high degree of rigidity in the specification of the agenda of the initiatives and the criteria for We thank Bert Cannella , Javier Gimeno , Bruce Kogut , Christoph Loch , Anand Swaminathan , Peter Zemsky , partic - ipants at the 2001 Strategy Research Forum and the Jones Center Workshop at Wharton , and our three reviewers for their valuable comments on prior drafts of this manuscript . (cid:1) Academy of Management Review 2004 , Vol . 29 , No . 1 , 74 – 85 . 74 their success . We consider the implications , pos - itive and negative , of such constraints and com - pare them to more generic path - dependent ap - proaches to managing investment under uncertainty . In the next section we briefly lay out the for - mal structure of real options . We then examine some of the critical assumptions that underlie the application of options to firms’ investment decisions . When uncertainty resolution emerges as an outcome of firm action , the sharp temporal demarcation made in the options literature be - tween “Stage 1” and “Stage 2” investments is called into question . In such settings , beyond learning about a specific initiative , the flexibil - ity associated with later investment decisions often stems from the possibility of discovering a wide variety of related opportunities , even in the face of unfavorable initial outcomes . We show that the greater the extent to which initiatives are open ended , the more problematic the appli - cation of the real options framework is . Flexibil - ity in search can undermine the flexibility asso - ciated with abandonment . Abandonment is essential for limiting downside risk , a key virtue attributed to real option investments . We con - sider how organizational processes , such as the allocation of decision rights that limit the range of possible action and the specification of well - defined temporal boundaries , can extend the applicability of real options reasoning but force strategic tradeoffs of their own . We conclude by considering differences between real options approaches and more generic path - dependent processes , and we suggest how they might be distinguished empirically . REAL OPTIONS Real options investments are characterized by sequential , irreversible investments made un - der conditions of uncertainty ( Dixit & Pindyck , 1994 ) . The framework suggests that purchasing a real option on a strategically important oppor - tunity allows firms to postpone commitment un - til a substantial portion of the uncertainty about the opportunity has been resolved . After making an initial investment , management is then to turn its attention to other matters and wait for a signal as to whether or not it is appropriate to harvest or cultivate the initial investment . Consider the events that transpire prior to the exercise of financial options , on which the real options model is based ( Figure 1 ) . First , an in - vestor purchases an option ( Stage 1 ) . Then , dur - ing the course of the holding period , the value of the option changes in response to external events . Throughout the holding period , the fi - nancial markets provide a clear signal as to the current value of the option . Finally , events tran - spire so that the investor chooses to exercise the option , or , alternatively , the expiration date specified in the option contract is reached and the option expires ( Stage 2 ) . Investments with this structure are optionlike in that Stage 2 in - vestments are not a necessary consequence of FIGURE 1 The Structure of Real Options 2004 75 Adner and Levinthal having made an initial Stage 1 investment but , rather , can be conditioned on the realization of interim information . Note two critical features of this process : ( 1 ) the value of the option ( and the underlying as - set ) is exogenous to the investor’s activity—the investor cannot take steps to make the intrinsic characteristics of the asset more attractive ; ( 2 ) the market signal of option value is readily ob - servable and is independent of the investor’s behavior . If these properties carry over to an investment of a nonfinancial sort ( such as in plant and equipment , or in technology licenses ) , then the logic of options can directly carry over . The greater the extent to which these properties are violated , the more problematic the applica - tion of an options framework is . The “wait and see” setting of financial options represents the extreme case of investment envi - ronments , but one for which the methodology is ideally suited . Because much attention in the management literature is focused on the ways in which the firm can affect outcomes and vari - ances ( e . g . , McGrath , 1997 ) , it is important to examine what happens to the applicability of options logic as we move away from a world of wait and see to a world of “act and see , ” in which uncertainty resolution is endogenous to firm activity . BOUNDARIES OF REAL OPTIONS The boundaries of the logic of real options are often considered in relation to the breakdown of net present value analysis : to the degree that investment choices have the property of high uncertainty and irreversibility , a real options valuation provides a better characterization of the investment’s true value than does a net present value calculation because of the latter’s inability to account for the value of delaying commitments ( see Figure 2a ) . Less examined but no less important are the boundaries along which real options logic is itself strained . As we move from a world of real options on tradable assets , in which the firm has no hand in resolving uncertainty and the set of possible actions in response to this uncertainty resolution can be specified at the time of the initial investment , to real options on strategic opportunities whose outcomes are intimately linked to firm action , the clean demarcations between investment stages begin to blur and the application of real options becomes more challenging analytically and , focal to this pa - per , organizationally . When target markets and technical agendas are flexible ( see Figure 2b ) , the discrete invest - ment logic of real options is eroded , and activities may be characterized more appropriately as more generic path - dependent processes that fall under such labels as probe and learn ( Lynn , Morone , & Paulson , 1996 ) , incremental search ( March & Si - mon , 1958 ; Nelson & Winter , 1982 ) , or innovation journeys ( Van de Ven , Pollery , Garud , & Venkat - araman , 1999 ) . Alternatively , if the scope of the option investment is fixed a priori—that is , if the opportunities on which one is taking an option can be clearly specified at the inception of the op - tion—then the decision to abandon an initiative can be clearly articulated and the flexibility asso - ciated with an option investment can be readily maintained . In the context of financial options , one can clearly state a priori when a given option will be FIGURE 2a Boundaries of Applicability for Net Present Value and Real Options FIGURE 2b Boundaries of Applicability for Real Options and Path - Dependent Opportunities 76 January Academy of Management Review “in the money” and worth exercising . However , in the case of real options on strategic opportu - nities in which new possibilities are identified as a consequence of a firm’s actions , such a prior specification may not be possible or even desirable . Experiments , even unsuccessful ones , not only provide information about intended in - vestment paths but also provide information about other possibilities—possibilities that may not even have been envisioned at the time of the initial investments . Outcomes that are negative vis - a ` - vis the initial proposed initiative may still suggest or engender other possible actions . For instance , the failure of a technology develop - ment effort to reach a given technical hurdle in a specified time horizon does not preclude addi - tional efforts or different approaches ; similarly , if a new product fails to win acceptance in a given target market , it may still be successful in other possible target markets . 1 At a basic logical level , the boundless set of possibilities associated with a strategic invest - ment initiative presents a problem analogous to that posed by Popper ( 1959 ) in the context of hypothesis testing . Popper’s proposition is that a hypothesis is never proved ; rather , it is not dis - proved in any given test . Conversely , in a given attempt to realize an opportunity , we can only prove that an initiative can be successful in a particular setting ; we cannot use negative out - comes to preclude the possibility that it will be successful in other target markets or with fur - ther technical refinements . This “impossibility of proving failure” is an inherent feature of firm initiatives under uncer - tainty and poses a fundamental challenge to the applicability of the real options framework . Fur - ther , because actors at different levels of an organization have different perspectives on the attractiveness of a given opportunity , they will disagree as to the proper framing of termination decisions . Thus , the open - ended nature of the search for success raises organizational chal - lenges to abandoning options that can deter firms from exercising the very flexibility that made the real options approach attractive in the first place . The degree to which an initiative is circum - scribed is itself dependent on organizational choices concerning project scope . If an initiative is highly circumscribed in terms of what appro - priate target markets are and what temporal and technical boundaries must be respected , then the degree of flexibility in the potential directions of the initiative is limited , but at a price . Imposing rigid criteria for abandonment may result in the underutilization of discoveries made in the context of initiatives that are fail - ures with respect to their initial agenda but that introduce promising possibilities not previously imagined . This highlights the need for proponents of real options logic to consider a more nuanced organ - izational perspective that incorporates the dif - ferent views that exist within an organization . The firm cannot be regarded as a unitary actor . Managers charged with pursuing an opportu - nity and executives charged with evaluating a portfolio of opportunities will differ in their be - liefs as to when an option ceases to be attrac - tive . Such differences are a function of their in - centives and opportunity structures , and they serve to compound the psychological biases re - garding sunk costs and escalating commitment that can act to deter strategic redirection . These considerations are largely overlooked in the theoretical ( e . g . , Dixit & Pindyck , 1994 ; Trigeorgis , 1997 ) and managerial ( e . g . , Amram & Kulatilaka , 1998 ; Luehrman , 1998 ) work on real options in strategy , in which researchers tend to treat the firm as a monolithic actor . They are also largely overlooked in empirical work in which scholars tend to look at investment deci - sions that are not integrated within the firm’s organizational activities ( e . g . , investments in ac - quisitions and joint ventures ) . The importance of organizational factors in determining the appli - cability of options logic increases as real op - tions theory is extended from the evaluation of investments in physical assets , for which the resolution of uncertainty is exogenous to firm action and the scope of possible firm response to this uncertainty is relatively constrained ( e . g . , making use of a plant in a foreign country to potentially take advantage of swings in relative wages ) , to the evaluation of investments in stra - 1 Knight’s ( 1921 ) distinction between risk and uncertainty , which lies at the heart of notions of entrepreneurship ( Kirz - ner , 1997 ) , is closely related to the distinction we are making here . Real options are well suited to incorporate risk , an uncertain realization from a well - specified probability dis - tribution . In contrast , the inherent unknowability that char - acterizes Knightian uncertainty poses a significant chal - lenge to characterizing means and variances of key option analysis parameters . 2004 77 Adner and Levinthal tegic opportunities , for which the resolution of uncertainty is largely endogenous to firm action , and the scope for possible modifications in the initial initiative is vast . CHALLENGE OF ABANDONMENT Ambiguity of Stages in Real Options An investment’s flexibility is revealed in the project abandonment decision . Options are flex - ible not because they substitute a stream of smaller payment for a larger lump sum payment but because the payment stream can be aban - doned in light of negative outcomes . The less well - defined the abandonment decision , the less valid the perception of flexibility and the less appropriate the nominal application of real options logic . In the absence of proofs of failure and strict , structured abandonment deadlines , firms face a difficult organizational challenge to exploit the flexibility offered by the sequential nature of optionlike investments . As noted ear - lier , there is an important asymmetry between positive and negative signals that is analogous to the asymmetry of proving and disproving a hypothesis in empirical research . Popper ( 1959 ) argues that it is logically impossible to prove that a hypothesis is true ; we can only show that it is not false , up to a specified probability level . In contrast , a managerial initiative can only be shown to be successful in that some market or technical criteria are met ; an initiative , such as the development of a new technology , cannot conclusively be shown to be incapable of succeeding . Consider what we learn when a new technol - ogy is “tried . ” We may learn that , in a given time period and with a given level of investment , researchers were not able to meet certain tech - nical milestones . Similarly , we may learn that a particular market context was not receptive to the technology in its current form . However , these results are not impossibility theorems . They do not demonstrate that , with more time and more resources , these technical milestones could not be met . Nor do such results demon - strate that other market settings might not re - spond positively to the technology in its current form or that enhancements to the technology or FIGURE 3 Malleability of Technical and Market Focus to Firm Activity 78 January Academy of Management Review a reduction in cost will not lead to success in the current market setting . Thus , the significance of any specific market response is constrained in market space to a specific segment , and constrained in time to a specific development state . Figure 3 maps the potential malleability of a project to interim feedback , in terms of the opportunity to affect the technical agenda of the project and the mar - kets in which the project will be evaluated , after an option has been purchased . Again , what is critical is that these new directions need not have been identified at the time of the inception of the initial option investment . They were not part of the justification for the initiation of the option , but they became critical for the continu - ation of the investment effort . The greater the potential for ex post discovery of possible new directions for the original initiative , the greater the difficulty in deciding when to abandon the opportunity . The problem of abandonment is compounded by the fact that most options on strategic oppor - tunities do not have an explicit , exogenous ex - piration date . How long the firm can keep the option open , whether in persisting in develop - ment efforts in nominally promising pharma - ceuticals or in market creation efforts for emerg - ing technologies , is often difficult to specify ex ante . 2 When there is no explicit time limit on efforts to enhance the value of the initial initia - tive , time to expiration becomes an endogenous choice . From a valuation perspective , longer op - tion durations lead to higher option values and increase the risk of overvaluation . From an or - ganizational perspective , flexibility in duration leads to negotiations over termination criteria , which increase the risk that firm investments will be governed by influence processes and idiosyncratic justification , rather than by a co - herent portfolio strategy . A fundamental difficulty raised by broad flex - ibility in response to interim signals is that while real options valuation techniques are well tailored to offering go / no - go guidance on project initiations , they are relatively equivo - cal regarding what to do after an initial “go” recommendation . Clearly , the real options valuation framework can be reapplied to the evaluation of a given initiative at a future time , when some uncer - tainty is resolved ( e . g . , compound real options ) . Structured reevaluation , however , becomes in - creasingly difficult as uncertainty gets resolved in increasingly incremental steps that are a function of firm activity . 3 Incremental discovery leads to difficulty in drawing precise distinc - tions among a series of independent options , a single compound option , and more generic path - dependent search activities . The division of time into discrete decision points is typically artifi - cial . Does the pharmaceutical firm that started a research project on Monday make a conscious choice on Tuesday to continue with the project ? Ultimately , the structure of the discovery activity 2 The fact that a real option may lack an explicit expira - tion date need not imply that the option persists indefinitely . In particular , competitive forces may result in the effective expiration of an option . However , even in cases where the competitive environment drives option expiration ( e . g . , McGrath , 1997 ; Trigeorgis , 1997 ) , the timing of expiration cannot be specified ex ante . In addition , when the opportu - nity can be exploited in multiple markets , a rival’s entry into one market does not necessarily lead to the expiration of the option in other markets , so even in these settings ex post endogeneity is present . Strategic interactions also present another dimension of endogeneity to the problem of evalu - ating options that leads to an additional set of challenges . As opposed to “standard” real options settings , where ex - pected payoffs are exogenously determined , “competitive” real options analysis requires an accounting for the ways in which the firm’s actions affect rivals’ responses . The benefits of delay and exploration that are derived from sequential investments must be weighted against the potential benefits offered by commitment and preemption ( Ghemawat , 1991 ) . Although still in infancy , theoretical attempts to marry real options with game theory ( e . g . , Grenadier , 2001 ; Kulati - laka & Perotti , 1998 ) suggest that analytic results can be obtained . These results , however , are very sensitive to un - derlying assumptions about parameter values — values that are impossible to assess with accuracy for many strategi - cally important opportunities . Furthermore , for analytic trac - tability , these models necessarily ignore many important factors , such as the complexity and duration of competitive responses , identified in recent work on competitive dynam - ics ( e . g . , Ferrier , Smith , & Grimm , 1999 ) . 3 Trigeorgis ( 1997 ) , for example , notes that a rich set of compound options poses analytic and computational chal - lenges to the actual evaluation of real options . Consider that of the six factors that determine option value ( value of un - derlying risky asset , exercise price , time to expiration , vol - atility of the value of the underlying asset , foregone cash flows , discount rate ) , the first four are especially difficult to specify with confidence for the case of strategic opportu - nities . See Bowman and Moskowitz ( 2001 ) for a reexami - nation of the effectiveness of the application of option analysis at Merck , and Lander and Pinches ( 1998 ) for a discussion of the modeling challenges to making real options analysis “practical . ” 2004 79 Adner and Levinthal and the scope of the authority of the project team define these distinctions and thereby draw the boundary of applicability for options logic . Organizational Factors Because holding options open entails both or - ganizational and financial maintenance costs ( Garud & Nayyar , 1994 ) , managing abandon - ment has direct implications for firms’ success in managing real options . The “option traps” presented in Figure 4 highlight the forces that undermine timely project abandonment in dif - ferent uncertainty resolution regimes . The chal - lenge of project abandonment is complicated by the nature of organizational resource allocation ( Bower , 1970 ) and the different perspectives and incentives of stakeholders at different levels in the organization . This contrast is most succinctly characterized as the difference between “holding the option” and “being the option . ” For executives at high levels in the organization within whose purview lie a number of distinct initiatives , an individual initiative may have an optionlike quality in that the abandonment of the particular project may not entail significant consequences . However , the managers focused on that particular project may see greater potential in its pursuit , both because they are not aware of the larger set of alternative investments available to the firm and because of the career consequences associ - ated with its abandonment . These consider - ations , in turn , act to increase these managers’ dedication to achieving success with respect to a particular initiative . This dedication , while positive in the sense of increasing the likelihood of success , clearly hampers their ability to aban - don initiatives when the learning outcomes are negative ( Garud & Van de Ven , 1992 ) . For this reason , the way in which the selection and re - source allocation mechanisms are manifested throughout the organizational hierarchy is fun - damental to the challenge of exploiting the flex - ibility inherent in real options . These organizational drivers are compounded by psychological deterrents to abandonment . Given the difficulty firms have in incorporating the logic of sunk costs ( Russo & Schoemaker , 1989 ) , their tendency toward escalating commit - ments ( Staw , 1981 ) and overconfidence ( Camerer & Lovallo , 1999 ) , the political impetus not to show failure ( McGrath , 1999 ; Sitkin , 1992 ) , and the natural desire to succeed , the challenge of abandonment—giving up on an opportunity that has a chance for success—is a large one . 4 This , essentially , is the dark side of managing projects with product champions ( Maidique , 1980 ) and skunk works ( Kanter , 1988 ) , where the systems and support mechanisms put in place to create an impetus for starting innovations act directly against their objective reassess - ment and termination . Indeed , the challenges associated with abandoning projects can be 4 Investment in joint ventures creates an organizational boundary that should make it easier to monitor , separate , and abandon an option investment ( e . g . , Kogut , 1991 ) . Even in this ideal setting , however , the evidence of firms’ effec - tiveness in managing exit and minimizing downside risk is mixed ( Reuer & Leiblein , 2000 ) . FIGURE 4 ‘‘Option Traps’’ That Hinder the Abandonment of Opportunities 80 January Academy of Management Review greater than those associated with initiating them ( Brunsson , 1982 ; Garud & Van de Ven , 1992 ) . 5 Real options logic makes a fundamental con - tribution to the structuring of risk . When de - ployed in real organizations , however , this logic must be complemented with appropriate con - trols ( Block & MacMillan , 1993 ; McGrath & Mac - Millan , 2000 ) . These controls need to reflect the evaluation traps created by flexible sets of pos - sible responses to interim signals and the way in which initiatives may be usefully redirected . Given the vast set of possible paths that an investment effort may take , the “flexibility” of abandonment that is central to the evaluation of real options calls for an off - setting rigidity in specifying the set of allowable courses of action at the time of the initial investment . The degree of flexibility in response to interim signals is likely to vary with the unit of analysis being considered and where the boundaries of the decision - making entity lie . At the level of the firm , it is difficult to presume that the firm can commit itself to a narrow range of response to information that may emerge for an initial “op - tion” investment . Indeed , such a commitment may not be sequentially rational ( Selten , 1975 ) . However , at lower levels of the organization , subunits may be constrained in the range of initiatives that they pursue ( Galunic & Eisen - hardt , 1996 ) , whether limited in the range of tar - get markets that can be addressed or the set of technical approaches that can be explored . It is at these lower levels that real options may re - side . Disciplined project management can foster organizational environments that facilitate real options strategies . Projects can be artificially constrained through milestones , strict dead - lines , and regimented market focus to over - come the challenge of the impossibility of proving that all possible avenues of opportu - nity are unpromising and , in turn , that the abandonment of the initiative is appropriate . Such practices , however , run the risk of under - exploiting the lessons learned from unsuc - cessful or only partially successful initiatives ( e . g . , Sitkin , 1992 ) . Our aim is not to dispute the importance of continued search activity . Indeed , we note that it is at the heart of well - admired processes such as skunk works , probe and learn , and so forth . Rather , our aim is to highlight the difficulty such processes raise for conceptualizing and manag - ing real options . Specifically , the more freedom afforded to an option manager ( i . e . , the more active his or her role is in resolving uncertainty ) , the more likely the option is to take on a life of its own , independent of the requirement speci - fied by the logic governing the firm’s portfolio of options . When the selection and evaluation cri - teria differ across levels of the organization , which is increasingly the case as managers have more control and are more vested in their projects , freedom of action at the level of the project is not consonant with the consistent ap - proach to portfolio management at the level of the firm . Making investment decisions under the assumption of clear - cut abandonment points , when organizational conditions are such that abandonment is unlikely to occur or unlikely to be timely , is likely to render an initial real op - tions valuation to be quite misleading . Since real options framework is a theory of allocation and control , this raises a question as to the mer - its of its application under such conditions . In sum , firms invest in the active develop - ment of technology , and not in passive bets as to winners and losers . Given the impossibility of proving failure and the absence of formal expiration dates for an option investment , a firm’s internal selection regime dictates its ability to manage options . A well - managed real options strategy must necessarily guard against the natural momentum that builds up around hopeful activity . Another way of characterizing our argument about the importance of abandonment is to rec - ognize that , from the perspective of the option initiative , the key is to avoid false negatives ( type II errors ) , in which valuable opportunities are foregone . However , from the perspective of managing the option portfolio , the key is not to forget about avoiding false positives ( type I er - rors ) , which tie up resources that are better used elsewhere . 5 In our own conversations with managers in high - technology firms known for the depth and breadth of their innovative capacity , they consistently spoke of the chal - lenge of shutting down projects . At one firm , “death row” was used to describe a set of projects that the organization had formally recognized as in need of termination but that , for various reasons , kept getting stays of execution and surviving . 2004 81 Adner and Levinthal ALTERNATIVE SEARCH PROCESSES While the notion of real options as a way to frame decision makers’ choices under uncer - tainty is relatively new to the management lit - erature , the problem of organizations confront - ing uncharted worlds is well established . A long - standing strand of the literature has high - lighted the role and importance of search pro - cesses . Search may be local and problem driven , but it also may comprise more opportu - nistic , and less local , exploration . This latter notion of slack search ( March & Simon , 1958 ) has been picked up and interpreted in terms of ideas of autonomous innovation ( Burgelman , 1983 ) and skunk works ( Kanter , 1988 ) —ideas that have not only been offered to capture existing behavior but also held out as normative suggestions for how organizations may cope with uncertain futures . These images of search efforts , relatively loosely controlled but modest in financial com - mitments , lack the procedural rationality of real options decision making . No explicit decision is made as to what constitutes the appropriate amount of slack search at a given time ; rather , the organization is viewed as having , or is en - couraged to develop , a heuristic or norm regard - ing the appropriate level of resources to be al - located to such efforts . Another clear distinction between this broad category of path - dependent principles and the real options framework is that specific initia - tives are not endorsed or necessarily examined by higher - level actors within the organization . Slack is introduced into the resource allocation system such that modest initiatives can occur without direct corporate oversight . Of course , if such initiatives identify opportunities that ap - pear to be worth pursuing and worth commer - cial development , it is likely that greater re - source commitments will be necessary , and , as a result , higher - level organizational actors will need to be convinced of the initiative’s merits . This commitment of more substantial resources and the organizational approval of such com - mitments is akin to the “striking” of a option . Again , though , it is important to note that the initial initiative was never chosen by the or - ganization ; rather , the organization chose to al - locate sufficient slack such that such initiatives might emerge . A natural question to ask is when might such less specified discovery processes be preferred to the more explicit decision calculus of real options ? One complexity in considering this contrast is what one is to take as a character - ization of a real options process . In our view , as a behavioral matter , the use of real options may not vary so greatly from the behavior that stems from slack search . Indeed , one of the merits of the real options framework is that it provides a procedurally rational justification for processes of slack search . In that sense , real options are a powerful tool for the “technology of foolishness” ( March , 1988 ) . 6 Alternatively , we can make the reference point decision processes that more closely ad - here to the precepts of real options decision making . One virtue of the real options approach is that since the initial stage - setting invest - ments are more explicit and , in turn , more visi - ble to higher - level actors within the organiza - tion , the organization will have a better sense of its portfolio of initiatives . An organization may feel that it wants some initial exploration in a variety of technologies or markets and would have a better sense of its overall exposure under the real options approach than under a system of slack search The tradeoff to this benefit is , as we have argued above , that to make exploration initia - tives conform to the structure of a real option , the boundaries of these initiatives should be tightly specified ex ante . If an initiative to ex - plore the value of a particular technology or particular market application wanders in re - sponse to feedback from initial efforts or shifts in markets and technologies , the discipline re - quired by real options is lost . However , such discovery processes are often heralded as valu - able means by which innovation occurs ( Adner & Levinthal , 2002 ; Day , 1990 ; Lynn et al . , 1996 ) . While these more generic path - dependent pro - cesses of exploration do not address the aban - donment challenges we have highlighted , un - like real option approaches , they do not make implicit assumptions about termination that are critical to their validity . 6 By “technology of foolishness , ” March ( 1988 ) refers to mechanisms that legitimate the allocation of resources for search and discovery processes . 82 January Academy of Management Review Clearly , to the extent that the potential paths a stage - setting investment may take are inher - ently limited , the real options framework is more readily applied . In addition , in such settings the potential downside of its application in terms of foregone opportunities that are discovered ex post is sharply diminished . Such a perspective suggests that real options may be better suited to well - specified investments , such as overseas production facilities and innovation licenses , than to less structured opportunities , such as the development of new product technologies in the face of a wide set of possible technical solutions and market applications . CONCLUSIONS In some sense , our argument simply places the notion of real options in the broader context of sequential decision making . Actions are taken , beliefs are revised , and subsequent choices are made . One is then left with the em - pirical question of how to distinguish real op - tions from the broader class of sequential deci - sion - making processes . Demonstrating that firms’ investment paths involve a sequential process of scaling up is , in itself , insufficient . There are a wide variety of processes that would generate such a pattern , such as adjust - ment costs and time compression diseconomies ( Dierickx & Cool , 1989 ) , and incremental learn - ing ( Cyert & March , 1963 ) , that are not directly linked to ideas of real options . As a result , we must move beyond measures of the performance characteristics of firms’ project portfolios , whether average project losses at real options firms are smaller ( because they have limited downside risk ) or average project gains relative to losses are larger at real options firms ( because losses are limited but upside risk is unbounded ) . Rather , we should examine the way in which the portfolio is ad - justed over time and , in particular , firms’ ap - proaches to abandonment . Thus , in terms of observed behavior , we would expect real options firms , relative to their tradi - tional counterparts , to 1 . abandon projects earlier and 2 . have higher project abandonment rates . Similarly , in terms of organizational pro - cesses , we would expect real options firms to have 1 . stricter action mandates for business units and project teams ; 2 . formalized milestones and go / no - go proce - dures ; 3 . incentive systems , organizational cultures , and allocation mechanisms that are more tolerant of failure ; and 4 . review procedures that are more sensitive to the presence of different incentives at different levels of the organization . More broadly , in terms of empirical research on the use of real options in organizations , we would hope to see demonstrations of patterns of systematic and structured decision making that demonstrate divergence from both net present value analysis and unstructured path depen - dence , as well as data that consider project ter - mination , not just the initiation and pacing of investment . Firms face complex and highly uncertain in - vestment environments . The real options frame - work usefully highlights the links between cur - rent actions and the set of future possibilities . However , to the extent that exit criteria are not well posed in a world of action and open - ended search , this framing can be overly seductive . While real options logic may justify investments that would be rejected under the calculus of net present value , these “justified” investments may well destroy value when implicit assumptions about abandonment flexibility are wrong . In set - tings where the range of responses to the reso - lution of technical and market uncertainty is largely unconstrained , the utility of applying op - tions logic is unclear . For such strategic invest - ments , in contrast to financial options , exit cri - teria are not self - evident . Rather , in such circumstances it may be more useful to identify the possible sequence of experiments that will test the most promising market and technical paths available to the firm . To be clear , our purpose is not to question the internal logic of real options . We do feel , how - ever , that grouping all path - dependent activity under the real options label overextends real options logic as tool , framework , and even as metaphor , and undermines its effective applica - tion . We believe that understanding a theory’s boundaries serves to make it more powerful and more precise . We argue that the cause of options thinking is best served in considering the boundaries of the domain of applicability of this logic for business strategy , and in defining its place within the broader set of tools that are 2004 83 Adner and Levinthal available to address decision making under un - certainty . In this regard , we suggest that the answer to the question “What is ( and is not ) a real option ? ” has as much to do with the or - ganization as it does with the opportunity . REFERENCES Adner , R . , & Levinthal , D . 2002 . The emergence of emerging technologies . California Management Review , 45 ( 1 ) : 50 – 66 . Amram , M . , & Kulatilaka , N . 1998 . Real options : Managing strategic investment in an uncertain world . Boston : Har - vard Business School Press . Block , Z . , & MacMillan , I . 1993 . Corporate venturing : Creating new businesses within the firm . Boston : Harvard Busi - ness School Press . Bower , J . L . 1970 . Managing the resource allocation process . Boston : Harvard Business School Press . Bowman , E . H . , & Moskowitz , G . T . 2001 . Real options analy - sis and strategic decision making . Organization Sci - ence , 12 : 772 – 777 . Brunsson , N . 1982 . The irrationality of action and action ra - tionality : Decisions , ideologies , and organizational ac - tions . Journal of Management Studies , 19 : 29 – 34 . Burgelman , R . A . 1983 . A process model of internal corporate venturing in the diversified major firm . Administrative Science Quarterly , 28 : 223 – 244 . Camerer , C . , & Lovallo , D . 1999 . Overconfidence and excess entry : An experimental approach . American Economic Review , 89 : 306 – 319 . Copeland , T . , & Antikarnov , V . 2001 . Real options : A practi - tioner’s guide . New York : Texere . Cyert , R . M . , & March , J . G . 1963 . A behavioral theory of the firm . Englewoods Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Day , G . S . 1990 . Market driven strategy : Processes for creating value . New York : Free Press . Dierickx , I . , & Cool , K . 1989 . Asset stock accumulation and the sustainability of competitive advanatage . Management Science , 35 : 1504 – 1511 . Dixit , A . K . , & Pindyck , R . S . 1994 . Investment under uncer - tainty . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Dosi , G . 1982 . Technological paradigms and technological trajectories : A suggested interpretation of the determi - nants and directions of technical change . Research Pol - icy , 11 : 147 – 162 . Ferrier , W . J . , Smith , K . G . , & Grimm , C . 1999 . The role of competitive action in market share erosion and industry dethronement : A study of industry leaders and challeng - ers . Academy of Management Journal , 42 : 372 – 388 . Galunic , D . C . , & Eisenhardt , K . M . 1996 . The evolution of intracorporate domains : Divisional charter losses in high - technology , multidivisional corporations . Organi - zation Science , 7 : 255 – 282 . Garud , R . , & Nayyar , P . R . 1994 . Transformative capacity : Continual structuring by intertermporal technology transfer . Strategic Management Journal , 15 : 365 – 385 . Garud , R . , & Van de Ven , A . H . 1992 . An empirical evaluation of the internal corporate venturing process . Strategic Management Journal , 13 : 93 – 109 . Ghemawat , P . 1991 . Commitment . New York : Free Press . Grenadier , S . 2001 . Game choices : The intersection of real options and game theory . London : Risk Books . Kanter , R . M . 1988 . When a thousand flowers bloom : Struc - tural , collective , and social conditions for innovation in organization . Research in Organizational Behavior , 10 : 169 – 211 . Kirzner , I . M . 1997 . Entrepreneurial discovery and the com - petitive market process : An Austrian approach . Journal of Economic Literature , 35 : 60 – 85 . Knight , F . H . 1921 . Risk , uncertainty and profit . Boston : Houghton Mifflin . Kogut , B . 1991 . Joint ventures and the option to expand and acquire . Management Science , 37 : 19 – 33 . Kogut , B . , & Kulatilaka , N . 2001 . Capabilities as real options . Organization Science , 12 : 744 – 758 . Kulatilaka , N . , & Perotti , A . 1998 . Strategic growth options . Management Science , 44 : 1021 – 1031 . Lander , D . M . , & Pinches , G . E . 1998 . Challenges to the prac - tical implementation of modeling and valuing real op - tions . Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance , 38 : 537 – 567 . Luehrman , T . A . 1998 . Strategy as a portfolio of real options . Harvard Business Review , 76 ( 5 ) : 89 – 99 . Lynn , G . S . , Morone , J . G . , & Paulson , A . S . 1996 . Marketing and discontinuous innovation : The probe and learn pro - cess . California Management Review , 38 ( 3 ) : 8 – 37 . Maidique , M . 1980 . Entrepreneurs , champions , and technolog - ical innovation . Sloan Management Review , 21 ( 2 ) : 59 – 76 . March , J . G . 1988 . Decisions and organizations . Oxford : Blackwell . March , J . G . , & Simon , H . A . 1958 . Organizations . New York : Wiley . McGrath , R . G . 1997 . A real options logic for initiating tech - nology positioning investments . Academy of Manage - ment Review , 22 : 974 – 996 . McGrath , R . G . 1999 . Falling forward : Real options reasoning and entrepreneurial failure . Academy of Management Review , 24 : 13 – 30 . McGrath , R . G . , & MacMillan , I . C . 2000 . The entrepreneurial mindset . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Business School Press . Miller , K . D . , & Reuer , J . J . 1998 . Firm strategy and economic exposure to foreign exchange rate movements . Journal of International Business Studies , 29 : 493 – 514 . Nelson , R . , & Winter , S . 1982 . An evolutionary theory of eco - nomic change . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Penrose , E . 1959 . The theory of the growth of the firm . New York : Oxford University Press . 84 January Academy of Management Review Popper , K . R . 1959 . The logic of scientific discovery . New York : Harper Torchbook . Reuer , J . J . , & Leiblein , M . J . 2000 . Downside risk implications of multinationality and international joint ventures . Academy of Management Journal , 43 : 203 – 214 . Russo , E . , & Schoemaker , P . J . 1989 . Decision traps : Ten bar - riers to brilliant decision - making and how to overcome them . New York : Doubleday . Selten , R . 1975 . Reexamination of the perfectness concept for equilibrium points in extension games . International Journal of Game Theory , 4 : 25 – 55 . Sitkin , S . B 1992 . Learning through failure : The strategy of small losses . Research in Organizational Behavior , 14 : 231 – 266 . Staw , B . M . 1981 . The escalation of commitment to a chosen course of action . Academy of Management Review , 6 : 577 – 587 . Trigeorgis , L . 1997 . Real options : Managerial flexibility and strategy in resource allocation . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Van de Ven , A . H . , Polley , D . E . , Garud , R . , & Venkataraman , S . 1999 . The innovation journey . New York : Oxford Uni - versity Press . Ron Adner is an associate professor of strategy and management at INSEAD . He received his Ph . D . from The Wharton School , University of Pennsylvania . His research examines the impact of the demand environment on technology evolution and com - petition , as well as the organizational challenges that confront firms competing in heterogeneous demand environments . Daniel A . Levinthal is the Julian Aresty Professor of Management and Economics at The Wharton School , University of Pennsylvania . He received his Ph . D . from the Graduate School of Business , Stanford University . His research interests focus on issues of organizational adaptation and industry evolution , particularly in the context of technological change . 2004 85 Adner and Levinthal