710 | SEPTEMBER 2003 | VOLUME 4 www . nature . com / reviews / genetics R E V I E W S distinct , yet architecturally similar , systems . I begin by reviewing our knowledge of the molecular specification of cell fate in the neural and vascular systems . I then examine the links between vascular and nervous system development , which include the influence of endothelial cells ( ECs ) on neurogenesis , the similarities in boundary formation in these systems , the interconnected genetic wiring of their developmental guidance decisions and the coordinated patterning of nerves and arteries . Finally , I discuss the unique perspectives that this inte - grated view of the developmental genetics of nerves and blood vessels allows , and the therapeutic opportunities that it could provide . Vascular and neural cell - fate specification Both neural and vascular progenitors differentiate into many cellular subtypes , all of which are adapted to per - form specialized functions . Both in the neural and vas - cular networks , cellular differentiation characteristics vary according to anatomical position , which implies that genetic programmes determine the positional identity of the distinct cell types . Also , as the various neural and vascular cell types arise at different stages in development , genetic programmes control their tem - poral identity . In general , the molecular mechanisms of these genetic programmes are better characterized for The evolution of multicellular organisms allowed spe - cialized tissues to perform complex tasks . At least two key steps were crucial for vertebrates to achieve this goal : the formation of a vascular system in which blood - vessel networks branch frequently to ensure that all tissues receive an adequate blood supply , and the development of a nervous system in which highly branched nerve networks transmit electrical signals to peripheral organs to coordinate tasks . Both networks are laid down in a complex and ordered manner , which is controlled by developmental cues that ensure that they match the architectural and functional demands of specific tissues . Notable similarities in the way in which these two net - works are organized and respond to injury , together with the obvious anatomical and developmental links between them , raise intriguing questions . To what extent is the genetic regulation of their development and func - tion interdependent ? How much can we learn about angiogenesis from studies of neurogenesis and vice versa ? New genetic studies have begun to answer these questions and are pointing the way to new and exciting studies of the development of nerves and blood vessels , which might also have important therapeutic implica - tions . Here , I highlight how these studies have shown that evolution has used common genetic pathways to regulate the development of these two functionally BLOOD VESSELS AND NERVES : COMMON SIGNALS , PATHWAYS AND DISEASES Peter Carmeliet Both blood vessels and nerves are vital channels to and from tissues . Recent genetic insights show that they have much more in common than was originally anticipated . They use similar signals and principles to differentiate , grow and navigate towards their targets . Moreover , the vascular and nervous systems cross - talk and , when dysregulated , this contributes to medically important diseases . The realization that both systems use common genetic pathways should not only form links between vascular biology and neuroscience , but also promises to accelerate the discovery of new mechanistic insights and therapeutic opportunities . Center for Transgene Technology and Gene Therapy , Flanders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology , Katholieke Universiteit Leuven , Campus Gasthuisberg , Herestraat 49 , B - 3000 , Leuven , Belgium . e - mail : peter . carmeliet @ med . kuleuven . ac . be doi : 10 . 1038 / nrg1158 NEUROECTODERM The embryonic ectoderm that develops into the central and peripheral nervous systems . NEURON A nerve cell that contains a cell body from which dendrites and axons extend to adjacent neurons , and receive and transmit electrical and chemical signals , respectively . NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 4 | SEPTEMBER 2003 | 711 R E V I E W S tissues , primarily fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) , bone morphogenetic protein ( BMP ) and sonic hedgehog ( Shh ) , determine the subsequent positional identity of the differentiating neural cells 1 – 3 , 6 ( FIG . 1 ) . Temporal spec - ification , it seems , is dependent on differences in the responsiveness to various signals at different stages of development . So , successive waves of different transcrip - tional regulators specify the combinatorial codes of positional and temporal identity . For example , in the ventral spinal cord pMN domain , the expression of OLIGODENDROCYTE lineage transcription factor 2 ( Olig2 ) and neurogenin - 2 ( Neurog2 ) induces the differentia - tion of motor neurons during mid - gestation , whereas the combination of Olig2 and Nkx2 - 2 subsequently generates oligodendrocytes 2 , 7 . Inhibitor of differentia - tion ( Id ) proteins inhibit the activity of differentiation promoting basic - helix – loop – helix ( bHLH ) transcrip - tion factors 8 and , therefore , the loss of Id1 / 3 or Id2 causes premature neuronal or oligodendrocyte differ - entiation , respectively 9 , 10 . Cell - fate decision - making in the neural crest ( NC ) provides a remarkable illustration of the link between the nervous and vascular systems . The neural crest seg - regates from the dorsal portion of the neural tube and migrates as a pluripotent cell population to various regions in the embryo , where it differentiates to form most of the peripheral nervous system , melanocytes and MESECTODERMAL derivatives such as the craniofacial cartilage and bone 11 , 12 . However , NC cells can also differentiate to form the smooth muscle cells ( SMCs ) of the vessels of the ‘branchial vascular sector’ , such as the pharyngeal arch arteries ( PAAs ) and the vessels in the forebrain , face and jaws 11 , 13 . On the basis of genetic studies in Xenopus , zebrafish and chickens , a medio - lateral BMP gradient , in combination with an antero - posterior gradient of FGF , Wnt and retinoic acid , induces the NC 12 , 14 . The subsequent migration and differentiation of NC cells depend on intrinsic cascades of transcription factors ( such as Pax3 , which is mutated in splotch mice ) , receptors ( for example , platelet - derived growth factor receptor - α , which is mutated in patch mice ) 11 , 15 , 16 and ligands 16 – 20 ( for example , transforming growth factor ( TGF ) - β 1 , which directs NC cells to an SMC fate 21 ) . Gene - inactivation studies in mice further show that the neurorepellent semaphorin - 3C ( Sema3C ) , which binds neuropilin - 1 ( Nrp1 ) , regulates NC - dependent remodelling of the pharyngeal arch arteries 17 , 18 . Although SMCs arise from NC cells , they can also originate from MESODERMAL or EPICARDIAL CELLS 13 , 22 , 23 . ECs , which are the other main type of vascular cell , arise from mesodermal ANGIOBLASTS or HAEMANGIOBLASTS . Similar to neural cells , there are also several different subtypes of ECs and SMCs , which fulfil specific func - tions in different tissues 22 , 24 , 25 . Fate - mapping studies in Xenopus embryos show that ECs in distinct regions arise from distinct angioblasts 26 , which indicates that these precursors might also assume positional and temporal identity . Even in a single vessel , many ECs have distinct cell fates . For example , three types of EC , each with a distinct cell fate , build the INTERSEGMENTAL VESSELS in the the neural than the vascular system . Here , I focus pri - marily on those molecules and mechanisms that are shared by both systems in parallel . Although several of these molecules have many family members , each with pleiotropic activities and relevance to biological processes other than neural and vascular development , here I only discuss these molecules in general owing to space limitations . The pathway from NEUROECTODERMAL stem cells ( NSCs ) to specialized NEURONS and GLIAL CELLS can be viewed as a three - component process : the initial decision to commit to a neural cell phenotype , the determination of positional identity ( antero - posterior and dorso - lateral ) and the developmental decision to differentiate . These decisions determine how neural progenitor populations in different regions of the neural tube undergo distinct programmes of neurogenesis that give rise to specific neuronal subtypes at precise locations and develop - mental times 1 – 3 ( FIG . 1 ) . Notch signals have an important role in the initial commitment to differentiation of NSCs in the neural tube . Through lateral inhibition , these signals prevent the neurogenic commitment of adjacent precursors by upregulation of Hes1 / 5 type repressors 4 , 5 . It is only when Notch signals are down - regulated that neural cells start to differentiate . Gradients of morphogens that are secreted from adjacent GLIAL CELL A non - neuronal cell in the brain that lacks axons and dendrites . These cells are subdivided into astrocytes ( which make contact with neurons and blood vessels ) , oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells ( which form myelin around axons in the central and peripheral nervous system , respectively ) , ependymal cells ( which line the ventricles ) and others . LATERAL INHIBITION The process by which a neuron that expresses Notch transmits inhibitory signals to adjacent precursors . MORPHOGEN A substance that specifies cell identity as a function ofits concentration . MOTOR NEURON A nerve cell that innervates muscle cells . Venous EC Arterial EC Angioblast Somite Shh Notch Notch Neuronal cell differentiation Dorsal aorta Axial vein NT NSC Arterial / venous cell - fate decision VEGF N Shh BMP Figure 1 | Neural and vascular cell fate . In the neural tube ( NT ) , LATERAL INHIBITION through Notch signalling maintains neuroectodermal stem cell ( NSC ) potential , and low Notch allows neuronal cell differentiation . Gradients of sonic hedgehog ( Shh ) , which is produced by the notochord ( N ) , and bone morphogenetic protein ( BMP ) determine the ventral and dorsal identity of neural progenitors and induce distinct neuronal cell subtypes in a dose - dependent fashion along the MORPHOGEN gradient , which explains why distinct types of neuron arise at different locations — for example , MOTOR NEURONS arise more ventrally than interneurons in the spinal cord . Notochord - derived Shh induces somites to release vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) , which — through Notch signalling — induces arterial endothelial cell ( EC ) fate at the expense of venous EC fate . 712 | SEPTEMBER 2003 | VOLUME 4 www . nature . com / reviews / genetics R E V I E W S factors that influence EC and SMC fate , respectively 31 . Further illustrations of how EC fate is co - determined by environmental signals are the induction of a blood – brain barrier EC phenotype by glial - derived neurotrophic factor ( GDNF ) and other glial cell - derived factors 32 , and the selective stimulation of endocrine gland ECs by EG - VEGF 33 . Malignant cells induce ECs in tumour ves - sels to acquire a distinct fate and express unique ‘vascular zip codes’that are absent in other vessels 34 . Genetic studies have also provided new insights into how molecules and pathways that are crucial for neural cell - fate specification determine the arterial versus venous EC - fate decision . Differences in blood pressure and direction of blood flow were previously thought to be responsible for determining whether an EC ended up as an arterial or venous cell . However , recent findings indicate that EC fate is specified before the onset of cir - culation . Lineage tracking in zebrafish embryos indicates that angioblast precursors for the trunk artery and vein are spatially mixed in the lateral posterior mesoderm , but that the progeny of each angioblast are restricted to one of the vessels 35 . These angioblasts receive signals from the notochord — which also releases crucial signals for neural progenitors — and the ventral endoderm , and become restricted to the aorta or trunk vein . So , in floating head ( flh ) and no tail ( ntl ) mutant zebrafish embryos , which lack a notochord , the dorsal aorta fails to form , but formation of the axial vein is less affected 36 , 37 . MORPHOLINO KNOCKDOWN of growth differentiation factor 6b ( gdf6b , also known as DGF6 / radar ) , which is a zebrafish member of the BMP family that is expressed in the hypochord and primitive endoderm , disrupts the integrity of the axial vessels 38 . Other endoderm - derived signals include VEGF 39 — a prototype key angiogenic factor 40 — and Indian hedgehog ( Ihh ) , which can reprogramme prospective neuroectoderm along EC zebrafish embryo 27 . Genetic studies in mice , zebrafish and Xenopus are starting to unravel the transcriptional code that determines EC fate 23 , 28 , 29 . This code also involves bHLH transcription factors ( hypoxia - inducible factor - 2 α , stem cell leukaemia factor and Tfeb trans - criptional repressor ) 30 as well as Id repressors — as exemplified by the perturbed developmental and tumour angiogenesis in mice that lack Id1 / 3 ( REF . 9 ) . Vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) and platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) - BB are environmental EPENDYMAL CELLS The cells that line the passageways in the brain , where the special fluid that protects the brain and spinal cord ( cerebro - spinal fluid ) is made and stored . OLIGODENDROCYTE A type ofnon - neuronal brain cell that lacks axons and dendrites , which forms axons in the central nervous system . MESECTODERM Mesenchymal cells that are derived from the neural crest . MESODERM One of the three germ layers of the early embryo , which consists of the notochord , muscle and blood . EPICARDIAL CELLS The cells that line the outside ofthe heart . ANGIOBLASTS Endothelial progenitors that give rise to endothelial cells . HAEMANGIOBLASTS The common ancestor of haematopoietic and endothelial cells . INTERSEGMENTAL VESSELS Vessels that carry blood from the dorsal aorta between somites to the sides ofthe neural tube . MORPHOLINO KNOCKDOWN The process by which morpholino DNA oligomers lower gene expression by inhibiting translation . Lateral ventricle Ependymalcell layer Ischaemia Capillary NSC SVZ BV VEGF NSC BDNF Neuron survival , axon outgrowth and enhanced differentiation Figure 2 | Neural stem cells at the vascular niche . Neuroectodermal stem cells ( NSCs ) at the subventricular zone ( SVZ ) lie in the vicinity of the EPENDYMAL CELL layer , which produces vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) , at a vascular niche of numerous capillaries . A shortage of oxygen during physical exercise or stroke upregulates VEGF levels , which stimulate both NSCs and capillaries to grow , and enhance neuronal differentiation , axon outgrowth and neuron survival . The favourable effect of endothelial cells on neurogenesis is , at least in part , mediated by the release of brain - derived neurotrophic factor ( BDNF ) . BV , blood vessel . Somite Notochord Neural tube Neural crest Ao Caudal Rostral ISV Figure 3 | Role of ephrin / Eph interactions in neural crest migration and intersegmental - vessel branching . Neural crest cells migrate only into and through the rostral half of the somite , and avoid the caudal half because of repulsive EphB / ephrin - B interactions . Intersegmental vessels ( ISVs ) branch at regularly spaced sites and are guided to migrate through the somites , but are repelled from entry into the somites through repulsive EphB / ephrin - B signals . Ao , aorta . NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 4 | SEPTEMBER 2003 | 713 R E V I E W S arteries , but not veins 54 . Notch - 3 signalling is also crucial for maintaining SMC fate and , when mutated , causes cerebral arteriopathy and stroke 55 . The extra vascular defects in mice or fish that lack Notch signalling indicate that Notch might be involved in many aspects of vascu - lar development 56 . One possibility is that Notch deter - mines the fate of an EC to remain quiescent or , instead , to sprout — Notch might contribute to the ‘angiogenic switch’ and vascular morphogenesis by influencing expression of the VEGF receptor Flk1 ( REFS 56 , 57 ) . So , neural and vascular precursors use common signals and genetic pathways ( for example , Notch , Shh , BMP , Nrp1 , bHLH proteins and inhibitors ) to specify , in a temporo - spatial pattern , their fate to many differenti - ated cellular subtypes , each of which fulfils specialized functions and is present at particular positions in the neural and vascular network . Also , the link between both systems is further illustrated by findings that neural and vascular cells influence the cell - fate decision - making of one another , and that certain neural cells can even acquire a vascular cell fate . Endothelial cells influence neurogenesis As well as the similarities in cell - fate decision - making in neural and vascular systems , there is now substan - tial evidence for a direct link between angiogenesis and neurogenesis . ECs have many more functions than simply providing a passive conduit for blood . Recent genetic studies in mice , zebrafish and Xenopus indicate that ECs might release developmental cues for organogenesis 25 , 58 – 63 , as well as neurogenesis and neural cell fate . For example , ECs and NSCs are found at similar locations and developmental stages in the neural germinal zones 64 , 65 . ECs also interact in a close temporo - spatial relationship with ASTROGLIAL CELLS , which are the source of NSCs . In the adult , NSCs are neighbours to ECs , and they proliferate in small clus - ters around dividing capillaries ( ‘vascular niches’ ) in specific areas of the bird 66 and mammal central nervous system , such as the subependymal zone of the lateral ventricle ( SVZ ) 67 ( FIG . 2 ) . ECs release leukaemia inhibitory factor , BMP - 2 , brain - derived growth factor ( BDNF ) and basic FGF , which induce the differentia - tion of astrocyte precursors or NC stem cells 21 , 68 . VEGF , which is produced by ependymal cells at neuro - genic sites or administered to the brain , stimulates the self - renewal and fate of neural progenitor cells 69 – 72 , partly through stimulating ECs to release neurogenic signals such as BDNF 66 . The fact that neural and vascular cells cross - talk is further illustrated by findings that VEGF and Sema3A antagonistically affect neural progenitor cells 73 and ECs 74 . Moreover , when SVZ explants are co - cultured with ECs , maturation , NEURITE outgrowth and migra - tion of neurons are enhanced 75 . Observations that conditions that increase neural activity and stimulate neurogenesis also trigger angiogenesis 76 , 77 , and that cranial irradiation causes a decrease in both hippo - campal neurogenesis and angiogenesis 78 , further strengthen the link between the development of nerves and blood vessels . lineages 41 , 42 . Chicken – quail graft studies indicate that ECs retain a remarkable plasticity for acquiring an arterial identity , at least during initial development , and that local cues determine this plasticity 43 , 44 . Studies in zebrafish indicate that Shh , which is pro - duced by the notochord , indirectly specifies arterial EC fate 45 , 46 ( FIG . 1 ) . Indeed , formation of the aorta is impaired in zebrafish embryos that are mutant for sonic you ( syu ) , which is the zebrafish homologue of Shh 29 , 47 , or after the reduction of Shh 45 . Shh induces the expression ofVEGF in the adjacent somites , which , in turn , drives the arterial differentiation of angioblasts . There are several other lines of evidence that indicate the importance of VEGF in vascular cell - fate determination . When released from SCHWANN CELLS , VEGF induces the arterial specification of vessels tracking alongside these nerves 48 . Moreover , Nrp1 , a receptor that is selective for the VEGF 165 isoform , is expressed in arterial beds 43 , 49 . VEGF also determines arterial EC specification after birth in the heart and retina , in which the matrix - binding VEGF 188 isoform is crucial for arterial development 49 , 50 . The Notch pathway acts downstream of VEGF in arterial EC specification 45 . As in the nervous system , Notch influences alternative fate choices between cells with equivalent developmental potential and ensures that uncommitted EC precursors differentiate along an arterial fate at the expense of a venous fate ( FIG . 1 ) . So , zebrafish embryos with a mutant form of mindbomb ( mib ) — a neurogenic gene in the Notch pathway that encodes a RING ubiquitin ligase 51 — or embryos in which Notch signalling is knocked down , have a loss of artery - specific markers and ectopic vein marker - gene expression in the dorsal aorta , whereas the ectopic activation of Notch signalling represses venous cell fate 52 . The hairy - related bHLH transcription factor gridlock ( grl ) is a candidate downstream effector , as a HYPOMORPH MUTATION or knockdown perturbs the assembly of the aorta 53 . Transgenic zebrafish studies showed that phospho - lipase C γ - 1 , which is a known effector of receptor tyro - sine kinase signalling , is crucial for the formation of SCHWANN CELL A type ofnon - neuronal brain cell that lacks axons and dendrites , which forms axons in the peripheral nervous system . HYPOMORPH MUTATION A mutation that does not completely eliminate the wild - type function of a gene and therefore causes a less severe phenotype than a loss - of - function ( or null ) mutation . ASTROGLIAL CELL ( Astrocyte ) . A star - shaped glial cell that supports the tissues of the central nervous system . NEURITE Any neuronal process ( axon or dendrite ) . This term is typically used to refer to the processes of neurons in cell culture . Sema3A Nrp1 Nrp1 VEGF VEGF Sema3A / Nrp1 causes repulsion VEGF / Nrp1 causes attraction Figure 4 | A balance of Sema3A and VEGF determines Nrp1 mediated growth - cone guidance . The filopodia of both endothelial cells ( ECs ) and axons express neuropilin - 1 ( Nrp1 ) : the semaphorin Sema3A repels ( jagged arrow ) the filopodia , whereas vascular endothelial growth factor VEGF 164 attracts the filopodia , which drives the EC or axon to move in the direction of the VEGF gradient . The role of VEGF is best characterized for ECs . 714 | SEPTEMBER 2003 | VOLUME 4 www . nature . com / reviews / genetics R E V I E W S membrane - bound ephrin ligands , which signal bi - directionally , are candidate effectors for cell sorting and the generation of exclusion zones 82 , as they are repellent cell - surface molecules that are expressed in alternating rhombomeres 83 . Zebrafish embryos with a null muta - tion in the val gene , which encodes the transcription factor valentino , lack rhombomere boundaries and fail to establish complementary domains of EphB4a and ephrin - B2a expression 84 . When signalling through EphA4 is disrupted in the Xenopus or zebrafish hind - brain , boundary formation is also compromised 85 . Eph / ephrins can , however , also be involved in adhesion and attraction , which explains why the neural tube fails to close properly in ephrin - A5 deficient mice 86 . A typical example of boundary formation in the vasculature is that observed between arterial and venous ECs . Similar to neural cells , vascular cells also use Eph / ephrin signals to establish these boundaries 87 , 88 . The prevailing view was that capillaries had neither arte - rial nor venous identity . However , LacZ knock - in studies showed that expression of ephrin - B2 extends into capillaries midway between the terminal arterioles and postcapillary veins , whereas EphB4 has an equiva - lent expression pattern at the venous side . These non - overlapping expression patterns might not only prevent the intermixing of both cell types and allow spatial seg - regation of arterial and venous vessels , but also ensure that arterial capillaries connect appropriately to the venous system , thereby precluding abnormal fusion into cavernous vessel lakes 89 – 92 . Segmentation might also rely on preferential cohe - sion between similar cells . Cadherins are homophilic membrane - spanning adhesion molecules that interact with the actin cytoskeleton through cytoplasmic catenins 93 , 94 . Differences in the amount or adhesive strength of cadherins , or differential expression of cad - herins that differ in binding specificity , might also induce cell sorting 80 . Both the vascular and neural systems Formation of vascular and neural boundaries The organization of both the vascular and nervous sys - tems requires mechanisms that maintain the physical seg - regation of distinct cell populations . The segmentation of the vertebrate hindbrain into RHOMBOMERES is a typical example of boundary formation 79 – 81 . Remarkably , adjacent rhombomeres have distinct adhesive proper - ties that prevent them from mixing with each other and , as a result , boundaries are formed . Members of the Eph family of receptor tyrosine kinases and their RHOMBOMERES Segments ofthe embryonic hindbrain , which is also known as the rhombencephalon . Box 1 | Role of VEGF isoforms in vessel guidance Genetic studies in mice that express a single vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) isoform , have provided insights into how VEGF , through the localization of heparin - binding isoforms in the extracellular matrix , provides a gradient of branching and patterning cues ( FIG . 5 ) . VEGF is alternatively transcribed in several isoforms with different matrix - and receptor - binding affinities : the diffusible VEGF 120 isoform , which lacks the heparin - binding domain that is necessary for interaction with the extracellular matrix ; the VEGF 188 isoform , which is secreted but remains bound to the matrix and is not soluble ; and the VEGF 164 isoform , which is soluble yet binds matrix components 123 , 155 . All isoforms bind the receptors Flk1 and Flt1 , but only VEGF 164 binds neuropilin - 1 ( Nrp1 ) . Vascular development in VEGF 164 / 164 mice , which express only the VEGF164 isoform , is normal , indicating that this isoform confers all guidance cues for vessel patterning 49 . In VEGF 120 / 120 mice , which express only VEGF 120 , vascular guidance is severely abnormal . In the retina , endothelial cell ( EC ) filopodia fail to protrude normally , become arrested and terminate in blind - ending loops that are incorporated in expanding vessels , thereby forming an aborted primitive network of large vessels 49 , 134 . Because of its solubility , VEGF 120 leaks out of the retina into the vitreous cavity and prevents normal regression of the hyaloid vasculature . Defective vessel branching also occurs in the heart and kidney in VEGF 120 / 120 mice 126 , 127 . In the pharyngeal arches , hotspots ofVEGF 164 and Nrp1 expression ensure that the fourth left - sided pharyngeal arch artery ( PAA ) persists , whereas the right - sided fourth PAA , which lacks such hotspots , is destined to regress . Absence ofVEGF 164 and reduced Nrp1 levels in VEGF 120 / 120 mice induce incorrect regression of the left - sided fourth PAA , which leads to persistence of the right - sided fourth PAA and birth defects of the great arteries 138 . By contrast , in VEGF 188 / 188 mice that express only the matrix - associated VEGF 188 , retinal ECs send out supernumerary , abnormally thin and chaotically branching filopodia 49 , 134 , whereas hyaloid vessels , which are attracted by retinal matrix - associated VEGF 188 , enter the peripheral retina 49 . So , correct EC patterning requires both short - range matrix - associated VEGF 188 guidance cues and long - range soluble VEGF 120 cues , which are laid down as a gradient from the target to the EC growth cones at the leading tip . VEGF 120 Target cells VEGF 164 VEGF 188 a b c ECM Figure 5 | Role of matrix association of VEGF in vessel branching . Long - range vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) gradients allow endothelial cells ( ECs ) to maintain their directional course to the target cell , whereas short - range matrix - bound VEGF guideposts are necessary for ECs to migrate step - by - step along the journey . a | In the absence of heparin - binding VEGF 164 and VEGF 188 , there is insufficient guidance by short - range matrix - associated VEGF . The soluble VEGF 120 is freely diffusible , chaotically distributed and fails to provide a directional long - range guidance cue . As a result , ECs in a single vessel move in all directions , which leads to vessel expansion rather than directional branching . b | The VEGF 164 isoform provides both short - range matrix guideposts and a long - range gradient of attractant , which allows the vessel to send long sprouts straight to the target . c | When only matrix bound VEGF 188 is present , there is no long - range attraction , and EC filopodia are misguided over short distances , often taking wrong turns . ECM , extracellular matrix . NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 4 | SEPTEMBER 2003 | 715 R E V I E W S from crossing the midline and COMMISSURAL AXONS from recrossing 109 . Mutations of Slit1 / Slit2 in mice , or astray ( ast ) / roundabout homologue 2 ( robo2 ) in zebrafish , dis - rupt optic - chiasm formation and cause guidance errors of retinal axons before , during and after crossing the midline 110 , 111 . Another family of guidance cues com - prises the laminin - related netrin molecules , which are involved in both the attraction and repulsion of neu - rons , depending on the receptor types that are expressed — not an unusual theme in the world of guidance cues 102 , 103 , 112 . For example , netrin - 1 attracts dorsal com - missural interneurons , but repels certain classes of motor neurons . Through interactions between these guidance cues , new combinatorial codes can be gener - ated . For example , when commissural axons cross the provide evidence in favour of this . For example , differen - tial expression of R - cadherin and cadherin - 6 regulates the positioning of cells in the mouse TELENCEPHALON 95 . In the developing spinal cord , repertoires of cadherins deter - mine segregation of motor neurons into functional units 96 . Similarly , ECs rely on the selective expression of vascular endothelial ( VE ) - cadherin : inactivation or inhi - bition of this junction molecule prevents the assembly of new vessels 94 , 97 . ECs in various vascular beds differ in the amount and type of junctional molecules ; for example , brain ECs , from which the blood – brain barrier is formed , have more and tighter junctions 98 . Neural ( N ) - cadherin mediates adhesion between pericytes and ECs , and thereby sorts these two vascular cell types together — a crucial phenomenon for normal vascular morphogenesis and maturation 99 . So , cell sorting in both the vascular and neural sys - tems relies on the use of similar classes of molecules , which attract cells with common functions ( cadherins ) and establish boundaries between cells with different properties ( ephrins ) , thereby establishing order and securing the identity of the many individual cell types in the complex architecture of these networks . Wiring of the vascular and nervous system The establishment of correct connections in both the neural and vascular system is directed by an ordered series of guidance decisions during development . Similar to axons , blood vessels navigate through a com - plex environment to their appropriate targets by select - ing pathways and choosing directions , reassessing their spatial environment and accurately selecting the correct pathways from the maze of possible routes . This process of axon or vessel guidance largely depends on the growth cone , which is a sensory structure that is present at the leading tip of extending axons and blood vessels , and , more specifically , on the finger - like growth - cone protrusions that are known as filopodia 100 – 102 . Axons and vessels can be guided through repulsive tissue corridors that are non - permissive for growth , or attracted by tra - jectories that enhance growth . Growth cones integrate directional information that is provided by combina - tions of attractive and repulsive guidance cues in the surrounding environment — these cues tell the growth cone where and where not to go . Gradients of both long - range diffusible cues and local cues that require contact can repel or attract axons or blood vessels , depending on the repertoire of receptors and down - stream signalling machinery . In general , more molecular insight has been gained into how axons find their path , although our understanding of how vessels are guided to their target is rapidly growing . Below , I discuss some – but not all – of these molecular signals , especially those with similar roles in the wiring of the neural and vascular system . Genetic studies in Drosophila , Caenorhabditis elegans and mice have identified at least four families of cues in the nervous system 102 – 105 . Secreted Slit proteins are one such family , which signal through Roundabout ( Robo ) family receptors 106 – 108 . In Drosophila , Slit is expressed at the ventral midline , where it prevents IPSILATERAL axons TELENCEPHALON The anterior portion ofthe forebrain , which is also known as the cerebrum , the outer layer ofwhich contains the cortex . IPSILATERAL The same side . COMMISSURAL AXONS The commissures are fibre tracts that connect the two brain hemispheres . Sympatheticnerve fibre VascularSMC a b VEGF ARTN Schwanncell Figure 6 | Coordinated patterning of nerves with blood vessels . a | Artemin ( ARTN ) is a vessel - derived neurotropic guidance signal for sympathetic nerve axons ; its expression in the vascular smooth muscle cells ( SMCs ) , from which it is secreted , gradually shifts distally and thereby guides the sympathetic nerve fibre to the target organ . b | Vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) is a nerve - derived arteriotropic guidance signal for small arteries ; its expression in , and secretion from , Schwann cells attracts and induces arteries , but not veins , to track alongside the nerve fibres . 716 | SEPTEMBER 2003 | VOLUME 4 www . nature . com / reviews / genetics R E V I E W S FASCICULATION , zonal segregation of distinct axon popula - tions , neuronal polarity and neuronal cell migration . Semaphorins can also act as attractants . In the case of Sema3A , changes in the cytosolic levels of cyclic GMP in the neuron can switch repulsion into attraction 122 . Moreover , neuropilins can bind particular isoforms of VEGF and its homologue PlGF , and thereby modify the activity of the VEGF receptors Flk1 and Flt1 ( REF . 123 ) . As neuropilins are expressed both on neural and vas - cular cells , semaphorins and VEGF family members might antagonistically regulate neural guidance or ANGIOGENIC SPROUTING ( FIG . 4 ) . Blood - vessel patterning in development is highly stereotyped . For example , there are fixed branching sites from the aorta for arteries that supply the head , internal organs and legs . However , vessel formation in the embryo is also extremely dynamic , with vessel tracts appearing and disappearing , and links between vessels being severed and then reconnected in entirely new pat - terns , until they find their target 124 . Several mechanisms determine vascular patterning . First , oxygen can be con - sidered a repellent , whereas the lack of oxygen is a strong attractant for vessel sprouts . In cells that are farther than the oxygen diffusion limit from a vessel , hypoxia activates hypoxia - inducible transcription fac - tors ( HIF1 α and HIF2 α ) that turn on the expression of angiogenic genes , such as VEGF , which induces vessels to branch towards the hypoxic tissue 125 . So , when HIF - dependent VEGF expression is genetically dysregulated , organs fail to grow and function normally , owing to insufficient vessel branching and growth 126 – 129 . HAEMODYNAMIC FORCES also affect vessel branching . An intralumenal stimulus , such as increased shear stress , induces capillary expansion without branching , whereas an ablumenal stimulus causes vessel sprouting 130 . Also , haemodynamic forces are crucial in reshaping nascent vascular networks and branch angles to optimize flow , floor plate , Slit silences the attractant activity of netrin , thereby preventing the crossed axons from being attracted to and recrossing the plate 102 , 104 , 113 . The Eph / ephrin family also determines the guidance and patterning of axons — both through repulsive and attractive mechanisms 83 , 86 , 102 , 103 , 114 . Their role in the ner - vous system has been highlighted by topographic map - ping studies ; for example , in the visual system , axons from the nasal retina project to the posterior TECTUM and those from the temporal retina project to the anterior tectum . In general , axons that express a high density of EphA receptors project to a tectal region with low ephrin - A expression , and axons with low EphA density project to a tectal region with high ephrin - A expression , but topographic maps form according to relative , rather than absolute , EphA levels . Consequently , loss of ephrin - A2 / - A5 disturbs retinotectal projections along the antero - posterior axis 115 . By contrast , attractive sig - nalling through EphB / ephrin - B promotes mapping along the dorso - ventral axis 116 . Ephrins also contribute to the reshaping of dendritic spines , which underlies plasticity 117 . When trunk NC cells navigate in the somitic mesoderm , they invade the rostral half of the somite but avoid the caudal half because of repulsive EphB / ephrin - B interactions 81 ( FIG . 3 ) . Furthermore , expression of Eph receptors on cranial NC cells and ephrin - B2 in branchial arches prevents intermingling between NC cells , which migrate into the second and third branchial arch 118 . Semaphorins constitute a large family of cell asso - ciated and secreted repulsive guidance molecules . They signal through multimeric receptor complexes , which comprise plexins , neuropilins ( Nrp1 and Nrp2 , which contribute to ligand specificity ) and other molecules 119 – 121 . Genetic analyses in Drosophila and mice indicate that these complexes might regulate many guidance events , including axon steering and TECTUM The dorsal part , or roof , ofthe midbrain . FASCICULATION The aggregation ofneuronal processes to form a bundle . ANGIOGENIC SPROUTING The formation ofnew blood - vessel branches . HAEMODYNAMICS Concerned with the forces that are generated by the heart , and the motion ofblood through the cardiovascular system . Box 2 | Neurovascular disorders and therapeutic potential Neurodegeneration has been considered to be primarily a neural disorder , but recent insights indicate that blood vessels might also be involved . Four important diseases are briefly discussed here . First , microvascular degeneration and cerebral amyloid angiopathy ( CAA ) are present in most Alzheimer disease subjects 156 . Cerebral microinfarcts and CAA - related intracerebral haemorrhage affect 35 % and 10 % of Alzheimer patients , respectively , and cerebral hypoperfusion often precedes the clinical onset of the disease . Amyloid - β has direct effects on the cerebral vasculature and leads to vasoconstriction , reduced blood flow , increased vascular resistance and endothelial cell ( EC ) damage 156 . Second , insufficient vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) levels cause adult - onset motor neuron degeneration and paralysis , which are reminiscent of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( ALS ) 153 , in knock - in mice with a subtle VEGF promoter mutation 128 . The reduced VEGF levels cause spinal - cord perfusion deficits and chronic ischaemia , which primarily affect motor neurons — these cells are particularly sensitive because of their active metabolism ( FIG . 7 ) . VEGF also has directneuroprothropic effects through protecting and preconditioning neurons against hypoxic stress 128 , 157 . Low - VEGF - expression gene variations also increase the risk for ALS in humans , whereas treatment with VEGF protects mice against ischaemia / reperfusion spinal motor - neuron death and persistent paralysis 154 . Third , cerebral autosomal - dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy ( CADASIL ) , which is caused by Notch3 mutations , leads to cognitive decline and dementia 55 . The syndrome is attributable to a progressive degeneration of cerebral arterioles with subsequent arterial narrowing and hypoperfusion . Fourth , basement - membrane thickening , EC hyperplasia and other vascular abnormalities cause endoneural perfusion deficits and chronic ischaemia in diabetic neuropathy . VEGF has a favourable effect on ischaemic and diabetic neuropathies by restoring perfusion and directly improving neural cell function 158 , 159 . Nerve regeneration is also stimulated by VEGF , not only because it stimulates angiogenesis but also because it enhances the survival , proliferation and migration of glial cells and stimulates the axonal outgrowth of neurons 160 , 161 . NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 4 | SEPTEMBER 2003 | 717 R E V I E W S the molecules that are known to affect EC or SMC growth 24 , few have been shown to provide directional guidance cues in vivo . Emerging evidence , based on genetic studies in mice , fish and frogs , indicates , however , that ECs share some common signals and mechanisms with neurons to select their pathways and directions . For example , the intersegmental vessels ( ISVs ) in the zebrafish trunk have a regularly spaced segmental organization and represent a prototype of hypoxia - independent vascular patterning that is governed by pre - cisely designated sites for branching and initial pathway guidance 124 . The ephrin - B2 - expressing somites consti - tute repulsive corridors for the EphB3 / 4 - expressing ISVs . So , loss of ephrin - B2 and EphB2 / EphB3 in mice , or dis - ruption of EphB4 / ephrin - B2 in Xenopus , causes the ISVs to deviate from their normal path and penetrate the somites 91 , 132 ( FIG . 3 ) . Vascular - specific deletion of ephrin - B2 results in angiogenic remodelling defects that are identical to those seen in the conventional ephrin - B2 mutants , which indicates that ephrin - B2 is required specifically in endothelial cells 133 . Repulsive Nrp1 signals also seem to guide ISVs , as their trajectories are abnor - mal in Nrp1 deficient mice 134 . Interestingly , ECs express the plexin - D1 receptor 135 , whereas genetic studies in zebrafish indicate that Sema3A is important for angioblast migration 136 , which further underscores the fact that semaphorins are important for the patterning of vessels , as is also the case for neurons . Magic Roundabout ( robo4 ) is expressed in sprouting vessels 137 , but it remains to be determined whether Slit and netrin family mem - bers guide ECs in a similar way to axons . In zebrafish embryos that are mutant for out - of - bounds ( obd ) , ISV sprouts originate and traverse the ventral somites in an irregular fashion , outside normal boundaries ; this mutant behaves in a non - EC - autonomous manner , which indicates that guideposts dictate the site of origin of these sprouts and repulsive signals restrain growth in particular pathways 27 . Knock - in studies in mice have provided insights into how VEGF , through localization of heparin - binding isoforms in the extracellular matrix , provides both short - range matrix - associated VEGF 188 guidance cues and long - range soluble VEGF 120 cues , which are laid down as a gradient from the target to the EC growth cones at the leading tip ( BOX 1 ; FIG . 5 ) 49 , 101 , 126 , 127 , 134 , 138 . Further spatial guidance cues that stimulate branching include FGF and renin 139 , 140 , and Sprouty and Sema3A might restrict branch initiation to selected sites along the vascular channels 74 , 141 . Coordinated patterning of nerves and arteries We know from our anatomy textbooks that blood vessels often track alongside peripheral nerves . But recent evi - dence now indicates that patterning and branching of blood vessels and nerves are also more strongly molecu - larly linked than anticipated . Signals from both blood vessels and nerves can influence the branching of one another . For example , the blood vessel - derived signal artemin ( ARTN ) , which is a glial cell - derived neuro - trophic factor ( GDNF ) that binds the Ret / GFR α 3 receptor complex , determines the patterning of sympa - thetic neurons 142 . During the development of the probably through the shear stress - dependent release of angiogenic signals 131 . Flow is also crucial to maintain vessel branches , and HYPOPERFUSED sprouts often regress . This adaptive plasticity is analogous to the fine tuning of synaptic circuits in which appropriate neuronal connec - tions are strengthened and inappropriate connections are eliminated in an activity - dependent fashion . However , the guidance of embryonic vessels is unlikely to be driven by flow dynamics or metabolic demands alone and requires local guidance cues . Of all ISCHAEMIA A lack ofblood supply to an area ofthe body . HYPOPERFUSED A diminished blood supply to the tissues . N t R i | G ti VEGF stimulates perfusion in spinal blood vessels ( Glut - 1 staining ) VEGF receptors ( red ) on motor neurons ( green ) provide neuroprotection VEGF receptor Spinal motor neuron Axon retraction Skeletal muscle Paralysis and muscle weakness Motor neuron degeneration a Healthy individual b Motor neuron degeneration in ALS patients Insufficient VEGF Perfusion deficit causes ischaemia Insufficient neuroprotection Figure 7 | Role of VEGF in motor neuron degeneration . a | In the spinal cord , vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) levels must be regulated to maintain adequate perfusion ; however , VEGF is also neurotrophic and stimulates the survival of motor neurons . b | Insufficient VEGF levels cause chronic ISCHAEMIA and deprive motor neurons of essential survival signals , which results in adult - onset motor neuron degeneration that is reminiscent of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( ALS ) 128 , 154 . 718 | SEPTEMBER 2003 | VOLUME 4 www . nature . com / reviews / genetics R E V I E W S neural system could not be drawn , such as , for example , how vessels and nerves regenerate and sprout , or how they plastically remodel 24 , 151 . Almost certainly , many more links will be identified in the coming years . Although still limited , our present understanding of the similarities between the vascular and neural systems should encourage us to address several outstanding questions . For example , do vascular cells assume a posi - tional and temporal identity , and which signals deter - mine their fate ? There is great interest in discovering tissue - specific molecules for therapeutic pro - or anti - angiogenesis 152 . ECs are extremely plastic and can rapidly grow to regenerate tissues after years of quies - cence — will our understanding of the angiogenic switch allow us to discover new routes to stimulate neural regeneration as well ? Much has been learned about the guidance of axons — will those insights help us to unravel the molecular basis of misguided vascular growth in the HAEMANGIOMAS and vascular malforma - tions that affect so many children ? For example , the segmented contribution of NC cells to particular vas - cular sectors in the head explains why angiomas METAMERICALLY co - localize in the meninges , ocular choroid and facital dermis of patients affected by Sturge - Weber syndrome 13 . Will we ever be able to therapeutically induce the stereotyped guidance of vessels and neurons that are crucial for functional recovery ? Many important neurodegenerative disor - ders remain largely unexplained : amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( ALS ) , for example , is attributable to particu - lar genetic mutations in less than 2 % of the entire patient population 153 — it is therefore no surprise that this devastating disorder is still incurable . Does the discovery that a prototype angiogenic molecule such as VEGF influences ALS 128 , 154 indicate that other neu - rodegenerative disorders are , at least in part , also angiogenic in origin ( BOX 2 ) ? And , how important will the neurovascular interaction be for regenerative medicine ? Finding the answers to these questions should be facilitated by cooperation and cross - talk between vascular biologists and neuroscientists — much like that between the vessels and nerves that they study . sympathetic nervous system , NC cells migrate to a posi - tion adjacent to the aorta and extend axonal processes in close contact with the vasculature . ARTN is ‘neurotropic’ because its expression pattern continuously ‘moves’ towards the final peripheral target of the sympathetic nerves , ahead of the axon growth cone . As this factor is produced by SMCs , sympathetic nerve fibres follow blood - vessel trajectories as they project towards their final target tissues ( FIG . 6a ) . Conversely , nerves might also modify vascular pat - terning . A recent genetic study showed that the branch - ing patterns of peripheral sensory nerves and small skin arteries are established coordinately , because VEGF , which is released by Schwann cells , instructs vessels to branch alongside the nerves 48 ( FIG . 6b ) . Initially , the pattern of nerve - fibre ARBORIZATION is topographically unrelated to the pattern of vessel branching in embryonic skin but , subsequently , arteries , not veins , specifically align with peripheral nerves . Mutations that disorganize nerve patterning ( for example , loss of Sema3A ) main - tain the alignment of arteries with misrouted axons , whereas those that eliminate the sensory nerves of Schwann cells ( for example , loss of Neurog1 / Neurog2 or erbB3 ) prevent coordinated branching 48 . Another study proposed that blood vessels and nerves are jointly repelled by Sema3A / Nrp1 signals from particular avas - cular regions of the developing forelimb ( such as the prechondrogenic mesenchyme ) 143 . Further evidence indicates that neural - derived signals might affect vascu - lar growth . For example , selective denervation reduces the capillary density in skeletal muscle 144 . Sympathetic nerve fibres innervate blood vessels and might , by releas - ing noradrenaline and its cotransmittor neurpeptide Y , stimulate new vessel growth 145 . The neurotrophins nerve growth factor ( NGF ) and BDNF , and neuro - transmitters such as dopamine or nicotine , also affect vascular development and growth 146 – 150 . Perspectives This overview highlights some of the signals and mech - anisms that are used by both vascular and neural cells to differentiate , grow and navigate . Owing to space restrictions , other parallels between the vascular and ARBORIZATION Branching out . HAEMANGIOMA A purple - red mark on the skin that is caused by an excess of blood vessels . METAMERE A division or segment ofthe body . 1 . Temple , S . The development of neural stem cells . Nature 414 , 112 – 117 ( 2001 ) . An overview of the molecular and cellular mechanisms of neural stem cells . 2 . Panchision , D . M . & McKay , R . D . The control of neural stem cells by morphogenic signals . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 12 , 478 – 487 ( 2002 ) . 3 . Osterfield , M . , Kirschner , M . W . & Flanagan , J . G . Graded positional information . Interpretation for both fate and guidance . Cell 113 , 425 – 428 ( 2003 ) . A recent overview that highlights how morphogens control neural development . 4 . Hitoshi , S . et al . Notch pathway molecules are essential for the maintenance , but not the generation , of mammalian neural stem cells . Genes Dev . 16 , 846 – 858 ( 2002 ) . 5 . Gaiano , N . & Fishell , G . The role of notch in promoting glial and neural stem cell fates . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 25 , 471 – 490 ( 2002 ) . 6 . Patten , I . & Placzek , M . The role of Sonic hedgehog in neural tube patterning . Cell Mol . Life Sci . 57 , 1695 – 1708 ( 2000 ) . 7 . Rowitch , D . H . , Lu , Q . R . , Kessaris , N . & Richardson , W . D . An ‘oligarchy’ rules neural development . Trends Neurosci . 25 , 417 – 422 ( 2002 ) . 8 . Mehler , M . F . Mechanisms regulating lineage diversity during mammalian cerebral cortical neurogenesis and gliogenesis . Results Probl . Cell Differ . 39 , 27 – 52 ( 2002 ) . 9 . Lyden , D . et al . Id1 and Id3 are required for neurogenesis , angiogenesis and vascularization of tumour xenografts . Nature 401 , 670 – 677 ( 1999 ) . This paper documents how bHLH - repressors affect both neurogenesis and angiogenesis . 10 . Wang , S . , Sdrulla , A . , Johnson , J . E . , Yokota , Y . & Barres , B . A . A role for the helix – loop – helix protein Id2 in the control of oligodendrocyte development . Neuron 29 , 603 – 614 ( 2001 ) . 11 . Dupin , E . , Real , C . & Ledouarin , N . The neural crest stem cells : control of neural crest cell fate and plasticity by endothelin - 3 . An . Acad . Bras . Cienc . 73 , 533 – 545 ( 2001 ) . 12 . Knecht , A . K . & Bronner - Fraser , M . Induction of the neural crest : a multigene process . Nature Rev . Genet . 3 , 453 – 461 ( 2002 ) . 13 . Etchevers , H . C . , Couly , G . & Le Douarin , N . M . Morphogenesis of the branchial vascular sector . Trends Cardiovasc . Med . 12 , 299 – 304 ( 2002 ) . A recent overview that illustrates the role of neural crest cells in vascular development . 14 . Aybar , M . J . & Mayor , R . Early induction of neural crest cells : lessons learned from frog , fish and chick . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 12 , 452 – 458 ( 2002 ) . 15 . Soriano , P . The PDGF α receptor is required for neural crest cell development and for normal patterning of the somites . Development 124 , 2691 – 2700 ( 1997 ) . 16 . Maschhoff , K . L . & Baldwin , H . S . Molecular determinants of neural crest migration . Am . J . Med . Genet . 97 , 280 – 288 ( 2000 ) . Overview of the genetics of neural crest cell migration . 17 . Kawasaki , T . et al . A requirement for neuropilin - 1 in embryonic vessel formation . Development 126 , 4895 – 4902 ( 1999 ) . 18 . Feiner , L . et al . Targeted disruption of semaphorin 3C leads to persistent truncus arteriosus and aortic arch interruption . Development 128 , 3061 – 3070 ( 2001 ) . NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 4 | SEPTEMBER 2003 | 719 R E V I E W S 19 . Kurihara , Y . et al . Aortic arch malformations and ventricular septal defect in mice deficient in endothelin - 1 . J . Clin . Invest . 96 , 293 – 300 ( 1995 ) . 20 . Williams , D . E . et al . Identification of a ligand for the c - kit proto - oncogene . Cell 63 , 167 – 174 ( 1990 ) . 21 . Shah , N . M . , Groves , A . K . & Anderson , D . J . Alternative neural crest cell fates are instructively promoted by TGF β superfamily members . Cell 85 , 331 – 343 ( 1996 ) . 22 . Carmeliet , P . One cell , two fates . Nature 408 , 43 , 45 ( 2000 ) . 23 . Mikkola , H . K . & Orkin , S . H . The search for the hemangioblast . J . Hematother . Stem Cell Res . 11 , 9 – 17 ( 2002 ) . 24 . Carmeliet , P . Angiogenesis in health and disease . Nature Med . 9 , 653 – 660 ( 2003 ) . A recent overview of the molecular and cellular mechanisms of vessel growth in health and disease . 25 . Cleaver , O . & Melton , D . A . Endothelial signaling during development . Nature Med . 9 , 661 – 668 ( 2003 ) . 26 . Rovainen , C . M . Labeling of developing vascular endothelium after injections of rhodamine - dextran into blastomeres of Xenopus laevis . J . Exp . Zool . 259 , 209 – 221 ( 1991 ) . 27 . Childs , S . , Chen , J . N . , Garrity , D . M . & Fishman , M . C . Patterning of angiogenesis in the zebrafish embryo . Development 129 , 973 – 982 ( 2002 ) . 28 . Liao , W . , Ho , C . Y . , Yan , Y . L . , Postlethwait , J . & Stainier , D . Y . Hhex and scl function in parallel to regulate early endothelial and blood differentiation in zebrafish . Development 127 , 4303 – 4313 ( 2000 ) . 29 . Brown , L . A . et al . Insights into early vasculogenesis revealed by expression of the ETS - domain transcription factor Fli - 1 in wild - type and mutant zebrafish embryos . Mech . Dev . 90 , 237 – 252 ( 2000 ) . 30 . Carmeliet , P . Controlling the cellular brakes . Nature 401 , 657 – 658 ( 1999 ) . 31 . Yamashita , J . et al . Flk1 - positive cells derived from embryonic stem cells serve as vascular progenitors . Nature 408 , 92 – 96 ( 2000 ) . 32 . Abbot , N . J . Glial – endothelial communication in physiology and pathology . J . Neurochem . 85 ( Suppl . ) 2 ( 2003 ) . 33 . LeCouter , J . , Lin , R . & Ferrara , N . Endocrine gland - derived VEGF and the emerging hypothesis of organ - specific regulation of angiogenesis . Nature Med . 8 , 913 – 917 ( 2002 ) . 34 . Ruoslahti , E . Specialization of tumour vasculature . Nature Rev . Cancer 2 , 83 – 90 ( 2002 ) . 35 . Zhong , T . P . , Childs , S . , Leu , J . P . & Fishman , M . C . Gridlock signalling pathway fashions the first embryonic artery . Nature 414 , 216 – 220 ( 2001 ) . 36 . Sumoy , L . , Keasey , J . B . , Dittman , T . D . & Kimelman , D . A role for notochord in axial vascular development revealed by analysis of phenotype and the expression of VEGR - 2 in zebrafish flh and ntl mutant embryos . Mech . Dev . 63 , 15 – 27 ( 1997 ) . 37 . Fouquet , B . , Weinstein , B . M . , Serluca , F . C . & Fishman , M . C . Vessel patterning in the embryo of the zebrafish : guidance by notochord . Dev . Biol . 183 , 37 – 48 ( 1997 ) . 38 . Hall , C . J . , Flores , M . V . , Davidson , A . J . , Crosier , K . E . & Crosier , P . S . Radar is required for the establishment of vascular integrity in the zebrafish . Dev . Biol . 251 , 105 – 117 ( 2002 ) . 39 . Damert , A . , Miquerol , L . , Gertsenstein , M . , Risau , W . & Nagy , A . Insufficient VEGFA activity in yolk sac endoderm compromises haematopoietic and endothelial differentiation . Development 129 , 1881 – 1892 ( 2002 ) . 40 . Ferrara , N . Role of vascular endothelial growth factor in physiologic and pathologic angiogenesis : therapeutic implications . Semin . Oncol . 29 , 10 – 14 ( 2002 ) . 41 . Baron , M . Induction of embryonic hematopoietic and endothelial stem / progenitor cells by hedgehog - mediated signals . Differentiation 68 , 175 – 185 ( 2001 ) . 42 . Dyer , M . A . , Farrington , S . M . , Mohn , D . , Munday , J . R . & Baron , M . H . Indian hedgehog activates hematopoiesis and vasculogenesis and can respecify prospective neurectodermal cell fate in the mouse embryo . Development 128 , 1717 – 1730 ( 2001 ) . 43 . Moyon , D . , Pardanaud , L . , Yuan , L . , Breant , C . & Eichmann , A . Plasticity of endothelial cells during arterial – venous differentiation in the avian embryo . Development 128 , 3359 – 3370 ( 2001 ) . 44 . Othman - Hassan , K . et al . Arterial identity of endothelial cells is controlled by local cues . Dev . Biol . 237 , 398 – 409 ( 2001 ) . 45 . Lawson , N . D . , Vogel , A . M . & Weinstein , B . M . Sonic hedgehog and vascular endothelial growth factor act upstream of the Notch pathway during arterial endothelial differentiation . Dev . Cell 3 , 127 – 136 ( 2002 ) . This paper explains the genetic pathways that determine arterial endothelial cell fate . 46 . Lawson , N . D . & Weinstein , B . M . Arteries and veins : making a difference with zebrafish . Nature Rev . Genet . 3 , 674 – 682 ( 2002 ) . 47 . Chen , J . N . et al . Mutations affecting the cardiovascular system and other internal organs in zebrafish . Development 123 , 293 – 302 ( 1996 ) . 48 . Mukouyama , Y . S . , Shin , D . , Britsch , S . , Taniguchi , M . & Anderson , D . J . Sensory nerves determine the pattern of arterial differentiation and blood vessel branching in the skin . Cell 109 , 693 – 705 ( 2002 ) . This study provides genetic insights into how arteries are guided by nerves . 49 . Stalmans , I . et al . Arteriolar and venular patterning in retinas of mice selectively expressing VEGF isoforms . J . Clin . Invest . 109 , 327 – 336 ( 2002 ) . 50 . Visconti , R . P . , Richardson , C . D . & Sato , T . N . Orchestration of angiogenesis and arteriovenous contribution by angiopoietins and vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 8219 – 8224 ( 2002 ) . 51 . Itoh , M . et al . Mind bomb is a ubiquitin ligase that is essential for efficient activation of Notch signaling by Delta . Dev . Cell 4 , 67 – 82 ( 2003 ) . 52 . Lawson , N . D . et al . Notch signaling is required for arterial – venous differentiation during embryonic vascular development . Development 128 , 3675 – 3683 ( 2001 ) . 53 . Zhong , T . P . , Rosenberg , M . , Mohideen , M . A . , Weinstein , B . & Fishman , M . C . gridlock , an HLH gene required for assembly of the aorta in zebrafish . Science 287 , 1820 – 1824 ( 2000 ) . This paper reports how bHLH proteins determine arterial cell fate . 54 . Lawson , N . D . , Mugford , J . W . , Diamond , B . A . & Weinstein , B . M . Phospholipase C γ - 1 is required downstream of vascular endothelial growth factor during arterial development . Genes Dev . 17 , 1346 – 1351 ( 2003 ) . 55 . Kalimo , H . , Ruchoux , M . M . , Viitanen , M . & Kalaria , R . N . CADASIL : a common form of hereditary arteriopathy causing brain infarcts and dementia . Brain Pathol . 12 , 371 – 384 ( 2002 ) . 56 . Iso , T . , Hamamori , Y . & Kedes , L . Notch signaling in vascular development . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 23 , 543 – 553 ( 2003 ) . 57 . Taylor , K . L . , Henderson , A . M . & Hughes , C . C . Notch activation during endothelial cell network formation in vitro targets the basic HLH transcription factor HESR - 1 and downregulates VEGFR - 2 / KDR expression . Microvasc . Res . 64 , 372 – 383 ( 2002 ) . 58 . Compernolle , V . et al . Loss of HIF - 2 α and inhibition of VEGF impair fetal lung maturation , whereas treatment with VEGF prevents fatal respiratory distress in premature mice . Nature Med . 8 , 702 – 710 ( 2002 ) . 59 . Gerber , H . P . et al . VEGF couples hypertrophic cartilage remodeling , ossification and angiogenesis during endochondral bone formation . Nature Med . 5 , 623 – 628 ( 1999 ) . 60 . Eremina , V . et al . Glomerular - specific alterations of VEGF - A expression lead to distinct congenital and acquired renal diseases . J . Clin . Invest . 111 , 707 – 716 ( 2003 ) . 61 . LeCouter , J . et al . Angiogenesis - independent endothelial protection of liver : role of VEGFR - 1 . Science 299 , 890 – 893 ( 2003 ) . 62 . Bahary , N . & Zon , L . I . Endothelium — chicken soup for the endoderm . Science 294 , 530 – 531 ( 2001 ) . 63 . Stainier , D . Y . et al . Mutations affecting the formation and function of the cardiovascular system in the zebrafish embryo . Development 123 , 285 – 292 ( 1996 ) . 64 . Zerlin , M . & Goldman , J . E . Interactions between glial progenitors and blood vessels during early postnatal corticogenesis : blood vessel contact represents an early stage of astrocyte differentiation . J . Comp . Neurol . 387 , 537 – 546 ( 1997 ) . 65 . Huxlin , K . R . , Sefton , A . J . & Furby , J . H . The origin and development of retinal astrocytes in the mouse . J . Neurocytol . 21 , 530 – 544 ( 1992 ) . 66 . Louissaint , A . , Rao , S . , Leventhal , C . & Goldman , S . A . Coordinated interaction of neurogenesis and angiogenesis in the adult songbird brain . Neuron 34 , 945 – 960 ( 2002 ) . This report documents how VEGF - driven angiogenesis stimulates BDNF - driven neurogenesis . 67 . Palmer , T . D . , Willhoite , A . R . & Gage , F . H . Vascular niche for adult hippocampal neurogenesis . J . Comp . Neurol . 425 , 479 – 494 ( 2000 ) . This study highlights the link between angiogenesis and neurogenesis . 68 . Mi , H . , Haeberle , H . & Barres , B . A . Induction of astrocyte differentiation by endothelial cells . J . Neurosci . 21 , 1538 – 1547 ( 2001 ) . 69 . Yang , K . & Cepko , C . L . Flk - 1 , a receptor for vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) is expressed by retinal progenitor cells . J . Neurosci . 16 , 6089 – 6099 ( 1996 ) . 70 . Yourey , P . A . , Gohari , S . , Su , J . L . & Alderson , R . F . Vascular endothelial cell growth factors promote the in vitro development of rat photoreceptor cells . J . Neurosci . 20 , 6781 – 6788 ( 2000 ) . 71 . Jin , K . et al . Vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) stimulates neurogenesis in vitro and in vivo . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 11946 – 11950 ( 2002 ) . This study documents how the prototype angiogenic factor VEGF affects neurogenesis . 72 . Zhu , Y . , Jin , K . , Mao , X . O . & Greenberg , D . A . Vascular endothelial growth factor promotes proliferation of cortical neuron precursors by regulating E2F expression . FASEB J . 17 , 186 – 193 ( 2003 ) . 73 . Bagnard , D . et al . Semaphorin 3A - vascular endothelial growth factor - 165 balance mediates migration and apoptosis of neural progenitor cells by the recruitment of shared receptor . J . Neurosci . 21 , 3332 – 3341 ( 2001 ) . 74 . Miao , H . Q . et al . Neuropilin - 1 mediates collapsin - 1 / semaphorin III inhibition of endothelial cell motility : functional competition of collapsin - 1 and vascular endothelial growth factor - 165 . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 233 – 242 ( 1999 ) . This paper illustrates how the neurorepellent Sema3A and VEGF antagonistically affect endothelial cells through binding neuropilin - 1 . 75 . Leventhal , C . , Rafii , S . , Rafii , D . , Shahar , A . & Goldman , S . A . Endothelial trophic support of neuronal production and recruitment from the adult mammalian subependyma . Mol . Cell Neurosci . 13 , 450 – 464 ( 1999 ) . 76 . Black , J . E . , Isaacs , K . R . , Anderson , B . J . , Alcantara , A . A . & Greenough , W . T . Learning causes synaptogenesis , whereas motor activity causes angiogenesis , in cerebellar cortex of adult rats . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 87 , 5568 – 5572 ( 1990 ) . 77 . Kokaia , Z . & Lindvall , O . Neurogenesis after ischaemic brain insults . Curr . Opin Neurobiol . 13 , 127 – 132 ( 2003 ) . 78 . Monje , M . L . , Mizumatsu , S . , Fike , J . R . & Palmer , T . D . Irradiation induces neural precursor - cell dysfunction . Nature Med . 8 , 955 – 962 ( 2002 ) . 79 . Cooke , J . E . & Moens , C . B . Boundary formation in the hindbrain : Eph only it were simple . Trends Neurosci . 25 , 260 – 267 ( 2002 ) . A review of the role of ephrins in boundary formation in the brain . 80 . Tepass , U . , Godt , D . & Winklbauer , R . Cell sorting in animal development : signalling and adhesive mechanisms in the formation of tissue boundaries . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 12 , 572 – 582 ( 2002 ) . 81 . Krull , C . E . Segmental organization of neural crest migration . Mech . Dev . 105 , 37 – 45 ( 2001 ) . 82 . Mellitzer , G . , Xu , Q . & Wilkinson , D . G . Eph receptors and ephrins restrict cell intermingling and communication . Nature 400 , 77 – 81 ( 1999 ) . 83 . Coulthard , M . G . et al . The role of the Eph – ephrin signalling system in the regulation of developmental patterning . Int . J . Dev . Biol . 46 , 375 – 384 ( 2002 ) . 84 . Cooke , J . et al . Eph signalling functions downstream of Val to regulate cell sorting and boundary formation in the caudal hindbrain . Development 128 , 571 – 580 ( 2001 ) . 85 . Xu , Q . , Alldus , G . , Holder , N . & Wilkinson , D . G . Expression of truncated Sek - 1 receptor tyrosine kinase disrupts the segmental restriction of gene expression in the Xenopus and zebrafish hindbrain . Development 121 , 4005 – 4016 ( 1995 ) . 86 . Holmberg , J . & Frisen , J . Ephrins are not only unattractive . Trends Neurosci . 25 , 239 – 243 ( 2002 ) . 87 . Adams , R . H . & Klein , R . Eph receptors and ephrin ligands : essential mediators of vascular development . Trends Cardiovasc . Med . 10 , 183 – 188 ( 2000 ) . An overview of the role of ephrins in vascular development . 88 . Cheng , N . , Brantley , D . M . & Chen , J . The ephrins and Eph receptors in angiogenesis . Cytokine Growth Factor Rev . 13 , 75 – 85 ( 2002 ) . 89 . Gale , N . W . et al . Ephrin - B2 selectively marks arterial vessels and neovascularization sites in the adult , with expression in both endothelial and smooth - muscle cells . Dev . Biol . 230 , 151 – 160 ( 2001 ) . 90 . Shin , D . et al . Expression of ephrinB2 identifies a stable genetic difference between arterial and venous vascular smooth muscle as well as endothelial cells , and marks subsets of microvessels at sites of adult neovascularization . Dev . Biol . 230 , 139 – 150 ( 2001 ) . 91 . Adams , R . H . et al . Roles of ephrinB ligands and EphB receptors in cardiovascular development : demarcation of arterial / venous domains , vascular morphogenesis , and sprouting angiogenesis . Genes Dev . 13 , 295 – 306 ( 1999 ) . 92 . Wang , H . U . , Chen , Z . F . & Anderson , D . J . Molecular distinction and angiogenic interaction between embryonic arteries and veins revealed by ephrin - B2 and its receptor Eph - B4 . Cell 93 , 741 – 753 ( 1998 ) . A seminal study that documents the role of ephrins in vascular development . 93 . Hirano , S . , Suzuki , S . T . & Redies , C . M . The cadherin superfamily in neural development : diversity , function and interaction with other molecules . Front . Biosci . 8 , 306 – 355 ( 2003 ) . 94 . Dejana , E . , Spagnuolo , R . & Bazzoni , G . Interendothelial junctions and their role in the control of angiogenesis , vascular permeability and leukocyte transmigration . Thromb . Haemost . 86 , 308 – 315 ( 2001 ) . 95 . Inoue , T . et al . Role of cadherins in maintaining the compartment boundary between the cortex and striatum during development . Development 128 , 561 – 569 ( 2001 ) . 720 | SEPTEMBER 2003 | VOLUME 4 www . nature . com / reviews / genetics R E V I E W S 96 . Guthrie , S . Neuronal development : sorting out motor neurons . Curr . Biol . 12 , 488 – 490 ( 2002 ) . This overview highlights how cadherins are involved in sorting neurons . 97 . Carmeliet , P . et al . Targeted deficiency or cytosolic truncation of the VE - cadherin gene in mice impairs VEGF - mediated endothelial survival and angiogenesis . Cell 98 , 147 – 157 ( 1999 ) . 98 . Wolburg , H . & Lippoldt , A . Tight junctions of the blood – brain barrier : development , composition and regulation . Vascul . Pharmacol . 38 , 323 – 337 ( 2002 ) . 99 . Gerhardt , H . , Wolburg , H . & Redies , C . N - cadherin mediates pericytic - endothelial interaction during brain angiogenesis in the chicken . Dev . Dyn . 218 , 472 – 479 ( 2000 ) . 100 . Lawson , N . D . & Weinstein , B . M . In vivo imaging of embryonic vascular development using transgenic zebrafish . Dev . Biol . 248 , 307 – 318 ( 2002 ) . 101 . Gerhardt , H . et al . VEGF guides angiogenic sprouting utilizing endothelial tip cell filopodia . J . Cell . Biol . 161 , 1163 – 1177 ( 2003 ) . 102 . Dickson , B . J . Molecular mechanisms of axon guidance . Science 298 , 1959 – 1964 ( 2002 ) . A recent overview of the cellular and molecular mechanisms of axon guidance . 103 . Yamamoto , N . , Tamada , A . & Murakami , F . Wiring of the brain by a range of guidance cues . Prog . Neurobiol . 68 , 393 – 407 ( 2002 ) . 104 . Cooper , H . M . Axon guidance receptors direct growth cone pathfinding : rivalry at the leading edge . Int . J . Dev . Biol . 46 , 621 – 631 ( 2002 ) . 105 . McFarlane , S . Attraction vs . repulsion : the growth cone decides . Biochem . Cell Biol . 78 , 563 – 568 ( 2000 ) . 106 . Nguyen - Ba - Charvet , K . T . & Chedotal , A . Role of Slit proteins in the vertebrate brain . J . Physiol . Paris 96 , 91 – 98 ( 2002 ) . 107 . Guthrie , S . Axon guidance : Robos make the rules . Curr . Biol . 11 , 300 – 303 ( 2001 ) . A review of the genetic pathways , in particular of the Robo receptors , which determine neuronal route finding . 108 . Wong , K . , Park , H . T . , Wu , J . Y . & Rao , Y . Slit proteins : molecular guidance cues for cells ranging from neurons to leukocytes . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 12 , 583 – 591 ( 2002 ) . 109 . Kidd , T . , Bland , K . S . & Goodman , C . S . Slit is the midline repellent for the robo receptor in Drosophila . Cell 96 , 785 – 794 ( 1999 ) . 110 . Fricke , C . , Lee , J . S . , Geiger - Rudolph , S . , Bonhoeffer , F . & Chien , C . B . astray , a zebrafish roundabout homolog required for retinal axon guidance . Science 292 , 507 – 510 ( 2001 ) . 111 . Plump , A . S . et al . Slit1 and Slit2 cooperate to prevent premature midline crossing of retinal axons in the mouse visual system . Neuron 33 , 219 – 232 ( 2002 ) . 112 . Manitt , C . & Kennedy , T . E . Where the rubber meets the road : netrin expression and function in developing and adult nervous systems . Prog . Brain Res . 137 , 425 – 442 ( 2002 ) . 113 . Giger , R . J . & Kolodkin , A . L . Silencing the siren : guidance cue hierarchies at the CNS midline . Cell 105 , 1 – 4 ( 2001 ) . 114 . Knoll , B . & Drescher , U . Ephrin - As as receptors in topographic projections . Trends Neurosci . 25 , 145 – 149 ( 2002 ) . 115 . Feldheim , D . A . et al . Genetic analysis of ephrin - A2 and ephrin - A5 shows their requirement in multiple aspects of retinocollicular mapping . Neuron 25 , 563 – 574 ( 2000 ) . 116 . McLaughlin , T . , Hindges , R . & O’Leary , D . D . Regulation of axial patterning of the retina and its topographic mapping in the brain . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 13 , 57 – 69 ( 2003 ) . 117 . Murai , K . K . , Nguyen , L . N . , Irie , F . , Yamaguchi , Y . & Pasquale , E . B . Control of hippocampal dendritic spine morphology through ephrin - A3 / EphA4 signaling . Nature Neurosci . 6 , 153 – 160 ( 2003 ) . 118 . Adams , R . H . et al . The cytoplasmic domain of the ligand ephrinB2 is required for vascular morphogenesis but not cranial neural crest migration . Cell 104 , 57 – 69 ( 2001 ) . 119 . Bagri , A . & Tessier - Lavigne , M . Neuropilins as semaphorin receptors : in vivo functions in neuronal cell migration and axon guidance . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 515 , 13 – 31 ( 2002 ) . An overview of the role of semaphorins and their neuropilin receptors in neurobiology . 120 . Pasterkamp , R . J . & Kolodkin , A . L . Semaphorin junction : making tracks toward neural connectivity . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 13 , 79 – 89 ( 2003 ) . 121 . Puschel , A . W . The function of neuropilin / plexin complexes . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 515 , 71 – 80 ( 2002 ) . 122 . Song , H . et al . Conversion of neuronal growth cone responses from repulsion to attraction by cyclic nucleotides . Science 281 , 1515 – 1518 ( 1998 ) . 123 . Neufeld , G . et al . The neuropilins : multifunctional semaphorin and VEGF receptors that modulate axon guidance and angiogenesis . Trends Cardiovasc . Med . 12 , 13 – 19 ( 2002 ) . 124 . Isogai , S . , Horiguchi , M . & Weinstein , B . M . The vascular anatomy of the developing zebrafish : an atlas of embryonic and early larval development . Dev . Biol . 230 , 278 – 301 ( 2001 ) . 125 . Pugh , C . W . & Ratcliffe , P . J . Regulation of angiogenesis by hypoxia : role of the HIF system . Nature Med . 9 , 677 – 684 ( 2003 ) . 126 . Carmeliet , P . et al . Impaired myocardial angiogenesis and ischemic cardiomyopathy in mice lacking the vascular endothelial growth factor isoforms VEGF164 and VEGF188 . Nature Med . 5 , 495 – 502 ( 1999 ) . 127 . Mattot , V . et al . Loss of the VEGF ( 164 ) and VEGF ( 188 ) isoforms impairs postnatal glomerular angiogenesis and renal arteriogenesis in mice . J . Am . Soc . Nephrol . 13 , 1548 – 1560 ( 2002 ) . 128 . Oosthuyse , B . et al . Deletion of the hypoxia - response element in the vascular endothelial growth factor promoter causes motor neuron degeneration . NatureGenet . 28 , 131 – 138 ( 2001 ) . A study that reports a neurotrophic and vascular role for the prototype angiogenic factor VEGF in motor neuron degeneration . 129 . Gerber , H . P . et al . VEGF is required for growth and survival in neonatal mice . Development 126 , 1149 – 1159 ( 1999 ) . 130 . Egginton , S . , Zhou , A . L . , Brown , M . D . & Hudlicka , O . Unorthodox angiogenesis in skeletal muscle . Cardiovasc . Res . 49 , 634 – 646 ( 2001 ) . 131 . Djonov , V . G . , Kurz , H . & Burri , P . H . Optimality in the developing vascular system : branching remodeling by means of intussusception as an efficient adaptation mechanism . Dev . Dyn . 224 , 391 – 402 ( 2002 ) . 132 . Helbling , P . M . , Saulnier , D . M . & Brandli , A . W . The receptor tyrosine kinase EphB4 and ephrin - B ligands restrict angiogenic growth of embryonic veins in Xenopus laevis . Development 127 , 269 – 278 ( 2000 ) . 133 . Gerety , S . S . & Anderson , D . J . Cardiovascular ephrinB2 function is essential for embryonic angiogenesis . Development 129 , 1397 – 1410 ( 2002 ) . 134 . Ruhrberg , C . et al . Spatially restricted patterning cues provided by heparin - binding VEGF - A control blood vessel branching morphogenesis . Genes Dev . 16 , 2684 – 2698 ( 2002 ) . A genetic study that documents the role of VEGF isoforms in vessel patterning and branching . 135 . van der Zwaag , B . et al . PLEXIN - D1 , a novel plexin family member , is expressed in vascular endothelium and the central nervous system during mouse embryogenesis . Dev . Dyn . 225 , 336 – 343 ( 2002 ) . 136 . Shoji , W . , Isogai , S . , Sato - Maeda , M . , Obinata , M . & Kuwada , J . Y . Semaphorin3a1 regulates angioblast migration and vascular development in zebrafish embryos . Development 130 , 3227 – 3236 ( 2003 ) . 137 . Huminiecki , L . , Gorn , M . , Suchting , S . , Poulsom , R . & Bicknell , R . Magic roundabout is a new member of the roundabout receptor family that is endothelial specific and expressed at sites of active angiogenesis . Genomics 79 , 547 – 552 ( 2002 ) . 138 . Stalmans , I . et al . VEGF : a modifier of the del22q11 ( DiGeorge ) syndrome ? Nature Med . 9 , 173 – 182 ( 2003 ) . A study that uses genetics in mice , zebrafish and humans to document a role of VEGF - isoforms in the patterning of the great thoracic arteries . 139 . Carmeliet , P . Fibroblast growth factor - 1 stimulates branching and survival of myocardial arteries : a goal for therapeutic angiogenesis ? Circ . Res . 87 , 176 – 178 ( 2000 ) . 140 . Hilgers , K . F . , Norwood , V . F . & Gomez , R . A . Angiotensin’s role in renal development . Semin . Nephrol . 17 , 492 – 501 ( 1997 ) . 141 . Lee , S . H . , Schloss , D . J . , Jarvis , L . , Krasnow , M . A . & Swain , J . L . Inhibition of angiogenesis by a mouse sprouty protein . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 4128 – 4133 ( 2001 ) . 142 . Honma , Y . et al . Artemin is a vascular - derived neurotropic factor for developing sympathetic neurons . Neuron 35 , 267 – 282 ( 2002 ) . This study provides genetic evidence for how vessel - produced artemin directs nerve patterning . 143 . Bates , D . et al . Neurovascular congruence results from a shared patterning mechanism that utilizes semaphorin3A and neuropilin - 1 . Dev . Biol . 255 , 77 – 98 ( 2003 ) . 144 . Borisov , A . B . , Huang , S . K . & Carlson , B . M . Remodeling of the vascular bed and progressive loss of capillaries in denervated skeletal muscle . Anat . Rec . 258 , 292 – 304 ( 2000 ) . 145 . Zukowska , Z . , Grant , D . S . & Lee , E . W . Neuropeptide Y : a novel mechanism for ischemic angiogenesis . Trends Cardiovasc . Med . 13 , 86 – 92 ( 2003 ) . 146 . Teunis , M . A . et al . Reduced tumor growth , experimental metastasis formation , and angiogenesis in rats with a hyperreactive dopaminergic system . FASEB J . 16 , 1465 – 1467 ( 2002 ) . 147 . Basu , S . et al . The neurotransmitter dopamine inhibits angiogenesis induced by vascular permeability factor / vascular endothelial growth factor . Nature Med . 7 , 569 – 574 ( 2001 ) . 148 . Heeschen , C . et al . Nicotine stimulates angiogenesis and promotes tumor growth and atherosclerosis . Nature Med . 7 , 833 – 839 ( 2001 ) . 149 . Donovan , M . J . et al . Brain derived neurotrophic factor is an endothelial cell survival factor required for intramyocardial vessel stabilization . Development 127 , 4531 – 4540 ( 2000 ) . 150 . Calza , L . , Giardino , L . , Giuliani , A . , Aloe , L . & Levi - Montalcini , R . Nerve growth factor control of neuronal expression of angiogenetic and vasoactive factors . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 4160 – 4165 ( 2001 ) . 151 . Carmichael , S . T . Plasticity of cortical projections after stroke . Neuroscientist 9 , 64 – 75 ( 2003 ) . 152 . Carmeliet , P . Creating unique blood vessels . Nature 412 , 868 – 869 ( 2001 ) . 153 . Cleveland , D . W . & Rothstein , J . D . From Charcot to Lou Gehrig : deciphering selective motor neuron death in ALS . Nature Rev . Neurosci . 2 , 806 – 819 ( 2001 ) . 154 . Lambrechts , D . et al . VEGF is a modifier of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in mice and humans and protects motoneurons against ischemic death . Nature Genet . 34 , 383 – 394 ( 2003 ) . 155 . Poltorak , Z . , Cohen , T . & Neufeld , G . The VEGF splice variants : properties , receptors , and usage for the treatment of ischemic diseases . Herz 25 , 126 – 129 ( 2000 ) . 156 . Kalaria , R . N . Small vessel disease and Alzheimer’s dementia : pathological considerations . Cerebrovasc . Dis . 13 ( Suppl . ) , 48 – 52 ( 2002 ) . An overview that highlights the role of blood vessels in neurodegenerative Alzheimer Disease . 157 . Wick , A . et al . Neuroprotection by hypoxic preconditioning requires sequential activation of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor and Akt . J . Neurosci . 22 , 6401 – 6407 ( 2002 ) . 158 . Isner , J . M . , Ropper , A . & Hirst , K . VEGF gene transfer for diabetic neuropathy . Hum . Gene Ther . 12 , 1593 – 1594 ( 2001 ) . 159 . Schratzberger , P . et al . Reversal of experimental diabetic neuropathy by VEGF gene transfer . J . Clin . Invest . 107 , 1083 – 1092 ( 2001 ) . 160 . Sondell , M . , Sundler , F . & Kanje , M . Vascular endothelial growth factor is a neurotrophic factor which stimulates axonal outgrowth through the flk - 1 receptor . Eur . J . Neurosci . 12 , 4243 – 4254 ( 2000 ) . 161 . Hobson , M . I . , Green , C . J . & Terenghi , G . VEGF enhances intraneural angiogenesis and improves nerve regeneration after axotomy . J . Anat . 197 , 591 – 605 ( 2000 ) . Online links DATABASES The following terms in this article are linked online to : LocusLink : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink Nkx2 - 2 | Neurog2 | Olig2 | Slit1 | Slit2 OMIM : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / Omim Alzheimer disease | amyotrophic lateral sclerosis | CADASIL | cerebral amyloid angiopathy | cerebral arteriopathy | Sturge - Weber syndrome ZFIN : http : / / zfin . org ast | flh | gdf6b | grl | mib | ntl | obd | robo2 | robo4 | syu | val Access to this interactive links box is free online .