Journal of Materials Science : Materials in Medicine ( 2020 ) 31 : 46 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10856 - 020 - 06381 - x TISSUE ENGINEERING CONSTRUCTS AND CELL SUBSTRATES Original Research Scale and structure dependent solute diffusivity within microporous tissue engineering scaffolds Giovanni S . Offeddu 1 ● Lakshana Mohee 1 ● Ruth E . Cameron 1 Received : 2 December 2019 / Accepted : 13 April 2020 / Published online : 4 May 2020 © The Author ( s ) 2020 Abstract Diffusion of nutrients to cells cultured within three - dimensional scaffolds is fundamental for cell survival during development of the tissue construct , when no vasculature is present to aid transport . Signi ﬁ cant efforts have been made to characterize the effect of structure on solute diffusivity in nanoporous hydrogels , yet a similar thorough characterization has not been attempted for microporous scaffolds . Here , we make use of freeze - dried collagen scaffolds , possessing pore sizes in the range 150 – 250 μ m and isotropic or aligned morphology , to study the diffusivity of ﬂ uorescent dextran molecules . Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching is used to measure the self diffusivity of the solutes within single pores , while Fickian diffusion over scales larger than the pore size is studied by assessing the solute concentration pro ﬁ le within the materials over time . We show that , not only do the morphological parameters of the scaffolds signi ﬁ cantly affect the diffusivity of the solutes , but also that the assessment of such diffusivity depends on the length scale of diffusion of the molecules under investigation , with the resulting diffusion coef ﬁ cients being differently affected by the scaffold structure . The results provided can guide the design of scaffolds with tailored diffusivity and nutrient concentration pro ﬁ les . Graphical Abstract Keywords Porous media microstructure ● Cell microenvironment ● Collagen ● FRAP ● Molecular transport 1 Introduction Tissue engineering scaffolds have evolved in the last two decades to recapitulate the cellular microenvironment found in a variety of tissues . The design variables available for scaffolds are numerous , even after satisfaction of funda - mental requirements such as the use of non - cytotoxic materials and porous , hydrated morphologies [ 1 ] . Indeed , cell substrates can be made to be nanoporous to encapsulate cells in a rich biomimetic extra - cellular matrix ( ECM ) environment , as in the case of most hydrogels [ 2 ] , or * Ruth E . Cameron rec11 @ cam . ac . uk 1 Cambridge Centre for Medical Materials , Department of Materials Science and Metallurgy , University of Cambridge , 27 Charles Babbage Rd , Cambridge CB3 0FS , UK Supplementary information The online version of this article ( https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10856 - 020 - 06381 - x ) contains supplementary material , which is available to authorized users . 1234567890 ( ) ; , : 1234567890 ( ) ; , : microporous , in order to facilitate three - dimensional ( 3D ) cell seeding and migration [ 3 ] to then rely on the cells to produce the natural ECM . The ability of solutes , cell nutrients in particular , to move through these structures is of paramount importance to ensure homogeneous cell viability during development of the tissue construct , as the lack of vasculature results in cells being farther away from the source of nutrients compared with in vivo conditions [ 2 ] . Accurate assessment of scaffold transport properties is , therefore , necessary to ensure successful translation to clinical settings . Solutes reach cells in interstitial spaces predominantly by diffusion , i . e . as the result of concentration gradients [ 4 ] . The capacity of a particular solute to move by diffusion , translating from large to small concentrations , is quanti ﬁ ed by its translational , or Fickian , diffusion coef ﬁ cient , D . The local random movement of the solute is characterized by the self diffusion coef ﬁ cient , D S , a quantity understood to be numerically equal to D in the absence of concurring ther - modynamic effects increasing solute translation [ 5 ] . Within nanoporous hydrogels , diffusivity has been investigated in order to understand how the mobility of solutes is affected by the polymer network , whose morphology can be described by one parameter only , the pore size , as this is always proportional to the solid volume fraction [ 6 ] . Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) was used in several studies to measure D S for molecules of comparable size to the nanopores of the hydrogels , reveal - ing a sieving effect by the polymer network [ 7 – 10 ] . Microporous scaffold materials , instead , are de ﬁ ned by structural features that are orders of magnitude larger than molecules ( tens to hundreds of microns compared to nan - ometers ) , which determine bulk properties vastly different from those of hydrogels [ 11 ] . These structures may possess more complex geometries that cannot be described only by the pore size , as often the pores are partially occluded so that the effective size and tortuosity of the transport paths may be different for scaffolds of comparable pore size or solid fraction [ 11 ] . Therefore , it is hypothesized here that it is not only the pore size or solid fraction that in ﬂ uences the response [ 12 , 13 ] , and that further structural parameters will affect solute diffusion in microporous materials . Freeze - dried collagen scaffolds represent an ideal platform to measure diffusional phenomena in controlled microscale morphologies . The materials are produced through ice - templating of a collagen slurry , where control over the freezing rate and resulting ice nucleation and growth results in isotropic structures with custom pore size and inter - connectivity [ 3 , 14 – 16 ] . Directional freezing of the slurry can also be used to fabricate aligned structures that allow for greater cell penetration and , as we have recently shown , larger permeabilities to interstitial ﬂ uid ﬂ ow [ 17 ] . Well - established characterization techniques can be applied to measure and compare the structural parameters describing the morphologies created [ 18 ] . Importantly , these materials were used in the pioneering study on tissue engineering by Yannas and coworkers [ 19 ] , and have since been employed in several clinical trials attesting to their clinical potential [ 20 , 21 ] . In this study , we make use of microporous freeze - dried collagen scaffolds possessing isotropic and aligned morphologies , and characterized by varying structural para - meters such as pore size , percolation diameter , tortuosity , and solid volume fraction . The slurry concentration used to form the ice templated scaffolds is varied , giving structures with different architectures and interconnectivities . The scale - dependent diffusivity of solutes is investigated using dextran molecules of varying molecular weight as models for physiologically - relevant proteins . Diffusion over scales lar - ger than the characteristic pore size is assessed using a simple experimental set up to measure the translational diffusion coef ﬁ cient into the materials ; FRAP is used to measure the local self diffusion properties within the pores of the struc - tures . The results reported con ﬁ rm the importance of scaffold structure for solute diffusivity , and ultimately for the effec - tive use of these materials as 3D cell culture environments . 2 Materials and methods 2 . 1 Materials Collagen ( insoluble ﬁ brillar type I from bovine Achilles tendon ) , 1 - ethyl - 3 - ( 3 - dimethylaminopropyl ) carbodiimide hydrochloride ( EDC ) , n - hydroxysuccinimide ( NHS ) , rho - damine B , and ﬂ uorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) - con - jugated dextrans of molecular weight 4 , 20 , 250 , and 2000 kDa , were all purchased from Sigma Aldrich UK and used without further puri ﬁ cation . Phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) was purchased from Thermo Fisher UK . 2 . 2 Scaffold fabrication Scaffolds were fabricated with type I bovine collagen using a well - established method detailed in [ 22 ] . Suspensions of col - lagen in 0 . 05 M acetic acid were made at a solid concentration of 0 . 5 , 0 . 75 , and 1 % w / V . Blending and centrifugation ( 2500 rpm , 15 min ) produced bubble - less homogeneous slur - ries , which were poured in polystyrene six - well plates to form isotropic structures , and in custom - built molds made with polycarbonate and a stainless steel base to form aligned structures through the application of a directional thermal gradient . Freeze - drying was carried out in a VirTis adVantage bench - top freeze - drier ( Biopharma Process Systems , UK ) , using a cooling rate of 0 . 5 °C min − 1 from room temperature down to a temperature of − 20 °C , which was maintained for 2 h . In the case of the aligned structures , the freeze - drier shelf 46 Page 2 of 11 Journal of Materials Science : Materials in Medicine ( 2020 ) 31 : 46 and molds were pre - cooled to the freezing temperature ( − 20 °C ) before the start of the process . A vacuum of 80 mTorr was then applied at 0 °C to dry all samples over 20 h . Crosslinking of the scaffolds was performed using EDC and NHS , both in 95 % V / V ethanol in water at a molar ratio of 5 : 2 : 1 to the collagen carboxyl groups ( EDC : NHS : Car - boxyl ) . The samples were ﬁ nally washed in water three times for 5 min and freeze - dried again as described above . 2 . 3 Measurement of translational diffusion coef ﬁ cients The sides of the collagen scaffolds were cut off using a scalpel to eliminate any external skin where the structure may be denser than the bulk of the materials [ 22 ] . The sections obtained , approximately 1 cm × 5 mm × 3 mm , were placed in a solution of 0 . 1 mg mL − 1 rhodamine B in distilled water and de - gassed for 20 min at 1200 mTorr in the freeze - drier , and thus stained overnight . The same samples were then washed in PBS three times to ensure removal of any non - bound rhodamine B . Solutions of FITC - dextran were prepared fresh in PBS at a concentration of 0 . 1 mg mL − 1 . Imaging was performed on an Olympus FV1200 confocal microscope ( Olympus , JP ) at room temperature using two lasers , 488 nm and 543 nm , with a 10X objective . Hydrated scaffold samples were placed on a glass slide and provided with additional PBS ( approximately 100 μ L ) to ensure swelling saturation and to form a ﬂ uid environment surrounding the solid scaffolds . Using a pipette , a 50 μ L droplet of FITC - dextran solution was gently put in touch with the ﬂ uid around the sample , and a recording was started in which the confocal micro - scope took images of the side of the sample closer to the droplet every ≈ 2 s . The FITC - dextran front appeared in the ﬁ eld of view within several frames and was recorded to reach the sample surface ( imaged through the rhodamine B signal ) to then slowly move into it over time , as shown in Fig . 1a . Analysis of the translational diffusion coef ﬁ cient D was performed in MatLab ( MathWorks , US ) for those time points where the ﬂ uorescent solution was in contact with the samples : At each time - point , the ﬂ uorescence intensity pro ﬁ le was plotted for the entire ﬁ eld of view . Sign - change analysis was used to automatically identify the surface of the sample , i . e . the point at which the intensity began to decrease compared with the outside ﬂ uid , and the back - ground depth , i . e . the point at which the intensity stopped decreasing and stabilized to a non - zero value ( Fig . 1b ) . The Fig . 1 Measurement of translational diffusion coef ﬁ cient . a Transla - tion of dextran into microporous collagen scaffold with time , observed by confocal microscopy . The scale bar is 200 μ m . Green : FITC - dex - tran ; red : rhodamine - stained scaffold . b Example ﬂ uorescence inten - sity pro ﬁ le with distance . The black squares represent the surface of the scaffold ( left ) and the end of the translating dextran front ( right ) , respectively . In the inset , a typical pro ﬁ le of the diffusion coef ﬁ cient with depth into the sample is shown , where the orange square repre - sents the point after which the coef ﬁ cient is averaged . c Time - dependence of the measured translational diffusion coef ﬁ cient with time where two regions are observed whereby large values determined by convection and edge effects reduce to a stable plateau determined by diffusion only Journal of Materials Science : Materials in Medicine ( 2020 ) 31 : 46 Page 3 of 11 46 segment of the intensity pro ﬁ le contained within the sample surface and background was compared to that for the pre - vious time point ( i . e . the previous intensity at each depth was subtracted from the later one ) , and the instantaneous diffusion coef ﬁ cient was calculated using a common deri - vation of Fick ’ s second law for a constant source [ 23 ] , as previously reported for diffusion within the brain inter - stitium [ 24 ] , using : I L I 0 ¼ erfc L 2 ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ Dt p (cid:3) (cid:4) ð 1 Þ where I L is the ﬂ uorescence intensity at a depth L , I 0 is the average intensity at the source , that is the ﬂ uorescence intensity outside the sample , and t the time between time - points . The assumption was made that ﬂ uorescence intensity scales linearly with solute concentration , as done previously [ 24 – 26 ] . A typical pro ﬁ le of D with depth is shown in the inset of Fig . 1b : Up to a depth of approximately 100 μ m , the translational diffusion coef ﬁ cient was non - constant and showed spikes to very large values , to then fall to a smaller near - constant plateau value for the remaining depth . The variability at small distances may result from surface effects arising from partial pores at the edges . Using sign - change analysis again , D was taken as the average of the plateau smaller values for each time point . As the last step , D was plotted as a function of time ( Fig . 1 . c ) and always found to decrease within several frames at short times , to then sta - bilize to a plateau at longer times . This trend is likely to be due to transient convective transport resulting from the additional ﬂ uid on one side of the material , which increases the apparent value of D at short times [ 27 ] . In this work , the value of the translational diffusion coef ﬁ cient D was approximated as that measured at t = 150 s , at which time the trend had stabilized to a plateau value in all cases . By calculating D in this way for all scaffolds and all probe molecules , it was possible to explore the effect of these parameters on transport . 2 . 4 Measurement of self - diffusion coef ﬁ cients The self diffusion coef ﬁ cients , D S , of FITC - dextrans within the various scaffold structures fabricated were assessed by FRAP . The samples were submerged in FITC - dextran PBS solutions ( same concentration as above ) and then imaged on the confocal microscope using the 488 nm laser . The same laser was used to bleach a circular spot within pores of the samples over ≈ 2 s , followed by a recording of the ﬂ uores - cence recovery every 67 ms for up to ≈ 25 s . The spot size was varied between 5 and 180 μ m to probe any change in diffusivity measured , and set to 30 μ m for the rest of the experiments . Analysis of the recovery pro ﬁ le was per - formed on FRAPAnalyser ( University of Luxembourg , ActinSim ) , which applies the formula [ 28 ] : D S ¼ w 2 = t R ð 2 Þ where w is the radius of the circular spot and t R the recovery time calculated by the software . 2 . 5 Structural analysis A standard set of samples was used for the experiments reported here as in our study on the permeability to ﬂ uid ﬂ ow of these materials [ 17 ] . The structural parameters describing the samples were obtained through analysis of tomography data . In brief , the collagen scaffolds were imaged using an X - ray micro - tomography scanner ( Skyscan 1172 , Bruker , UK ) . The optimized settings used a voltage of 25 kV and a current of 137 μ A . The 3D reconstructed images , corresponding to each scaffold architecture , were analyzed using ImageJ , distribution FIJI , in terms of col - lagen volume fraction , structure average pore size , perco - lation diameter , and tortuosity . Each dataset was initially binarized using the Trainable Segmentation plugin , part of the ImageJ software . Noise removal was carried out using both the Despeckle function and the Median 3D ﬁ lter . All outliers larger than 2 pixels were ﬁ ltered out , and the volume fraction of collagen , φ c , was measured directly as the percentage of volume occupied by solid . The Watershed algorithm was used to ﬁ t each pore with an ellipse , and the pore size d was calculated from the average diameter of each ellipse . The average pore aspect ratio for the aligned scaffolds was calculated from the fraction of the two orthogonal ellipse diameters , denoted a ( shorter diameter ) and b ( longer diameter ) ﬁ t to the pore sections orthogonal to the direction of diffusion . The pore aspect ratio was assumed to be unity for the isotropic scaffolds . Percolation theory was used to calculate the percolation diameter of the porous media . This mathematical analysis reveals the interconnectivity of pores within the scaffolds , by determining the accessible lengths of a range of particle sizes within the porous structure [ 18 ] . The percolation diameter was obtained by applying the “ Shrink Wrap ” function to the binarized datasets . Using the results , the percolation diameter , d p , was calculated as the y - intercept of the following relationship [ 29 ] : L ¼ L 0 δ (cid:2) d p (cid:5) (cid:6) (cid:2) υ ð 3 Þ where δ is the particle diameter , L is the depth traveled by the particle within the structure , ν is equal to 0 . 88 in 3D , and L 0 is a constant . The percolation diameter , in the case of the aligned scaffolds , was measured in the direction of alignment . Tortuosity can be de ﬁ ned as the ratio of the effective path between two points to the Euclidean distance between start 46 Page 4 of 11 Journal of Materials Science : Materials in Medicine ( 2020 ) 31 : 46 and end of the path [ 30 ] . It was mathematically calculated using the Skeletonize option in ImageJ . This algorithm connects all voxels that represent the pore structure to form branch lengths . The skeletons were then analyzed by the software and the tortuosity , τ , calculated . 2 . 6 Statistical analysis and data representation The translational diffusion coef ﬁ cient was measured for ﬁ ve samples per condition ( scaffold morphology and speci ﬁ c solute ) , while ten FRAP measurements were conducted on the same ﬁ ve samples per condition to measure the self diffusion coef ﬁ cient . All data is reported as mean ± standard deviation . Model ﬁ tting and statistical analysis were per - formed using the software OriginPro 2016 , where a prob - ability p of 0 . 05 was taken as the threshold value to ascertain statistically signi ﬁ cant differences in two - sample t - tests . 3 Results Structural studies were conducted on the different scaffolds fabricated ( Table 1 ) . As the concentration of collagen in the slurry was increased , the ﬁ nal scaffold structure varied signi ﬁ cantly . In particular , the volume fraction of collagen increased with slurry concentration , and the pore size and percolation diameter decreased . At the same time , the tor - tuosity of the porous structure increased with collagen concentration in the slurry . Compared with the isotropic structure made from the same slurry concentration ( 0 . 75 % w / V ) , the aligned structure presented a larger ﬁ nal solid fraction and smaller pore size , but larger percolation dia - meter and smaller tortuosity . The results of the analysis for the translational diffusion coef ﬁ cient in the isotropic structures of dextrans with varying molecular weight are reported in Fig . 2 . Qualita - tively , the ﬂ uorescence front was observed to reach a farther depth with time within the scaffolds characterized by a smaller collagen concentration used in their slurries ( Fig . 2a ) . Measurement of the diffusion coef ﬁ cient , reported in Fig . 2b , indeed showed D decreasing with collagen slurry concentration ( p < 0 . 05 between 0 . 5 % w / V and 1 % w / V ) , as well as dextran molecular weight ( p < 0 . 05 in all cases ) . FRAP was used to assess the self diffusion coef ﬁ cient of the same solutes within the scaffold structures . A spot was bleached within single pores of the scaffolds , and the shape of a typical ﬂ uorescence recovery pro ﬁ le is displayed in Fig . 3a . The spot size was varied between 5 and 120 μ m , com - pared in Fig . 3b to a 0 . 75 % w / V structure . The resulting D S for the structures is shown in Fig . 3c as a result of such variation in spot size . It was found that the average self diffusion coef ﬁ cient initially increased with spot size to reach a ﬁ xed value , yet the variability in the measurement increased as the spot size became larger than 100 μ m . Recovery data for spots larger than 120 μ m ( not shown ) was too noisy to be successfully analyzed by the software used . A spot size of 30 μ m was chosen for further analysis . The resulting self diffusion coef ﬁ cients for the dextrans in the isotropic structures are reported in Fig . 3d . As for the translational diffusion coef ﬁ cient results , D S decreased with dextran molecular weight and , on average , with increasing collagen slurry concentration ( p < 0 . 05 between 0 . 5 % w / V and 1 % w / V ) , although the difference was much less marked . Fig . 2 Translational diffusion in collagen scaffolds . a Representative confocal microscopy images of dextran solutions in contact with scaffolds of varying slurry concentrations for 60 s . The scale bar is 200 μ m . d Translational diffusion coef ﬁ cient for scaffolds made with varying slurry concentration , as a function of dextran molecular weight Table 1 Structural parameters of freeze - dried collagen scaffold as a function of collagen concentration in the slurry and the application of uniform or directional freezing pro ﬁ les [ 16 ] . For the aligned scaffolds , a and b , representing the shorter and longer radii of the ellipses ﬁ t to the pores , were measured as 85 ± 24 μ m and 485 ± 130 μ m , respectively Scaffold condition d ( μ m ) d p ( μ m ) φ c ( % ) τ Average Std . dev . Average Std . dev . Average Std . dev . Average Std . dev . 0 . 5 % 221 22 187 10 0 . 58 0 . 13 1 . 34 0 . 11 0 . 75 % 187 28 124 18 0 . 65 0 . 06 1 . 58 0 . 18 1 % 165 15 89 19 1 . 25 0 . 13 1 . 74 0 . 25 Aligned 160 6 143 3 0 . 83 0 . 11 1 . 43 0 . 15 Journal of Materials Science : Materials in Medicine ( 2020 ) 31 : 46 Page 5 of 11 46 Comparison between isotropic and aligned structures was made both in terms of translational and self diffusion . Figure 4a shows the qualitative difference between the two , whereby larger , non - aligned pores can be seen in the for - mer , while aligned pores perpendicular to the outside solution are visible in the latter . Both translational ( Fig . 4b ) and self ( Fig . 4c ) diffusion coef ﬁ cients decreased with dextran molecular weight , with the average always larger for the isotropic structures in the case of translational dif - fusion ( p < 0 . 05 ) , but comparable for the two structures for self diffusion ( p > 0 . 05 ) . All translational and self diffusion coef ﬁ cients measured as part of this study for the various scaffold conditions are summarized in Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary Table 2 , respectively . 4 Discussion The clinical translation of tissue engineered scaffolds has suffered , in part , from the ineffective transport of cell nutrients and oxygen within large constructs , resulting in different tissue formation patterns in the center compared with the edges of the scaffolds [ 31 , 32 ] . Understanding the factors that can affect diffusion in microporous scaffolds can help to address this issue , while also providing insight into the use of these materials in other biomedical appli - cations , such as in drug delivery [ 33 , 34 ] or as part of bioreactors [ 35 , 36 ] . The study of dextran diffusivity in microporous collagen scaffolds conducted here , in parti - cular , shines light on a number of phenomena that improve our understanding regarding the use of these and other microporous materials in such applications . Diffusion is the predominant mechanism by which cells in vivo receive nutrients from the vasculature , playing a major role in ensuring cell viability with depth into the scaffold during tissue culture in vitro [ 37 – 39 ] . Our assess - ment of the translational diffusion coef ﬁ cient within microporous materials showed that this parameter appar - ently varies with depth , decreasing to a plateau value at depths greater than a distance approximating the pore size ( ≈ 100 μ m , Fig . 1a ) . The behavior could be explained by considering that the super ﬁ cial pores , ﬁ rst to oppose the movement of the dextran , are sectioned and so partially open to the outside solution , therefore limiting the solute Fig . 3 Measurement of self - diffusion coef ﬁ cient . a Representative ﬂ uorescence intensity pro ﬁ le with time , recorded during a FRAP experiment . The insets show the area around the bleached spot varying with time . b Comparison between spot sizes and microstructure of a 0 . 75 % collagen scaffold ( dark ) ﬁ lled with dextran solution ( green ) . c Self diffusion coef ﬁ cient versus spot radius for a 0 . 75 % collagen scaffold . d Self diffusion coef ﬁ cient of dextran in microporous collagen scaffolds as a function of dextran molecular weight Fig . 4 Comparison between isotropic and aligned scaffolds . a Con - focal images of isotropic and aligned collagen scaffolds ( red ) in con - tact with dextran solutions ( green ) . The scale bar is 200 μ m . b Translational and c self - diffusion coef ﬁ cient of dextran in both structures as a function of dextran molecular weight 46 Page 6 of 11 Journal of Materials Science : Materials in Medicine ( 2020 ) 31 : 46 mean free path to a lesser extent than in the bulk of the scaffold . It is only when the solutes reach greater depths into the scaffold that the constraining effect of the structure begins to dominate their diffusivity . The large D values measured at shallow depths may also be due to convection near the surface , a phenomenon expected [ 40 ] and visua - lized for all time points . Signi ﬁ cant morphological differences in the isotropic scaffolds utilized for the studies were produced by varying the concentration of collagen in the slurry . In fact , as the slurry concentration was increased , so was the concentra - tion of collagen present in the ﬁ nal scaffold ( Table 1 ) . A larger volume fraction of collagen in these materials results in more of the pore surface becoming covered by pore walls [ 11 ] . As a result of this effect and the decreasing pore size with concentration , the percolation diameter , i . e . the size of the transport paths , also decreased , while the tortuosity of such paths increased . Interestingly , these structural varia - tions were found to affect the translational and self diffu - sivity of the dextrans differently , decreasing the mobility of the molecules more predominantly over scales larger than the pore size ( i . e . those assessed by the translational diffu - sion coef ﬁ cient , rather than the self diffusion coef ﬁ cient , Fig . 2b compared to Fig . 3d ) . Indeed , self diffusivity of dextrans within the micro - porous structures could only be studied at a scale smaller than the pore size . FRAP was used for this purpose , a technique that measures the self diffusion coef ﬁ cient D S by considering the ﬂ uorescence recovery within a bleached spot , as previously done in nanoporous materials such as hydrogels [ 6 – 8 ] . The size of the spot in those hydrogel studies was larger than the pore size of the materials , so that the effect of structure on the diffusivity could be ascer - tained . Here , the spot size was changed to observe any effect on the measured self diffusion coef ﬁ cient ( Fig . 3 ) . It was found that a small spot size ( 5 μ m ) resulted in a smaller value of D S , yet for values up to 60 μ m the diffusion coef ﬁ cient measured was constant . A small spot size may result in non - uniform bleaching , which in turn compromises the analysis [ 41 ] . Large spot sizes could also not be used : when the size was set as 120 μ m , the variability in the measurement greatly increased , and the recovery pro ﬁ le for spots larger than that were too noisy to ﬁ t successfully . As the spot size becomes too large , the assumption that the area is uniformly bleached is likely to break down , rendering the analysis model invalid . Therefore , self diffusivity was stu - died within the pore space of the various scaffolds ( 30 μ m FRAP spot size compared to 160 – 220 μ m pore size ) . The normalized self diffusion coef ﬁ cient divided by the self diffusivity of the solute in liquid , D S / D S , 0 , is often used to assess the impact of the presence of a second phase on diffusivity [ 42 ] . For the microporous scaffolds investigated here , the pore size is vastly larger than the size of the dextran molecules used , of the order of a few nanometers [ 27 ] . In contrast , in the case of nanoporous hydrogels , the size of the solutes is often comparable to that of the pore size . As a result , the normalized self diffusion coef ﬁ cient of dextrans in a collagen hydrogel is affected by solute size , decreasing with it [ 13 ] . The behavior of the microporous collagen scaffolds considered here is different , as the ratio D S / D S , 0 did not show a trend with solute molecular weight ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . This behavior is likely to be due to the larger scale of the morphological features compared with solute size , with the possibility that any small effect of solute size on D S / D S , 0 may be smaller than the variability in the measurements conducted . Coupled with the inert nature of dextrans [ 43 ] , which were not seen to bind to the col - lagen scaffolds ( Fig . 3b ) , this observation allowed for the averaging of the normalized self diffusion coef ﬁ cients for each structure , irrespective of solutes , to analyze any effect of morphology alone on diffusivity within the pores of the scaffolds . Figure 5 shows the normalized self diffusion coef ﬁ cient ( averaged across all solute sizes ) plotted as a function of the morphological parameters characterizing the scaffolds . None of the trends were found to be signi ﬁ cant ( p > 0 . 05 for all ﬁ tted line gradients ) . This is likely to be due to the intrinsic scale - dependency of the measurement , which make properties affecting transport over scales larger than the pore size less relevant within the pore space assessed here . Nevertheless , the self diffusion coef ﬁ cient was found to be a Fig . 5 Relationship of self diffusion ( averaged over all solute sizes ) with scaffold structural parameters . Normalized self diffusion coef ﬁ - cient over the diffusion coef ﬁ cient of the dextrans in PBS , plotted as a function of a pore size , b percolation diameter , c collagen volume fraction , and d tortuosity of the scaffolds . The ﬁ lled points represent the isotropic structures of varying slurry concentration , while the open points are for the aligned scaffold Journal of Materials Science : Materials in Medicine ( 2020 ) 31 : 46 Page 7 of 11 46 fraction of D S , 0 ( average D S / D S , 0 = 0 . 56 ± 0 . 05 ) , indicating that the presence of the scaffold structure decreases the self diffusivity of the solutes compared to the free ﬂ uid . The reason for this phenomenon may be that the presence of the collagen solid phase introduces a hydrodynamic drag on the solutes , whose diffusional jumps are limited by colli - sions with the pore walls [ 44 ] . However , the variability in the structures may be too small here to show an effect on D S , which overall appears to be only affected by solute size rather than scaffold morphology . The morphological parameters of the scaffolds do affect diffusion at scales larger than the pore size , i . e . in the case of the translational diffusion coef ﬁ cient D as it is measured in this work . The scaffold structural parameters vary concomitantly upon changes in collagen slurry concentration , so that their separate contribution may not be easily resolved . Figure 6 shows the variation in translational diffusion coef ﬁ cient with scaffold morphol - ogy for one dextran ( 4 kDa ) . Within the isotropic struc - tures , D increased with pore size d and percolation diameter d p , while it decreased with tortuosity τ and col - lagen volume fraction ϕ c . However , the ﬁ t between aligned and isotropic structures was generally of poor quality , so that an approach capable of concurrently tak - ing into consideration all morphological parameters , as well as solute size , is necessary . A model originally developed for hydrogels [ 44 ] assumes that the decrease in diffusivity ( assumed not dif - ferent between self and translational diffusions ) of a solute from its value in unobstructed ﬂ uid , D S , 0 , is dependent on the probability to ﬁ nd a space for the solute to cross between pores . In the microporous collagen scaffolds , such probability may be approximated by the ratio between percolation diameter and pore size , representing the fraction of the pore wall that is open to the next pore , assuming a rectangular pore cross section ( Fig . 5e ) . This ratio is adjusted for the aspect ratio of the pores , taken as unity for the isotropic structures , and measured as θ = a / b = 0 . 18 ± 0 . 07 for the aligned structures , where a and b represent the shorter and longer radii of the ellipses ﬁ t to the pores . Further , the solute path can be thought of being lengthened by the tortuosity of the scaffolds , and limited by the volume fraction of collagen , which results in a non - unity partition coef ﬁ cient between the ﬂ uid outside and inside the scaffold [ 45 ] . The resulting predicted translational diffusion coef ﬁ - cient then takes the form : D ¼ D S ; 0 1 (cid:2) ϕ c τ d p d θ ð 4 Þ This predicted coef ﬁ cient is compared with the measured values in Fig . 6f , where the trend can be seen to broadly follow the reference parity line . Differences between pre - dicted and measured values are likely to be due to the oversimpli ﬁ cation of the scaffold geometry , where the pore shape in 3D was previously observed to take that of a tet - rakaidekahedron rather than a parallelepiped [ 11 ] , and multiple pore walls possess openings that are available for diffusion . Nevertheless , Eq . ( 4 ) may be adjusted for Fig . 6 Relationship of translational diffusion with scaffold structural parameters . Translational diffusion coef ﬁ cient of 4 kDa dextran plotted as a function of a pore size , b percolation diameter , c collagen volume fraction , and d tortuosity of the scaffolds . The ﬁ lled points represent the isotropic structures of varying slurry concentration , while the open point is for the aligned scaffold . e Diagram of a scaffold pore de ﬁ ned by its principal pore dimensions a and b , and its percolation diameter d p . f Relationship between the predicted translational diffusion coef - ﬁ cient , as given in Eq . 4 , and the measured translational diffusion coef ﬁ cient . The dashed line represents the parity line ; The ﬁ lled points represent the isotropic structures of varying slurry concentration , while the open points are for the aligned scaffold 46 Page 8 of 11 Journal of Materials Science : Materials in Medicine ( 2020 ) 31 : 46 different pore morphologies that are characteristic of other microporous scaffolds , allowing the prediction of diffusion within those structures . The relationship between convective ﬂ uid transport and diffusive solute transport is not well understood in porous materials used as cell culture substrates [ 6 ] . Here , within the isotropic structures , the translational diffusion coef ﬁ cient was found to vary in a similar way to the ﬂ uid permeability of the materials , increasing with d and d p , and decreasing with τ , as measured for the same standard set of samples [ 17 ] . However , contrary to what was reported for con - vective transport in these materials , where the ﬂ uid per - meability of the aligned scaffolds was found to be larger than the isotropic counterparts [ 17 ] , here it was observed that the translational diffusion coef ﬁ cient was smaller in the aligned scaffolds ( Fig . 4 ) . A structural comparison between these two types of structures made with the same collagen slurry concentration showed that the aligned scaffolds possess a smaller tortuosity and larger percolation diameter in the direction of the alignment , despite a smaller pore size and larger average collagen volume fraction ( Table 1 ) . These results suggest that convection and diffusion are differently affected by the complex morphologies of microporous scaffolds , in contrast to what seen in nano - porous hydrogels [ 6 ] . In comparison with nanoporous hydrogels , the micro - porous materials assessed possess a striking capacity to carry solutes , most obvious when considering the translational diffusion coef ﬁ cient , which impacts the availability of cell nutrients diffusing from a source outside the scaffold . Fitting a power law to the diffusion coef ﬁ cient results for the 0 . 5 % wt scaffolds , we can predict the diffusion of a protein like albumin , which is metabolized by mammalian cells to extract necessary amino acids [ 46 ] and possesses a molecular weight in the range of those considered ( ≈ 70 kDa [ 47 ] ) . Our results suggest that albumin would possess an effective room tem - perature diffusion coef ﬁ cient of ≈ 40 μ m 2 s − 1 , much larger than that reported for its diffusion in collagen hydrogels at body temperature ( 22 μ m 2 s − 1 at 37 °C ) [ 13 ] . The values reported in this study can be used to evaluate the in ﬂ uence of structural parameters on the diffusivity of other molecules within microporous scaffolds at different scales , even after adjustments for changes in temperature and cell culture media viscosity . It is critical to note that , in addition to the analysis presented , one may expect that the presence of cell - produced ECM , as well as consumption of nutrients by the cells , will result in a decrease in the overall transport depth [ 43 , 48 ] . Similarly , our analysis does not take into consideration electrostatic [ 49 ] or osmotic [ 50 ] effects within the scaffolds , which were found to impact ﬂ uid transport and so may also affect solute transport . However , the open nature of the freeze - dried scaffolds will likely make them less affected by these factors compared with denser hydrogels . For these reasons , the microporous materials considered here may be more suitable than nanoporous hydrogels to allow 3D culture of cells at large depths . 5 Conclusions The studies conducted here show that diffusion of macro - molecules within microporous tissue engineering scaffolds is scale - dependent , with different structural contributions to transport depending on the distance from the source of solutes . This scale dependence of the diffusion is interest - ing , as from a practical point of view , the translational diffusion coef ﬁ cient dominates the transport of nutrients when the source is distant , outside the scaffold during in vitro culture , while the self diffusion coef ﬁ cient dom - inates the transport from de novo vasculature within the pores of the scaffold after implantation in vivo , with the two types of diffusion differently affected by the scaffold mor - phology . The results reported here , therefore , provide insight into the development of scaffolds with custom concentration gradient pro ﬁ les and increased ef ﬁ cacy as platforms for 3D cell culture . Acknowledgements The authors are thankful to the European Research Council , which funded this research through the ERC Advanced Grant 320598 3D - E . L . M . is also grateful for the ﬁ nancial support received from the Cambridge Trust Scholarship and the Department of Materials Science and Metallurgy , University of Cambridge . The research data produced as part of this study is available at : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17863 / CAM . 26221 . Compliance with ethical standards Con ﬂ ict of interest The authors declare that they have no con ﬂ ict of interest . Publisher ’ s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional af ﬁ liations . Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International License , which permits use , sharing , adaptation , distribution and reproduction in any medium or format , as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author ( s ) and the source , provide a link to the Creative Commons license , and indicate if changes were made . The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article ’ s Creative Commons license , unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material . If material is not included in the article ’ s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use , you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder . To view a copy of this license , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . References 1 . Hollister SJ . Porous scaffold design for tissue engineering . Nat Mater . 2005 ; 4 : 518 – 24 . Journal of Materials Science : Materials in Medicine ( 2020 ) 31 : 46 Page 9 of 11 46 2 . Drury JL , Mooney DJ . Hydrogels for tissue engineering : scaffold design variables and applications . Biomaterials . 2003 ; 24 : 4337 – 51 . 3 . Ashworth JC , Mehr M , Buxton PG , Best SM , Cameron RE . Cell invasion in collagen scaffold architectures characterized by per - colation theory . Adv Healthc Mater . 2015 ; 4 : 1317 – 21 . 4 . Yu H , Meyvantsson I , Shkel IA , Beebe DJ . Diffusion dependent cell behavior in microenvironments . Lab Chip . 2005 ; 5 : 1089 – 95 . 5 . Laurent TC , Sundelof L , Wik KO , Warmegard B . Diffusion of dextran in concentrated solutions . FEBS J . 1976 ; 68 : 95 – 102 . 6 . Offeddu GS , Axpe E , Harley BAC , Oyen ML . Relationship between permeability and diffusivity in polyethylene glycol hydrogels . AIP Adv . 2018 ; 8 : 105006 . 7 . Brandl F , Kastner F , Gschwind RM , Blunk T , Tessmar J , Gopferich A . Hydrogel - based drug delivery systems : comparison of drug diffusivity and release kinetics . J Controll Release . 2010 ; 142 : 221 – 8 . 8 . Stylianopoulos T , Diop - Frimpong B , Munn LL , Jain RK . Diffu - sion anisotropy in collagen gels and tumors : the effect of ﬁ ber network orientation . Biophys J . 2010 ; 99 : 3119 – 28 . 9 . Censi R , et al . Photopolymerized thermosensitive hydrogels for tailorable diffusion - controlled protein delivery . J Controll Release . 2009 ; 140 : 230 – 6 . 10 . Axpe E , et al . A multiscale model for solute diffusion in hydro - gels . Macromolecules . 2019 ; 52 : 6889 – 97 . 11 . Offeddu GS , Ashworth JC , Cameron RE , Oyen ML . Structural determinants of hydration , mechanics and ﬂ uid ﬂ ow in freeze - dried collagen scaffolds . Acta Biomater . 2016 ; 41 : 193 – 203 . 12 . Suhaimi H , Wang S , Thornton T , Das DB . On glucose diffusivity of tissue engineering membranes and scaffolds . Chem Eng Sci . 2015 ; 126 : 244 – 56 . 13 . Ramanujan S , Pluen A , McKee TD , Brown EB , Boucher Y , Jain RK . Diffusion and convection in collagen gels : implications for transport in the tumor interstitium . Biophys J . 2002 ; 83 : 1650 – 60 . 14 . Kew SJ , et al . Synthetic collagen fascicles for the regeneration of tendon tissue . Acta Biomater . 2012 ; 8 : 3723 – 31 . 15 . O ’ Brien FJ , Harley BA , Yannas IV , Gibson L . In ﬂ uence of freezing rate on pore structure in freeze - dried collagen - GAG scaffolds . Biomaterials . 2004 ; 25 : 1077 – 86 . 16 . Campbell JJ , Husmann A , Hume RD , Watson CJ , Cameron RE . Development of three - dimensional collagen scaffolds with con - trolled architecture for cell migration studies using breast cancer cell lines . Biomaterials . 2017 ; 114 : 34 – 43 . 17 . Mohee L , Offeddu GS , Husmann A , Oyen ML , Cameron RE . Investigation of the intrinsic permeability of ice - templated col - lagen scaffolds as a function of their structural and mechanical properties . Acta Biomater . 2018 ; 83 : 189 – 98 . 18 . Ashworth JC , Mehr M , Buxton PG , Best SM , Cameron RE . Parameterizing the transport pathways for cell invasion in complex scaffold architectures . Tissue Eng C Methods . 2016 ; 22 : 409 – 17 . 19 . Yannas IV , Burke JF , Orgill DP , Skrabut EM . Wound tissue can utilize a polymeric template to synthesize a functional extension of skin . Science . 1982 ; 215 : 174 – 6 . 20 . Yannas IV . Tissue regeneration by use of collagen - glycosaminoglycan copolymers . Clinic Mater . 1992 ; 9 : 179 – 87 . 21 . Cheema U , Ananta M , Mudera V . Collagen : applications of a natural polymer in regenerative medicine . Eberli D , editor . Regenerative medicine and tissue engineering — cells and bioma - terials . London : InTech — Open Access Publisher ; 2011 : 287 – 300 . 22 . Offeddu GS , Ashworth JC , Cameron RE , Oyen ML . Multi - scale mechanical response of freeze - dried collagen scaffolds for tissue engineering applications . J Mech Behav Biomed Mater . 2015 ; 42 : 19 – 25 . 23 . Bokstein BS , Mendelev MI , Srolovitz DJ . Thermodynamics and kinetics in materials science . Oxford University Press , Oxford , U . K . 2005 . 24 . Wolak DJ , Pizzo ME , Thorne RG . Probing the extracellular dif - fusion of antibodies in brain using in vivo integrative optical imaging and ex vivo ﬂ uorescence imaging . J Controll Release . 2015 ; 197 : 78 – 86 . 25 . Offeddu GS , et al . An on - chip model of protein paracellular and transcellular permeability in the microcirculation . Biomaterials . 2019 ; 212 : 115 – 25 . 26 . Offeddu GS , et al . Application of transmural ﬂ ow across in vitro microvasculature enables direct sampling of interstitial therapeutic molecule distribution . Small . 2019 ; 15 : 1902393 . 27 . Ferguson SJ , Ito K , Nolte LP . Fluid ﬂ ow and convective transport of solutes within the intervertebral disc . J Biomech . 2004 ; 37 : 213 – 21 . 28 . Gribbon P , Hardingham TE . Macromolecular diffusion of biolo - gical polymers measured by confocal ﬂ uorescence recovery after photobleaching . Biophys J . 1998 ; 75 : 1032 – 9 . 29 . Saxton MJ . Two - dimensional continuum percolation threshold for diffusing particles of nonzero radius . Biophys J . 2010 ; 99 : 1490 – 9 . 30 . Johnson DL , Koplik J , Dashen R . Theory of dynamic permeability and tortuosity in ﬂ uid - saturated porous media . J Fluid Mech . 1987 ; 176 : 379 – 402 . 31 . Bruzauskaite I , Bironaite D , Bagdonas E , Bernotiene E . Scaffolds and cells for tissue regeneration : different scaffold pore sizes — different cell effects . Cytotechnology . 2016 ; 68 : 355 – 69 . 32 . Farris AL , Rindone AN , Grayson WL . Oxygen delivering bioma - terials for tissue engineering . J Mater Chem B . 2016 ; 4 : 3422 – 32 . 33 . Fenton OS , Olafson KN , Pillai PS , Mitchell MJ , Langer R . Advances in biomaterials for drug delivery . Adv Mater . 2018 ; 30 : 30 . 34 . Cyphert EL , Bil M , von Recum HA , Swieszkowski W . Repurposing biodegradable tissue engineering scaffolds for loca - lized chemotherapeutic delivery . J Biomed Mater Res . 2020 ( In press ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jbm . a . 36889 . 35 . Paez - Mayorga J , et al . Bioreactors foR CARDIAC TISSUE Engineering . Adv Healthc Mater . 2019 ; 8 : 1701504 . 36 . Kumar P , Dey B , Sekhar GPR . Nutrient transport through deformable cylindrical scaffold inside a bioreactor : an application to tissue engineering . Int J Eng Sci . 2018 ; 127 : 201 – 16 . 37 . Cheema U , Rong Z , Kirresh O , Macrobert AZ , Vadgama P , Brown RA . Oxygen diffusion through collagen scaffolds at de ﬁ ned densities : implications for cell survival in tissue models . J Tissue Eng Regen Med . 2012 ; 6 : 77 – 84 . 38 . Buckley CT , O ’ Kelly KU . Maintaining cell depth viability : on the ef ﬁ cacy of a trimodal scaffold pore architecture and dynamic rotational culturing . J Mater Sci Mater Med . 2010 ; 21 : 1731 – 8 . 39 . Karande TS , Ong JL , Agrawal CM . Diffusion in musculoskeletal tissue engineering scaffolds : design issues related to porosity , permeability , architecture , and nutrient mixing . Ann Biomed Eng . 2004 ; 32 : 1728 – 43 . 40 . Cheng P . Combined free and forced convection ﬂ ow about inclined surfaces in porous media . Int J Heat Mass Transf . 1977 ; 20 : 807 – 14 . 41 . Kang M , Day CA , Drake K , Kenworthy AK , DiBenedetto E . A generalization of theory for two - dimensional ﬂ uorescence recov - ery after photobleaching applicable to confocal laser scanning microscopes . Biophys J . 2009 ; 97 : 1501 – 11 . 42 . Boving TB , Grathwohl P . Tracer diffusion coef ﬁ cients in sedi - mentary rocks : correlation to porosity and hydraulic conductivity . J Contam Hydrol . 2001 ; 53 : 85 – 100 . 43 . Leddy HA , Awad HA , Guilak F . Molecular diffusion in tissue ‐ engineered cartilage constructs : effects of scaffold material , time , and culture conditions . J Biomed Mater Res . 2004 ; 70B : 397 – 406 . 44 . Amsden B . An obstruction - scaling model for diffusion in homo - geneous hydrogels . Macromolecules . 1999 ; 32 : 874 – 9 . 45 . Pimenta AFR , Ascenso J , Fernandes JCS , Colaco R , Serro AP , Saramago B . Controlled drug release from hydrogels for contact lenses : Drug partitioning and diffusion . Int J Pharm . 2016 ; 515 : 467 – 75 . 46 Page 10 of 11 Journal of Materials Science : Materials in Medicine ( 2020 ) 31 : 46 46 . Palm W , Thompson CB . Nutrient acquisition strategies of mam - malian cells . Nature . 2017 ; 546 : 234 – 42 . 47 . Kratz FA . Clinical update of using albumin as a drug vehicle — a commentary . J Controll Release . 2014 ; 190 : 331 – 6 . 48 . Suhaimi H , Das DB . Glucose diffusivity in cell - seeded tissue engineering scaffolds . Biotechnol Lett . 2016 ; 38 : 183 – 90 . 49 . Offeddu GS , Mela I , Jeggle P , Henderson RM , Smoukov SK , Oyen ML . Cartilage - like electrostatic stiffening of responsive cryogel scaffolds . Sci Rep . 2017 ; 5 : 42948 . 50 . Offeddu GS , Tanase CE , Toumpaniari S , Oyen ML , Cameron RE . Stiffening by osmotic swelling constraint in cartilage ‐ like cell culture scaffolds . Macromol Biosci . 2018 ; 18 : 1800247 . Journal of Materials Science : Materials in Medicine ( 2020 ) 31 : 46 Page 11 of 11 46