European Journal of Psychology of Education 1996 , VoL XI , n ~ l , 3 - 23 (cid:14)9 1996 , LS . P . A . Analogical reasoning in restructuring scientific knowledge Lucia Ma : son Paolo Sorzio UniversiO ~ of Padova , Italy This study presents the results oran experiment which investigated analogical reasoning in knowledge acquisition in a natural school set - ting , The airas were to evaluate the effieieney of analogy in the concep - tual restrueturing of a seienee topic and compare the effeets of analogy # 1 different learning eonditions . Two analogieal topics of physics ( water flow and heat flow ) were studied by means of two experiments performed in the elassroom with concrete objects . Eighty - four 5th graders , divided into three experimental conditions ( given analogy , eonstrueted analogy , no analogy ) , took part in the study . The quantita - tive analysis mainly confirms the hypothesis that analogy can be a pro - ductive way to trigger a proeess of knowledge restructuring while stu - dents learn a new topic . However , the effective use of the analogy was qffected by the experimental eondition . When the analogy was con - s , ' ructed by the learners themselves , instead of being presented andjus - ti ) qed by the teacher , it acted indeed as a more powerful tool in under - s / anding the new topic which required changing their initiat cancep - tions . The qualitative analysis shows the children ' s explanations of the heat flow phenomenon and different conceptual outcomes of the learn - ing process . Finalty , edueational implications are eonsidered . Introduction Analogy is thought to be one of the fundamental metbods to enbance knowledge ( Hesse , 1966 ; Rossi , 1986 ) . It is the transfer , by mapping processes , of relational structure from a known dom ' ain ( the source ) to another fundamentally similar but less known domain ( the tar - get ) . Among the systematic approaches to the studying ofanalogical reasoning , which have led We wish 1 : o thank al [ the fifth grade teachers in the following eLementary schools for their cooperation with this study : in Padova , " U . Foscolo " school ( Mrs . Leda Basalisco and Mrs . Donatella Cervi ) ; in Venezia , " Ca ' Bianca " , " A . Gabelli ' , " Parmeggiani " , and " S . Giovanni Bosco " schools . We are also very grateful to all the children who sfimulated us to many reflections . Moreover , spec [ ai thanks to En¡ Giordarto for her helpful clarifications on heat phenomeaa . The authors have contributed equally to the development and writing ofthis article . They wish to thank the anony - mous reviewers for their constructive cont¡ 4 L . MASON & P . SORZIO to different theories of how mapping occurs , we could refer to the componential one , the prag - matic one , and the syntactic one . The componential theory identifies the different component skills underlying reasoning by analogy in the classical paradigm on solving analogies ( present - ed in IQ tests ) which involve four element comparisons : a : b : : c : d ( bird : feathers : : dog : ? ) . Sternberg ( 1977 , 1982 ) suggested six components which constitute analogical reasoning : encoding the terms of ah analogy to establish their semantic extensions ; inferring the relation between the two first terms ( a and b ) ; mapping the relation between the first and the third term ( a and c ) ; applying an analogous relation to the second term ( b ) to generate the solution to the analogy ; justifying the match of the chosen term ( d ) ; making the response . The structuraI and pragmatic models have been elaborated to account for analogical reasoning not in solving clas - sical , frequently arbitrary , analogies , but in solving problem analogies . The structure - mapping theory ( Gentner , 1983 , 1989 ) proposes a system of procedures and implicit rules through which analogies ate generated or understood . These rules are based on the syntactic features of the knowledge representation . The principle of systematicity is central to the mapping process . People prefer to map connected systems of relations govemed by higher - order relations rather than isolated predicates . In making the analogy between the solar system and the atom , only the relational similarities shared by the source and the target are maximized by mapping sys - tems of predicates linked by higher . - order relations , such as " cause " , instead of lower - order relations , such as " bigger than " , or isolated predicates , such as " hot " . The pragmatic theory considers the role of analogy in a goal - directed processing system ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ; Holyoak , 1984 , 1985 ) . The mapping of information from a source to a target is heavily influenced by the system ' s goal . Different goals can lead to different mappings for the same analogy . Even the perception of the structure of an analogy is affected by the pragmatic con - text of its use . Therefore , what is transferred from the source analog to the target is determined by a variety of factors , neglected in the purely syntactic approach to analogy , such as knowl - edge about the conventional importance or salience ofsome aspects in the source and the aim toward which the analogy itself is used . Despite their divergences , all these theories attribute crucial importance to the mapping stage of the source characteristics to the target and to the elaboration of higher - order relations which link the two domains . Research on the processes of knowledge development has pointed out the power of analogies in connecting information and in elaborating more comprehensive and integrated conceptual structures ( Brown , 1978 ; Bransford , Franks , Vye , & Sherwood , 1989 ; Duit , 1991 ; Glynn , 1990 ; Prawat , 1989 ; Ross , 1989 ; Rumelhart & Norman , 1978 ; Spiro , Feltovich , Coulson , & Anderson , 1989 ; Stepich & Newby , 1988 ; Weinstein & Underwood , 1985 ) . The question ofhow to liberate " inert " knowledge is a major challenge facing research on leaming and instruction ( Vosniadou & Ortony , 1989 ) . The issue is that problem solvers may have the knowledge to solve a problem , but they are not able to use that knowledge when needed . Reasoning by similarity and analogy can make students ' knowledge bases more flexible and integrated . The knowledge acquired by leamers in school should not remain isolated and con - text - bound , but become transferable and usable in new situations . Analogies were found particularly useful for : ( a ) the coding and organization of new knowledge ; ( b ) the access to , and retrieval of , information previously stored in memory ; ( c ) the creation of anomalies in a conceptual framework ; ( d ) the overcoming of misconceptions ; ( e ) the creation of new schemata . Specific studies have addressed the tole of instructional analogies in teaching and leam - ing contents in different complex domains and at different school levels . They have indicated the conditions under which analogie , ; may be effective aids in building richer representations of new concepts ( Clement , 1989 ; Halpern , 1987 ; Mayer , 1975 ; Mayer & Bromage , 1980 ; Newby & Ertmer , 1994 ; Schustack & Anderson , 1979 ; Silvestri , 1989 ; Simons , 1982 , 1984 ; Vosniadou & Schommer , 1988 ) . Assuming the uselfuness of analogy in knowledge develop - ment , models for teaching by scientific analogies have been proposed ( Zeitoun , 1984 ; Glynn , 1990 , 1991 ) . Some innovative studies have investigated the use of analogies for conceptual change , that is when students have already constructed knowledge on the target , the new topic to be