Precise control of microtubule disassembly in living cells Grace Y . Liu 1 # , Shiau - Chi Chen 1 # , Kritika Shaiv 1 # , Shi - Rong Hong 1 , Wen - Ting Yang 1 , Shih - Han Huang 1 , Ya - Chu Chang 1 , Hsuan Cheng 1 , and Yu - Chun Lin 1 , 2 * 1 Institute of Molecular Medicine , National Tsing Hua University , Hsinchu , Taiwan 2 Department of Medical Science , National Tsing Hua University , Hsinchu , Taiwan # These authors contributed equally to this work . * To whom correspondence should be addressed . Email : Yu - Chun Lin : ycl @ life . nthu . edu . tw Abstract Microtubules ( MTs ) are components of the evolutionarily conserved cytoskeleton , which tightly regulates various cellular activities . Our understanding of MTs is largely based on MT - targeting agents , which , however , are insufficient to dissect the dynamic mechanisms of specific MT populations due to their slow effects on the entire pool of MTs in cells . To address this limitation , we have used chemogenetics and optogenetics to disassemble specific MT subtypes by rapid recruitment of engineered MT - cleaving enzymes . Acute MT disassembly swiftly halted vesicular trafficking and lysosome dynamics . We also used this approach to disassemble MTs specifically modified by tyrosination and several MT - based structures including primary cilia , mitotic spindles , and intercellular bridges . These effects were rapidly reversed by inhibiting the activity or MT association of the cleaving enzymes . The disassembly of targeted MTs with spatial and temporal accuracy enables to uncover new insights of how MTs precisely regulate cellular architectures and functions . Introduction Microtubules ( MTs ) are hollow tubes constructed from α - and β - tubulins and are present in all eukaryotic cells . They are involved in many cellular activities including intracellular trafficking , cell migration , cell division , cell polarity , signaling , and others 1 , 2 . To execute these functions , cells form several MT - based structures spatiotemporally such as primary cilia on the surface of G0 cells , intercellular bridges in the connected regions of two dividing cells during telophase , mitotic spindles in the cytosol of metaphase cells , and centrosomes 3 – 6 . Our understanding of MTs and these MT - based organelles is largely dependent on MT - targeting agents ( MTAs ) that perturb MT dynamics 7 . As MTs are vital for cellular physiology and mitosis , these MTAs have also been used in cancer chemotherapy 8 . In addition to their effects on MT dynamics , however , MTAs slowly disrupt MT structures and non - selectively perturb all MT subtypes . Several recent studies using photoswitchable MTAs and optogenetics to module MT dynamics or their ability to crosslink with actin filaments raise the possibility of precisely controlling MT activities 9 – 11 . However , none of these systems can directly disassemble specific MT subtypes and MT - based structures . We have developed a new and easy - to - use system that enables precise disassembly of targeted MT subtypes or specific MT - based structures under the control of chemical treatments or light illumination . Results Rapid translocation of proteins of interest onto MTs The chemically inducible dimerization ( CID ) system has been used to manipulate cellular signaling and molecular composition over both space and time 12 – 14 . This is achieved by the rapid recruitment of proteins of interest ( POIs ) onto specific subcellular sites or their substrates 12 . Dimerization of FKBP ( FK506 - binding protein ) and FRB ( FKBP - rapamycin binding domain ) that is triggered by a small chemical component , rapamycin , is one well - established CID system 12 . To rapidly recruit POIs onto MTs , we tagged FRB with a MT - binding sequence , EMTB ( the MT - binding domain of ensconsin ) , and a cyan fluorescent protein ( CFP ) for visualizing its distribution ( Fig . 1a ) . A linescan analysis showed that the resulting construct , EMTB - CFP - FRB , colocalizes with cytosolic MTs labeled by an antibody against α - tubulin ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . The addition of rapamycin to HeLa cells led to the rapid translocation of yellow fluorescent protein – tagged FKBP ( YFP - FKBP ) onto EMTB - CFP - FRB – labeled MTs as evidenced by an increased FRET ( fluorescence resonance energy transfer ) signal on MTs ( T 1 / 2 of translocation : 5 . 73 ± 0 . 54 sec ; Fig . 1b , c ; Supplementary Video 1 ) . In summary , these results demonstrated that cytosolic POIs can be rapidly translocated onto MTs through inducible protein dimerization . Engineering MT - severing enzymes for precise MT disruption Spastin is a MT - severing enzyme that is ubiquitous in nearly all eukaryotic cells 15 . Consistent with previous study 16 , expression of full - length spastin ( Spastin - YFP ) and truncated spastin without the N - terminal 1 – 140 amino acids ( dNSpastin - YFP ) in HeLa cells removed significant amounts of cytosolic MTs , 47 . 45 % and 42 . 86 % , respectively , relative to YFP - transfected control cells ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . Thus the N - terminal fragment ( 1 – 140 amino acids ) was dispensable for Spastin - mediated MT severing . To minimize the MT - cleaving reaction before recruitment of spastins onto MTs , we next attempted to disassociate dNSpastin from MTs by three strategies and also tagged spastin with YFP - FKBP : 1 ) removal of the MT - binding domain from dNSpastin 17 ( while retaining its catalytic domain ; dNSpastinCD - YFP - FKBP ) ; 2 ) mutation of key residues that are required for MT binding of Spastin ( dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ) ; and 3 ) tagging spastin with a plasma membrane – binding sequence , C2Lact 14 , to mislocate spastin to the cell cortex , where MTs are rarely found ( dNSpastin - YFP - FKBP - C2Lact ) . We then characterized the enzyme activities of the above constructs before and after they were recruited onto MTs . dNSpastin - YFP - FKBP - C2Lact and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP showed low MT - severing activities before rapamycin treatment and robustly disrupted MTs after rapamycin treatment . dNSpastinCD - YFP - FKBP did not show severing activity ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . Live - cell imaging revealed that rapamycin treatment rapidly triggered the translocation of dNSpastin - YFP - FKBP - C2Lact ( T 1 / 2 = 55 . 44 ± 8 . 38 sec ) and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( T 1 / 2 = 60 . 35 ± 5 . 30 sec ) from the cytosol onto MTs ( Supplementary Fig . 3 ; Supplementary Video 2 ) . It was noteworthy that MT disruption triggered by dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP upon rapamycin treatment ( T 1 / 2 = 11 . 05 ± 1 . 52 min ) was much faster than that of dNSpastin - YFP - FKBP - C2Lact upon rapamycin treatment ( T 1 / 2 = 53 . 08 ± 8 . 08 min ) , and treatment of two common MTAs , nocodazole ( 10 µM ; T 1 / 2 = 54 . 02 ± 10 . 29 min ) , colchicine ( 500 µM ; T 1 / 2 = 94 . 28 ± 8 . 63 min ; Fig . 1d , e ; Extended data Fig . 1 ; Supplementary Videos 3 , 4 ) . Moreover , recruitment of dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP onto MTs significantly removed more MT filaments as compared with others treatments ( Extended data Fig . 1a , c ) . Trapping the enzyme - inactive dNSpastinXXXED - YFP - FKBP onto MTs showed no MT disruption , indicating that acute MT disruption is an enzyme - dependent event ( Fig . 1e ; Extended data Fig . 1 ; Supplementary Video 4 ) . This inducible MT disruption occurs in other cell types ( Supplementary Figs . 4 , 5 ; Supplementary Videos 5 , 6 ) and can also be controlled by rapamycin - orthogonal systems such as a gibberellin - based system with similar MT disruption kinetics ( Supplementary Figs . 6 , 7 ; Supplementary Video 7 ) 14 . Moreover , dNSpastinXXX - mediated MT disruption did not result in a change in the amount of MT mass when cells were pretreated with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 , indicating that this event was not dependent on proteosome - mediated degradation ( Fig . 1e ; Extended data Fig . 2 ; Supplementary Video 8 ) . Moreover , spastazoline , a spastin inhibitor 18 , swiftly reversed rapamycin - mediated acute MT disruption ( Fig . 2 ; Supplementary Video 9 ) . Intriguingly , nascent MTs from the fragments derived from dNspastinXXX - mediated cleavage assembled at a polymerization rate of 0 . 92 ± 0 . 04 µm / sec , which was slightly slower than the regrowth rate of 1 . 17 ± 0 . 07 µm / sec for MTs from centrosomes ( Fig . 2c ) . Taken together , these results demonstrate that acute MT disruption occurs through MT filament disassembly instead of MT degradation . In summary , rapid recruitment of dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP onto MTs efficiently triggered MT disassembly in living cells upon dimerization induction . Acute MT disassembly inhibits vesicular trafficking and lysosome dynamics We next evaluated whether acute MT disassembly functionally perturbs vesicle and organelle dynamics . To address this , a YFP - labeled post - Golgi vesicle marker , TGN38 ( Trans - Golgi network integral membrane protein 38 ) , and lysosome marker , LAMP3 ( Lysosome - associated membrane glycoprotein 3 ) , were used to observe the real - time dynamics of vesicles and lysosomes upon acute MT disassembly , respectively ( Fig . 3 and supplementary Fig . 8 ) . Acute MT disassembly attenuated the movement of post - Golgi vesicles and lysosomes in terms of moving distance and speed ( Fig . 3 and supplementary Fig . 8 ; Supplementary Videos 10 - 13 ) . Thus our system not only disrupts MT structure but also rapidly blocks vesicular trafficking and lysosome dynamics . Rapid disruption of tyrosinated MTs MTs undergo various post - translational modification ( PTMs ) for spatiotemporally regulating their properties and functions 1 . We next turned our efforts to precisely disrupt MTs with specific PTMs . Very recently , an elegant work has established a biosensor , A1AY1 , that specifically target to tyrosinated MTs in living cells 19 . To apply it in our system , A1AY1 was tagged with FRB and a red fluorescent protein , TagRFP . Immunostaining results confirmed that the regulating construct ( TagRFP - FRB - A1AY1 ) preferentially targeted to generic MTs and tyrosinated MTs but not to detyrosinated MTs ( Fig . 4a , b ) . The addition of rapamycin rapidly recruited a cyan fluorescent protein , TagCFP , tagged FKBP ( TagCFP - FKBP ) , onto TagRFP - FRB - A1AY1 - bound MTs ( T 1 / 2 = 64 . 71 ± 16 . 08 sec ; Supplementary Video 14 ) . Moreover , recruitment of dNSpastinXXX - TagCFP - FKBP onto A1AY1 - labeled MTs disrupted the A1AY1 - positive MT filaments and significantly reduce ~ 41 . 4 % of tyrosinated MTs ( Fig . 4e , f ) , indicating that , with specific tubulin PTMs biosensor against tyrosinated MTs , our system is able to precisely disassemble MTs modified with tyrosination . Rapid disruption of specific MT - based structures In addition to cytosol MTs , many MT - based structures including primary cilia , centrosomes , mitotic spindles , and intercellular bridges regulate various cellular activities in a defined spatiotemporal manner 3 – 6 . We next tested whether recruitment of dNSpastinXXX onto these different MT - based structures can specifically disassemble them . A truncated MT - binding domain of microtubule associate protein 4 ( MAP4m ) preferentially bound to ciliary axonemes in G0 cells and shifts to mitotic spindles during metaphase and intercellular bridges during telophase ( Supplementary Fig . 9 ) 13 . In G0 cells , addition of rapamycin rapidly trapped FKBP - tagged dNSpastinXXX on CFP - FRB - MAP4m - labeled axonemes in the cilia . Local accumulation of dNSpastinXXX on ciliary axonemes resulted in rapid disassembly of axonemes and primary cilia within ~ 15 min ( Fig . 5a , b ; Extended data Fig . 3 ; Supplementary Video 15 ) . Trapping enzyme - inactive dNSpastinXXXED - YFP - FKBP on ciliary axonemes did not perturb the ciliary structure ( Extended data Fig . 3 ; Supplementary Video 15 ) . Although axonemes are known as major skeletons of primary cilia , acute axoneme disruption was occasionally not associated with disassembly of the entire ciliary structure ( 2 out of 10 cells examined ) and induced bulging and branched phenotypes in cilia ( Supplementary Fig . 10 ; Supplementary Video 16 ) , suggesting that other MT - independent factors may also contribute to the maintenance of ciliary structures . This may explain why rare cells paradoxically showed a ciliary membrane that did not have axonemes ( Supplementary Fig . 11 ) . In mitotic cells , translocation of dNSpastinXXX onto CFP - FRB - MAP4m - labeled mitotic spindles ( Fig . 5c ) and intercellular bridges ( Fig . 5e ) quickly disrupted these MT - based structures ( Fig . 5c - f ; Supplementary Videos 17 , 18 ) . Surprisingly , dNSpastinXXX did not disrupt centrosomes ( or basal bodies in G0 cells ) as shown by the images of cells that retained PACT ( a conserved centrosomal targeting motif of pericentrin protein ) 20 - labeled centrosomes after MT disruption treatment for 1 hr ( Supplementary Fig . 12 ; Supplementary Video 19 ; the same phenotype is shown by dotted structures in Supplementary Videos 5 , 6 , 7 , 9 , 12 , 15 , and 16 ) . Using light to spatiotemporally disrupt MTs We next tried to use an optogenetic system to trigger MT disassembly in a sub - cellular region of interest during a specific period of time . Cryptochrome 2 ( Cry2 ) and CIBN ( N - terminal 170 amino acids of CIB1 ) , two blue light - sensitive dimerizing partners 21 , were used in our MT - manipulating system . Cry2 , which was tagged with the red fluorescent protein mCherry ( mCh - Cry2 ) , was rapidly translocated onto EMTB - YFP - CIBN - labeled MTs only in regions illuminated with light ( T 1 / 2 = 34 . 6 ± 7 . 58 sec ) and dissociated from MTs to the cytosol when the light was off ( T 1 / 2 = 28 . 2 ± 4 . 88 sec ; Fig . 6a , b ; Supplementary Video 19 ) . We then used light to control spastin - mediated MT disassembly in a spatially and temporally specific manner . dNSpastinXXX tagged with mCh - Cry2 was co - expressed with EMTB - YFP - CIBN in COS7 cells . MTs were labeled with SPY650 - tubulin in these experiments . Local illumination with blue light robustly recruited dNSpastinXXX - mCh - Cry2 onto MTs , leading to the disassembly of MTs only in illuminated regions . The dNSpastinXXX - mCh - Cry2 reverted to cytosol and MT reassembly occurred when the cells were placed back in the dark ( Fig . 6c , d ; Supplementary Video 21 ) . Recruitment of mCh - Cry2 without Spastin onto MTs by the same photostimulation procedure did not lead to MT disassembly , confirming that light - induced MT disassembly did not result from phototoxicity ( Extended data Fig . 4 ; Supplementary Video 22 ) . Discussion Overexpression of unmodified Spastin ( SpastinFL ) and dNSpastin depleted 47 . 45 % and 42 . 86 % of cytosolic MTs , respectively ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . Spastin - mediated cleavage of MTs was boosted by recruiting dNSpastin onto MTs with a 1 - hr incubation of rapamycin which removed 74 . 75 % of MTs ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . These results suggest a key role for MT association in regulating spastin - mediated MT cleaving . Previous in vitro and in vivo studies have demonstrated that tubulin glutamylation acts as a fine regulator to modulate MT binding and cleavage by Spastins , which supports this assumption 16 , 22 . Spastin is involved in MT reorganization 23 . For example , Spastin preferentially localizes to axon branching points in neuronal cells to locally destabilize MTs and facilitate the elongation of branched MTs 24 . Our results showed that remnants of digested MTs derived from spastin - mediated severing were able to serve as platforms to extend nascent MTs when activity and MT association of spastin were inhibited ( Figs . 2 and 6 ; Supplementary Videos 9 and 21 ) . Several MT nucleation factors such as SSNA1 localize to axon branching sites and may cooperate with Spastin to initiate branched axons 25 . Whether MT nucleation factors accumulate on MT fragments upon this acute MT disassembly needs to be comprehensively evaluated to better understand the molecular mechanisms of MT remodeling . The subcellular distribution of Spastin has been well studied , as it is preferentially enriched among cytosolic MTs , the mitotic spindle , and intercellular bridges 24 , 26 . Moreover , co - fractionation of Spastin with the centrosome marker γ - tubulin implies that Spastin may also be anchored to centrosomes / basal bodies 26 , and glutamylation on centrosomes may facilitate spastin - mediated severing 16 . To test whether Spastin is involved in MT severing in different subcellular regions , we recruited Spastin onto specific pools of MTs . Among all MT structures examined , the centrosome was the only one resistant to spastin - mediated MT severing ( Supplementary Fig . 12 ; Supplementary Video 19 ) . We suggest two explanations for this phenomenon . First , the unique triplet structure of centrosomal MTs may contribute to the centrosome’s ability to withstand spastin - mediated severing . A second possibility is that the anchoring orientation of EMTB - CFP - FRB may not allow the spastin - mediated severing reaction at centrosomes . Experiments to evaluate the effect of Spastin on centrosomes that lack MT triplets 27 and that use different centrosomal - targeting proteins will be useful for addressing these possible mechanisms . In addition to providing insights into how Spastin modulates MTs , our acute MT disassembly system is a powerful tool for distinguishing MT - dependent and - independent mechanisms and for dissecting causal relationships between MTs of interest and cellular events . This precise MT manipulation system also represents a fundamental step in developing new strategies to treat various diseases such as tumors and neurodegeneration and developmental disorders in which MT - mediated events have gone awry . Acknowledgements We thank Dr . Carsten Janke ( Institut Curie ) for the Spastin constructs . This study was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology ( MOST ) , Taiwan ( MOST grant numbers 109 - 2636 - B - 007 - 003 and 108 - 2638 - B - 010 - 001 - MY2 to Y . C . L . ) . Contributions G . Y . L . , K . S . , and Y . C . L . designed and conducted the experiments . G . Y . L . , S . C . C . , K . S . , and Y . C . C . generated DNA constructs . S . R . H performed western blotting analysis . S . C . C . , W . T . Y . , and Y . C . C . conducted the photostimulation experiments . H . C . analyzed the dynamics of vesicles and lysosomes . S . H . H . conducted cell synchronization . Y . C . L . , G . Y . L . , and W . T . Y . wrote the manuscript . Ethics declarations The patent for acute MT disassembly developed in this study is pending . Data availability The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request . Figure legends Fig . 1 . Recruitment of engineered Spastins onto MTs leads to their rapid disassembly . a . Schematic of the inducible MT disassembly system . One of the dimerization proteins is fused with one of two engineered Spastin enzymes , dNSpastinXXX and C2Lact - tagged dNSpastin , whereas the other is fused with MT - associated proteins ( MAPs ) . Dimerization upon certain stimuli ( e . g . , chemical treatments or illumination ) induces recruitment of engineered Spastins onto MAP - labeled MTs . Acute accumulation of Spastins on MTs rapidly induces disassembly of target MTs . b . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB and YFP - FKBP were treated with 100 nM rapamycin ( Rapa ) . Addition of rapamycin rapidly translocated YFP - FKBP onto EMTB - CFP - FRB – labeled MTs and increased the FRET signal . Scale bar , 10 μm . c . The normalized intensity of FRET / CFP in cells before and after rapamycin ( blue ) and 0 . 1 % DMSO ( control ; red ) treatment . n = 6 and 10 cells in the rapamycin and DMSO group , respectively , from three independent experiments . d . The video frames of MTs after recruitment of the indicated enzymes onto MTs . HeLa cells co - transfected with the indicated constructs were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) . Scale bar , 10 μm . e . The normalized MT filament area in cells with different MT disruption treatments . n = 30 , 45 , 19 , 20 , 14 , and 6 cells in nocodazole ( 10 µM ) , colchicine ( 500 µM ) , dNSpastin - YFP - FKBP - C2Lact , dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP , dNSpastinXXXED - YFP - FKBP , and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP with MG132 ( 50 μM ) pre - treatment , respectively , from three independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Fig . 2 . Inhibition of Spastin activity reverses MT disruption . a . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB ( black ) and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) were pre - treated with rapamycin for 28 min to induce acute MT disassembly . Spastazoline ( 10 µM ) , a Spastin inhibitor , was then added to the cultures to halt our MT disruption system . Arrows indicate the centrosome - derived MTs . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . Normalized MT filament area for cells co - transfected and treated as in a . n = 3 cells from two independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . c . The polymerization rates of MTs regrowing from spastin - digested MT fragments in cytosol ( acentrosome ) and centrosomes . n = 147 and 74 MTs in the cytosol and centrosome group , respectively . Data ( red ) are shown as the mean ± SD . A Student’s t - test was performed to generate the indicated p - value . Fig . 3 . Acute MT disassembly attenuates vesicular trafficking . a . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) , dNSpastinXXX - mCh - FKBP ( red ) , and TGN38 - YFP ( green ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) to induce MT disruption . Dotted lines indicate the cell boundary . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The MT filament area in the cell shown in a . c . Trajectories of each TGN38 - YFP - labeled vesicle at different levels of MT disruption . Insets show higher - magnification images of the regions indicated by the dotted - line boxes . Scale bar , 10 μm . d . The displacement ( left ) and velocity ( right ) of each labeled vesicle shown in c . n = 312 , 319 , and 111 vesicles in the MT 100 , 50 , and 0 % group , respectively . Data ( red ) are shown as the mean ± SD . Student’s t - tests were performed to generate the indicated p - values . Fig . 4 . Disruption of tyrosinated MTs . a . COS7 cells transfected with TagRFP - FRB - A1AY1 ( red ) were labeled by anti - α - tubulin antibody ( green ; upper panel ) , anti - tyrosinated tubulin antibody ( green ; middle panel ) , or anti - detyrosinated tubulin antibody ( green ; lower panel ) , respectively . b . The intensity profiles of TagRFP - FRB - A1AY1 ( red ) and tubulin with the indicated PTMs ( green ) along dotted lines drawn in a . c . COS7 cells co - transfected with TagRFP - FRB - A1AY1 ( red ) and TagCFP - FKBP ( green ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) . The addition of rapamycin rapidly recruits TagCFP - FKBP from cytosol onto A1AY1 - labeled MTs ( arrows ) . Scale bar , 10 µm . d . The normalized intensity of TagCFP - FKBP at A1AY1 - labeled MTs upon rapamycin treatments . n = 7 cells from 3 independent experiments . Data represent as mean ± S . E . M . e . COS7 cells co - transfected with TagRFP - FRB - A1AY1 ( red ) and dNSpastinXXX - TagCFP - FKBP ( cyan ) were treated with 0 . 1 % DMSO or rapamycin ( 100 nM ) for 1 hr and following by immunostaining with anti - tyrosinated tubulin antibody ( green ) . Dotted lines highlight the transfected cells . Scale bar , 20 μm . f . The normalized intensity of tyrosinated MTs in TagRFP - FRB - A1AY1 and dNSpastinXXX - TagCFP - FKBP co - transfected cells upon 0 . 1 % DMSO or rapamycin treatment for 1 hr . n = 31 and 26 cells in DMSO and rapamycin treated groups , respectively , from three independent experiments . Data ( blue ) represent as mean ± S . E . M . Student’s t tests were performed with p values indicated . Fig . 5 . Rapid disruption of primary cilia , mitotic spindles , and intercellular bridges . a . NIH3T3 fibroblasts co - transfected with 5HT6 - mCherry ( 5HT6 - mCh ; a ciliary membrane marker ; red ) , CFP - FRB - MAP4m ( blue ) , and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) were serum starved for 24 hr to induce ciliogenesis . Ciliated cells were then treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) to induce dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP recruitment to axonemal MTs . Scale bar , 5 μm . b . The normalized length of axonemes ( blue ) , primary cilia ( red ) , and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP in cilia ( green ) upon rapamycin treatment . n = 6 cells from three independent experiments . c . HeLa cells co - transfected with H2B - mCherry ( H2B - mCh ; a chromosome marker ; red ) , CFP - FRB - MAP4m ( a marker of mitotic spindles ; blue ) , and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) were synchronized in metaphase and treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) to induce dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP recruitment to mitotic spindles . Scale bar , 10 μm . d . The normalized area of the mitotic spindle ( blue ) and intensity of dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP in the mitotic spindle ( green ) upon rapamycin treatment . n = 6 cells from three independent experiments . e . HeLa cells co - transfected with H2B - mCherry ( red ) , CFP - FRB - MAP4m ( intercellular bridges ; blue ) , and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) to induce dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP recruitment to intercellular bridges . Arrows indicate the intercellular bridges . Scale bar , 10 μm . f . The normalized area of intercellular bridges ( blue ) and intensity of dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP at intercellular bridges ( green ) upon rapamycin treatment . n = 5 cells from three independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Dotted lines indicate the cell boundaries . Fig . 6 . Using light to disassemble MTs in a reversible and location - specific manner . a . COS7 cells co - transfected with EMTB - YFP - CIBN and mCh - Cry2 ( red ) were incubated with SPY650 - tubulin ( SPY650 - tub ) to visualize MTs . The cells were illuminated by blue light within a specified region ( indicated by the dotted circle ) for the indicated time period . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The normalized intensity of mCh - Cry2 at MTs in illuminated regions ( red ) and non - illuminated regions ( green ) . n = 6 cells from three independent experiments . c . COS7 cells co - transfected with EMTB - YFP - CIBN and dNSpastinXXX - mCh - Cry2 were incubated with SPY650 - tubulin to visualize MTs . The cells were illuminated by blue light as in a . Scale bar , 10 μm . d . The normalized intensity of dNSpastinXXX - mCh - Cry2 and mCh - Cry2 at MTs and the normalized area of SPY650 - tubulin in illuminated regions and non - illuminated regions . n = 6 and 6 cells in dNSpastinXXX - mCh - Cry2 and mCh - Cry2 group , respectively , from three independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Supplementary Fig . 1 . EMTB - CFP - FRB localizes to cytosolic MTs . a . HeLa cells expressing EMTB - CFP - FRB ( green ) were fixed and stained with anti - α - tubulin antibody ( red ) . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The normalized intensity profiles of α - tubulin ( red ) and EMTB - CFP - FRB ( green ) along the dotted lines drawn in a . Supplementary Fig . 2 . The MT - severing activity of engineered Spastin enzymes . a . HeLa cells transfected with YFP - tagged full - length spastin ( SpastinFL - YFP ; green ) and truncated spastin ( dNSpastin - YFP ; green ) were fixed and stained with the α - tubulin antibody ( red ) . YFP alone and an ED ( enzyme dead ) form of each enzyme ( SpastinFLED and dNSpastinED ) are negative controls . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB and the indicated constructs were treated with either 0 . 1 % DMSO or 100 nM rapamycin ( Rapa ) for 1 hr and then were fixed and stained with anti - α - tubulin antibody . Scale bar , 10 μm . Dotted lines highlight transfected cells . c . The normalized intensity of α - tubulin in cells expressing the indicated construct with 0 . 1 % DMSO or rapamycin treatment . n = 103 , 39 , 33 , 123 , 41 , 175 , 144 , 88 , 79 , 82 , 90 , 134 , 104 , 81 , and 97 cells from left to right ; three to five independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Student’s t - tests were performed , with p - values indicated . Supplementary Fig . 3 . Rapidly recruiting engineered Spastins onto MTs . a . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) and either dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP or dNSpastin - YFP - FKBP - C2Lact ( green ) were treated with 100 nM rapamycin ( Rapa ) . The FRET signal of cells was monitored in real time by live - cell imaging . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The normalized intensity of FRET / CFP in cells upon rapamycin treatment . n = 23 and 25 cells for dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( red ) and dNSpastin - YFP - FKBP - C2Lact ( blue ) , respectively , from four independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Supplementary Fig . 4 . Rapid disruption of MTs in COS7 cells . a . COS7 cells transfected with dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) and EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) and imaged . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The normalized MT filament area in cells transfected and treated as in a . n = 12 cells from four independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Supplementary Fig . 5 . Rapid disruption of MTs in U2OS cells . a . U2OS cells transfected with dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) and EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) and imaged . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The normalized MT filament area in cells transfected and treated as in a . n = 16 cells from four independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Supplementary Fig . 6 . Using a gibberellin - based system to rapidly translocate proteins of interest onto MTs . a . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - mGID1 ( blue ) and YFP - GAIs ( green ) ( mGID1 and GAIs are dimerizing partners of the gibberellin system ) were treated with GA3 - AM ( chemical dimerizer of the gibberellin system ; 100 µM ) . We used live - cell imaging to monitor the FRET / CFP signal in cells . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The normalized ratio of FRET / CFP in cells upon GA3 - AM ( blue ) and 0 . 1 % DMSO ( red ) treatment . n = 10 and 6 cells for the DMSO and GA3 - AM treatments , respectively , from three independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Supplementary Fig . 7 . Using the gibberellin - based system to rapidly disassemble MTs . a . HeLa cells co - transfected with dNSpastinXXX - YFP - GAIs ( green ) and EMTB - CFP - mGID1 ( black and blue ) were treated with GA3 - AM ( 100 µM ) . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The normalized MT filament area in cells transfected with the constructs shown in a upon GA3 - AM treatment . n = 8 cells from three independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Supplementary Fig . 8 . Acute MT disassembly attenuates lysosome dynamics . a . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) , dNSpastinXXX - mCh - FKBP ( red ) , and LAMP3 - YFP ( green ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) to induce MT disruption . Dotted lines indicate the cell boundary . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The MT filament area in the cell shown in a . c . Trajectories of each LAMP3 - YFP - labeled lysosome at different levels of MT disruption . Insets show higher - magnification images of the regions indicated by the dotted - line boxes . Scale bar , 10 μm . d . Displacement ( left ) and velocity ( right ) of each labeled lysosome shown in c . n = 2893 , 2618 , and 2315 lysosomes in the MT 100 , 50 , and 0 % group , respectively . Data ( red ) are shown as the mean ± SD . Student’s t - tests were performed to generate the indicated p - values . Supplementary Fig . 9 . Subcellular distribution of CFP - FRB - MAP4m at different phases of the cell cycle . a . NIH3T3 cells transfected with CFP - FRB - MAP4m ( green ) were serum starved to promote ciliogenesis . Ciliated cells were fixed and labeled with GT335 , an antibody that is specific for glutamylated tubulin ( Glu - tub ; red ) at ciliary axonemes . b and c . HeLa cells expressing CFP - FRB - MAP4m ( green ) were synchronized during metaphase ( b ) and telophase ( c ) and then were fixed and stained with α - tubulin antibody ( red ) . Dotted lines indicate cell boundaries . Scale bar , 10 μm . Supplementary Fig . 10 . The structure of the cilia occasionally does not collapse after axoneme disruption . a . NIH3T3 cells co - transfected with 5HT6 - mCh ( ciliary membrane ; red ) , CFP - FRB - MAP4m ( axonemal MTs ; blue ) , and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) were serum starved to induce ciliogenesis . Ciliated cells were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) to recruit dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP onto axonemes . The recruitment of Spastin proteins , morphology of the axonemes , and ciliary membrane were monitored upon rapamycin addition by live - cell imaging . Scale bar , 5 μm . b . The length of the indicated structures in the cell shown in a was measured and plotted . The time period during which the ciliary membrane became bulged and / or branched is shown with the orange lines above the graph . Supplementary Fig . 11 . Cells can spontaneously form ciliary membranes without axonemes . a . NIH3T3 cells were serum starved to promote ciliogenesis . Ciliated cells were fixed and labeled with antibodies against Arl13b ( a ciliary membrane marker ; red ) and against acetylated tubulin ( acetylated tub ; a ciliary axoneme marker ; green ) . Dotted lines indicate cell boundaries . Insets show higher - magnification images of the regions indicated by the dotted - line boxes . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The percentage of cells that spontaneously formed ciliary membranes with a short or absent axoneme or a normal axoneme . n = 391 cells from four dishes . Supplementary Fig . 12 . Spastin does not disrupt centrosomes . a . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) , dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) , and PACT - mCh ( a centrosomal marker ; red ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) and imaged . Dotted lines indicate the cell boundary . Insets show higher - magnification images of the centrosome regions . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The normalized area of MT filaments in the cytosol ( blue ) and centrosomes ( orange ) is shown . n = 8 cells from four independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Supplementary Fig . 13 . Method used to measure MT filament area in real time . a . MT filaments in living cells were labeled with EMTB - CFP - FRB and used for real - time imaging ( RAW image ) . The cytosol background of the RAW images was removed by rolling ball correction and processed to generate the binary MT filament pattern via the Otsu threshold . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The area of binary MT filaments upon MT disruption treatment was quantified and plotted . Extended data Fig . 1 . The MT disruption rates of MTAs and our MT disruption system . a . HeLa cells transfected with the indicated constructs were treated with nocodazole ( 10 μM ) , colchicine ( 500 μM ) , or rapamycin ( 100 nM ) . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The half time of MT disassembly triggered by the indicated MT disruption systems . n = 30 , 45 , 19 , 30 , and 6 cells from left to right , three to five independent experiments . c . The relative proportion of MT area left in transfected HeLa cells after 1 hr of different MT - disrupting treatments . n = 34 , 30 , 45 , 19 , 20 , 6 , and 14 cells from left to right , three to five independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Student’s t - tests were performed , with the resulting p - values indicated . Extended data Fig . 2 . Acute MT disruption is not dependent on proteasome - mediated degradation . a . COS7 cells co - expressing EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) were either pre - treated with 0 . 1 % DMSO ( control ) or proteasome inhibitor , MG132 ( 50 μM ) for 30 mins . The effect of MG132 on dNSpastinXXX - mediated MT disruption was evaluated by live - cell imaging . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The a - tubulin protein levels in HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB and the indicated constructs after 30 min of DMSO or MG132 ( 50 μM ) pretreatment followed by rapamycin ( 100 nM ) treatment for the indicated time . Cold - mediated MT disassembly at 4 ° C was included as a control . Extended data Fig . 3 . Rapid disassembly of primary cilia . a . NIH3T3 cells co - transfected with 5HT6 - mCh ( a ciliary membrane marker ; red ) , CFP - FRB - MAP4m ( an axoneme marker ; blue ) , and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( upper panel ; green ) or enzyme dead dNSpastinXXXED - YFP - FKBP ( lower panel ; green ) were serum starved for 24 hr to induce ciliogenesis . Ciliated cells were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) to recruit dNSpastin proteins onto axonemes . The recruitment of Spastin proteins , morphology of ciliary axonemes , and ciliary membrane , upon rapamycin treatment was monitored by live - cell imaging . Dotted lines indicate the cell boundary . Scale bar , 5 μm . Extended data Fig . 4 . Recruitment of light - sensitive dimerizing proteins without spastin does not disrupt MTs . COS7 cells were co - transfected with EMTB - YFP - CIBN and mCh - Cry2 ( red ) , and MTs were labeled with SPY650 - tubulin ( SPY650 - tub ; black ) . Illumination with blue light for the indicated period of time triggered rapid recruitment of mCh - Cry2 onto MTs in the light - illuminated region ( dotted circle ) . The MTs , however , remained intact after recruitment of mCh - Cry2 . Scale bar , 10 μm . Supplementary Video 1 : Rapid translocation of POIs onto MTs . HeLa cells were co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) and YFP - FKBP ( green ) 1 day before imaging . The addition of 100 nM rapamycin led to a rapid increase in YFP - FKBP fluorescence and the FRET / CFP signal ( heatmap ) at MTs . Images were taken every 5 sec for 3 min . Scale bar , 10 μm . See also Fig . 1b . Supplementary Video 2 : Rapid recruitment of engineered Spastins onto MTs . HeLa cells were co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) and either dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( upper panel ; green ) or dNSpastin - YFP - FKBP - C2Lact ( lower panel ; green ) . The addition of 100 nM rapamycin led to a rapid increase in YFP - FKBP fluorescence and FRET / CFP ( heatmap ) at MTs . Images were taken every 10 sec for 10 min . Scale bar , 10 μm . See also Supplementary Fig . 3a . Supplementary Video 3 : Slow MT disruption in the presence of two MTAs . HeLa cells transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB were treated with either nocodazole ( 10 μM ; left ) or colchicine ( 500 μM ; right ) . Images were taken every 1 min for 70 min . Scale bar , 10 μm . See also Extended data Fig . 1a . Supplementary Video 4 : Rapid MT disruption with our MT disruption system . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB ( black ) and the indicated Spastin constructs ( green ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) . Images were taken every 1 min for 70 min . Scale bar , 10 μm . See also Fig . 1d and Extended data Fig . 1a . Supplementary Video 5 : Rapid disruption of MTs in COS7 cells . COS7 cells transfected with dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) and EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) and imaged . Images were taken every 1 min for 1 hr . Scale bar , 10 μm . See also Supplementary Fig . 4a . Supplementary Video 6 : Rapid disruption of MTs in U2OS cells . U2OS cells transfected with dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) and EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) and imaged . Images were taken every 1 min for 1 hr . Scale bar , 10 μm . See also Supplementary Fig . 5a . Supplementary Video 7 : The gibberellin system rapidly disrupts MTs . HeLa cells co - transfected with dNSpastinXXX - YFP - GAIs ( green ) and EMTB - CFP - mGID1 ( blue and black ) were treated with GA3 - AM ( 100 µM ) . Images were taken every 1 min for 1 hr . Scale bar , 10 μm . See also Supplementary Fig . 7a . Supplementary Video 8 : Acute MT disruption is independent of proteasome - mediated degradation . COS7 cells co - expressing EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) were either pretreated with 0 . 1 % DMSO ( upper panel ) or the proteasome inhibitor MG132 ( 50 μM ) for 30 min ( lower panel ) . Rapamycin ( 100 nM ) - mediated recruitment of dNSpastinXXX led to a similar degree of MT disassembly after each pretreatment . Images were taken every 1 min for 90 min . Scale bar , 10 μm . See also Extended data Fig . 2a . Supplementary Video 9 : Inhibition of Spastin activity reverses the MT disruption . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue and black ) and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) for 28 min to induce acute MT disassembly followed by spastazoline ( 10 µM ) treatment to halt our MT disruption system . Images were taken every 1 min for 2 hr . Scale bar , 10 μm . See also Fig . 2a . Supplementary Video 10 : Acute MT disassembly impairs vesicular trafficking . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) , dNSpastinXXX - mCh - FKBP ( red ) , and TGN38 - YFP ( green ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) . Images were taken every 1 min for 2 hr . Scale bar , 10 μm . See also Fig . 3 . Supplementary Video 11 : Trajectories of each labeled vesicle at different MT levels . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) , dNSpastinXXX - mCh - FKBP ( red ) , and TGN38 - YFP ( green ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) . Trajectories of each labeled vesicle at normalized MT areas of 100 % ( upper panel ) , 50 % ( middle ) , and 0 % ( lower panel ) are shown . Scale bar , 10 μm . See also Fig . 3c . Supplementary Video 12 : Acute MT disassembly impairs lysosome dynamics . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) , dNSpastinXXX - mCh - FKBP ( red ) , and LAMP3 - YFP ( green ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) . Images were taken every 30 sec for 90 min . Scale bar , 10 μm . See also Supplementary Fig . 8 . Supplementary Video 13 : Trajectories of each labeled lysosome at different levels of MT disruption . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) , dNSpastinXXX - mCh - FKBP ( red ) , and LAMP3 - YFP ( green ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) . Trajectories of each labeled lysosome at normalized MT areas of 100 % ( upper panel ) , 50 % ( middle ) , and 0 % ( lower panel ) are shown . Scale bar , 10 μm . See also Supplementary Fig . 8 . Supplementary Video 14 : Rapid translocation of POIs onto tyrosinated MTs . COS7 cells were co - transfected with TagRFP - FRB - A1AY1 ( red ) and TagCFP - FKBP ( green ) 1 day before imaging . The addition of 100 nM rapamycin led to a rapid increase in TagCFP - FKBP fluorescence at A1AY1 - labeled MTs . Images were taken every 30 sec for 14 min . Scale bar , 10 μm . See also Fig . 4c . Supplementary Video 15 : Rapid disassembly of primary cilia . NIH3T3 cells co - transfected with 5HT6 - mCh ( a marker of ciliary membranes ; red ) , CFP - FRB - MAP4m ( an axoneme marker ; blue ) , and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( upper panel ; green ) or enzyme dead dNSpastinXXXED - YFP - FKBP ( lower panel ; green ) were serum starved for 24 hr to induce ciliogenesis , followed by treatment with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) to recruit dNSpastin proteins onto axonemes . Images were taken every 1 min for 90 min . Scale bar , 5 μm . See also Fig . 5a and Extended data Fig . 3 . Supplementary Video 16 : Ciliary structures occasionally do not collapse after axoneme disruption . NIH3T3 cells co - transfected with 5HT6 - mCh ( a marker of ciliary membranes ; red ) , CFP - FRB - MAP4m ( an axoneme marker ; blue ) , and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) were serum starved to induce ciliogenesis . Ciliated cells were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) to recruit dNSpastin proteins onto axonemes . Images were taken every 1 min for 90 min . Scale bar , 5 μm . See also Supplementary Fig . 10a . Supplementary Video 17 : Mitotic spindles can be rapidly disrupted in metaphase cells . HeLa cells co - transfected with H2B - mCherry ( a chromosomal marker ; red ) , CFP - FRB - MAP4m ( a marker of mitotic spindles ; blue ) , and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) were synchronized in metaphase and treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) , which led to dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP recruitment at mitotic spindles . Images were taken every 1 min for 90 min . Scale bar , 10 μm . See also Fig . 5c . Supplementary Video 18 : Intercellular bridges can be rapidly disrupted in telophase cells . HeLa cells co - transfected with H2B - mCherry ( a chromosomal marker ; red ) , CFP - FRB - MAP4m ( a marker of intercellular bridges ; blue ) , and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) , which led to dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP recruitment at intercellular bridges . Images were taken every 1 min for 1 hr . Scale bar , 10 μm . See also Fig . 5e . Supplementary Video 19 : Centrosomes remain intact after acute MT disassembly triggered by dNSpastinXXX . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) , dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) , and PACT - mCh ( a centrosomal marker ; red ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) . Images were taken every 1 min for 90 min . Scale bar , 10 μm . See also Supplementary Fig . 12a . Supplementary Video 20 : A light - induced system leads to rapid translocation of the proteins of interest onto MTs . COS7 cells co - transfected with EMTB - YFP - CIBN and mCh - Cry2 ( red ) were transiently illuminated by blue light in the regions indicated by the dotted circles . MTs were labeled by SPY650 - tubulin ( black ) . Illumination rapidly triggered translocation of mCh - Cry2 onto MTs only within the illuminated region . Images were taken every 15 sec for 15 min . Scale bar , 10 μm . See also Fig . 6a . Supplementary Video 21 : A light - induced system ] leads to spatially and temporally specific disassembly of MTs . COS7 cells co - transfected with EMTB - YFP - CIBN and dNSpastinXXX - mCh - Cry2 ( red ) were transiently illuminated by blue light in the regions indicated by the dotted circles . MTs were labeled by SPY650 - tubulin ( green ) . The light illumination rapidly triggered MT disruption in the illuminated regions ( dotted circle ) . MT regrowth occurred when the light was off . Images were taken every 1 min for 1 hr . Scale bar , 10 μm . See also Fig . 6c . Supplementary Video 22 : Recruitment of light - sensitive dimerizing proteins without spastin does not disrupt MTs . COS7 cells were co - transfected with EMTB - YFP - CIBN and mCh - Cry2 ( red ) , and MTs were labeled by SPY650 - tubulin ( black ) . The cells were transiently illuminated by blue light in the regions indicated by the dotted circles . This triggered rapid recruitment of mCh - Cry2 onto MTs in illuminated regions . MTs remained intact after recruitment of mCh - Cry2 . Images were taken every 1 min for 1 hr . Scale bar , 10 μm . See also Extended data Fig . 4 . Methods Cell culture and transfection COS7 , HeLa , U2OS , HEK293T , and NIH3T3 cells were maintained at 37°C , 5 % CO 2 , and 95 % humidity in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , and penicillin and streptomycin ( Corning ) . To induce ciliogenesis , NIH3T3 cells were serum starved for 24 hr . COS7 cells were transfected with plasmid DNAs by using TurboFect transfection reagents ( Thermo Fisher ) . HeLa , U2OS , HEK293T , and NIH3T3 cells were transfected with FuGENE HD ( Promega ) . Transfected cells were incubated for 24 - 48 hr prior to imaging and other experiments . DNA constructs We obtained constructs encoding the most abundantly expressed isoform of Spastin in cells ( 58 kDa ; starting at position M85 in the mouse spastin sequence ) , a truncated form of dNSpastin that is missing the N - terminal 1 - 140 amino acids ( the shortest active truncated version of spastin ) , and the enzyme - inactive versions SpastinFLED and dNSpastinED , each of which was tagged with EYFP ( SpastinFL - YFP , dNSpastin - YFP , SpastinFLED - YFP , and dNSpastinED - YFP ) , from Dr . Carsten Janke ( Institut Curie ) . To remove the MT binding domain of dNSpastin , the catalytic AAA domain of dNSpastin ( dNSpstinCD ) was amplified by PCR - based methods . Three residues of Spastin were mutated to XXX ( dNSpastinXXX ) by site - directed mutagenesis DNA encoding individual forms of dNSpastin ( dNSpastin , dNSpastinED , dNSpastinCD , and dNSpastinXXX ) was then cloned into the YFP - FKBP vector ( pEGFP - C1 backbone ) to generate dNSpastin - YFP - FKBP , dNSpastinCD - YFP - FKBP , and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP . Using this method , we also generated the enzyme - inactive dNSpastinXXXED - YFP - FKBP construct . dNSpastin - YFP - FKBP - C2Lact was generated by inserting the C2Lact sequence between the HindIII and BamHI restriction sites in dNSpastin - YFP - FKBP . The DNA fragments of A1AY1 , TagRFP , and TagCFP were synthesized with codon optimization and subcloned to FRB and FKBP vectors . We transformed each construct into competent cells and isolated single clones for DNA purification . All DNA constructs were verified by DNA sequencing . The detailed protein sequences of constructs used in this study are provided in supplementary sequence . Immunofluorescence staining Cells cultured in borosilicate glass Lab - Tek eight - well chambers ( Nunc ) were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde ( Electron Microscopy Sciences ) at room temperature for 15 min . Fixed cells were permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 and then incubated in blocking solution ( phosphate - buffered saline with 2 % bovine serum albumin ) for 30 min at room temperature . To label cytosolic MTs , primary ciliary membrane , and axonemal MTs , cells were incubated for 1 hr at room temperature with mouse antibody against a - tubulin ( 1 : 500 ; Sigma Aldrich , T6199 ) , rabbit antibody against Arl13b ( 1 : 500 ; Proteintech , 17711 - 1 - AP ) , mouse antibody against glutamylated tubulin ( 1 : 100 ; Adipogen , AG - 20B - 0020 - C100 ) , mouse antibody against acetylated tubulin ( 1 : 500 ; Sigma Aldrich , T7451 ) , rat antibody against tyrosinated tubulin ( 1 : 100 ; Sigma Aldrich , MAB1864 ) , and mouse antibody against detyrosinated tubulin ( 1 : 100 ; MERCK , AB3201 ) each of which was diluted in blocking solution . Cells were then washed with PBS and incubated for 1 hr with appropriate secondary antibodies ( 1 : 1000 dilution ; Thermo Fisher ) at room temperature . Western blotting HEK293T cells were co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB and YFP - FKBP , dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP , or dNSpastinXXXED - YFP - FKBP . Two days after transfection , cells were incubated with 50 μM MG132 ( Sigma Aldrich ) for 30 min and then treated with 100 nM rapamycin or 0 . 1 % DMSO ( vehicle control ) for 30 min prior to cell collection . For the cold treatment ( 4 ° C ) , untransfected HEK293T cells were put on ice for 40 min to depolymerize MTs . Cells were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 6 ; 2 mM EGTA ; 9 % NaCl ; 1 % Triton X - 100 ) containing protease inhibitors ( Roche ) . Protein concentrations were measured with the Bio - Rad Protein Assay . Cell lysates were diluted with 2 ´ Laemmli sample buffer ( Bio - Rad ) and boiled at 95°C for 10 min and then underwent western blotting . After the transfer process , the PVDF membranes ( Bio - Rad ) were incubated with blocking buffer ( 5 % skim milk in Tris - buffered saline with Tween 20 ; TBST ) for 1 hr at room temperature and then stained with primary antibodies against a - tubulin ( 1 : 1000 ; Sigma Aldrich , T6199 ) and GAPDH ( 1 : 5000 ; Cell Signaling , 2118 ) , which were diluted with blocking buffer , overnight at 4°C . Membranes were washed with TBST and then were incubated with horseradish peroxidase - conjugated secondary antibodies diluted in blocking buffer ( anti - rabbit , 1 : 10000 ; anti - mouse , 1 : 5000 ) for 1 hr at room temperature . The bioluminescence signal was detected with Amersham TM ECL Select TM ( GE Healthcare ) , and blot images were acquired with an iBright TM FL1500 Instrument ( Thermo Fisher ) . Live - cell imaging Live transfected cells cultured on poly ( D - lysine ) - coated glass coverslips ( Hecht Assistent ) were treated with either 100 nM rapamycin for rapid induction of protein dimerization and translocation or MT - targeting agents ( 10 μM nocodazole or 500 μM colchicine ) during imaging . Live - cell imaging was conducted on a Nikon T1 inverted fluorescence microscope ( Nikon ) with a 60× oil objective ( Nikon ) , a Prime camera ( Photometrics ) , and 37°C , 5 % CO 2 heat stage ( Live Cell Instrument ) . Rapid recruitment of POIs was imaged at 5 - or 10 - sec intervals , whereas the process of MT disruption was imaged at 1 - min intervals . Images were obtained using Nikon NIS - Elements AR software and processed with Huygens Deconvolution Software ( Scientific Volume Imaging ) . Image analysis was mainly performed with Nikon NIS - Elements AR software . Photostimulation COS7 cells were plated on poly ( D - lysine ) - coated coverslips and cultured in six - well plates ( Thermo Scientific ) for 48 hr . Before imaging , cells were incubated with SPY650 - tubulin ( 1000 - fold dilution ; Spirochrome ) at 37°C for 1 hr . Local photostimulation was carried out with a fluorescence microscope ( Nikon ) equipped with a digital micromirror device , polygon 400 ( MIGHTEX ) , and a 488 - nm light source . Cells were illuminated with the blue light ( 5 sec on / 1 sec off ; 1 . 6 nW / µm 2 ) for the indicated duration . The mCherry and SPY650 - tubulin were simultaneously imaged during photostimulation using Nikon element AR software . Measurement of MT filament area The MT filaments in living cells were labeled with EMTB - CFP - FRB and imaged in real time ( RAW image ) . The rolling ball correction was used to remove the cytosol background from the RAW images , which was carried out with the Nikon NIS - Elements AR software . Images were processed to generate the binary MT filament pattern via the Otsu threshold and analyzed by Fiji software ( Supplementary Fig . 13 ) . Tracking vesicles and lysosomes The displacement and velocity of LAMP3 - YFP / TGN38 - YFP were tracked and analyzed by the DoG detector and Simple LAP tracker in the Fiji software plugin Trackmate . Estimated blob diameter was set at 0 . 8 - 1 µ m , linking max distance at 2 microns , gap - closing distance at 2 µ m , and gap - closing max frame gap at 0 . Cell synchronization Plasmid DNA transfection was carried out 20 - 24 hr prior to cell cycle synchronization . For synchronization , HeLa cells were treated with 2 mM thymidine ( Sigma ) for 16 - 18 hr to induce arrest at G1 / S phase and then were treated with 2 . 5 ng / ml RO3306 ( Sigma ) for 12 hr to induce arrest at G2 / M phase . After being washed with warm DMEM , cells were incubated with DMEM and 10 % FBS at 37°C , 5 % CO 2 for 30 - 60 min to enrich the population of metaphase and telophase cells . Statistical analysis We first determined whether variances were equal or not with the F - test and then used the unpaired two - tailed Student’s t - test to calculate p - values via PRISM 6 software . A p - value of < 0 . 05 indicated a significant difference , and p < 0 . 01 indicated a highly significant difference . References 1 . Janke , C . & Magiera , M . M . The tubulin code and its role in controlling microtubule properties and functions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . ( 2020 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 020 - 0214 - 3 2 . Cleary , J . M . & Hancock , W . O . Molecular mechanisms underlying microtubule growth dynamics . Curr . Biol . 31 , R560 – R573 ( 2021 ) . 3 . Yang , W . et al . The Emerging Roles of Axonemal Glutamylation in Regulation of Cilia Architecture and Functions . 9 , ( 2021 ) . 4 . Prosser , S . L . & Pelletier , L . Mitotic spindle assembly in animal cells : A fine balancing act . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 18 , 187 – 201 ( 2017 ) . 5 . Antanavičiūtė , I . , Gibieža , P . , Prekeris , R . & Skeberdis , V . A . Midbody : From the regulator of cytokinesis to postmitotic signaling organelle . Med . 54 , 1 – 10 ( 2018 ) . 6 . Doxsey , S . , McCollum , D . & Theurkauf , W . Centrosomes in cellular regulation . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 21 , 411 – 434 ( 2005 ) . 7 . Steinmetz , M . O . & Prota , A . E . Microtubule - Targeting Agents : Strategies To Hijack the Cytoskeleton . Trends Cell Biol . 28 , 776 – 792 ( 2018 ) . 8 . Rovini , A . , Savry , A . , Braguer , D . & Carré , M . Microtubule - targeted agents : When mitochondria become essential to chemotherapy . Biochim . Biophys . Acta - Bioenerg . 1807 , 679 – 688 ( 2011 ) . 9 . Borowiak , M . et al . Photoswitchable Inhibitors of Microtubule Dynamics Optically Control Mitosis and Cell Death . Cell 162 , 403 – 411 ( 2015 ) . 10 . Adikes , R . C . , Hallett , R . A . , Saway , B . F . , Kuhlman , B . & Slep , K . C . Control of microtubule dynamics using an optogenetic microtubule plus end - F - actin cross - linker . J . Cell Biol . 217 , 779 – 793 ( 2018 ) . 11 . Van Haren , J . et al . Local control of intracellular microtubule dynamics by EB1 photodissociation . Nat . Cell Biol . 20 , 252 – 261 ( 2018 ) . 12 . DeRose , R . , Miyamoto , T . & Inoue , T . Manipulating signaling at will : chemically - inducible dimerization ( CID ) techniques resolve problems in cell biology . Pfl { ü } gers Arch . Eur . J . Physiol . 465 , 409 – 417 ( 2013 ) . 13 . Hong , S . - R . R . et al . Spatiotemporal manipulation of ciliary glutamylation reveals its roles in intraciliary trafficking and Hedgehog signaling . Nat . Commun . 9 , 1 – 13 ( 2018 ) . 14 . Fan , C . - H . H . et al . Manipulating cellular activities using an ultrasound - chemical hybrid tool . ACS Synth . Biol . 6 , acssynbio . 7b00162 ( 2017 ) . 15 . Rodrigues , T . B . & Ballesteros , P . Spastin and Microtubules : Functions in Health and Disease . J . Neurosci . Res . 3253 , 3244 – 3253 ( 2007 ) . 16 . Lacroix , B . et al . Tubulin polyglutamylation stimulates spastin - mediated microtubule severing . J . Cell Biol . 189 , 945 – 954 ( 2010 ) . 17 . Eckert , T . , Le , D . T . Van , Link , S . , Friedmann , L . & Woehlke , G . Spastin’s Microtubule - Binding Properties and Comparison to Katanin . PLoS One 7 , ( 2012 ) . 18 . Cupido , T . , Pisa , R . , Kelley , M . E . & Kapoor , T . M . Designing a chemical inhibitor for the AAA protein spastin using active site mutations . Nat . Chem . Biol . 15 , 444 – 452 ( 2019 ) . 19 . Kesarwani , S . et al . Genetically encoded live - cell sensor for tyrosinated microtubules . J . Cell Biol . 219 , ( 2020 ) . 20 . Gillingham , A . K . & Munro , S . The PACT domain , a conserved centrosomal targeting motif in the coiled - coil proteins AKAP450 and pericentrin . EMBO Rep . 1 , 524 – 529 ( 2000 ) . 21 . Taslimi , A . et al . Optimized second generation CRY2 / CIB dimerizers and photoactivatable Cre recombinase . 118 , 6072 – 6078 ( 2016 ) . 22 . Valenstein , M . L . , Roll - Mecak , A . , Roll - Mecak , A . , Valenstein , M . L . & Roll - Mecak , A . Graded Control of Microtubule Severing by Tubulin Glutamylation . Cell 164 , 911 – 921 ( 2016 ) . 23 . Kuo , Y . W . , Trottier , O . , Mahamdeh , M . & Howard , J . Spastin is a dual - function enzyme that severs microtubules and promotes their regrowth to increase the number and mass of microtubules . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 116 , 5533 – 5541 ( 2019 ) . 24 . Yu , W . et al . The microtubule - severing proteins spastin and katanin participate differently in the formation of axonal branches . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , ( 2008 ) . 25 . Basnet , N . et al . Direct induction of microtubule branching by microtubule nucleation factor SSNA1 . Nat . Cell Biol . 20 , 1172 – 1180 ( 2018 ) . 26 . Errico , A . , Claudiani , P . , D’Addio , M . & Rugarli , E . I . Spastin interacts with the centrosomal protein NA14 , and is enriched in the spindle pole , the midbody and the distal axon . Hum . Mol . Genet . 13 , 2121 – 2132 ( 2004 ) . 27 . Wang , J . T . , Kong , D . , Hoerner , C . R . , Loncarek , J . & Stearns , T . Centriole triplet microtubules are required for stable centriole formation and inheritance in human cells . bioRxiv 110 , 1 – 17 ( 2017 ) . See figure legend on next page Fig . 1 . Recruitment of engineered Spastins onto MTs leads to their rapid disassembly . a . Schematic of the inducible MT disassembly system . One of the dimerization proteins is fused with one of two engineered Spastin enzymes , dNSpastinXXX and C2Lact - tagged dNSpastin , whereas the other is fused with MT - associated proteins ( MAPs ) . Dimerization upon certain stimuli ( e . g . , chemical treatments or illumination ) induces recruitment of engineered Spastins onto MAP - labeled MTs . Acute accumulation of Spastins on MTs rapidly induces disassembly of target MTs . b . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB and YFP - FKBP were treated with 100 nM rapamycin ( Rapa ) . Addition of rapamycin rapidly translocated YFP - FKBP onto EMTB - CFP - FRB – labeled MTs and increased the FRET signal . Scale bar , 10 μm . c . The normalized intensity of FRET / CFP in cells before and after rapamycin ( blue ) and 0 . 1 % DMSO ( control ; red ) treatment . n = 6 and 10 cells in the rapamycin and DMSO group , respectively , from three independent experiments . d . The video frames of MTs after recruitment of the indicated enzymes onto MTs . HeLa cells co - transfected with the indicated constructs were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) . Scale bar , 10 μm . e . The normalized MT filament area in cells with different MT disruption treatments . n = 30 , 45 , 19 , 20 , 14 , and 6 cells in nocodazole ( 10 µM ) , colchicine ( 500 µM ) , dNSpastin - YFP - FKBP - C2Lact , dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP , dNSpastinXXXED - YFP - FKBP , and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP with MG132 ( 50 μM ) pre - treatment , respectively , from three independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Fig . 2 . Inhibition of Spastin activity reverses MT disruption . a . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB ( black ) and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) were pre - treated with rapamycin for 28 min to induce acute MT disassembly . Spastazoline ( 10 µM ) , a Spastin inhibitor , was then added to the cultures to halt our MT disruption system . Arrows indicate the centrosome - derived MTs . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . Normalized MT filament area for cells co - transfected and treated as in a . n = 3 cells from two independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . c . The polymerization rates of MTs regrowing from spastin - digested MT fragments in cytosol ( acentrosome ) and centrosomes . n = 147 and 74 MTs in the cytosol and centrosome group , respectively . Data ( red ) are shown as the mean ± SD . A Student’s t - test was performed to generate the indicated p - value . Fig . 3 . Acute MT disassembly attenuates vesicular trafficking . a . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) , dNSpastinXXX - mCh - FKBP ( red ) , and TGN38 - YFP ( green ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) to induce MT disruption . Dotted lines indicate the cell boundary . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The MT filament area in the cell shown in a . c . Trajectories of each TGN38 - YFP - labeled vesicle at different levels of MT disruption . Insets show higher - magnification images of the regions indicated by the dotted - line boxes . Scale bar , 10 μm . d . The displacement ( left ) and velocity ( right ) of each labeled vesicle shown in c . n = 312 , 319 , and 111 vesicles in the MT 100 , 50 , and 0 % group , respectively . Data ( red ) are shown as the mean ± SD . Student’s t - tests were performed to generate the indicated p - values . See figure legend on next page Fig . 4 . Disruption of tyrosinated MTs . a . COS7 cells transfected with TagRFP - FRB - A1AY1 ( red ) were labeled by anti - α - tubulin antibody ( green ; upper panel ) , anti - tyrosinated tubulin antibody ( green ; middle panel ) , or anti - detyrosinated tubulin antibody ( green ; lower panel ) , respectively . b . The intensity profiles of TagRFP - FRB - A1AY1 ( red ) and tubulin with the indicated PTMs ( green ) along dotted lines drawn in a . c . COS7 cells co - transfected with TagRFP - FRB - A1AY1 ( red ) and TagCFP - FKBP ( green ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) . The addition of rapamycin rapidly recruits TagCFP - FKBP from cytosol onto A1AY1 - labeled MTs ( arrows ) . Scale bar , 10 µm . d . The normalized intensity of TagCFP - FKBP at A1AY1 - labeled MTs upon rapamycin treatments . n = 7 cells from 3 independent experiments . Data represent as mean ± S . E . M . e . COS7 cells co - transfected with TagRFP - FRB - A1AY1 ( red ) and dNSpastinXXX - TagCFP - FKBP ( cyan ) were treated with 0 . 1 % DMSO or rapamycin ( 100 nM ) for 1 hr and following by immunostaining with anti - tyrosinated tubulin antibody ( green ) . Dotted lines highlight the transfected cells . Scale bar , 20 μm . f . The normalized intensity of tyrosinated MTs in TagRFP - FRB - A1AY1 and dNSpastinXXX - TagCFP - FKBP co - transfected cells upon 0 . 1 % DMSO or rapamycin treatment for 1 hr . n = 31 and 26 cells in DMSO and rapamycin treated groups , respectively , from three independent experiments . Data ( blue ) represent as mean ± S . E . M . Student’s t tests were performed with p values indicated . See figure legend on next page Fig . 5 . Rapid disruption of primary cilia , mitotic spindles , and intercellular bridges . a . NIH3T3 fibroblasts co - transfected with 5HT6 - mCherry ( 5HT6 - mCh ; a ciliary membrane marker ; red ) , CFP - FRB - MAP4m ( blue ) , and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) were serum starved for 24 hr to induce ciliogenesis . Ciliated cells were then treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) to induce dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP recruitment to axonemal MTs . Scale bar , 5 μm . b . The normalized length of axonemes ( blue ) , primary cilia ( red ) , and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP in cilia ( green ) upon rapamycin treatment . n = 6 cells from three independent experiments . c . HeLa cells co - transfected with H2B - mCherry ( H2B - mCh ; a chromosome marker ; red ) , CFP - FRB - MAP4m ( a marker of mitotic spindles ; blue ) , and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) were synchronized in metaphase and treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) to induce dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP recruitment to mitotic spindles . Scale bar , 10 μm . d . The normalized area of the mitotic spindle ( blue ) and intensity of dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP in the mitotic spindle ( green ) upon rapamycin treatment . n = 6 cells from three independent experiments . e . HeLa cells co - transfected with H2B - mCherry ( red ) , CFP - FRB - MAP4m ( intercellular bridges ; blue ) , and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) to induce dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP recruitment to intercellular bridges . Arrows indicate the intercellular bridges . Scale bar , 10 μm . f . The normalized area of intercellular bridges ( blue ) and intensity of dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP at intercellular bridges ( green ) upon rapamycin treatment . n = 5 cells from three independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Dotted lines indicate the cell boundaries . Fig . 6 . Using light to disassemble MTs in a reversible and location - specific manner . a . COS7 cells co - transfected with EMTB - YFP - CIBN and mCh - Cry2 ( red ) were incubated with SPY650 - tubulin ( SPY650 - tub ) to visualize MTs . The cells were illuminated by blue light within a specified region ( indicated by the dotted circle ) for the indicated time period . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The normalized intensity of mCh - Cry2 at MTs in illuminated regions ( red ) and non - illuminated regions ( green ) . n = 6 cells from three independent experiments . c . COS7 cells co - transfected with EMTB - YFP - CIBN and dNSpastinXXX - mCh - Cry2 were incubated with SPY650 - tubulin to visualize MTs . The cells were illuminated by blue light as in a . Scale bar , 10 μm . d . The normalized intensity of dNSpastinXXX - mCh - Cry2 and mCh - Cry2 at MTs and the normalized area of SPY650 - tubulin in illuminated regions and non - illuminated regions . n = 6 and 6 cells in dNSpastinXXX - mCh - Cry2 and mCh - Cry2 group , respectively , from three independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Supplementary Fig . 1 . EMTB - CFP - FRB localizes to cytosolic MTs . a . HeLa cells expressing EMTB - CFP - FRB ( green ) were fixed and stained with anti - α - tubulin antibody ( red ) . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The normalized intensity profiles of α - tubulin ( red ) and EMTB - CFP - FRB ( green ) along the dotted lines drawn in a . Supplementary Fig . 2 . The MT - severing activity of engineered Spastin enzymes . a . HeLa cells transfected with YFP - tagged full - length spastin ( SpastinFL - YFP ; green ) and truncated spastin ( dNSpastin - YFP ; green ) were fixed and stained with the α - tubulin antibody ( red ) . YFP alone and an ED ( enzyme dead ) form of each enzyme ( SpastinFLED and dNSpastinED ) are negative controls . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB and the indicated constructs were treated with either 0 . 1 % DMSO or 100 nM rapamycin ( Rapa ) for 1 hr and then were fixed and stained with anti - α - tubulin antibody . Scale bar , 10 μm . Dotted lines highlight transfected cells . c . The normalized intensity of α - tubulin in cells expressing the indicated construct with 0 . 1 % DMSO or rapamycin treatment . n = 103 , 39 , 33 , 123 , 41 , 175 , 144 , 88 , 79 , 82 , 90 , 134 , 104 , 81 , and 97 cells from left to right ; three to five independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Student’s t - tests were performed , with p - values indicated . Supplementary Fig . 3 . Rapidly recruiting engineered Spastins onto MTs . a . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) and either dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP or dNSpastin - YFP - FKBP - C2Lact ( green ) were treated with 100 nM rapamycin ( Rapa ) . The FRET signal of cells was monitored in real time by live - cell imaging . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The normalized intensity of FRET / CFP in cells upon rapamycin treatment . n = 23 and 25 cells for dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( red ) and dNSpastin - YFP - FKBP - C2Lact ( blue ) , respectively , from four independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Supplementary Fig . 4 . Rapid disruption of MTs in COS7 cells . a . COS7 cells transfected with dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) and EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) and imaged . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The normalized MT filament area in cells transfected and treated as in a . n = 12 cells from four independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Supplementary Fig . 5 . Rapid disruption of MTs in U2OS cells . a . U2OS cells transfected with dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) and EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) and imaged . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The normalized MT filament area in cells transfected and treated as in a . n = 16 cells from four independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Supplementary Fig . 6 . Using a gibberellin - based system to rapidly translocate proteins of interest onto MTs . a . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - mGID1 ( blue ) and YFP - GAIs ( green ) ( mGID1 and GAIs are dimerizing partners of the gibberellin system ) were treated with GA3 - AM ( chemical dimerizer of the gibberellin system ; 100 µM ) . We used live - cell imaging to monitor the FRET / CFP signal in cells . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The normalized ratio of FRET / CFP in cells upon GA3 - AM ( blue ) and 0 . 1 % DMSO ( red ) treatment . n = 10 and 6 cells for the DMSO and GA3 - AM treatments , respectively , from three independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Supplementary Fig . 7 . Using the gibberellin - based system to rapidly disassemble MTs . a . HeLa cells co - transfected with dNSpastinXXX - YFP - GAIs ( green ) and EMTB - CFP - mGID1 ( black and blue ) were treated with GA3 - AM ( 100 µM ) . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The normalized MT filament area in cells transfected with the constructs shown in a upon GA3 - AM treatment . n = 8 cells from three independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Supplementary Fig . 8 . Acute MT disassembly attenuates lysosome dynamics . a . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) , dNSpastinXXX - mCh - FKBP ( red ) , and LAMP3 - YFP ( green ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) to induce MT disruption . Dotted lines indicate the cell boundary . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The MT filament area in the cell shown in a . c . Trajectories of each LAMP3 - YFP - labeled lysosome at different levels of MT disruption . Insets show higher - magnification images of the regions indicated by the dotted - line boxes . Scale bar , 10 μm . d . Displacement ( left ) and velocity ( right ) of each labeled lysosome shown in c . n = 2893 , 2618 , and 2315 lysosomes in the MT 100 , 50 , and 0 % group , respectively . Data ( red ) are shown as the mean ± SD . Student’s t - tests were performed to generate the indicated p - values . Supplementary Fig . 9 . Subcellular distribution of CFP - FRB - MAP4m at different phases of the cell cycle . a . NIH3T3 cells transfected with CFP - FRB - MAP4m ( green ) were serum starved to promote ciliogenesis . Ciliated cells were fixed and labeled with GT335 , an antibody that is specific for glutamylated tubulin ( Glu - tub ; red ) at ciliary axonemes . b and c . HeLa cells expressing CFP - FRB - MAP4m ( green ) were synchronized during metaphase ( b ) and telophase ( c ) and then were fixed and stained with α - tubulin antibody ( red ) . Dotted lines indicate cell boundaries . Scale bar , 10 μm . See figure legend on next page Supplementary Fig . 10 . The structure of the cilia occasionally does not collapse after axoneme disruption . a . NIH3T3 cells co - transfected with 5HT6 - mCh ( ciliary membrane ; red ) , CFP - FRB - MAP4m ( axonemal MTs ; blue ) , and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) were serum starved to induce ciliogenesis . Ciliated cells were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) to recruit dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP onto axonemes . The recruitment of Spastin proteins , morphology of the axonemes , and ciliary membrane were monitored upon rapamycin addition by live - cell imaging . Scale bar , 5 μm . b . The length of the indicated structures in the cell shown in a was measured and plotted . The time period during which the ciliary membrane became bulged and / or branched is shown with the orange lines above the graph . Supplementary Fig . 11 . Cells can spontaneously form ciliary membranes without axonemes . a . NIH3T3 cells were serum starved to promote ciliogenesis . Ciliated cells were fixed and labeled with antibodies against Arl13b ( a ciliary membrane marker ; red ) and against acetylated tubulin ( acetylated tub ; a ciliary axoneme marker ; green ) . Dotted lines indicate cell boundaries . Insets show higher - magnification images of the regions indicated by the dotted - line boxes . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The percentage of cells that spontaneously formed ciliary membranes with a short or absent axoneme or a normal axoneme . n = 391 cells from four dishes . Supplementary Fig . 12 . Spastin does not disrupt centrosomes . a . HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) , dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) , and PACT - mCh ( a centrosomal marker ; red ) were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) and imaged . Dotted lines indicate the cell boundary . Insets show higher - magnification images of the centrosome regions . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The normalized area of MT filaments in the cytosol ( blue ) and centrosomes ( orange ) is shown . n = 8 cells from four independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Supplementary Fig . 13 . Method used to measure MT filament area in real time . a . MT filaments in living cells were labeled with EMTB - CFP - FRB and used for real - time imaging ( RAW image ) . The cytosol background of the RAW images was removed by rolling ball correction and processed to generate the binary MT filament pattern via the Otsu threshold . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The area of binary MT filaments upon MT disruption treatment was quantified and plotted . Extended data Fig . 1 . The MT disruption rates of MTAs and our MT disruption system . a . HeLa cells transfected with the indicated constructs were treated with nocodazole ( 10 μM ) , colchicine ( 500 μM ) , or rapamycin ( 100 nM ) . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The half time of MT disassembly triggered by the indicated MT disruption systems . n = 30 , 45 , 19 , 30 , and 6 cells from left to right , three to five independent experiments . c . The relative proportion of MT area left in transfected HeLa cells after 1 hr of different MT - disrupting treatments . n = 34 , 30 , 45 , 19 , 20 , 6 , and 14 cells from left to right , three to five independent experiments . Data are shown as the mean ± S . E . M . Student’s t - tests were performed , with the resulting p - values indicated . Extended data Fig . 2 . Acute MT disruption is not dependent on proteasome - mediated degradation . a . COS7 cells co - expressing EMTB - CFP - FRB ( blue ) and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( green ) were either pre - treated with 0 . 1 % DMSO ( control ) or proteasome inhibitor , MG132 ( 50 μM ) for 30 mins . The effect of MG132 on dNSpastinXXX - mediated MT disruption was evaluated by live - cell imaging . Scale bar , 10 μm . b . The a - tubulin protein levels in HeLa cells co - transfected with EMTB - CFP - FRB and the indicated constructs after 30 min of DMSO or MG132 ( 50 μM ) pretreatment followed by rapamycin ( 100 nM ) treatment for the indicated time . Cold - mediated MT disassembly at 4 ° C was included as a control . Extended data Fig . 3 . Rapid disassembly of primary cilia . a . NIH3T3 cells co - transfected with 5HT6 - mCh ( a ciliary membrane marker ; red ) , CFP - FRB - MAP4m ( an axoneme marker ; blue ) , and dNSpastinXXX - YFP - FKBP ( upper panel ; green ) or enzyme dead dNSpastinXXXED - YFP - FKBP ( lower panel ; green ) were serum starved for 24 hr to induce ciliogenesis . Ciliated cells were treated with rapamycin ( 100 nM ) to recruit dNSpastin proteins onto axonemes . The recruitment of Spastin proteins , morphology of ciliary axonemes , and ciliary membrane , upon rapamycin treatment was monitored by live - cell imaging . Dotted lines indicate the cell boundary . Scale bar , 5 μm . Extended data Fig . 4 . Recruitment of light - sensitive dimerizing proteins without spastin does not disrupt MTs . COS7 cells were co - transfected with EMTB - YFP - CIBN and mCh - Cry2 ( red ) , and MTs were labeled with SPY650 - tubulin ( SPY650 - tub ; black ) . Illumination with blue light for the indicated period of time triggered rapid recruitment of mCh - Cry2 onto MTs in the light - illuminated region ( dotted circle ) . The MTs , however , remained intact after recruitment of mCh - Cry2 . Scale bar , 10 μm .