Engaging Pregnant Women in Kenya with a Hybrid Computer - Human SMS Communication System Trevor Perrier † Nicola Dell † Brian DeRenzi † Richard Anderson † John Kinuthia ‡ Jennifer Unger § Grace John - Stewart ¶ † Computer Science & Engineering § Obstetrics & Gynecology ¶ Epidemiology ‡ Obstetrics & Gynecology University of Washington University of Nairobi { tperrier , nixdell , bderenzi , richarda , junger , gjohn } @ uw . edu kinuthia @ uw . edu ABSTRACT A growing body of HCI4D research studies the use of SMS communication to deliver health and information services to underserved populations . This paper contributes a novel dimension to this ﬁeld of study by examining if a hybrid computer - human SMS system can engage pregnant women in Kenya in health - related communication . Our approach lever - ages the different strengths of both the computer and the hu - man . The computer automates the bulk - sending of person - alized messages to patients , allowing the human to read pa - tients’ replies and respond to those in need of attention . Find - ings from a 12 - month deployment with 100 women show that our approach is capable of engaging the majority of partici - pants in health - related conversations . We show that receiving messages from the system triggers participant communica - tion and the amount of communication increases as partici - pants approach their expected due date . In addition , analysis of participants’ messages shows that they often contain sensi - tive health information conveyed through a complex mixture of languages and ‘txting’ abbreviations , all of which highlight the beneﬁts of including a human in the workﬂow . Our ﬁnd - ings are relevant for HCI researchers and practitioners inter - ested in understanding or engaging underserved populations . Author Keywords HCI4D ; ICTD ; Maternal Health ; SMS ; Mobile ; mHealth . INTRODUCTION The proliferation of mobile devices throughout the world , and particularly in low - income countries such as Kenya , is pro - viding opportunities to create mobile applications that deliver health and information services to people living in poverty . Many of these applications focus on SMS , a low - cost com - munication channel that is supported on even the most basic mobile phones . However , the majority of existing SMS - based health applications use one - way ‘push’ messaging , in which generic messages are sent to large numbers of users who have no way to respond [ 7 , 13 ] or they enable two - way commu - nication between users and a server by requiring that users Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita - tion on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or re - publish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CHI 2015 , April 18 - 23 2015 , Seoul , Republic of Korea Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3145 - 6 / 15 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702124 submit highly - structured messages that can be automatically parsed by the server [ 5 , 16 ] . Although many SMS - based ser - vices would prefer to provide patients with personal atten - tion that takes into account their speciﬁc context , they usu - ally employ a small number of health workers who have lim - ited amounts of time to engage in direct communication with individual users . This suggests a need for new approaches that increase the capacity of health workers and allow them to communicate effectively with a larger number of patients . This paper makes a novel contribution to HCI4D by investi - gating if a hybrid computer - human SMS system can engage pregnant women in health - related conversations . Unlike prior research , our system leverages the different strengths of both the human and the computer and we argue that each plays a critical role in communicating with and engaging patients . The computer automates the bulk sending of personalized , time - speciﬁc messages to a large number of patients , which allows the human to spend time reading patients’ replies and responding to those that have speciﬁc questions or concerns . This approach allows the human to effectively manage a much larger number of patients than would be possible if s / he was required to send all of the messages manually . Moreover , by allowing participants to send unstructured messages to the system in any format or language that they choose , we aim to allow users who may have little experience with SMS to participate and engage with the system . We evaluate our hybrid approach through a 12 - month deploy - ment with 100 pregnant women in Kenya . Pregnant women in Kenya often have to wait for several hours at the clinic to see a nurse [ 18 ] , which discourages them from attending their antenatal clinic visits and decreases the amount of ad - vice and support that they receive during pregnancy . We use our hybrid SMS system to send pregnant women timely in - formation that is tailored to their speciﬁc context and con - nect them directly to a nurse who is able to respond to their questions or concerns . This research is part of an in - progress randomized controlled trial ( RCT ) that aims to assess if two - way SMS communication can inﬂuence antenatal clinic vis - its , infant immunization rates and adoption of family plan - ning practices . However , discussing the long - term medical outcomes of the trial is beyond the scope of this paper . In - stead , we focus on understanding how low - income women use our computer - human SMS system to engage in health - related communication and we analyze the conversations that are enabled by our approach . Healthcare Bias , Engagement & Adaptation CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 1429 Key ﬁndings from the design and evaluation of our hybrid computer - human SMS system show that , despite most partic - ipants having little prior experience with SMS , our approach successfully engages the majority of participants in meaning - ful health - related conversations . We show that receiving au - tomated messages from the system triggers participant com - munication and that the amount of communication increases as participants approach their delivery date . Finally , although prior work has presented large - scale quantitative analyses of SMS usage data [ 8 ] , to the best of our knowledge we con - tribute the ﬁrst in - depth analysis of unstructured SMS con - versations with low - income women in Kenya . We show that participants used a complex mixture of languages and ‘txting’ abbreviations to communicate highly personal health infor - mation over SMS . Taken together , these ﬁndings suggest that our hybrid computer - human SMS system has the potential to engage users in meaningful health - related communication . BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK Our work contributes to a growing body of HCI4D literature that focuses on using SMS to communicate with users in un - derserved communities . The low cost of SMS compared to voice means that SMS is currently the preferred communica - tion channel for much of Africa , including Kenya [ 12 ] . One - Way SMS Communication A large number of prior studies have focused on one - way communication in which a server sends bulk SMS messages to a large number of recipients . Reminder systems fall under this category , including solutions designed to increase medi - cation adherence [ 15 ] , reduce missed clinic visits [ 13 ] , or in - crease the timeliness of health worker home visits [ 7 ] . How - ever , a major disadvantage of these systems is that the recip - ients have no way to send messages back to the system . For example , in one study health workers still received reminders to visit patients that had moved away from the area [ 7 ] . Another class of one - way SMS systems allow users to sub - mit data to a server . In most cases , submitted messages must conform to a speciﬁc structure to enable automated parsing by the system . This model has been used to report stock lev - els [ 2 ] , communicate diagnostic test results [ 1 ] or submit data [ 19 ] . However , several of these studies ﬁnd that users strug - gle to compose properly structured messages and frequently make mistakes [ 19 ] . To overcome this limitation , other sys - tems allow users to submit unstructured messages and then employ complex server - side processing to try and make sense of the messages . For example , Ushahidi [ 17 ] used server - side natural language processing to try and decipher submit - ted messages , while Hellstr¨om et al . [ 9 ] used crowdsourcing to enable users to report election incidents by SMS . However , these systems do not provide feedback to users and partici - pants reported not using the system because they had no idea if the information they submitted made any difference [ 9 ] . Two - Way SMS Communication To overcome the lack of feedback provided by one - way sys - tems , several projects have designed two - way user - server SMS platforms in which users submit structured queries to a server and receive automated responses . This model has been deployed to provide users with health [ 16 ] , education [ 5 ] , and agricultural [ 23 ] information . However , as with one - way sys - tems that use structured messages , many of these projects re - port high error rates in the messages submitted to the system . Moreover , training users to compose formatted messages is challenging and hampers the scalability of these systems . Other systems enable two - way communication between hu - man users . One particularly relevant example is the Weltel study [ 14 ] , in which a health worker manually sent a sin - gle word message to participants who were required to re - spond with a single word answer . Participants that did not re - spond received a telephone call from the health worker . The study results show that patients who received messages had improved HIV medication adherence and lower viral loads than a control group . However , the health worker needed to manually send 273 messages and call roughly 30 % of par - ticipants each week , with 62 % of calls unanswered [ 22 ] . By using our hybrid SMS system , we are able to send longer , informative messages , reduce the health worker’s workload , and enable meaningful SMS conversations between the health worker and participants . Densmore [ 6 ] describes a bulk SMS platform designed to im - prove an NGO’s communications with its clients . The system shares some similarities with our system in that it can be used to send messages to groups of users who may respond . How - ever , unlike our system , which automatically sends tailored messages to participants at appropriate times , all of the mes - sages in Densmore’s study were manually initiated by NGO employees . In addition , all of the message senders and recip - ients were skilled professionals or NGO employees . Our re - search shows communication with low - income women drawn from the general population of Kenya , who have unknown backgrounds and varied experience with technology . Perhaps the closest match to our hybrid human - computer communication model are ‘human - in - the - loop’ systems that require the input of both humans and machines . Prahalad [ 20 ] and Joshi [ 11 ] have proposed such systems in the context of rural banking and other global development efforts , though not in relation to user engagement or SMS communication . Existing SMS Platforms Several open - source platforms have been developed in re - cent years that enable the creation of SMS - based applications in low - resource environments , including FrontlineSMS 1 and RapidSMS 2 . These platforms have been widely used for a va - riety of applications that primarily require one - way or highly - structured two - way communication . In designing our hybrid SMS system for this study , we needed an automated solu - tion capable of sending tailored , time - speciﬁc and dynamic messages to different groups of participants , coupled with an administrative user interface that allows a human to moderate conversations and respond to participant communication . At the time , neither FrontlineSMS nor RapidSMS supported this functionality and so we built our own prototype . However , 1 FrontlineSMS : http : / / www . frontlinesms . com 2 RapidSMS : https : / / www . rapidsms . org Healthcare Bias , Engagement & Adaptation CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 1430 we do not intend for our prototype to compete with these ex - isting systems . Instead , we anticipate that they could incor - porate our hybrid approach , which would allow their users to create SMS applications that better support user engagement and more nuanced communication with target populations . A HYBRID COMPUTER - HUMAN SMS SYSTEM The goal of our work is to use a hybrid computer - human SMS system to engage pregnant women in Kenya in health - related communication . Designing an SMS messaging system that is appropriate for maternal health settings requires that we take into account a complex and nuanced set of design criteria . For example , the date at which a woman is predicted to give birth and the date at which she actually gives birth can vary by several weeks . As a result , it is often impossible to accu - rately predict when a woman will give birth and automatically switch her from antenatal to postpartum messaging . To over - come challenges like this , our hybrid SMS system has been designed to incorporate input from both a human nurse and automated software , with each playing a critical role in the resulting communication . Design At a high - level , our approach allows automated SMS schedul - ing software to handle the majority of outgoing messages . This greatly reduces the total number of messages that the nurse is required to manage , allowing her to instead spend time reading and responding to unstructured messages sub - mitted by participants . In this way , the nurse is able to ef - fectively communicate with a larger number of patients than would be possible if she had to send all of the messages man - ually . Keeping in mind the challenges of designing for ma - ternal health settings , we identiﬁed the following criteria that inﬂuenced the design of our system : Personalize messages As much as possible , we personalize the content of the mes - sages to each individual woman’s speciﬁc context . We send messages that take into account gestational age and provide tailored message tracks for groups of participants with spe - cial circumstances , such as ﬁrst time mothers , adolescent mothers , or women who have had previous cesarean sections . Moreover , we allow participants to choose the language ( En - glish or Swahili ) that they receive messages in , and the day of the week and time of day that the messages arrive . Encourage engagement Our approach encourages women to engage with the system in several ways . First , each message includes a simple ques - tion relevant to the informational content of the message . An - swering the question provides a natural method for engage - ment . Second , messages that women send to the system do not have to be structured or specially formatted in any way . Instead , women can submit questions , concerns or updates in any format and in whatever language they prefer . Provide professional health care Since we cannot predict the nature or content of the messages that women send to the system , it is important that responses come from qualiﬁed health professional familiar with the lo - cal culture and language . Moreover , the information in the Figure 1 . The laptop - based interface that the nurse uses to manage all participant communication . The system has a list of searchable contacts on the left , the communication history of the currently selected partic - ipant in the center , and mechanisms for tracking the participant’s visit history and health status on the right automated messages was carefully crafted by maternal and child health experts to ensure that it was both relevant and medically accurate . Connecting underserved women directly to a health professional was one of our major goals . Increase the nurse’s capacity To allow the nurse to easily communicate with a large number of women we designed a laptop - based interface that provides a portal through which the nurse can view and reply to mes - sages ( see Figure 1 ) . The center of the interface depicts mes - sages that have been sent and received by the selected partic - ipant as a conversation . Messages from the system , the nurse and the participant are displayed in different colors so that it is easy to interpret the participant’s communication history . At the top of the interface is an input box that the nurse can use to send messages to the participant . The left side of the interface provides a searchable list of participants with new messages ﬁltered to the top of the list . This allows the nurse to quickly locate and view unread messages that she has not yet responded to . Finally , the right side of the screen displays the participant’s visit history and health status , such as her next scheduled clinic visit or when she is expected to give birth . Using this interface , the nurse can quickly understand a patient’s prior communication , visit history and medical con - text and personalize her responses accordingly . Adapt to participant circumstances The unpredictable nature of pregnancy means that the se - quence of outgoing messages may need to be dynamically ad - justed based on a participant’s changing circumstances . For example , if a woman gives birth earlier than expected , we need to be able to change the messages that she is receiving accordingly . Thus , rather than deﬁning a ﬁxed set of mes - sages to be sent at sign - up , the messages sent to participants are instead dynamically selected according to each woman’s current status at the time of sending . If the nurse changes the status of a woman in the system , the messages that she receives will automatically adapt to her new status . Healthcare Bias , Engagement & Adaptation CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 1431 Allow participants to respond only when they want to Several prior studies [ 7 , 14 ] used escalating reminder systems in which participants received a telephone call when they did not respond to a message . Our original design emulated this model . Initially , if a participant did not respond to a message , the message would be repeated every 48 hours for four days until a response was received . If no response had been re - ceived at that point , the system would prompt the nurse to call the participant . However , early feedback from focus groups with health workers and pregnant women revealed that this interaction model was overly demanding , and we changed our design to allow participants to only respond to messages when it made sense to them . Message Content and Timing The content of the SMS messages sent to participants was carefully crafted by maternal and child health experts using Kenya’s antenatal care guidelines . In addition , we conducted focus groups with 22 pregnant women and 10 health workers prior to the start of the study to obtain feedback and iterate on the message content . Findings from these focus groups sug - gested that participants really wanted to feel as though some - one cared about them . In addition , they wanted the messages to be directed speciﬁcally to them and take into account their personal situation . To achieve these goals , we designed the message content to include the name of the participant , with each message appearing as if it came from the study nurse ( see Table 1 ) . The messages were then further tailored to each participant based on her speciﬁc expected delivery date and covered a range of health and pregnancy related topics , in - cluding birth preparedness , factual information on what to ex - pect , family planning , breastfeeding and immunization . The messages were then further personalized based on the par - ticipant’s current pregnancy status , such as being a ﬁrst time mother or adolescent . Finally , as shown in Table 1 , each mes - sage that was sent by the system included a speciﬁc question designed to encourage the participant to respond . Based on each participant’s speciﬁc criteria , the system automatically selected and dispatched the relevant pre - programmed message at the appropriate time . In several cases , the ﬁnal automated message was longer than the max - imum size of a single SMS ( 140 characters ) and was broken into two messages that were sent at the same time ( see Ta - ble 1 ( b ) for an example ) . In addition to health related in - formation , participants also received automated appointment reminders two days before each scheduled clinic appointment ( see Table 1 ( c ) ) . Messages were also sent on the day of en - rollment , on the day a clinic visit was recorded , and when a delivery was recorded . Finally , women’s delivery dates in Kenya are typically calcu - lated based on the date of their last menstrual period . How - ever , this method is frequently inaccurate and , in reality , they give birth anywhere from several weeks before to several weeks after their predicted date of delivery . Thus , if a par - ticipant had not given birth by the time all of the scheduled antenatal messages had been sent , the ﬁnal antenatal message was repeated for an additional two weeks or until a birth was recorded in the system , at which point they began receiving ( a ) Automated message at 27 weeks pregnant [ Name ] , this is [ Nurse ] from clinic . Iron helps carry nutrition to your baby . If it is low , you feel tired . Are you taking iron or do you need tablets ? ( b ) Automated message 8 weeks after giving birth ( 1 ) [ Name ] this is [ Nurse ] from clinic . Are you having trouble breastfeeding ? Giving the baby other ﬂuids can cause illness and weakness . ( 2 ) Please continue to only give breast milk to your baby for at least six months . How long do you plan to breastfeed ? ( c ) Automated clinic appointment reminder [ Name ] , it is [ Nurse ] from clinic . You are to come in Friday Aug 08 . We will give vaccines to your baby . You may also get free family planning . Please come in . Table 1 . Examples of automated messages sent by the system at ( a ) 27 weeks pregnant ; ( b ) 8 weeks after birth ; and ( c ) 2 days before a sched - uled clinic visit . Note that , as is the case for ( b ) , any messages longer than 140 characters were sent in two parts . tailored postpartum messages . In total , each participant that completed the study received approximately 35 automated messages in the seven to eight months between enrollment and completion , with at most two system messages per week . Implementation Our system is a python - based Django web application that connects to the Kenyan telecommunication system through Shujaa Solutions 3 , a third party SMS gateway that provides an API that our server can use to post outgoing messages . In - coming messages from participants are routed to our server via a callback URL . In addition , by establishing a reverse billing ﬁve - digit short code , we were able to to allow par - ticipants to send and receive messages free of charge . EVALUATION To understand women’s engagement with our hybrid SMS system , we analyzed messages sent during a year long de - ployment with 100 pregnant women in Kenya . Our work is part of Mobile WACh , a larger IRB - approved clinical trial investigating maternal mobile health initiatives and behav - ior change . The deployment was based at Mathare North Health Center , a city council clinic located approximately 10km from Nairobi , the capital city of Kenya . Mathare pro - vides basic health services to patients , including normal ante - natal services for pregnant women , but refers all complicated cases to a higher level health facility . Study Nurse A dedicated nurse was hired for the duration of the study to enroll participants , respond to SMSs , keep track of antici - pated and completed patient visits , monitor when participants gave birth , and conduct post study surveys . The nurse was female , computer literate and had experience reading and re - sponding to email and participating in Skype conversations . 3 Shujaa Solutions : http : / / shujaa . co . ke Healthcare Bias , Engagement & Adaptation CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 1432 We provided the nurse with a laptop and access to the sys - tem management portal so that she could communicate with participants . Prior to the start of the study , the nurse received roughly two hours of training on how to use the software . Participant Enrollment Starting in August 2013 , pregnant women visiting the clinic for their ﬁrst or second antenatal visit were invited to par - ticipate in the study . Volunteers needed to have personal or shared access to a mobile phone , be able to read and respond to messages in English or Swahili ( the two national languages of Kenya ) and be planning to reside in the area for the dura - tion of their pregnancy . In addition , due to technical lim - itations of the SMS gateway , participants were required to possess a SIM card for the telecommunications provider Sa - faricom . Fortunately , the majority of Kenyans already use Safaricom . During the entire study only two people failed to meet the inclusion criteria , and this was because they did not possess a Safaricom SIM card . In total , we enrolled 100 women to receive messages from our hybrid SMS system . All participants sent and received messages using their own per - sonal or shared mobile phones . During enrollment the nurse explained that participants would not be charged for any mes - sages sent to the ﬁve - digit study number . All participants re - ceived a small monetary compensation for their participation . Procedure After screening volunteers and obtaining informed consent , the study nurse conducted a structured interview with each participant in which she collected the participant’s demo - graphic information , medical history , and current usage of and prior experience with technology . She also collected their mobile phone number and explained that they would receive one to two messages per week , starting at 20 weeks of preg - nancy and continuing until 10 weeks postpartum . She ex - plained that the messages would contain questions about their health and that they should respond , although she also made it clear that they should not use the service for emergencies . Each participant also received a business card that contained the study’s ﬁve - digit short - code . After enrollment , the study nurse did not meet with participants again until several weeks after they had given birth , although participants did see other clinic nurses when they attended their normal antenatal ap - pointments . All participant communication with the study nurse was through participants’ personal mobile phones . Data Collection and Analysis The goal of our paper is to investigate if we are able to engage pregnant women using our hybrid computer - human SMS sys - tem and to characterize the resulting conversations that take place . To achieve this goal , we analyzed data from 100 struc - tured interviews conducted with participants at enrollment , 3661 automated messages sent by the system , 423 messages sent by the nurse and 944 messages sent by participants , and data from two 45 - minute semi - structured interviews with the study nurse that were conducted over Skype . We began by examining the data from interviews conducted at enrollment and characterized the population of women that participated in our study , organizing them according to age , income , language , education level , employment , and their current usage of and prior experience with technology . Fol - lowing this , we conducted an iterative , in - depth analysis of messages that participants sent to the system . We began by noting the language that participants sent messages in ( En - glish , Swahili or a mixture ) and whether each message con - tained abbreviations or ‘txting’ . One of the authors , who speaks Swahili , translated any messages that were in Swahili into English . Then , we coded any messages that ( 1 ) an - swered a question posed by the system ; ( 2 ) answered a ques - tion posed by the study nurse ; ( 3 ) asked a question related to information sent by the system ; ( 4 ) asked a new question that was not related to anything sent by the system ; and ( 5 ) provided the nurse with an unprompted update or informa - tion . We further identiﬁed any messages that formed a ‘con - versation’ , which we deﬁne as a back - and - forth sequence of at least two related messages . For each identiﬁed conversa - tion , we then further analyzed the messages that made up the conversation to identify who initiated the conversation ( the system or the participant ) and any themes , events or topics that caused participants to engage in conversation . FINDINGS Understanding Our Participants Before analyzing participant engagement with the system , it is important to understand the characteristics of the women in our study and their prior experience with technology . Demographic Characteristics Our participants were all pregnant women aged between 16 and 37 years ( M = 24 . 1 , SD = 4 . 6 ) . 38 participants reported that they had attended primary school , 51 had started ( but not necessarily ﬁnished ) secondary school , while 11 had some form of post - secondary education . The majority of Kenyans in Nairobi speak a complex combination of Swahili , English , slang words and local languages known as Sheng . However , since the language of education and government in Kenya is English , most of our participants prefer to receive formal communication in English as opposed to Swahili , and 97 par - ticipants chose to receive SMS messages in English . 86 par - ticipants reported that they live in single - room houses , 94 within 10km of the clinic , and 88 walked to the clinic for their appointment . 85 participants said that they were self - employed or housewives with family sizes ranging from 2 to 6 people ( M = 3 . 1 , SD = 1 . 3 ) with a mean monthly house - hold income of 6500 ( SD = 3728 ) Kenyan shillings ( roughly US $ 73 ) . These characteristics suggest that , despite living close to Nairobi , Kenya’s capital city , many of our partici - pants are living in extreme poverty [ 21 ] . Experience with Technology Access to mobile technology in Kenya has expanded expo - nentially over the past decade . All of the women screened for our study had access to a mobile phone . 76 reported that they possess their own mobile phone , while the other 24 shared a mobile phone , usually with their husband . Despite this widespread access to mobile technology , only 34 participants self - reported that they use SMS regularly , with 16 reporting that they do not use SMS at all . Moreover , only 7 participants reported ever having used the Internet . By contrast , 90 % of Healthcare Bias , Engagement & Adaptation CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 1433 Figure 2 . Total number of messages sent during each week before and after delivery . Week 0 corresponds to the week in which participants were recorded as giving birth . Week - 5 depicts ﬁve weeks before giving birth while 5 shows ﬁve weeks after giving birth participants do use their mobile phones to access mPesa , Sa - faricom’s mobile banking service . Since mPesa requires users to navigate text - based menus and enter data , we anticipated that participants would be able to send and receive SMS mes - sages even if they were not already frequent SMS users . Measuring Participant Engagement We use the number of messages that participants sent to the system as our measure of engagement . Thus , women who communicate more by sending more messages have a higher level of engagement . The total number of weeks that partici - pants received messages from the system varied according to when they enrolled in the study and when they gave birth . To account for this variance , we divided the total number of mes - sages that each participant sent by the number of weeks that they were receiving messages to obtain our ﬁnal engagement metric , which we report as the average number of messages that each participant sent per week of participation . The majority of participants engaged with the system Between August 23 , 2013 and August 31 , 2014 we received a total of 944 SMS messages from participants . During the same time period , the system sent 3661 automated messages and the study nurse sent 423 messages to participants . On av - erage , each participant sent 0 . 46 ( M = 0 . 26 SD = 0 . 54 ) messages per week or two messages per month for the 7 - 8 months that they participated in the study , with 73 of our 100 participants sending at least one message . In addition , many participants communicated on a regular basis throughout the study ( see Figure 2 ) with the highest amounts of engagement recorded during weeks close to participants’ delivery dates . This high level of participant engagement is encouraging , particularly since the majority of our participants did not have much ex - perience with SMS and prior work has struggled to engage these kinds of users with SMS communication [ 4 ] . Participants were more engaged close to their delivery date To analyze how participants’ communication varied through - out pregnancy , we calculated the total number of messages that participants sent in relation to when they gave birth . Our ﬁndings are shown in Figure 2 . Week 0 in the graph shows the week that participants were recorded as giving birth , with values before 0 showing weeks before giving birth and values after 0 showing weeks after giving birth . In general , participants’ engagement with the system in - creased as they approached their delivery date . This sug - gests that participants were more motivated to communicate the closer that they were to giving birth . In addition , the questions that the system sent to participants in the third and fourth weeks prior to their expected delivery date speciﬁcally asked , “Are you worried ? ” and “Do you have any questions about where to go in labor and how to get there ? ” Similar open - ended questions were asked in other automated mes - sages , however , they elicited the most responses in the weeks just prior to delivery , which indicates that this was an oppor - tune time to provide participants with someone to whom they could direct their questions or concerns about the process of giving birth . After delivery , the number of messages that par - ticipants sent gradually decreased again , with a notable drop in messages submitted more than 10 weeks after birth . Since participants stopped receiving messages from the system at 10 weeks postpartum , it makes sense that , for the most part , they also stopped sending messages to the system . Receiving messages triggered engagement Figure 3 shows when participants sent messages to the system in relation to when they received messages from the system . The vast majority of messages sent by participants were on the same calendar day as they received a message from the system ( 705 out of a total of 944 ) . A large number of these were direct responses to questions that the system had asked . However , many also triggered additional questions unrelated to those posed by the system , with 39 different users each submitting at least one new question . For example , one par - ticipant received the following automated message : “ [ Name ] 4 this is [ Nurse ] from Mathare clinic . Regular , strong stomach pains are a sign of labor . If you feel strong tightening of your belly , leaking of ﬂuid or any bleeding go to the clinic . Have you had any labor pains ? How often do you feel them ? Are you worried ? ” 40 minutes after receiving this message , the participant sent 5 , “Hi , am not as such worried , but i have a little fear . i have never had any labor pains . ” 4 All names have been removed to preserve anonymity . 5 All messages quoted in the paper show participants’ original spelling and grammar . Healthcare Bias , Engagement & Adaptation CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 1434 Figure 3 . Summary of when participants sent messages to the system in relation to when they received messages . A value of 0 days means that the participant sent a message on the same day as receiving a message . Then , ten minutes after sending her initial response , she sent another message to the system , “Hi . madam [ nurse ] , kindly will u state for me items that are needed when i will attend clinic during labor pains e . g clothing for the baby , basin , . and what els . . . . . . . ” to which the nurse then responded , “Hi [ name ] , you need baby clothes , shawl , leso , basin , spirit , cotton wool . that is mainly it . the rest you can inquire from the nurses when you reach the hospital . ” Exchanges like this suggest that receiving messages from the system reminded participants that they had someone to whom they could direct their questions or concerns and highlight the potential for the automated messages to trigger engagement . Some participants did not respond Twenty - seven participants did not engage in any communica - tion during the study . We tried to contact these participants to understand some of the reasons for their lack of response and were able to successfully reach eight participants . Three explained that they shared a phone with their husband , which made it difﬁcult for them to read and respond to the mes - sages . In one case , a participant said that her husband deleted the messages before she had a chance to read them . In several other cases , the person who answered the call told us that the participant had changed their phone number during the study . Moreover , several of the phone numbers that participants had provided to us appeared to be incorrect , with the number ei - ther not being a valid phone number or with the person who answered the call claiming to not know the participant . Understanding Participants’ Use of Language Kenya has two national languages , English and Swahili , and we wanted to understand participants’ use of these languages in their messages . Our ﬁndings show that participants’ mes - sages frequently included a complex mix of English , Swahili and Sheng ( an informal mixture of the two ) , ‘txt’ abbrevia - tions , and numerous spelling and grammatical errors , all of which highlight the beneﬁt of having a human interpret and respond to messages . Participants sent messages in a mixture of languages Since 97 participants chose to receive messages in English , it makes sense that the majority of messages sent to the sys - tem ( 784 out of 944 ) were also in English . However , since only three participants chose to receive messages in Swahili , we were surprised to ﬁnd that 41 participants sent messages that contained at least some Swahili , with 13 communicating entirely in Swahili . Follow - up conversations with the nurse showed that although some participants were more comfort - able with Swahili , they feared that the messages would con - tain formal Swahili rather than the colloquial language that they typically use . A total of 73 participant messages were entirely in Swahili and a further 87 contained a mixture of Swahili and English . Our analysis of these messages sug - gests that participants mix Swahili and English freely , choos - ing whichever word comes to mind ﬁrst . For example , “my headache is ve ly pain and kizuguzugu” The word ‘kizuguzugu’ ( a misspelling of ‘kizunguzungu’ ) means ‘dizzy’ and , although we cannot be sure , we hypothe - size that this participant was either unsure of the English word for dizzy , or simply more familiar with the word in Swahili . Other participants more blatantly used Sheng , mixing English and Swahili whenever was convenient and incorporating new words not pulled from either language : “My nxt visit will be on 29th may . na nina sweat sana siku hizi xana xana usiku . can u elaborate on this pliz” The Swahili part of this message means ‘I am sweating a lot these days a lot a lot at night’ . The ﬁrst time the participant writes ‘a lot’ in Swahili , but the second and third time it is written in the slang version commonly used in Sheng . Al - though this complex mixing of languages may be understood by a bilingual Kenyan , it would be extremely difﬁcult for any language processing software to interpret these messages . Participants frequently used ‘txt’ abbreviations ‘Txting’ refers to the use of abbreviations and other tech - niques to craft SMS messages , often with the aim of reducing the overall length of the message [ 3 ] . Analysis of our par - ticipants’ messages shows that 30 % or 287 messages used ‘txting’ that often made the messages difﬁcult to interpret : “the 1st thing iwould like 2say hi 2u hpng dat ur ﬁne . my qstn is dat when ivisted clnc last mnth itryd 2expose my complication 2the dctr dat the lab told 2hav some medicine coz of infctn bt they gav out 2 me some amoxil capsols 4me 2use 2x3 pa day bt whn iused them 4the 1st 4day iwas ﬂng stomach strng pain den ijust chsn my self 2surender tkng thm did iwrng or icld cntnu usng them bcz its how they use 2cure” In addition , several participants appeared to not know how to input certain characters into their phone . For example , one participant responded to a question about heartburn with , “yesiamhavingheartburninaweekitocurstwice” These ﬁndings suggest that many participants would ﬁnd it difﬁcult to compose messages that required speciﬁc format - ting and it is an advantage that our system allows participants to send unstructured messages . In addition , the mix of lan - guage , ’txting’ , and errors highlights the importance of con - sidering the cultural and linguistic context for automated mes - sages and human replies . Healthcare Bias , Engagement & Adaptation CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 1435 Figure 4 . Graph showing the number and length of conversations ( two or more related messages ) started by the system and by participants . Understanding the SMS Conversations To understand the conversations that arose from participants’ engagement with the system , we labeled any sequence of two or more related messages as a ‘conversation’ and analyzed the length and content of these conversations . In total , we recorded 703 conversations that took place during the study , ranging in length from two to ten messages ( see Figure 4 ) . 529 conversations were initiated by automated system mes - sages , while the other 124 were initiated by participants . Conversations with two messages : question and answer The majority of two - message conversations fall into two cat - egories : ( 1 ) the automated message asks a question and the participant responds , and ( 2 ) the participant asks a question and the nurse responds . Participant responses to system ques - tions ranged in length and complexity from simple ‘yes’ and ‘no’ answers to longer , in - depth updates , such as , “Am not having heartburn but am having alot of pain at the side of stormach and at the back . sometime it enter in the legs that i cant even make a single step till the pain disapear . then there is something coming up from stomach such as am unable to breath . ” There were 73 additional questions posed by participants that the nurse was able to answer with a single message . Many of these questions demonstrate the value of connecting partici - pants to a health professional . One message asked , “I have a question that is disturbing me , can a pregnant woman be dewarmed ? ” while another inquired , “Hey [ nurse ] i ga ve birth on satudy bt my bby is cryng of stomac is it advaisable i giv ha medicine ? ” It is unlikely that these participants would be willing to wait in line for hours at the clinic just to ask these kinds of questions , which suggests that our system successfully lowers the barrier between our participants and health - related information . Conversations with three or more messages The majority of conversations longer than two messages were initiated by the system and then continued by the participant and the nurse . In many cases , participants would respond to a system question with a related question . For example , System : “ [ Name ] this is [ Nurse ] from Mathare clinic . When you come in for labor , we will give you a birth notiﬁcation for the baby . Delivery at the hospital could save your baby’s life . Do you have any questions about where to go in labor and how to get there ? ” Participant : “My worry is how 2 get in the hosp . Becoz of insecurity in our area incase labor starts at midnight . Another question is when i get at the hosp . 4 example at mathare at midnight will they able 2 open 4 me ? ” Nurse : “Hi [ name ] , This is [ nurse ] . The maternity unit at Mathare operates for 24 hrs a day , so if you go there at midnight they will deﬁnitely attend to you . Thank you . ” This highlights the value of including carefully crafted ques - tions in the automated messages that encourage participants to share their questions and concerns . Other conversations took place solely between a participant and the nurse . In these cases , a participant usually contacted the nurse seeking addi - tional information or advice . For example , Participant : “how about if i’give the baby other liq - uids , like cow milk what will happen ? ” Nurse : “Hi [ name ] . How old is your baby ? If the baby is below 6 months , we advise you give only breast milk because the baby’s digestive system is not yet fully de - veloped to digest other foods . If i may ask . Why do you want to give cows milk ? ” Participant : “she is almost three months . very soon am going back to work whereby i’can’t go and come back to breastfeed the baby , what is another option ? ” Nurse : “if you are going back to work , you can express the milk and leave it for the baby to be given while you are away . you can also buy NAN for the baby to substi - tute the breast milk . ” The longest conversation that we identiﬁed consisted of 10 messages in which the participant asked four different ques - tions that were answered by the nurse . After receiving her answers , the participant concluded the conversation with , “Thanks alot . Those are some of the questions that were really bothering me . ” Participants communicated sensitive personal information Our analysis of participants’ communication revealed that many were willing to communicate deeply personal health in - formation over SMS . Several participants inquired about sex - ually transmitted diseases : “i’was tested 4 siphilis on monday . is it posible someone can stil have other std ? ” while others asked if it was safe for them to have sex : “Hi [ nurse ] , am gud since we were 2getha . just wanted 2 ask u whetha a baby can b affected by sex while in the womb apart from sexual transmitted diseases . ” Interestingly , some participants communicated sensitive in - formation through updates without asking a speciﬁc question : “Thanks a lot . I don’t have pains nor bleeding . If I can cough or sneeze I notice little urine come out . Am satis - ﬁed in early stage is okey . Am greatful for your concern . ” Healthcare Bias , Engagement & Adaptation CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 1436 Participants’ willingness to communicate this personal infor - mation over SMS has several potential implications . For ex - ample , since participants may be hesitant to talk about em - barrassing or sensitive topics in person [ 10 ] the SMS system could provide them with a more comfortable communication channel for airing their concerns . Finally , many participants expressed gratitude for the support that they received : “Dank U 2 , 4 Being Consern About My Health . Am Not Realy Bad , But We R Stil Struggling With Life & Pray 2 Survive It . Coz 4 Me It’s Had . ” These messages are particularly rewarding because they were unsolicited , which gives us reason to believe that participants were genuinely grateful and that it made a difference to them to feel as if someone cared about them . Some participant questions went unanswered For our hybrid computer - human SMS system to be success - ful , it is crucial that the nurse is also engaged and sends timely responses to participants ( although we made it clear during enrollment that participants should not use the system as an emergency service ) . Our analysis of participant messages re - vealed a total of 50 questions that were never answered . In addition , in some cases the nurse responded several days af - ter the message was received . Although the nurse’s lack of response to messages did not have any observable effect on participant engagement , we plan to change the design of the interface to help the nurse do a better job of responding to messages . First , although the software made it easy to see unread messages , the nurse would often read a message but not respond immediately . However , after reading messages , it was difﬁcult to keep track of messages that she had read but not responded to . To overcome this challenge , we plan to change the design of the system management portal so that , in addition to highlighting unread messages , it also ﬂags mes - sages that have not yet received a response . The nurse also described that she feared the laptop would get stolen if she carried it on public transit or left it at the clinic overnight . Thus , she frequently left the laptop at home when she went to the clinic for the day and was then unable to read and respond to messages until she got home in the evening . To overcome this issue , we plan to design a mobile version of the software that the nurse can use to read and respond to messages at any location using her personal Android phone . DISCUSSION Our ﬁndings clearly demonstrate the potential for hybrid computer - human SMS systems like ours to engage women in health - related communication during pregnancy and post - partum . We believe the success of our approach relies on the contributions of both the computer and the human . Since participants only met the nurse once at enrollment , we argue that it is not only the personal face - to - face connection to the nurse that causes them to engage with the system . Rather , it is the combination of carefully crafted personalized messages , the perceived relationship with the ‘nurse’ created by the au - tomated messages and the messages sent by the nurse , each of which contribute to participants’ motivation to communi - cate . The streamlined , tailored system messages provided a foundation on which further communication was built , and participants’ responses to these messages suggest that they perceived the automated messages to come directly from the nurse rather than an automated system . With the system au - tomating the bulk of the sending , the human was able to ful - ﬁll the higher order demands for advice and person - speciﬁc care . In addition , the varied topics and questions messaged by participants and the unpredictable nature of pregnancy moti - vate the need for a human to dynamically and adeptly control the messages that are sent . Participants often asked sensitive medical questions that require a trained professional to an - swer or triage to higher - level in - person care . Taken together , these ﬁndings suggest that our system is able to supplement currently overstretched health care systems in a meaningful way . Not only do hybrid systems like ours allow for health education , appointment reminders and in - formation dissemination , they may engage women in their own care , creating more informed patients and allowing for triage of both necessary and unnecessary in - person clinic vis - its . Moreover , enabling this communication requires little in terms of direct or indirect costs to the participant ( e . g . , no travel time , transportation , waiting to see a nurse ) and may decrease unnecessary visits to the clinic , which could help to reduce clinic waiting times for all patients . The use of a hybrid messaging system does raise an interest - ing ethical debate : participants may think that the automated messages are being personally composed by the nurse . Our hybrid design is a compromise between an entirely automated system and a manual one . We use technology to efﬁciently accomplish what a human could do manually without signif - icantly changing the process or workﬂow . Moreover , in our case , the outgoing automated messages have been carefully crafted by global health experts and tailored to each partici - pant’s health status . In addition , all participant messages and questions are reviewed and responded to by a qualiﬁed nurse . We believe that this approach is ethically acceptable , allowing underserved women to receive personal advice from a trained health professional , which would not be feasible if the nurse had to send all of the automated messages manually . Our study also exposed several interesting design opportu - nities that we plan to explore . For example , we would like to make it easier for nurses to keep track of questions sent by women . One potential approach could be to model the web - based interface as a ‘ticket management system’ or email client instead of using an SMS - focused paradigm . Another interesting addition would be to allow the nurse to create and save template responses to frequently asked questions . For example , several participants asked about hospital operating hours , the safety of eating particular foods , vaccine schedules etc . Having template answers to these questions may help the nurse to respond more quickly and efﬁciently . As we consider how to scale our hybrid system to larger de - ployments , we need to carefully consider how best to preserve the privacy of patients’ personal health data . In our study , we explained that participants would receive messages on their own phones and we allowed them to choose the time of day that messages would arrive in part to allow them to choose a time when they would likely be alone . To avoid accidentally Healthcare Bias , Engagement & Adaptation CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 1437 revealing a woman’s pregnancy to her husband or family , we only began sending messages at 20 weeks of pregnancy . At the clinic , access to the messages was limited to the study nurse who logged in with a password . We hope to learn more about patients opinions on privacy through follow - up inter - views at the conclusion of the ongoing medical study . Finally , an important consideration in any HCI4D project is the sustainability of the system . Since women were able to send messages to the system for free , we are unable to tell how engagement would change if women had to pay for messages . The cost of each incoming or outgoing SMS was US $ 0 . 03 . We paid for a total of 5028 messages , costing a total of US $ 150 . 84 . Our biggest cost was a US $ 300 monthly fee to keep the SMS gateway open . However , this is a ﬁxed fee that will not increase as the system is scaled up which means that ( at least for the foreseeable future ) the cost per partic - ipant will decrease as the number of participants increases . Another limitation of our study is that it involved a single nurse who managed all 100 participants at a single study site . We anticipate that additional challenges will arise as we scale the system to a large number of clinics and health workers . CONCLUSION This paper describes a hybrid computer - human SMS system that we designed to encourage pregnant women in Kenya to engage in health - related communication . Findings from a 12 - month deployment of the system involving 100 pregnant women show that the system successfully engages the major - ity of participants by leveraging the different strengths of both the computer and the human . Moreover , analysis of the re - sulting conversations that took place between the system , the nurse and participants suggest that our hybrid approach pro - vides a valuable communication channel that connects preg - nant women directly to a qualiﬁed health professional . Taken together , our ﬁndings contribute a valuable and novel dimen - sion to the growing body of HCI4D research that aims to un - derstand and engage underserved populations . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank the study nurse and our par - ticipants for their valuable contributions and time . This work was funded in part by NSF grant IIS - 1111433 . Dr . Unger is supported by the Women’s Reproductive Health Research ( WRHR ) Career Development Award NICHD , K12 HD001264 - 14 . Dr . John - Stewart is supported by NIH / NICHD 1 K24 HD054314 - 06 . REFERENCES 1 . Asiimwe , C . , Gelvin , D . , Lee , E . , Amor , Y . B . , Quinto , E . , Katureebe , C . , Sundaram , L . , Bell , D . , and Berg , M . Use of an Innovative , Affordable , and Open - Source Short Message ServiceBased Tool to Monitor Malaria in Remote Areas of Uganda . American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 85 ( 2011 ) , 26 – 33 . 2 . Barrington , J . , Wereko - Brobby , O . , Ward , P . , Mwafongo , W . , and Kungulwe , S . SMS for Life : a pilot project to improve anti - malarial drug supply management in rural Tanzania using standard technology . Malaria Journal 9 ( 2010 ) , 298 . 3 . Carrington , V . Txting : the end of civilization ( again ) ? Cambridge Journal of Education 35 , 2 ( 2005 ) , 161 – 175 . 4 . Crandall , A . Kenyan Farmers Use of Cell Phones : Calling Preferred over SMS . In Mobile Communication for Development ( M4D ) ( 2012 ) . 5 . Danis , C . M . , Ellis , J . B . , Kellogg , W . A . , van Beijma , H . , Hoefman , B . , Daniels , S . D . , and Loggers , J . - W . Mobile phones for health education in the developing world : SMS as a user interface . In ACM Symposium on Computing for Development ( 2010 ) , 13 : 1 – 13 : 9 . 6 . Densmore , M . Experiences with Bulk SMS for Health Financing in Uganda . In Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( 2012 ) , 383 – 398 . 7 . DeRenzi , B . , Findlater , L . , Payne , J . , Birnbaum , B . , Mangilima , J . , Parikh , T . , Borriello , G . , and Lesh , N . Improving community health worker performance through automated SMS . In Information and Communication Technologies and Development ( 2012 ) , 25 – 34 . 8 . Frias - Martinez , V . , and Virseda , J . On the relationship between socio - economic factors and cell phone usage . In Information and Communication Technologies and Development ( 2012 ) , 76 – 84 . 9 . Hellstr¨om , J . , and Karefelt , A . Participation Through Mobile Phones : A Study of SMS Use During the Ugandan General Elections 2011 . In Information and Communication Technologies and Development ( 2012 ) , 249 – 258 . 10 . Johnson , T . , , and Parsons , J . Interviewer effects on self - reported substance use among homeless persons . Addict Behavior 19 ( 1994 ) . 11 . Joshi , A . Mobile Phones and Economic Sustainability : Perspectives from India . In The First International Conference on Expressive Interactions for Sustainability and Empowerment ( 2009 ) . 12 . Kechiche , B . Leveraging SMS to Attract the Low End of the Income Scale . Africa and Middle East Telecom Insider 1 , 2 ( 2009 ) . 13 . Kunutsor , S . , Walley , J . , Katabira , E . , Muchuro , S . , Balidawa , H . , Namagala , E . , and Ikoona , E . Using mobile phones to improve clinic attendance amongst an antiretroviral treatment cohort in rural Uganda . AIDS and behavior 14 , 6 ( 2010 ) , 1347 – 1352 . 14 . Lester , P . , Ritvo , P . , Mills , E . , Kariri , A . , Karanja , S . , Chung , M . , Jack , W . , Habyarimana , J . , Sadatsafavi , M . , Najafzadeh , M . , Marra , C . , Estambale , B . , Ngugi , E . , Ball , T . , Thabane , L . , Gelmon , L . , Kimani , J . , Ackers , M . , and Plummer , F . Effects of a mobile phone short message service on antiretroviral treatment adherence in Kenya ( WelTel Kenya1 ) : a randomised trial . The Lancet 376 ( 2010 ) , 1838 – 1845 . 15 . Mbuagbaw , L . , Thabane , L . , Ongolo - Zogo , P . , Lester , R . , Mills , E . , Volmink , J . , Yondo , D . , Essi , M . , Bonono - Momnougui , R . , Mba , R . , Ndongo , J . , N . F . , and Ondoa , H . The cameroon mobile phone sms ( CAMPS ) trial . Trials 12 , 1 ( 2011 ) . 16 . Ngabo , F . , Nguimfack , J . , Nwaigwe , F . , Mugeni , C . , Muhoza , D . , Wilson , D . , Kalach , J . , Gakuba , R . , Karema , C . , and Binagwaho , A . Designing and implementing an innovative SMS - based alert system to monitor pregnancy and reduce maternal and child deaths in Rwanda . Pan African Medical Journal 13 , 31 ( 2012 ) . 17 . Okolloh , O . Ushahidi or ’testimony’ : Web 2 . 0 tools for crowdsourcing crisis information . Participatory Learning and Action 59 ( 2009 ) , 65 – 70 . 18 . Ouma , P . , van Eijk , A . , Hamel , M . , Sikuku , E . , Odhiambo , F . , Munguti , K . , Ayisi , J . , Crawford , S . , Kager , P . , and Slutsker , L . Research antenatal and delivery care in rural western kenya : the effect of training health care workers to provide focused antenatal care . Reproductive Health 7 , 1 ( 2010 ) . 19 . Patnaik , S . , Brunskill , E . , and Thies , W . Evaluating the accuracy of data collection on mobile phones : forms , SMS , and voice . In Information and Communication Technologies and Development ( 2009 ) . 20 . Prahalad , C . , and Fruehauf , H . The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid . Wharton School Publishing , 2004 . 21 . Ravallion , M . How long will it take to lift one billion people out of poverty ? The World Bank Research Observer 28 , 2 ( 2013 ) , 139 – 158 . 22 . van der Kop , M . L . , Karanja , S . , Thabane , L . , Marra , C . , Chung , M . H . , Gelmon , L . , Kimani , J . , and Lester , R . T . In - Depth Analysis of Patient - Clinician Cell Phone Communication during the WelTel Kenya1 Antiretroviral Adherence Trial . PLoS ONE 7 , 9 , 1932 – 6203 . 23 . Veeraraghavan , R . , Yasodhar , N . , and Toyama , K . Warana Unwired . In Information and Communication Technologies and Development ( 2007 ) , 1 – 10 . Healthcare Bias , Engagement & Adaptation CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 1438