Neurons are highly polarized cells with two molecularly and functionally distinct domains that emerge from the cell body : a single thin , long axon , which transmits sig - nals , and multiple shorter dendrites , which are special - ized to receive signals . The ability of neurons to polarize is crucial for synaptic transmission , and knowledge of the mechanisms that govern neuronal polarization is fundamental to our understanding of neural develop - ment , plasticity and neurodegenerative diseases . Over the past three decades , many studies have explored the cellular and molecular mechanisms that underlie neuro - nal polarization using cultured hippocampal neurons 1 . Remarkably , these neurons polarize in the presence of the trophic factor insulin - like growth factor 1 ( IGF1 ) 2 and in the absence of cell - to - cell contacts or extracellular matrix molecules , to generate a single axon and multiple dendrites , which exhibit the molecular features that dis - tinguish axons and dendrites in vivo . Using this model system it has been possible to identify proteins that con - trol the establishment of neuronal polarity , including kinases , phosphatases , small GTPases and scaffolding proteins 3 . In addition , more recent studies have dem - onstrated that regulation of the actin cytoskeleton by phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) , the Rho family of small GTPases , the Par complex and their downstream effectors is crucial for neuronal polarization 3 – 9 . It has also become clear that loss of polarity correlates with characteristic changes in microtubule organization and dynamics 10 – 12 . Thus , it has now been established that local microtubule assembly and stabilization in one neurite is a physiological signal that specifies neuronal polarization , and that changing microtubule dynamics is sufficient to alter axon and dendrite specification and development . Here we review current evidence regard - ing the regulation of microtubule assembly , organization and dynamics during neuronal polarization and briefly discuss microtubules’ potential roles at synapses . Microtubule dynamics and cell polarity A characteristic property of microtubules ( BOX 1 ) is their ability to undergo cycles of rapid growth and disassem - bly . This is known as dynamic instability and has been observed both in vitro and in vivo 13 – 15 . Thus , individual microtubules do not reach a steady - state length , but exist in either polymerization ( growth ) or depolym - erization ( shrinkage ) states . Conversion from growth to shrinkage is termed ‘catastrophe’ , whereas the switch from shrinkage to growth is called ‘rescue’ . This non - equilibrium behaviour depends on the binding of GTP at the nucleotide exchangeable site ( E site ) on β - tubulin during polymerization ( see the figure in BOX 1 ) . The polymerization dynamics of microtubules are central to their biological functions : they allow micro - tubules to rapidly reorganize , to differentiate spatially and temporally in accordance with the cell context 16 , and to generate pushing and pulling forces during polymeri - zation and depolymerization , respectively 17 . Dynamic instability allows microtubules to search the cell’s three - dimensional space in order to find specific target sites on the cell periphery 18 , 19 . In the selective stabilization model , proposed by Kirschner and Mitchison 16 , envi - ronmental signals or factors located at the cell cortex capture and stabilize a select population of dynamic microtubules searching the cellular space , and this leads to cell asymmetry . Since this model was first proposed , cell polarization mediated by selective sta - bilization of microtubules has been described in many cell types , including neurons . Direct evidence for microtubule capture has been obtained by observing changes in the dynamic behaviour of microtubules at Laboratorio de Neurobiología Celular y Molecular , Instituto Investigación Médica Mercedes y Martín Ferreyra ( INIMEC - CONICET ) , Friuli 2434 , 5016 Córdoba , Argentina . Correspondence to A . C . e - mail : acaceres @ immf . uncor . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrn2631 Cell cortex The region of a cell that lies beneath the plasma membrane and contains a network of actin filaments and associated proteins . Microtubule capture The interaction between microtubules and components of the cell cortex that results in stabilization of the microtubules . Microtubule assembly , organization and dynamics in axons and dendrites Cecilia Conde and Alfredo Cáceres Abstract | During the past decade enormous advances have been made in our understanding of the basic molecular machinery that is involved in the development of neuronal polarity . Far from being mere structural elements , microtubules are emerging as key determinants of neuronal polarity . Here we review the current understanding of the regulation of microtubule assembly , organization and dynamics in axons and dendrites . These studies provide new insight into microtubules’ function in neuronal development and their potential contribution to plasticity . R E V I E W S NATURE REvIEwS | NeuroscieNce vOlUME 10 | MAy 2009 | 319 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Neuroscience Growing microtubule Paused microtubule ( neither polymerizing nor depolymerizing ) Shrinking microtubule b a Catastrophe Rescue Polymerization Depolymerization GTP GDP Tubulin dimer bound to GTP β - Tubulin α - Tubulin γ - Tubulin Tubulin dimer bound to GDP + end – end Cappingproteins 24 nm P i P i Microtubule severing A process through which enzymes break the lattice of the microtubule to generate multiple short microtubules that have the potential to move and reconfigure . cell cortical sites , and components of the microtubule capture machinery that is required for polarized growth have been identified 20 , 21 . Microtubule assembly and dynamics are further regulated by other components , including microtubule assembly - promoting factors , microtubule stabilizing factors ( such as structural or classical microtubule - associated proteins ( MAPs ) ) , microtubule destabilizing factors , microtubule severing proteins and microtubule - based motors of the kinesin and dynein superfamilies . Box 1 | Microtubules : the basics microtubules are non - covalent cytoskeletal polymers found in all eukaryotic cells that are involved in mitosis , cell motility , intracellular transport , secretion , the maintenance of cell shape and cell polarization . They are polarized structures composed of α - and β - tubulin heterodimer subunits assembled into linear protofilaments . A single microtubule is comprised of 10 – 15 protofilaments ( usually 13 in mammalian cells ) that associate laterally to form a 24 nm wide hollow cylinder ( see the figure ) 13 , 186 – 188 . The head - to - tail association of the αβ heterodimers makes microtubules polar structures , and they have different polymerization rates at the two ends . In each protofilament , the αβ heterodimers are oriented with their β - tubulin monomer pointing towards the faster - growing end ( plus end ) and their α - tubulin monomer exposed at the slower - growing end ( minus end ) . The lateral interaction between subunits of adjacent protofilaments has been described as a B - type lattice with a seam ( long arrow , part a in the figure ) . A third tubulin isoform , γ - tubulin , functions as a template for the correct assembly of microtubules 189 , 190 . On addition of a new dimer at the plus end , the catalytic domain of α - tubulin contacts the nucleotide exchangeable site ( E site ) of the previous β - subunit and becomes ready for hydrolysis ; the plus end generally has a minimum GTP cap of one tubulin layer that stabilizes the microtubule structure . When this GTP cap is stochastically lost , the protofilaments splay apart and the microtubule rapidly depolymerizes . During or soon after polymerization , the tubulin subunits hydrolyse their bound GTP and become non - exchangeable . Thus , the microtubule lattice is predominantly composed of GDP – tubulin , with depolymerization being characterized by the rapid loss of GDP – tubulin subunits and oligomers from the microtubule plus end . At the minus end , contact is made between the E site of the new dimer and the catalytic region of the last subunit at the end ; therefore , no GTP cap should be present . The properties of microtubules depend on the tubulin isoforms they are made up of — there are three α - tubulins ( α 1 , α 2 and α 4 ) and five β - tubulins ( β I , β II , β III , β IVa and β IVb ) — and on how they have been altered by various forms of post - translational modification , including tyrosination , detyrosination , acetylation , polyglutamylation , polyglycylation , phosphorylation and palmitoylation 14 , 191 – 193 . Except for tubulin tyrosine ligase , the enzyme that adds a tyrosine to non - assembled α - tubulin , most of the modifying enzymes act preferentially on tubulin subunits that are already incorporated into microtubules 192 , 193 . Post - translational modifications of tubulin subunits mark subpopulations of microtubules and selectively affect their functions . Although they are not directly involved in determining the dynamic properties of microtubules , post - translational modifications of tubulin , such as the sequential tyrosination - detyrosination - acetylation , correlate well with the half - life and spatial distribution of microtubules 194 – 196 . R E V I E W S 320 | MAy 2009 | vOlUME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Neuroscience Dendrite Soma Axon Central domain Peripheral domain Growth cone + + + – – + + – – + – + + Golgi outpost Golgi apparatusNucleus Microtubule MAP2 Polyribosomes Rough endoplasmicreticulum Ribosome Tau Microtubule Microtubule Golgi apparatus Nucleation The formation of new microtubules from α ‑ and β ‑tubulin heterodimers . It requires γ ‑tubulin protein complexes . Neuronal microtubules Microtubules form dense parallel arrays ( bundles ) in axons and dendrites that are required for the growth and maintenance of these neurites . This was initially inferred from ultrastructural analyses of microtubule organiza - tion in axons 22 , from pharmacological studies which demonstrated that microtubule depolymerizing drugs inhibit the growth of neurites and cause their retrac - tion 23 , 24 , and from biochemical studies which showed that microtubule mass increases in parallel with axonal and dendritic elongation 25 , 26 . However , microtubule organization differs between axons and dendrites in at least two major aspects ( FIG . 1 ) . First , orientation : axonal microtubules have uniform orientation , with their plus ends facing the axon tip , whereas dendritic microtubules have mixed orientation , with their plus ends facing either the cell body or the dendritic tip . Second , microtubules differ in their complement of MAPs : for example , MAP2 is found mostly in dendrites and tau is found mainly in axons . Neuronal microtubules are nucleated at the centro - some 27 , rapidly released by the action of the microtubule severing protein , katanin 28 – 30 , and then transported as short polymers into neurites by molecular motors 31 – 33 . Antibody blockade of the γ - tubulin isoform or katanin causes inhibition of axon outgrowth 28 , 34 . Furthermore , ninein , a protein that is present in the pericentriolar material and is involved in microtubule capture , is downregulated during neuronal development 35 . It has been proposed that the capacity of microtubules to move along axons is inversely proportional to their length , with only the shortest microtubules displaying rapid concerted motion 36 . Evidence for the transport of non - polymerized tubulin has also been obtained 37 , 38 , but the contribution of microtubule and tubulin trans - port to axonal microtubule organization is still a matter of debate . microtubule stabilization and axon specification . Ultrastructural and quantitative immunofluorescence analyses of the composition and dynamic properties of microtubules in cultured neurons have revealed that individual axonal microtubules consist of two distinct domains that differ in their content of post - translationally modified α - tubulin subunits and in their stability 39 , 40 ( BOX 2 ) . One domain that stains poorly for tyrosinated tubulin is enriched in detyrosinated tubulin ( Glu - tubulin ) and acetylated α - tubulin , is resistant to the microtubule depolymerizing agent nocodazole and has a long half - life ( t 1 / 2 > 2 h ) . The other domain stains strongly for tyrosinated tubulin , rapidly depolymerizes with nocodazole and has a short half - life ( t 1 / 2 < 5 min ) . The tyrosinated tubulin - rich domain is situated at the plus end of the tyrosine - poor domain , and the transition Figure 1 | Microtubule organization and organelle distribution in axons and dendrites . Axons have tau - bound microtubules of uniform orientation , whereas dendrites have microtubule - associated protein 2 ( MAP2 ) - bound microtubules of mixed orientation . Dendrites also contain organelles that are not found in axons , such as rough endoplasmic reticulum , polyribosomes and Golgi outposts . R E V I E W S NATURE REvIEwS | NeuroscieNce vOlUME 10 | MAy 2009 | 321 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Taxol A microtubule stabilizing agent and mitotic inhibitor used in cancer therapy . Lamellipodial veil A flattened and highly dynamic cell expansion that contains abundant branched and cross‑linked actin filaments . It is particularly prominent at the leading edge of migrating cells and growth cones . Actin ribs Short actin filament bundles that are radially oriented and abundant in small growth cones . Vinblastine A natural alkaloid that binds to tubulin and inhibits microtubule formation . between these two domains is quite abrupt . It is now accepted that the tyrosinated tubulin - rich domain assembles locally in the axon by elongating from the plus end of the stable domain . Spatial variations in the rela - tive content of tyrosinated and acetylated α - tubulin along individual microtubules reflect differences in their dynamic properties . In growing axons , the more dynamic polymer is highly concentrated at neuritic tips , whereas the more long - lived polymer predominates in the proximal axon 41 – 43 ( FIG . 2 ) . Attempts to correlate these observations with a specific role for selective microtubule stabilization in the establishment of neuronal polarity have been con - troversial until now . Early studies that analysed the distribution of dynamic and stable microtubules at the onset of neuronal polarization — when cells exhibit a symmetrical array of short neurites or minor processes ( stage 2 ) 44 , before one of them becomes specified as the axon ( stage 3 ) 44 — yielded contrasting results 45 – 47 . A recent study 48 assessed the ratio of stable to dynamic microtubules in minor processes of stage 2 hippo campal neurons . It found that one neurite exhibited a signifi - cantly higher ratio of stable to dynamic microtubules than the other neurites . These results suggest that , in morphologically unpolarized cells , microtubule sta - bilization in one neurite precedes axon formation 48 , 49 . Microtubule stabilization was sufficient to induce axon formation , as neurons treated with low doses of taxol extended axon - like neurites that displayed a high ratio of acetylated to tyrosinated tubulin , a proximo - distal tau gradient and an absence of MAP2 ( ReF . 48 ) . Moreover , selectively stabilizing microtubules in one neurite of unpolarized neurons by locally activating a membrane - permeable caged form of taxol at the growth cone or at the region adjacent to it resulted in axon formation 48 . Interestingly , photoactivation of caged taxol not only induced local microtubule stabilization , it also promoted the extension of newly polymerized microtubules to the distal part of the neurite , including the growth cone . In cultured hippocampal neurons , a major change that accompanies the transformation of a minor neu - rite into the future axon occurs at the growth cone . It involves an increase in growth cone size , the expan - sion of the peripheral lamellipodial veil , a shortening of actin ribs , increased actin dynamics , an increase in the number and length of recently assembled dynamic microtubules , and penetration of microtubules into the central and peripheral domains of the growth cone 50 – 52 . Increased membrane traffic has also been observed 50 . These stages of axon outgrowth have also been described as protrusion , engorgement and consolidation 11 , 53 . It is likely that stable microtubules are at the heart of these modifications . For example , stable microtubules might act as nucleation seeds for the microtubule assem - bly and protrusion that is required before and during axon outgrowth . They might also provide tracks for the preferential binding of microtubule - based motors transporting membrane - bound organelles and regula - tory macromolecular complexes 54 – 56 . In agreement with this latter suggestion , kinesin 1 preferentially binds to acetylated microtubules 56 , and the kinesin 1 motor domain ( when overexpressed ) accumulates in the future axon before morphological polarization occurs 57 . These observations are important given that a complex con - sisting of kinesin family member 5C ( KIF5C ) , a heavy chain of kinesin 1 , kinesin light chain 1 ( KlC1 ) and collapsin response mediator protein 2 ( CRMP2 ; also known as DPySl2 ) is involved in transporting tubulin heterodimers and oligomers to the tip of the growing axon 38 . CRMP2 is enriched at the distal part of grow - ing axons 58 , where it promotes the assembly of tubulin subunits onto the ends of existing microtubules and is required for axon formation 59 ( FIG . 2 ) . PI3K signalling also plays an important part in neuronal polarization 2 , 60 , 61 . Phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate - containing vesicles interact with guanylate kinase - associated kinesin ( GAKIN ; also known as KIF13B ) and accumulate at the tip of the future axon 62 ; the anterograde translocation of this kinesin family member might also involve a prefer - ential interaction with stable ( acetylated ) micro tubules . Finally , stable microtubules themselves may help to establish a landmark that is required for maintaining axonal identity in functionally polarized neurons 63 . Dynamic microtubules in growth cones . Axonal micro - tubule bundles splay on entering the growth cone , where individual dynamic microtubules display highly com - plex behaviours including splaying , looping , bending and bundling ( FIG . 2 ) . This remodelling and reorgani - zation of dynamic microtubules in the growth cone is required for persistent growth cone advance and axonal elongation , as well as for the recognition of guidance cues 64 , 65 . For example , low doses of vinblastine that do not affect the integrity of the existing axonal microtubule array , but that decrease microtubule dynamics , abolish Box 2 | Assessing microtubule dynamics in neurons Several methods have been used to asses the dynamic properties of neuronal microtubules . Stable and dynamic microtubules have been identified on the basis of their sensitivity to microtubule depolymerizing agents , such as nocodazole . In these and related experiments , stable and dynamic microtubules were distinguished through their content of post - translationally modified α - tubulin . microtubules that are rich in tyrosinated , detyrosinated or acetylated α - tubulin were visualized using specific antibodies and immunofluorescence or immunoelectron microscopy 39 , 40 . In some experiments , quantitative fluorescence techniques were used to measure the ratio of tyrosinated to detyrosinated or acetylated α - tubulin in the cell body and along neurites using detergent - extracted cytoskeletons 41 – 43 . In other studies , the dynamic behaviour of microtubules was visualized in living or fixed cells by conventional fluorescence microscopy after microinjection of fluorescein - or biotin - labelled tubulin 43 . more recently , fluorescence speckle microscopy ( FSm ) , an epifluorescence microscopy technique developed by Waterman - Storer in the late 1990s , has been used to analyse the dynamic properties of neuronal microtubules 197 . This technique is particularly useful for visualizing the movement , assembly – disassembly dynamics and turnover of macromolecular assemblies in living cells . In this method , low concentrations of fluorescently labelled tubulin subunits assemble with endogenous unlabelled subunits to generate structures with a speckled appearance . Changes in the pattern of fluorescence speckles correspond to the dynamics and movement of the system under analysis and can be quantified in space and time . In combination with total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy , another epifluorescence optical technique that is used to observe single molecule fluorescence at surfaces and interfaces , FSm has been used to analyse the dynamics of microtubule and actin filaments in neuronal growth cones . R E V I E W S 322 | MAy 2009 | vOlUME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Neuroscience Axon Dynein Tau Phosphorylated tau Splayed Looped Bundled P P Tau Phosphorylated tau Spastin Katanin Collateralbranch Microtubule P A R 6 a P K C Captured Polymerization Depolymerization GTP GDP Growing microtubule Shrinking microtubule MAP1B KIF2 Stathmin CRMP2 CRMP2 KIF5C C L I P 1 7 0 C L I P 1 7 0 I Q G A P 1 M D I A E B 1 E B 1 P A R 3 E B 1 A P C A P C Kinesin II ? Dynein Membrane E B 1 CLASP1 or 2 E B 3 Drebrin + + – – Centrosome Golgi apparatus Katanin Microtubule Minor processes a d b c e Nucleus Golgi apparatus Membrane Actin LIS1 Figure 2 | Microtubule organization in developing axons . The organization and regulation of microtubules in a stage 3 hippocampal pyramidal neuron . Dynamic ( blue ) microtubules predominate in minor processes ( short , unbranched neurites ) and at the distal end of the axon and collateral branches , whereas stable ( purple ) microtubules are enriched in the proximal part of the axon . Inset a shows katanin - mediated release of microtubules nucleated at the centrosome . Short polymers are transported along microtubules by motors such as dynein . Inset b shows the transport of tubulin dimers or oligomers to the growth cone by a complex of kinesin family member 5C ( KIF5C ) and collpasin response mediator protein 2 ( CRMP2 ; also known as DPYSL2 ) . On entering the axonal growth cone microtubules splay , bend , loop , bundle or get captured at the cell cortex . Inset c illustrates the dynamic behaviour of splayed microtubules . Proteins such as CRMP2 promote microtubule assembly , whereas microtubule - associated protein 1B ( MAP1B ) contributes to the maintenance of microtubule dynamics and KIF2 and stathmin induce microtubule depolymerization . Inset d shows the protein machinery that is involved in microtubule capture ( see also Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . Inset e shows how tau protects microtubules from katanin - induced severing , thereby contributing to microtubule stabilization and preventing excessive collateral branching . In the axon shaft , the formation of collateral branches is regulated by the action of microtubule severing proteins such as spastin . APC , adenomatous polyposis coli ; aPKC , atypical protein kinase C ( also known as PRKCI ) ; CLASP , cytoplasmic linker associated protein ; CLIP170 , CAP - GLY domain containing linker protein 170 ( also known as CLIP1 ) ; EB , end - binding protein ; IQGAP1 , IQ motif containing GTPase activating protein 1 . R E V I E W S NATURE REvIEwS | NeuroscieNce vOlUME 10 | MAy 2009 | 323 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Cytochalasin D A cell‑permeable and potent inhibitor of actin polymerization . axonal elongation ; the microtubules remain locked in a non - dynamic array that does not proceed through the subsequent step of microtubule bundling , which is essential for the formation of a new axonal segment 65 . It was proposed that a population of pioneer dynamic microtubules that can invade the growth cone lamellipo - dial veil acts as a guide for further invasion by micro - tubules carrying organelles ; this in turn would allow further consolidation of the axon . Analysis of micro - tubule behaviour in living growth cones has revealed that the generation of the various microtubule configu - rations seems to reflect the relationship between the rate of microtubule extension and the rate of growth cone advance 64 . For example , when microtubules are splayed the amount of polymer in the growth cone seems to remain constant and the rate of polymer translocation matches the rate of growth cone advance . By contrast , when microtubules become looped the rate of polymer translocation exceeds the rate of growth cone advance and in many cases this looped morphology is observed when growth cones are in a paused state . Microtubule looping could result from the continuous polymeriza - tion of tubulin in a paused growth cone , which could cause microtubules to bend backwards when they reach the leading edge , or from a failure to get captured at the growth cone cell cortex . Microtubule bundling can occur through the coalescence of splayed microtubules or through the extension of a pre - existing bundle or loop of microtubules ; during microtubule bundling the rate of growth cone advance exceeds that of microtubule translocation 64 . Finally , it is important to consider that a major function of microtubules in growth cones may be to act as sensors of cellular conditions rather than as mere structural scaffolds . By extending in various direc - tions in the actin - rich peripheral domain , some micro - tubules interact with components of the cell cortex to activate signalling pathways required for regulating actin dynamics and axonal growth . Regulation of microtubule dynamics The observations described above strongly suggest that microtubule dynamics should be a major target of sig - nalling pathways that regulate neuronal polarization . In fact , an increasing number of organelles and molecular systems have been identified that may allow for a precise spatial and temporal regulation of neuronal microtubule dynamics . The centrosome . In several non - neuronal cells the cen - trosome and the Golgi apparatus ( GA ) are reoriented to a position between the leading edge and the nucleus during polarized migration 66 , 67 . This reorientation may be required for establishing a polarized microtubule network , as well as for the directed and polarized flow of membrane and polarity proteins . Early studies by Dotti and Banker revealed no correlation between the positioning of the centrosome and GA and the site of origin of the axon 47 . live - cell image analyses of retinal ganglion cells in zebrafish confirmed this observation 68 . However , studies in cultured granule cells 69 and in pio - neering neurons of the grasshopper 70 demonstrated a correlation between centrosome positioning and the site of axon origin . Recently , Dotti and co - workers showed that blocking the cytokinesis of neuroblasts present in hippocampal cultures from embryonic day ( E ) 16 rat embryos with cytochalasin D , which induces two centrosomes , led to the formation of neurons with two long axon - like neurites 71 . Conversely , micro - chromophore - assisted laser inactivation of the centro - some in Drosophila melanogaster neurons impaired axon formation 71 . Thus , appropriate positioning of the centrosome – GA complex might have an instructive , facilitatory role in axon specification . However , when neurite outgrowth is generated several hours after the last mitosis , the positioning of the centrosome may not be important for initial neuronal polarization . In the absence of cell division orientation mechanisms , axon formation might proceed at a much slower rate , which would explain the prolonged ‘tug of war’ among minor neurites that has been described in stage 2 hippocam - pal neurons obtained from E18 embryos 72 . Although no mechanisms for centrosome reorientation have been described in early postmitotic neurons , it is possible that it could involve microtubule capture events similar to those described in budding yeast and migrating cells . An obvious candidate to anchor microtubules and generate pulling forces on them that could reorient the centro - some is the minus end - directed motor complex dynein and its regulators ( reviewed in ReF . 67 ) . If dynein did have this role , such a mechanism would probably rely on plus end - associated protein complexes tightly controlling microtubule dynamics at the cell cortex . microtubule plus end tracking proteins ( + TIPs ) . + TIPs are proteins that associate and specifically accumulate at the plus ends of microtubules , allowing control of micro - tubule dynamics , growth directionality and interactions with components of the cell cortex ( Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) 73 – 85 . Recent studies have shown the importance of + TIPs in neurite extension and axon outgrowth ( FIG . 2d ) . In cultured hippocampal pyramidal neurons , adenomatous polyposis coli ( APC ) initially localizes to the growth cones of all minor neurites but then becomes enriched at the tip of the future axon , before this neurite grows considerably longer than the others 86 . APC localization to the tip of the prospective axon is required for the proper targeting of PAR3 to the axonal growth cone , where its interaction with PAR6 and atypical protein kinase C ( aPKC ; also known as PRKCI ) is required for neuronal polarization 87 . Expression of APC or end - binding protein 1 ( EB1 ; also known as MAPRE1 ) mutants , which results in sequestration of APC from the axon tip , or APC depletion by RNA inter - ference ( RNAi ) markedly inhibits axon outgrowth in cul - tured neurons , possibly by interfering with micro tubule capture mechanisms at the cell cortex 88 , 89 . However , it should be noted that APC might not be required for polarization in all neurons : complete knockdown of APCs in D . melanogaster neurons does not affect axon outgrowth or targeting 4 , 90 . EB1 and EB3 have been found throughout neurons on microtubule plus ends . EB1 is upregulated during R E V I E W S 324 | MAy 2009 | vOlUME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Retrograde actin flow Myosin‑driven , retrograde ( relative to the substratum ) movement of actin filaments in lamellipodia ; it has a role in cell motility and growth cone advance . axon formation 91 and there is some evidence which suggests that it is required for axon elongation in hip - pocampal neurons 92 . A recent study showed that the actin binding protein drebrin binds to EB3 but not EB1 and is enriched in growth cone filopodia 93 . when the EB3 – drebrin interaction was disrupted , growth cone formation and neurite extension were impaired . These results suggest that drebrin targets EB3 to coordinate filamentous actin – microtubule interactions during neurite formation 93 . lIS1 ( also known as PAFAH1B1 ) has also been impli - cated in neuronal and non - neuronal migration 94 , 95 and axon formation 96 . RNAi - mediated reduction of lIS1 or injection of antibodies against lIS1 delays the onset of polarization , alters growth cone shape and decreases microtubule bundling . Although lIS1 inhibition has no effect on microtubule assembly , it does reduce the abil - ity of microtubules to penetrate into the growth cone peripheral domain and increases microtubule pauses . It has been proposed that in rapidly growing axons lIS1 , acting in concert with dynein , accumulates at the cell cortex , where it interacts with assembling microtubules to allow them to resist retrograde actin flow and penetrate the growth cone peripheral domain 96 . Doublecortin ( DCX ) , a MAP that is enriched at the tip of growing neurites , has also been implicated in microtubule bundling 97 and axon formation . Dcx dele - tion in mice results in excessively branched axonal shafts in developing neurons 98 , 99 . Branching is initiated at the axonal growth cone and shaft when microtubules splay apart , allowing shorter microtubules to invade nascent actin - rich areas . Therefore , it is likely that failure to maintain bundled microtubules underlies the excessive branching that is observed in DCX - knockout animals . DCX interacts with spinophilin ( SPN ; also known as PPP1R9B ) , an actin binding protein that can bundle actin filaments and target protein phosphatase 1 ( PP1 ) to the transition zone between the axon shaft and the growth cone , where it dephosphorylates and activates DCX 100 . It has been proposed that DCX , SPN and PP1 are part of the machinery that is involved in the transi - tion from splayed to bundled microtubules and that has a role in the consolidation phase of axon formation . microtubule severing proteins . Another way in which neuronal microtubules could be remodelled during axonal growth is by severing , which is prominent at the centrosome 27 but has also been detected at the growth cone 101 and at axonal branch points 102 . Katanin , which consists of a P60 and a P80 subunit , severs microtubules from the centrosome but , as it is widely distributed throughout the neuron , probably also severs micro - tubules elsewhere . levels of katanin are high during axon growth but diminish when axons reach their targets 29 . Expression of dominant - negative p60 katanin inhibits microtubule severing and impairs axonal outgrowth in cultured neurons ; conversely , overexpression of p60 katanin results in excess microtubule severing , which is also deleterious for axonal growth 29 . Interestingly , over - expression of p80 katanin caused an increase in process number , suggesting that a mild increase in microtubule severing reconfigures the microtubule array to promote the formation of more axons ; however , collateral branch - ing is unaltered 30 . This last observation is intriguing , as serial electron microscopic and live - cell imaging studies have provided evidence for local microtubule severing at axonal branch points 101 , 102 . Spastin is another micro - tubule severing protein ; its function is primarily related to microtubule reconfiguration at branch points 103 – 105 . Spastin overexpression dramatically enhances branch formation , whereas depletion of spastin results in a fairly modest decrease in axon length but a dramatic reduction in collateral branch formation 106 . Interestingly , katanin’s microtubule severing activity and associated axonal branching have been reported after tau depletion 107 . This suggests that there are at least two modes of branch formation by microtubule severing , one based on the local concentration of spastin and another based on the detachment of tau ( which normally protects micro - tubules from the severing activity of p60 katanin ) from microtubules ( FIG . 2 ) . microtubule destabilizing proteins . Proteins that act as microtubule destabilizers have also been identified in neurons . Among these are stathmin , superior cervical ganglia neural - specific 10 protein ( SCG10 ; also known as STMN2 ) and SCG10 - like protein ( SClIP ; also known as STMN3 ) 108 . Although these three proteins are highly related in structure , stathmin has a cytosolic distribu - tion whereas SCG10 and SClIP are found in the Golgi area , along neurites and enriched in growth cones 108 , 109 . Stathmin and SCG10 increase the rate of microtubule catastrophes , either through tubulin sequestration or by acting at microtubule ends 108 , 110 . It has been proposed that the growth cone localization of SCG10 might antagonize microtubule stabilizing factors , such as structural MAPs , to promote microtubule dynamics . Indeed , recent studies have shown that loss of SCG10 function reduced neurite extension and growth cone motility , phenomena that are associated with growth cone expansion and a greater pro - portion of looped microtubules 111 , 112 . By contrast , SClIP downregulation specifically enhanced axonal branching , independently of SCG10 112 . Following SClIP RNAi , neu - rons display filopodia extending from the axonal shafts that contain fragmented acetylated microtubules at their bases and are filled by splayed dynamic microtubules . The mechanisms that underlie the different effects of SCG10 and SClIP in neurite formation are currently not well understood , but they may reflect interactions with different partners or differential phosphorylation 112 . Another microtubule destabilizing protein that is involved in regulating axonal collateral branching is KIF2A , a member of the kinesin 13 family 32 . Originally identified as a plus end molecular motor that is expressed in juvenile brain tissue , enriched in growth cones and associated with a subpopulation of non - synaptic vesi - cles , it was later demonstrated that members of this kinesin superfamily depolymerize microtubules using the energy from ATP hydrolysis ( reviewed in ReF . 32 ) . Interestingly , KIF2A - null mice display aberrant axonal growth due to overextension of collateral branches and decreased microtubule depolymerization at growth R E V I E W S NATURE REvIEwS | NeuroscieNce vOlUME 10 | MAy 2009 | 325 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Actin arcs Arc‑shaped actin filament bundles that are found at the transition zone between the central and peripheral domains of growth cones . Actin arcs undergo myosin II‑driven contraction to compress and bundle microtubules in the growth cone central domain . cones 113 . It was postulated that KIF2 might depolymer - ize individual microtubules and control their dynamics at the growth cone edge ( FIG . 2 ) . Structural mAPs . MAP1B and tau proteins ( reviewed in ReFS 114 , 115 ) were among the first proteins to be implicated in regulating microtubule organization and dynamics and neuronal polarization 116 – 118 . Despite the controversy that arose from early studies 116 – 121 , a con - sensus finally emerged that both MAP1B and tau are required for axon formation , but that there is functional redundancy between them 122 , 123 . Structural MAPs have other important functions beyond their ability to directly stabilize microtubules . For example , tau pro - tects microtubules from katanin - induced microtubule severing 107 and interacts with components of the actin subcortical cytoskeleton 124 . In the case of MAP1B , there is evidence suggesting functional redundancy between phosphorylated MAP1B and EB1 ( ReF . 92 ) , an interaction with tubulin tyrosine ligase 125 and involvement in the maintenance of a dynamic population of growth cone microtubules 49 , 126 . Kinases . It has now been demonstrated that a signalling pathway that is locally activated at the growth cone and controlled by PI3K is involved in axon specification 2 , 3 , 60 . Glycogen synthase kinase 3 ( GSK3 ) is a downstream effector of PI3K that phosphorylates proteins involved in regulating microtubule dynamics and microtubule - based transport . Experimentally induced alterations of GSK3 profoundly affect neuronal morphology in culture . These studies have yielded contradictory results , with some showing that inhibition of GSK3 activity impaired axon outgrowth 87 , 88 , 127 – 129 and others showing that it enhanced axon formation 88 , 130 – 132 . Two recent studies have stressed the importance of dosage , targeting , sub - strate and timing for reconciling this controversy 133 , 134 . Strong knockdown of both GSK3 isoforms ( GSK3α and GSK3β ) markedly reduced axon growth in dissoci - ated cultures and slice preparations , whereas localized inactivation of both GSK3 isoforms at the distal axon led to efficient axon elongation and partial inactivation of axon branching 133 . Some GSK3 substrates , like APC and CRMP2 , require a priming kinase and are inactivated by GSK3 - mediated phosphorylation , whereas others , like MAP1B , do not require a priming kinase and are activated by GSK3 - mediated phosphorylation . Thus , when GSK3 is locally inactivated near the growth cone , presumably by PI3K - mediated phosphorylation , APC and CRMP2 bind to microtubule ends or tubulin subunits , promoting micro - tubule capture and assembly ; this local inactivation pre - serves GSK3’s effects on MAP1B , favouring micro tubule dynamics 133 . By contrast , strong global GSK3 inhibition may produce excessive microtubule stability all along the axon owing to inhibition of MAP1B and redistribution of APC to the axonal shaft . However , additional studies are required as this scheme does not take into account other important substrates or regulators of GSK3 , such as the kinesin light chain 135 and the phosphatase PTEN 130 . Many other kinases are important for regulat - ing microtubule dynamics and neuronal polarization . Two recent studies have shown that accumulation of the serine and threonine kinase lKB1 ( also known as STK11 ) and its interacting partner STRAD in a minor neurite predicts axonal fate 136 and that downregulation of either lKB1 or STRAD prevents axon differentiation , whereas their overexpression leads to multiple axon for - mation 136 , 137 . One mechanism by which lKB1 – STRAD could regulate neuronal polarization involves phospho - rylation and activation of SADA ( also known as BRSK2 ) and SADB ( also known as BRSK1 ) 138 , two PAR1 ( also known as MARK2 ) - related kinases that are required for neuronal polarization and that phosphorylate sev - eral MAPs , including tau 139 . Another mechanism might involve modulation of aPKC phosphorylation and inac - tivation of GSK3β at the growth cone 136 , or inhibition of PAR1 ( ReFS 139 , 140 ) . The JUN N - terminal kinase ( JNK ) family of mitogen - activated protein kinases ( MAPKs ) is highly enriched in the nervous system and has been implicated in regulat - ing brain development . JNK1 ( also known as MAPK8 ) - deficient mice display a progressive loss of axonal and dendritic microtubules . In addition , MAP1B and MAP2 are hypophosphorylated in JNK1 – / – brains , which com - promises their ability to bind to microtubules and pro - mote their assembly and stability 141 . More recently it has been shown that JNK1 phosphorylates SCG10 and nega - tively regulates its microtubule destabilizing activity 142 . Thus , by regulating SCG10 activity , JNK1 may play an important part in maintaining microtubule stability and efficient neurite elongation . microtubule – actin interactions and Rho GTPase signalling . There is mounting evidence that actin fila - ments significantly influence the dynamic properties of microtubules , and that reciprocal interactions between these cytoskeletal elements are important for axon speci - fication , guidance and elongation 3 , 11 . Studies in Aplysia growth cones using fluorescence speckle microscopy and total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy ( TIRFM ) have allowed the direct visualization of actin filament and microtubule dynamics , and established a crucial role for actin dynamics and myosin - dependent contractility in regulating microtubule bundling during growth cone advance 143 , 144 ( FIG . 3 ) . These studies showed that laterally moving actin arcs interact with growing microtubules , moving and compressing microtubules from the sides of the growth cone into the central domain for initial bundling . After myosin II inhibition , micro - tubules spread out and unbundle , suggesting that actin – myosin II contractility does not cause stable microtubule crosslinking 144 but rather is an initial step required for subsequent MAP - mediated stable microtubule bun - dling in the growth cone neck during consolidation of the axon shaft 100 . Members of the Rho family of small GTPases , including Rho , Rac and CDC42 , seem to be major players in regulating the crosstalk between actin and microtubules in developing neurons . For example , the Rho – Rho kinase ( RHOK ; also known as GRK1 ) signal - ling pathway is directly involved in promoting actin con - tractility 145 and myosin II - driven microtubule bundling R E V I E W S 326 | MAy 2009 | vOlUME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Neuroscience Consolidation of microtubule bundling Splayed growing microtubule Actin arc contractility Growth cone advance Myosin II DOCK7 Rac GTP Rac GDP ? ? Rho GTP RHOK Stathmin TIAM and STEF Actin PAR3 PAR6aPKC GEF - H1a GEF - H1a GEF - H1a GEF - H1a GEF - H1i GEF - H1i during consolidation 144 . During the initial stages of neu - rite extension , inhibition of the Rho – RHOK pathway might promote growth by reducing the actin barrier that prevents microtubule advance towards the growth cone peripheral domain 146 ; indeed , RHOK inhibition induces multiple axon formation in hippocampal neurons 146 . It has also been shown that RHOK phosphorylates and inhibits STEF ( also known as TIAM2 ) and TIAM1 , two guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) for Rac that associate with microtubules and are crucially involved in axon formation 52 , 147 – 149 , as well as PAR3 , disrupting the polarity complex 149 . GEF - H1 ( also known as ARHGEF2 ) is a Rho GEF that associates with microtubules and becomes active on microtubule depolymerization 150 ; in cultured hippocampal pyramidal neurons , suppression of lFC , the murine homologue of GEF - H1 , enhances axon formation ( C . C . , C . H . Sung & A . C . , unpublished observations ) . DOCK7 , another GEF for Rac , induces multiple axon formation when over expressed and prevents axon formation when it is knocked down 151 . DOCK7 - mediated Rac activation leads to phosphoryla - tion and inactivation of stathmin 151 . Thus , a feedback loop involving the opposing effects of Rho and Rac ( acting through microtubule - associated GEFs ) and the regulation of microtubule and actin dynamics could be crucial during axon specification ( FIG . 3 ) . GTPase activating proteins ( GAPs ) also participate in neuronal polarization . Tuberous sclerosis complex 2 ( TSC2 ) is a GAP for the RHEB GTPase , which is an activator for mammalian target of rapamycin ( mTOR ; also known as FRAP1 ) and associates with TSC1 . Overexpression of TSC1 – TSC2 suppresses axon forma - tion , whereas a lack of the TSC complex produces ectopic axons in cultured neurons and in vivo . Inactivation of TSC1 – TSC2 promotes axonal growth by upregulating the activity of SAD and tau phosphorylation 152 . It is worth noting that active PI3K and AKT phosphorylate and inactivate TSC2 . Thus , TSC2 might mediate the effect of trophic factors , such as IGF1 ( ReF . 2 ) , on neuro - nal polarization 152 . TCTEX - 1 ( also known as DyNlT1 ) , a dynein light chain , has also been proposed to act as a linker between microtubules and the actin cytoskeleton , promoting Rac activation and axon outgrowth by as yet undefined mechanisms 153 . Regulation of microtubules in dendrites So far , we have mostly discussed the roles of microtubules in axons ; now we turn our attention to the distinct fea - tures of microtubules in dendrites and their contribu - tion to dendritic development . As mentioned above , the orientation of microtubules in dendrites is one of the key features that distinguish them from axons . The presence Figure 3 | Microtubule – actin interactions in axonal growth cones . A simplified microtubule – actin feedback loop regulating axon consolidation and growth cone advance . During consolidation , a Rho – Rho kinase ( RHOK ; also known as GRK1 ) signalling pathway phosphorylates myosin II , promoting actin arc contractility and microtubule bundling . RHOK phosphorylates and inactivates PAR3 , disrupting the Par polarity complex as well as the activity of the Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) TIAM1 and STEF ( also known as TIAM2 ) . Conversely , DOCK7 - mediated Rac activation leads to phosphorylation and inactivation of stathmin ; this could prevent GEF - H1 ( also known as ARHGEF2 ) - induced activation of the Rho – RHOK signalling pathway and break this loop , tipping the balance in favour of Rac 150 , 151 . This inhibition of Rho – RHOK signalling promotes the formation of the PAR3 – PAR6 – atypical protein kinase ( aPKC ; also known as PRKCI ) polarity complex , which in turn could activate TIAM1 or STEF , further enhancing Rac activity , growth cone lamellipodial expansion , microtubule penetration and splaying , and growth cone advance 3 . Thus , control of the on – off switching and direction of this loop ( towards either Rho or Rac ) could allow switching from growing to consolidation phases during neurite extension , and vice versa . Pointed arrows indicate positive regulation ; blunt arrows indicate negative regulation . R E V I E W S NATURE REvIEwS | NeuroscieNce vOlUME 10 | MAy 2009 | 327 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Hairpin microtubule loop A looped portion of microtubule in a stable synaptic bouton . Disassembly of hairpin microtubule loops is associated with boutons undergoing division or with sites of sprouting . Synaptic bouton A button‑like terminal enlargement of an axon that contains synaptic vesicles filled with neurotransmitters . of distal microtubules oriented so that their minus ends point to the dendritic tip correlates with the acquisition of many distinctive features of dendritic morphology and organelle distribution , suggesting that there is a mechanistic link between microtubule organization and the distinct features of dendrites . Several studies have raised the possibility that neurons use motor - driven transport events to differentially organize the orientation of axonal and dendritic microtubules 154 – 156 . The mitotic microtubule - based motor CHO1 ( also known as KIF23 and MKlP1 ) is enriched in dendrites and is required for the establishment of the dendritic microtubule array 154 . More importantly , suppression of CHO1 using antisense oligonucleotides inhibited dendritic differentiation , with arrested dendrites acquiring axonal features and micro - tubules of uniform polarity 154 , 155 . The microtubule minus end - based motor dynein has also been shown to have a crucial role in organizing dendritic arbors and the uni - form orientation of axonal microtubules 156 : mutations in components of the dynein complex in D . melanogaster dendritic arborization ( da ) neurons cause a proximal shift in the distribution of branch points and dendritic organelles ( such as Golgi outposts ) . These mutations cause dendritic cargo to be mislocalized to axons and lead to a mixed orientation of axonal microtubules . Structural MAPs , such as MAP2 and MAP1A , have also been implicated in dendritic differentiation and maintenance . High molecular weight ( HMw ) - MAP2 preferentially associates with dendritic microtubules , as a result of differential protein sorting , stability and local synthesis 114 , 157 . MAP2 binds along the sides of microtubules and contributes to their stabilization by crosslinking adjacent microtubules 157 . Overexpression of HMw - MAP2 induces the extension of dendrite - like processes in non - neuronal cells , whereas MAP2 deple - tion in primary cultured neurons prevents dendritic dif - ferentiation ( reviewed in ReF . 157 ) . In accordance with this , MAP2 - deficient mice display a reduction in den - drite length 158 , and deletion of the first 158 amino acids from the projection domain of HMw - MAP2 alters den - dritic morphology in hippocampal neurons 159 . Although these phenotypes may reflect a loss of dendritic micro - tubule stability , adult MAP2 - deficient mice showed only a moderate reduction of microtubule density 158 ; this is not surprising given the functional redundancy that exists between MAP2 and MAP1B 160 . Other studies sug - gested that HMw - MAP2 might have additional func - tions at the surface of microtubules , by interacting with signalling proteins involved in dendritic remodelling and synaptic plasticity ( reviewed in ReF . 157 ) . HMw - MAP2 might also contribute to segregating organelles , such as rough endoplasmic reticulum , to dendrites 161 . Kinases that phosphorylate MAP2 , such as JNK1 , are also crucially involved in dendritic differentiation 141 , 157 . MAP1A , which is enriched in mature dendrites and is structurally related to MAP1B , is also important for dendritic growth and activity - driven dendritic remod - elling 162 . MAP1A depletion does not affect the elon - gation of primary dendrites , but it does significantly inhibit activity - induced dendritic branching and results in dendritic retraction . Although the mechanisms that underlie these effects are not fully understood , it is worth noting that MAP1A mediates interactions between microtubules and actin , and also binds components of the postsynaptic density ( reviewed in ReF . 115 ) . Finally , downregulation of both the expression levels and the activity of the microtubule destabilizing protein stath - min is important for normal dendritic arborization in cultured Purkinje cells ; stathmin downregulation is mediated by neuronal activity and calcium / calmodu - lin - dependent protein kinase II ( CAMKII ) phosphor - ylation 163 . Interestingly , CAMKII also phosphorylates MAP2 , increasing its binding to microtubules 164 . Thus , stathmin and MAP2 could both mediate the regulation of microtubule stability by CAMKII that is required for dendritic growth and branching . Regulation of microtubules at synapses The regulation of microtubule organization and dynam - ics has been extensively studied during axon and den - drite formation and maintenance . By contrast , much less is known about the regulation of microtubule dynamics in synaptic terminals . Most of our current knowledge derives from studies of the D . melanogaster neuromus - cular junction . Data from this model system have estab - lished that the conversion of a motile growth cone into a presynaptic terminal is associated with the appearance of a hairpin microtubule loop in the growth cone 165 ( FIG . 4 ) . Microtubules are found in stable synaptic boutons . Several MAPs and signalling pathways have been shown to regu - late microtubule loop formation during synaptogenesis . For example , the cytoskeleton - associated D . melanogaster futsch protein associates with microtubules and is neces - sary for the organization of synaptic microtubules ( FIG . 4 ) . Two homozygous mutations in futsch alter synaptic growth and disrupt both microtubule localization and loop formation 165 , 166 . Bouton division and subsequent terminal branching induced by external factors also require futsch expression 165 . futsch seems to be under the control of the Bazooka ( the D . melanogaster homologue of PAR3 ) - PAR6 - aPKC complex 167 that , in mammalian neurons , is required for axon specification 60 . In fact , expression of a dominant - negative mutant of D . mela - nogaster aPKC ( DN - PKM ) resulted in a phenotype similar to that of futsch mutants ; more importantly , the effect of DN - PKM was dependent on futsch expression , as pre synaptic PKM overexpression did not rescue the increased microtubule fragmentation that is observed in futsch mutants 167 . This study also showed that aPKC mutants have alterations in synaptic efficacy , and that the synaptic localization of Bazooka and PAR6 depends on aPKC expression . A signalling pathway involving wG ( also known as wNT ) and SGG ( also known as GSK3 ) has also been shown to regulate futsch protein binding to microtubules and the assembly of the neuro muscular junction . loss of either wg or sgg leads to changes in fut - sch protein localization and to a decrease in splayed and looped microtubules at synaptic boutons 168 , 169 ( FIG . 4 ) . A similar pathway regulating presynaptic remodelling has been described in the zebrafish retinotectal projection and in mammalian cerebellar mossy fibres ( reviewed in ReF . 170 ) . R E V I E W S 328 | MAy 2009 | vOlUME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Neuroscience Plastic ( dynamic ) Stable Synapse formation Motile ( dynamic ) Paused Synapse formation a Drosophila melanogaster b Mammalian MAP1B Phosphorylated MAP1B P GSK3 β Wnt Wnt Microtubule ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? Synaptic vesicle Futsch B A Z P a r 6 a P K C B A Z P A R 6 a P K C B A Z P A R 6 a P K C Futsch Microtubule MAP1B D - spastin WG Another protein that regulates synaptic micro tubule stability at the neuromuscular junction is spastin . D . mel - anogaster Spastin ( D - Spastin ) is enriched in axons and is highly abundant in presynaptic terminals . RNAi suppression of D - Spastin causes a severe reduction of synaptic area , enhances synaptic strength and leads to an increase in stable and looped microtubules at synap - tic terminals ; by contrast , overexpression of D - Spastin reduces synaptic efficacy and causes loss of acetylated ( stable ) microtubules 171 ( FIG . 4 ) . At postsynaptic spines the role of microtubules has been largely disregarded , as most light and electron microscopic studies have failed to detect their presence or that of MAPs here 172 , 173 . However , a few electron micro - scopic studies have provided evidence for the presence of microtubules 174 – 176 and MAP2 ( ReF . 177 ) . Although some of these observations have been considered possible arte - facts , three recent studies using live confocal imaging and TIRFM have reported that dynamic microtubules rapidly invade dendritic spines 178 – 180 . They showed that increasing neuronal activity enhanced both the number of spines invaded by microtubules and the time that the micro - tubules spent in the spines 179 , and that EB3 knockdown significantly reduced the number of spines in cultured hippocampal neurons 178 , 180 . Together , these observations show that synaptic architecture and function are sensitive to changes in microtubule dynamics . Additional studies are required to understand the relationship between microtubule dynamics , synapse formation and functional plasticity in mammalian neurons 31 , 32 , 181 . Conclusions and future directions During the past decade enormous advances have been made in our understanding of the basic molecular machinery involved in the development of neuronal polarity . However , most of these studies have been car - ried out in cultured neurons . Regulators of microtubule and actin dynamics have emerged as crucial players in this phenomenon . One of the major challenges for future studies will be to assign specific functions to the Figure 4 | regulation of the synaptic microtubule cytoskeleton . A regulated microtubule architecture seems to be an essential element in the control of growth cone morphology and motility as well as synapse formation . a | During synaptic bouton formation at the Drosophila melanogaster neuromuscular junction , the irregular and highly variable branched microtubule array is indicative of an actively growing ( plastic or dynamic ) terminal . By contrast , the assembly of microtubule loops correlates with an arrest in synaptic bouton division ( panels titled ‘stable’ and ‘synapse formation’ ) . The enlargement shows a bouton during synapse formation , illustrating that Futsch co - localizes with microtubules . Futsch is necessary for organizing and stabilizing synaptic microtubule loops . The active zone domain contains the machinery for neurotransmitter release , including synaptic vesicles . Peri - active zones contain proteins that play a part in modulating synaptic microtubule stability ( for example , WG and D - spastin ) . The BAz – PAR6 – atypical protein kinase C ( aPKC ; also known as PRKCI ) complex regulates microtubule stability by promoting the association of Futsch with microtubules . b | In the mammalian growth cone , similar microtubule loops ( panels titled ‘paused’ and ‘synapse formation’ ) , which could be involved in synapse formation , have been observed 165 , 166 . The control of microtubule organization by microtubule - associated protein 1B ( MAP1B ) might represent a mechanism for regulating growth cone motility and synaptic growth . Phosphorylation of MAP1B by glycogen synthase kinase 3 β ( GSK3 β ) seems to maintain microtubules in the dynamic state that is necessary for growth cone motility and advance . As in D . melanogaster , the Wnt signalling pathway has been shown to modulate microtubule dynamics : Wnt signalling inhibits GSK3 β to maintain microtubules in a stable and looped conformation . R E V I E W S NATURE REvIEwS | NeuroscieNce vOlUME 10 | MAy 2009 | 329 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 1 . Craig , A . M . & Banker , G . Neuronal polarity . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 17 , 267 – 310 ( 1994 ) . 2 . Sosa , L . et al . IGF‑1 receptor is essential for the establishment of hippocampal neuronal polarity . Nature Neurosci . 9 , 993 – 995 ( 2006 ) . 3 . Arimura , N . & Kaibuchi , K . Neuronal polarity : from extracellular signals to intracellular mechanisms . Nature Rev . Neurosci . 8 , 194 – 205 ( 2007 ) . 4 . Barnes , A . P . , Solecki , D . & Polleux , F . New insights into the molecular mechanisms specifying neuronal polarity in vivo . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 18 , 44 – 52 ( 2008 ) . 5 . Luo , L . Rho GTPases in neuronal morphogenesis . Nature Rev . Neurosci . 1 , 173 – 179 ( 2000 ) . 6 . Da Silva , J . S . & Dotti , C . G . Breaking the neuronal sphere : regulation of the actin cytoskeleton in neuritogenesis . Nature Rev . Neurosci . 3 , 694 – 704 ( 2002 ) . 7 . Jan , Y . N . & Jan , L . Y . The control of dendritic development . Neuron 40 , 229 – 242 ( 2003 ) . 8 . Govek , E . E . , Newey , S . E . & Van Aelst , L . The role of Rho GTPases in neuronal development . Genes Dev . 19 , 1 – 49 ( 2005 ) . 9 . Wiggin , G . R . , Fawcett , J . P . & Pawson , T . Polarity proteins in axon specification and synaptogenesis . Dev . Cell 8 , 803 – 816 ( 2005 ) . 10 . Baas , P . W . Neuronal polarity : microtubules strike back . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 194 – 195 ( 2002 ) . An excellent short review that shifted attention to microtubules as key regulators of neuronal polarization . 11 . Dent , E . W . & Gentler , F . Cytoskeletal dynamics and transport in growth cone motility and axon guidance . Neuron 40 , 209 – 227 ( 2003 ) . 12 . Witte , H . & Bradke , F . The role of the cytoskeleton during neuronal polarization . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 18 , 1 – 9 ( 2008 ) . 13 . Desai , A . & Mitchison , T . Microtubule polymerization dynamics . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 13 , 83 – 117 ( 1997 ) . 14 . Nogales , E . Structural insights into microtubule function . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 30 , 397 – 420 ( 2001 ) . 15 . Burbank , K . S . & Mitchison , T . Microtubule dynamic instability . Curr . Biol . 25 , R516 – R517 ( 2006 ) . 16 . Kirschner , M . & Mitchison , T . Beyond self‑assembly : from microtubules to morphogenesis . Cell 45 , 329 – 342 ( 1986 ) . 17 . Inoue , S . & Salmon , E . D . Force generation by microtubule assembly / disassembly in mitosis and related movements . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 , 1619 – 1640 ( 1995 ) . 18 . Gundersen , G . G . & Bretscher , A . Microtubule asymmetry . Science 300 , 2040 – 2041 ( 2003 ) . 19 . Gundersen , G . G . Evolutionary conservation of microtubule‑capture mechanisms . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 296 – 304 ( 2002 ) . 20 . Gundersen , G . G . , Gomes , E . R . & Wen , Y . Cortical control of microtubule stability and polarization . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 106 – 112 ( 2004 ) . 21 . Siegrist , S . E . & Doe , C . Q . Microtubule‑induced cortical cell polarity . Genes Dev . 21 , 483 – 496 ( 2007 ) . 22 . Yamada , K . M . , Spooner , B . S . & Wessells , N . K . Ultrastructure and function of growth cones and axons of cultured nerve cells . J . Cell Biol . 49 , 614 – 635 ( 1971 ) . 23 . Yamada , K . M . , Spooner , B . S . & Wessells , N . K . Axon growth : role of microfilaments and microtubules . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 66 , 1206 – 1212 ( 1970 ) . 24 . Daniels , M . P . Fine structural changes in neurons associated with colchicine inhibition of nerve fiber formation in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 58 , 463 – 470 ( 1973 ) . 25 . Drubin , D . , Feinstein , S . C . , Shooter , E . M . & Kirschner , M . Nerve growth factor induced neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells involves the coordinate induction of microtubule assembly and assembly‑ promoting factors . J . Cell Biol . 101 , 1790 – 1807 ( 1985 ) . 26 . Ferreira , A . , Busciglio , J . & Caceres , A . Microtubule formation and neurite outgrowth in cerebellar macroneurons that develop in vitro : evidence for the involvement of the microtubule‑associated proteins MAP1a , HMW‑MAP2 and tau . Dev . Brain Res . 49 , 215 – 228 ( 1989 ) . 27 . Yu , W . , Centonze , V . E . , Ahmad , F . J . & Baas , P . W . Microtubule nucleation and release from the neuronal centrosomes . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 349 – 359 ( 1993 ) . 28 . Ahmad , F . J . , Yu , W . , McNally , F . J . & Baas , P . W . An essential role for katanin in severing microtubules in the neuron . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 305 – 315 ( 1999 ) . 29 . Karabay , A . , Yu , W . , Solowska , J . M . , Baird , D . & Baas , P . W . Axonal growth is sensitive to the levels of katanin , a protein that severs microtubules . J . Neurosci . 24 , 5778 – 5788 ( 2004 ) . 30 . Yu , W . et al . Regulation of microtubule severing by katanin subunits during neuronal development . J . Neurosci . 25 , 5573 – 5583 ( 2005 ) . 31 . Vale , R . D . The molecular motor toolbox for intracellular transport . Cell 112 , 467 – 480 ( 2003 ) . 32 . Hirokawa , N . & Noda , Y . Intracellular transport and kinesin superfamily proteins , KIFs : structure , function and dynamics . Physiol . Rev . 88 , 1089 – 1118 ( 2008 ) . 33 . Baas , P . W . & Buster , D . W . Slow axonal transport and the genesis of neuronal morphology . J . Neurobiol . 58 , 3 – 17 ( 2004 ) . 34 . Ahmad , F . J . , Joshi , H . C . , Centonze , V . E . & Baas , P . W . Inhibition of microtubule nucleation at the neuronal centrosome compromises axon growth . Neuron 12 , 271 – 280 ( 1994 ) . 35 . Baird , D . H . , Myers , K . A . , Mogensen , M . , Moss , D . & Baas , P . W . Distribution of the microtubule‑related protein ninein in developing neurons . Neuropharmacology 47 , 677 – 683 ( 2004 ) . 36 . Baas , P . W . , Karabay , A . & Qiang , L . Microtubules cut and run . Trends Cell Biol . 15 , 518 – 524 ( 2005 ) . 37 . Terada , S . , Kinjo , M . & Hirokawa , N . Oligomeric tubulin in large transporting complex is transported via kinesin in squid giant axons . Cell 103 , 141 – 155 ( 2000 ) . 38 . Kimura , T . , Watanabe , H . , Iwamatsu , A . & Kaibuchi , K . Tubulin and CRMP‑2 complex is transported via kinesin‑1 . J . Neurochem . 93 , 1371 – 8213 ( 2005 ) . 39 . Baas , P . W . & Black , M . Individual microtubules in the axon consist of domains that differ in both composition and stability . J . Cell Biol . 111 , 495 – 509 ( 1990 ) . 40 . Brown , A . , Li , Y . , Slaughter , T . & Black , M . Composite microtubules of the axon : quantitative analysis of tyrosinated and acetylated tubulin along individual axonal microtubules . J . Cell Sci . 104 , 339 – 352 ( 1993 ) . 41 . Brown , A . , Slaughter , T . & Black , M . Newly assembled microtubules are concentrated in the proximal and distal regions of growing axons . J . Cell Biol . 119 , 867 – 882 ( 1992 ) . 42 . Baas , P . W . , Ahmad , F . , Pienkowski , T . , Brown , A . & Black , M . Sites of microtubule stabilization for the axon . J . Neurosci . 13 , 2177 – 2185 ( 1993 ) . 43 . Li , Y . & Black , M . Microtubule assembly and turnover in growing axons . J . Neurosci . 16 , 531 – 544 ( 1996 ) . 44 . Dotti , C . G . , Sullivan , C . A . & Banker , G . A . The establishment of polarity by hippocampal neurons in culture . J . Neurosci . 8 , 1454 – 1468 ( 1988 ) . 45 . Ferreira , A . & Cáceres , A . The expression of acetylated microtubules during axonal and dendritic growth in cerebellar macroneurons , which develop in vitro . Dev . Brain Res . 49 , 205 – 213 ( 1989 ) . 46 . Arregui , C . , Busciglio , J . , Cáceres , A . & Barra , H . Tyrosinated and detyrosinated microtubules in axonal processes of cerebellar macroneurons grown in culture . J . Neurosci . Res . 28 , 171 – 181 ( 1991 ) . 47 . Dotti , C . G . & Banker , G . Intracellular organization of hippocampal neurons during the development of neuronal polarity . J . Cell Sci . Suppl . 15 , 75 – 84 ( 1991 ) . 48 . Witte , H . , Neurkirchen , D . & Bradke , F . Microtubule stabilization specifies initial neuronal polarization . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 619 – 632 ( 2008 ) . A key paper that described how local microtubule stabilization in one neurite is a crucial event in specifying neuronal polarization . 49 . Gonzalez‑Billault , C . , Avila , J . & Caceres , A . Evidence for a role of MAP1B in axon formation . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2087 – 2098 ( 2001 ) . 50 . Bradke , F . & Dotti , C . G . Vectorial cytoplasmic flow precedes axon formation . Neuron 19 , 1175 – 1186 ( 1997 ) . 51 . Bradke , F . & Dotti , C . G . The role of local actin instability in axon formation . Science 283 , 1931 – 1934 ( 1999 ) . 52 . Kunda , P . , Paglini , G . , Quiroga , S . , Kosik , K . & Caceres , A . Evidence for the involvement of Tiam1 in axon formation . J . Neurosci . 21 , 2361 – 2372 ( 2001 ) . 53 . Goldberg , D . J . & Burmeister , D . W . Stages in axon formation : observations of growth of Aplysia axons in culture using video‑enhanced contrast‑differential interference contrast . J . Cell Biol . 103 , 1921 – 1931 ( 1986 ) . 54 . Liao , G . & Gundersen , G . G . Kinesin is a candidate for cross‑bridging microtubules and intermediate filaments . Selective binding of kinesin to detyrosinated tubulin and vimentin . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 9797 – 9803 ( 1998 ) . 55 . Nakata , T . & Hirokawa , N . Microtubules provide directional cues for polarized axonal transport through interaction with kinesin motor head . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 1045 – 1055 ( 2003 ) . 56 . Reed , N . A . et al . Microtubule acetylation promotes kinesin‑1 binding and transport . Curr . Biol . 16 , 2166 – 2172 ( 2006 ) . 57 . Jacobson , C . B . , Schnapp , B . & Banker , G . A . A change in the selective translocation of the kinesin‑1 motor domain marks the initial specification of the axon . Neuron 49 , 797 – 804 ( 2006 ) . 58 . Inagaki , N . et al . CRMP‑2 induces axons in cultured hippocampal neurons . Nature Neurosci . 4 , 781 – 782 ( 2001 ) . 59 . Fukata , Y . et al . CRMP‑2 binds to tubulin heterodimers to promote microtubule assembly . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 583 – 591 ( 2003 ) . 60 . Shi , S . H . , Cheng , T . , Jan , L . Y . & Jan , Y . N . Hippocampal neuronal polarity specified by spatially localized mPar3 / mPar6 and PI 3‑kinase activity . Cell 112 , 63 – 75 ( 2003 ) . 61 . Menager , C . , Arimura , N . , Fukata , Y . & Kaibuchi , K . PIP3 is involved in neuronal polarization and axon formation . J . Neurochem . 89 , 109 – 118 ( 2004 ) . 62 . Horiguchi , K . , Hanada , T . , Fukui , Y . & Chishti , A . H . Transport of PIP3 by GAKIN , a kinesin 3 family protein , regulates neuronal cell polarity . J . Cell Biol . 174 , 425 – 436 ( 2006 ) . 63 . Gomis‑Ruth , S . , Wierenga , C . J . , Bradke , F . Plasticity of polarization : changing dendrites into axons in neurons integrated in neuronal circuits . Curr . Biol . 18 , 992 – 1000 ( 2008 ) . 64 . Tanaka , E . & Kirschner , M . W . Microtubule behavior in the growth cones of living neurons during axonal elongation . J . Cell Biol . 115 , 345 – 363 ( 1991 ) . 65 . Tanaka , E . , Ho , T . & Kirschner , M . W . The role of microtubule dynamics in growth cone motility and axonal growth . J . Cell Biol . 128 , 139 – 155 ( 1995 ) . 66 . Etienne‑Manneville , S . Cdc42‑the centre of polarity . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 1291 – 1300 ( 2004 ) . 67 . Manneville , J . ‑P . & Etienne‑Manneville , S . Positioning centrosomes and spindle poles : looking at the periphery to find the cell centre . Biol . Cell 98 , 557 – 565 ( 2006 ) . proteins and signalling pathways involved in neuronal polarization . Most of the studies to date have used simple read - outs ( such as suppression of axon formation versus extension of multiple axons ) rather than characterized specific events underlying axon or dendrite formation . Methods are needed to quantitatively analyse cytoskel - etal dynamics and its regulation by polarity regulators in living neurons . In addition , little is known about the machinery that is involved in regulating membrane addi - tion 182 and its relationship to the signalling pathways that control cytoskeletal dynamics 183 . Finally , it will be essen - tial to test whether the events and mechanisms described in cultured neurons also apply to neurons developing in situ 4 , 184 . The use of genetically modified animals and in vivo imaging with two - photon microscopy 185 will certainly help in this task . R E V I E W S 330 | MAy 2009 | vOlUME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 68 . Zolessi , F . R . , Poggi , L . , Wilkinson , C . J . , Chine , C . B . & Harris , W . A . Polarization and orientation of retinal ganglion cells in vivo . Neural Dev . 1 , 2 ( 2006 ) . 69 . Zmuda , J . F . & Rivas , R . J . The Golgi apparatus and centrosome are localized to the sites of newly emerging axons in cerebellar granule neurons in vitro . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 41 , 18 – 38 ( 1998 ) . 70 . Lefcort , F . & Bentley , D . Organization of cytoskeletal elements and organelles preceding growth cone emergence from an identified neuron in situ . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 1737 – 1749 ( 1989 ) . 71 . De Anda , F . C . et al . Centrosome localization determines neuronal polarity . Nature 436 , 704 – 708 ( 2005 ) . 72 . Goslin , K . & Banker , G . Rapid changes in the distribution of GAP‑43 correlate with the expression of neuronal polarity during normal development and under experimental conditions . J . Cell Biol . 110 , 1319 – 1331 ( 1999 ) . 73 . Akhmanova , A . & Steinmetz , M . O . Tracking the ends : a dynamic protein network controls the fate of microtubule tips . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 309 – 322 ( 2008 ) . 74 . Jaworski , J . , Hoogenraad , C . C . & Akhmanova , A . Microtubule plus‑end tracking proteins in differentiated mammalian cells . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 40 , 619 – 637 ( 2007 ) . 75 . Galjart , N . Clips and clasps and cellular dynamics . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 , 487 – 498 ( 2006 ) . 76 . Barth , A . I . , Caro‑Gonzalez , H . Y . & Nelson , W . J . Role of adenomatous polyposis coli ( APC ) and microtubules in directional cell migration and neuronal polarization . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 245 – 251 ( 2008 ) . 77 . Nakamura , M . , Zhou , X . Z . & Lu , P . K . Critical role for EB1 and APC interaction in the regulation of microtubule polymerization . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1062 – 1067 ( 2001 ) . 78 . Zunbrunn , J . , Kinoshita , K . , Hyman , A . A . & Nathke , I . S . Binding of the adenomatous polyposis coli protein to microtubules increases microtubule stability and is regulated by GSK3 β phosphorylation . Curr . Biol . 11 , 44 – 49 ( 2001 ) . 79 . Akhmanova , A . et al . Clasps are CLIP‑115 and ‑170 associating proteins involved in the regional regulation of microtubule dynamics in motile fibroblasts . Cell 104 , 923 – 935 ( 2001 ) . 80 . Mimori‑Kiyosue , Y . et al . CLASP1 and CLASP2 bind to EB1 and regulate microtubule plus‑end dynamics at the cell cortex . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 141 – 153 ( 2005 ) . 81 . Sapir , T . , Elbaum , M . & Reiner , O . Reduction of microtubule catastrophe events by LIS1 , platelet‑ activating factor acetylhydrolase subunit . EMBO J . 16 , 6977 – 6984 ( 1997 ) . 82 . Coquelle , F . M . et al . LIS1 , CLIP‑170’s key to the dynein / dynactin pathway . Mol . Cell . Biol . 22 , 3089 – 3102 ( 2002 ) . 83 . Fukata , M . et al . Rac1 and Cdc42 capture microtubules through IQGAP1 and CLIP‑170 . Cell 109 , 873 – 885 ( 2002 ) . 84 . Watanabe , T . et al . Interaction with IQGAP1 links APC to Rac1 , Cdc42 , and actin filaments during cell polarization and migration . Dev . Cell 7 , 871 – 883 ( 2004 ) . 85 . Wen , Y . et al . EB1 and APC bind to mDia to stabilize microtubules downstream of Rho and promote cell migration . Nature Cell Biol . 6 , 820 – 830 ( 2004 ) . 86 . Votin , V . , Nelson , J . W . & Barth , A . I . Neurite outgrowth involves adenomatous polyposis coli protein and β ‑catenin . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 5699 – 5708 ( 2005 ) . 87 . Shi , S . H . , Cheng , T . , Jan , L . Y . & Jan , Y . N . APC and GSK3 β are involved in mPar3 targeting to the nascent axon and the establishment of neuronal polarity . Curr . Biol . 14 , 2025 – 2032 ( 2004 ) . 88 . Zhou , F . ‑Q . , Zhou , J . , Dedhar , S . , Wu , Y . & Snider , W . D . NGF‑induced axon growth is mediated by localized inactivation of GSK3 β and functions on the microtubule plus end binding protein APC . Neuron 42 , 897 – 912 ( 2004 ) . 89 . Purro , S . A . et al . Wnt regulates axon behavior through changes in microtubule growth directionality : a new role for adenomatous polyposis coli . J . Neurosci . 28 , 8644 – 8654 ( 2008 ) . 90 . Rusan , N . M . , Akong , K . & Peifer , M . Putting the model to the test : are APC proteins essential for neuronal polarity , axon outgrowth , and axon targeting ? J . Cell Biol . 183 , 203 – 212 ( 2008 ) . 91 . Morrison , E . E . , Moncur , P . M . & Askam , J . M . EB1 identifies sites of microtubule polymerization during neurite development . Mol . Brain Res . 98 , 145 – 152 ( 2002 ) . 92 . Jimenez , M . , Paglini , E . M . , Gonzalez‑Billault , C . , Caceres , A . & Avila , J . End‑binding protein1 ( EB1 ) complements microtubule‑associated protein 1B during axogenesis . J . Neurosci . Res . 80 , 350 – 359 ( 2004 ) . 93 . Geraldo , S . , Khanzada , U . K . , Parsons , M . , Chilton , J . & Gordon‑Weeks , P . Targeting of the F‑actin‑binding protein drebrin by the microtubule plus‑tip protein EB3 is required for neuritogenesis . Nature Cell Biol . 10 , 1181 – 1189 ( 2008 ) . 94 . Ayala , R . , Shu , T . & Tsai , L . H . Trekking across the brain : the journey of neuronal migration . Cell 128 , 29 – 43 ( 2007 ) . 95 . Tsai , J . ‑W . , Chen , Y . , Kriegstein , A . R . & Valle , R . B . LIS1 RNA interference blocks neural stem cell division , morphogenesis , and motility at multiple stages . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 935 – 945 ( 2005 ) . 96 . Grabham , P . W . , Seale , G . E . , Bennecib , M . , Goldberg , D . & Vallee , R . B . Cytoplasmic dynein and LIS1 are required for microtubule advance during growth cone remodeling and fast axonal growth . J . Neurosci . 27 , 5823 – 5834 ( 2007 ) . 97 . Friocourt , G . et al . Doublecortin functions at the extremities of growing neuronal processes . Cereb . Cortex 13 , 620 – 626 ( 2003 ) . 98 . Kappeler , C . et al . Branching and nucleokinesis defects in migrating interneurons derived from doublecortin knockout mice . Hum . Mol . Genet . 15 , 1387 – 1400 ( 2006 ) . 99 . Koizumi , H . , Tanaka , T . & Gleeson , J . G . Doublecortin maintains bipolar shape and nuclear translocation during migration in the adult forebrain . Nature Neurosci . 9 , 779 – 786 ( 2006 ) . 100 . Bielas , S . L . et al . Spinophilin facilitates dephosphorylation of doublecortin by PP1 to mediate microtubule bundling at the axonal wrist . Cell 129 , 579 – 591 ( 2007 ) . 101 . Dent , E . W . , Callaway , J . L . , Szebenyi , G . , Baas , P . W . & Kalil , K . Reorganization and movement of microtubules in growth cones and developing interstitial branches . J . Neurosci . 9 , 8894 – 8904 ( 1999 ) . 102 . Yu , W . , Ahmad , F . J . & Baas , P . W . Microtubule fragmentation and partitioning during axon collateral branch formation . J . Neurosci . 14 , 5872 – 5884 ( 1994 ) . 103 . Hazan , J . et al . Spastin , a new AAA protein , is altered in the most frequent form of autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia . Nature Genet . 23 , 296 – 303 ( 1999 ) . 104 . Errico , A . , Claudiani , P . , D’Addio , M . & Rugarli , E . L . Spastin , the protein mutated in autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia , is involved in microtubule dynamics . Hum . Mol . Genet . 13 , 2121 – 2132 ( 2002 ) . 105 . Roll‑Mecak , A . & Vale , R . D . Making more microtubules by severing : a common theme of noncentrosomal microtubule arrays ? J . Cell Biol . 175 , 849 – 851 ( 2006 ) . 106 . Yu , W . et al . The microtubule‑severing proteins spastin and katanin participate differently in the formation of axon branches . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 1485 – 1498 ( 2008 ) . This study described different mechanisms used by microtubule severing proteins for regulating axon growth and collateral branching . 107 . Qiang , L . , Yu , W . , Andreadis , A . , Luo , M . & Baas , P . W . Tau protects microtubules in the axon from severing by katanin . J . Neurosci . 26 , 3120 – 3129 ( 2006 ) . 108 . Grenningloh , G . , Soehrman , S . , Bondallaz , P . , Ruchti , E . & Cadas , H . Role of the microtubule destabilizing proteins SCG10 and stathmin in neuronal growth . J . Neurobiol . 58 , 60 – 69 ( 2004 ) . 109 . Charbaut , E . , Chauvin , S . , Enslen , H . , Zamaroczy , S . & Sobel , A . Two separate motifs cooperate to target stathmin‑related proteins to the Golgi complex . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 2313 – 2323 ( 2005 ) . 110 . Manna , T . , Grenningloh , G . , Miller , H . P . & Wilson , L . Stathmin family protein SCG10 differentially regulates the plus and minus end dynamics of microtubules at steady state in vitro ; implications for its role in neurite outgrowth . Biochemistry 46 , 3543 – 3542 ( 2008 ) . 111 . Morii , H . , Shiraishi‑Yamaguchi , Y . & Mori , N . SCG10 , a microtubule destabilizing factor , stimulates the neurite outgrowth by modulating microtubule dynamics in rat hippocampal primary cultured neurons . J . Neurobiol . 66 , 1101 – 1114 ( 2006 ) . 112 . Poulain , F . E . & Sobel , A . The “SCG10‑like protein” CLIP is a novel regulator of axonal branching in hippocampal neurons , unlike SCG10 . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 34 , 137 – 146 ( 2007 ) . 113 . Homma , N . et al . Kinesin superfamily protein 2A ( KIF2A ) functions in suppression of collateral branch extension . Cell 114 , 229 – 239 ( 2003 ) . 114 . Dehmelt , L . & Halpain , S . The MAP2 / Tau family of microtubule‑associated proteins . Genome Biol . 6 , 204 ( 2004 ) . 115 . Halpain , S . & Dehmelt , L . The MAP1 family of microtubule‑associated proteins . Genome Biol . 7 , 224 ( 2006 ) . 116 . Cáceres , A . & Kosik , K . Inhibition of neurite polarity by tau antisense oligonucleotides in primary cerebellar neurons . Nature 343 , 461 – 463 ( 1990 ) . 117 . Cáceres , A . , Mautino , J . & Kosik , K . Suppression of MAP‑2 in cultured cerebellar macroneurons inhibits minor neurite formation . Neuron 9 , 607 – 618 ( 1992 ) . 118 . Harada , A . et al . Altered microtubule organization in small‑calibre axons of mice lacking tau protein . Nature 369 , 488 – 491 ( 1994 ) . 119 . Takei , Y . et al . Delayed development of nervous system in mice homozygous for disrupted microtubule‑ associated protein 1B ( MAP1B ) gene . J . Cell Biol . 137 , 1615 – 1626 ( 1997 ) . 120 . Dawson , H . N . et al . Inhibition of neuronal maturation in primary hippocampal neurons from tau deficient mice . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 1179 – 1187 ( 2001 ) . 121 . Meixner , A . et al . MAP1B is required for axon guidance and is involved in the development of the central and peripheral nervous system . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 1169 – 1178 ( 2000 ) . 122 . DiTella , M . , Feiguin , F . , Carri , N . & Cáceres , A . MAP‑1b / Tau functional redundancy during laminin‑ enhanced axonal growth . J . Cell Sci . 109 , 467 – 477 ( 1996 ) . 123 . Takei , Y . , Teng , J . , Harada , A . & Hirokawa , N . Defects in axonal elongation and neuronal migration in mice with disrupted tau and map1b genes . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 989 – 1000 ( 2000 ) . 124 . Sharma , V . M . , Litersky , J . M . , Bhaskar , K . & Lee , G . Tau impacts on growth‑factor‑stimulated actin remodeling . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 748 – 757 ( 2007 ) . 125 . Utreras , E . et al . Microtubule‑associated protein 1B interaction with tubulin tyrosine ligase contributes to the control of microtubule tyrosination . Dev . Neurosci . 30 , 200 – 210 ( 2008 ) . 126 . Gonzalez‑Billault , C . et al . Microtubule‑associated protein 1B function during normal development , regeneration , and pathological conditions in the nervous system . J . Neurobiol . 58 , 48 – 59 ( 2004 ) . 127 . Lucas , F . R . , Goold , R . G . , Gordon‑Weeks , P . & Salinas , P . C . Inhibition of GSK3 β leading to the loss of phosphorylated MAP‑1B is an early event in axonal remodeling induced by WNT‑7a or lithium . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 1351 – 1361 ( 1998 ) . 128 . Goold , R . G . & Gordon‑Weeks , P . The MAP kinase pathway is upstream of the activation of GSK3 β that enables it to phosphorylate MAP1B and contributes to the stimulation of axon growth . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 28 , 524 – 534 ( 2005 ) . 129 . Zhou , F . Q . & Snider , W . D . Cell biology : GSK3‑3 β and microtubule assembly in axons . Science 308 , 211 – 214 ( 2005 ) . 130 . Jiang , H . , Guo , W . , Liang , X . & Rao , Y . Both the establishment and maintenance of neuronal polarity require active mechanisms : critical roles of GSK3 β and its upstream regulators . Cell 120 , 123 – 135 ( 2005 ) . 131 . Yoshimura , T . et al . GSK3 β regulates phosphorylation of CRMP‑2 and neuronal polarity . Cell 120 , 137 – 149 ( 2005 ) . 132 . Gartner , A . & Hall , A . Neuronal polarity is regulated by glycogen synthase kinase‑3 ( GSK3 β ) independently of Akt / PKB serine phosphorylation . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 3927 – 3934 ( 2006 ) . 133 . Kim , W . ‑Y . et al . Essential roles for GSK3s and GSK3‑ primed substrates in neurotrophin‑induced and hippocampal axon growth . Neuron 52 , 981 – 996 ( 2006 ) . An excellent study of GSK3 function in axon formation . 134 . Garrido , J . J . , Simon , D . , Varea , O . & Wandosell , F . GSK3 α and GSK3 β are necessary for axon formation . FEBS Lett . 581 , 1579 – 1586 ( 2007 ) . 135 . Morfini , G . , Szebenyi , G . , Eluru , R . , Ratner , N . & Brady , S . Glycogen synthase kinase 3 phosphorylates kinesin light chains and negatively regulates kinesin‑ based motility . EMBO J . 21 , 281 – 293 ( 2002 ) . 136 . Shelly , M . , Cancedda , L . , Heilshorm , S . , Sumbre , G . & Poo , M . LKB1 / STRAD promotes axon initiation during neuronal polarization . Cell 129 , 565 – 577 ( 2007 ) . 137 . Barnes , A . P . et al . LKB1 and SAD kinases define a pathway required for the polarization of cortical neurons . Cell 129 , 549 – 563 ( 2007 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REvIEwS | NeuroscieNce vOlUME 10 | MAy 2009 | 331 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 138 . Kishi , M . , Pan , Y . A . , Crump , J . G . & Sanes , J . Mammalian SAD kinases are required for neuronal polarization . Science 307 , 929 – 932 ( 2005 ) . 139 . Biernat , J . et al . Protein kinase MARK / PAR‑1 is required for neurite outgrowth and establishment of neuronal polarity . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 4013 – 4028 ( 2002 ) . 140 . Chen , Y . M . et al . Microtubule affinity‑regulating kinase 2 functions downstream of the PAR3 / PAR6 / atypical PKC complex in regulating hippocampal neuronal polarity . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 8534 – 8539 ( 2006 ) . 141 . Chang , L . , Jones , Y . , Ellisman , M . , Goldstein , L . S . B . & Karin , M . JNK1 is required for maintenance of neuronal microtubules and controls phosphorylation of microtubule‑associated proteins . Dev . Cell 4 , 521 – 533 ( 2003 ) . 142 . Tarauk , T . et al . JNK1 phosphorylation of SCG10 determines microtubule dynamics and axodendritic length . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 265 – 277 ( 2006 ) . 143 . Schaefer , A . W . et al . Coordination of actin filament and microtubule dynamics during neurite outgrowth . Dev . Cell 15 , 146 – 162 ( 2008 ) . 144 . Burnette , D . et al . Myosin II activity facilitates microtubule bundling in the neuronal growth cone neck . Dev . Cell 15 , 163 – 169 ( 2008 ) . This work , together with that of reference 143 , provided detailed evidence regarding the relationship between microtubules and actin filaments during neurite extension . 145 . Zhang , X . F . , Schaefer , A . W . , Burnette , D . T . , Schoonderwoert , V . & Forscher , P . Rho‑dependent contractile responses in the neuronal growth cone are independent of classical peripheral retrograde actin flow . Neuron 40 , 931 – 944 ( 2003 ) . 146 . Da Silva , J . S . et al . RhoA / ROCK regulation of neuritogenesis via profilin IIa‑mediated control of actin stability . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 1267 – 1279 ( 2003 ) . 147 . Nishimura , T . et al . PAR‑6‑PAR‑3 mediates Cdc42‑ induced rac activation through the rac GEFs STEF / Tiam1 . Nature Cell Biol . 7 , 270 – 277 ( 2005 ) . 148 . Takefuji , M . et al . Rho‑kinase modulates the function of STEF , a Rac GEF , through its phosphorylation . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 355 , 788 – 794 ( 2008 ) . 149 . Nakayama , M . et al . Rho‑kinase phosphorylates Par‑3 and disrupts Par complex formation . Dev . Cell 14 , 205 – 215 ( 2008 ) . 150 . Birkenfeld , J . , Nalbant , P . , Yoon , S . ‑H . & Bokoch , G . M . Cellular functions of GEF‑H1 , a microtubule regulated Rho‑GEF : is altered GEF‑H1 activity a crucial determinant of disease pathogenesis ? Trends Cell Biol . 18 , 210 – 219 ( 2008 ) . 151 . Watabe‑Uchida , M . , John , K . A . , Janas , J . A . , Newey , S . A . & Van Aelst , L . The Rac activator DOCK7 regulates neuronal polarity through local phosphorylation of stathmin / Op18 . Neuron 51 , 727 – 739 ( 2006 ) . 152 . Choi , Y . ‑J . et al . Tuberous sclerosis complex proteins control axon formation . Genes Dev . 22 , 2485 – 2495 ( 2008 ) . 153 . Chuang , J . et al . The dynein light chain Tctex‑1 has a dynein‑independent role in actin remodeling during neurite outgrowth . Dev . Cell 9 , 75 – 86 ( 2005 ) . 154 . Sharp , D . J . et al . Identification of a microtubule‑ associated motor protein essential for dendritic differentiation . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 833 – 843 ( 1997 ) . 155 . Yu , W . et al . Depletion of a microtubule‑associated motor protein induces the loss of dendritic identity . J . Neurosci . 20 , 5782 – 5790 ( 2000 ) . 156 . Zheng , Y . et al . Dynein is required for polarized dendritic transport and uniform polarity orientation in axons . Nature Cell Biol . 10 , 1172 – 1180 ( 2008 ) . This study described the role of dynein in establishing microtubule orientation and organelle distribution in axons and dendrites of D . melanogaster da neurons . 157 . Farah , C . A . & Leclerc , N . HMWMAP2 : new perspectives on a pathway to dendritic identity . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 65 , 515 – 527 ( 2008 ) . 158 . Harada , A . , Teng , J . , Takei , Y . , Oguchi , K . & Hirokawa , N . MAP2 is required for dendritic elongation , PKA anchoring in dendrites , and proper PKA signal transduction . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 541 – 549 ( 2002 ) . 159 . Khuchua , Z . et al . Deletion of the N‑terminus of murine map2 by gene targeting disrupts hippocampal ca1 neuron architecture and alters contextual memory . Neuroscience 119 , 101 – 111 ( 2003 ) . 160 . Teng , J . et al . Synergistic effects of MAP2 and MAP1B knockout in neuronal migration , dendritic outgrowth and microtubule organization . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 65 – 76 ( 2001 ) . 161 . Farah , C . A . et al . Interaction of microtubule‑ associated protein‑2 and p63 : a new link between microtubules and rough endoplasmic reticulum membranes in neurons . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 9439 – 9449 ( 2005 ) . 162 . Szebenyi , G . et al . Activity‑driven dendritic remodeling requires microtubule‑associated protein 1A . Curr . Biol . 15 , 1820 – 1826 ( 2005 ) . 163 . Ohkawa , N . , Fujitani , K . , Tokunaga , E . , Furuya , S . & Inokuchi , K . The microtubule‑destabilizer stathmin mediates the development of dendritic arbors in neuronal cells . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 1447 – 1456 ( 2007 ) . 164 . Vaillant , A . R . et al . Signaling mechanisms underlying reversible , activity‑dependent dendrite formation . Neuron 34 , 985 – 998 ( 2002 ) . 165 . Roos , J . , Hummel , T . , Ng , N . , Klambt , C . & Davis , G . M . Drosophila Futsch regulates synaptic microtubule organization and is necessary for synaptic growth . Neuron 26 , 371 – 382 ( 2000 ) . 166 . Hummel , T . , Krukkert , K . Roos , J . , Davis , G . & Klambt , C . Drosophila Futsch / 22C10 is a MAP21B‑like protein required for dendritic and axonal development . Neuron 26 , 357 – 370 ( 2000 ) . 167 . Ruiz‑Canada , C . et al . New synaptic bouton formation is disrupted by misregulation of microtubule stability in aPKC mutants . Neuron 42 , 567 – 580 ( 2004 ) . 168 . Packard , M . et al . The Drosophila Wnt , wingless , provides an essential signal for pre‑ and postsynaptic differentiation . Cell 111 , 319 – 330 ( 2002 ) . 169 . Franco , B . et al . Shaggy , the homolog of glycogen synthase kinase 3 , controls neuromuscular junction growth in Drosophila . J . Neurosci . 27 , 5315 – 5325 ( 2004 ) . 170 . Salinas , P . C . & Zou , Y . Wnt signaling in neural circuit assembly . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 31 , 339 – 358 ( 2008 ) . 171 . Trotta , N . , Orso , G . , Rossetto , M . G . , Draga , A . & Broasle , K . The hereditary spastic paraplegia gene , spastin , regulates microtubule stability to modulate synaptic structure and function . Neuron 14 , 1135 – 1147 ( 2004 ) . 172 . Kaech , S . , Parmar , H . , Roelandse , M . , Bornmann , C . & Matus , A . Cytoskeletal microdifferentiation : a mechanism for organizing morphological plasticity in dendrites . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 7086 – 7092 ( 2001 ) . 173 . Halpain , S . , Spencer , K . & Graber , S . Dynamics and pathology of dendritic spines . Prog . Brain Res . 147 , 29 – 37 ( 2005 ) . 174 . Westrum , L . E . , Jones , D . H . , Gray , E . G . & Barron , J . Microtubules , dendritic spines , and spines apparatuses . Cell Tissue Res . 208 , 171 – 181 ( 1980 ) . 175 . Westrum , L . E . , Jones , D . H . , Burgoyne , R . D . & Barron , J . Synaptic development and microtubule organization . Cell Tissue Res . 231 , 93 – 102 ( 1983 ) . 176 . Gray , E . G . , Westrum , L . E . , Burgoyne , R . D . & Barron , J . Synaptic organization and neuron microtubule distribution . Cell Tissue Res . 226 , 579 – 588 ( 1982 ) . 177 . Caceres , A . , Payne , M . R . , Binder , L . I . & Steward , O . Immunocytochemical localization of actin and microtubule‑associated protein MAP2 in dendritic spines . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 80 , 1738 – 1742 ( 1983 ) . 178 . Gu , J . , Firestein , B . L . & Zheng , J . Q . Microtubules in dendritic spine development . J . Neurosci . 28 , 12120 – 12124 ( 2008 ) . 179 . Hu , X . , Viesselmann , C . , Nam , S . , Merriam , E . & Dent , E . W . Activity‑dependent dynamic microtubule invasion of dendritic spines . J . Neurosci . 28 , 13094 – 13105 ( 2008 ) . 180 . Jaworski , J . et al . Dynamic microtubules regulate spine morphology and synaptic plasticity . Neuron 61 , 85 – 100 ( 2009 ) . 181 . Penzes , P . , Srivastava , D . P . & Woolfrey , K . V . Not just actin ? A role for dynamic microtubules in dendritic spines . Neuron 61 , 3 – 5 ( 2009 ) . 182 . Pfenninger , K . H . et al . Regulation of membrane expansion at the nerve growth cone . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 1209 – 1217 ( 2003 ) . 183 . Laurino , L . et al . PI3K activation by IGF‑1 is essential for the regulation of membrane expansion at the nerve growth cone . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 3653 – 3662 ( 2005 ) . 184 . Calderon de Anda , F . , Gärtner , A . , Tsai , L . H . & Dotti , C . G . Pyramidal neuron polarity axis is defined at the bipolar stage . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 178 – 185 ( 2008 ) . 185 . Portera‑Cailliau , C . , Weimer , R . M . , De Paola , V . , Caroni , P . & Svoboda , K . Diverse modes of axon elaboration in the developing neocortex . PloS Biol . 3 , e272 ( 2005 ) . 186 . Nogales , E . , Wolf , S . & Downing , K . H . Structure of the αβ tubulin dimer by electron crystallography . Nature 391 , 199 – 203 ( 1998 ) . 187 . Lowe , J . , Li , H . & Nogales , E . Refined structure of a β ‑tubulin at 3 . 5 Å resolution . J . Mol . Biol . 313 , 1045 – 1057 ( 2001 ) . 188 . Tuszynski , J . A . et al . The evolution of the structure of tubulin and its potential consequences for the role and function of microtubules in cells and embryos . Int . J . Dev . Biol . 50 , 341 – 358 ( 2006 ) . 189 . Erikson , H . P . γ ‑Tubulin nucleation : template or protofilament ? Nature Cell Biol . 2 , E93 – E96 ( 2000 ) . 190 . Inclan , Y . F . & Nogales , E . Structural models for the self‑assembly and microtubule interactions of γ ‑ , δ ‑ and ε ‑tubulin . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 413 – 422 ( 2001 ) . 191 . Ludueña , R . F . Multiple forms of tubulin : different gene products and covalent modifications . Int . Rev . Cytol . 178 , 207 – 275 ( 1998 ) . 192 . Barra , H . S . , Arce , C . & Argaraña , C . E . Posttranslational tyrosination / detyrosination of tubulin . Mol . Neurobiol . 2 , 133 – 153 ( 1988 ) . 193 . Verhey , K . J . & Gaertig , J . The tubulin code . Cell Cycle 6 , 2152 – 2160 ( 2007 ) . 194 . Hammond , J . C . , Cai , D . & Verhey , K . J . Tubulin modifications and their cellular functions . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 20 , 71 – 76 ( 2008 ) . 195 . Bulinski , J . C . & Gundersen , G . G . Stabilization of post‑ translational modifications of microtubules during cellular morphogenesis . Bioessays 13 , 285 – 293 ( 1991 ) . 196 . Palazzo , A . , Ackerman , B . & Gundersen , G . G . Cell biology : tubulin acetylation and cell motility . Nature 421 , 230 ( 2003 ) . 197 . Waterman‑Storer , C . & Salmon , E . D . Fluorescent speckle microscopy of microtubules : how long can you go ? FASEB J . 13 , S225 – S230 ( 1999 ) . Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge support from the National Research Council of Argentina ( CONICET ) and the Agencia Nacional de Promoción Científica y Tecnológica ( ANPCyT ) . We also thank members of our laboratory for helpful discussions about neu‑ ronal polarity . DATABASES Entrez Gene : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / query . fcgi ? db = gene aPKC | CDC42 | CHO1 | CRMP2 | DCX | DOCK7 | EB1 | futsch | GAKIN | GEF - H1 | GSK3 α | GSK3 β | JNK1 | KIF2A | KIF5C | KLC1 | LIS1 | LKB1 | MAP1A | MAP1B | MAP2 | mTOR | ninein | PAR1 | PAR3 | PAR6 | RHEB | RHOK | SADA | SADB | SCG10 | SCLIP | SGG | Spastin | SPN | stathmin | STEF | STRAD | TIAM1 | TSC1 | TSC2 | tau | WG FURTHER INFORMATION Alfredo Caceres’s website : www . immf . uncor . edu SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION See online article : S1 ( table ) All liNks Are Active iN the oNliNe pdf R E V I E W S 332 | MAy 2009 | vOlUME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved