Nonaka meets Giddens : A critique Zhichang Zhu 1 , 2 1 The University of Hull Business School , Hull , U . K . ; 2 South China Normal University , Guangzhou , China Correspondence : Zhichang Zhu , The University of Hull Business School , Hull HU6 7RX , U . K . Tel : 44 1482 463076 ; Fax : 44 1482 463484 E - mail : z . zhu @ hull . ac . uk Received : 18 October 2004 Accepted : 2 May 2006 Abstract Nonaka’s recent incorporation of Giddens into the knowledge movement is superficial and problematic . The incorporation accepts uncritically Giddens’s controversial conceptions of structure and agency , avoids his concerns of power and domination , exaggerates his elaboration on contradictions , and shares with him the search for an omelette - like theoretical totalising . Using Giddens as an illustrative vehicle , this paper analyses the pattern of Nonaka’s recent borrowing of others’ work and the consequent tensions built up in his simplistic model of the knowledge creating company . Knowledge Management Research & Practice ( 2006 ) 4 , 106 – 115 . doi : 10 . 1057 / palgrave . kmrp . 8500091 Keywords : Nonaka ; Giddens ; theoretical borrowing ; knowledge creating company ; critique Introduction Ikujiro Nonaka is certainly a phenomenon in the present knowledge movement ( KM ) . His ‘knowledge creating company’ ( KCC ) has inspired a huge body of secondary literature and many have taken his knowledge division and spiral conversion as a starting point for further research . Given his great influence ( Edwards et al . , 2003 ) , Nonaka’s moves deserve attention and scrutiny . One of his recent interesting moves is incorporat - ing Giddens into KM in conjunction with an attempt to ‘build a new knowledge - based theory of the firm’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2002 , 2003 , 2005 ) . While efforts in building such a theory are not new ( e . g . , Quinn , 1992 ; Kogut & Zander , 1995 ; Grant , 1996 ; Spender , 1996 ; Tsoukas , 1996 ; Nahapiet & Ghoshal , 1998 ) , Nonaka’s incorporation of Giddens certainly is . Nonaka’s move is , in my view , in itself long overdue and therefore should be whole - heartedly welcomed . We witness Giddens being incorpo - rated into other fields such as technology ( Orlikowski , 1992 ; DeSanctis & Poole , 1994 ) and strategic management ( Whittington , 1992 ; Jarzabkowski , 2004 ) which has generated significant impacts . However , we also note that there are growing debates and controversies around the incorporations and upon Giddens’s theory , which we should not overlook if we want our inquiries be healthy and fruitful . Hence , in the regard of Nonaka’s move , it is not an issue whether we should incorporate Giddens , but what from Giddens are to be incorporated , for what reason , and how . In this paper I intend to offer a critical analysis of Nonaka’s incorporation in order to invite clarifications and debates which I wish be useful for KM . However , Giddens is merely one of the many heavyweights that Nonaka in the last few years has touched in passing , who include Nietzche , Husserl , Heidegger , Whitehead , Dewey , Merleau - Ponty , Bhaskar , Rorty , etc . To each of them , Nonaka gives a superficial reading , picks up catchwords , inserts them into his jumble of increasingly disconnected and often contradictory threads . By focusing on Nonaka’s recent incorporation of Giddens , I do not imply that Nonaka is a dedicated acolyte of Giddens with a comprehensive conviction to structuration theory . If Nonaka has not taken Giddens Knowledge Management Research & Practice ( 2006 ) 4 , 106 – 115 & 2006 Operational Research Society Ltd . All rights reserved 1477 – 8238 / 06 $ 30 . 00 www . palgrave - journals . com / kmrp seriously but simply touches him in passing , as I aim to show below , how can one charge Nonaka as being inconsistent toward Giddens and structuration theory ? But this is exactly the point I want to convey : Nonaka’s theoretical cherry picking has not been engaging , critical , dedicated or insistent , toward Giddens as well as other theorists . I am using Giddens as a vehicle to show a more general pattern : Nonaka’s cavalier style in his treatment and appropriation of other people’s work in the course of expanding his own canon . With the above said , my critical discussion of Nonaka’s incorporation of Giddens will take place along a number of interrelated lines : his uncritical acceptance of Gid - dens’s controversial conceptions of structure and agent , his conspicuous silence toward Giddens’s concern of power and domination , his exaggeration of Giddens’s treatment on contradictions , and his affinity with Giddens in searching for totalising synthesis in their fields of study . In the conclusion , I will comment on the consequences of Nonaka’s incorporation . The confused structuration A central criticism towards Giddens’s structuration theory levels at his collapsing structure into social action ( Mouzelis , 1989 ; Thompson , 1989 ; Layder , 1994 ; Archer , 1995 ) . To Giddens , structure does not have any indepen - dent existence , nor is it patterns of interaction : ‘structure only exists in and through the activities of human agents’ ( Giddens , 1989 , p . 256 ) . Explicitly , therefore , Giddens’s conception of structure is eminently voluntarist . But implicitly , when it comes to historical analysis of the dominance of system tendencies against the agents’ ability to change the world , Giddens cannot be otherwise but writing in tone with more ‘conventional’ , for example , Marxist , structural - functionalist , ideas of structure ( Anderson , 1990 ; Craib , 1992 ) . Any serious incorporation of Giddens is expected to take into account the criticisms and Giddens’s internal complexity and ambiguity . Giddens’s voluntarist conception appears accepted wholesale by Nonaka . ‘ [ I ] nstead of a logical analysis of structure or action’ , Nonaka declares , ‘strategy and organisation should be re - examined as the synthesising and self - transcending process ’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 2 ; emphasis original ) , which is coupled with a typical Giddensian ontological view that ‘social structure does not exist independently outside of human agency . Rather , structure and humans are two ways of consider - ing social action and they interplay in defining and reproducing each other’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 4 ) . We found perfect affinity between Giddens’s ‘instantia - tion of structure’ and Nonaka’s manipulation of ‘ba’ , as ba is said to have ‘a ‘‘here and now’’ quality as it can be instantly created and can quickly disappear’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2002 , p . 1002 ) . Indeed , Nonaka might have gone farther than Giddens could have expected by citing Nietzche that ‘there are no facts , only interpretations’ ( Nonaka et al . , 2000 , p . 14 ) . Of course , one should not be criticised simply for adopting the conception of Giddens instead of the critics or of Bhaskar ( whose critical realism Nonaka claims also wanting to incorporate , see Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 3 ) . The choice is ‘a matter of ontological affinity’ ( Pozzebon , 2004 , p . 250 ) . No one can prove that an ontological assumption is in itself correct or wrong with certainty . However , one can still demand that the adoption should be internally logical , consistent , clear , and hence rationally contestable . It is in this I have problem : it is difficult to know what structure means to Nonaka , given his uncritical acceptance of structuration theory , his acknowledgement of ‘ontological differences’ between Giddens and Bhaskar , as well as the internal ambivalence in Giddens . Adopting Giddens , Nonaka now frequently talks about ‘the entities and structure’ , ‘the agents and the context’ , and so on . Such usage of the pairs of keywords is strange and unconventional . But that is not my main concern . The critical point is : given the almost 30 years con - troversy around Giddens , what is structure to Nonaka ? As Nonaka does not give a definition , one can only guess . Is it equivalent to ‘environment’ , ‘context’ , or simply ba ? My reading of Nonaka suggests that ba is perhaps the best candidate : ‘The context for dialectic knowledge creation is ba’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 9 ) . But ba in Nonaka is at once physical , mental , virtual , social , emotional , practical , including the market , brought in , shared and taken out by participants at will , constantly moving and self - transcending . If this is what ba means in Japanese , so be it . It is difficult and perhaps inappropriate for an outsider to question a particular meaning attached to a specific word by a specific culture . Yet the problem remains : how this all - embracing and highly culturally charged concept ba is related in a systemic way with Giddens’s ‘structure’ ? Is the physical ba ( e . g . , ‘meeting room’ , ‘office space’ ) or virtual ba ( e . g . , ‘computerised communication networks and large - scale databases’ ) hav - ing merely ‘a virtual existence’ in human’s head only ? Does Nonaka’s model allow structures their own external existence , emergent properties , generative mechanisms and intransitive effect ? Or does structure denote some - thing else , not ba ? Does Nonaka agree with Giddens or with Bhaskar given he notices the ‘ontological differences’ between the two ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 3 ) ? Nonaka can of course choose to adopt Giddens’s ‘duality’ over ‘dualism’ . But I have difficulty in reconcil - ing Nonaka’s propositions , with ‘social structure does not exist independently outside of human agency’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 4 ) on the one side , which is nicely lined up with Giddens , and ‘the dialectic process is driven by the dualistic nature between the agents and structure’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 9 ) on the other , which is terribly at odds with structuration theory . I am not quite sure what Nonaka is actually trying to say about all this , but I think I may have at least discovered the source of my confusion : Nonaka is , in his recent writings , im - patient to grasp the difference . Nonaka meets Giddens Zhichang Zhu 107 Knowledge Management Research & Practice Furthermore , in Nonaka , on the one hand , ‘ba is created , functions , and disappears’ , ‘fluid and can be changed quickly’ ; on the other , ba has ‘its own intention , direction or mission’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 7 ) . Confusion reigns . In the sense that it is created and changed instantly by participants , ba seems to be the structure , albeit conflated ; but with its own intention and mission , ba looks more like human agents , knowledge - able and reflexive , having the motivation to act , or ‘to act otherwise’ . I must admit that I got lost . Perhaps Nonaka has found a third way , for example , accepting actor - network theory ( Latour , 1987 ) in that transformative capability belongs not merely to human agents . But he did not say . There is recently a further invention by Nonaka which makes my confusion deeper : ‘ [ I ] n this paper , the conceptualisation of ba is extended to cover the inter - dependent interaction between agents and structure’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 6 ) ( this time , it appears clear enough that the ‘extension’ is not what the Japanese concept ba originally means ) . Put all the above together in plain language , ba in Nonaka is now at once ( 1 ) the structure itself , ( 2 ) the agents that create it , and ( 3 ) the interactions between the two . Covering everything with one magic word is of course exciting , but is ba as such an analytically and empirically useful concept any longer ? The nice - guy agents Compared with the conflated structure , agents in struc - turation theory are all powerful and empowering in a way that ‘any individual in any situation could not not be an agent’ ( Thompson , 1989 , p . 74 ) . Critics argue that Giddens’s happy , feel - good , nice - guy portrait of the agent is based on the oversimplified , progressive , modernist ideology in which the agent is always knowledgeable , reflexive , skilled , able to monitor his / her actions , cannot be simultaneously non - agent ( Mestrovic , 1998 , p . 86 ) . Indeed , Giddens assumes thus : y human beings are purposive actors , who virtually all the time know what they are doing ( under some description ) and why ( Giddens , 1989 , p . 253 ) . Against Giddens’s excessively cognitive agent , the critics call for a stratified , socio - psychologically thicker concep - tion , asking ‘Are humans really that free and rational all or even most of the time ? ’ ( Craib , 1992 ; Archer , 1995 ; Mestrovic , 1998 , p . 86 ) . In Nonaka’s model , we found , too , excessively skilled and over reflexive employees , from ‘top management’ to workers at the ‘front line’ , who are free and able to bring their own ba into the ‘greater ba’ at will , change it ‘according to need’ , become the centre of the ‘greater ba’ if they want to ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2002 , 2003 ) . In Nonaka’s KCC , employees are so committed and know - ledgeable that they could not not be knowledge creators . Whereas Giddens does not rule out unintended con - sequences and unacknowledged conditions of social action , in Nonaka’s KCC there are in the end all and only success and happy stories . Nonaka makes it clear that the focus of his model is particularly on the ‘cognitive dimension’ of knowledge ( Nonaka & Takeuchi , 1995 ) . In his early writings , Nonaka talks about emotions , passions and bodily experiences , but not in their own terms . These non - cognitive proper - ties are always in the service of rational , cognitive knowledge . The unspoken assumption is : we know what we are doing even if we cannot say what it is . The problem is therefore not whether we do or do not know , or even how we know , but centrally we cannot tell or share fully what we know in totality , and this is why the ‘conversions of knowledge’ are critical and central in Nonaka’s model . From Giddens , Nonaka quickly seizes the notions of practical and discursive consciousness , leaves out un - consciousness , relates consciousness to the ‘two types of knowledge’ . In the critics’ eyes , what Nonaka incorpo - rates is not an insight , but a problem : Giddens’s agents are always knowledgeable and reflexive , but only in the cognitive sense and nothing else . Giddens’s agents are ‘all mind but no heart’ , ‘know much but feel little’ ( Mestrovic , 1998 ) . Leaving out unconsciousness , which is already weak in Giddens , Nonaka’s model of the employ - ee in the KCC is thinner than Giddens’s agents . S / he is always a nice company man , a cognitively socialised me , not a multi - facet , robust I . In Nonaka’s later writings , we see more and more synthesis , transcendence , rationalisa - tion , monitoring , upgrading , protecting , the ‘greater ba’ and the ‘higher viewpoints’ , less and less emotions , passions and the ‘bringing forth a world’ by individuals . The invisible hand of Giddens’s one - dimensional agents has produced visible impacts on Nonaka . Critics further challenge Giddens’s progressive moder - nist ideology which sees knowledgeability and rationality as simply a sort of virtue , an unqualified good ( Mestrovic , 1998 , p . 95 ) : Giddens writes ‘as if action is always creative , transformative’ ( Archer , 1982 ; Craib , 1992 , p . 35 ) , ‘Giddens is oblivious to any negative conse - quences of knowledge and skill on the part of the human agent’ , ‘Giddens’s vision of human agency is so ‘‘nice’’ , that it might seem uncharitable to criticise it’ ( Mestrovic , 1998 , p . 23 and p . 94 ) , etc . In Nonaka , as in Giddens , knowledge cannot be otherwise but always a liberation , a progress motor . There is no room in Nonaka’s model that allows knowledge to be thought of as a source of domination and oppression , no possibility of manipulation and mispresentation of knowledge by vested interests , no place for a human being whose nature is complex enough to experience both love and hate , cooperation and competition , personal inspiration and collective harmony , reflexivity and ignorance , self - determined and other - directed . To Nonaka , knowledge creation is a one - way exercise : knowledge workers in the KCC create knowledge . He never asks the question that at least at times bothers Giddens : how knowledge constitutes agents , their Nonaka meets Giddens Zhichang Zhu 108 Knowledge Management Research & Practice structural relationships , and the society ? Nor can he ask the Foucauldian question : is knowledge necessarily a good thing ( Foucault , 1980 ) ? No one can deny that Nonaka’s model of knowledge and knowledge workers is pretty . But since Plato and Aristotle in the West and Mencius and Sun Zi in the East , philosophers have been aware that human being is a complex animal , that excessive virtue of any sort can become a vice . The ugly side of knowledge and human nature have not disappeared from our life simply because we did not model them in . Nonaka’s model is not wrong , just seriously incomplete and selectively blind . No doubt we need to be optimistic living in this chaotic and uncertain world , but ‘unrealistic optimism in the face of mounting social problems is not serious’ ( Mestrovic , 1998 , p . 4 ) . Recently , Nonaka repeats the following message on several occasions : In the knowledge creation process , dialectics is a method of thinking and acting . It is a way / process to approach a reality to find a truth in it . The absolute truth may never be found . It may never exist . However , dialectic tries to approach the elusive ‘absolute truth’ through the process of examining and denying the series of ‘relative truth’ . It is this process that is important , rather than whether one can reach the absolute truth or not ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 9 ) . I have problem with this message , not because I am anti - dialectic - thinking / acting , nor because the message sounds surprisingly like the Maoist version of Marxist epistemology , but because I believe that any process , dialectic or otherwise , consumes resources and produces consequences . The 15th - century Confucian philosopher Wang Yang - ming teaches us that knowing and acting are but one , for purpose and with consequences . Whatever ‘truth’ we ‘find’ or ‘deny’ , we live in the consequences . Six hundred years later , the American scholar Karl E . Weick ( 2003 ) informs us that knowing and learning is an act of enactment and enactment ‘often has material consequences’ ( p . 185 and p . 191 ) . That ‘it is process that is important , not outcomes’ is credible only when human nature is necessarily good and knowledge is in itself a good thing . In this complex world , wishful assumptions and simplistic models , however nice they look and however good they make us feel , are dangerous . The cosy company Nonaka’s borrowing of Giddens’s theory is specific and does not take on the whole of it . That is fair enough since no one can escape selectivity . But sometimes what is left out tells more than what is incorporated . What I found left out from Giddens by Nonaka are sectional interests , power structure and domination in ‘the company’ and the society . Giddens consistently emphasises that no social theory of knowledge is seriously relevant without addressing the issue of power and domination . To Giddens ( 1979 ) , cognition and power mediate each other : on the one hand , domination is the very condition of signification since it is inherent in human action , whereas on the other , this allows powerful groups to mobilise interpre - tive schemas to serve their sectional interests . Knowledge hence cannot be studied separately from issues of power and legitimation . In contrast to Giddens’s social world , Nonaka’s KCC is a cosy paradise , full of happy contradictions and comfor - table synthesis , but void of nasty interest conflicts , absent of material and mental manipulations . Power and domination are not in Nonaka’s vocabulary . There are no such things as differential interests of the workers , the top management , the consumers , the sub - contractors and the wider community . There is only one interest : that of ‘the company’ . Whereas Giddens ( 1979 ) suggests us to analyse the process of ‘reification’ : how dominant groups present their sectional interests as if they are neutral , Nonaka would have us to accept that those interests are neutral in nature . Giddens ( 1982 ) qualifies his structuration theory as critical , arguing that it does not take the society that it analyses as given but asks questions about the types of social change that are feasible , which are desirable , and the means we might find to pursue them . Although we cannot ‘seize history’ and bend it to our collective purpose , Giddens ( 1990 ) argues , we can and need to envisage possible alternative futures in a way that links an emancipatory politics with a politics of self - actualisa - tion . Whereas in Nonaka’s KCC , workers need not look beyond products , all problems boil down to the cognitive conversions between tacit and explicit knowledge . As long as cognitive barriers are overcome , knowledge creation follows , new product development sets in motion , market share increases and everybody is closer to the world we all want to live in . As Silverman ( 1968 , p . 225 ) concisely criticised almost forty years ago : Conflict is thus not the outcome of the different goals pursued by organised groups with separate interests ; rather it stems from faulty communications , difficult personalities and ‘misunderstandings’ . It is , therefore , neither endemic in the industrial situation nor insoluble . Where it exists , it can be eliminated by intelligent managements who , by provid - ing ‘satisfying’ conditions and disseminating ‘information’ , can encourage their workers to develop favourable defini - tions of their situation . On the one hand , Nonaka would have us believe that in the KCC ‘ [ E ] very participant in ba is at the same distance from the centre , as there should be no difference among the participants in terms of the access to the centre . y In ba , anyone has a potential to be a centre’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2002 , p . 1002 ) . Nice paradise . On the other , there is not any doubt at any time in Nonaka that it should be ‘the leaders’ and ‘the leaders’ alone , or ‘top management’ for that matter , who are to build , justify , maintain , keep , protect the ba , to ‘select the participants of ba’ , and to ‘define the vision and strategy’ that is then to be shared ‘by the whole organisation’ ( Nonaka & Nonaka meets Giddens Zhichang Zhu 109 Knowledge Management Research & Practice Toyama , 2002 , pp . 1002 – 1004 ) , with the middle level managers ‘ [ S ] erving as a bridge between the visionary ideals of those at the top and the chaotic reality of the front line’ ( Nonaka et al . , 2000 , p . 24 ) . Cold reality . Perhaps this tells us why Nonaka substitutes Giddens’s key concept ‘rule - following’ with ‘role - taking’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 4 ) . 1 But what would happen if ‘the leaders’ ‘personal belief’ , and hence all the ‘visionary ideals and strategies’ ‘of those at the top’ , turn out to be unjustified ? This never bothers Nonaka . That is a question that should not be asked . Nevertheless , one need not look beyond Japan to note that the ‘leaders’ vision is not always noble or novel . I am not talking about the wars tens of years ago , I am talking about the recent bankruptcy and troubles of the household - name Japanese equity houses , construction firms and service industries , ‘the companies’ , for the last 10 years ( e . g . , The Economist , 2004a , b ) . Giddens is criticised by some for his ignorance toward emotions and passions on the one hand , and by others for his rationalist manipulation of cultures and traditions on the other ( e . g . , Mestrovic , 1998 ) . The critics have their point as Giddens ( 1994 ) demands that ‘Traditions have to explain themselves , to become open to interrogation and discourse’ ( p . 5 ) . While Giddens ( 1979 ) considers that ‘a conception of the unconscious is essential to social theory’ , he maintains that ‘the unconscious , of course , can only be explored in relation to the conscious : to the reflexive monitoring and rationalisation of conduct , grounded in practical consciousness’ ( p . 58 ) . What Giddens fails to recognise , the critics argue , is that traditions cease to be traditions if they are reflexively deconstructed and emotions are no longer emotions if they are purposefully rationalised . In this regard , no one can deny that Nonaka is mindful of cultures and emotions . ‘ [ L ] ove , care , trust and commitment’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 1003 ) are at the core of his model , particularly in its early version ( Nonaka & Takeuchi , 1995 ) . Some regard Nonaka as bringing a ‘cultural revolution’ into KM . But make no mistake : all the cultural stuff in Nonaka is carefully and thoroughly engineered through cognitive filters in the name of ‘the company’ , so as not to up - set the status quo but to be embodied into marketable products . Like Giddens , Nonaka treats culture , tradition , emotion and care in a rationalist way . He is not interested in those emotions that are not useful for ‘the company’ , he is not concerned with knowledge outside the cognitive realm , he rules out individual goals that in the end vary from that of ‘the company’ , and he cannot face such questions as ‘if I am fired tomorrow , why should I share my knowledge with the company’ even at a time when lifetime employment is shaken in Japan’s mighty com - panies . Nonaka’s later writing on such things as incentive systems , motivation management , self - satisfaction , peer recognition , sense of belonging , etc . ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2002 , pp . 1004 – 1005 ) , looks more and more like the human relations school of the Hawthorne sort . Sadly , the revolution deteriorates into regression . The omnipresent contradictions A theme that gains overwhelming significance as Nonaka incorporates Giddens is ‘transcending and synthesising contradictions’ . To offer an opposite injunction to structural functionalism , Giddens takes the concept from Marx : for understanding society and social action , do not look for functions , look for contradictions ( cf . Craib , 1992 , p . 59 ) . Throughout his theory , Giddens ( 1979 , 1982 , 1984 ) maintains that contradictions are produced and reproduced in social practices , that there remain contradictions in capitalism , primary and secondary , etc . Contradictions , of course the apolitical , cosy sort , now become more essential in Nonaka than ever before : ‘Today , firms are facing many contradictions’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2002 , p . 995 ) ‘in terms of its employees , customers , suppliers , related firms , and so on’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2002 , p . 998 ) ; ‘Contradiction is a necessity y for creation’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2002 , p . 999 ) since ‘ [ K ] nowledge is dynamically created out of contradic - tions’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2002 , p . 996 ) ; ‘ [ T ] he key to understanding the knowledge - creating process is dialec - tic thinking and acting , which transcend and synthesis such contradictions’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 3 ) ; ‘ [ I ] t is such a synthesising capability that gives a firm a reason to exist’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2002 , p . 1006 ) , etc . Underneath the rhetoric , here is the logic : ( 1 ) anything in and around the firm is in contradiction with every - thing else , ( 2 ) which is good for the firm but ( 3 ) need to be synthesised and transcended ( 4 ) into a ‘higher stage of truth’ . Simply put : no contradictions , no organisations . To contradict or not to contradict , to synthesise or not to synthesise , that is not a question . Dialectics , synthesis , transcendence and integration are obviously attractive ideas , but what they mean and how they are done is much less clear . To acknowledge that organisation boundaries become increasingly dynamic and blurred ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 8 ) is plausible , to suggest that firms can share ba with competitors and customers ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 5 ) is interesting , although not novel ideas . But these are not necessarily the same thing as synthesis or transcendence . It appears that Nonaka treats all ideas and writers as one and the same thing as long as they take on the ‘synthesis’ or 1 There is an interesting development from Nonaka recently . After the first draft of this paper was submitted to this journal in 2004 , Nonaka published a paper in 2005 . In that , as if anticipating and replying to criticism , Nonaka acknowledges that ‘the issue of power in organisations needs to be developed further’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2005 , pp . 433 – 434 ) . Such an acknowledgement is apparently overdue and hence should be welcomed . But to acknowledge an issue under criticism is one thing , to take it seriously can be quite another . It remains , therefore , to be seen what power , domination and politics mean to Nonaka and how they are to be incorporated into his idealist KCC . Nonaka meets Giddens Zhichang Zhu 110 Knowledge Management Research & Practice ‘dialectics’ hat . This is evident in the following short paragraph : The word ‘synthesise’ is defined as ‘the dialectic combina - tion of thesis and antithesis into a higher stage of truth’ y It is not ‘either / or’ but ‘both / and’ , and it is not just finding an optimal balance . It is an action to transcend the existing self , which in essence is the interdependence , interpenetra - tion and unity of opposites y Dialectic has a long history in Western philosophy , form Plato to Hegal [ sic ] to Bhaskar y It is also a major part of Eastern philosophy ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2002 , p . 999 ) . This is of course a convenient and harmonious treatment . But it glosses over so much diversity and difference , produces more confusion than stimulation . As an East - erner myself , I doubt whether ‘combination of thesis and antithesis into a higher stage of truth’ is in the ‘major part of Eastern philosophy’ . In Far - eastern traditions , as far as I know , yin and yang never melt down into a ‘synthesis’ , the loss of opposites means death . So much trouble for synthesis . But why should we see organisation as in contradiction with all and everything within and surrounding it in the first place ? Why should there be only one type , that is , contradictory , of relation - ship ? Nonaka asserts that ‘ [ S ] ince individuals have different goals and contexts , contradictions are inevitable among individuals and the organisation to which they belong’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 3 ) . But are differences ‘inevitably’ equivalent to contradictions ? Nonaka implies that it is , but does not argue for it . If things different are necessarily in contradiction , as Nonaka would have us to believe , the world would be very dark indeed . Men and women are different , for example , but are they ‘inevitably’ always in contra - diction ? How are a cleaner and a driver in ‘the company’ , for further example , ‘inevitably’ in contradiction , given that they are indeed ‘different individuals’ ? Seeing the organisation as in contradiction with everything else , that is , ‘its employees , customers , suppliers , related firms , and so on’ , Nonaka falls into the trap of Porter’s ( 1980 ) five - forces model of which he claims to be critical ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 4 ) . My view is that life in the world and organisations are much more variegated and rich than Nonaka’s theory allows for . Contradiction does not exhaust all possible relationships within an organisation , nor between it and other ‘entities’ , and that synthesis and transcendence is not always the only solution , let alone the best one . An organisation is dealing with different kinds of ‘entities’ and issues which constitute different types of relation - ships , and this calls for different forms of understanding and different kinds of action . We had better learn to live and work with heterogeneity and variety in and of relationships . A ‘synthesised’ ‘higher stage of truth’ or a ‘transcendent’ ‘higher viewpoint’ is not always a better one . Or it may be better for some , not necessarily for all . There are limits to single - minded , wishful synthesis and transcendence . In a recent paper ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2005 ) , Nonaka speaks of ‘soft dialectic’ ‘which embraces contradictions and incorporates conflicting views’ and goes on to submit that such a dialectic ‘is more suited to synthesis in management than the Hegelian dialectic , that does not allow contradictions to stay’ ( p . 426 ) . Yet how does it work ? In that same paper , Nonaka tells us a presumably successful story of a supposedly good KCC , Eisai , a Japanese pharmaceutical company and its unique ‘hhc ( human health care ) ’ vision . ‘This vision made the employees of Eisai recognise that the mission of the company is to be on the side of patients and their families , not on the side of doctors or pharmacists’ ( p . 424 ) . But why and how patients and doctors are at two ‘sides’ ? No descriptions or explanations , we are simply taught to assume that patients and doctors are in contradiction by default , and to take side between them . Is this what Nonaka means by ‘synthesis in manage - ment’ ? How does this ‘allow contradictions to stay’ ? And how is it ‘more suited than the Hegelian dialectic’ ? Again , Nonaka says nothing beyond convenient assertions and unquestionable cases . It appears that , no matter ‘hard’ or ‘soft’ synthesis , Nokana has become a prisoner of his own obsession with contradictions . Nonaka is correct that any theory of the firm is to answer the question ‘Why does a firm exist’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2002 , p . 1005 ) . To transaction cost theory , the firm exists because it can handle some economic exchanges internally more efficiently than in the market ( Coase , 1937 ) . For other knowledge - based theories , such as Nahapiet & Ghoshal ( 1998 ) , the firm exists because it has an advantage over markets in creating and sharing intellectual capital due to more dense social capital within the firm . Why does a firm exist for Nonaka , then ? This is what Nonaka has to say : The basic argument is that knowledge creation is a synthesising process through which an organisation inter - acts with individuals and the environment to transcend emerging contradictions that the organisation faces ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 3 ; emphasis mine ) . It is such a synthesising capability that gives a firm a reason to exist ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2002 , p . 1006 ) . To put it in plain language , the firm exists to synthesise the contradictions it faces . The problem is : if the firm does not exist , it need not face any contradictions at all . If there is not the firm , there will be no ‘its employees , customers , suppliers , related firms , and so on’ , and hence no contradictions and no need of synthesis . So why should the firm bother to be there at the first instance ? In other words , why should we create the firm simply for the purpose of synthesising contradictions which will not exist if without the firm ? All other theories of the firm have defects , big or small , this or that kind , but none has such an existentialist problem as Nonaka’s theory which is due to his narrowly - minded obsession with contra - dictions and synthesis . Nonaka meets Giddens Zhichang Zhu 111 Knowledge Management Research & Practice I do find troubling contradictions in Nonaka’s model and incorporation , however . On the one hand , know - ledge is context - specific ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 6 ) , ‘cannot be readily bought and sold’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2002 , p . 997 ) , on the other , it can be bought from ‘the outside’ , ‘through a market’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2002 , p . 995 ) ; at one place , there is ‘the dualistic nature between the agents and structure’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 9 ) , yet at another , the dualistic two are only merely ‘ways of considering social action’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 4 ) ; at one moment , we are told that ‘‘‘Truth’’ differs according to who we are ( values ) and from where we look at it ( context ) ’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2005 , p . 421 ) , while at another we are instructed to guard against cases where ‘it is hard to create new knowledge or achieve the universality of knowledge’ ( p . 422 ) , and so forth . I do not see how Nonaka can seriously have them both ways . I do not think these contradictions are synthesisable or transcendable . They must be discarded . The omelette synthesis Many have criticised ‘the imperialist synthesising and totalising project’ with which Giddens ( 1 ) attempts to offer an overarching order for social sciences , for which he ( 2 ) denounces almost all ‘traditional’ social theories from Durkheim , Weber , Marx to Parsons , but ( 3 ) draws bits and bites from others at will and ( 4 ) leaves out valuable insights of others which appear not fit for his grand theory ( Craib , 1992 ; Mestrovic , 1998 ) . One found these same tendencies in Nonaka’s recent work . While Nonaka once famously preached that knowledge is ‘justified personal belief’ ( Nonaka & Takeuchi , 1995 ; Nonaka & Toyama , 2002 ) , there are recently moments when he rules out the justified beliefs of others . Nonaka appears to be forgetting that there can be no certain , best single theory for KM or of the firm across time and space , as he now frequently writes in either / or terms thus ‘An organisation is not a collection of small tasks y but an organic configuration of ba y ’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2003 , p . 9 ) , and as he believes that he has captured and represents the fundamental essence of things thus ‘Western epistemology has traditionally viewed know - ledge as explicit . However , to understand the true nature of knowledge and knowledge creation , we need to recognise y ’ ( Nonaka et al . , 2000 , p . 8 ) . The implication : only one representation of the social world is valid and all others must be ‘synthesised’ , i . e . , homogenised , into it . Like Giddens , Nonaka presents his work as breaking with ‘conventional theories’ . This is a fair aim as long as other theories are treated fairly and room is left for learning from them . Yet his treatments are usually sweeping and distorting . Nonaka comments on neoclas - sical economics theory , transaction cost theory and the resource - based view of the firm altogether , as if they were the same thing , thus : ‘Traditionally , these theories focus mainly on the production of physical goods’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , 2002 , p . 995 ) . I must admit that I failed to find such a ‘focus’ in transaction cost economics and the associated principal - agent theory . Instead , I found that Alchian & Demsetz ( 1972 ) , Jensen & Meckling ( 1976 ) and Williamson’s ( 1980 ) main concern , for example , is cooperation , or the lack of it , and incentives in teamwork when the production is not of easy - to - measure physical products but difficult - to - disentangle knowledge . As to the resource - based view , as far as I know , intangible resources and products have gained prominent attention since Barney ( 1991 ) , if not earlier since Penrose ( 1959 ) and Marshall ( 1965 ) . In fact , it is Nonaka himself who has been focusing exclusively on the ‘production of physical goods’ : his KCCs are almost all machinery or household product manufacturers : Honda , Toyota , Cannon , Kao , Maekawa Seisakusho , etc . , and his analysis domain is seldom beyond physical goods development . I have particular difficulty with his wholesale de - nouncement of the information - based theories of the firm . Nonaka criticises the theories at a time nearly everybody is rejecting the ‘information - processing ma - chine’ metaphor . This is easy , like attacking a dead man . However , to reject the machine metaphor is one thing , to dismiss the information paradigm altogether ‘in the long tradition of Western management’ ( Nonaka et al . , 2000 , p . 6 ) is quite another . It is this line of research , I shall argue , that reveals something important which Nonaka’s KCC model cannot handle and does not tell : information asymmetry , information manipulation , information manufacturing , sectional interest , dependence , legiti - macy , politics , etc . The problem is , Nonaka reads the rich information - based theories of the firm in organisa - tion studies merely through the superficial machine metaphor which he conveniently picks up , and then throws out the baby with the bathwater . A critic describes how he feels when handling Giddens’s ‘theoretical omelette’ thus : ‘I have occasionally felt I was getting lost y He moves around from topic to topic , point to point , thinker to thinker , and I find myself struggling to find the ‘‘point’’’ ( Craib , 1992 , p . 31 ) . One may feel the same frustration when reading the recent Nonaka . Personally , I was excited by Nonaka’s early inspiring writings on chaos theory , the rugby team metaphor , the concept of ba , and his earnest analysis of differing performances of Japanese industries in conjunction with the Japanese ways of knowledge management ( Nonaka , 1986 , 1990a , b ; Kusunoki et al . , 1998 ; Nonaka & Konno , 1998 ) , all of which are well related with each other and bear a distinguishable Nonaka intellectual mark in the 1980s and 1990s . I become disappointed when Nonaka adopts a me - too , I - am - everything strategy , daily expands his now all - encapsulating model by adding - on almost everything we can find in the management literature : knowledge visions , assets , routines , incentives , leader - ship , etc . One wonders what is Nonaka’s present ‘point’ . Nonaka criticises ‘traditional organisation theories’ be - cause they ‘try to solve such contradictions through the design of organisational structure , incentive systems , routines , or organisational culture’ ( Nonaka & Toyama , Nonaka meets Giddens Zhichang Zhu 112 Knowledge Management Research & Practice 2003 , p . 3 ) . Yet we see Nonaka brings all these ‘traditional’ mechanisms into his own model through the backdoor without any hesitation . They are , after all , nice things to have , yet only for his model , not for others . The once inspiring , energetic intellectual spin - off has now become a grand , totalising bureaucratic machine , become an end in itself . I do not in principle have a problem with ‘theoretical totalising’ , since any theory or model contains , explicitly or implicitly , its broad view upon itself as well as its relations with other theories . Even postmodernism cannot help but presents a unique fabric of narratives upon how all other ‘texts’ should be locally and temporarily ‘consumed’ , in spite of its anti - totalising - narrative rhetoric . Therefore , I am not against theoretical totalising per se . What concerns me is Nonaka’s distorting omelette totalising . It is distorting because it bundles the resource - based view and other knowledge - based theories such as Grant ( 1996 ) altogether with classical economics as one and the same thing simply because those theories do not fit well with his narrowly - minded , one dimen - sional synthesis ; it is a theoretical omelette because of the lack of consistency and coherence in recent theoretical incorporation due to his uncritical , superficial cherry - picking of Giddens and many others . Practically , as Nonaka’s organisational mechanism checklist gets longer and longer , it is less and less instructive when and where application is appropriate . If you fail , there must be something you got wrong , for example , the wrong ba , the wrong spiral , the wrong vision , the wrong assets , the wrong routine , the wrong incentive system , the wrong leadership , the wrong manager who failed the role of middle - up - down bridges , the wrong synthesis of contradictions , etc . While the all - synthesising model can in no way be challenged since it tells all and everything ex ante regardless of context , it gradually lost its distinctive explanation and creative power . My point of all this is that I am happy to have Nonaka’s model , but I also want to learn from other theories of the firm , since these theories , for all their defects , still provide useful perspectives to probe the questions in organisational life which Nonaka’s model failed to address , for example , why individuals come to share and exchange knowledge in teams and firms , and how to solve associated problems such as information asymme - try , social embeddedness , domination and political actions ( e . g . , Arrow , 1962 ; Granovetter , 1985 ; Aoki , 1988 ; DiMaggio , 1988 ; Roberts , 2004 ; for a summary see Swedberg , 2003 ) . These issues may not be as new or ‘transcendent’ as Nonaka’s theory , but they are no less crucial to practical managers . To me , the most striking feature of the modern firm is its complexity and variability . Information - and knowledge - based theories , and others , offer not mutually exclusive descriptions , but different descriptions , each of which focuses attention to different aspects of the firm , useful in different ways , in different contexts . There is no point for indiscriminatory , blanket denouncement upon others . As to Nonaka’s theory itself , what I am arguing in the above is not so much that it is wrong , but that it is , like many others , only partial , and hence needs to be complemented with , not replace , others . Further , all elements in the theory have something to aid our understanding , but they do not fit together . Crucially , when these elements are taken out from their original contexts and inserted into the Nonaka model , much has been lost or distorted : the ‘two types of knowledge’ taken out unhandily from Polanyi is just an often criticised example ( for critiques see , e . g . , Tsoukas , 1996 , p . 14 ; Boisot , 1998 , p . 56 ; Nahapiet & Ghoshal , 1998 , p . 248 ; Cook & Brown , 1999 , p . 384 ; Brown & Duguid , 2001 , p . 203 ; Orlikowski , 2002 , p . 250 ) . Conclusion In this paper , I have tried to show that Nonaka’s appropriation of Giddens , as an illustrative example of the more general pattern of his recent incorporation of other heavyweight theorists , is confused , confusing and intentionally partial . He uncritically accepts from Gid - dens the controversial conceptions of structure and agency , sometimes makes them more problematic . Let me make myself clear on this point : I am not critical of his incorporation of controversial conceptions , but critical of his lack of engaging analysis , justification and argument for it . He exaggerates Giddens’s ‘contradiction’ into an all - dominant mechanism , whereas he reduces Giddens’s ‘practical - discursive consciousness’ into the whether - we - can - tell aspect only . He is almost the double of Giddens in the project and the way of search for a grand synthesis , which only turns out to be a discon - nected and self - contradictory omelette sort , while he keeps as far away as possible from Giddens’s concern of power and domination . At another level , however , Nonaka is all conscious , sharply focusing and perfectly consistent . He incorpo - rates Giddens’s conflated structure because it justifies his own magical ba . He appreciates Giddens’s rationalised agent because it mirrors well his own one - dimensional , idealistic knowledge creators . He praises Giddens’s two kinds of consciousness because they are thought to support his own ‘separation of the two types of knowl - edge’ . He spreads Giddens’s contradictions because they seemingly allow him to bend the diversity , complexity and richness of organisational life into one homogeneous conceptual device . But he manages to keep conspicuously silent toward Giddens’s concern of power and domina - tion due to its potential in disturbing the cosy status quo of his KCC . As a consequence of such superficial and incoherent theoretical borrowing , however , tensions , contradictions and existential problems gradually build up in Nonaka’s recent writings . Overall , the incorporation leads to an illusory con - firmation of the idealistic yet simplistic Nonaka model , rather than a critical review of it . To some , this is satisfactory since no uncertainties emerge and previous intellectual investment is safe . To others , this is regretta - Nonaka meets Giddens Zhichang Zhu 113 Knowledge Management Research & Practice ble since an innovation opportunity is wasted . But both views are premature because Nonaka’s is not the only way Giddens can be incorporated into KM . This paper is meant to be critical , not toward Nonaka personally , but toward his recent theoretical appropria - tion , his superficial and idealistic style , and associated consequences , which can be significant due to his huge and usually unquestioned influence . In KM , as in any other field of human inquiry , critique and debate are as important as theory building and extension . No model , however popular or influential , shall be beyond scrutiny and contestation . For some time now , there have been plenty of praises and convictions , few questions and debates , which is hardly a healthy sign for a field of inquiry . It is against this situation that I offer my critique in order to invite clarifications , dialogues , refinements and further innovations . I firmly believe , and wish my critique be read as such , that it is precisely by critically appreciating their work that we keep faith with our intellectual pioneers . References A LCHIAN A and D EMSETZ H ( 1972 ) Production , information cost , and economic organisation . American Economic Review 62 , 777 – 795 . A NDERSON P ( 1990 ) A culture in counterflow 1 . New Left Review 180 , 41 – 78 . A OKI M ( 1988 ) Information , Incentives and Bargaining in the Japanese Economy . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . A RCHER MS ( 1982 ) Morphogenesis vs structuration . British Journal of Sociology 33 , 455 – 483 . A RCHER MS ( 1995 ) Realist Social Theory : The Morphogenetic Approach . University of Cambridge Press , Cambridge . A RROW KL ( 1962 ) The economic implications of learning by doing . Review of Economic Studies 29 , 155 – 173 . B ARNEY J ( 1991 ) Firm resources and sustainable competitive advantage . Journal of Management 17 , 99 – 120 . B OISOT M ( 1998 ) Knowledge Assets : Securing Competitive Advantage in the Information Economy . Oxford University Press , New York . B ROWN JS and D UGUID P ( 2001 ) Knowledge and organisation : a social - practice perspective . Organisation Science 12 ( 2 ) , 198 – 213 . C OASE R ( 1937 ) The nature of the firm . Economica 4 , 386 – 405 . C OOK SDN and B ROWN JS ( 1999 ) Bridging epistemologies : the generative dance between organisational knowledge and organisational know - ing . Organisation Science 10 ( 4 ) , 381 – 400 . C RAIB I ( 1992 ) Anthony Giddens . Routledge , London . D E S ANCTIS G and P OOLE MS ( 1994 ) Capturing the complexity in advanced technology use : adaptive structuration theory . Organisation Science 5 ( 2 ) , 121 – 147 . D I M AGGIO PJ ( 1988 ) Interest and agency in institutional theory . In Institutional Patterns and Organisations : Cultural and Environment ( Zucker LD , Ed ) , pp 3 – 22 , Ballinger , Cambridge , MA . E CONOMIST ( 2004a ) Japanese carmakers : the also - rans . February 21 , 73 – 74 . E CONOMIST ( 2004b ) Dead firms walking . September 25 , 97 – 99 . E DWARDS JS , H ANDZIC M , C ARLSSON S VEN and N ISSEN M ( 2003 ) Knowledge management research & practice : visions and directions . Knowledge Management Research and Practice 1 ( 1 ) , 49 – 60 . F OUCAULT M ( 1980 ) Power / Knowledge . Pantheon , New York . G IDDENS A ( 1979 ) Central Problems in Social Theory : Action , Structure and Contradiction in Social Analysis . Macmillan : London . G IDDENS A ( 1982 ) A Contemporary Critique of Historical Materialism . University of California Press , Berkeley , CA . G IDDENS A ( 1984 ) The Constitution of Society : Outline of the Theory of Structuration . University of California Press , Berkeley and Los Angeles , CA . G IDDENS A ( 1989 ) A reply to my critics . In Social Theory of Modern Societies : Anthony Giddens and His Critics ( Held D and Thompson JB , Eds ) , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . G IDDENS A ( 1990 ) The Consequence of Modernity . Stanford University Press , Stanford , CA . G IDDENS A ( 1994 ) Beyond Left and Right : The Future of Radical Politics . Stanford University Press , Stanford , CA . G RANOVETTER M ( 1985 ) Economic action and social structure : the problem of embeddedness . American Journal of Sociology 91 , 481 – 510 . G RANT RM ( 1996 ) Toward a knowledge - based theory of the firm . Strategic Management Journal 17 ( Winter Special Issue ) , 109 – 122 . J ARZABKOWSKI P ( 2004 ) Strategy as practice : recursiveness , adaptation , and practices - in - use . Organisation Studies 25 ( 4 ) , 529 – 560 . J ENSEN MC and M ECKLING WH ( 1976 ) Theory of the firm : managerial behaviour , agency costs , and ownership structure . Journal of Financial Economics 3 ( 4 ) , 305 – 360 . K OGUT B and Z ANDER U ( 1995 ) Knowledge , market failure and the multinational enterprise : a reply . Journal of International Business Studies 26 , 417 – 426 . K USUNOKI K , N ONAKA I and N AGATA A ( 1998 ) Organisational capabilities in product development of Japanese firms : a conceptual framework and empirical findings . Organisation Science 9 , 699 – 718 . L ATOUR B ( 1987 ) Science in Action : How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through Society . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . L AYDER D ( 1994 ) Understanding Social Theory . Sage , London . M ARSHALL A ( 1965 ) Principles of Economics . Macmillan , London . M ESTROVIC SG ( 1998 ) Anthony Giddens : The Last Modernist . Routledge , London . M OUZELIS N ( 1989 ) Restructuring structuration theory . Sociological Review 37 , 615 – 635 . N AHAPIET J and G HOSHAL S ( 1998 ) Social capital , intellectual capital , and the organizational advantage . Academy of Management Review 23 ( 2 ) , 242 – 266 . N ONAKA I ( 1986 ) The new new product development game . Harvard Business Review 64 ( 1 ) , 137 – 146 . N ONAKA I ( 1990a ) The knowledge - creating company . Harvard Business Review 69 ( 6 ) , 96 – 104 . N ONAKA I ( 1990b ) Redundant , overlapping organisation : a Japanese approach to managing the innovation process . California Management Review 32 ( 1 ) , 27 – 38 . N ONAKA I and K ONNO N ( 1998 ) The concept of ba : building a foundation for knowledge creation . California Management Review 40 ( 3 ) , 40 – 54 . N ONAKA I and T AKEUCHI H ( 1995 ) The Knowledge Creating Company . Oxford University Press , New York . N ONAKA I and T OYAMA R ( 2002 ) A firm as a dialectic being : towards a dynamic theory of a firm . Industrial and Corporate Change 11 ( 5 ) , 995 – 1009 . N ONAKA I and T OYAMA R ( 2003 ) The knowledge - creating theory revisited : knowledge creation as a synthesizing process . Knowledge Management Research & Practice 1 ( 1 ) , 2 – 10 . N ONAKA I and T OYAMA R ( 2005 ) The theory of the knowledge - creating firm : subjectivity , objectivity and synthesis . Industrial and Corporate Change 14 ( 3 ) , 419 – 436 . N ONAKA I , T OYAMA R and K ONNO N ( 2000 ) SECI , ba and leadership : a unified model of dynamic knowledge creation . Long Range Planning 33 , 5 – 34 . O RLIKOWSKI WJ ( 1992 ) The duality of technology : rethinking the concept of technology in organisations . Organisation Science 3 ( 3 ) , 398 – 427 . O RLIKOWSKI WJ ( 2002 ) Knowing in practice : enacting a collective capability in distributed organising . Organisation Science 13 ( 3 ) , 249 – 273 . P ENROSE E ( 1959 ) The Theory of the Growth of the Firm . Basil Blackwell , Oxford . P ORTER ME ( 1980 ) Competitive Strategy : Techniques for Analysing Industries and Competitors . The Free Press , New York . Nonaka meets Giddens Zhichang Zhu 114 Knowledge Management Research & Practice P OZZEBON M ( 2004 ) The influence of a structurationist view on strategic management research . Journal of Management Studies 41 ( 2 ) , 247 – 272 . Q UINN JB ( 1992 ) The Intelligent Enterprise . Free Press , New York . R OBERTS J ( 2004 ) The Modern Firm : Organisational Design for Performance and Growth . Oxford University Press , Oxford . S ILVERMAN D ( 1968 ) Formal organizations or industrial sociology : towards a social action analysis of organizations . Sociology 2 ( 2 ) , 221 – 238 . S PENDER J - C ( 1996 ) Making knowledge the basis of a dynamic theory of the firm . Strategic Management Journal 17 ( S2 ) , 45 – 62 . S WEDBERG R ( 2003 ) Economic vs sociological approaches to organisation theory . In Oxford Handbook of Organisation Theory ( Tsoukas H and Knudsen C , Eds ) , pp 373 – 391 , Oxford University Press , Oxford . T HOMPSON JB ( 1989 ) The theory of strucutration . In Social theory of modern societies : Anthony Giddens and his critics ( Held D and Thompson JB , Eds ) , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . T SOUKAS H ( 1996 ) The firm as a distributed knowledge system : a constructionist approach . Strategic Management Journal 17 ( S2 ) , 11 – 25 . W EICK KE ( 2003 ) Enacting an environment : the infrastructure of organizing . In Debating Organisation : Point - Counterpoint in Organisa - tion Studies ( Westwood R and Clegg S , Eds ) , pp 184 – 194 , Blackwell Publishing , Malden , MA . W HITTINGTON R ( 1992 ) Putting Giddens into action : social systems and managerial agency . Journal of Management Studies 29 ( 6 ) , 693 – 712 . W ILLIAMSON OE ( 1980 ) The organization of work . Journal of Economic Behaviour and Organisation 1 , 5 – 38 . About the author Zhichang Zhu’s formal education stopped when he was sixteen , due to China’s ‘Cultural Revolution’ . Without a high school certificate and a university first degree , he obtained an M . Sc . in Information Management ( 1990 ) and a Ph . D . in Management Systems and Sciences ( 1995 ) , supported by British scholarships . Zhichang has been a communist Red Guard , farm labourer , shop assistant , lorry driver , corporate manager , assistant to the Dean of a business school , systems analyst , IT / IS / business consul - tant , in several countries . Zhichang is currently teaching strategic management for MBA programmes at the University of Hull Business School in England , and conducting consultancy for business firms in China . Zhichang also holds visiting positions as Professor and Research Fellow in China , Germany , Japan and the U . S . Zhichang’s current research focuses on strategy , systems and knowledge management , all from an institutional and comparative perspective . Nonaka meets Giddens Zhichang Zhu 115 Knowledge Management Research & Practice