The Role of External Representations in the Writing Process : Implications for the Design of Hypertext - based Writing Tools Christine M . Neuwirth and David S . Kaufer English Department Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh , PA 15213 ABSTRACT The long - range goal of the research reported here is to study the role of hypertext - based external representations in augmenting performance on a cognitively complex task , in particular , on a synthesis writing task . The production of a written synthesis is a challenging task that requires managing large amounts of information over an extended period of time . Thus , synthesis writing is a task that is well - suited for testing the potential of hypertext technologies to support work on complex tasks . From a case study of experts and novices , we have developed a theory of the cognitive processes involved in producing a written synthesis . We have also developed a preliminary theory of the role of external representations in the writing process . We have drawn upon these two theories to design several hypertext - based external representations that we believe will augment writers’ performance on a written synthesis task . The hypertext - based applications include a general graph object and a table object ; these objects form the foundation for a set of specialized tools to support synthesis writing , namely , a summary graph , synthesis grid and synthesis tree . INTRODUCTION From the beginning , hypertext researchers have been concerned with the role of external representations in complex tasks such as writing . For example , Douglas Engelbart , an influential hypertext pioneer , explicitly envisioned the computer as a tool for augmenting human intellect through “automated external symbol manipulation CEnge631 . ” Even earlier , Vannever Bush , a visionary who is generally credited with proposing the first hypertext ( which he called a “memex” ) , conceived of it as an external representation of human associative memory that would augment our ability to work with the worlds scientific literature . Bush saw the role for such an external representation of memory as improving upon the encoding performance of the human memory system , with associative links providing more speed and flexibility of retrieval than traditional external stores , albeit still not equal to the speed and flexibility of the human system : One cannot hope to equal the speed and flexibility with which the mind follows an associative trail , but it should be possible to beat the mind decisively in regard to the permanence and clarity of the items resurrectedfrom storage [ Bush45 ] . The basic vision that Bush described for creating associative links , representing them , and following them has been pursued in many actual implementations of hypertext systems . An implicit assumption shared by such systems was that a good representation for performing the process of retrieval from an external memory would be one that provided a Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 319 November 1989 mechanism to mimic the associative links of human memory . This assumption has been called into question by the problem of users “getting lost in hypertext , ” a disorientation problem in which users forget where they are in the hypertext network , forget how to get to another place in the network , or forget what is in the network [ Char87 , Foss891 . Conklin characterizes the root of the problem as follows : Of course , one also has a disorientation problem in traditional linear text documents , but there are only two options about where the & sired passage is : earlier or later in the text . Hypertext offers more degrees offeedom [ than traditional linear documents ] , more dimensions in which one can move , and hence a greater potential for the user to become lost or disoriented . In a network of 1000 nodes , it is easy to imagine that information could become hard to find or evenforgotten altogether [ Conk87al . Ironically , the very potential strength of hypertext , namely improving the management of loose collections of relatively unstructured information , turned out to be a major potential weakness . Not surprisingly , numerous efforts have been undertaken to create more adequate mechanisms for managing the loose collections of unstructured information that are characteristic of hypertext , including mechanisms for accessing , organizing and filtering it . These efforts fall into two camps : those who are developing general mechanisms and those who are developing task - specific mechanisms . General mechanisms that have been developed include , among others , graph views of the hypertext network [ Hala87b ] , user - defined paths through the network [ Trig831 as well as dynamically generated system paths [ pobelll , Shne86 ] , and context - dependent displays [ GoldsO , Gold84 , Yank85J . Task - specific development efforts abound . For those explicitly concerned with writing tasks , mechanisms have included , among others , hierarchical structures [ Enge68 , Trig83 , Neuw87 , Smit871 , special link types for authors and reviewers [ Trig83 ] , and hypertext interfaces for authoring and linear interfaces for reading lWalk871 . In systems with sufficient flexibility , users themselves have evolved task - specific interfaces [ Trig87 , vanL85 ] . Indeed , Marshall argues that sufficiently flexible hypertext systems are well - suited for supporting the process of developing task - specific external representations [ Mars87 ] . Although concern for external representations has occupied one of the central places in hypertext research , little is known about what makes one external representation better than another . Competing external representations have received only informal evaluations . This paper will report on a project whose aim is to study the role external representations can play in augmenting human performance on a complex task , in particular , on a synthesis writing task . As part of the project , we are exploring a framework , based on a model of the architecture of human cognition , for comparing external representations . The framework is intended to provide a foundation for more formal evaluations of competing external representations . Such a foundation is needed for empirical studies of how external representations can augment human performance on complex tasks . In the next section we outline why writing , and in particular , synthesis writing , is a good task for studying external representations . In section three , we present aspects of synthesis writing that are important for understanding the research we are describing . In section four , we present a cognitively - based framework for answering the question “When is one external representation better than another ? ” In section five , we outline the interface design for a set of hypertext - based applications and describe what cognitive role we see them playing in the process of synthesis writing . In section six , we discuss related research . Finally , we outline some general implications for the design of hypertext systems . Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 320 November 1989 THE IMPORTANCE OF EXTERNAL REPRESENTATIONS IN WRITING TASKS Is writing an appropriate task for studying the potential of hypertext - based representations for augmenting performance on complex tasks ? In this section , we review some of the features of the writing that , we believe , make it appropriate . Task Difficulty Many writing tasks are sufficiently difficult that even experienced , highly skilled writers frequently - focus on details at the expense of larger goals and attend to information that plays no role in later problem - solving - forget information that would have been useful - need to search for information that they could only partially retrieve - select incorrect operators and paths and need to backtrack - engage in trial search - lose track of goals As we shall argue in this paper , hypertext - based external representations have the potential to significantly reduce these difficulties . The Role of Partial Products Writing is an open - ended design task . A design task is a task that involves creating a product : an architect designs a building , a software engineer designs a computer program , a writer designs a paper . An open - ended task is one in which the task specifications do not sufficiently constrain the end - state . In open - ended design tasks , problem solvers must further constrain the task in order to build the final product . The partially completed product plays an important role in this process : The partially completed product becomes part of the task environment and constrains the subsequent course of the design . For example , writers frequently re - read portions of the text they have produced so far to provide constraints for the next segment of text that they want to produce [ Flow81 , Kauf86 ] . Thus , writing is a task in which new , interactive external representations of partial products can be expected to have a profound impact . The Role of Planning To construct a finished , polished product is expensive , so we usually associate design with planning , especially planning with the aid of representations and models . In this sense of design , an architect’s task is a prototype design task because steel , bricks and concrete are too unwieldy and costly to be good media for planning : the architect rnl ~ ~ t work with the aid of drawings and models , Although less prototypical , it is relatively expensive for a software engineer to produce syntactically correct program code , and for a writer to produce polished formal sentences . Indeed , a study by Glynn , B & ton , Muth and Dogen indicated that generating polished formal sentences early in the process of writing depressed the quality and quantity of ideas that writers produced [ Glyn82 ] . Presumably , interactive external representations that offer writers more alternatives to formal sentences could significantly facilitate planning . Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 321 November 1989 Synthesis Writing The production of a written synthesis is a challenging task that requires managing large amounts of information over an extended period of time . As such , it is a task that is well - suited for testing the potential of hypertext for supporting work on complex tasks . Moreover , providing tools to support the production of written syntheses is of significance in its own right , In every discipline , constructing a synthesis of previous research is a crucial step in carrying out new research . In all areas of scientific endeavor , a researcher must provide a context for his or her contribution , both when contemplating new studies and when conimunicating new results with colleagues . A PRELIMINARY MODEL OF THE PROCESS OF SYNTHESIS WRITING Constructing a written synthesis has many elements in common with other writing tasks as well as some points of difference . In this section , we sketch some aspects of synthesis writing that are important for understanding the research we are undertaking . The primary purpose of a written synthesis is to describe the structure and relationships among various authors and to simplify those relationships in such a way that general statements can be made , statements that can lead to economies of memory , to the description of general laws , or to the generation of insights such as hypotheses for research or solutions to problems [ Soka74 ] . To examine the processes involved in producing a written synthesis , we collected thinking - aloud protocols from people at two skill levels , expert and novice . Our model of synthesis writing is based on data from a larger task - writing an original argument from sources . This set of protocols formed a rich data base of evidence about the problem - solving processes involved in writing a synthesis because subjects produced a written synthesis as part of their original essays . Subjects and Materials Five of the subjects were experienced writers . They included three professors of philosophy and two Ph . D . students . Two subjects were novices . Both were undergraduate students recruited from a writing class . We asked subjects to read eight articles on the issue of paternalism and to write an essay that made an original contribution to the issue . The issue of paternalism can be summed - up by the question , “When is it right , if ever , for a society or an individual to limit another person’s freedom for that person’s own good . 3” We chose this task because it offers an open - ended challenge , yet it does not require knowledge of highly specialized domains that would fall outside the competence of some subjects ; that is , subjects could construct a reasonable essay using only the techniques taught in a writing class . Writers wrote at their own pace , taking up to fifty hours to complete the task . We analyzed a subset of the subjects’ protocols in detail ; we examined others more cursorily to find corroborating evidence [ Geis86 ] . In analyzing the protocols , we did not take it as our task to develop a model of the entire writing process . Instead , we focused on aspects of particular importance to argument . In the following sections , we limit the analysis even further and discuss the similarities and differences among subjects as they relate to producing a written synthesis . Because of the small number of subjects , the model that we will sketch must be viewed as preliminary and open to significant revision . The model will have served its purpose in this paper , however , if it provides the level of detail about cognitive processes in writing that we believe is necessary in order to discuss the role of external representations . Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 322 November 1989 Processes of Synthesis In working on the synthesis writing task , our experts employed the following , identifmble processes : 1 . A selection process that identifies important information in individual source texts . In what follows , we refer to the knowledge structures that this process produces as a summary of each author . The knowledge structures built by this process provide a representation of a single source text . 2 . An aggregation process that groups authors according to similarities / differences on relevant attributes . We refer to the knowledge structures that this process produces as a synthesis grid . 3 . A hierarchy - building process that organizes the authors according to degree of similarity / difference and provides an analysis of the causes of those differences . We refer to the knowledge structures that this process produces as a synthesis tree . 4 . A generation process that produces a written synthesis in an organizational pattern that can be seen as a traversal of the synthesis tree . In contrast to the expert subjects , the novice subjects can best be characterized as decomposing the synthesis writing task into two subtasks : 1 . A selection process that identifies important information in individual source texts . 2 A generation process that produces a written synthesis by the juxtaposition of the summaries . In sum , expert subjects interpreted the synthesis writing task as an opportunity to create new knowledge that allowed them to position authors in the issue . Novices , however , interpreted the synthesis writing task as a report on the reading that simply included information from all the sources . Task Decomposition The experts carried out these subtasks in ways that can be characterized both as opportunistic [ Haye79 ] and as decomposed into minimally interacting subsystems . For example , it was not uncommon for experts to make an aggregation statement while in the course of selecting important information from a single source text . We consider this behavior to be opportunistic . However , after reading all the source texts most of the experts also spent some time in aggregating authors and building a hierarchy . In Sciences of the Artificial , Simon argues that a useful way to study a complex system is to decompose it into nearly independent subsystems , subsystems that can be studied in relative isolation from each other [ Simo69 ] . This “divide and conquer” strategy has been observed in subjects working on other complex information processing tasks such as programming [ Jeff81 ] . Not all decompositions are equally effective . A poor task decomposition will leave many significant interactions between subtasks . When subtasks interact significantly , the work accomplished in one subtask will have to be substantially redone when working on another subtask . Subjects sometimes had to redo their work . The selection process , aggregation process and hierarchy - construction process , working in a structured , yet flexible , flow of control , are central to the representations in our interface design . In the following paragraphs , we describe these processes in more detail . Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 323 November 1989 The Selection Process : A Schema - Theoretic View In our analysis of the expert protocols , we hypothesize that experts encode an argumentative text with a problem - solution schema . A schema is an abstract knowledge structure that summarizes what is known about a variety of cases that differ in many particulars [ AndeS4 ] . The theoretical challenge for researchers is to specify the form and substance of schemata and the processes that use the knowledge structured by the schema . The experts we studied seem to encode an argumentative text as an author’s directions for proceeding through an issue , from problem to solution . To understand an argument is to be able to follow the author’s directions as the author moves from “What’s the issue about ? ” ( see the issue ) , to “What’s the root tension in the issue ? ” ( define the problem ) , to “How do we resolve this tension ? ” ( choose a solution ) . Although we studied arguments of policy , we expect to see a similar schema for other genres such as research . When reading , experts devoted little time to the consideration of statements that did not fit the issue - problem - solution schema . Moreover , experts demonstrated an impressive , though by no means perfect , ability to retrieve and apply information that fit into this schema . In contrast , novices often could not see the forest for the trees , spending more time on statements that are peripheral to the author’s main argument than experts . In addition , they had difficulty distinguishing the author’s position from the author’s discussion of an opponent’s position . The Aggregation Process : A Class Formation View The goal of the aggregation process is to find a set of dimensions of similarity / difference across the multiple authors . For the most part , subjects did not take the original source texts as input to the process of aggregation . Rather they worked with a subset of information generated by the selection process . Moreover , for our expert subjects , this subset was often not a direct quotation from the source text ; more frequently , it was a gist that seemed to remind them of the source . As noted earlier , novices did not exhibit a strong aggregation process . Subjects did not always articulate the attributes on which they were basing their aggregation . Experts seemed to search for statements on which authors disagreed . Sometimes these disagreements were explicit ; sometimes the experts inferred them . Novices , on the other hand , seemed to suppress disagreement among authors . Experts sometimes attempted to generate characterizations of the groupings , that is , they tried to make general statements that described a group in a way that distinguished it from other groups . Construction of a Hierarchy The aggregation process only builds similarities and differences on single propositions . The hierarchy - construction process seeks to connect propositions into a hierarchy . The goal of the hierarchy - construction process is to find the most important unresolved disagreements among authors . We hypothesize that experts use these unresolved differences as starting points for discovering their own contribution to the issue . We hypothesize that experts begin by examining the knowledge structures built in the aggregation process . If one of the propositions in these structures can be identified as important , unresolved , and most deserving of further discussion , the search may end . If none of the propositions meet these criteria , then the expert will try to construct a proposition which does . Regardless of whether the proposition arrived at is found or constructed , experts treat it as the pivotal proposition and use it to form the start of their synthesis tree . They build the rest of the synthesis tree by positioning authors on Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 324 November 1989 branches that are backward or forward from the propositional disagreement at the pivotal point . Evidence for this hierarchic construction from our case studies is suggestive but far from conclusive . Invariably our experts , in combination with the aggregation process , set the goal of trying to identify the most important or pivotal propositional disagreement in the issue . They often nominated and rejected many such disagreements in the course of arriving at one . Whenever they nominated a disagreement as pivotal , they would search for the underlying agreements that channelled into that disagreement . They would also search for disagreements among authors who agreed in their response to the pivotal proposition . A FRAMEWORK FOR STUDYING THE ROLE OF REPRESENTATIONS In this section , we draw on an architectural model of human cognition developed by Anderson [ And831 to explore the space of interactions between external and internal representations and to develop a framework for understanding the ways in which one representation may be better than another . This framework will serve as the methodological ground in studying the role of hypertext - based external representations in complex tasks . To study the role of external representations , we need to define more precisely what we mean by a representation and to develop criteria for making a judgment that one representation is better than another . Following Bobrow , we define a representation as the result of a selective mapping M from a world W at time t : W + M Rt . 1 We first must distinguish external representations from internal representations and define their interactions . Internal representations are stored in memory ; external representations are stored on paper or some other medium . Internal representations , of course , are not directly observable . When we speak of an internal representation encoding particular units and relations , we mean that the particular internal representation is postulated in order to account for subjects’ observable behavior . In the remainder of this section , we discuss the interactions of internal and external representations in terms of the following components of human cognition : encoding processes , storage and retrieval processes , match and execution processes , and control of cognition . The discussion forms the basis for answering the question “When is one representation better than another ? ” Encoding Processes Encoding prccesses create an internal representation from an external representation and deposit the internal representation into working memory . The resulting internal representation may or may not be informationally equivalent to the external representation , where two representations are informationally equivalent if all of the information in one is also inferable from the other , and vice versa ] Simo78 ] . There is considerable evidence that the encoding processes for external representations do not always create an informationally equivalent internal representation . For example , the encoding processes for sentences do not seem to encode the temporal sequence of words in most cases [ Bran72 ] . Given the limits of the number of elements in working memory , it is probably adaptive for subjects not to encode elements that are usually irrelevant to processing tasks . 1 Where W can also be a representation [ Bobr79 ] . If W has a set of actions that change the state of W to w’ , then we may define a set of operations , RG , on R that operate on R in order to change R to R’ in response to W - - > W’ instead of mapping from W’ to obtain R’ . Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 325 November 1989 Although the encoding processes do not necessarily produce an internal representation that is informationally equivalent to the external representation , they can . Indeed , in a recent article on external representations , in particular , on the role of diagram versus words , Larkin and Simon ground their discussion in the hypothesis that the encoding processes for diagrams and words produce informationally equivalent internal representations , but that the internal representations for diagrams are not computationally equivalent to the internal representations for words , that is , the set of processes that operate on the diagrammatic versus verbal internal representations do not carry out those operations with equivalent ease and speed [ Lark87 ] . A study by Santa provides evidence for their hypothesis [ Sant77 ] . Santa presented subjects with a spatial configuration of verbal elements and a spatial configuration of geometric elements . Santa predicted that subjects would encode the verbal material serially in the normal left - to - right , top - to - bottom reading order ; he predicted that subjects would encode geometric material in a way that preserved spatial information . If this prediction were the case , then the internal representations would be informationally equivalent but computationally inequivalent . Subjects were asked to verify whether a test array contained the same elements as the study array . Some test arrays were identical to the study array , others arrayed the elements linearly . Subjects’ reaction times confirmed Santa’s prediction : For the verbal material , subjects made judgments more quickly when the test array was linear rather than identical ; for the geometric material , subjects made judgments more quickly when the test array was identical rather than linear . The Santa study also demonstrates that in the absence of other information ( e . g . , what the external representation is going to be used for ) , the encoding processes are influenced by the type of elements ( e . g . , verbal , geometric ) that are being encoded . An experiment by Bower and Springston demonstrates that the encoding processes are strongly influenced by properties of the representation such as time , color , size , and so on [ Bowe70 ] . Subjects were induced by pauses or variations in size and color to miss encoding a set of letters into familiar chunks ( e . g . , IC BMF BIU SAOK instead of ICBM FBI USA OK ) . Subjects remembered fewer letters from the hard to encode lists than from the easy to encode lists . It is reasonable to suppose that encoding processes are both data - driven and context - driven ( e . g . , to a certain extent , the same representation may be encoded in different ways for use in different problem - solving contexts ) ; it is also reasonable to suppose that encoding processes themselves change in response to problem - solving experience . In addition to evidence that some representations are encoded in computationally inequivalent representations , there is also evidence that the computational inequivalence of representations can significantly influence subjects’ problem - solving performance [ Haye77 , Paig66 , Simo76 ] . For example , Paige and Simon documented that in some problems , crucial relationships among components of a problem are easier for subjects to discover with an external diagrammatic representation than with an external verbal representation [ Paig66 ] . The verbal and diagrammatic external representations were informationally equivalent . If we assume that the internal representations that subjects encoded were also informationally equivalent , then the effect can be plausibly explained if it is attributed to the computational inequivalence of subjects’ internal representations : Subjects operating with the internal verbal representation , in which the relationship is not explicitly represented , fail to make the inferences necessary to discover the crucial relationships ; subjects operating with the internal diagrammatic representation do not need to infer the relationship , since it is represented explicitly . Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 326 November 1989 This discussion suggests that we can compare external representations as follows : 1 . One external representation can be better than another if it helps a subject encode more elements that are relevant to a particular problem - solving activity than another , or fewer elements that are irrelevant . 2 . One external representation can be better than another if the subject’s encoding processes produce informationally equivalent internal representations , but the subject has a set of processes that operate more easily and efficiently on one internal representation than another . Storage and Retrieval Processes Storage processes create permanent records in declarative memory of the contents of working memory . Retrieval processes access internal representations in long term , declarative memory and deposit them in working memory . The elements that the encoding processes deposit into working memory act as sources of activation in memory . These elements stay active for a period of time . An element that is a source of activation by direct perception , however , only becomes inactive after it is no longer directly perceived . By keeping an element in direct perception , external representations can affect the duration of an element in working memory . How does duration in working memory affect storage and retrieval ? Although an element in working memory that is still being directly perceived remains in working memory , there is evidence that the duration in working memory is not related to whether the element will be stored permanently [ Crai73 ] . Thus , it is unlikely that the continued activation of elements in the presence of external representations by itself will improve memory for the element . Although duration in working memory does not affect whether an element is stored , it may affect how and where the element is stored . Permanent declarative knowledge is stored in chunks ( or cognitive units ) . Broadbent has suggested that the ability to combine elements into chunks depends on the ability to access those elements in working memory [ Broa75 ] . An external representation that keeps otherwise widely separated elements in working memory may increase the likelihood that they will be stored as a unit . For example , in an argumentative text , the elements that subjects need to identify as instances of see - the - issue , define - the - problem , and propose - a - solution may occur at widely separate locations . Subjects who lack strong schema for argumentative texts are unlikely to activate the schema upon encountering an element . However , if the elements needed for the schema are represented externally and , as a result , are still in working memory , the likelihood of activation will be increased . Although this explanation was not suggested , it is consistent with Dansereau et al . ‘s findings of a facilitative effect for less skilled readers of external , network representations of texts [ Dans79 ] . Because elements in the external representation that are perceived remain active and do not need to be retrieved , we might expect that the external representation could reduce retrieval failures if it helps people maintain the elements needed in processing in working memory . In addition , the elements in working memory can act also as primes for associative activation , facilitating retrieval of related elements . It is interesting to note that representations that are informationally equivalent can serve this role . For example , a study by Glynn and DiVesta found facilitative effects on retrieval in the presence of an external , structured outline [ Glyn771 . Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 327 November 1989 These observations allow us to add to our developing understanding of the ways in which one representation might be better than another : 3 . One external representation can be better than another if it increases the likelihood that the element will be stored in a chunk that will be useful in problem - solving ; since elements in a chunk are retrieved together , such chunking can reduce search upon retrieval , that is , it can reduce the time needed for associative activation of the chunked elements . 4 . One external representation can be better than another if it reduces the need to retrieve the element , either because the element is currently being perceived and is already in working memory or because the element is easily re - encodable through a perceptual scan of the external representation . 5 . One external representation can be better than another if it primes related elements for retrieval and these elements are needed for problem - solving . Match and Execution Processes A matching process puts data in working memory in correspondence with the conditions of productions . Productions consist of condition - action pairs . The condition specifies a set of features that must be in working memory . The action specifies a set of structures that will be deposited in working memory . When the condition of a production matches a set of structures in working memory , the production is selected to apply and the execution processes deposit the action side in working memory . Since the structures that the actions of productions deposit in working memory compete with other elements , external representations can clearly be useful as memory aids for helping to store intermediate results of operations . Control of Cognition The matching processes control the major processes of cognition including perception , attention , and motor control . Although a major source for the control of cognition is data - driven , another major source of control is the goals that the actions of productions can deposit into working memory . These goals then act as sources of activation ; activation spreading from the current goal will maintain closely linked goals in working memory as well . The rest of the goals , however , will have to be retrieved from long term memory . Given the limitations of long term memory retrieval , there will be many failures to retrieve goals . An external representation of goals could be expected to have a facilitative effect on maintaining goals . Burtis et al . report that experienced writers often use notes of their goals to keep themselves on task [ Burt83 ] . Singley reports a facilitative effect of an external representation of goals for novice LISP learners [ Sing87 ] . External representations then can be useful for keeping track of goals . In performing under the control of a goal structure , problem solvers can encounter points where insufficient information exists to achieve the next goal . In this case , a problem solver must often choose to guess or to postpone an action and set an intention to deal with it later ( delay execution ) . Because human ability to maintain prior states of control in problem solving is severely limited [ Gree74 ] , we can expect a facilitative effect for a representation of goals that the problem solver intends to return to later . Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 328 November 1989 These observations allow us to add again to our picture of the ways in which one representation can be better than another : 6 . One external representation can be better than another if it is a better medium for storing intermediate results of operations . 7 . One external representation can be better than another if it helps to maintain the activation of the current goal or to retrieve the next goal . 8 . One external representation can be better than another if it helps the problem - solver to maintain a set of goals that must be returned to when the problem - solver has more information . APPLYING OUR THEORY TO INTERFACE DESIGN The framework just outlined does not , unfortunately , generate user interfaces for tasks . It does , however , provide a heuristic by which to think about the role of external representations and to compare them . This section describes the design of interfaces to augment writers’ performance on a written synthesis task and analyzes them with the aid of our theory of the cognitive processes involved in synthesis writing and our heuristic framework for studying the role of external representations . For the purposes of description , it is useful to start with our representational theory of the knowledge structures writers build as they design a synthesis . The names of these knowledge structures correspond to the names of individual tools that will assist writers in building them . We call these tools Notes , Summary Graph , Synthesis Grid , and Synthesis Tree . To make the work of these representations clear and to sketch how they communicate with one another , we ask the reader to follow a hypothetical writer using these programs to write a synthesis of essays on the issue of animal experimentation . The Summary Environment Notes Figure 1 depicts a screen from a note - taking program we have already implemented called Notes [ Neuw87 ] . 2 The program allows writers to take notes on source texts , either hard copy or stored as computer files . The left portion of Figure 1 shows a source text , C . R . Gallistel , “Bell , Magendie , and the Proposals to Restrict the Use of Animals in Neurobehavioral Research , ” To the right , in a region labeled AI1 Notes List , is a list of notes that a writer has been taking on the Gallistel article . Further to the right , in the region labeled View Notes , are the contents of those notes . Above the All Notes List , in a region labeled Classes , is a set of user - defined classes by which users can categorize their notes . The Notes program is intended to augment writers’ performance in encoding source texts and retrieving what they have encoded , and in encoding and retrieving their responses , reactions , and evaluations of those texts . 2 The Notes program supports work in a variety of reading and writing courses on the CMU campus . The other interfaces described in this section are currently being designed as part of a project entitled “The Work - in - Preparation” ( PREP ) Editor : Support for Co - Authoring and Commenting , ” James Morris , David S . Kaufer , Christine M . Neuwirth , Ravinder Chandhok , Principal Investigators , NSF Grant No . IRI - 8902891 . Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 329 November 1989 1 Notes / cmu / itckmn / AnimalExxDeri ~ Source Text / cmuAtclcmnhallisteI Cl Ml , Magondio , and the Proposal to Restrict the Use of Animals in Neurobiological Research by C . R . Galktel A bill called the “Research Modernization Act” is now before Congress , where it is picking up influential support . The bill would ban most surgical experiments using live animals , on the theory that the same knowledge may usually be gained by computer simulations , experiments on bacteria , and so on . The bill would establish a committee that would allow at most one experiment of a given type to be done on live animals . 4 The proponents of this legislaticufain that the law is amoral imperative and that itwould not cause serious harm to research in th # e sciences . 4 I wish to argue that this bill would devastate behaviorial neurobiology and that it is an affront to moral sensibility ~ i Behaviorial methodology tries Take Note c 1 manner in which the nervous E COPY ltes I ment ses View dotes See the issue Define the problem Choose solutions opponents II Notes List Sallistel , C . R . ‘Bell . Magsndie . and the Modernization Act is proposals lo Restrict currently being debated . the Use of Animals in It would impose severe Neurobblogical restrictions on the use of Research animals in medical Reaearch Mcdemiratton Research Modernization Act But Gallistel sees it as a threat to the advancement of medical science . Research - Singer , P . ‘All Animals . Are Equal’ Figure 1 . The Notes program . Summary Graph Figure 2 depicts a Summary Graph , a representation of the schema we hypothesized experts employ for encoding an argumentative text , namely , as a path through an issue , from seeing it , defining it and choosing a solution . The main path represents the position of the author of the argumentative text . Faulty paths represent the positions of those that the author opposes . Return paths represent the author’s reasons for rejecting positions on the faulty paths . An author’s linear text may contain all of the schema elements depicted in Figure 2 , but in a different order , or it may leave out some elements altogether . But , we hypothesize , experts can be usefully described as instantiating a linear text within this schema . See the Issue Choose Solution Define Problem ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ Figure 2 . A Summary Graph . Figure 3 depicts a portion of a Summary Graph for Gallistel on the issue of animal experimentation . The graph is a competing external representation for the information depicted in the Notes interface in Figure 1 . Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 330 November 1989 Gallistel : . : , : ; i ; : ; Animal Experimentation See the Issue The Research Modernization Act is currently being debated . It wouldimpose severe restrictions on the use of animals in medical research . Zoom 1 Add Main Path Add Faulty Path Add Return Path Add Support Add Development _ Quit Advocates see But Gallistel it as a humane sees it as a Faulty Path threat to the gesture in support of advancement animals of medical science Return Path . . . / . . . . . . . . . : : : : : : : . . . . I Figure 3 . A portion of an instantiated Summary Graph The Summary Graph may help writers , particularly novice writers , encode more elements that are relevant to synthesis writing - and fewer irrelevant ones - than the Notes program interface . Unlike the Notes program , it may focus novice writers’ attention explicitly on the elements that experts focus upon . 3 Likewise , the representation may help novice writers maintain goal activation . An empty cell in the graph may help them to notice that they have missed encoding some part of the author’s position on the issueP On the other hand , expert writers already seem to encode relevant elements and exhibited little trouble in maintaining goals in this part of the task , so the Summary Graph may not be superior to Notes for them in this regard . Indeed , since the Notes program allows writers to record their own elaborations of the source text material while they are encoding the source itself , Notes may be a better encoding interface than the Summary Graph for experts . On its face , it is a better medium for storing a wider variety of the intermediate results that experts generated during this reading - to - write task . The Summary Graph may also provide writers , both novices and experts , with more help than Notes in working with the relationships among the argumentative elements . Note that in the Summary Graph , the relationships among faulty path , return path and seeing the issue are represented explicitly whereas they have only an implicit representation ( via the class mechanism ) in Notes . The two representations may be informationally equivalent , but writers may be able to operate more easily and efficiently on the representation which depicts the relationships explicitly . For example , such an encoding may help writers when they are drafting summaries of the argument . Likewise , the Summary Graph may increase the likelihood that the argumentative elements will be stored as a single chunk , reducing search upon retrieval . 3 Of course , novice writers must be taught to understand the meanings of these elements and to recognize them in source texts . See [ Kauf891 for a textbook . 4 In one instance , when a source text omitted an explicit discussion of “seeing - the - issue , ” we observed an expert trying to infer what the author might have said , based on what would be consistent with the rest of the source text . Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 331 November 1989 The Synthesis Environment Synthesis Grid Figure 4 depicts a Synthesis Grid on the issue of Animal Experimentation . The purpose of this structure is to let writers explore points of local similarity and difference across authors . The first column of the grid depicts the names of authors - Cohen , Gallistel , etc . - summarized in previously constructed Notes or Summary Graphs . This column is automatically generated . The remaining columns depict authors’ responses to abbreviated propositions ( e . g . , Results Important , Alternative Means , etc . ) , responses which relate or distinguish them on the dimension of similarity / difference . Discovering these dimensions ( column headings ) is the goal of building a synthesis grid . 1 SynthesisGrid / cmulitc / cmnlanimal . grid 1 Animal Research Cohen Results Important improves understanding of how humans function ; allevisl ~ s hunan suffering Gellietel Improves understanding of how hunem fuxtfon ; aIIevIates human suffering Results in no impwtant human good ; most results irrelevant or invalid reduction of human White cut COPY Paste Save I Insert Author Insert Issue Alternative Means I fl Moraltv Wro a Causes F I I - Only method of testtng & gs . 1 krimal research is a 1 Causes win to pro & dures and vacci & in maral duty for snimat but live organisms I bfomedcal I necessary to bring researchers abti & & r benefits alternative methods easily I Pulti”g animal csusos great pain lead to ORD” ~ OUS co”cluslo” Wfferfng above funan to animals but it is suffering I * P moral u”awldable affront Human data . tissue cUltwe Causes groat pain and math models wadd & # e I < # a aomnenb , 3 to animals better results “eedessly : < < No camnmt . , Modefling not alternative since need animal data to consbwt “wdels Morally wrong ; animals deswvs same Causes great pain to consider animal research morally m”g Figure 4 . A Synthesis Grid . To discover these dimensions , writers can automatically route their summary notes into the cells of this grid . The grid starts with columns for each milestone : “see the issue , ” “define the problem , ” “choose a solution . ” Summary notes sorted across authors and indexed at the same milestone can be shuffled and reshuffled under that column heading until the writer is ready to decompose the “see the issue” column into more specific dimensions . The writer can edit the summary notes so that they look like responses to the propositions . For example , in the summarizing space , the note on Cohen under the column heading “Morally Wrong” is not phrased as a response to the proposition , “The results of animal research are morally wrong . ” But now , as part of the synthesis grid , a Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 332 November 1989 writer , to make progress toward a synthesis , might come to view this note as a response to that proposition - and edit it accordingly . We hypothesize that the Synthesis Grid will be superior to the Notes or Summary Graph representations in producing a synthesis because the processes of searching for similarities / differences across authors operate more efficiently on this representation : Elements needed by those processes are more easily retrieved through a perceptual scan of the external representation . Like the Summary Graph , the Synthesis Grid representation can cause writers to notice that they have missed encoding an author’s position on some part of an issue . For example , the cell Mayo / Morally Wrong may be empty because the writer failed to notice Mayo’s position when reading the original source text ( cf . [ vanL85 ] ) . Synthesis Tree Figure 5 depicts a Synthesis Tree . The Synthesis Tree goes a step beyond the Synthesis Grid . Whereas the Grid enables writers to index their notes on authors around common propositions , there are no relationships holding across propositions ( column headings ) and so no guarantee that anything but local similarities and differences across authors are being represented . What is needed is a way to index authors within a structure that explicitly represents hierarchies of overall agreement and disagreement . Agreements or disagreements high in the hierarchy propagate down and so are more important than agreements or disagreements lower in the hierarchy . 1 SynthesisTree / cmu / itc / cmn / animal . tree Are we guilty or not guilty of mistreating animals ? What & s - relationship of humans to animals ? Not Guilty Why not guilty ? 1 \ / \ Eq ; ral Stop reserach eating meat [ Singer ] S”y ; erior Turn to spiritual [ Roberts ] Animals don’t Science is have Yght = unpredictable I Continue research Continue research [ Cohen ] [ Gallistel ] Figure 5 . A Synthesis Tree . A synthesis tree is a data structure that allows writers to index authors within this hierarchy of overall agreement and disagreement . Writers build the tree in three steps . First , they design what they perceive to be the most salient division among authors . Without labeling this split , they make a binary ( sometimes tertiary ) sort of authors according to where they fall along this division . The system then creates two ( or three ) branches sprouting from a root with the authors sorted according to branches . The writer is now prompted to label the branches . This labeling completes the major division ( the crux ) of the issue . Writers then design the tree both above the crux and below it . To design up from the crux , they are directed to search their synthesis grid for agreements across authors who occupy different branches at the crux . These agreements are called preliminary agreements because they represent commonalities between authors before they split at the crux . To design down from the crux , writers are directed to search their synthesis grid for disagreements across authors who occupy the same branch at the crux . These disagreements are called minor disagreements because they represent splinterings that arise between authors who occupy the same node at the crux . The division at the crux Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 333 November 1989 is a one time decision . Designing preliminary splits above and minor splits beIow the crux are iterative decisions . In Figure 5 , a writer has represented the division at the question “Are we guilty or not guilty of mistreating animals ? ” as the crux of the issue . The authors Singer and Roberts both fall on the same branch at the crux . They are opposed to Cohen and Gallistel on this same question . However , subsequent to their agreement at the crux , Singer and Roberts part company on the question of the relationship of humans to animals . And Cohen and Gallistel part company on their explanation as to why we are not guilty of mistreating animals . The Synthesis Tree provides an overall design structure for the written synthesis . That is , this tree can be linearized into a plan for a formal synthesis paper . We expect the Synthesis Tree to be a better representation than the Grid for writers who are trying to find the most important unresolved differences among authors . It provides a medium for storing writers’ intermediate decisions about importance of disagreement . In addition , writers can scan the tree and see , at a glance , the relationships among authors . For example , it is easy to see that the disagreement between Singer and Roberts is a disagreement “among friends . ” Cognitive Control Representation of Goals Figure 6 depicts a goal tree for the synthesis writing task . The goal tree program will allow writers to traverse the tree in a depth - first order via a Next option or in a user - defined order . In addition , the program will allow writers to mark a goal as suspended . Marking a goal as suspended will put the goal on a Return List , a list of goals that the writer wants to be reminded to return to later . Support for Backtracking The processes of synthesis writing that we have been sketching require writers to abstract from the original source texts . Such abstractions are often open to significant revisions as the writer’s understanding of the issue evolves . In a hypertext environment , these abstractions can be linked to their supporting locations in the source texts . 5 When writers need to return to the source texts to check their abstractions for accuracy against their current understanding , such links reduce search upon retrieval . Such backtracking is a characteristic of open - ended design tasks . Thus , an architectural requirement for the system is support for backtracking . In particular , the system must allow users to trace information that they have transformed from the original source text to notes to summary to synthesis and so on . For example , whenever the user takes a note , the Notes program creates a link that links the passage in the source text to the note . As the information is viewed and perhaps altered in different viewing environments ( e . g . , in the Synthesis Grid ) , the system must maintain links to its history in those environments . At any time , the user can request to see the representation of that information in different envirohments , perhaps to check its accuracy , its placement in relation to other propositions , and so on . Figure 7 illustrates a writer selecting the menu option “History As Source Text . ” This click opens up a window with Gallistel’s original source text . It highlights and activates passages of Gallistel’s text that lie in the scope of the currently activated notes . 5 For offline texts , abstractions can be linked to supporting quotations and page numbers . Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 334 November 1989 To write a synthesis of literature hnulitclcmnlgoal - - - - - - - - - - - summarize synthesize / I \ / I \ ’ pick author i build summary write summary build synthesis grid write synthesis I , _ : . . . , lrlrll , . \ I / \ build synthesis tree cornpore 2x3 1 \ I I \ I : - - - - : - - / identify examine common across authors I llnearlze \ tree \ compose identify main assertions i secondary I I \ assertions i I I \ CaaJFI Ll” , , a I / \ opposing I \ / . . . \ support \ concession 1 ’ atfirming decide on main minor qualification disagreement disagreements see ’ choose across authors ’ issue define solution prior problem disagreements Figure 6 . A Goal Tree . Our case studies suggest two reasons why writers need to backtrack . First , they need to explore previous paths in order to get a perspective on their current progress . Second , they need to search for decisions they want to undo . The need to undo many of these decisions only reveals itself after progressing further through the task , Thus a writer will often learn that the notes and summaries taken are nonoptimal only after entering the synthesis space . Previous views don’t simply inform current views ; current views can also inform previous ones as well . Building tools that support such backtracking will allow us to explore whether writers will be less prone to premature closure in their search for good solutions [ perk81 ] , and if so , whether more search translates to better solutions . Support for Bottom - up and Top - down Planning Writing actual prose represents a bottom - up planning procedure . As in other complex tasks , our experts engaged in a combination of top - down and bottom - up planning . It is unclear , however , whether writers need to plan bottom - up or whether bottom - up planning results from failure to retrieve goals . Thus , another architectural requirement is support for bottom - up and top - down planning . For example , the system must support movement from prose to notes as easily as writers can at the present time convert notes to prose . Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 335 November 1989 SourceText / cmu / itc / cmn / gallistel $ 3 . There is no way to establish the relation between the nervous system and behavior without some experimental surgery . n 4 . Most experiments conducted by behaviorial neurobiologists , like scientific experiments L in general , may be seen in retrospect to have been a waste of time , in the sense that they : did not prove anything or yield any new insight . I I I 5 . There is no way of discriminating in advance the waste - of - time experiments from the : illuminating ones with anything approaching certainty . 8uch judgements are necessarily \ made under conditions of high uncertainty . As shown by the theory of signal detection , a : necessary consequence of this uncertainty is that any attempt to reduce the number of i neurobehaviorial experiments by prior evaluation of their possible significance will I 1 nacasfnrilv niv ~ rise 10 manv ” frrlse n m - mtines” withmtt diminatinn take nnsitivas SynthesisTree / cmu / itc / cmn / animal . tree i Are 1 File - s uilty of mistreetina animals ? Guilty HIstorvh What’s relationshi humans to animal . Note $ Q : : : : : EqlUa’ : : : : : ; ; ; ; I Stop reserach eating meat Summary Graph # $ j - Synthesis Grid $ $ w $ 2 [ Singer ] I L ‘1 , . . - . . . - . . . - . - Not Guilty Why not guilty ? / Animals don’t Science is have iIghts I unpredictabl Continue research Continud research [ Cohen ] [ Gallistel ] Figure 7 . Support for backtracking . RELATED WORK Smith , Weiss , and Ferguson have been developing WE , a Writing Environment to support professional writers [ Smit87 ] . WE provides two major external representations , “Network Mode” and “Tree Mode , ” and two subordinate ones , “Editor Mode , ” through which the user associates text with nodes in the network or tree , and “Text Mode , ” by which the user can see a linearization of the nodes and text in Tree Mode , where the nodes represent headings , subheadings , and so forth . Like WE , we advocate a general graph object . But we advocate task - and user - specific instantiations of graph objects to support specific cognitive processes ( e . g . , SummaryGraph for encoding relevant elements in arguments of policy ) . Like WE , we advocate a general tree object . But again , we advocate task - and user - specific uses for the tree . For example , the SynthesisTree represents a plan for a written synthesis , but the nodes do not represent headings , subheadings , and so forth of a linear document . The work we have described here is complementary to WE , since the sort of mechanisms provided by WE’s Network Mode and Tree Mode could be useful for a writer who is drafting a written synthesis after having used Notes , Summary Graph , Synthesis Grid , and Synthesis Tree to create a design for one . Numerous projects are involved in representing arguments by displaying views of the relationships among various elements . Conklin and Begemen are developing gIBIS , a hypertext system to support the collaborative construction of Issue Based Information Systems ( Conk87bl . Again , the work we describe here is complementary . For example , gIBIS assumes that users know what the issue is , and provides them with a structure for representing an issue’s elements . In contrast , our work has been focused on discovering what the issues are across a range of sources . Also , the external representations we are developing may prove useful in synthesizing networks like those in gIBIS . Smolensky , Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 336 November 1989 Bell , Fox , King and Lewis are developing EUCLID , a hypertext system designed to represent the logical structure of philosophical arguments [ Smo187 ] . Their development effort has focused on developing alternative representions of argumentative texts themselves , whereas ours has focused on analyzing cognitive processes of authors working with traditional linear representations of argumentative texts and providing support for those processes . Marshall has been using the Xerox’s NoteCards system [ Hala87b ] to develop a methodology for exploring representation issues for various application areas , including argumentation [ Mars87 ] . Like EUCLID , the representations are of argumentative texts themselves , in this case , legal arguments . IMPLICATIONS FOR THE DESIGN OF HYPERTEXT The external representations we envision have a couple implications for the design of hypertext systems to support them . First , our framework for comparing external representations implies that the “best” external representation depends intimately on the cognitive processes that the user is performing and upon the user’s own knowledge and skills . This suggests that the flexibility needed to allow users to view hypertext networks through multiple representations , to move from one representation to another , and to tailor representations for themselves will continue to be an important issue in the design of hypertext systems [ Hala87a ] . Another implication concerns the issue of types of nodes the system supports , in particular , types of composites . Halasz defines the semantics of composites as inclusion ‘by reference’ rather than ‘by value . ’ In inclusion by reference , changes to the components of a composite node are reflected in the composite and changes in the composite would actually change the components [ Hala87a ] . In inclusion ‘by value , ’ changes made in the composite are not automatically reflected in the component , nor vice versa . In an application such as the Synthesis Grid , however , it would be useful to define another composite type in which the component would be included by value , ’ but with the links from the composite to the components retained . Note that the ‘by value’ component needs itself to be includable in other composites . For example , the revisions a writer creates in a Summary Graph ( a composite of selections from the source texts ) need to be able to work as components of a composite in the Synthesis Grid . FUTURE PLANS In conjunction with the development of these hypertext - based external representations , we plan to conduct a set of studies to help us answer three research questions . In this section , we briefly outline these questions . The framework for studying the role of external representations will both guide these studies and itself be put to the test as to its usefulness in guiding research on user interface . Question 1 : Are the assumptions about representation that our interface design makes warranted ? This is a question of the validity of our knowledge representations for writing . It would be foolish to implement representations that don’t matter to high quality summaries and syntheses or that writers are unable to use effectively . Question 2 : Do our hypertext - based interfaces effectively support the building of knowledge structures they are designed to support ? This is a question of formative evaluation . Question 3 : What is the effect of our writing environment on the quality of a written synthesis and the time it takes to complete one ? How will writers using our tools compare to writers using a simple text - editor ? Does it make a difference if the writer is an expert ? A novice ? This is a question of summative evaluation . Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 337 November 1989 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The ideas presented here were developed during many discussions Dick Hayes , Jim Morris and Rob Chandhok . Thanks to Terilyn Gillespie for her assistance with all aspects of this project and to Soo - Tsu Leng for his assistance with the illustrations . Thanks also to the Hypertext ‘89 reviewers for their helpful comments . REFERENCES bde831 Bobr791 lBowe701 [ Bran721 [ Broa75 ] [ Bur @ 31 [ Bush451 [ Char871 [ Conk87a ] [ Conk87b ] [ Crai73 ] @ hls79 ] Anderson , J . R . The Architecture of Cognition . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press , 1983 . Anderson , R . C . , & Pearson , P . D . A schema - theoretic view of basic processes in reading comprehension . In P . D . Pearson , ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Reading Research , pp . 255 - 291 . New York : Longman , 1984 . Bobrow , D . G . Dimensions of Representation . In D . G . Bobrow & A . Collins ( Eds . ) , Representation and Understanding , pp . l - 34 . NY , NY : Academic Press , 1979 . Bower , G . H . , & Springston , F . Pauses as recoding points in letter series . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 83 , 1970 , 421 - 430 . Bransford , J . D . , Barclay , J . R . , & Franks , J . J . Sentence memory : A constructive versus interpretive approach . Cognitive Psychology , 3 , 1972 , 193 - 209 . Broadbent , D . E . The magical number seven after fifteen years . In R . A . Kennedy & A . Wilkes ( Eds . ) , Studies in Long - term Memory . New York : Wiley , 1975 . Burtis , P . J . , Bereiter , C . , Scardamailia , M . , & Tetroe , J . The development of planning in writing . In G . Wells dz B . Kroll ( Eds . ) Explorations in the Development of Writing . Chichester , England : JohnWiley and Sons , 1983 . Bush , V . As we may think . Atlantic Monthly , 176 , July 1945 , 101 - 108 . Chamey , D . Comprehending non - linear text : The role of discourse cues and reading strategies . Hypertext ‘87 Papers , The University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , NC , November 13 - 15 , 1987 , 109 - 120 . Conklin , J . A survey of hypertext . MCC Technical Report SIP - 356 - 86 , Rev . 1 , Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation , February , 1987 . Conklin , J . , & Begeman , M . L . gIBIS : A hypertext tool for team design deliberation . Hypertext ‘87 Papers . The University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , NC , November 13 - 15 , 1987 , 247 - 252 . Craik , F . I . M . , & Watkins , M . J . The role of rehearsal in short - term memory . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior . 12 , 1973 , 599 - 607 . Dansereau , D . F . et al . Development and evaluation of a learning strategy training program . Journal of Educational Psychology 71 ( I ) , 1979 , 64 - 73 . Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 338 November 1989 IEngW l - h681 IFlow8 11 l - Foss891 [ Geis86 ] [ Glyn77 ] [ Glyn82 ] [ Gold801 [ Gold841 [ Gree74 ] IHalaf - W IHayeW EWe771 [ Jeff811 Engelbart , D . C . A conceptual framework for the augmentation of man’s intellect . In P . W . Howerton & D . C . Weeks ( Eds . ) Vistas in Information Handling , Vol . 1 . London : Spartan Books , 1963 . Engelbart , D . C . , & English , W . K . A research center for augmenting human intellect . Proceedings of 1968 Fall Joint Computer Conference , 33 Part 1 , Montvale , N . J . : AFIPS Press , 1968 , 395 - 410 . Flower , L . , & Hayes , J . R . The pregnant pause : An inquiry into the nature of planning . Research in the Teaching of English , 15 , October , 1981 , 229 - 243 . Foss , C . L . Detecting losr users : Empirical studies on browsing hypertext . INDIA Technical Report No . 972 , L’institut National de Recherche en Informatique et en automatique , Sophia - Antipolis , 2004 Route des Lucioles , 06565 Valbonne , France , February , 1989 . Geisler , C . Taking control of the text : Transforming issues through reading and writing . Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association , San Francisco , April 1986 . Glynn , SM . , & DiVesta , F . J . Outline and hierarchical organization aids for study and retrieval . Journal of Educational Psychology 69 ( 2 ) , 1977 , 89 - 95 . Glynn , S . M . , Britton , B . K . , Muth , K . D . , & Dogen , N . Writing and revising persuasive documents : Cognitive demands . Journal of Educational Research 74 ( 4 ) , 1982 , 557 - 567 . Goldstein , I . P . , & Bobrow , D . G . Descriptions for a programming environment . Proceedings of the First Conference AAAI , August 1980 . Goldstein , I . P . , & Bobrow , D . G . A layered approach to software design . In D . Barstow , H . Shrobe , & E . Sandewall ( Eds . ) Interactive Programming Environments . McGraw - Hill , 1984 , 387 - 413 . Greeno , J . G . , & Simon , H . A . Processes for sequence production . Psychological Review , 81 , 1974 , 187 - 198 . Halasz , F . G . Reflections on Notecards : Seven issues for the next generation of hypermedia systems . Hypertext ‘87 Papers . The University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , NC , November 13 - 15 , 1987 , 345 - 366 . Halasz , F . , Moran , T . , & Trigg , R . NoteCards in a nutshell . CHI + GI , Toronto , Ontario , April 5 - 9 , 1987 , 45 - 52 . Hayes - Roth , B . , & Hayes - Roth , F . A cognitive model of planning . Cognitive Science , 3 , 1979 , 275 - 310 . Hayes , J . R . , & Simon , H . A . Psychological differences among problem isomorphs . In N . J . Castellan , D . B . Pisoni , & G . R . Potts ( Eds . ) , Cognitive Theory , Vol . 2 , pp . 21 - 41 . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , 1977 . Jeffries , R , , Turner , A . A . , Poison , P . G . & Atwood , M . E . The processes involved in designing software . In J . R . Anderson ( Ed . ) , Cognitive Skills and Their Aquisition , pp . 255 - 283 . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , 1981 . Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 339 November 1989 II = @ 361 Kauf89 ] bark871 FIars871 [ perk8 11 IRobe & lm77 ] [ Shne86 ] [ Simo69 ] [ Simo76 ] [ Simo78 ] [ Sing871 [ Smit871 Kaufer , D . S . , Hayes , J . R . , & Flower , L . Composing written sentences . Research in the Teaching ofEnglish 20 ( 2 ) , May , 1986 , 121 - 140 . Kaufer , D . S . , Geisler , C . , & Neuwirth , C . M . Arguing from Sources : Exploring Issues through Reading and Writing , San Diego : Harcourt Brace Jovanovich , 1989 . Larkin , J . H . , & Simon , H . A . Why a diagram is ( sometimes ) worth ten thousand words . Cognitive Science , 11 , 1987 , 65 - 99 . Marshall , C . C . Exploring representation problems using hypertext . Hypertext ‘87 Papers . The University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , NC , November 13 - 15 , 1987 , 253 - 268 . Morris , J . H . , Satyanarayanan , M . , Conner , M . H . , Howard , J . H . , Rosenthal , D . S . , & Smith , F . D . Andrew : A distributed personal computing environment . Communications of the ACM 29 ( 3 ) , March , 1986 , 184 - 201 . Paige , J . M . , & Simon , H . A . Cognitive processes in solving algebra word problems . In B . Kleinmuntz ( Ed . ) , Problem Solving : Research , Method and Theory , New York : John Wiley , & Sons , Inc . , 1966 . Perkins , D . N . The Mind’s Best Work . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press , 1981 . Robertson , G . , McCracken , D . , & Newell , A . The ZOG approach to man - machine communication . International Journal of Man - Machine Studies , 14 , 1981 , 461 - 488 . Santa , J . L . Spatial transformations of words and pictures . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Learning and Memory , 3 , 1977 , 418 - 427 . Shneiderman , B . , & Morariu , J . The interactive encyclopedia system ( TIES ) , Department of Computer Science , University of Maryland , College Park , MD 20742 , June 1986 . Simon , H . A . The Sciences of the Artificial . Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press , 1969 . Simon , H . A . , & Hayes , J . R . The understanding process : Problem isomorphs . Cognitive Psychology , 8 , 1976 , 165 - 190 . Simon , H . A . On the forms of mental representation . In C . W . Savage ( Eds . ) , Minnesota studies in the Philosophy of Science . Vol IX : Perception and Cognition : Issues in the Foundation of Psychology . University of Minnesota , Minneapolis , 1978 . Singley , IS . The effect of goal - posting on operator selection . Paper presented at the Third International Conference on Al and Education , Pittsburgh , May 1987 . Smith , J . C . , Weiss , S . F . , & Ferguson , G . J . A hypertext writing environment and its cognitive basis . Hypertext ‘87 Papers . The University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , NC , November 13 - 15 , 1987 , 195 - 214 . Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 340 November 1989 [ Smo1871 Smolensky , P . , Bell , B . , Fox , B . , King , R . , & Lewis , C . Constraint - based hypertext for argumentation . Hypertext ‘87 Papers . The University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , NC , November 13 - 15 , 1987 , 215 - 246 . [ Soka743 Sokal , R . R . Classification : purposes , principles , progress , prospects . Science , 185 , 1974 , 115 - 123 . t - k831 Trigg , R . A network - based approach to text handling for the online scientific community , PhD Thesis , Dept . of Computer Science , University of Maryland , 1983 . i - JS $ W Trigg , R . H . , & Irish , P . M . Hypertext habitats : Experiences of writers in NoteCards . Hypertext ‘87 Papers . The University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , NC , November 13 - 15 , 1987 , 89 - 108 . [ vanL851 van Lehn , K . Theory reform caused by an argumentation tool . Xerox Palo Alto Research Center Technical Report , ISL - 11 , 1985 . [ Y ~ 851 Yankelovich , N . , Meyrowitz , N . , & van Dam , A . Reading and writing the electronic book . IEEE Computer , October , 1985 . Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage . the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear , and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery . To copy otherwise , or to republish , requires a fee and / or specific permission . 0 1989 ACM 089791 - 339 - 6 / 89 / 001 l / O341 $ 1 . 50 Hypertext ‘89 Proceedings 341 November 1989