Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) 1 3 Journal of Muscle Research and Cell Motility ( 2020 ) 41 : 175 – 188 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10974 - 019 - 09564 - 4 The advantages of microfluidics to study actin biochemistry and biomechanics Hugo Wioland 1 · Emiko Suzuki 1 · Luyan Cao 1 · Guillaume Romet‑Lemonne 1 · Antoine Jegou 1 Received : 11 March 2019 / Accepted : 26 October 2019 / Published online : 20 November 2019 © The Author ( s ) 2019 Abstract The regulated assembly of actin filaments is essential in nearly all cell types . Studying actin assembly dynamics can pose many technical challenges . A number of these challenges can be overcome by using microfluidics to observe and manipulate single actin filaments under an optical microscope . In particular , microfluidics can be tremendously useful for applying dif - ferent mechanical stresses to actin filaments and determining how the physical context of the filaments affects their regula - tion by biochemical factors . In this review , we summarize the main features of microfluidics for the study of actin assembly dynamics , and we highlight some recent developments that have emerged from the combination of microfluidics and other techniques . We use two case studies to illustrate our points : the rapid assembly of actin filaments by formins and the disas - sembly of filaments by actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / cofilin . Both of these protein families play important roles in cells . They regulate actin assembly through complex molecular mechanisms that are sensitive to the filaments’ mechanical context , with multiple activities that need to be quantified separately . Microfluidics - based experiments have been extremely useful for gaining insight into the regulatory actions of these two protein families . Keywords Actin · Microfluidics · Microscopy · Cofilin · Formin Introduction : some challenges of studying actin assembly dynamics The various actin filament networks in cells are responsible for a number of important processes . Their diverse archi - tectures and turnover rates are tightly regulated in order to generate the proper filament organization at the right time and place ( Campellone and Welch 2010 ; Blanchoin et al . 2014 ; Skau and Waterman 2015 ; Plastino and Blanchoin 2019 ) . This is orchestrated by a large array of actin binding proteins ( ABP ) , which are able to perform various actions on actin monomers and filaments ( Pollard 2016 ) . They may , for example , assist or prevent the nucleation of new filaments , regulate their elongation from either end , crosslink filaments together , stabilize or sever filaments , and regulate their dis - assembly from either end . When a new ABP is discovered , the first task is thus to determine what it actually does to actin , i . e . to identify biochemical reactions and to quantify their rates . This task is complicated by the possibility for a protein to combine different actions , which may be difficult to disentangle . In the cell context , ABPs do not act independently . Another challenge is thus to determine how different ABPs modify each other’s actions , i . e . how they compete or syner - gize . In addition to this , other factors modulate ABPs’ inter - actions with actin , such as the filament’s nucleotide state , its post - translational modifications , and even its mechani - cal environment ( Jégou and Romet - Lemonne 2016 ; Harris et al . 2018 ) . Experiments thus need to be quantitative and to be repeated under different biochemical and mechanical conditions . Addressing these challenges requires the ability to moni - tor individual events , on individual filaments . This require - ment raises challenges of its own . The first is that one does not learn much by observing an individual event a few times . Large amounts of data have to be collected in order to reli - ably determine reaction rates . The second is that observ - ing individual filaments live mostly relies on fluorescence microscopy techniques and requires binding filaments to * Guillaume Romet - Lemonne romet @ ijm . fr * Antoine Jegou antoine . jegou @ ijm . fr 1 Institut Jacques Monod , CNRS , Université de Paris , 75013 Paris , France 176 Journal of Muscle Research and Cell Motility ( 2020 ) 41 : 175 – 188 1 3 surfaces or constraining their movements to allow their observation over time . These technical strategies ( labeling , binding… ) , like any other , can alter the parameters one is trying to measure . Potential artefacts need to be tracked down , systematically and carefully . Microfluidics has emerged as a versatile technique for a number of experimental situations , in different fields of research . Over the past 10 years , it has been applied to the manipulation and observation of individual actin filaments , in order to study the regulation of their assembly dynamics . In the following sections , we will present this method ( “Simple microfluidics for the study of individual actin fila - ments” Section ) and its main assets ( “Key advantages for the study of actin assembly dynamics” Section ) , which help to address most of the challenges we have listed above . We will then go over concrete examples with the study of formins ( “Using microfluidics to study rapid filament elongation by formins” Section ) and ADF / cofilin ( “Using microfluidics to study the disassembly of actin filaments by ADF / cofilin” Section ) , for which microfluidics has been extremely useful . Observing and manipulating actin filaments with the help of microfluidics Simple microfluidics for the study of individual actin filaments “Microfluidics” generally refers to a technique where fluids are flowed through micrometer - size channels . Studying the properties of flowing fluids at such small scales is a very active research field of its own ( Squires and Quake 2005 ) . Tremendous progress of this field over the past decades has led to a broad range of applications . In the life sciences , in particular , microfluidics is now commonly used in a number of experiments ( Sonnen and Merten 2019 ) , including the creation of concentration gradients in which cells migrate ( Toh et al . 2014 ) , the application of mechanical stresses to living cells ( Kurth et al . 2012 ) , and the generation of drop - let - size reactors in which to encapsulate reagents ( Seemann et al . 2012 ) . Beyond basic research , microfluidics is also a powerful tool for DNA manipulation ( Wu et al . 2014 ) and drug screening ( Wu et al . 2010 ) . In this review , we focus on the benefits of microfluid - ics for the study of individual actin filaments . The general purpose of the technique is to ease the manipulation and the imaging of these filaments by light microscopy , in order to gain insight into various processes , both biochemical and mechanical , which control actin assembly dynamics . Compared to other applications of microfluidics , such as the examples cited in the previous paragraph , this is a fairly simple and affordable experimental configuration , read - ily accessible to non - specialists . Recent developments in commercially - available microfluidics devices also make it easy to implement this technique in virtually any lab . Our basic , single actin filament experimental configu - ration using microfluidics exploits the fact that actin fila - ments are semi - flexible and align with the flow when they are anchored by one end ( Jégou et al . 2011b ) . This can be achieved by growing filaments from surface - anchored seeds ( i . e . short , stabilized filaments ) or by attaching them to an anchored end - binding protein , while the surface is otherwise passivated . When filaments are long enough ( typically , a few micrometers or more ) and the flow velocity high enough ( typically , 10 µm / s or more , close to the surface ) the fila - ments are maintained within a few hundred nanometers above the surface and align with the flow ( Fig . 1 ) . This is directly inspired by work on DNA using microfluidics , with the notable difference that DNA is a far more flexible fila - ment and thus spontaneously coils up in the absence of flow and is uncoiled by the flowing solution ( Brewer and Bianco 2008 ) . Microtubules , which are stiffer than actin filaments , can also be studied in a similar fashion using microfluidics ( Schaedel et al . 2015 ; Duellberg et al . 2016 ) . Note that another use of microfluidics , where non - anchored single filaments are tracked as they flow down the channel , also offers interesting possibilities , for example as a means to impose mechanical stress on the filaments ( Köster et al . 2005 ; Liu et al . 2018 ) . They will not be discussed here , and hereafter , we focus on situations where filaments are anchored to the bottom surface of the flow chamber . One of the great benefits of microfluidics is the possibility to rapidly change the solution to which the anchored fila - ments are exposed , by using chambers with multiple entries . ( Figure 1a , b ) . In the main channel , the different incom - ing solutions flow side by side , with neat boundaries and virtually no mixing ( laminar flows ) . Today’s pressure con - trol devices can rapidly change the pressures applied in the solution reservoirs , thereby modulating the incoming flow rates and thus moving the boundaries between the flowing solutions inside the main channel . This allows the exchange of the solution to which the anchored filaments are exposed ( in the microscope field of view ) in less than one second . The flowing solution exerts a viscous drag force on the anchored filaments . As a result , filaments align with the flow , as already mentioned , and a tensile stress is applied to the filaments . This tension is not uniform , but gradu - ally increases from the free end where it is negligible , to the anchoring point where it is maximal . This force can be calibrated based on the drag coefficient of actin filaments , the flow rate profile , and the filament contour height as it fluctuates above the coverslip surface ( Jégou et al . 2013 ; Wioland et al . 2019a ) . By controlling the flow rate , the ten - sion applied to the filaments and their anchoring point can be modulated , up to a few tens of picoNewtons . Note that it is possible to apply negligible tension to filaments ( less 177 Journal of Muscle Research and Cell Motility ( 2020 ) 41 : 175 – 188 1 3 than 0 . 1 pN ) with very low flow rates which are nonetheless enough to align the filaments for proper imaging . It is thus possible to use microfluidics to study actin dynamics and benefit from all its assets ( see “Filaments appear straight and parallel to the direction of the flow , easing analysis” Section ) without applying significant forces to the filaments . Technically , the basic experimental configuration we have described here is not very demanding . It has some specific equipment requirements related to the use of microfluidics : pressure controllers and flow meters ( commercially avail - able ) and the microchamber itself , which can be made in the lab ( usually using polydimethylsiloxane and a mold with the trash microchamber ( seen from above ) reservoirs P P P microscope ﬁeld of view ﬂow meters pressurecontroller a b ﬁxed point polarized emission fluorescent label ﬂow polarizationfilters + 45° - 45° Anchoring the pointed end c d e main channel f glass coverslip surface passivation seed labeled actin barbed end ﬂow unlabeled actin ﬂow Anchoring the barbed end ﬂow labeled actin ( seen from above ) formin labeled actin pointed end ﬂow unlabeled actin pointed end ﬂow ﬂow ( seen from above ) ( side view ) PEG brush lipid bilayer lipid bilayer PEG brush Filaments not exposed to ﬂow ( seen from above ) diﬀusion ﬂow ( seen from above ) + fascin anchor filament bundle ﬂow single filament ﬂow Fig . 1 Microfluidics setup for the study of individual actin filaments . a Sketch of the setup , with a microscope image ( epifluorescence , image width 83 µm ) of a typical field of view , showing filaments anchored by their pointed end , on the left hand side . The pressures in the three solution reservoirs are controlled in order to modify the incoming flow rates . Typical dimensions of the main channel , in the microchamber : 800 µm wide , 1 cm long , 40 µm high . The chamber is sketched seen from above . b Sketches ( side view ) illustrating differ - ent anchoring strategies . In each configuration , a significant tension can be applied to the filament and its anchoring point . Left : filaments are anchored by their pointed ends ( spectrin - actin seed adsorbed to the surface ) . Right : filaments grow from their anchored barbed ends ( formin bound to the surface ) . Alternatively , stabilized barbed ends can be anchored , using biotinylated gelsolin for example . In each con - figuration , alternating the incoming solutions allows one to generate unlabeled actin segments . c Thanks to the polarization of the light emitted by the fluorophore bound to an actin subunit , one can monitor the orientation of that subunit around the filament axis . d Neighbor - ing filaments can form bundles when exposed to bundling proteins such as fascin . e Filaments anchored to a lipid bilayer are dragged to the edge of the bilayer by the flow . Left : sketch , from a side view . Right : epifluorescence microscopy image showing filaments gathered at the edge of a lipid bilayer and bundled by fascin . Filaments are approximately 10 µm long 178 Journal of Muscle Research and Cell Motility ( 2020 ) 41 : 175 – 188 1 3 desired channel pattern , which can itself be made in the lab or purchased from a specialized company ) or bought ready - made . The chamber height is typically a few tens of microm - eters . The other technical requirements are very similar to those of classical single - filament observations that do not employ microfluidics . In particular , glass surfaces must be properly cleaned , passivated and functionalized . Other experimental configurations can be achieved , as simple variations of the basic setup we have described . For example , while the flow lines are practically parallel to the direction of the main channel downstream of the entry chan - nels’ junction , this is not the case in the vicinity of the junc - tion itself . This region can be exploited in order to modulate the direction in which the filaments align . Also , rather than anchoring filaments by one point only , one can purposely anchor filaments at multiple sites ( Wioland et al . 2019a ) . In addition , the setup can become more sophisticated as microfluidics can be combined with other techniques ( see “Microfluidics can be combined with other techniques” Sec - tion for more examples ) . Key advantages for the study of actin assembly dynamics In this section , we highlight what we believe to be the main assets of microfluidics for the study of individual actin fila - ments . In the next sections , we give examples of how these advantages concretely play out , by going through recent results obtained thanks to microfluidics on two key protein families : formins , which can rapidly generate long actin fila - ments ( “Using microfluidics to study rapid filament elonga - tion by formins” Section ) , and proteins of the ADF / cofilin family , which are the central players in actin filament disas - sembly ( “Using microfluidics to study the disassembly of actin filaments by ADF / cofilin” Section ) . Filaments are anchored by a single point , limiting the risk of artefacts Single filament studies require that filaments be main - tained close to the surface in order to image them , in par - ticular with total internal reflection microscopy ( TIRFM ) . This is classically achieved by decorating the coverslip surface with F - actin binding proteins ( such as inactivated myosins , or filamin ) or by maintaining unanchored fila - ments close to the surface with a crowding agent ( usually methylcellulose ) . Each method has its pros and cons , but for both it is not straightforward to assess whether the technique used ( crowding agent or multiple anchors ) has any impact on the observed behavior . The flowing solution in microfluidics can potentially alter the protein interaction kinetics , however this is easy to test since the microfluidic flows can be controlled at will , in real time . For instance , it is possible to compare the observation under continuous flow , with a situation where the flow rate is reduced to zero between imaging time points ( Jégou et al . 2011b ) . So far , none of the reactions we have studied showed any sign of being directly affected by the flow , within the range of flow rates that we commonly use ( up to several hundreds of µm / s in the vicinity of the filament ) . Note , however , that the flow may indirectly affect reaction kinetics via the mechanical stress it applies to the filaments ( see “Vari - ous mechanical stresses can be applied to the filaments” Section ) . Filaments appear straight and parallel to the direction of the flow , easing analysis Filaments , anchored to the coverslip surface by one end only , align with the flow . This enables the observation of straight , parallel filaments . While the random positioning of anchoring points may lead to some filaments overlapping with their neighbors , their alignment with the flow prevents the filament crossings encountered in a classical experiment where filaments have random orientations . Straight filaments without intersections make their analysis easier , including with the assistance of software for ( semi - ) automatic data processing ( Janco et al . 2018 ) . This is an important aspect when large amounts of data are collected ( see next point ) . Moreover , based on the design of the experiments , it is clear which filament end is the barbed end and which is the pointed end . Note that the filaments , even when they appear com - pletely straight , still fluctuate laterally and vertically . Dif - fraction limitations of light microscopy , combined with typi - cal exposure times in the 100 ms time - range , average out these fluctuations and the filaments thus appear as straight segments . Large populations of single filaments are imaged An essential requirement of single filament studies ( and , more generally , of single molecule studies ) is the observa - tion of large numbers of individual events . An advantage that directly comes from the previous point is the possibility to generate fields of view with a high density of filaments , which can be easily analyzed . This aspect is reinforced by the possibility to create filament populations that are homo - geneous in length ( by growing the filaments directly in the chamber , before starting the experiment—all done thanks to the possibility to change the protein solution bathing the filaments ) . Imaging in one field of view a large number of filaments with similar characteristics ( length , age—i . e . 179 Journal of Muscle Research and Cell Motility ( 2020 ) 41 : 175 – 188 1 3 nucleotide content ) under the same conditions is a great asset for statistical analyses . Protein concentrations are thoroughly controlled , and buffered by the flowing solution A rather obvious , though often overlooked consequence of using a constantly incoming flow of a protein solution , is that the protein concentration seen by the surface - anchored filaments is stable . There is no depletion of reagents , like there could be in a closed chamber , because fresh solution is constantly supplied by the incoming flow . Likewise , proteins detaching from the filaments ( including actin monomers themselves , if the filaments are depolymerizing ) are flowed away and do not alter the local protein concentration . This aspect is particularly useful when quantifying reaction rates . Rapid and sequential exposure to different protein solutions This is perhaps the most important feature of microfluidics for the study of biochemical reactions . The possibility to rapidly ( < 1 s ) move the boundaries between the incoming solutions in the main channel of the flow cell allows one to sequentially expose the field of view to different solutions in a time - controlled manner . Hence the filaments can be subjected to abrupt concen - tration changes , providing a well - defined “time zero” for kinetic studies under the microscope . A simple example is the instant removal of actin monomers , enabling the obser - vation of the transition from elongation to depolymerization , thereby providing insight on the nucleotide content of the recently assembled filament region ( Jégou et al . 2011b ) . The same strategy , using microfluidics , can be applied to micro - tubules ( Duellberg et al . 2016 ) . In general , sequential exposure allows the construction of filaments with a well - controlled history before exposing them to a protein of interest . A specific and useful conse - quence is the possibility to build filaments with unlabeled segments ( Fig . 1b ) . This has been instrumental in debunking an unsuspected artefact due to labeling and illumination : that fluorescently labeled actin subunits form a covalent bond with neighboring subunits over time when exposed to light ( Niedermayer et al . 2012 ) . Another interesting use of this controlled sequential exposure is the possibility to study the binding of a fluores - cently labeled protein to actin filaments , without using TIRF microscopy : by briefly exposing the filaments to an identical solution of unlabeled proteins , thereby removing the fluo - rescent background , filaments can be imaged in epifluores - cence ( Wioland et al . 2017 ; Cao et al . 2018 ) . This can also be useful when exposing filaments to high concentrations of labeled proteins , and TIRF may not suffice to decrease the background signal and allow the acquisition of well - contrasted images . Various mechanical stresses can be applied to the filaments The viscous drag exerted by the flowing fluid on the actin filament can be used to apply a significant tension ( up to several tens of picoNewtons ) to the filament . When fila - ments are anchored by one end , the tension is not uniform . It increases progressively from the free end to the anchoring point , where the tension is maximum . The precise calibra - tion of this tension requires determining the filament profile in z , i . e . its height above the surface , in the flow gradient . At low flow rates ( flow gradient above the surface < 1000 s −1 ) , the filament height rapidly increases from the anchor to a stable height , about 250 nm above the surface , and the ten - sion gradient along the filament can be considered linear ( Jégou et al . 2013 ; Wioland et al . 2019a ) . At stronger flow rates ( flow gradient > 2000 s −1 ) the filament height remains below 250 nm and increases linearly from the anchor to the free end , making the tension gradient along the filament non - linear ( Wioland et al . 2019a ) . Generating such tension gradients on actin filaments can be a powerful way to directly probe a large range of local tensions . However , a nearly uniform tension can also be obtained using microfluidics : by anchoring both filament ends to the surface , and applying a flow perpendicular to the main axis of the filament ( Wioland et al . 2019a ) . Note that , as filaments fluctuate spatially in a flow gradient , the applied tension fluctuates rapidly ( typically ± 30 % around its mean value ) ( Jégou et al . 2013 ) . Compared to optical trapping , a powerful technique widely used to put filaments under tension , microfluidics thus is not as accurate . However , this limitation is compensated by the fact that force is simultane - ously applied to hundreds of individual filaments , which can all be analyzed ( see “Large populations of single filaments are imaged” Section ) . Microfluidics can also be used to bend actin filaments , a configuration which is difficult to achieve with other tech - niques . A simple way to do so is to anchor stable filament seeds to the surface with a fixed orientation that differs from that of the flow ( Wioland et al . 2019a ) . This can be achieved by applying different flow directions at , or near , the junc - tion between incoming channels . Similarly , microfluidic flows have been used , in combination with micropattern - ing , to bend microtubules and reveal the consequences of this mechanical stress ( Schaedel et al . 2015 ) . Compared to other studies where the actin filaments , including their curved regions , are clamped to the surface ( Risca et al . 2012 ) , microfluidics - based techniques have the advantage that the bending is reversible and can be modulated by adjusting the flow rate . More sophisticated approaches using 180 Journal of Muscle Research and Cell Motility ( 2020 ) 41 : 175 – 188 1 3 microfluidics and micropillars to deviate the flow lines , have been proposed ( Jégou et al . 2011a ; Carlier et al . 2014 ) but they are more difficult to implement and certainly limited to the application of large radii of curvature . Finally , microfluidics can help bind filaments to fixed points , or to other filaments . These anchors constrain the filaments , in particular they reduce their ability to relax tor - sional stress ( Wioland et al . 2019a ) . Microfluidics can be combined with other techniques The microfluidics configuration that we present here is very simple , and it can be extended to include more sophisticated features found in other microfluidics setups . For example , in order to observe filaments and change their chemical environment without imposing an orientation , one may wish to generate regions with no significant flow . This may be achieved by monitoring filaments in side chambers , or cavities , where the reagents will be exchanged with the main channel by diffusion ( Cambier et al . 2014 ; Deshpande and Pfohl 2015 ; Wioland et al . 2019a ) ( Fig . 1f ) or by using mem - branes through which proteins can diffuse ( de Jong et al . 2006 ) . Another classic development of microfluidics is the generation of protein gradients ( Jeon et al . 2000 ) , and strate - gies can be devised to generate static gradients with no flow in the region of interest ( Strelnikova et al . 2016 ) , some also using permeable membranes ( Diao et al . 2006 ) . In addition , a number of techniques with no connection to microfluidics can be implemented . Micropatterns can be used to create specific regions within the chamber , for example to control where the filaments will bind to the sur - face in order to further ease the subsequent data analysis ( an example with microtubules can be found in ( Schaedel et al . 2015 ) ) . Lipid bilayers can be used in order to bind proteins and filaments to a fluid surface , rather than to a rigid glass coverslip . This technique , inspired by DNA studies , can also be applied to actin filaments ( Courtemanche et al . 2013 ) ( Suzuki et al . 2019 ) . Moving away from the surface , an opti - cal trap can be added to the microfluidics device ( Jégou et al . 2013 ) . Some techniques can even be made more efficient thanks to microfluidics . An important example is the measurement of the polarization of the light emitted by a single fluorescent label , in order to assess the orientation of the actin subu - nit to which the label is bound . This powerful technique , introduced over two decades ago , allows the monitoring of the rotation of an actin filament around its main axis by measuring the two components of the polarized emission , at + 45° and − 45° with respect to the filament’s axis ( Sase et al . 1997 ) . To be exploited to its full potential , however , this technique requires the filaments’ main axis to point sta - bly in a well - defined direction , which is extremely unlikely in experiments where the filaments are randomy oriented or free to wiggle around ( Mizuno et al . 2011 ) . Microfluid - ics , by orienting all the filaments in a fixed direction ( see “Filaments appear straight and parallel to the direction of the flow , easing analysis” Section ) greatly improves the throughput of the experiment : one simply needs to position the polarization filters at + 45° and − 45° with respect to the direction of the flow . As we shall see in the next sections , this combination of techniques is instrumental to study the rotation of formin - elongated filaments ( Suzuki et al . 2019 ) and the application of a torsional moment by ADF / cofilin decorating the sides of the filaments ( Wioland et al . 2019a ) . Using microfluidics to study rapid filament elongation by formins A brief introduction to formins More details on formins can be found in recent reviews , focusing on physiological aspects ( Bogdan et al . 2013 ) , on their mechanistic molecular details ( Courtemanche 2018 ) and on their role in mechanotransduction ( Zimmermann and Kovar 2019 ) . Formins are a protein family ( 15 genes in humans ) which plays an important role in actin assembly . They ease the nucleation of new actin filaments and , most notably , they accelerate barbed end assembly from profilin - actin . In cells , formins are responsible for generating elongated , unbranched actin filament networks , such as filopodia , stress fibers and the cytokinetic ring . They also cooperate with other ABPs to generate complex actin networks , including lamellipodia and the cell cortex . Formins thus participate in various cellular functions , including adhesion , division and motility . Malfunction of formins can lead to a number of diseases , such as neuropathies , cardiomyopathies , and kidney disease . At the molecular level , formins are fascinating machines . Formins have rather high molecular weights ( 120 – 220 kDa ) and form homodimers . They contain two key functional domains : the highly conserved Formin Homology 2 ( FH2 ) domain is responsible for tracking the actin fila - ment barbed end processively , while the disordered Formin Homology 1 ( FH1 ) domain harbors several polyproline motifs which bind profilin - actin complexes in order to speed up filament barbed end assembly . Most members of the formin family are auto - inhibited , typically by having their DID ( Diaphanous inhibitory ) domain binding directly to their DAD ( Diaphanous autoinhibitory ) domain , and are activated by Rho GTPase binding to their RBD ( Rho - bind - ing ) domain ( Chesarone et al . 2010 ) . Most formin studies in vitro use truncated formin constructs in order to circum - vent auto - inhibition . In the following , the term “formin” will refer to these active constructs . 181 Journal of Muscle Research and Cell Motility ( 2020 ) 41 : 175 – 188 1 3 Studying formins’ hallmark ability to rapidly assem - ble long actin filaments requires distinguishing it from its other activities , such as nucleation . To do so reliably , individual filaments must be monitored . In particular , two key parameters should be measured : the elongation rate of the barbed end when it is occupied by a formin , and the rate at which the formin detaches from the barbed end ( i . e . characterizing its processivity ) . As we shall see in the next paragraphs , microfluidics offers many advan - tages for such studies . Insights from experiments with formins interacting with the unanchored filament barbed end In the simple configuration where filaments are grown from anchored pointed ends ( e . g . adsorbed spectrin - actin seeds , Fig . 2a ) , the barbed end elongation rates are easily 1 . Capping protein Injecting sequentially : 2 . Formin 3 . Actin + profilin fast elongation ( i ) ( ii ) slow elongation b c k off tension increases the elongation rate v elong v formin v elong v formin tension increases the detachment rate e a d M ADF / coflin increasedhelicity severingx100 biotinanchor ADF / cofilin generates a torque on twist - constrained filaments that boosts severing : ADF / cofilin domain nucleation flow domainelongation severing at domain boundary ADF / cofilin cooperative binding and severing : f g bending angle surfaceanchoring Filament curvature promotes severing : sharper bends sever faster v elong v elong v formin v elong k off slow elongation rapid elongation profilin - actin formin FH1 FH2 flow CappingProtein ATP - actin Injecting constantly actin , ADF / cofilin , Capping Protein unstoppable depolymerization ADF / cofilin cooperates with Capping Protein to depolymerize barbed ends : ADP - Pi actin ADPactin ADF / cofilin flow Fig . 2 Microfluidics applied to the study of formins and ADF / cofilin . a – c Formins . a Formins at the barbed ends of filaments anchored by their pointed end ( spectrin - actin seed ) can be detected by the faster elongation rate from profilin - actin . The elongation rate is directly measured , and the formin off - rate can be also determined . b When formins are anchored to the surface , they can be exposed to mechani - cal tension ( viscous drag on the filament ) . Filament detachment from the surface indicates formin departure from the barbed end . c Sequential exposure of a filament to Capping Protein , then formin , then profilin - actin , reveals that both CP and the formin can coexist at the barbed end . Different outcomes are then possible : the formin can detach first ( a ) and the filament will elongate slowly once the capping protein has also detached ; or the capping protein can detach first ( b ) and the filament elongates rapidly from profilin - actin . d – g ADF / cofi - lin . d ADF / cofilin binds cooperatively to ADP - F - actin , thereby form - ing domains on the filaments . Severing events occur at the boundaries between ADF / cofilin domains and bare filament regions . e Capping a filament barbed end allows ADF / cofilin to fully decorate this fila - ment , which ages and becomes fully ADP - actin . The barbed end of the ADF / cofilin - decorated filaments uncaps rapidly , and undergoes a nearly unstoppable depolymerization , as ATP - actin monomers and capping protein can barely bind to it . f Filaments regions between two anchoring points are constrained in twist , and ADF / cofilin thus applies a mechanical torque ( M ) as it binds . This torque dramatically enhances the severing rate at the domain boundaries . g Sketches illus - trating the experiment where sharp bends are applied to filaments by anchoring a filament segment to the surface , and aligning the rest of the filament with the flow , in a different direction . Two filaments are depicted , and the one with the sharper bend is severed faster by ADF / cofilin 182 Journal of Muscle Research and Cell Motility ( 2020 ) 41 : 175 – 188 1 3 measured . The presence of a formin at the barbed end can be assessed thanks to its enhancement of the elongation rate from profilin - actin . To assess the presence of the formin in the absence of profilin , one can alternate with a profilin - actin solution and determine if elongation is then fast or slow . For clarity , this can be done with different fluorescent labels on actin , resulting in striped filaments ( Cao et al . 2018 ) . Alternatively , one can use a fluorescently labelled formin ( Shekhar et al . 2015 ) , or switch to a configuration where the formin is anchored to the surface ( “Insights from experi - ments with anchored formins” Section ) . This can be neces - sary when working with a slow formin , where the enhance - ment of elongation is mild and difficult to detect . Formin off - rate measurements can be made without microfluidics ( Kovar et al . 2006 ; Paul and Pollard 2008 ; Bombardier et al . 2015 ) but they are challenging and micro - fluidics makes them easier , thereby allowing the exploration of more biochemical conditions . Being able to easily moni - tor large populations of filaments ( “Filaments appear straight and parallel to the direction of the flow , easing analysis” and “Large populations of single filaments are imaged” Sections ) enables the measurement of formin survival fractions over time ( i . e . , what fraction of the filament barbed ends still bear a formin ) and thus the determination of the off - rate . This is also made more efficient by the possibility to tran - siently expose barbed ends to relatively high ( tens of nM ) concentrations of formin ( “Rapid and sequential exposure to different protein solutions” Section ) : this leads to an initial population where nearly all barbed ends bear a formin , and their evolution in the absence of formins in solution can subsequently be monitored . Using microfluidics thus allowed us to explore the pro - cessivity of formins mDia1 and mDia2 under different bio - chemical conditions ( Cao et al . 2018 ) . We showed that , at a fixed profilin concentration , the formin off - rate increased with actin concentration , confirming an earlier report on yeast formin Bni1p ( Paul and Pollard 2008 ) , and we further showed that the off - rate increased with the ionic strength and decreased with the profilin concentration ( Cao et al . 2018 ) . The latter result indicates that profilin stabilizes formins at the barbed end and is consistent with the proposed formation of a “ring complex” consisting of simultaneous FH2 - barbed end - profilin - FH1 contacts ( Vavylonis et al . 2006 ) . Being able to sequentially expose the filaments to differ - ent protein solutions is also very useful for addressing the competition and synergy between formins and other end - binding proteins . The first example is that of an unexpected synergy between Spire and formin Fmn2 ( Montaville et al . 2014 ) . Spire contains four actin - binding , WH2 domains , and it can interact with actin in several ways , including by capping barbed ends . Using microfluidics , we have succes - sively exposed filament barbed ends : ( i ) to Spire in order to cap them , then ( ii ) to formin Fmn2 , and finally ( iii ) to a solution of profilin - actin . We then observed during step ( iii ) that some filaments , upon the departure of Spire , underwent a rapid elongation indicating that formin Fmn2 had been present at their barbed end since step ( ii ) . Experiments with truncated Spire revealed that Spire directly recruited Fmn2 at the barbed end . Further quantification of the reactions , using different protein concentrations , showed that the Fmn2 on - rate was 30 - fold higher for Spire - capped barbed ends than for bare barbed ends . The second example is that of a competition which is not as fierce as expected , between capping protein ( CP ) and formins mDia1 and FMNL2 ( Shekhar et al . 2015 ) . Performing sequential exposure experiments similar to the one we have described for Spire , we showed that CP and formins could occupy the barbed end simultaneously ( Fig . 2c ) . Quantifying formin on - rates in different situations revealed that the presence of CP at the barbed end , while it did not fully prevent the binding of formin mDia1 , reduced its on - rate 18 - fold . Likewise , the presence of a formin at the barbed end reduced the on - rate of CP . In the ternary , CP - formin - barbed end complex , CP and formin each have a higher off - rate than if they were alone at the barbed end . The existence of the CP - formin - barbed end ternary complex was also evidenced without microfluidics by single molecule fluorescence microscopy , at the same time as our study , with formins mDia1 and Daam1 ( Bombardier et al . 2015 ) . Each technique has its own advantages : using single - molecule imaging allowed Bombardier and colleagues to observe that formins could diffuse along the length of the filament , while microfluidics allowed us to explore broader protein concentration ranges . Combining microfluidics and single molecule observations would provide exciting experimental possibilities . In both of these examples , being able to expose filament barbed ends ( either bare , capped by Spire or capped by CP ) to different concentrations of formins , including high concentrations , was instrumental in order to quantify the formin on - rates . Microfluidics made this possible because the formin solution contained no actin , and filaments could subsequently be exposed to a profilin - actin solution to moni - tor their behavior . In classical experiments , where all the proteins are present throughout , formins must be limited to very low concentrations in order to avoid the massive nucleation of new filaments in the sample . Insights from experiments with anchored formins Besides allowing the application of tension to the formin ( see next paragraphs ) , working with anchored formins offers a number of interesting possibilities . First , it allows one to monitor the nucleation of filaments by a fixed formin population and thus to directly determine the nucleation rate . Second , it provides a convenient way to assess the 183 Journal of Muscle Research and Cell Motility ( 2020 ) 41 : 175 – 188 1 3 presence of the formin at the barbed end , regardless of its elongation rate , thereby allowing to determine the off - rate : detachment of the filament from the surface then indicates that the formin has left the barbed end ( Fig . 2b ) . Naturally , in this case , formin detachment from the surface during the experiment must be controlled , and this can be done by renucleating filaments from the same surface to verify that formins are still present and active ( Cao et al . 2018 ) . Finally , when formins are anchored , filament elongation can be monitored using unlabeled actin , after a small filament segment with labeled actin is nucleated , as shown in Fig . 1 ( Jégou et al . 2013 ; Cao et al . 2018 ) . Both ends are easily localized : the pointed end is at the tip of the labeled segment and the barbed end is in the fixed location where the formin is anchored , which can be identified during the elongation of the labeled segment or immediately after . All these measurements can be carried out with weak flow rates , applying a negligible force ( < 0 . 1 pN ) to the anchored formin . However , one of the great interests of this configuration is to apply significant forces to the formin . Doing so , we have shown that formins mDia1 ( Jégou et al . 2013 ) and mDia2 ( Cao et al . 2018 ) are mechanosensitive , as tensile forces of a few picoNewtons increased their elonga - tion rates up by approximately two - fold . Others , also using microfluidics to apply tension to filaments have shown a similar behavior for yeast formin Bni1p anchored to a lipid bilayer ( Courtemanche et al . 2013 ) . We have also shown , by switching from elongating to depolymerizing conditions ( i . e . with no actin in solution ) , that formin mDia1 could remain attached to depolymerizing barbed ends and with - stand picoNewton forces ( Jégou et al . 2013 ) . An interesting consequence of this observation is that formins are able to put depolymerizing filaments under tension . Other techniques have successfully been used to put filaments under tension and to further study formin mecha - nosensitivity : myosin motors , mimicking the physiologi - cal generation of force , have been used to pull on mDia2 and yeast formin Cdc12 ( Zimmermann et al . 2017 ) , and magnetic tweezers ( Yu et al . 2017 , 2018 ) as well as opti - cal tweezers ( Kubota et al . 2017 ) have been used to pull on mDia1 . Compared to these techniques , the main advantage of microfluidics is that it allows the simultaneous applica - tion of tension to very large numbers of individual filaments , easing the collection of data ( but the applied force fluctuates more , see “Various mechanical stresses can be applied to the filaments” Section ) . This point is reinforced by the fact that processivity is finite , and many formins let go of their filament before a reliable velocity measurement could be performed . Sample size is particularly critical when studying formin processivity : while a few reliable measurements are enough to estimate the average filament elongation rate under a given set of conditions , determining the formin off - rate requires monitoring detachment events for a population of several tens of filaments . Using microfluidics , we were thus able to measure the impact of tension on the processivity of formins mDia1 and mDia2 ( Cao et al . 2018 ) . We found that the formin off - rate was extremely sensitive to force , as the application of a couple of picoNewtons was enough to increase the off - rate by roughly one order of magnitude . This mechanical effect on processively outweighed the biochemical effects mentioned previously ( “A brief introduction to formins” Section ) . The impact of tension was also much stronger on the off - rate than on the elongation rate , and thus the application of tension led to a dramatic reduction in the resulting length of the formin - elongated filaments . From single filaments to filament bundles So far , we have characterized the action of formins on single , independent filaments . In the cell context , actin filaments are organized in networks , and the action of regulatory proteins can be affected by the network geometry ( Reymann et al . 2012 ; Jégou and Romet - Lemonne 2016 ) . In the case of form - ins , filament bundles such as the ones that make up filopodia are a clear example . Microfluidics can also be a useful tool to generate such bundles from a few actin filaments and study how bundling affects formin activity . This can be achieved by elongating filaments from independent surface - anchored proteins and exposing them to a solution containing the bun - dling protein fascin to trigger the association of neighboring filaments ( Fig . 1d ) . Alternatively , formins can be anchored to a lipid bilayer pattern . The viscous drag applied by the flow to the filaments then leads to their collection at the downstream border of the lipid bilayer , with a higher local density that can favor the formation of bundles ( Fig . 1e ) . As for single filament experiments , the precise control of biochemical conditions , the alignment of the filaments and the high throughput provided by microfluidics are beneficial to study filament bundles . In addition , multiple filaments joined together can take on complex forms , but the flow direction can simplify the geometry of the bundled filaments and make it easier to discern individual filaments and events , such as detachment , bending and buckling . Performing experiments using microfluidics in different configurations , we have observed that bundling can signifi - cantly reduce the elongation rate of formin - bound barbed ends and increase the formin off - rate ( Suzuki et al . 2019 ) . Using the polarization of fluorescence to assess the rotation of a filament around its axis ( see “Microfluidics can be combined with other techniques” Section and Fig . 1c ) , we showed that constraining the formin’s ability to rotate around its anchoring point further enhanced these effects . 184 Journal of Muscle Research and Cell Motility ( 2020 ) 41 : 175 – 188 1 3 Using microfluidics to study the disassembly of actin filaments by ADF / cofilin A brief introduction to ADF / cofilin More details on ADF / cofilin can be found in reviews , such as ( De La Cruz 2009 ; Bravo - Cordero et al . 2013 ; Hild et al . 2014 ) . In cells , actin filament networks turnover , sometimes very rapidly , and controlling their disassembly is as important as controlling their nucleation and growth . A number of regu - latory proteins are involved in filament disassembly , and the central player is the ADF / cofilin protein family ( with 3 isoforms in mammals : cofilin - 1 , cofilin - 2 and ADF , which behave very similarly and are hereafter collectively referred to as “ADF / cofilin” ) . ADF / cofilin is essential for a num - ber of cell functions , and it is linked to several pathologies ( Bamburg and Bernstein 2016 ; Shishkin et al . 2016 ) . ADF / cofilin binds actin monomers , but we will focus here on its binding to actin filaments and to the different ways it promotes their disassembly . As we shall see , the action of ADF / cofilin on actin filaments is complex , and what we summarize here results from decades of work from several labs ( and we apologize for not citing all the articles that have led to this current understanding ) . ADF / cofilin binds preferably to ADP - F - actin ( i . e . , the older regions of actin filaments ) and does so in a cooperative fashion , leading to the formation of ADF / cofilin domains ( De La Cruz 2005 ) . These domains locally change the actin filament conformation : the helical pitch is reduced ( with no measurable change in length ) and the filament is locally more flexible , both in bending and torsion ( McGough et al . 1997 ; Prochniewicz et al . 2005 ; McCullough et al . 2008 ) . As a consequence , filaments sever at ( or near ) the bounda - ries between ADF / cofilin domains and bare filament regions ( Fig . 2a ) ( Suarez et al . 2011 ) . Filaments fully decorated by ADF / cofilin do not sever because they contain no domain boundaries . The ( dis ) assembly dynamics of the ends of decorated filaments differ from that of bare filaments . We discuss in “Quantifying ADF / cofilin’s many reactions” Sec - tion how microfluidics has enabled us to quantify and to bring insight into these different reactions . In addition , ADF / cofilin binding and severing have been reported to be inhibited by mechanical tension applied to the actin filaments ( Hayakawa et al . 2011 ) , and there is recent theoretical ( Schramm et al . 2017 ) and experimental ( Mizuno et al . 2018 ) evidence that other mechanical con - straints can have an impact on the action of ADF / cofilin . As we discuss in “Applying various forms of mechanical stress” section , microfluidics can also help to address these questions by providing new means to apply mechanical stress to actin filaments . Quantifying ADF / cofilin’s many reactions The global severing activity of ADF / cofilin results from a number of individual , underlying reactions : nucleating a domain , expanding a domain ( with on - and off - rates for ADF / cofilin within the domain and at the domain bounda - ries ) and severing at each domain boundary ( Fig . 2d ) . Micro - fluidics , by allowing us to sequentially expose the chamber to different solutions has allowed us to create situations where we could monitor these different reactions , and meas - ure their kinetic rate constants ( Wioland et al . 2017 , 2019b ) . For example , exposing filaments saturated with unlabeled ADF / cofilin to labeled ADF / cofilin allowed us to measure the turnover of ADF / cofilin within a domain . Also , moni - toring the growth of ADF / cofilin domains on straight fila - ments in the flow made it easy to track and quantify severing events , and we could thus measure , for the first time , the severing rate per domain . The ease with which such experiments can be performed on large filament populations was instrumental in order to repeat these measurements at different values of pH ( Wio - land et al . 2019b ) . Measuring the rates for the different underlying reactions allowed us to show that , at lower pH , the reduced severing efficiency of ADF / cofilin does not reflect a reduction in the severing rate per domain ( which is unaffected ) but rather results from a faster decoration of the filaments by ADF / cofilin ( making domain boundaries , where severing can happen , shorter lived because domains expand and merge faster ) . The possibility to generate unlabeled segments ( “Rapid and sequential exposure to different protein solutions” Sec - tion and Fig . 1b ) has also allowed us to measure a number of these rates on unlabeled actin . This feature could prove essential for other proteins , such as some tropomyosins which do not appear to bind on labeled actin ( Gateva et al . 2017 ) . Microfluidics also eased the observation and the quan - tification of depolymerization from ADF / cofilin - saturated filament ends . We showed that , compared to bare ADP - actin filaments , decoration by ADF / cofilin accelerated pointed end depolymerization , and slowed down barbed end depolymeri - zation . The amplitude of this effect depends on the protein isoforms and on pH , but overall , depolymerization remains slightly faster at the barbed end than at the pointed end . More strikingly , using microfluidics allowed us to come across two unexpected results at the barbed end ( Wioland et al . 2017 ) . First , we showed that soluble ADF / cofilin inter - acted directly with bare ADP - actin barbed ends and acceler - ated their depolymerization . It should be noted that another study using microfluidics also observed this acceleration of barbed end depolymerization , but mistakenly attributed it to the decoration of the filament sides instead of a direct interaction with barbed ends ( Shekhar and Carlier 2017 ) . 185 Journal of Muscle Research and Cell Motility ( 2020 ) 41 : 175 – 188 1 3 This effect probably does not play a great role under physi - ological conditions , since it requires barbed ends to be in the ADP state . Our second , unexpected observation is far more signifi - cant : we found that the barbed ends of ADF / cofilin - deco - rated filaments were in a state where they could hardly stop depolymerizing , even in the presence of monomeric actin and capping protein ( Wioland et al . 2017 ) . For instance , we could measure that the dissociation constant of capping protein at the barbed end was increased more than 600 - fold by ADF / cofilin decoration . A consequence is that capping protein and ADF / cofilin synergize to depolymerize barbed ends : capping stops filament elongation and thus allows ADF / cofilin to decorate it all the way up to the barbed end ( otherwise , the recently assembled barbed end region is mostly ADP - Pi - actin , preventing ADF / cofilin from binding there ) ; once the filament is fully decorated , capping protein detaches and the barbed end depolymerizes , hardly getting capped by CP or “rescued” by ATP - G - actin ( Fig . 2e ) . We believe that this effect is likely to cause filaments to depo - lymerize from both ends , including their barbed ends , in many cellular processes . The discovery of this new barbed end state , as well as its quantitative characterization , were eased by the fact that filament fragments were flowed away , allowing us to observe populations for long periods of time . In a classical experi - ment without microfluidics , the accumulation of these frag - ments ( and also , in some cases , of new filaments coming from the bulk solution containing methylcellulose ) would have made it very difficult to follow individual filaments over time . Applying various forms of mechanical stress As we have explained in the “Key advantages for the study of actin assembly dynamics” Section , microfluidics experi - ments can be performed in different configurations in order to put filaments under tension ( “Various mechanical stresses can be applied to the filaments” Section ) . Doing so , we found that tension , up to 30 pN , had almost no effect on the binding and severing activities of ADF / cofilin ( Wio - land et al . 2019a ) . This result is in contradiction with opti - cal trap and magnetic trap experiments which reported that mechanical tension protected filaments from the action of ADF / cofilin ( Hayakawa et al . 2011 ) , and more experiments are required to solve this discrepancy . Using microfluidics to bend filaments ( “Various mechanical stresses can be applied to the filaments” Section and Fig . 2g ) , we have shown that increasing the local curvature increased the severing rate ( Wioland et al . 2019a ) . Since structural data shows that filaments regions dec - orated by ADF / cofilin have a reduced helical pitch , we expected that single filaments anchored by one end would be made to rotate around their axis as ADF / cofilin binds to them . Using the polarized emission of single fluorescently labeled actin subunits ( “Microfluidics can be combined with other techniques” Section and Fig . 1c ) we confirmed this mechanical effect : we quantified that the binding of approximately 90 ADF / cofilin molecules generated one full turn of the filament . A consequence is that filament regions that are held between two anchoring points and are thereby constrained in twist ( they cannot rotate around their axis ) , undergo a mechanical torque as ADF / cofilin decorates them . By exposing populations of single - and double - anchored fil - aments to ADF / cofilin , we showed that constraining the twist had not impact on ADF / cofilin binding , but that it increased the severing rate per domain up to 100 - fold ( Fig . 2f ) ( Wio - land et al . 2019a ) . This shows that ADF / cofilin , as it binds to twist - constrained filaments , has a mechanical effect ( gener - ating a torque ) which dramatically enhances its biochemical action ( severing filaments ) . From single filaments to cross‑linked networks , protected from the flow In cells , filaments are not only exposed to mechanical stress , they are also interconnected . Being connected constrains their twist , and based on our single - filament observations , we expected that it would greatly enhance their severing by ADF / cofilin . To test this , we needed to observe filament net - works without exposing them to shear flow . As we have dis - cussed , there are ways to create regions with no flow within a microfluidics system ( “Microfluidics can be combined with other techniques” Section and Fig . 1f ) . We have used a sim - pler system , a T - shaped microchamber where solutions are injected manually , which nonetheless illustrates what can be gained by changing solutions with a flow without exposing the filaments to the flow . Here , dense quasi - bidimensional filament assemblies were put in a “dead end” region , next to the main channel where solutions could be flowed in . Fila - ments contained biotinylated actin and exposing them to a solution of neutravidin led to their cross - linking . Subsequent exposure to ADF / cofilin resulted in far more severing events when the filaments were crosslinked than when they were not connected ( Wioland et al . 2019a ) . Conclusion and perspectives The results we have summarized here were made easier , and sometimes even possible , to obtain by using micro - fluidics , which enabled the manipulation of individual actin filaments and their observation with optical micros - copy . We believe some of the main assets of this tech - nique are that it is easy to use , easy to implement in a 186 Journal of Muscle Research and Cell Motility ( 2020 ) 41 : 175 – 188 1 3 non - microfluidics lab , and that it is easy to take advantage of its benefits for the study of actin regulatory processes in vitro . To tackle future challenges , a simple feature like the ability to sequentially expose filaments to different protein solutions opens avenues for fruitful experiments . This will certainly be the case for the study of tropomyosins . The decoration of actin filaments by different tropomyosin iso - forms appears to determine which ABPs are able to bind to the ( Gunning et al . 2015 ; Meiring et al . 2018 ) , and we still have a very limited understanding of how this essential regulatory mechanism is orchestrated . We still lack most of the basic rate constants for the binding of tropomyosin to actin . Progress with single filament experiments is cer - tainly hindered by the fact that tropomyosins bind poorly to fluorescently - labeled actin ( Gateva et al . 2017 ) . As we have seen , microfluidics is a powerful tool to circumvent this limitation . In addition , sequential exposure to different solutions enables the construction of filaments decorated with different tropomyosin isoforms before exposing them to other ABPs . Another challenge for the coming years is to be able to decipher regulatory mechanisms that involve several ABPs . A clear example is actin filament disassembly , where the action of ADF / cofilin now appears to be regulated by the combined action of other ABPs such as coronin , Actin Inter - acting Protein 1 , twinfilin , and Cyclase - Associated Protein ( Jansen et al . 2015 ; Johnston et al . 2015 ) . In spite of recent progress , it is still unclear how these numerous partners act together , competing or synergizing , targeting the ends or the sides of the filaments . Being able to sequentially expose actin filaments to different combinations of proteins , while rapidly collecting data on large amounts of individual reac - tions , is an asset to address these questions . Increasing the number of proteins in an experiment poses the additional challenge of testing a large number of combi - nations of protein concentrations . Microfluidics offers solu - tions to address this difficulty , by allowing the generation of concentration gradients which enable to simultaneously test many concentrations in one experiment . This can be coupled to gradients in the surface density of anchored pro - teins ( themselves generated thanks to gradients in solution as well ) in order to increase further the efficiency of the system . Finally , a current challenge for future in vitro studies is to study biochemical reactions in physically relevant condi - tions . We have seen simple examples of how microfluidics can be a powerful tool to do so , and the bottom - up recon - stitution of higher - order actin networks is now within reach thanks to the combination of microfluidics and surface pat - terning . In the future , these approaches should help answer more complex questions , such as , “how are ABPs sensitive to mechanical tension in a stress fiber ? ” Or , “which param - eters affect the constriction of the cytokinetic ring ? ” Acknowledgements We acknowledge funding from the Agence Nationale de la Recherche ( Grants Muscactin and Conformin to G . R . - L . ) , The Fondation pour la Recherche Medicale ( Grant to G . R . - L . ) , The European Research Council ( Grant StG - 679116 to A . J . ) , and Fonda - tion ARC pour la Recherche sur le Cancer ( Postdoctoral Fellowship to H . W . ) . Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Crea - tive Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International License ( http : / / creat iveco mmons . org / licen ses / by / 4 . 0 / ) , which permits unrestricted use , distribu - tion , and reproduction in any medium , provided you give appropriate credit to the original author ( s ) and the source , provide a link to the Creative Commons license , and indicate if changes were made . References Bamburg JR , Bernstein BW ( 2016 ) Actin dynamics and cofilin - actin rods in alzheimer disease . Cytoskeleton 73 : 477 – 497 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / cm . 21282 Blanchoin L , Boujemaa - Paterski R , Sykes C , Plastino J ( 2014 ) Actin dynamics , architecture , and mechanics in cell motility . Physiol Rev 94 : 235 – 263 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1152 / physr ev . 00018 . 2013 Bogdan S , Schultz J , Grosshans J ( 2013 ) Formin’ cellular structures : physiological roles of Diaphanous ( Dia ) in actin dynamics . Com - mun Integr Biol 6 : 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4161 / cib . 27634 Bombardier JP , Eskin JA , Jaiswal R et al ( 2015 ) Single - molecule visualization of a formin - capping protein “decision complex” at the actin filament barbed end . Nat Commun 6 : 8707 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomm s9707 Bravo - Cordero JJ , Magalhaes MAO , Eddy RJ et al ( 2013 ) Functions of cofilin in cell locomotion and invasion . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 14 : 405 – 417 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm36 09 Brewer LR , Bianco PR ( 2008 ) Laminar flow cells for single - molecule studies of DNA - protein interactions . Nat Methods 5 : 517 – 525 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1217 Cambier T , Honegger T , Vanneaux V et al ( 2014 ) Design of a 2D no - flow chamber to monitor hematopoietic stem cells . Lab Chip 15 : 77 – 85 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / c4lc0 0807c Campellone KG , Welch MD ( 2010 ) A nucleator arms race : cellular control of actin assembly . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 : 237 – 251 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm28 67 Cao L , Kerleau M , Suzuki EL et al ( 2018 ) Modulation of formin pro - cessivity by profilin and mechanical tension . Elife . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 34176 Carlier M - F , Romet - Lemonne G , Jégou A ( 2014 ) Actin filament dynamics using microfluidics . Methods Enzymol 540 : 3 – 17 Chesarone MA , DuPage AG , Goode BL ( 2010 ) Unleashing formins to remodel the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 : 62 – 74 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm28 16 Courtemanche N ( 2018 ) Mechanisms of formin - mediated actin assembly and dynamics . Biophys Rev 10 : 1553 – 1569 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s1255 1 - 018 - 0468 - 6 Courtemanche N , Lee JY , Pollard TD , Greene EC ( 2013 ) Tension modulates actin filament polymerization mediated by formin and profilin . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110 : 9752 – 9757 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 13082 57110 de Jong J , Lammertink RGH , Wessling M ( 2006 ) Membranes and microfluidics : a review . Lab Chip 6 : 1125 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / b6032 75c De La Cruz EM ( 2005 ) Cofilin binding to muscle and non - muscle actin filaments : isoform - dependent cooperative interactions . J Mol Biol 346 : 557 – 564 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2004 . 11 . 065 187 Journal of Muscle Research and Cell Motility ( 2020 ) 41 : 175 – 188 1 3 De La Cruz EM ( 2009 ) How cofilin severs an actin filament . Biophys Rev 1 : 51 – 59 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s1255 1 - 009 - 0008 - 5 Deshpande S , Pfohl T ( 2015 ) Real - time dynamics of emerging actin networks in cell - mimicking compartments . PLoS ONE 10 : 1 – 19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journ al . pone . 01165 21 Diao J , Young L , Kim S et al ( 2006 ) A three - channel microfluidic device for generating static linear gradients and its application to the quantitative analysis of bacterial chemotaxis . Lab Chip 6 : 381 – 388 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / B5119 58H Duellberg C , Cade NI , Holmes D , Surrey T ( 2016 ) The size of the EB cap determines instantaneous microtubule stability . Elife 5 : 1 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 13470 Gateva G , Kremneva E , Reindl T et al ( 2017 ) Tropomyosin isoforms specify functionally distinct actin filament populations in vitro . Curr Biol 27 : 705 – 713 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2017 . 01 . 018 Gunning PW , Hardeman EC , Lappalainen P , Mulvihill DP ( 2015 ) Tropomyosin - master regulator of actin filament function in the cytoskeleton . J Cell Sci . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 17250 2 Harris AR , Jreij P , Fletcher DA ( 2018 ) Mechanotransduction by the actin cytoskeleton : converting mechanical stimuli into bio - chemical signals . Annu Rev Biophys 47 : 617 – 631 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annur ev - bioph ys - 07081 6 - 03354 7 Hayakawa K , Tatsumi H , Sokabe M ( 2011 ) Actin filaments function as a tension sensor by tension - dependent binding of cofilin to the filament . J Cell Biol 195 : 721 – 727 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 20110 2039 Hild G , Kalmár L , Kardos R et al ( 2014 ) The other side of the coin : functional and structural versatility of ADF / cofilins . Eur J Cell Biol 93 : 238 – 251 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2013 . 12 . 001 Janco M , Böcking T , He S , Coster ACF ( 2018 ) Interactions of tropo - myosin Tpm1 . 1 on a single actin filament : A method for extraction and processing of high resolution TIRF microscopy data . PLoS One 13 : e0208586 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journ al . pone . 02085 86 Jansen S , Collins A , Chin SM et al ( 2015 ) Single - molecule imaging of a three - component ordered actin disassembly mechanism . Nat Commun 6 : 7202 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomm s8202 Jégou A , Romet - Lemonne G ( 2016 ) Single filaments to reveal the multiple flavors of actin . Biophys J 110 : 2138 – 2146 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2016 . 04 . 025 Jégou A , Carlier M - F , Romet - Lemonne G ( 2011a ) Microfluidics pushes forward microscopy analysis of actin dynamics . Bioarchitecture . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4161 / bioa . 1 . 6 . 19338 Jégou A , Niedermayer T , Orbán J et al ( 2011b ) Individual actin fila - ments in a microfluidic flow reveal the mechanism of ATP hydrol - ysis and give insight into the properties of profilin . PLoS Biol . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journ al . pbio . 10011 61 Jégou A , Carlier M - F , Romet - Lemonne G ( 2013 ) Formin mDia1 senses and generates mechanical forces on actin filaments . Nat Commun . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomm s2888 Jeon NL , Dertinger SKW , Chiu DT et al ( 2000 ) Generation of solu - tion and surface gradients using microfluidic systems . Langmuir 16 : 8311 – 8316 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la000 600b Johnston AB , Collins A , Goode BL ( 2015 ) High - speed depolymeri - zation at actin filament ends jointly catalysed by Twinfilin and Srv2 / CAP . Nat Cell Biol 17 : 1504 – 1511 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb32 52 Köster S , Steinhauser D , Pfohl T ( 2005 ) Brownian motion of actin filaments in confining microchannels . J Phys 17 : S4091 – S4104 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 0953 - 8984 / 17 / 49 / 006 Kovar DR , Harris ES , Mahaffy R et al ( 2006 ) Control of the assembly of ATP - and ADP - actin by formins and profilin . Cell 124 : 423 – 435 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 11 . 038 Kubota H , Miyazaki M , Ogawa T et al ( 2017 ) Biphasic effect of pro - filin impacts the formin mDia1 force - sensing mechanism in actin polymerization . Biophys J 113 : 461 – 471 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2017 . 06 . 012 Kurth F , Eyer K , Franco - Obregón A , Dittrich PS ( 2012 ) A new mecha - nobiological era : microfluidic pathways to apply and sense forces at the cellular level . Curr Opin Chem Biol 16 : 400 – 408 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cbpa . 2012 . 03 . 014 Liu Y , Chakrabarti B , Saintillan D et al ( 2018 ) Morphological tran - sitions of elastic filaments in shear flow . Proc Natl Acad Sci 115 : 9438 – 9443 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 18053 99115 McCullough BR , Blanchoin L , Martiel JL , De La Cruz EM ( 2008 ) Cofilin increases the bending flexibility of actin filaments : impli - cations for severing and cell mechanics . J Mol Biol 381 : 550 – 558 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2008 . 05 . 055 McGough A , Pope B , Chiu W , Weeds A ( 1997 ) Cofilin changes the twist of F - actin : implications for actin filament dynamics and cel - lular function . J Cell Biol 138 : 771 – 781 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 138 . 4 . 771 Meiring JCM , Bryce NS , Wang Y et al ( 2018 ) Co - polymers of actin and tropomyosin account for a major fraction of the human actin cytoskeleton . Curr Biol 28 : 2331 – 2337 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2018 . 05 . 053 Mizuno H , Higashida C , Yuan Y et al ( 2011 ) Rotational movement of the formin mDia1 along the double helical strand of an actin fila - ment . Science 331 : 80 – 83 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / scien ce . 11976 92 Mizuno H , Tanaka K , Yamashiro S et al ( 2018 ) Helical rotation of the diaphanous - related formin mDia1 generates actin filaments resist - ant to cofilin . Proc Natl Acad Sci 115 : E5000 – E5007 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 18034 15115 Montaville P , Jégou A , Pernier J et al ( 2014 ) Spire and Formin 2 synergize and antagonize in regulating actin assembly in meio - sis by a ping - pong mechanism . PLoS Biol 12 : 1 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journ al . pbio . 10017 95 Niedermayer T , Jegou A , Chieze L et al ( 2012 ) Intermittent depolym - erization of actin filaments is caused by photo - induced dimeriza - tion of actin protomers . Proc Natl Acad Sci 109 : 10769 – 10774 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 11213 81109 Paul A , Pollard T ( 2008 ) The role of the FH1 domain and profilin in formin - mediated actin - filament elongation and nucleation . Curr Biol 18 : 9 – 19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2007 . 11 . 062 Plastino J , Blanchoin L ( 2019 ) Dynamic stability of the actin ecosys - tem . J Cell Sci 132 : jcs219832 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 21983 2 Pollard TD ( 2016 ) Actin and actin - binding proteins . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 8 : a018226 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / cshpe rspec t . a0182 26 Prochniewicz E , Janson N , Thomas DD , De La Cruz EM ( 2005 ) Cofilin increases the torsional flexibility and dynamics of actin filaments . J Mol Biol 353 : 990 – 1000 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2005 . 09 . 021 Reymann A - C , Boujemaa - Paterski R , Martiel J - L et al ( 2012 ) Actin network architecture can determine myosin motor activity . Science 336 : 1310 – 1314 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / scien ce . 12217 08 Risca VI , Wang EB , Chaudhuri O et al ( 2012 ) Actin filament curvature biases branching direction . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 : 2913 – 2918 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 11142 92109 Sase I , Miyata H , Ishiwata S , Kinosita K ( 1997 ) Axial rotation of slid - ing actin filaments revealed by single - fluorophore imaging . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 : 5646 – 5650 Schaedel L , John K , Gaillard J et al ( 2015 ) Microtubules self - repair in response to mechanical stress . Nat Mater 14 : 1156 – 1163 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmat4 396 Schramm AC , Hocky GM , Voth GA et al ( 2017 ) Actin filament strain promotes severing and cofilin dissociation . Biophys J 112 : 2624 – 2633 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2017 . 05 . 016 Seemann R , Brinkmann M , Pfohl T , Herminghaus S ( 2012 ) Drop - let based microfluidics . Rep Prog Phys 75 : 016601 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 0034 - 4885 / 75 / 1 / 01660 1 188 Journal of Muscle Research and Cell Motility ( 2020 ) 41 : 175 – 188 1 3 Shekhar S , Carlier M - F ( 2017 ) Enhanced depolymerization of actin filaments by ADF / cofilin and monomer funneling by capping protein cooperate to accelerate barbed - end growth . Curr Biol 27 : 1990 – 1998 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2017 . 05 . 036 Shekhar S , Kerleau M , Kühn S et al ( 2015 ) Formin and capping protein together embrace the actin filament in a ménage à trois . Nat Com - mun 6 : 8730 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomm s9730 Shishkin S , Eremina L , Pashintseva N et al ( 2016 ) Cofilin - 1 and Other ADF / cofilin superfamily members in human malignant cells . Int J Mol Sci 18 : 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / ijms1 80100 10 Skau CT , Waterman CM ( 2015 ) Specification of architecture and func - tion of actin structures by actin nucleation factors . Annu Rev Bio - phys 44 : 285 – 310 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annur ev - bioph ys - 06041 4 - 03430 8 Sonnen KF , Merten CA ( 2019 ) Microfluidics as an emerging precision tool in developmental biology . Dev Cell 48 : 293 – 311 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devce l . 2019 . 01 . 015 Squires TM , Quake SR ( 2005 ) Microfluidics : fluid physics at the nano - liter scale . Rev Mod Phys 77 : 977 – 1026 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1103 / RevMo dPhys . 77 . 977 Strelnikova N , Herren F , Schoenenberger C - A , Pfohl T ( 2016 ) Forma - tion of actin networks in microfluidic concentration gradients . Front Mater . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fmats . 2016 . 00020 Suarez C , Roland J , Boujemaa - Paterski R et al ( 2011 ) Cofilin tunes the nucleotide state of actin filaments and severs at bare and dec - orated segment boundaries . Curr Biol 21 : 862 – 868 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2011 . 03 . 064 Suzuki EL , Guichard B , Romet - Lemonne G , Jégou A ( 2019 ) Geomet - rical constraints greatly hinder formin mDia1 activity . bioRxiv . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 67184 2 Toh AGG , Wang ZP , Yang C , Nguyen N - T ( 2014 ) Engineering micro - fluidic concentration gradient generators for biological applica - tions . Microfluid Nanofluidics 16 : 1 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s1040 4 - 013 - 1236 - 3 Vavylonis D , Kovar DR , O’Shaughnessy B , Pollard TD ( 2006 ) Model of formin - associated actin filament elongation . Mol Cell 21 : 455 – 466 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molce l . 2006 . 01 . 016 Wioland H , Guichard B , Senju Y et al ( 2017 ) ADF / cofilin accelerates actin dynamics by severing filaments and promoting their depo - lymerization at both ends . Curr Biol 27 : 1956 – 1967 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2017 . 05 . 048 Wioland H , Jegou A , Romet - Lemonne G ( 2019a ) Torsional stress generated by ADF / cofilin on cross - linked actin filaments boosts their severing . Proc Natl Acad Sci 116 : 2595 – 2602 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 18120 53116 Wioland H , Jegou A , Romet - Lemonne G ( 2019b ) Quantitative vari - ations with pH of actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin’s multiple actions on actin filaments . Biochemistry 58 : 40 – 47 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acs . bioch em . 8b010 01 Wu M - H , Huang S - B , Lee G - B ( 2010 ) Microfluidic cell culture sys - tems for drug research . Lab Chip 10 : 939 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / b9216 95b Wu J , Kodzius R , Cao W , Wen W ( 2014 ) Extraction , amplification and detection of DNA in microfluidic chip - based assays . Microchim Acta 181 : 1611 – 1631 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s0060 4 - 013 - 1140 - 2 Yu M , Yuan X , Lu C et al ( 2017 ) mDia1 senses both force and torque during F - actin filament polymerization . Nat Commun 8 : 1650 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s4146 7 - 017 - 01745 - 4 Yu M , Le S , Efremov AK et al ( 2018 ) Effects of mechanical stimuli on profilin - and formin - mediated actin polymerization . Nano Lett 18 : 5239 – 5247 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acs . nanol ett . 8b022 11 Zimmermann D , Kovar DR ( 2019 ) Feeling the force : formin’s role in mechanotransduction . Curr Opin Cell Biol 56 : 130 – 140 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2018 . 12 . 008 Zimmermann D , Homa KE , Hocky GM et al ( 2017 ) Mechanoregu - lated inhibition of formin facilitates contractile actomyosin ring assembly . Nat Commun 8 : 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s4146 7 - 017 - 00445 - 3 Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations .