Automatically Providing Action Plans Helps People Complete Tasks Nicolas Kokkalis , Johannes Huebner , Steven Diamond , Dominic Becker , Michael Chang , Moontae Lee , Florian Schulze , Thomas Koehn , Scott R . Klemmer Stanford HCI Group taskgenies @ cs . stanford . edu Abstract People complete tasks more quickly when they have con - crete plans , especially for open - ended , creative tasks . How - ever , people often fail to create such action plans . ( How ) can systems provide people with these concrete steps auto - matically ? To scalably provide personalized action plans , this paper introduces and evaluates crowdsourcing and peer approaches for creating plans , and NLP techniques for reus - ing them . We evaluated the effects of action plans on differ - ent types of tasks . A between - subjects experiment found that people who received crowd - created plans completed more tasks than people asked to self - create plans and than a control group without action plans . We found that crowd - created action plans are especially effective for lingering and high - level tasks . A second experiment found that peer - provided plans led to more completed tasks than no plans . A third experiment found that participants who received re - used action plans also completed more tasks than a control group without action plans . We have incorporated these principles into TaskGenies : a crowd - powered task manage - ment system . Introduction People complete tasks faster when they develop concrete implementation intentions ( Gollwitzer 1996 , Leventhal 1965 ) . For example , an experiment presented students with the benefits of getting a flu vaccination shot ( Milkman 2011 ) . Students in one condition were asked to make a concrete plan for when and how they would get the shot ; students in the Control condition did not make such plans . The planning group followed through and got the shot much more often . This benefit could arise from the availa - bility of an action plan ( regardless of source ) and / or the process of contemplating a plan oneself . Auto - Provided Plans Increase Completion Rate The primary shortcoming of self - created action plans is that people do not do it . Making specific , concrete plans is Copyright © 2012 , Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelli - gence ( www . aaai . org ) . All rights reserved . often mentally taxing , time consuming , and not “actual” work . These factors dissuade from planning , which in turn leaves thorny , inactionable tasks that linger . Automatically providing plans ( see Figure 1 ) , if possi - ble , removes the barriers of self - creation . This could poten - tially help people to focus on execution and work more effectively . Is it realistic to ask crowdsourced workers to provide ac - tion plans ? This paper hypothesizes that yes , crowd - created action plans can be relevant , useful , and help people com - plete more tasks . We hypothesize that , in some cases , an automatically provided plan will get people to an actiona - ble state with higher probability and less effort than if they were left to their own devices . In other cases , action plans may provide tactics or insight that people lack on their own . And in other cases , an automatically provided plan may not be relevant , useful , or action inducing . Not every suggestion needs to be helpful in order for the entire sys - tem to be helpful . If a majority of suggestions is valuable , people may reasonably ignore irrelevant plans . Main Hypothesis : Automatically providing action plans helps people complete more tasks . This paper compared participants’ task completion rates in three between - subjects experiments that collectively compare crowd - , peer - , and self - production ; recycling plans , and a control without explicit planning prompts . John enters into his task list : • Exercise more frequently TaskGenies responds with the action plan : • Find a workout buddy to keep you accountable • Get a gym membership • Create a weekly exercise schedule • Start working out this Monday and stick to the schedule Figure 1 : Decomposing people’s tasks to concrete steps ( action plans ) makes high - level tasks more actionable . This way , tasks linger less and people complete more of them . Online crowds can create new plans , algorithms can identify and reuse existing ones . 116 Human Computation AAAI Technical Report WS - 12 - 08 Action Plans can be Reused for Multiple People Creating new action plans for every task seems wasteful and costly , especially when tasks are similar or repeat . Re - using action plans across people’s similar tasks might be an effective alternative . But would such recycled action plans be helpful to people ? It is possible that the benefits of action plans arise from being custom - created for every task . This paper hypothesizes that tasks can be sufficiently similar to reuse action plans across people . These recycled action plans help people complete more tasks . Reusability Hypothesis : The same action plan can help multiple people complete similar tasks . This study compared the average task completion rates of participants in the Recycle and the Control condition . The system’s NLP algorithm determined task - similarity . Evaluation To test these hypotheses on providing action plans , we performed three between - subjects experiments . The first experiment compared task completion rates be - tween a Crowd group in which participants were provided with action plans from anonymous crowd workers , and a Control group that was not suggested to create action plans . To reduce bias of this setup , we also compared it to a third group of people who were explicitly asked to create action plans on their own ( Self condition ) . We found that participants in the Crowd condition completed significantly more tasks than those in the Control and Self conditions ( see Figure 2 ) . Analyzing completion rates of different types of tasks we found that providing action plans helps people more with high - level than small & well defines tasks . We also found that action plans were particularly effective with lingering tasks . To understand whether list users will also be content creators , a second between - subjects experiment compared participants who created action plans for each other ( Peer ) against a Control group . This experiment found that Peer condition participants significantly outperformed the ones in Control condition . However , on average , participants contributed fewer plans than the number of plans received . The third experiment investigated further workload re - ductions by algorithmically reusing existing action plans . For a Recycle condition , we designed an algorithm that selected the action plan based on the similarity of a given task against a corpus of tasks with existing action plans . Participant completion rates in the Recycle condition were found to significantly outperform those of a Control group . The results of the Peer and Recycle experiments show how the system can scale for a large number of people . The TaskGenies System To conduct the experiments , we built TaskGenies , a crowd - powered task management system , which evolved with the learnings of this study . There were two primary technical challenges of this system : first , to design an exa - mple - based suggestion interface , that enables crowd work - ers to produce good action plans ; second , to create and calibrate an NLP algorithm that accurately processes the often grammatically incorrect task titles . Users manage their task lists through a mobile or web interface . The sys - tem automatically provides users with action plans upon request or when tasks linger . Conclusion The contributions of this work are summarized as follows : Providing action plans helps people complete more tasks . Action plans help people especially with high - level and lingering tasks . Action plans are helpful even when reused across different people with similar tasks . Crowdsourcing is an effective way to create action plans , as shown by a method and system we created . We introduce a technique for successfully scaling this approach through a combination of peer - produced action plans and NLP - based reuse . We recommend that task management systems should automatically provide action plans to their users and we demonstrate the first system that accomplishes this . References Gollwitzer , P . M . The Psychology of Action : Linking Cognition and Motivation to Behavior . Guilford Press , New York , USA , 1996 . Leventhal , H . , Singer , R . and Jones , S . Effects of fear and specifici - ty of recommendation upon attitudes and behavior . Journal of Per - sonality and Social Psychology 2 , 1 ( 1965 ) , 20 - 29 . Milkman , K . , Beshears , J . , Choi , J . , Laibson , D . , and Madrian , B . Using implementation intentions prompts to enhance influenza vaccination rates . In Proc . PNAS 108 , 26 ( 2011 ) , 10415 - 10420 . Figure 2 : Participants in the Crowd completed significantly more tasks than those in the Control and Self conditions . Error bars indicate 95 % CI . 117