Cell , Vol . 110 , 673 – 687 , September 20 , 2002 , Copyright  2002 by Cell Press Review Integrins : Bidirectional , Allosteric Signaling Machines and Hynes , 2002 ) . The simplest metazoa , sponges and cnidaria , have integrins ( Burke , 1999 ; Hughes , 2001 ) and it is clear that primitive bilateria had at least two integrin Richard O . Hynes 1 Howard Hughes Medical Institute Center for Cancer Research Department of Biology (cid:1)(cid:2) heterodimers , the descendents of which persist to this day in organisms as diverse as flies , nematodes , Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge , Massachusetts 02139 and vertebrates ( Hynes and Zhao , 2000 ) . Indeed , that is the entire set of integrins in Caenorhabditis elegans ; one (cid:2) subunit and two (cid:1) subunits forming two integrins . Orthologs of these two integrins are recognized in Dro - In their roles as major adhesion receptors , integrins sophila melanogaster and in vertebrates , although ver - signalacrosstheplasmamembraneinbothdirections . tebrates have expanded each set ( Figure 1 ) . One set Recent structural and cell biological data suggest ( blue in Figure 1 ) recognizes the tripeptide sequence , models for how integrins transmit signals between RGD , in molecules such as fibronectin and vitronectin their extracellular ligand binding adhesion sites and in vertebrates and tiggrin in Drosophila , whereas the their cytoplasmic domains , which link to the cytoskel - other set ( purple in Figure 1 ) mediates adhesion to base - eton and to signal transduction pathways . Long - range ment membrane laminins . It is plausible that evolution conformational changes couple these functions via of integrins was necessary to allow the cell - matrix adhe - allosteric equilibria . sion intrinsic to metazoa , and as diploblastic organisms evolved , the two cell layers may have evolved separate Integrinsarethemajormetazoanreceptorsforcelladhe - integrins to mediate their asymmetric interactions with sion to extracellular matrix proteins and , in vertebrates , thebasallamina ; representativesofthesetwoprimordial also play important roles in certain cell - cell adhesions . integrins are detected in all higher metazoan phyla . In addition to mediating cell adhesion , integrins make transmembrane connections to the cytoskeleton and Expansions of the integrin subunit set have occurred activate many intracellular signaling pathways . Since in different phyla . Figure 1 shows the complete mamma - the recognition of the integrin receptor family around lian set ( based on extensive searches of the human and 15 years ago ( Hynes , 1987 ) , they have become the best - mouse genomic sequences , C . A . Whittaker and R . O . H . , understood cell adhesion receptors . Integrins and their unpublished data ) , comprising 8 (cid:2) and 18 (cid:1) subunits , ligands play key roles in development , immune re - so far known to assemble into 24 distinct integrins . Or - sponses , leukocyte traffic , hemostasis , and cancer and thologs of more than half these subunits have , so far , areat theheartof manyhuman diseases—genetic , auto - been found only in chordates , including most of the (cid:2) immune , and others . They are the target of effective subunits and all the nine (cid:1) subunits that have an extra therapeutic drugs against thrombosis and inflammation , inserted domain , known as an I or A domain ( see later ) . and integrins are receptors for many viruses and bac - In addition to the ancient RGD and laminin receptor teria . subfamilies mentioned above , vertebrates have a set of Because of these multifarious functions , integrins collagen receptors with inserted I / A domains ( (cid:1) 1 , (cid:1) 2 , have been and are being studied intensively and there (cid:1) 10 , (cid:1) 11 ) and a pair of related integrins ( (cid:1) 4 (cid:2) 1 , (cid:1) 9 (cid:2) 1 ) , has been continuous , rapid progress over the past 15 which recognize both ECM proteins such as fibronectin or so years ( averaging over a 1000 papers a year for and Ig - superfamily cell surface counterreceptors such the past decade ) . Over the past year there have been as VCAM - 1 . Vertebrates also have a set of leukocyte - particularly rapid advances in understanding integrin specific integrins ( Figure 1 ) , which also recognize Ig - structure and function because of the elucidation of the superfamily counterreceptors and mediate heterotypic 3D structures of one integrin ( Xiong et al . , 2001 , 2002 ) cell - cell adhesion . Most integrins recognize relatively and parts of others . These structural analyses have re - short peptide motifs and , in general , a key constituent vealed some surprises but are also beginning to make residue is an acidic amino acid ( see more below ) . The sense of an enormous body of prior data on integrins . ligand specificities rely on both subunits of a given (cid:1)(cid:2) In this review , I will first give a brief overview of the heterodimer and are significantly more complex than integrin family to set the context and then review the shown in Figure 1 ( see reviews cited in Figure 1 for recent structural data and experiments arising from more details about the diverse ligand specificities of them , which give insight into some long - standing ques - integrins ) . tions concerning integrin functions . It is impossible to Each of the 24 integrins shown in Figure 1 appears be exhaustive in such a review of integrins , so I have to have a specific , nonredundant function . In part , this resorted to summary figures and tables and cited other is evident from the details of their ligand specificities reviews for more details on specific aspects . ( not shown in Figure 1 ) but is most clearly shown by the phenotypes of knockout mice ( Table 1 ) . Genes for the The Integrin Receptor Family : Evolution (cid:2) subunits and all but four of the (cid:1) subunits have been and Complexity knocked out and each phenotype is distinct , reflecting Integrins are restricted to the metazoa ; no homologs the different roles of the various integrins . The pheno - are detected in prokaryotes , plants , or fungi ( Whittaker types range from a complete block in preimplantation development ( (cid:2) 1 ) , throughmajor developmental defects ( (cid:1) 4 , (cid:1) 5 , (cid:1) v , (cid:2) 8 ) , to perinatal lethality ( (cid:1) 3 , (cid:1) 6 , (cid:1) 8 , (cid:1) v , (cid:2) 4 , 1 Correspondence : rohynes @ mit . edu Cell674 in controlling integrin functions but there is not space here to review the integrin - cytoskeleton links ; details can be found in recent reviews ( Zamir and Geiger , 2001 ; van der Flier and Sonnenberg , 2001 ) . In part related ( both in cause and in effect ) to the integrin - mediated assembly of cytoskeletal linkages , li - gation of integrins also triggers a large variety of signal transduction events ( Figure 2 ) that serve to modulate many aspects of cell behavior including proliferation , survival / apoptosis , shape , polarity , motility , gene ex - pression , and differentiation . These signal transduction pathways are complex , like those emanating from re - ceptors for soluble factors ( e . g . , G protein - coupled and kinase receptors ) . Indeed , many integrin - stimulated pathways are very similar to those triggered by growth factor receptors and are intimately coupled with them ( Figure 2 ) . In fact , many cellular responses to soluble growth factors , such as EGF , PDGF , LPA , and thrombin , Figure 1 . The Integrin Receptor Family etc . , are dependent on the cell’s being adherent to a substrate via integrins . That is the essence of anchorage Integrins are (cid:1)(cid:2) heterodimers ; each subunit crosses the membrane once , with most of each polypeptide ( (cid:3) 1600 amino acids in total ) dependence of cell survival and proliferation and integ - intheextracellularspaceandtwoshortcytoplasmicdomains ( 20 – 50 rins lie at the basis of these phenomena ( Assoian , 1997 ; amino acids ) . The figure depicts the mammalian subunits and their Schwartz and Assoian , 2001 ; Frisch and Screaton , (cid:1)(cid:2) associations ; 8 (cid:2) subunits can assort with 18 (cid:1) subunits to form 2001 ) . It is now very well established that integrin - medi - 24distinctintegrins . Thesecanbeconsideredinseveralsubfamilies ated signals are necessary in normal cells to block apo - based on evolutionary relationships ( coloring of (cid:1) subunits ) , ligand ptosis ( viaPI3 - kinase and Akt ) and to stimulatecell cycle specificity and , in the case of (cid:2) 2 and (cid:2) 7 integrins , restricted expres - sion on white blood cells . (cid:1) subunits with gray hatching or stippling progression ( via ERK and cyclin D1 , etc . ) . In oncogeni - have inserted I / A domains ( see text ) . Such (cid:1) subunits are restricted cally transformed cells , these anchorage ( integrin ) - to chordates , as are (cid:1) 4 and (cid:1) 9 ( green ) and subunits (cid:2) 2 - (cid:2) 8 . In con - dependent signals are instead provided by oncogenes trast , (cid:1) subunits with specificity for laminins ( purple ) or RGD ( blue ) or by loss of tumor suppressor genes . Again , this is too are found throughout the metazoa and are clearly ancient ( see text ) . complex an area to review here in detail and the reader Asterisks denote alternatively spliced cytoplasmic domains . A few is referred to more specialized reviews ; see Figure 2 , extracellulardomainsarealsoalternativelyspliced ( notshown ) . Fur - ther information on integrin subunit structures and details of ligand which summarizes the main messages—integrins are specificity are given in several extensive reviews ( Hemler , 1999 ; full - fledged signal transduction receptors , at least as Plow et al . , 2000 ; van der Flier and Sonnenberg , 2001 ) . important to cells as more traditional growth factor re - ceptors . (cid:2) 8 ) and defects in leukocyte function ( (cid:1) L , (cid:1) M , (cid:1) E , (cid:2) 2 , Regulation of Integrin Function : Activation (cid:2) 7 ) , inflammation ( (cid:2) 6 ) , hemostasis ( (cid:1) IIb , (cid:2) 3 , (cid:1) 2 ) , bone and Inactivation remodeling ( (cid:2) 3 ) , and angiogenesis ( (cid:1) 1 , (cid:2) 3 ) as well as Many integrins are not constitutively active ; they can others ( see Table 1 ; Hynes , 1996 , 2002 ; DeArcangelis be , and often are , expressed on cell surfaces in an inac - and Georges - Labouesse , 2000 ; Sheppard , 2000 ; Bou - tive or “OFF” state , in which they do not bind ligands and vard et al . , 2001 ) . There is not space here to discuss do not signal . This is very important for their biological the details of all these phenotypes ; the relevant point is functions , as is most evident from considering integrins that the integrins play diverse and important roles in on circulating blood cells . most biological processes . How do they accomplish The major platelet integrin , (cid:1) IIb (cid:2) 3 , also known as this ? GPIIb / IIIa , is present at high density on circulating plate - lets where it is inactive . If it were not , platelets would bind their major ligand , fibrinogen , from the plasma and Transmembrane Connections and Signaling In addition to their roles in adhesion to ECM ligands or aggregate , leading to thrombosis . On platelet activation , (cid:1) IIb (cid:2) 3 is activated from within the cell , so that it can counterreceptors on adjacent cells , integrins serve as transmembrane mechanical links from those extracellu - bind fibrinogen , von Willebrand factor , and fibronectin , leading to strong adherence to the vessel wall and , by larcontactstothecytoskeletoninsidecells . Forallinteg - rinsexcept (cid:1) 6 (cid:2) 4 , thelinkageistotheactin - basedmicro - crosslinking via fibrinogen , to aggregation with other platelets . The importance of this activation of (cid:1) IIb (cid:2) 3 for filament system , which integrins also regulate and modulate . The (cid:2) 4 subunit differs from all the others ; its hemostasis is clear from the phenotypes of mice lacking either subunit ( see Table 1 ) ; these mice show major cytoplasmic domain being much larger , (cid:1) 1000 amino acids long instead of around 50 , and making connec - defects in hemostasis and have a bleeding disorder that is an excellent model of the human genetic disease tions to intermediate filaments instead of to actin . The submembrane linker proteins connecting the cyto - Glanzmann thrombasthenia ( GT ) , which arises from mu - tations in the genes for (cid:1) IIb or (cid:2) 3 ( Kato , 1997 ) . Antago - plasmic domains of integrins to the cytoskeleton are multiple and their interactions are complex . We will re - nists of (cid:1) IIb (cid:2) 3 / fibrinogen binding , either antibodies or low molecular reagents based on the integrin recogni - turn later to a discussion of the roles of some of them Review675 Table 1 . Integrin Gene Knockout Phenotypes (cid:1) 1 V , F No immediately obvious developmental defects , reduced tumor Gardner et al . , 1996 ; Pozzi vascularization et al . , 2000 , 2002 (cid:1) 2 V , F Few immediately obvious developmental defects , delayed platelet Holtkotter et al . , 2002 ; Chen aggregation and reduced binding to monomeric collagen , et al . , 2002 reduced mammary gland branching (cid:1) 3 P Kidney tubule defects , reduced branching morphogenesis in lungs , Kriedberg et al . , 1996 ; mild skin blistering , lamination defects in neocortex DiPersio et al . , 1997 ; Anton et al . , 1999 (cid:1) 4 E11 / 14 Defects in placenta ( chorioallantoic fusion defect ) and heart Yang et al . , 1995 ; Arroyo et ( epicardium , coronary vessels ) . Chimeras show defects in al . , 1996 , 1999 hematopoiesis . (cid:1) 5 E10 - 11 Defects in mesoderm ( posterior somites ) and vascular development , Yang et al . , 1993 ; Goh et al . , neural crest apoptosis . Chimeras show muscular dystrophy 1997 ; Taverna et al . , 1998 (cid:1) 6 a P Severe skin blistering , other epithelial tissues also defective . Georges - Labouesse et al . , Lamination defects in cortex and retina . 1996 , 1998 (cid:1) 7 V , F Muscular dystrophy , defective myotendinous junctions Mayer et al . , 1997 (cid:1) 8 P Small or absent kidneys , inner ear hair cell defects Muller et al . , 1997 ; Littlewood Evans et al . , 2000 (cid:1) 9 V Die within 10 days of birth , chylothorax due to lymphatic duct defect Huang et al . , 2000 (cid:1) 10 Not reported (cid:1) 11 Not reported (cid:1) v E10 / P Two classes : embryonic lethality due to placental defects , perinatal Bader et al . , 1998 ; McCarty lethality with cerebral vascular defects probably due to et al . , 2002 neuroepithelial defects , cleft palate . Most blood vessels develop normally (cid:1) IIb b V , F Hemorrhage , no platelet aggregation Tronik - Le Roux et al . , 2000 (cid:1) L V , F Impaired leukocyte recruitment Schmits et al . , 1996 (cid:1) M V , F Defective phagocytosis and apoptosis of neutrophils , mast cell Coxon et al . , 1996 ; Tang et development defects , adipose accumulation . al . , 1997 ; Dong et al . , 1997 (cid:1) X Not reported (cid:1) D Not reported (cid:1) E V , F Greatly reduced numbers of intraepithelial lymphocytes . Schon et al . , 1999 (cid:2) 1 E6 . 5 Peri - implantation lethality , ICM deteriorates , embryos fail to Fa¨ssler and Meyer , 1995 ; gastrulate . Extensive analyses of chimeras . Stephens et al . , 1995 ; Brakebusch et al . , 1997 (cid:2) 2 c V , F Leukocytosis , impaired inflammatory responses , skin infections , T Scharffetter - Kochanek et cell proliferation defects al . , 1998 (cid:2) 3 b V , F Hemorrhage , no platelet aggregation , osteosclerosis , Hodivala - Dilke et al . , 1999 ; hypervascularisation of tumors McHugh et al . , 2000 ; Reynolds et al . , 2002 (cid:2) 4 a P Severe skin blistering , other epithelial tissues also defective van der Neut et al . , 1996 ; Dowling et al . , 1996 (cid:2) 5 V , F No immediately obvious developmental defects Huang et al . , 2000 (cid:2) 6 V , F Inflammation in skin and airways , impaired lung fibrosis—all Huang et al . , 1996 ; Munger probably due to failure to activate TGF (cid:2) et al . , 1999 (cid:2) 7 V Deficits in gut - associated lymphocytes—no Peyer’s patches , Wagner et al . , 1996 reduced intraepithelial lymphocytes ( IEL ) . (cid:2) 8 E10 / P Two classes : embryonic lethality due to placental defects , perinatal Zhu et al . , 2002 lethality with cerebral vascular defects probably due to neuroepithelial defects . Most blood vessels develop normally . Reference citations are listed but not given in the reference list . They can be found in PubMed or in several extensive reviews , which also discuss the implications of the results as well as work with chimeric mice and recent work using conditional and tissue - specific ablation of integrins ( Hynes , 1996 ; De Arcangelis and Georges - Labouesse , 2000 ; Sheppard , 2000 ; Bouvard et al . , 2001 ) . Abbreviations : E , embryonic lethal ( day of lethality ) ; P , perinatal lethal ; V , viable ; F , fertile . a , b , c Human mutations in these genes lead to disease ( Hogg and Bates , 2000 ) a (cid:1) 6 (cid:2) 4 Epidermolysis bullosa ( JEB - PA ) —skin blistering ( Pulkkinen and Uitto , 1999 ) b (cid:1) IIb (cid:2) 3 Glanzmann thrombasthenia ( GT ) —bleeding ( Kato , 1997 ) c (cid:2) 2 Leukocyte adhesion deficiency ( LAD ) —failure in leukocyte recruitment ( Etzioni et al . , 1999 ) tion sequence , are effective antithrombotic drugs ( Col - tors GPVI and the integrin (cid:1) 2 (cid:2) 1 . This last is an example of another important general principle , namely that in - ler , 1997 ; Scarborough andGretler , 2000 ) . The activation of (cid:1) IIb (cid:2) 3 is triggered by thrombin , ADP , or epinephrine , tegrins frequently intercommunicate , serving to activate ( as in this case ) or inhibit each other ( Schwartz and all of which act through G protein - coupled receptors , or by von Willebrand factor signaling through its receptor Ginsberg , 2002 ; Hynes , 2002 ) . Leukocytes offer other examples of the importance ( GPIb / V / IX ) , or by collagen signaling through its recep - Cell676 Figure 2 . Integrin Signaling A decade ago , ideas about integrin signaling were in their infancy ( Hynes , 1992 ) . It was clear that integrins synergized with other cell surface receptors including growth factor re - ceptorstoactivate largelyunknownsignaling pathways to affect cell proliferation and dif - ferentiation , cell shape and migration , and other events . These signal transduction mechanisms could be subverted by onco - genessuchaspp60 sre togiveanchorageinde - pendence of growth . Our current view re - mains the same in outline but many detailed signal transduction pathways have now been elucidated . The major signal transduction pathways and many of the key players in them are shown , leading to the major effects on cell behavior mediatedbyintegrins , often actinginconcert with G protein - coupled or kinase receptors for soluble factors . The major submembra - nous , integrin - associated links between integrins and these signal transduction pathways are contained within the pink - purple pentagon beneath the clustered integrins . Details of the interactions of theselinker / adaptor proteins and of the signal transduction pathways are omitted , as are other known players in these processes . Readers are referred to several excellent reviews for further details ( Clark and Brugge , 1995 ; Schwartz et al . , 1995 ; Yamada and Miyamoto , 1995 ; Clark and Hynes , 1997 ; Giancotti and Ruoslahti , 1999 ; Danen and Yamada , 2001 ; Wu and Dedhar , 2001 ; Schwartz and Ginsberg , 2002 ; Miranti and Brugge , 2002 ) . of inactiveintegrins and their regulatedactivation . Mem - lation of integrin function from within the cell has com - monly been called “inside - out” signaling to distinguish bers of the (cid:2) 2 integrin subfamily ( also known as CD11 / 18 ) are expressed on most white blood cells but , when it from “outside - in” signaling , as depicted in Figure 2 ( Hynes , 1992 ; Ginsberg et al . , 1992 ) . Both obviously in - these cells are “resting , ” these integrins become inac - tive . When the cells become activated , for example by volve transmembrane signals , the nature of which has been difficult to decipher . Major insights come from cytokines , the (cid:2) 2 integrins are rapidly activated and the cells become adhesive for their counterreceptors , in this recent structural information on integrins and from ex - periments stimulated by and / or reinterpreted in light case , Ig superfamily molecules such as ICAMs . These are expressed on endothelial cells , allowing attachment of the structural results , and we will return later to a discussion of the nature of integrin activation . of leukocytes to the vessel wall , or on other cells , allowing phenomena such as phagocytosis , cytotoxic killing , or lymphocyte help . As in the case of platelets , Integrin Structure : Extracellular Domains ThefirstdomainofintegrinstobecrystallizedwastheI / A it is important that the (cid:2) 2 integrins are inactive on the surfaces of resting leukocytes ( to avoid inflammation ) domain inserted into half of the mammalian (cid:1) subunits ( Figure 1 ) . Lee et al . ( 1995a ) determined the structure of and that they can be rapidly activated ( to allow immune function ) . Defects in either have pathological conse - thisdomainfrom (cid:1) M (cid:2) 2 ( CD11b / CD18 , CR3 ) andshowed it to be a Rossmann fold with a core of parallel (cid:2) sheets quences . Clear support for the importance of these pro - cesses comes from the phenotypes of mice lacking one surrounded by amphipathic (cid:1) helices . Within the ex - tended family of Rossmann folds , the integrin I / A do - or more of the (cid:2) 2 integrins or their ligands ( Table 1 ; Rosenkranz and Mayadas , 1999 ) and from the genetic mains form a subset of the larger group of VWA domains found in a wide variety of proteins ( Tuckwell , 1999 ; Whit - disease leukocyte adhesion deficiency ( LAD ) , which arises from mutations in the gene for (cid:2) 2 integrin . LAD taker and Hynes , 2002 ) . VWA domains are around 180 amino acids long and many appear to be involved in patients suffer from leukocytosis and the failure to re - cruit leukocytes to sites of infection , leading to early protein - protein interactions . The I / A domains of integrin (cid:1) subunits comprise the ligand binding sites of these death ( Etzioni et al . , 1999 ) . In contrast , blockade of (cid:2) 2 integrins , and of (cid:1) 4 integrins , which mediate similar integrins . Lee et al . ( 1995a ) defined a metal ion coordination site functions on lymphocytes , is a very promising avenue for therapy of a variety of inflammatory and autoimmune at the “top” of the I / A domain of (cid:1) M , involving residues from three separate loops of the I / A domain . Interest - diseases ( Gottlieb et al . , 2000 ; Jackson , 2002 ) . While these vascular processes offer particularly clear ingly , a glutamate from an adjacent molecule in the crys - tal formedpart ofthe coordinationsphere . Itwas already examples of the importance of inactivation and activa - tion of integrin function , not all integrins have been well established that integrins require divalent cations for ligand binding and that an aspartate ( D ) or glutamate shown to undergo such extremes of activity . However , it is believed that many , perhaps all , integrins may behave ( E ) residue is key to the integrin recognition site of all ligands ( including ICAM - 1 , a ligand for (cid:1) M (cid:2) 2 ) . This had similarly , albeit in a less absolute and more localized fashion , during processes such as cell migration , neurite led to the idea that the ligand D / E might participate togetherwithresiduesfromtheintegrininjointcoordina - outgrowth , and so forth , when it is important for cells to regulate their adhesion in a temporal and spatial fashion tion of a divalent cation . The structure determined by Lee et al . ( 1995a ) fitted this idea very well and they ( LauffenburgerandHorwitz , 1996 ) . Thisconceptofregu - Review677 Figure 3 . Integrin I / A Domain Structure and Conformational Change ( A ) Comparison of I / A domain structures of (cid:1) 2 ( left ) and (cid:1) M ( right ) . In each case , regions showing large changes between the two states ; open / liganded ( blue ) and closed / unli - ganded ( yellow ) are indicated , and the shifts on ligationare shown byred arrows . Note the shiftfromtheChelix ( red ; specifictocollagen binding I / A domains ) into the (cid:1) 6 helix and the large downward shift of the C - terminal (cid:1) 7 helix on binding of ligand to (cid:1) 2 . (cid:1) M shows a very similar downward shift of the C - terminal helix . ( B ) Close - up of the movements of the metal ion and loops around the MIDAS site in (cid:1) 2 ( left ) and (cid:1) M ( right ) with color - coding as in ( A ) . Againnotethestrongsimilarityinthecon - formational changes occurring in the two do - mains . The movement of the loops is coordi - nated with the movement of the metal ion , which switches its coordination from a D in loop L3 to a T in loop L1 . Changes in L1 and L2 lead to the reorganization of (cid:1) C and (cid:1) 7 shown in ( A ) . ( C ) Stereo diagram of the MIDAS motif of (cid:1) 2 with theglutamate residue ( E ) fromthe ligand ( yellow ) coordinating the metal ion ( blue ) . Residues from the loops of the I / A domain coordinate the metal ion either directly or through water molecules ( (cid:4) ) . An additional residue ( E256 from L3 ) has been omitted for clarity . All panels from Emsley et al . ( 2000 ) . coined the term metal ion - dependent adhesion site mational change within the I / A domain and this was elegantly confirmed by the determination of the struc - ( MIDAS ) . They also pointed out a homologous segment embedded within the (cid:2) subunit and sharing hydropathy ture of the I / A domain of (cid:1) 2 with and without a model ligand based on the recognition sequence in collagen and secondary structure predictions and a MIDAS motif . This segment of the (cid:2) 3 subunit had already been impli - ( Figure 3 ; Emsley et al . , 1997 , 2000 ) . Comparisons among all the I / A domain structures lead to the clear cated in ligand binding by crosslinking , genetic , and mutagenesis data ( D’Souza et al . , 1988 ; Bajt and Loftus , deduction that the ligand does indeed coordinate the metal ion in the MIDAS site via a carboxylate group and 1994 ; Loftus et al . , 1994 ) . This prediction was followed up by more elaborate secondary structure predictions this is coupled to alterations in metal coordination by residues within the integrin MIDAS motif . These in turn ( Tozer et al . , 1996 ; Tuckwell and Humphries , 1997 ; Huang et al . , 2000 ) , and refined HMM models now reli - are coupled to conformational shifts within the domain : lateral movements of the loops containing the MIDAS ably predict a VWA domain within integrin (cid:2) subunits . These conclusions have been confirmed within the last residues and longer - range movements in the C - terminal helix of the I / A domain , which moves around 10 A˚ down year by the determination of the structure of the entire extracellular domain of integrin (cid:1) v (cid:2) 3 ( see below ) . the side of the domain when ligand binds ( Figure 3 ) . Liddington and colleagues ( Lee et al . , 1995b ; Loftus and Additional structures of I / A domains followed and it became clear that the domains could take on two con - Liddington , 1997 ) noted the strong parallels between these conformational changes in I / A domains and those formations , “open” and “closed , ” differing in the coordi - nation of the metal at the MIDAS site ( Lee et al . , 1995b ; occurring in GTPases such as ras and G proteins , which also contain Rossmann nucleotide binding folds . It is Qu and Leahy , 1995 , 1996 ; Emsley et al . , 1997 ) . It was proposed that ligand binding was coupled to a confor - easy to imagine how such conformational changes Cell678 could propagate to the rest of the molecule , to which refer to as I - EGF repeats . The four I - EGF repeats are followed by a C - terminal disulfide - bonded (cid:2) sheet do - the I / A domain is coupled via its adjacent N and C ter - mini , and we will return later to this important allosteric main termed the (cid:2) - tail domain . As mentioned , this structure confirmed many predic - property of integrins . Xiong et al . ( 2000 ) expressed I / A domains of (cid:1) M that tions and conformed with much preexisting data con - cerning integrin structure ( see Humphries , 2000 , 2002 ; adopt each of the two forms ( open or closed ) and showed that only the open form binds ligands . Springer Shimaokaetal . , 2002 , forrelevantreviewsrelatingearlier data to the structure ) . The big surprise was that , instead and colleagues have also exploited the structural infor - mation to produce I / A domains of (cid:1) L locked in the open of being extended as depicted in Figure 4B and as ex - pected from published EM images of integrins , the (cid:1) v (cid:2) 3 and closed states by disulfide bonds engineered into the C - terminal helix to lock it into the up ( closed ) or integrin in the crystal structure was bent over at a 135 (cid:5) angle with a “genu” between the thigh and calf domains down ( open ) position and shown that these two forms differ markedly in affinity for ligand ( Lu et al . , 2001a ; of (cid:1) v and a similar bend in the I - EGF 2 / 3 region of the (cid:2) 3 leg ( Figure 4A ) . This surprising structure raises very Shimaoka et al . , 2001 , 2002 ) . The open form is high affinity or “active” and the closed form is low affinity or interesting questions and has already stimulated experi - ments to which I will return below . “inactive , ” and the conformational switch between them is coupled with ligand binding or with known activation The structure determined by Xiong et al . ( 2001 ) was obtained in a Ca 2 (cid:6) buffer and lacked bound ligand , con - stimuli such as activating antibodies or Mn 2 (cid:6) ions . Half the mammalian (cid:1) subunits and all known non - ditions usually yielding inactive integrins . The MIDAS motif did not have a clear cation engaged , although an chordate integrins lack an inserted I / A domain ( Figure 1 ) , but it is clear that these (cid:1) subunits also contribute adjacent site ( ADMIDAS ) did and other cations bind at other sites within both subunits . Subsequent structures ligandbindingspecificity . Howdo theydothat ? Springer ( 1997 ) predictedthatthe7 - foldrepeatintheextracellular obtained after diffusing cycloRGDF and Mn 2 (cid:6) into the crystal showed cycloRGDF bound at the (cid:1)(cid:2) interface domain of all (cid:1) subunits folds into a 7 - bladed (cid:2) propeller like that in the (cid:2) subunit of G proteins ( Wall et al . , 1995 ; with the arginine residue binding the propeller domain of the (cid:1) subunit and the aspartate joining the coordination Lambrightetal . , 1996 ; Sondeketal . , 1996 ) andpredicted that this might complex with the I / A domain embedded sphere of a Mn 2 (cid:6) ion bound at the MIDAS site ( Figure 4C ; Xiong et al . , 2002 ) . Changes occurred in the loops within the integrin (cid:2) subunit by analogy with the G (cid:1) / G (cid:2) complex in G proteins . This prediction has also been at the top of the I / A domains , similar to those seen in (cid:1) - I / A domains , but the 10 A˚ shift in the C - terminal helix confirmed by the (cid:1) v (cid:2) 3 structure . The solution by Arnaout and colleagues of the crystal characteristic of ligand bound I / A domains from (cid:1) sub - units was not observed in the (cid:2) 3 I / A domain . Several structure of the extracellular domain of (cid:1) v (cid:2) 3 ( Xiong et al . , 2001 ) represents a truly major advance in the integrin possibilities have been suggested : ( 1 ) the (cid:2) 3 I / A domain is constitutively active , even in the absence of ligand field . In addition to confirming the predictions of an I / A domain within the (cid:2) subunit and of a (cid:2) - propeller domain ( Xiong et al . , 2001 , 2002 ) , ( 2 ) the lattice contacts in the crystal prevent the full conformational change and acti - within the (cid:1) subunit in an association very like that of G (cid:1) and G (cid:2)(cid:7) , it revealed the structure of much of the vation ( Liddington , 2002 ) , or ( 3 ) activation of the I / A do - main in (cid:2) subunits occurs somewhat differently ( Mould rest of the extracellular domains of both subunits ( Figure 4 ; Xiong et al . , 2001 , 2002 ) . The propeller domain and the et al . , 2002 ; Liddington , 2002 ) . Mould et al . ( 2002 ) report anactivation - dependentantibodythat bindsthe (cid:1) 1helix (cid:2) - I / A domain are complexed to form the ligand binding head of the integrin , which is attached to two legs , one at the base of the (cid:2) - I / A domain near the contact with the hybrid domain . Many function - blocking and - activating from each subunit , as predicted from a large body of electron microscopic , biophysical , and other data . The antibodies bind the (cid:1) 1 and (cid:1) 2 helices in this part of the (cid:2) - I / A domain ( Takada andPuzon , 1993 ) , also suggesting N - terminal propeller domain of the (cid:1) subunit is attached to an elongated leg formed of three (cid:2) sandwich domains a propagated conformational change in this region not seen in the cycloRGDF - (cid:1) v (cid:2) 3 crystal . termed thigh , calf1 , and calf2 . The (cid:2) subunit domain organization is a bit more complex ; although the (cid:2) - I / A Much of the top surface of the propeller is occluded by the apposed (cid:2) - I / A domain in the crystal structure domain is at the distal end of the molecule ( furthest from the C - terminal membrane insertion site ) , it is not at the ( Xiong et al . , 2001 ) , including residues known to be in - volved in interactions with ligands and to contain epi - N terminus of the primary sequence . Instead , it is in - serted into a loop in a so - called hybrid domain , another topes for blocking antibodies against several integrins ( Humphries , 2000 , 2002 ) . It has been known for a long (cid:2) sandwich domain with some homology with I - set Ig domains . The hybrid - I / A domain unit is preceded in the timethatRGDpeptidesandsmallligandscanbindinteg - rins that are not fully activated , whereas larger ligands sequence by an N - terminal 54 - residue PSI domain , which in the 3D structure lies below the hybrid - I / A do - such as fibrinogen and fibronectin cannot ( Coller , 1986 ; Beer et al . , 1992 ) . Mould et al . ( 1997 ) showed that the main “head” and is disulfide bonded to the distal end of the (cid:2) subunit leg . This leg is made up of four tandem RGD of fibronectin interacts with the (cid:2) - I / A domain , whereas the synergy site in the adjacent Fn3 repeat cystine - rich repeats highly characteristic of integrin (cid:2) subunits . The first and second are poorly resolved in interacts with the propeller domain . Dual interaction of these two sites appears to be necessary for strong bind - the crystal , but the third and fourth are clearly folded into EGF - like folds . An NMR structure of the second and ing of (cid:1) 5 (cid:2) 1 integrin to fibronectin ( Garcia et al . , 2002 ) . These data suggest that a fully active ligand - engaged third cystine - rich repeats of (cid:2) 2 ( Beglova et al . , 2002 ) confirms their EGF - like pattern including an extra fourth integrin must undergo some opening up at the interface between the (cid:2) - I / A domain and the propeller domain . cystine pair characteristic of these repeats , which I will Review679 Figure 4 . Three - DimensionalStructureofthe Integrin (cid:1) v (cid:2) 3 ( A ) The structure of the unliganded (cid:1) v (cid:2) 3 is shown as a ribbon diagram with the (cid:1) v sub - unit in blue and the (cid:2) 3 subunit in red . In the crystal the integrin is folded over at a bend or“genu , ”withthehead ( propeller , (cid:2) - I / A , and hybrid domains ) bent over toward the C ter - mini of the legs which would be inserted into the membrane in an intact integrin . The do - mains are hard to see in this view and are more readily visualized in ( B ) . ( B ) The structure in ( A ) has been unfolded by straightening it out at the “genu” of the (cid:1) v subunit by 135 (cid:5) and rotating the thigh 120 (cid:5) around its axis , with similar adjustments to the (cid:2) 3 structure . The structures of the linker segments ( 1 in the (cid:1) v , 2 and 3 in the (cid:2) 3 ) and of the PSI domain and I - EGF repeats 1 and 2 are not well resolved and are approximate estimatesonly . Thestructurerevealstwolegs ( (cid:1) 160 A˚ (cid:8) (cid:1) 20 A˚ ) extending from the mem - brane insertion site at the C termini to the head at the top . The head is (cid:1) 90 A˚ (cid:8) 60 A˚ (cid:8) 45 A˚ and comprises three domains : a (cid:2) pro - peller domain at the N terminus of the (cid:1) v subunitandanI / Adomaininsertedintoaloop on the top of the hybrid domain in the (cid:2) sub - unit . The N - terminal PSI domain is curled in below the hybrid domain and is known to be linked by a disulfide bond to the I - EGF - 1 re - peat , althoughthisconnectionisnotresolved in the crystal structure . The apposition of the propeller and I / A domains is highly similar to that of G proteins . A 3 10 helix from the I / A domain reaches out to the propeller and inserts an arginine residue into the central channel of the propeller . This arrangement is very similar to the arrangement of a lysine in the (cid:1) 2 helix of the switch II region of G (cid:1) inserted into the propeller domain of G (cid:2) . The asterisk marks the loop into which I / A domains are inserted in some integrin (cid:1) subunits , although not (cid:1) v . ( C ) Surface representation of the cyclo RGDF peptide bound to the interface between the (cid:1) subunit propeller ( blue ) and the (cid:2) subunit I / A domain ( red ) . The aspartate ( D ) of the ligand coordinates a Mn 2 (cid:6) ion ( cyan ) and the arginine ( R ) binds to aspartate residues in loops on top of the propeller . The second Mn 2 (cid:6) ion ( violet ) is in the ADMIDAS site . ( A ) and ( B ) are from Xiong et al . ( 2001 ) ; ( C ) is from Xiong et al . ( 2002 ) . This would resemble the separation of the homologous activation of the extracellular domains after we have reviewed recent data on the cytoplasmic domains of G (cid:1) and G (cid:2) domains in activated G proteins and seems a very reasonable working hypothesis for integrins ( Lid - integrins towhich eventsat theligand bindingsites must be coupled . dington , 2002 ; Liddington and Ginsberg , 2002 ) . Such a model receives some support from EM images of integ - rins in the presence of ligand peptides . Hantgan et al . Cytoplasmic Domains : Structures and Interactions ( 1999 ) report some separation of the (cid:1) and (cid:2) heads of (cid:1) IIb (cid:2) 3 in the presence of RGD peptides and Takagi et Despite the fact that integrins’ cytoplasmic domains are much smaller than their extracellular domains ( generally al . ( 2002 ) detect changes in the relationship between the head and the hybrid domain of (cid:1) v (cid:2) 3 as a conse - less than 50 amino acids ) they play a vital role in integrin functions and have been the subject of intensive analy - quence of RGD binding . Since the C - terminal helix of the (cid:2) - I / A domain connects to the hybrid domain , if it sis . Paradoxically we have a less clear picture of their 3D structure than we do for the large extracellular domains , were to undergo a downward shift like that shown by the corresponding helix in (cid:1) - I / A domains , that would although recent work has produced some major in - sights . necessarily be coupled to changes in (cid:2) - I / A - hybrid do - main organization that could well include rotation away The cytoplasmic domains are the sites of interaction with , and linkage to , the cytoskeletal and signaling part - from contact with the propeller domain , opening it up for further interactions with ligands ( Figure 5 ) . ners of integrins ( see Figure 2 ) . There is an extensive literature on the many proteins that have been reported The (cid:1) v (cid:2) 3 integrin lacks an (cid:1) - I / A domain , but the site of insertion of I / A domains in those (cid:1) subunits that have to interact with (cid:1) or (cid:2) cytoplasmic domains but I will not attempt to review most of that work ( see Burridge onefallsbetweenblades2and3ofthepropellerdomain , and this position is marked in Figures 4 and 5 . Since and Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , 1996 ; Critchley et al . , 1999 ; Calderwood et al . , 2000 ; Zamir and Geiger , 2001 , (cid:1) - I / A domains contain the ligand binding sites of the corresponding integrins , we need to consider how li - for reviews ) . For our present considerations , it is most relevant to consider data that indicate that integrin cyto - gand binding may differ between the two classes of integrin , those with and without (cid:1) - I / A domains . We will plasmic domains can regulate the activation state of integrins ; that is , affect the structure and function of the return to consider further models for ligand binding and Cell680 Figure 6 . Interactions between and with Integrin Cytoplasmic Do - mains Figure 5 . Hypothetical Models for Ligand binding to Integrin Heads ( A ) Sequences of the cytoplasmic tails of (cid:1) IIb and (cid:2) 3 . The mem - ( A ) An integrin without an I / A domain in the (cid:1) subunit , such as (cid:1) v (cid:2) 3 brane - spanning segment is usually considered to end at the W ( note ; only the head region is shown ) . A small ligand such as cyclo within the darker gray shaded area ( lipid bilayer ) . The immediately RGDF binds at the interface between the propeller and the (cid:2) - I / A membrane - proximal segments are highly conserved ( red denotes domain ( see Figure 4 ) . The model proposes that the C - terminal helix conservationinthevastmajorityofsubunits , lilacdenotesconserva - ( orange ) moves down , causing the (cid:2) - I / A domain ( pink ) to rotate tion in more than half ) . Conserved NxxY motifs are highlighted in away from the propeller domain opening up the top of the propeller yellow . Deletion of the conserved membrane - proximal segment to engage larger ligands such as fibronectin ( lilac ) . It is known that fromeithersubunitleadstoactivation , asdopointmutationsmarked the RGD motif in fibronectin engages the (cid:2) - I / A domain while the by asterisks ( see text ) . The proposed salt bridge between R995 and synergy site in the adjacent Fn3 domain engages the propeller D723 is marked by a red bar ( Hughes et al . , 1996 ) . The pink bars ( Mould et al . , 1997 ) , consistent with this model , although the degree denoteregionsshowinginteractionbetweensubunitsandthegreen of opening shown is hypothetical and could easily vary among in - bars denote (cid:1) - helical segments , both deduced from NMR data ( Vi - tegrins . nogradova et al . , 2002 ) . The purple bar denotes segment of (cid:2) 3 ( B ) An integrin with an (cid:1) - I / A domain such as (cid:1) 2 (cid:2) 1 . The ligand , showing interaction with talin head by NMR ( Vinogradova et al . , collagen , binds to the top of the (cid:1) - I / A domain ( pale blue ) causing 2002 ) consistentwithcellbiologicalresults ( Calderwoodetal . , 1999 , a 10 A˚ downward shift of the C - terminal helix ( Figure 3 ) , which is 2002 ; Patil et al . , 1999 ) . Talin binding also requires Y747 ( hatch attached to an extended loop containing a conserved glutamate mark ) . Since the affinity of talin head for (cid:2) 3 tail is much higher than ( red dot ) . It is proposed that this could bind to the MIDAS site in thatbetweenthetwotails , bindingoftalinundoestheclaspbetween the (cid:2) - I / A domain ( Alonso et al . , 2002 ) and act upon it as a ligand the cytoplasmic domains in the same way as mutations in the mem - relay . The (cid:2) - I / A domain is proposed to transmit conformational brane - proximal region ( asterisks ) . Armulik et al . ( 1999 ) report that change to the hybrid domain as in ( A ) . Springer and colleagues the conserved membrane - proximal segments can be buried in the ( Shimaoka et al . , 2002 ) have concentrated on inside - out activation lipid bilayer ( lighter gray shading ) . If so , then the transmembrane of (cid:2) 2 integrins and thus have focused on how the (cid:1) - I / A domains segments are atypically long ( 28 – 30 residues ) and Armulik et al . become activated . They have suggested that the C - terminal helix suggest that interactions with cytoplasmic proteins could pull the actslikeabellropetopullopentheI / Adomain . Thisisthereciprocal conserved segments out of the bilayer , offering an alternative or of the ligand - relay model . The change is an allosteric one and the additional way in which binding of proteins such as talin could alter equilibrium can be driven from either end . integrin conformation leading to activation ( see also Figure 7B ) . ( B ) Talin can be activated for binding to (cid:2) tails by cleavage ( Yan et al . , 2001 ) to release the FERM domain - containing head ( blue ) or by extracellular domains . There is a considerable body of interaction with PIP2 ( Martel et al . , 2001 ) . In each case , the talin data indicating that the cytoplasmic domains of the (cid:1) head binds the (cid:2) cytoplasmic domain leading to separation of the tails ( see [ A ] and text ) . Intact talin does not interact with integrin and (cid:2) subunits can interact to control the activation tails and is depicted as folded upon itself with the head domain states of integrins . These analyses have proceeded fur - occluded by the tail of talin , by analogy with ERM proteins ( Pearson thest for theplatelet integrin , (cid:1) IIb (cid:2) 3 , whichas discussed et al . , 2000 ) , although the tertiary structure of talin is unknown . The earlier is tightly regulated so that it is inactive on resting talin tail comprises a series of short (cid:1) - helical segments ( yellow ) and platelets but rapidly activated by thrombogenic stimuli . an actin binding domain ( red ) . Ginsberg and colleagues have investigated the roles of the (cid:1) IIb and (cid:2) 3 cytoplasmic domains in this regulation . They have shownthat the short (cid:1) IIbcytoplasmic domain tion of either one to alanine yields a constitutively active integrin , whereas a charge reversal , (cid:1) IIbR995D / (cid:2) 3D723R , acts as a negative regulator of activation . Deletion of the entire domain ( see Figure 6A ) or of just the highly restored the inactive state ( Hughes et al . , 1996 ) . Based on these and other results , Ginsberg and colleagues conserved GFFKR sequence produces a constitutively active integrin ( O’Toole et al . , 1991 , 1994 ) . Similarly , the suggested several models , all relying on interaction be - tween the membrane - proximal segments of (cid:1) IIb and (cid:2) 3 conserved membrane - proximal segment of (cid:2) 3 is also necessary ( Hughes et al . , 1995 ) . They proposed that to restrain the integrin in an inactive state ( Williams et al . , 1994 ; Woodside et al . , 2001 ) . Separation , twisting , R995 of (cid:1) IIb forms a salt bridge with D723 of (cid:2) 3 ; muta - Review681 pistoning , and hinging of the tails were all considered integrin tails , most often those of (cid:2) subunits . Others of as mechanisms to allow activation . More recent data these could act similarly to talin head or , alternatively , favor models involving separation of the cytoplasmic could bind elsewhere in the tail , such as the distal por - domains as a key step in integrin activation . Evidence tion of (cid:2) tail , which does not appear to interact with the comes from recent NMR analyses and from cell biologi - (cid:1) tail ( Figure 6A ) . cal studies . Binding between the cytoplasmic domains of (cid:1) IIb and Integrin Activation : Transmembrane Connections (cid:2) 3 could be detected by surface plasmon resonance and Long - Range Conformational Changes andwasablatedbydeletionofKVGFFKRorbyanR995A If activation of integrins by inside - out signaling involves mutation ( Vallar et al . , 1999 ) . The affinity was low ( K d (cid:9) separation of the (cid:1) and (cid:2) cytoplasmic tails , how is that 7 – 50 (cid:10) M depending on divalent cation concentration ) , signal transmitted to the ligand binding site ( s ) 10 – 20 nm which may explain why initial efforts to determine struc - away at the far end of the extracellular domain ? Recent turesoftheinteractingdomainswerelargelyunsuccess - results are beginning to reveal possible mechanisms , ful ( Ulmer et al . , 2001 ; Li et al . , 2001 ) . However , Weljie despite the fact that there is not a structure for an intact etal . ( 2002 ) detected (cid:1) - helicalstructureandintersubunit integrin , only for the separate intracellular and extracel - interactions using synthetic peptides representing the lular domains . membrane - proximal segments . Vinogradova et al . (cid:2) 2 integrins , like (cid:1) IIb (cid:2) 3 , are dependent on their mem - ( 2002 ) demonstrated interactions between membrane - brane - proximal cytoplasmic domains to maintain an in - proximal helices in both subunits , using the entire cyto - active state ; deletion of either (cid:1) or (cid:2) segments yields plasmic domains , and also demonstrated that they were active integrins ( Lu et al . , 2001b ) . Furthermore , replace - disrupted by point mutations ( F992A or R995D ) already ment of the (cid:1) L and (cid:2) 2 tails by , respectively , acidic and known to interfere with inactivation by (cid:1) IIb cytoplasmic basic coiled - coil domains restored the inactive state . domain in the intact integrin ( see earlier discussion ) . Thisisanalogoustothecharge - reversalexperimentwith These data are summarized in Figure 6A , which also (cid:1) IIb (cid:2) 3 and confirms that (cid:1)(cid:2) tail associations also re - collects together information from a different , comple - strain (cid:2) 2 integrins in an inactive state . To take the analy - mentary set of experiments . sis further , Takagi et al . ( 2001 ) eliminated both the tails Calderwood et al . ( 1999 , 2002 ) showed that the head and the transmembrane domains from (cid:1) 5 (cid:2) 1 and re - domain of talin binds to the cytoplasmic domains of placed them with acidic and basic coiled coils joined (cid:2) 3 and other (cid:2) subunits via a PTB domain within the by a disulfide bond . This generated a soluble (cid:1) 5 (cid:2) 1 di - conserved FERM domain of talin ; Y747 of (cid:2) 3 is neces - mer . As predicted , this clamped , soluble (cid:1) 5 (cid:2) 1 did not sary for this interaction . The NPLY motif is believed to bind its ligand , fibronectin , but it could be activated by form a (cid:2) turn , and NMR data on (cid:2) 3 cytoplasmic domain cleaving the C - terminal clamp ; that is , by allowing the support this idea ( Ulmer et al . , 2001 ) . Vinogradova et al . (cid:1) and (cid:2) stalks ( legs ) to separate , which was confirmed ( 2002 ) therefore analyzed the effects of talin head on by EM . This experiment shows that the C - terminal cyto - theNMRsignalsofthe (cid:1) IIband (cid:2) 3cytoplasmicdomains ; plasmic domain clasp or the engineered C - terminal talin head bound to (cid:2) 3 but not to (cid:1) IIb . The interactions clamp , whether inside or outside the membrane , con - extended from K716 to N744 , completely overlapping strain integrins in an inactive state but release of these the region of (cid:2) 3 interaction with (cid:1) IIb ( see Figure 6A ) . constraints , allowing separation of the stalks / legs of the Furthermore , talin head ablated the interaction between extracellular domains , leads to activation of the ligand the (cid:1) IIband (cid:2) 3tails ( Vinogradovaetal . , 2002 ) , consistent binding site in the head . with its much higher affinity for (cid:2) 3 tail ( K d (cid:1) 100 nM ; The idea that conformational changes in the extracel - Calderwood et al . , 1999 , 2002 ) . Thus , the head of talin lular domain near the membrane can be linked to binds to the (cid:2) 3 tail and separates it from the (cid:1) IIb tail . changes in the ligand binding domain in the head of Talin head was also shown to bind to and activate integrins is far from a new one . A decade ago Weisel et integrins ( Calderwood etal . , 1999 , 2002 ) , entirelyconsis - al . ( 1992 ) demonstrated that (cid:1) IIb (cid:2) 3 bound to fibrinogen tent with the model that interactions between (cid:1) IIb tail tends to show widely separated tails . This is effectively and (cid:2) 3 tail keep the integrin in an inactive state and the reciprocal result of the experiment of Takagi et al . separation is necessary for activation ( see Figure 6B ) . ( 2001 ) with (cid:1) 5 (cid:2) 1 and fibronectin . In another early experi - In order for talin’s head domain to trigger this activation , ment , Du et al . ( 1993 ) showed cooperative activation it must be exposed . This can be accomplished by ex - between the binding of fibrinogen to the head of the pressing recombinant fragments of talin ( Calderwood (cid:1) IIb (cid:2) 3 integrin and binding of a monoclonal antibody to et al . , 1999 , 2002 ; Patil et al . , 1999 ) , by calpain cleavage , the first 90 amino acids of the (cid:2) 3 stalk adjacent to the which separates the head from the tail ( Yan et al . , 2001 ) , membrane . The distance between these two sites as or by phosphatidyl inositols ( Martel et al . , 2001 ) as de - revealed by EM was 16 nm . The antibody had originally picted in Figure 6B . The mapping of the interaction to been isolated as recognizing a ligand - induced binding a PTB domain within the talin head ( Calderwood et al . , site ( anti - LIBS ) and its binding was enhanced by fibrino - 2002 ) , which binds to the NPxY motif conserved in (cid:2) 3 gen binding to the head of the integrin . Importantly , and in most other integrin (cid:2) subunits , raises the very binding of the antibody also enhanced the affinity of the interesting possibility that other PTB - containing pro - integrin for fibrinogen , i . e . , the activation was reciprocal . teins may also interact with (cid:2) tails leading to activation So we now have a picture of long - range conforma - of integrins ( Liddington and Ginsberg , 2002 ) . Among tional changes linking the C - terminal ends of an integ - candidates for such a role is FAK , which like talin has rin’s legs , i . e . , the membrane - proximal regions both out - aFERMdomaincontaininga PTBdomain . Asmentioned earlier , multiple proteins have been reported to bind to side and inside the membrane , to ligand binding at the Cell682 head . Thereis , infact , agreatdealofevidenceinsupport of this concept , including many activating and activa - tion - sensitive monoclonal antibodies that frequently map in the (cid:2) stalk regions ( reviewed in Humphries , 2000 , 2002 ; Shimaoka et al . , 2002 ) , as well as biophysical data ( e . g . , Hantgan et al . , 1999 , and earlier work ) and the electron microscopy already mentioned . The challenge is to understand how conformational changes in the head domains associated with ligand binding are cou - pled reciprocally with alterations , probably separation , at the base of the legs and in the cytoplasm . How can we fit these results with the newly available structural data ? The structure offers some potential solutions but also the complication represented by the bent structure observed in the crystal ( Figure 4A ) . Xiong et al . ( 2001 , 2002 ) suggested that the bent form is the active form of the integrin . However , others have argued that it is more likely to be the inactive state , based on details of the conformation of the (cid:2) - I / A domain and the fact that it was crystallized in the absence of ligand ( Liddington , 2002 ; Liddington and Ginsberg , 2002 ; Shimaoka et al . , 2002 ) . The latter interpretation would fit much better with EM images of ligand bound integrins ( Weisel et al . , 1992 ; Du et al . , 1993 ) , which show an extended structure like that shown in Figure 4B . Beglovaetal . ( 2002 ) mappedepitopesforactivation - specific monoclonal antibodies to specific residues in Figure 7 . Models for Long - Range Allosteric Changes Giving Bidi - I - EGF repeats 2 and 3 and noted that these residues rectional Signaling by Integrins would be buried in the bent form of the integrin . They ( A ) Integrin in its bent form is presumed to be inactive . Activation proposed , therefore , that the bent form represents the can occur either by ligand binding or by effects on the cytoplasmic inactive state and that activation occurs by a “switch - domains , leading to straightening and separation of the legs . Alter - ationsintheorientationofthepropellerandI / Adomainsarecoupled blade” opening of the integrin into an extended shape to changes in the hybrid domain ( yellow ) by movement of the C - ter - and a separation of the legs . Such a conformational minal helix of the I / A domain ( orange ) . The hybrid domain , in turn , change could expose the epitopes for activation - spe - is linked to the I - EGF domains ( purple ) via the PSI domain ( green ) , cific antibodies , many of which are known to bind to which is disulfide bonded ( yellow line ) to the first I - EGF domain . the I - EGF repeats or to the PSI domain , which is also Straightening and separation of the legs exposes activation epi - buried in the genu ( the structure is not well resolved topes in the I - EGF domains ( red stars ) and in the PSI domain ( not there ) . Takagi et al . ( 2002 ) went on to show that integrins shown ) . Separation of the cytoplasmic domains is accompanied by conformational changes in them , allowing binding of cytoplasmic clamped in the inactive state predominantly adopt a proteins ( see Figure 2 ) and signaling ( lightning ) . All changes are bent shape as seen by EM , whereas integrins activated reversible equilibria and can operate in either direction , allowing by Mn 2 (cid:6) or by cyclo RGDfV were predominantly in an both outside - in and inside - out signaling . See text for discussion extended form . They showed that the clamped , bent and references . form did not bind ligand , whereas the activated , ex - ( B ) Twomodelsfortheproposedstraighteningupofintegrinsduring tended form did . Finally they presented evidence that activation . The switch - blade or flick - knife model ( Beglova et al . , 2002 ) andanalternativeangle - poisemodeldifferinthewayinwhich integrins on cell surfaces can be trapped in a bent and the C termini of the legs relate to the transmembrane segments inactive state by an engineered disulfide bond that , ( which is unknown ) . The angle - poise model incorporates the possi - when released , allows their activation . These results bility that the transmembrane helices may be especially long and conform well with the idea that the bent form seen in could change orientation and / or move in and out of the membrane the crystal represents the inactive state of the integrin during activation ( Armulik et al . , 1999 ; see Figure 6A ) . The angle - and that activation comprises straightening and separa - poisemodelwouldplacetheligandbindingsiteinamoreaccessible tion of the legs . This is , of course , also in good agree - position for macromolecular ligands . ment with the data on cytoplasmic domain separation ( Figure 6 , see prior discussion ) . These concepts are tion . The latter model would place the head domain in a schematized in Figure7 , which shows twoways in which better position to interact with macromolecular ligands . the bent form might be related to the membrane . These There are currently no data available to distinguish be - differ in the orientation of the membrane - proximal tween these two possibilities . “ankles” of the legs relative to the membrane ; this is of Thus , the preponderance of the evidence strongly fa - course unknown at present . In the switch - blade ( Beg - vors models in which activation of the ligand binding lova et al . 2002 ; Shimaoka et al . , 2002 ) or “flick - knife” domain in the head and binding of ligand are coupled , ( Liddington , 2002 ) model , the “calves” of each leg are via long - range conformational changes in the legs perpendicular to the membrane and the head domain ( probably including straightening and separation ) , to is very close to the cell surface . In a variant “angle - separation of the bases of the legs and the attached poise” model , the legs are bent over closer to the mem - braneandextendlikeanangle - poiselampduringactiva - transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains . This cou - Review683 pling is bidirectional and reciprocal and is best viewed Open Questions and Future Directions Although the models presented ( Figures 5 – 7 ) are consis - intermsofanallostericequilibrium , orseriesofequilibria tent with a broad range of data , including the 3D struc - ( Figure7 ) . Bindingofextracellularligandwouldtherefore tures , they remain working hypotheses and require ex - enhance separation of the cytoplasmic domains , perimental tests . Foremost among these is the pressing allowing their interaction with cytoskeletal and signal need for integrin / ligand cocrystals to investigate the transduction molecules , that is , outside - in signaling conformation of ligand bound integrins . Does an acti - ( Figure 2 ) . Reciprocally , separation of the cytoplasmic vated integrin actually stand up as implied by Figures domains by talin and perhaps other activators would 4B and 7 ? Do the legs separate ? What exactly are the activate the head for ligand binding , that is , inside - out conformational changes in the (cid:2) - I / A domain and the signaling ( Figure 6 ) . The distinction between these two domains in the legs ? Much immunological evidence forms of integrin signaling has been conceptually useful demonstrates the existence of conformational changes overthepastdecade , buttheyshouldactuallybeviewed in these domains , but what exactly are they ? In fact , we as two reflections of the same allosteric equilibrium . lack any definitive structures for the PSI domain and Either cytoplasmic or extracellular interactions can trap several of the I - EGF domains . There are inconsistencies the equilibrium in the active state , enhancing thereby between the disulfide bonding patterns for I - EGF - 3 de - the function at the opposite end of the integrin . One duced from the X - ray crystallography ( Xiong et al . , 2001 ) could also imagine cytoplasmic interactors that could and by NMR ( Beglova et al . , 2002 ) . Could these perhaps trap the equilibrium in the inactive state , stabilizing the reflect possible disulfide interchanges within the integ - integrin in the “off” state as on resting platelets or leuko - rin , as has been suggested ( Yan and Smith , 2000 , 2001 ; cytes . Similarly , antibodies that activate integrins or rec - O’Neill et al . , 2000 ) ? What is the significance of the other ognize only the active state presumably trap the equilib - divalent cations bound to integrins ? Does the (cid:2) - I / A do - rium in the active state , and some function - blocking main change conformation in the same way as the (cid:1) - I / A antibodies are also known to act allosterically rather domain ? Does its C - terminal helix move down , altering than at the actual ligand binding site and presumably the relationship between the (cid:2) - I / A and hybrid domains ? act by trapping the equilibrium in the inactive state ; I Does the (cid:2) - I / A domain rotate away from the propeller , will discuss an example of this below . opening up the top of the integrin for more extensive Figure 7 depicts an integrin lacking an (cid:1) - I / A domain . interactions with macromolecular ligands ? Are there in - We need to consider how the situation might differ for termediate , stable conformers and different activation those integrins with an inserted (cid:1) - I / A domain . In these states , as suggested by some data ? Do all integrins integrins , ligand is wholly or largely bound by the (cid:1) - I / A undergo extreme changes in conformation or are some domain . As discussed earlier , recombinant (cid:1) - I / A do - more subtle in their approach ? Is there linkage between mains can bind ligand with the same affinity and speci - (cid:1) - I / A and (cid:2) - I / A domains as suggested in Figure 5B ? ficity as intact integrins , especially when locked in the Why do some integrins have (cid:1) - I / A domains , anyway ? active conformation . Many inactivating mutations and Although the current data favor the model that the epitopes for function - blocking antibodies lie in the (cid:1) - I / A inactive state of integrins is a bent form as seen in the domains and deletion of these domains inactivates the X - ray structure ( or something very like it ) , this requires integrins . As discussed above , the active conformation furtherinvestigationanditsgeneralityneedstesting . The of (cid:1) - I / A domains shows a downward shift of the C - ter - resultsof Takagiet al . ( 2002 ) clearly showthat soluble (cid:2) 3 minal helix ( Figure 3 ) . This could clearly propagate a integrins and those on the cell surface do adopt a bent , conformational change to other domains of the integrin . inactive form , which can be induced to extend by appro - Alonso et al . ( 2002 ) have suggested that a highly con - priate manipulations , However , it would be helpful to be served glutamate just C - terminal to the C - terminal helix able to monitor this process in living cells , perhaps using could act as a pseudoligand for the (cid:2) - I / A MIDAS site , conformation - specific antibodies or FRET . We also do acting as a ligand relay ( Figure 5B ) . They present muta - not know exactly how the bent extracellular part of an genesis data in support of this model , although it , like integrin is connected to the membrane . What is the all the other models discussed here , will need further significance of the fact that most integrins lacking an confirmation . Consistent with the model is the fact that (cid:1) - I / A domain are cleaved nearthe base of their (cid:1) subunit there exist both mutations in , and function - blocking an - legs ( in the calf2 domain ) , whereas none of those with tibodies against , the (cid:2) - I / A domain that preclude binding an (cid:1) - I / A domain is so cleaved ? We know essentially of ligand at the (cid:1) - I / A domain unless the (cid:1) - I / A domain nothing about the transmembrane domain structures is locked in the open position when it becomes immune and their interactions . They are always assumed to be to such inhibition ( Lu et al . , 2001c ) . Based on these and helical but are they and , if so , how long are they ? The other results , Shimaoka et al . ( 2002 ) proposed that the results of Armulik et al . ( 1999 ) suggest that the TM seg - (cid:1) - I / A domain is activated by allosteric interactions with ments may be longer than necessary for a straight , per - the (cid:2) - I / A domain and proposed that the C - terminal helix pendicular (cid:1) helix and could even move in and out of acts like a bell rope to open the (cid:1) - I / A domain . This is the membrane to some degree . There are intriguing con - entirely compatible with the ligand - relay model ( Figure servations in primary sequence among integrin TM do - 5 ) . Thus , it appears likely that integrins containing (cid:1) - I / A mains ; what do they mean ? Do the (cid:1) and (cid:2) TM segments domains function in essentially the same way as those interact ? Do other integral membrane proteins known which lack that extra domain , differing only in that there to interact with integrins perhaps interact within the is an extra step in the chain of linked conformational membrane ? Could this affect activation and signaling ? changes connecting the ligand binding site with the cy - Possible candidates for such interactions and effects include IAP / CD47 ( Brown and Frazier , 2001 ) , tetraspa - toplasmic domains . Cell684 nins ( Hemler , 2001 ) , CD98 ( Fenczik et al . , 1997 ; Kolesni - tors will continue in the next few years as these ques - kova et al . , 2001 ) , and others ( Hemler , 1998 ; Hughes tions and others are addressed , incorporating structural and Pfaff , 1998 ) , importantly including the growth factor information along with the cell biological data and new receptors with which integrins cooperate in signal trans - techniques such as proteomic analysis of complexes duction ( Figure 2 ) . and real - time imaging of molecules and their interac - The role of cytoplasmic domain separation in integrin tions in situ . One hope is that the insights obtained will signaling seems well established , but we need to know lead to better therapeutic agents targeting integrins in more about exactly what happens . What are the precise human diseases as diverse as thrombosis , hemorrhage , structures of the cytoplasmic domains in the inactive inflammation , atherosclerosis , osteoporosis , cancer , and active states ? If the talin head PTB domain binds and infectious diseases . It is , after all , the biological (cid:2) tails and activates integrins , as seems clear , do other importance of these receptors that makes them particu - proteins with PTB domains do the same or do some of larly interesting ; the elegance of their allosteric signal those proteins only bind a previously activated tail ? Do transduction mechanisms is an extra bonus . some such proteins prefer a phosphorylated NPxY se - Acknowledgments quence ? There are typically two NPxY sequences in (cid:2) tails . Do both work analogously ? Do different proteins I would like to thank all those whose research , writings , and discus - bind different ones ? What about the manyother proteins sion have contributed to the ideas in this review , including the refer - that have been reported to bind to integrin cytoplasmic ees of the manuscript . I apologize to all those in the field whose domains ? It seems likely that , like anti - integrin antibod - work could not be discussed in the context of a brief review , includ - ies , there will be activating , activation - specific , and in - ingmanyimportantstudiesonthebiologyofintegrins . IthankGene - vieve Hendrey for help with manuscript preparation , Charlie Whitta - hibitory interactors among them . Plausible models exist ker for help with figures , and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute , for activation of talin to allow it to bind to (cid:2) tails ( Figure theNationalCancerInstitute , andtheNationalHeartLungandBlood 6 ) , but how is that controlled ? Evidence exists for small Institute for support . GTPases as intermediates in pathways leading to integ - rin activation ( Zhang et al . , 1996 ; Hughes et al . , 1997 ; References Schoenwaelder and Burridge , 1999 ; Katagiri et al . , 2000 ; Bos et al . , 2001 ; Bertoni et al . , 2002 ) . Phosphatidyl inosi - Alonso , J . L . , Essafi , M . , Xiong , J . P . , Stehle , T . , and Arnaout , M . A . tols are also likely to be significant , since they activate ( 2002 ) . Does the integrin alphaA domain act as a ligand for its betaA domain ? Curr . Biol . 12 , R340 – 342 . many of the proteins that might interact with integrin Armulik , A . , Nilsson , I . , von Heijne , G . , and Johansson , S . ( 1999 ) . tails ( talin , vinculin , ERM proteins ) and many of the pro - Determination of the border between the transmembrane and cyto - teins are phosphorylated , so they could be regulated plasmic domains of human integrin subunits . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , by kinases and phosphatases . Somewhere in this net - 37030 – 37034 . work of regulators must be the mechanisms by which Assoian , R . K . ( 1997 ) . Anchorage - dependent cell cycle progression . integrins regulate each other . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 1 – 4 . We should also not forget that active integrins typi - Bajt , M . L . , and Loftus , J . C . ( 1994 ) . Mutation of a ligand binding cally cluster in the plane of the membrane , and this domain of beta 3 integrin . Integral role of oxygenated residues in “avidity modulation” of cell adhesion has long been a alpha IIb beta 3 ( GPIIb - IIIa ) receptor function . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , competitive model ( Bazzoni and Hemler , 1998 ) with the 20913 – 20919 . “affinity modulation” models that I have reviewed here . Bazzoni , G . , and Hemler , M . E . ( 1998 ) . Are changes in integrin affinity Although it is clear that affinity modulation of integrins and conformation overemphasized ? Trends Biochem . Sci . 23 , plays a central role in regulating their functions , that 30 – 34 . certainly does not exclude clustering from also making Beer , J . H . , Springer , K . T . , and Coller , B . S . ( 1992 ) . Immobilized Arg - Gly - Asp ( RGD ) peptides of varying lengths as structural probes of major contributions ; the two are not mutually exclusive the platelet glycoprotein IIb / IIIa receptor . Blood 79 , 117 – 128 . and usually occur in concert ( Hato et al . , 1998 ) . Could Beglova , N . , Blacklow , S . C . , Takagi , J . , and Springer , T . A . ( 2002 ) . the conformational changes intrinsic to the allosteric , Cysteine - rich module structure reveals a fulcrum for integrin re - bidirectional control of integrins’ affinities and signaling arrangement upon activation . Nat . Struct . Biol . 9 , 282 – 287 . also regulate their ability to cluster ? Clustering could be Bertoni , A . , Tadokoro , S . , Eto , K . , Pampori , N . , Parise , L . V . , White , via integrin - integrin interactions , regulated interactions G . C . , and Shattil , S . J . ( 2002 ) . Relationships between Rap1b , affinity with integrin - associated proteins , altered associations modulation of integrin aIIbB3 and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . with lipid domains in the membrane , or contributions of Chem . 277 , 25715 – 25721 . any or all of these , not to mention the well - established Bos , J . L . , de Rooij , J . , and Reedquist , K . A . ( 2001 ) . Rap1 signalling : cytoskeletal interactions of integrins ( Schoenwaelder adhering to new models . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 2 , 369 – 377 . and Burridge , 1999 ) . There are hints in the literature Bouvard , D . , Brakebusch , C . , Gustafsson , E . , Aszodi , A . , Bengtsson , aboutallofthesepossibilities ; progresswouldbegreatly T . , Berna , A . , and Fassler , R . ( 2001 ) . Functional consequences of enhanced by a better understanding of the transmem - integrin gene mutations in mice . Circ . Res . 89 , 211 – 223 . brane domains of integrins . Brown , E . J . , and Frazier , W . A . ( 2001 ) . Integrin - associated protein It is clear that these fascinating and important recep - ( CD47 ) and its ligands . Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 130 – 135 . tors have many secrets yet to be discovered . The struc - Burke , R . D . ( 1999 ) . Invertebrate integrins : structure , function , and tural information has made sense of a lot of prior data evolution . Int . Rev . Cytol . 191 , 257 – 284 . and offered possible answers to some long - standing Burridge , K . , and Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , M . ( 1996 ) . Focal adhe - questions about integrin functions . It has also raised or , sions , contractility , and signaling . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 12 , rather , refocused many additional questions and mod - 463 – 518 . els , a few of which I have touched upon . We can expect Calderwood , D . A . , Zent , R . , Grant , R . , Rees , D . J . , Hynes , R . O . , and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 1999 ) . The Talin head domain binds to integrin beta that the rapid advances in understanding these recep - Review685 subunit cytoplasmic tails and regulates integrin activation . J . Biol . Hemler , M . E . ( 1998 ) . Integrin associated proteins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 , 578 – 585 . Chem . 274 , 28071 – 28074 . Hemler , M . E . ( 1999 ) . Integrins . In Guidebook to the Extracellular Calderwood , D . A . , Shattil , S . J . , and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 2000 ) . Integrins Matrix , Anchor and Adhesion Proteins , T . Kreis and R . Vale , eds . andactinfilaments : reciprocalregulationofcelladhesionandsignal - ( Oxford : Sambrook and Tooze Publication at Oxford University ing . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 22607 – 22610 . Press ) , pp . 196 – 212 . Calderwood , D . A . , Yan , B . , de Pereda , J . M . , Alvarez , B . G . , Fujioka , Hemler , M . E . ( 2001 ) . Specific tetraspanin functions . J . Cell Biol . 155 , Y . , Liddington , R . C . , and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 2002 ) . The phosphotyro - 1103 – 1107 . sine binding - like domain of talin activates integrins . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 21749 – 21758 . Hogg , N . , andBates , P . A . ( 2000 ) . Geneticanalysisofintegrinfunction in man : LAD - 1 and other syndromes . Matrix Biol . 19 , 211 – 222 . Clark , E . A . , andBrugge , J . S . ( 1995 ) . Integrinsandsignaltransduction Huang , C . , Zang , Q . , Takagi , J . , and Springer , T . A . ( 2000 ) . Structural pathways : the road taken . Science 268 , 233 – 239 . and functional studies with antibodies tothe integrin beta 2 subunit . Clark , E . A . , and Hynes , R . O . ( 1997 ) . Meeting report . 1997 Keystone A model for the I - like domain . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 21514 – 21524 . symposium on signal transduction by cell adhesion receptors . BBA Hughes , A . L . ( 2001 ) . Evolution of the integrin alpha and beta protein Reviews on Cancer . 1333 : R9 – R16 . families . J . Mol . Evol . 52 , 63 – 72 . Coller , B . S . ( 1986 ) . Activation affects access to the platelet receptor Hughes , P . E . , and Pfaff , M . ( 1998 ) . Integrin affinity modulation . for adhesive glycoproteins . J . Cell Biol . 103 , 451 – 456 . Trends Cell Biol . 8 , 359 – 364 . Coller , B . S . ( 1997 ) . PlateletGPIIb / IIIaantagonists : thefirstanti - integ - Hughes , P . E . , O’Toole , T . E . , Ylanne , J . , Shattil , S . J . , and Ginsberg , rin receptor therapeutics . J . Clin . Invest . 99 , 1467 – 1471 . M . H . ( 1995 ) . The conserved membrane - proximal region of an integ - Critchley , D . R . , Holt , M . R . , Barry , S . T . , Priddle , H . , Hemmings , L . , and rin cytoplasmic domain specifies ligand binding affinity . J . Biol . Norman , J . ( 1999 ) . Integrin - mediated cell adhesion : the cytoskeletal Chem . 270 , 12411 – 12417 . connection . Biochem . Soc . Symp . 65 , 79 – 99 . Hughes , P . E . , Diaz - Gonzalez , F . , Leong , L . , Wu , C . , McDonald , J . A . , Danen , E . H . , and Yamada , K . M . ( 2001 ) . Fibronectin , integrins , and Shattil , S . J . , and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 1996 ) . Breaking the integrin hinge . growth control . J . Cell . Physiol . 189 , 1 – 13 . A defined structural constraint regulates integrin signaling . J . Biol . De Arcangelis , A . , and Georges - Labouesse , E . ( 2000 ) . Integrin and Chem . 271 , 6571 – 6574 . ECM functions : roles in vertebrate development . Trends Genet . 16 , Hughes , P . E . , Renshaw , M . W . , Pfaff , M . , Forsyth , J . , Keivens , V . M . , 389 – 395 . Schwartz , M . A . , and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 1997 ) . Suppression of integrin activation : a novel function of a Ras / Raf - initiated MAP kinase path - D’Souza , S . E . , Ginsberg , M . H . , Burke , T . A . , Lam , S . C . , and Plow , E . F . ( 1988 ) . Localization of an Arg - Gly - Asp recognition site within way . Cell 88 , 521 – 530 . an integrin adhesion receptor . Science 242 , 91 – 93 . Humphries , M . J . ( 2000 ) . Integrin structure . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 28 , 311 – 339 . Du , X . , Gu , M . , Weisel , J . W . , Nagaswami , C . , Bennett , J . S . , Bowditch , R . , andGinsberg , M . H . ( 1993 ) . Longrangepropagationofconforma - Humphries , M . J . ( 2002 ) . Insights into integrin - ligand binding and tionalchangesinintegrinalphaIIbbeta3 . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 23087 – activation from the first crystal structure . Arthritis Res . 4 , S69 – S78 . 23092 . Hynes , R . O . ( 1987 ) . Integrins : a family of cell surface receptors . Cell Emsley , J . , King , S . L . , Bergelson , J . M . , and Liddington , R . C . ( 1997 ) . 48 , 549 – 554 . Crystal structure of the I domain from integrin alpha2beta1 . J . Biol . Hynes , R . O . ( 1992 ) . Integrins : versatility , modulation , and signaling Chem . 272 , 28512 – 28517 . in cell adhesion . Cell 69 , 11 – 25 . Emsley , J . , Knight , C . G . , Farndale , R . W . , Barnes , M . J . , and Lidding - Hynes , R . O . ( 1996 ) . Targetedmutationsincelladhesiongenes : what ton , R . C . ( 2000 ) . Structural basis of collagen recognition by integrin have we learned from them ? Dev . Biol . 180 , 402 – 412 . alpha2beta1 . Cell 101 , 47 – 56 . Hynes , R . O . ( 2002 ) . Areevaluationofintegrinsasregulatorsofangio - Etzioni , A . , Doerschuk , C . M . , and Harlan , J . M . ( 1999 ) . Of man and genesis . Nat . Med . 8 , 918 – 921 . mouse : leukocyte and endothelial adhesion molecule deficiencies . Hynes , R . O . , and Zhao , Q . ( 2000 ) . The evolution of cell adhesion . J . Blood 94 , 3281 – 3288 . Cell Biol . 150 , F89 – 96 . Fenczik , C . A . , Sethi , T . , Ramos , J . W . , Hughes , P . E . , and Ginsberg , Jackson , D . Y . ( 2002 ) . Alpha4integrinantagonists . Curr . Pharm . Des . M . H . ( 1997 ) . Complementation of dominant suppression implicates 8 , 1229 – 1253 . CD98 in integrin activation . Nature 390 , 81 – 85 . Katagiri , K . , Hattori , M . , Minato , N . , Irie , S . , Takatsu , K . , and Kinashi , Frisch , S . M . , and Screaton , R . A . ( 2001 ) . Anoikis mechanisms . Curr . T . ( 2000 ) . Rap1 is a potent activation signal for leukocyte function - Opin . Cell Biol . 13 , 555 – 562 . associated antigen 1 distinct from protein . kinase C and phosphati - dylinositol - 3 - OH kinase . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 , 1956 – 1969 . Garcia , A . J . , Schwarzbauer , J . E . , and Boettiger , D . ( 2002 ) . Distinct activation states of alpha5beta1 integrin show differential binding Kato , A . ( 1997 ) . The biologic and clinical spectrum of Glanzmann’s to RGD and synergy domains of fibronectin . Biochemistry 41 , 9063 – thrombasthenia : implications of integrin alpha IIb beta 3 for its 9069 . pathogenesis . Crit . Rev . Oncol . Hematol . 26 , 1 – 23 . Giancotti , F . G . , and Ruoslahti , E . ( 1999 ) . Integrin signaling . Science Kolesnikova , T . V . , Mannion , B . A . , Berditchevski , F . , and Hemler , 285 , 1028 – 1032 . M . E . ( 2001 ) . Beta1 integrins show specific association with CD98 protein in low density membranes . BMC Biochem . 2 , 10 – 20 . Ginsberg , M . H . , Du , X . , and Plow , E . F . ( 1992 ) . Inside - out integrin signalling . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 4 , 766 – 771 . Lambright , D . G . , Sondek , J . , Bohm , A . , Skiba , N . P . , Hamm , H . E . , andSigler , P . B . ( 1996 ) . The2 . 0A˚crystalstructureofaheterotrimeric Gottlieb , A . , Krueger , J . G . , Bright , R . , Ling , M . , Lebwohl , M . , Kang , G protein . Nature 379 , 311 – 319 . S . , Feldman , S . , Spellman , M . , Wittkowski , K . , Ochs , H . D . , et al . Lauffenburger , D . A . , andHorwitz , A . F . ( 1996 ) . Cellmigration : aphysi - ( 2000 ) . Effects of administration of a single dose of a humanized cally integrated molecular process . Cell 84 , 359 – 369 . monoclonal antibody to CD11a on the immunobiology and clinical activity of psoriasis . J . Am . Acad . Dermatol . 42 , 428 – 435 . Lee , J . O . , Bankston , L . A . , Arnaout , M . A . , and Liddington , R . C . ( 1995a ) . Two conformations of the integrin A - domain ( I - domain ) : a Hantgan , R . R . , Paumi , C . , Rocco , M . , andWeisel , J . W . ( 1999 ) . Effects pathway for activation ? Structure 3 , 1333 – 1340 . of ligand - mimetic peptides Arg - Gly - Asp - X ( X (cid:9) Phe , Trp , Ser ) on alphaIIbbeta3 integrin conformation and oligomerization . Biochem - Lee , J . O . , Rieu , P . , Arnaout , M . A . , andLiddington , R . ( 1995b ) . Crystal istry 38 , 14461 – 14474 . structure of the A domain from the alpha subunit of integrin CR3 ( CD11b / CD18 ) . Cell 80 , 631 – 638 . Hato , T . , Pampori , N . , and Shattil , S . J . ( 1998 ) . Complementary roles for receptor clustering and conformational change in the adhesive Li , R . , Babu , C . R . , Lear , J . D . , Wand , A . J . , Bennett , J . S . , andDeGrado , W . F . ( 2001 ) . Oligomerization of the integrin alphaIIbbeta3 : roles of and signaling function of integrin (cid:1) IIb (cid:2) 3 . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 1685 – 1695 . Cell686 the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains . Proc . Natl . Acad . from the CD11a / CD18 ( LFA - 1 , alpha L beta 2 ) integrin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 92 , 10277 – 10281 . Sci . USA 98 , 12462 – 12467 . Qu , A . , and Leahy , D . J . ( 1996 ) . The role of the divalent cation in the Liddington , R . C . ( 2002 ) . Willtherealintegrinpleasestandup ? Struc - structure of the I domain from the CD11a / CD18 integrin . Structure ture 10 , 605 – 607 . 4 , 931 – 942 . Liddington , R . C . , andGinsberg , M . H . ( 2002 ) . Integrinactivationtakes Rosenkranz , A . R . , and Mayadas , T . N . ( 1999 ) . Leukocyte - endothelial shape . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 833 – 839 . cell interactions—lessons from knockout mice . Exp . Nephrol . 7 , Loftus , J . C . , and Liddington , R . C . ( 1997 ) . Cell adhesion in vascular 125 – 136 . biology . New insights into integrin - ligand interaction . J . Clin . Invest . Scarborough , R . M . , and Gretler , D . D . ( 2000 ) . Platelet glycoprotein 99 , 2302 – 2306 . IIb - IIIa antagonists as prototypical integrin blockers : novel paren - Loftus , J . C . , Smith , J . W . , and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 1994 ) . Integrin - medi - teral and potential oral antithrombotic agents . J . Med . Chem . 43 , ated celladhesion : the extracellular face . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 25235 – 3453 – 3473 . 25238 . Schoenwaelder , S . M . , and Burridge , K . ( 1999 ) . Bidirectional signal - Lu , C . , Shimaoka , M . , Ferzly , M . , Oxvig , C . , Takagi , J . , and Springer , ing between the cytoskeleton and integrins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . T . A . ( 2001a ) . An isolated , surface - expressed I domain of the integrin 11 , 274 – 286 . alphaLbeta2 is sufficient for strong adhesive function when locked Schwartz , M . A . , andAssoian , R . K . ( 2001 ) . Integrinsandcellprolifera - in the open conformation with a disulfide bond . Proc . Natl . Acad . tion : regulation of cyclin - dependent kinases via cytoplasmic signal - Sci . USA 98 , 2387 – 2392 . ing pathways . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 2553 – 2560 . Lu , C . , Takagi , J . , and Springer , T . A . ( 2001b ) . Association of the Schwartz , M . A . , and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 2002 ) . Networks and crosstalk : membrane proximal regions of the alpha and beta subunit cyto - integrin signalling spreads . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , E65 – 68 . plasmic domains constrains an integrin in the inactive state . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 14642 – 14648 . Schwartz , M . A . , Schaller , M . D . , andGinsberg , M . H . ( 1995 ) . Integrins : emerging paradigms of signal transduction . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Lu , C . , Shimaoka , M . , Zang , Q . , Takagi , J . , andSpringer , T . A . ( 2001c ) . Biol . 11 , 549 – 599 . Locking in alternate conformations of the integrin alphaLbeta2 I domain with disulfide bonds reveals functional relationships among Sheppard , D . ( 2000 ) . In vivo functions of integrins : lessons from null integrin domains . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 2393 – 2398 . mutations in mice . Matrix Biol . 19 , 203 – 209 . Martel , V . , Racaud - Sultan , C . , Dupe , S . , Marie , C . , Paulhe , F . , Gal - Shimaoka , M . , Lu , C . , Palframan , R . T . , von Andrian , U . H . , McCor - miche , A . , Block , M . R . , and Albiges - Rizo , C . ( 2001 ) . Conformation , mack , A . , Takagi , J . , and Springer , T . A . ( 2001 ) . Reversibly locking a localization , and integrin binding of talin depend on its interaction protein fold in an active conformation with a disulfide bond : integrin with phosphoinositides . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 21217 – 21227 . alphaL I domains with high affinity and antagonist activity in vivo . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 6009 – 6014 . Miranti , C . K . , and Brugge , J . S . ( 2002 ) . Sensing the environment : a historical perspective on integrin signal transduction . Nat . Cell Biol . Shimaoka , M . , Takagi , J . , and Springer , T . A . ( 2002 ) . Conformational regulation of integrin structure and function . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 4 , E83 – 90 . Biomol . Struct . 31 , 485 – 516 . Mould , A . P . , Askari , J . A . , Aota , S . , Yamada , K . M . , Irie , A . , Takada , Sondek , J . , Bohm , A . , Lambright , D . G . , Hamm , H . E . , and Sigler , P . B . Y . , Mardon , H . J . , and Humphries , M . J . ( 1997 ) . Defining the topology ( 1996 ) . Crystal structure of a G - protein beta gamma dimer at 2 . 1 A˚ ofintegrinalpha5beta1 - fibronectininteractionsusinginhibitoryanti - resolution . Nature 379 , 369 – 374 . alpha5 and anti - beta1 monoclonal antibodies . Evidence that the synergysequenceoffibronectinisrecognizedbytheamino - terminal Springer , T . A . ( 1997 ) . Folding of the N - terminal , ligand - binding re - repeats of the alpha5 subunit . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 17283 – 17292 . gion of integrin alpha - subunits into a beta - propeller domain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 65 – 72 . Mould , A . P . , Askari , J . A . , Barton , S . , Kline , A . D . , McEwan , P . A . , Craig , S . E . , and Humphries , M . J . ( 2002 ) . Integrin activation involves a con - Takada , Y . , andPuzon , W . ( 1993 ) . Identificationofaregulatoryregion formationalchangeinthealpha1helixofthebetasubunitA - domain . of integrin beta 1 subunit using activating and inhibiting antibodies . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 19800 – 19805 . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 17597 – 17601 . O’Neill , S . , Robinson , A . , Deering , A . , Ryan , M . , Fitzgerald , D . J . , Takagi , J . , Erickson , H . P . , and Springer , T . A . ( 2001 ) . C - terminal and Moran , N . ( 2000 ) . The platelet integrin alpha IIbbeta 3 has an opening mimics ‘inside - out’ activation of integrin alpha5beta1 . Nat . endogenous thiol isomerase activity . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 36984 – Struct . Biol . 8 , 412 – 416 . 36990 . Takagi , J . , Petre , B . M . , Walz , T . , and Springer , T . A . ( 2002 ) . Global O’Toole , T . E . , Mandelman , D . , Forsyth , J . , Shattil , S . J . , Plow , E . F . , conformational rearrangements in integrin extracellular domains in and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 1991 ) . Modulation of the affinity of integrin outside - in and inside - out signaling . Cell 110 , 599 – 611 . alpha IIb beta 3 ( GPIIb - IIIa ) by the cytoplasmic domain of alpha IIb . Tozer , E . C . , Liddington , R . C . , Sutcliffe , M . J . , Smeeton , A . H . , and Science 254 , 845 – 847 . Loftus , J . C . ( 1996 ) . Ligand binding to integrin alphaIIbbeta3 is de - O’Toole , T . E . , Katagiri , Y . , Faull , R . J . , Peter , K . , Tamura , R . , Quaranta , pendentonaMIDAS - likedomaininthebeta3subunit . J . Biol . Chem . V . , Loftus , J . C . , Shattil , S . J . , and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 1994 ) . Integrin 271 , 21978 – 21984 . cytoplasmic domainsmediate inside - outsignal transduction . J . Cell Tuckwell , D . ( 1999 ) . Evolution of von Willebrand factor A ( VWA ) Biol . 124 , 1047 – 1059 . domains . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 27 , 835 – 840 . Patil , S . , Jedsadayanmata , A . , Wencel - Drake , J . D . , Wang , W . , Knez - Tuckwell , D . S . , and Humphries , M . J . ( 1997 ) . A structure prediction evic , I . , and Lam , S . C . ( 1999 ) . Identification of a talin - binding site in for the ligand - binding region of the integrin beta subunit : evidence the integrin beta ( 3 ) subunit distinct from the NPLY regulatory motif for the presence of a von Willebrand factor A domain . FEBS Lett . of post - ligand binding functions . The talin n - terminal head domain 400 , 297 – 303 . interacts with the membrane - proximal region of the beta ( 3 ) cyto - Ulmer , T . S . , Yaspan , B . , Ginsberg , M . H . , and Campbell , I . D . ( 2001 ) . plasmic tail . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 28575 – 28583 . NMR analysis of structure and dynamics of the cytosolic tails of Pearson , M . A . , Reczek , D . , Bretscher , A . , and Karplus , P . A . ( 2000 ) . integrinalphaIIbbeta3in aqueoussolution . Biochemistry 40 , 7498 – Structure of the ERM protein moesin reveals the FERM domain fold 7508 . maskedbyanextendedactinbindingtaildomain . Cell 101 , 259 – 270 . Vallar , L . , Melchior , C . , Plancon , S . , Drobecq , H . , Lippens , G . , Reg - Plow , E . F . , Haas , T . A . , Zhang , L . , Loftus , J . , and Smith , J . W . ( 2000 ) . nault , V . , and Kieffer , N . ( 1999 ) . Divalent cations differentially regu - Ligand binding to integrins . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 21785 – 21788 . late integrin alphaIIb cytoplasmic tail binding to beta3 and to calci - Pulkkinen , L . , and Uitto , J . ( 1999 ) . Mutation analysis and molecular um - and integrin - binding protein . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 17257 – 17266 . genetics of epidermolysis bullosa . Matrix Biol . 18 , 29 – 42 . van der Flier , A . , and Sonnenberg , A . ( 2001 ) . Function and interac - tions of integrins . Cell Tissue Res . 305 , 285 – 298 . Qu , A . , and Leahy , D . J . ( 1995 ) . Crystal structure of the I - domain Review687 Vinogradova , O . , Velyvis , A . , Velyviene , A . , Hu , B . , Haas , T . A . , Plow , E . F . , and Qin , J . ( 2002 ) . A structural mechanism of integrin (cid:1) IIb (cid:2) 3 “inside - out” activation as regulated by its cytoplasmic face . Cell 110 , 587 – 597 . Wall , M . A . , Coleman , D . E . , Lee , E . , Iniguez - Lluhi , J . A . , Posner , B . A . , Gilman , A . G . , and Sprang , S . R . ( 1995 ) . The structure of the G protein heterotrimer Gi alpha 1 beta 1 gamma 2 . Cell 83 , 1047 – 1058 . Weisel , J . W . , Nagaswami , C . , Vilaire , G . , and Bennett , J . S . ( 1992 ) . Examination of the platelet membrane glycoprotein IIb - IIIa complex and its interaction with fibrinogen and other ligands by electron microscopy . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 16637 – 16643 . Weljie , A . M . , Hwang , P . M . , andVogel , H . J . ( 2002 ) . Solutionstructures of the cytoplasmic tail complex from platelet integrin alpha IIb - and beta 3 - subunits . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 5878 – 5883 . Whittaker , C . A . , and Hynes , R . O . ( 2002 ) . Distribution and evolution of the von Willebrand / Integrin A domain : a widely dispersed domain with roles in cell adhesion and elsewhere . Mol . Biol . Cell , in press , published online August 6 , 2002 . 10 . 1091 / mbc . E02 - 05 - 0259 Williams , M . J . , Hughes , P . E . , O’Toole , T . E . , and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 1994 ) . The inner world of cell adhesion : integrin cytoplasmic do - mains . Trends Cell Biol . 4 , 109 – 112 . Woodside , D . G . , Liu , S . , and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 2001 ) . Integrin activa - tion . Thromb . Haemost . 86 , 316 – 323 . Wu , C . , and Dedhar , S . ( 2001 ) . Integrin - linked kinase ( ILK ) and its interactors : a new paradigm for the coupling of extracellular matrix to actin cytoskeleton and signaling complexes . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 505 – 510 . Xiong , J . P . , Li , R . , Essafi , M . , Stehle , T . , and Arnaout , M . A . ( 2000 ) . An isoleucine - based allosteric switch controls affinity and shape shifting in integrin CD11b A - domain . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 38762 – 38767 . Xiong , J . P . , Stehle , T . , Diefenbach , B . , Zhang , R . , Dunker , R . , Scott , D . L . , Joachimiak , A . , Goodman , S . L . , andArnaout , M . A . ( 2001 ) . Crys - tal structure of the extracellular segment of integrin alpha Vbeta3 . Science 294 , 339 – 345 . Xiong , J . P . , Stehle , T . , Zhang , R . , Joachimiak , A . , Frech , M . , Good - man , S . L . , andArnaout , M . A . ( 2002 ) . Crystalstructureoftheextracel - lular segment of integrin alpha Vbeta3 in complex with an Arg - Gly - Asp ligand . Science 296 , 151 – 155 . Yamada , K . M . , and Miyamoto , S . ( 1995 ) . Integrin transmembrane signaling and cytoskeletal control . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 7 , 681 – 689 . Yan , B . , and Smith , J . W . ( 2000 ) . A redox site involved in integrin activation . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 39964 – 39972 . Yan , B . , and Smith , J . W . ( 2001 ) . Mechanism of integrin activation by disulfide bond reduction . Biochemistry 40 , 8861 – 8867 . Yan , B . , Calderwood , D . A . , Yaspan , B . , and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 2001 ) . Calpain cleavage promotes talin binding to the beta 3 integrin cyto - plasmic domain . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 28164 – 28170 . Zamir , E . , andGeiger , B . ( 2001 ) . Molecularcomplexityanddynamics of cell - matrix adhesions . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 3583 – 3590 . Zhang , Z . , Vuori , K . , Wang , H . , Reed , J . C . , and Ruoslahti , E . ( 1996 ) . Integrin activation by R - ras . Cell 85 , 61 – 69 .