This article was downloaded by : [ University of Victoria ] On : 26 February 2015 , At : 02 : 27 Publisher : Routledge Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number : 1072954 Registered office : Mortimer House , 37 - 41 Mortimer Street , London W1T 3JH , UK International Journal of Electronic Commerce Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / www . tandfonline . com / loi / mjec20 Social Buying : The Effects of Group Size and Communication on Buyer Performance Alexander Pelaez a , Martin Y . Yu b & Karl R . Lang a a Zicklin School of Business , Baruch College , City University of New York b IS & M team at the School of Information Systems , Singapore Management University Published online : 06 Dec 2014 . To cite this article : Alexander Pelaez , Martin Y . Yu & Karl R . Lang ( 2013 ) Social Buying : The Effects of Group Size and Communication on Buyer Performance , International Journal of Electronic Commerce , 18 : 2 , 127 - 157 To link to this article : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2753 / JEC1086 - 4415180205 PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information ( the “Content” ) contained in the publications on our platform . However , Taylor & Francis , our agents , and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy , completeness , or suitability for any purpose of the Content . Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors , and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis . The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information . Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses , actions , claims , proceedings , demands , costs , expenses , damages , and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with , in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content . This article may be used for research , teaching , and private study purposes . Any substantial or systematic reproduction , redistribution , reselling , loan , sub - licensing , systematic supply , or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden . Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http : / / www . tandfonline . com / page / terms - and - conditions International Journal of Electronic Commerce / Winter 2013 – 14 , Vol . 18 , No . 2 , pp . 127 – 157 . Copyright © 2014 M . E . Sharpe , Inc . All rights reserved . Permissions : www . copyright . com ISSN 1086 – 4415 ( print ) / ISSN 1557 – 9301 ( online ) DOI : 10 . 2753 / JEC1086 - 4415180205 Social Buying : The Effects of Group Size and Communication on Buyer Performance Alexander Pelaez , Martin Y . Yu , and Karl R . Lang ABSTRACT : Viewing social communication on group - buying platforms as a new form of IT - enabled coordination mechanisms , we examine the impact of group size and commu - nication capacity on buyer performance on group - buying platforms . Using an economic experiment , we found that although larger groups were able to extract moderately higher surplus on average than smaller groups , there was also a negative impact of group size on group coordination for time to task completion . Interestingly , when a private communi - cation channel was introduced for buyers , it actually lowered group surplus . We explain this unexpected finding as caused by the increased task complexity that arises from the additional needs for information processing of the exchanged messages . In general , add - ing communication capacity slowed down task completion , and this effect was stronger for larger groups than smaller ones . Our study suggests that business managers of group buying sites should be concerned about both the level and the kind of communication tools they want to offer and they need to be mindful that larger buyer groups may need different kinds of communication support from those needed by smaller groups . KEY WORDS AND PHRASES : Buying platforms , coordination , electronic market de - sign , experimental economics , group buying , information overload , social buying , task complexity . Social buying , or group buying , presents a particular form of social com - merce [ 31 ] that has attracted a fair amount of attention from business world - wide since the early 2000s . Industry examples of group buying businesses include early ventures like Mercata , which ceased operation by 2004 , as well as more recent ones like Living Social and Groupon in the United States and Meituan and Lashou in China . The nascent market of online group buying is still evolving , and companies continue to innovate both new group buying technology platforms and business models . 1 Exploring new revenue streams and experimenting with new technology features are the two principle driv - ers for business change in this dynamic industry . In this study , we focus on the latter of the two and examine , mainly from the buyers’ perspective , the potential value of introducing a new social technology feature on a group buying platform . From a theoretical perspective , our study is motivated by research on information technology ( IT ) - enabled coordination . We view social communica - tion on group buying platforms as a new form of an IT - enabled coordination An earlier version of this paper was presented at the 2012 International Conference on Electronic Commerce , held in Singapore in August 2012 . We appreciate comments from the session chair , Ting Li , and the participants in the session . We thank Rob Kauff - man for sharing his insights on our research , which helped us greatly in developing the paper . We also thank Raquel Benbunan - Fich for her help in using the laboratory facilities at Baruch College , where we conducted our experiments . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 128 PELAEz , Yu , And LAng mechanism . Historically , various IT - enabled coordination innovations have had a profound impact on market structure and seller - buyer relations in different industries . For example , Malone et al . [ 35 ] advanced the idea that electronically coordinated business - to - business markets tend to increase market transparency and reduce the role of intermediaries , and Brynjolfsson and Smith [ 3 ] showed empirically that electronically coordinated business - to - consumer markets reduce transaction costs and lead to lower consumer prices . Clemons et al . [ 8 ] argued that IT - enabled coordination reduces moni - toring cost in supply chains and likely leads to more outsourcing and to the development of strategic partnerships with key suppliers . Porter [ 40 ] theorized that the adoption of the Internet as a coordination platform would tend to shift bargaining power from sellers to buyers . Clemons [ 7 ] posited that social commerce technologies like online communities , recommendation systems , and consumer ratings and reviews increase consumer informedness , that is , consumer knowledge about products , availability , and prices . This leads to consumers’ demanding steeper compromise discounts and to decreasing consumer willingness to pay for products that are useful to them but do not perfectly meet their individual preference and taste . Finally , Zwass [ 56 ] con - cluded that Web 2 . 0 – based coordination platforms foster collective effort by users in order to co - create consumer value . The literature on IT - enabled coordination has looked specifically at the impact of an IT innovation on a specific market and found that new IT - enabled coordination tools and mechanisms lead to significant changes in market structure ( e . g . , level of vertical integration , role of intermediaries , bargaining relationships ) and market performance measures ( e . g . , economic efficiency , price and surplus levels , transaction costs , transparency levels ) . Our aim with the present study is to add to this body of research by examining the impact of incorporating a novel IT - enabled coordination mechanism in the design of an electronic group buying platform , initially from a buyers’ perspective . There have been theoretical arguments among economists about the bar - gaining power of buyer groups and group coordination since at least the 1920s , predominantly saying that larger buyer groups should be able to obtain better prices from sellers but that coordination costs among buyers may offset price advantages when buyers do not already have established relationships [ 15 ] . Yet , in the absence of modern information and communication technology , Galbraith at the time also argued that advantages of group buying in practice were essentially limited to corporate buyers in large - scale procurement and supply chains , and they were largely unavailable to consumers because of the difficulty in coordinating consumers’ buying decisions , especially given their differences in product attribute preferences and product valuations . Recent advances in digital technology , however , have enabled the develop - ment of online platforms that do in fact support coordination of consumers on a large scale . Commercial group buying platforms support various forms of social buy - ing . They differ in how groups form , what kinds of deals are offered , what group size thresholds are required to make deals , how group buyers can communicate with each other and what social features are supported , and how prices are determined . group size and communication capacity are hence D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 IntERnAtIonAL JouRnAL of ELECtRonIC CoMMERCE 129 two salient features for the design of group buying models from a theoretical as well as a practical perspective . Based on analytical results using economic modeling , researchers have suggested that improving the coordination and cooperation process among group buyers should result in higher welfare for both buyers and sellers [ 5 , 24 , 30 ] . Empiricists are also showing interest in group buying – related issues [ 26 , 28 , 29 ] , but none of the currently available studies has specifically investigated how communication capacity among buyers affects group buying perfor - mance . Adding communication capacity can affect both individual users’ attitudes and group performance . The presence of reciprocal communication can positively influence cognitive and affective involvement of individual users [ 23 ] , and increasing media synchronicity among group members can improve group coordination [ 10 , 19 ] . Thus , in the present research , we explore specifically the impact of group size ( larger vs . smaller ) and communication capacity level ( high vs . low ) on group performance in terms of economic welfare ( buyer surplus ) and group coordination ( task completion time ) . We conducted experiments in the laboratory using an adaptation of the buyer - initiated intra - auction group buying model [ 5 ] in our design . We found that group size had positive effects on buyer surplus . Larger groups were able to extract more surplus on average than smaller groups . We also found a negative impact of group size on group coordination in terms of time to task completion . Interestingly , and contrary to our prediction , introducing a private communication channel for buyers did show a negative effect on group surplus . We explain this unexpected finding as due to the cognitive load that arises from the additional need for message processing . In general , adding communication capacity slowed down task completion , and this effect was stronger for the larger groups than the smaller ones . The key finding of our study is the interesting trade - off between the ben - efits from IT - enabled coordination capabilities and their associated costs due to increased task complexity , which raises the practical question of how to best manage consumer interactions on social buying platforms . We discuss implications of these results and offer some possible explanations later in the paper . Theoretical Perspective and Hypothesis Development Social commerce generally refers to e - commerce activities that are supported by social technology platforms or social media tools [ 19 , 31 , 32 ] . Online group buying represents a social commerce example that uses a market mechanism in which customers with similar interests but diverse demand regimes participate in generating collective orders with volume price discounts [ 27 ] . Our group buying study looks at two important dimensions of group performance—economic performance and group task performance—from the buyer perspective . Group surplus indicates monetary payoffs for the group buyers , and task performance measures indicate how well the buyers in a group coordinate to accomplish the group tasks of agreeing on a joint D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 130 PELAEz , Yu , And LAng offer and making a deal with the seller . To examine to what extent group size and communication capacity affect group performance , we draw on two principal streams of research to theoretically ground our study and develop specific hypotheses . 2 For one , we look at the economics literature to theorize the relationship between buyer group size and buyer surplus generated in the market . Second , we borrow from the media synchronicity theory in the information systems literature and the task complexity theory in the organi - zational management literature to theorize about the effect of communication capacity and information availability on group coordination . Group Buyer Surplus Countervailing power theory provides us with the theoretical basis to under - stand how group size and communication capacity can affect the arguably most important aspect of group buying performance—group surplus ( i . e . , the buyer surplus that obtains by aggregating the individual surpluses that are generated by the members of the group ) . Galbraith [ 15 ] presented a counter - vailing power theory , stating that unbalanced economic power can be “held in check by the countervailing power of those who are subject to it” and that the existence of coordinated buyers would evolve as a response to aggregation of power by sellers . Researchers have found that buyer concentration is a source for countervailing power , which can lower seller margins and accrue more surplus at the buyers’ side [ 45 ] . Galbraith originally focused on the buying consortiums of his time and noted that large buying groups were able to resist actions by monopolistic sellers . Galbraith recognized that it was theoretically possible for consumers to exercise some form of direct countervailing power , too , but pointed out that it would be unrealistic to expect it to occur in practice at any significant level because of the difficulty for the consumers to coordi - nate effectively . Nonetheless , consumers could realize some of these benefits indirectly , through intermediaries [ 15 ] . Rha and Widdows [ 42 ] extended this view to electronic commerce settings . Economists have confirmed this kind of benefit to consumers when large retailers exercise countervailing power [ 34 , 46 ] and pass some of the achieved cost savings on to their customers . By providing quantity discounts , group buying sites attempt to aggregate disparate and asynchronous buyers , with buyers benefiting from lower prices ( and thus higher buyer surplus ) and sellers benefiting from increased economies of scale [ 1 ] . However , retail intermediaries can be replaced with electronic group buying sites , for some purchases , since online consumers can interact more easily [ 35 ] . Similarly , Porter [ 40 ] has argued that the Internet has the potential to increase the bargaining power of buyers . Moreover , Parameswaran and Whinston [ 38 ] and Rezabakhsh et al . [ 41 ] have suggested that the shift of bargaining power to consumers will be stronger in social commerce environments based on Web 2 . 0 architectures , such as social buying settings , than in standard Internet commerce environments . Recent economic experiments on countervailing power have shown that even a small number of buyers can influence monopolist pricing , concluding that group size matters . Ruffle [ 43 ] , for example , showed that markets with two buyers D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 IntERnAtIonAL JouRnAL of ELECtRonIC CoMMERCE 131 ( smaller groups ) attained lower prices than those with four buyers ( larger groups ) . Thus , we hypothesize : Hypothesis 1 ( Group Size and Buyer Surplus Hypothesis ) : Increasing the group size of buyers in a group - buyer model will tend to increase buyer surplus . Rha and Widdows [ 42 ] studied how consumers actually organize to exercise countervailing power , especially on the Internet . Forming successful coalitions of consumers requires better organization and simplified communication . The Internet provides the means by which communication and organization can occur more efficiently , breaking down demographic , geographic , and temporal barriers [ 37 ] . The communication process pertaining to the group buying task repre - sents an example of a typical convergent process and as such needs support for verification , negotiation , and clarification [ 33 ] . According to the theory of media synchronicity , a simple synchronous communication channel like an instant messaging tool can provide a good fit for such communication process needs [ 10 ] . With the appropriate communication tools , group buyers should collaborate more effectively in order to reach consensus and achieve common goals [ 55 ] . Hence , offering additional communication capacity to the buyers should enable them to share more information and thus coordinate better bid - ding strategies and consequently also obtain better deals than buyer groups without such a communication mechanism . Thus , we hypothesize : Hypothesis 2 ( Communication Capacity and Buyer Surplus Hypoth - esis ) : Introducing a communication channel for buyers to exchange private messages will tend to increase buyer surplus . Assuming heterogeneous consumer preferences in terms of different willingness - to - pay ( WTP ) values held by buyers introduces some conflicts of interest . For example , high - WTP buyers ( Hi - WTP ) , that is , buyers who are willing and able to pay a higher price for a product , may want to bid to increase the chances for an offer to get accepted by the seller , and low - WTP buyers ( Lo - WTP ) may not be able or willing to follow suit and so drop out of a group bid . Evidently , bigger groups encounter more such interest conflicts than smaller groups . Group buyers can coordinate better bidding strategies if they can recognize those conflicts due to diverging WTP values and reach consensus within those constraints in order to not jeopardize possible deals , e . g . , Hi - WTP buyers may decide to bid less aggressively in order to allow the more constrained Lo - WTP buyers to stay in the group , and Lo - WTP buyers may bid more aggressively to keep the group intact . Of course , in some cases , a deal that is acceptable to all may still be difficult to negotiate , or simply not be possible at all . Introducing a communication channel among buyers should help buyers recognize WTP - related conflicts and move their group price threshold to a feasible level . The more potential conflicts are present among buyers , the more important the communication channel should be for mitigat - ing them . Moreover , the effect of the communication channel on increasing D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 132 PELAEz , Yu , And LAng group surplus should become more salient in bigger groups than in smaller groups . Hence , theoretically , in accordance with Baron and Kenny [ 2 ] , the communication channel serves not only as a predictor for buyer surplus but also as a moderator between group size and buyer surplus by strengthening the effect of group size . Therefore , we propose the following interaction effect between group size and communication level : Hypothesis 3 ( Communication Capacity and Group Size Interactions on Buyer Surplus Hypothesis ) : the positive effective of introducing a communication channel for buyers to exchange private messages on buyer surplus will be more salient in bigger groups than in smaller groups . Group Task Completion The second dimension of group performance that we consider in our study concerns task completion , and primarily how fast the members of a group can complete the task of generating their first joint offer to the seller . This involves decisions to join a group bid and to negotiate a jointly agreed - on bidding price . Time to task completion is strongly connected with task complexity . Theory suggests that task complexity is best conceptualized from three interdependent perspectives—psychological experience , task - doer interactions , and objective task characteristics [ 4 ] . When task performance is regarded as a psychological experience , the doer’s motivation , the level of stimulation , and potential arous - als during performance of the task should be taken into account ( e . g . , [ 53 ] ) . The task - doer interaction relationship focuses on the doer’s cognitive limita - tion and task - related proficiency [ 47 , 17 ] . Objective measures for complexity can be constructed from the number of information sources and the degree of information diversity that the people who are involved in performing a task are confronted with [ 52 ] . It is important to note that both group size and communication capacity can change the nature of a task and thus change task complexity [ 4 ] . Enlarging the group size can substantially increase the information input to the task performance process , and hence increase task complexity . Introducing a private communication channel allows the buyers to acquire more information through exchanging messages instead of merely observing the market movement on the trading platform . Working on more complex tasks , groups should need more time to reach consensus . Compared with a bigger group , a smaller group deals with fewer divergent WTP values , and thus less information needs to be processed by the group members and fewer WTP - related bidding conflicts need to be resolved . How - ever , coordination becomes more complex as the size of the group increases . For example , Chen et al . [ 5 ] showed that technology provides , in principle , effective communication in intra - auction bidding clubs , but coordination becomes increasingly more difficult as the member base grows . This leads to our next hypothesis . Hypothesis 4 ( Group Size and Task Completion Hypothesis ) : Increas - ing the group size of buyers tends to delay group task completion . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 IntERnAtIonAL JouRnAL of ELECtRonIC CoMMERCE 133 Similarly , making a buyer communication channel available on the group buying platform introduces a new information source to the buyers , in addition to the publicly posted bidding prices , and one which can make WTP - related conflicts more transparent . On the one hand , the new information can help buyers coordinate more effective bidding strategies by better recognizing the different pricing constraints . But , on the other hand , some of the shared information may be irrelevant to the task or even incorrect . Processing the additional information also presents a higher cognitive load for each buyer and consequently may lead to a longer completion time for performing the group task . The information exchange among the buyers increases their mutual interdependency , which tends to help them work out better coordinated outcomes [ 44 ] but also increases task complexity and may make the buyers more cautious in announcing their individual offer prices [ 4 , 52 ] . Therefore , we hypothesize the following : Hypothesis 5 ( Communication Capacity and Task Completion Hy - pothesis ) : Introducing a communication channel for buyers to exchange private messages tends to delay group task completion . Furthermore , because buyers in bigger groups face more potential con - flicts when they deal with more diverse WTP values than those in smaller groups , they are likely to exchange more information through the communi - cation channel than those in smaller groups in order to manage conflicts and reach agreements . The information exchanges in larger groups , dealing with increased levels of potential interest conflicts , are also likely to create more emotional pressure than in smaller groups and stimulate arousal among buy - ers , thus increasing the cognitive challenges they face [ 4 , 53 ] and decelerating the group decision - making process . The relationship conflicts , pertaining to feelings , tension , and friction , will further slow down the task completion process , especially for more complex tasks [ 9 , 21 ] . Therefore , we propose that there is an interaction effect between communication and group size with regard to task completion : Hypothesis 6 ( Communication and Group Size Interactions on Task Completion Hypothesis ) : Introducing a communication channel for buyers to exchange private messages will delay the group task completion in bigger groups more than in smaller groups . Methodology Experimental Design Using a specific variant of the buyer - initiated intra - auction group buying model proposed by Chen et al . [ 5 ] , we designed a laboratory economic experiment that created an electronic social buying market in which partici - pants were asked to coordinate group purchases of a single product from a monopolistic seller . Each individual buyer was given a demand of one unit D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 134 PELAEz , Yu , And LAng with a preassigned unique willingness - to - pay value . These valuations varied across buyers , thus modeling heterogeneous consumer demand preferences . Buyers were preassigned to groups . The experimental environment was de - veloped using the z - Tree software [ 12 ] and was implemented in a Windows client - server network environment . 3 The participants were recruited from an undergraduate student pool and were compensated with course credit in an introductory - level information systems class . We used a 2 × 2 factorial design in which we manipulated two variables , group size and communication capacity , at two levels . First , we manipulated group size and compared smaller groups with larger groups , and based on prior experimental research [ 43 ] , we operationalized smaller groups as two - buyer groups and larger ones as four - buyer groups . 4 The second manipula - tion compared low with high communication capacity among buyers . At the high level , we operationalized communication capacity by including a communication channel as a social technology feature on the buyer screen , whereas no such communication channel was offered at the low level . The used communication mechanism resembled a standard chat box . As depicted in the flow chart ( see Appendix A ) , which shows the basic logical sequence of the events and decisions in the experiment , buyer subjects could either place an opening bid ( the first proposed purchasing price to be offered to the seller ) or join an already - existing bid within the group . How - ever , a group offer was not routed to the seller until the required number of buyers ( minimum buyer threshold ) had joined the offer at the proposed bid price . Hence , group bidding occurred in two stages , requiring the completion of two group tasks . The first task involved proposing in - group bids , among themselves , to determine an agreed - on joint offer bid . The bargaining process with the seller began only after the first task had been completed and a joint offer had been submitted to the seller . Successfully negotiating with the seller and making the deal was the second group task in our study . If the seller rejected an offer , the buyers needed to renegotiate a new , improved bid . This process continued until the seller either accepted an offer and closed the deal ( the group successfully completed the task ) or the experimental round terminated when time expired , without a deal ( the group failed to successfully complete the task ) . Procedure Each session consisted of groups with one seller ( monopolist ) and either two or four buyers . Upon entering the laboratory , the participants were randomly assigned to computer terminals with a seller screen for the seller and a buyer screen for the buyers . Once the participants were seated , they were asked to review a set of instructions 5 that explained the electronic group buying mecha - nism and the user interface for their specific role as either a buyer or a seller . Each session consisted of one extended practice period and ten experimental periods , in which buyers worked to coordinate group offers to the seller . The data from the practice round were discarded and not used in our analysis . Each regular round lasted 150 seconds . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 IntERnAtIonAL JouRnAL of ELECtRonIC CoMMERCE 135 The seller received only finalized group bids , once a group had agreed on a joint offer . The seller screen showed the group bid as the number of people who joined in the bid , the offer price per unit , and the total amount of the offer ( see Appendix B for an illustrative seller screenshot ) . The seller then had the opportunity to accept the bid and thus terminate the current round , or not . Buyers could work on a new , improved joint offer if their bid was not accepted . Both buyer user interfaces , with or without a communication box , were simple , convenient , and very easy to use , but the design of the buyer screen was a bit more complex , as illustrated in Appendix C ) . It showed them their assigned willingness - to - pay value for the product they were asked to buy . With the beginning of each round , a buyer could initiate a bid or wait and join an existing bid price . When all the buyers in the group joined a bid , a group offer was generated and immediately forwarded to the seller for review . In any case , a new bid price could be proposed at any time . Buyers could observe the market by looking at the current bids , pending offers , and also by learning from declined offers . In the treatment with a private communication channel , buyers could exchange text messages via an instant message type of communication box . No such communication channel was made available to sellers . When a transaction occurred , that is , a seller accepted an offer from the buyer group ( completing group task 2 ) , both the seller’s surplus and buyers’ surplus were calculated and shown to the participants . Individual buyer sur - plus values were computed for each buyer as transaction price less WTP value . Summing individual buyer surplus over the members of a group yielded group surplus . No surplus accrued when a round ended with no bids accepted . The participant rewards were not linked to task completion time . In each period of the ten repeated rounds of the experiment , the buyers were given different WTP values . The values were generated randomly and rotated to buyers sequentially in each period , as detailed in Appendix D . First , we generated ten random integer numbers between 25 and 100 from a uniform distribution . These ten numbers were then recorded and reused for all of the ten repeated rounds for all the experimental groups in order to experimentally control for WTP effects . In the first round of the experiment , the first two ( or four ) numbers were assigned to the two ( or four ) group buyers sequentially , and in the second round , the next two ( or four ) values , starting from the second number , were assigned to the buyers sequentially , and so on . This WTP rotation method ensured that every buyer got to use all of the ten generated values over the course of the ten repeated rounds and that for any given round , all the buyers also had different values . Measures The two experimental treatment variables , presence of the communication channel and group size , represented the two independent variables in our study . We also investigated two dependent variables—group - level surplus , measured as average buyer surplus within groups , and group performance in terms of time for group task completion . More specifically , the latter was D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 136 PELAEz , Yu , And LAng measured as the time a group needed to generate their first joint offer for the seller , which we previously defined as the first group task . Because the groups controlled this performance task , it was chosen as the primary task performance indicator in our study . We also measured the performance of the second group task—making a deal with the seller—by calculating the success rate of task completion over the repeated rounds of the experiment as a sec - ondary group performance variable in the study . To control for round effects , we modeled the periods as control variables . In addition , we also collected data on some bidding and communication activities of the group buyers by observing the number of bids submitted and the number of messages posted per buyer and group . The measures are summarized in Table 1 . Finally , the group surplus was normalized by group size as well as by average WTP within experimental sessions to adjust for potential differences . Data Analysis Descriptive Analysis The experiment was carried out with a total of 45 groups . Each group had one seller and either two or four buyers . Data from each group was collected in one session over 10 rounds of bidding . The design represents a typical 2 × 2 experi - ment with repeated measures . The descriptive analysis of the experimental data is summarized in Table 2 . Out of the 450 rounds of potential deal making by the 45 groups , 296 final bids from 44 groups were successful and accepted by sellers , and 154 rounds were unsuccessful and failed to produce a winning bid . Due to inconsistent show - up rates of the recruited subjects at the laboratory for the scheduled experiments , some planned sessions had to be canceled , result - ing in an unbalanced experimental design . One of the groups in the treatment with four buyers without the communication channel exhibited total group performance failure and did not generate any successful bids . In the rounds that did not generate a sales transaction , groups failed for two reasons : either the buyers could not agree on a common bid to form a group offer ( failure to complete the first group task ) or the submitted bids were too low and rejected by the seller ( failure to complete the second group task ) . Periods with unsuc - Table 1 . Measures Used in the Experiment . Variables Measures Independent variables Communication capacity ( with vs . without a communication channel ) Group size ( bigger vs . smaller ) Dependent variables Group performance Buyer surplus ( average surplus per buyer in a group ) Time for task completion ( generating the first offer ) Control variables Experimental periods ( Period1 , Period2 , … , Period9 = 0 or 1 ; Period10 fixed ) Other variables Bidding outcome ( success rate of deal closings ) Bidding activities ( number of group bids submitted per buyer ) Communication activities ( number of messages per buyer ) D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 IntERnAtIonAL JouRnAL of ELECtRonIC CoMMERCE 137 T ab l e 2 . D e s c r i p t i v e S t a t i s t i c s o f S u cc e s s f u l R o u n d s o f B i dd i n g . W i t h o u t c o mm u n i c a t i o n W i t h c o mm u n i c a t i o n N u m b e r o f b i d s ( g r o u p s ) B u y e r s u r p l u s C o m p l e t i o n t i m e N u m b e r o f b i d s ( g r o u p s ) B u y e r s u r p l u s C o m p l e t i o n t i m e M e a n S D M e a n S D M e a n S D M e a n S D G r o u p s i z e 2 85 ( 11 ) 40 . 7 10 . 3 16 . 7 12 . 5 94 ( 13 ) 37 . 0 10 . 4 20 . 0 20 . 2 G r o u p s i z e 4 75 ( 12 ) 41 . 8 7 . 8 24 . 5 21 . 0 42 ( 8 ) 40 . 2 7 . 1 41 . 5 34 . 9 D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 138 PELAEz , Yu , And LAng cessful bids were removed from the main analysis . On average , buyers in the larger groups outperformed their counterparts in the smaller groups in both treatments , with and without the communication channel . The descriptive analysis result is consistent with our Group Size and Buyer Surplus Hypothesis ( H1 ) , and formal testing is discussed in the following section . A nonparametric Spearman’s rho correlation analysis was conducted to check the correlations between the major measures of the study ( Table 3 ) . The correlation between the two dependent variables , group surplus and time for group formation , is significantly negative , which implies that more time spent on the preparation for the first bid does not necessarily mean higher surplus . The correlation analysis shows that communication capacity is negatively cor - related with buyer surplus ( p < 0 . 01 ) and positively correlated with time for group task completion ( p < 0 . 05 ) . Group size is positively correlated with both surplus ( p < 0 . 1 ) and the time for group task completion ( p < 0 . 01 ) . Number of group bids submitted , used as a proxy for degree of buyer initia - tive , is negatively correlated with surplus ( p < 0 . 01 ) . This indicates how tactically buyers act in submitting group bids but also reflects how tough the seller is in terms of rejecting group bids . A high number of group bids submitted shows a lot of activity but could also mean that the buyer group does not develop an effective bidding strategy over the course of the experiment . The rank of the bidding period ( 1 to 10 ) is positively correlated with sur - plus ( p < 0 . 05 ) and negatively with time for group task completion ( p < 0 . 05 ) . The correlation results indicate that buyers in later rounds tend to generate higher surplus in less time than in earlier rounds of the experimental session . The trend lines of surplus and time over the bidding periods are consistent with the correlation analysis ( see Figures 1 and 2 ) . These results point to the possible presence of learning effects , prompting us to incorporate the periods as control variables in the following section on hypothesis testing . Hypothesis Testing Because we regarded rounds with unsuccessful deal - making attempts as miss - ing values , we obtained an unequal sample size for our 2 × 2 design . To control Table 3 . Spearman’s Rho Correlations . Surplus Time Comm - Capacity GroupSize Period Time – 0 . 395 * * CommCapacity – 0 . 191 * * 0 . 117 * GroupSize 0 . 088 † 0 . 254 * * – 0 . 163 * * Period 0 . 132 * – 0 . 119 * 0 . 039 0 . 064 Number of bids submitted – 0 . 198 * * 0 . 069 – 0 . 111 – 0 . 187 * * – 0 . 057 † Regression is significant at the 0 . 10 level ( two - tailed ) . * Correlation is significant at the 0 . 05 level ( two - tailed ) . * * Correlation is significant at the 0 . 01 level ( two - tailed ) . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 IntERnAtIonAL JouRnAL of ELECtRonIC CoMMERCE 139 for the effect of repeated measures with unequal sample size , we applied two sets of statistical examinations . First , we employed multiple linear regression analysis for the main test . Second , we followed up with a robustness test us - ing a mixed model analysis with maximum likelihood estimation to verify the results . We developed the following regression model for our analysis : Surplus = α 0 + S 9 i = 1 α i Period i + α 10 groupSize + α 11 CommCapacity + α 12 ( groupSize × CommCapacity ) + ε ( 1 ) time = β 0 + S 9 i = 1 α i Period i + β 10 groupSize + β 11 CommCapacity + β 12 ( groupSize × CommCapacity ) + μ , ( 2 ) Figure 1 . Buyer Surplus Figure 2 . Time to Task Completion D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 140 PELAEz , Yu , And LAng where Surplus is buyer surplus ; time is time to generate the first bid ; α i , β i are regression coefficients ( i = 0 , 1 , . . . , 12 ) ; Period i is experiment period ( i = 1 , 2 , . . . , 9 ) ; groupSize is group size ( bigger vs . smaller ) ; CommCapacity is communication capacity ( with vs . without a communication box ) ; groupSize × CommCapacity is an interaction term of group size and communication capacity ; and ε , μ are error terms . Main Test We introduced dummy variables to model group size ( groupSize ) and com - munication capacity ( CommCapacity ) . Specifically , for the treatment with the smaller group size ( two - buyer model ) groupSize was coded 0 , and for the larger group size , groupSize = 1 . Likewise , for the treatment without a communica - tion channel , CommCapacity was coded 0 , and for the treatment with a com - munication channel , CommCapacity = 1 . An additional nine dummy variables ( Period1 , . . . , Period9 ) were generated to represent the experimental periods 1 to 9 , with “period” 10 was fixed to serve as the reference measure for our analy - sis . Two separate regression tests were conducted to analyze the main effects of group size and communication capacity on the two dependent variables , ( buyer ) Surplus and time ( for generating the first group bid ) , respectively . We combine the results of the two separate linear tests in Table 4 . It shows buyer surplus at the group level , expressed as average surplus of the buy - ers within a group , across the ten repeated rounds ( Surplus ) and the time for task completion ( time ) . To examine the contribution of each of the four treatments , we did a hierarchical multiple linear regression in four stages , Model 0 , Model 1 , Model 2 , and Model 3 , in which we added the variables Period , CommCapacity , groupSize , and the interaction effect ( CommCapacity × groupSize ) . The nine dummy variables , Period 1 through Period 9 , are included in the test to control for the effect of repeated measurement , especially learn - ing effects . 6 According to Model 1 , buyers in bigger groups generated $ 2 . 4 more surplus than in smaller groups ( p < 0 . 05 ) shown in Table 4 . It contributes 1 . 5 percent explanatory power . After adding presence of a communication channel as an independent variable in the regression , we did find that the effect of group size on buyer surplus was still positive , but it was only moderately significant ( p < 0 . 1 ; Model 2 ) . Thus , H1 is weakly supported . Presence of a communica - tion channel has a significant negative effect on buyer surplus , which inter - estingly not only rejects H2 but also shows an effect that is actually opposite to our prediction . Based on the testing results in Model 3 , we cannot identify any significant interaction effect between communication and group size on buyer surplus . With respect to group task performance , in terms of task completion time , both the main effects and the interaction effect are significant . Based on Model 2 , the groups with a communication channel spent 8 . 8 seconds longer than the groups without one to generate the first agreed - on bidding price ( p < 0 . 01 ) . The larger groups ( with four buyers ) spent 13 . 8 seconds longer than the smaller groups ( with two buyers ) to generate the first bidding price ( p < 0 . 01 ) . That is , D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 IntERnAtIonAL JouRnAL of ELECtRonIC CoMMERCE 141 T ab l e 4 . M u l t i p l e L i n e a r R e g r e ss i o n C o e f fi c i e n t s . M 0 M 1 M 2 M 3 S u r p l u s T i m e S u r p l u s T i m e S u r p l u s T i m e S u r p l u s T i m e I n t e r c e p t 42 . 7 * * 24 . 6 * * 41 . 5 * * 21 . 4 * * 43 . 2 * * 13 . 2 * * 43 . 7 * * 15 . 8 * * P e r i o d 1 – 6 . 2 * 11 . 4 † – 6 . 0 * 11 . 8 * – 6 . 2 * 13 . 5 * – 6 . 2 * 13 . 6 * P e r i o d 2 – 4 . 3 † – 2 . 1 – 3 . 8 – 1 . 9 – 4 . 0 1 . 0 – 4 . 0 0 . 9 P e r i o d 3 – 4 . 7 † 4 . 0 – 4 . 3 † 4 . 4 – 4 . 6 † 6 . 9 – 4 . 6 † 6 . 8 P e r i o d 4 0 . 6 – 4 . 7 1 . 0 – 4 . 7 0 . 9 – 2 . 5 0 . 9 – 2 . 2 P e r i o d 5 – 1 . 9 – 3 . 7 – 1 . 6 – 2 . 7 – 2 . 1 – 0 . 8 – 2 . 1 – 0 . 8 P e r i o d 6 – 5 . 6 * – 2 . 8 – 5 . 5 * – 2 . 9 – 5 . 4 * – 1 . 9 – 5 . 4 * – 1 . 9 P e r i o d 7 – 4 . 2 † – 1 . 8 – 3 . 9 – 2 . 0 – 3 . 9 . 0 – 3 . 9 † – 0 . 4 P e r i o d 8 0 . 0 – 6 . 3 0 . 2 – 6 . 4 0 . 3 – 5 . 3 0 . 3 – 4 . 8 P e r i o d 9 – 2 . 5 – 6 . 6 – 2 . 1 – 6 . 5 – 2 . 3 – 4 . 4 – 2 . 2 – 4 . 1 G r o u p S i z e 2 . 4 * 12 . 3 * * 1 . 8 † 13 . 8 * * 0 . 8 8 . 2 * C o mm C a pa c i t y – 3 . 0 * * 8 . 8 * * – 3 . 9 * * 3 . 8 C o mm C a pa c i t y × G r o u p S i z e 2 . 5 13 . 4 * * ∆ R 2 S u r p l u s 0 . 061 0 . 015 0 . 024 0 . 004 S t a n da r d e rr o r s u r p l u s 9 . 352 9 . 296 9 . 191 9 . 187 ∆ R 2 T i m e 0 . 052 0 . 069 0 . 03 6 0 . 020 S t a n da r d e rr o r t i m e 22 . 480 21 . 679 21 . 269 21 . 057 N o t e s : U n s t a n da r d i z e d c o e f fi c i e n t s a r e d i s p l a y e d . † R e g r e ss i o n i s s i g n i fi c a n t a t t h e 0 . 10 l e v e l ( t w o - t a i l e d ) . * R e g r e ss i o n i s s i g n i fi c a n t a t t h e 0 . 0 5 l e v e l ( t w o - t a i l e d ) . * * R e g r e ss i o n i s s i g n i fi - c a n t a t t h e 0 . 01 l e v e l ( t w o - t a i l e d ) . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 142 PELAEz , Yu , And LAng enlarging groups and introducing a communication channel both delay group task completion in terms of generating an initial group bid . Based on Model 3 , the groups of four buyers with a communication channel spent 13 . 4 seconds longer than the groups in the other treatments to generate the first bid offer , that is , the larger the group , the stronger the effect of com - munication . The R - squared changes indicate that a communication channel , group size , and the interaction effect contributed 6 . 9 percent , 3 . 6 percent , and 2 percent explanatory power , respectively . Robustness Tests Using linear regression , we can easily interpret the effects of each predictor through the significance level of the coefficients . But employing a mixed model analysis has been recommended as the better alternative in cases with missing observations in repeated measures data than the conventional regres - sion method [ 51 , 36 ] . To check the robustness of the main tests , we therefore conducted a mixed model analysis on the two dependent variables . In the new model , we set group as the test subject instead of experimental round of a group , and , likewise , we set the period as within - subject effects instead of as control variables . The type III tests of fixed effects for the two dependent variables are shown in Tables 5 and 6 , and they suggest that CommCapacity is a significant predictor for Surplus , and CommCapacity , groupSize , and the interaction CommCapacity × groupSize is a significant predictor of time . These results are highly consistent with the results of the main tests , except for the effect of group size on buyer surplus . Our robustness analysis could not iden - tify a significant effect of group size on buyer surplus , which , however , was only weakly significant at the 0 . 1 level in the main test to begin with . But this inconsistency could perhaps be attributed to the unequal sample size of the testing groups . Our hypothesis testing results are summarized in Table 7 . Additional Analysis Based on our results , we found an effect of adding a communication channel on buyer surplus that is in the opposite direction from that we theoretically predicted . Because the group buying process is very dynamic and highly in - teractive , it is difficult to discern the underlying reasons for the negative role Table 5 . Robustness Test on Surplus . Source Numerator df Denominator df F Sig . Intercept 1 258 . 6 5 , 722 . 1 0 . 000 GroupSize 1 258 . 6 2 . 1 0 . 149 CommCapacity 1 258 . 6 4 . 7 0 . 031 CommCapacity × GroupSize 1 258 . 6 1 . 0 0 . 328 D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 IntERnAtIonAL JouRnAL of ELECtRonIC CoMMERCE 143 of the communication channel . Therefore , we conducted a post hoc analysis to explore some possible explanations for this unexpected but interesting finding . In Tables 8 and 9 , which summarize the descriptive statistics on bidding and communication activities ( i . e . , number of bids submitted and number of messages posted ) , our analysis shows that bigger groups submitted more bids and exchanged more messages than smaller groups . This implies that bigger groups have to process more information within the same time window in the process of reaching consensus on a joint offer than smaller groups . We followed up on this insight and ran a logistic regression 7 for groupSize and CommCapacity on success rate , using rounds ( early vs . late ) as a control vari - able , and found that bigger groups were less successful in making deals , that Table 6 . Robustness Test on Time for Task Completion . Source Numerator df Denominator df F Sig . Intercept 1 212 . 52 461 . 2 0 . 000 GroupSize 1 212 . 52 37 . 9 0 . 000 CommCapacity 1 212 . 52 22 . 9 0 . 000 CommCapacity × GroupSize 1 212 . 52 11 . 2 0 . 001 Table 7 . Summary of Hypothesis Testing . No . Hypothesis Dependent variable Result Buyer Surplus H1 Group Size and Buyer Surplus Hypothesis : Increasing the group size of buyers in a group buyer model tends to increase buyer surplus . Buyer surplus Weakly supported H2 Communication Capacity and Buyer Surplus Hypothesis : Introducing a communication channel for buyers to ex - change private messages tends to increase buyer surplus . Buyer surplus Not supported H3 Communication Capacity and Group Size Interactions on Buyer Surplus Hypothesis : Introducing a communication channel in group - buying will increase buyer surplus in bigger groups more than in smaller group . Buyer surplus Not supported Time for Group Task Completion H4 Group Size and Task Completion Hypothesis : Increas - ing the group size of buyers tends to delay group task performance . Task completion time Supported H5 Communication Capacity and Task Completion Hypothesis : Introducing a communication channel for buyers to exchange private messages tends to delay group task performance . Task completion time Supported H6 Communication and Group Size Interactions on Task Com - pletion Hypothesis : Introducing a communication channel in group - buying will delay the group task performance in bigger groups more than in smaller groups . Task completion time Supported D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 144 PELAEz , Yu , And LAng T ab l e 8 . B i d s p e r G r o u p . W i t h o u t c o mm u n i c a t i o n W i t h c o mm u n i c a t i o n S u cc e ss r a t e F a il e d r o u n d s S u cc e ss f u l r o u n d s S u cc e ss r a t e F a il e d r o u n d s S u cc e ss f u l r o u n d s N N u m b e r o f b i d s N N u m b e r o f b i d s N N u m b e r o f b i d s N N u m b e r o f b i d s S m a ll g r o u p s 77 . 3 % 25 12 . 4 85 5 . 6 72 . 3 % 36 6 94 2 . 6 L a r g e g r o u p s 57 . 7 % 55 1 4 . 4 75 6 . 1 52 . 5 % 38 11 . 1 42 5 . 9 D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 IntERnAtIonAL JouRnAL of ELECtRonIC CoMMERCE 145 is , in getting a bid accepted by the seller , than smaller groups ( p < 0 . 01 ) . While groups with communication channels showed a lower success rate than the groups without a communication channel ( Table 8 ) , this difference was statisti - cally not significant . However , we also found that all groups were generally more successful in making deals in later rounds than in earlier ones ( p < 0 . 01 ) , confirming learning effects in terms of deal - making success rates similar to those we found for surplus levels . The number of bids submitted per group depends not just on group coor - dination but also on mutual interdependencies between buyer and seller bidding tactics , like how hard a seller negotiates or how efficiently the buy - ers respond to an offer rejection . The average number of bids per buyer per group submitted almost doubles in failed rounds compared to successful rounds ( Table 8 ) . In the rounds that ended successfully with accepted bids , groups with a communication channel submitted fewer bids than the groups without a communication channel , which implies that with communication , buyers tend to submit their bids more tactically than the buyers without a communication channel . In other words , the availability of a communication channel helped groups with coordination , resulting in more efficient bidding and fewer exploratory bids . However , we did not observe the surplus increases that we expected from these improved group coordination patterns . For messages exchanged , we found that in rounds that ended unsuccess - fully , with failed last bids and no deals , buyers posted more messages than they did in the successful rounds . Given the time constraints for a round , this means that if buyers were not able to use the communication channel effectively , for example , if they posted irrelevant or redundant information , information overload could occur . The literature in task complexity and decision making suggests that for performing more complex decision tasks , decision makers tend to simplify the process by limiting information search to accelerate their evaluation [ 39 ] . Ineffective communication burdens the decision - making process for the buyers , which can result in information overload and failed bidding outcomes . This applies especially to the larger groups , which not only generate more messages per group member but also need to read and process messages from a larger number of group mates . In other words , the amount of information shared grows exponentially with group size . With regard to message content , we also noticed that , perhaps because of the time constraints and task complexity , a considerable number of emotional expressions were shared through the communication channel . In Table 10 , we show a few selected sample messages illustrating how the participants Table 9 . Messages Posted per Buyer ( Group ) . Failed rounds Successful rounds Small group 1 . 3 ( 2 . 7 ) 0 . 9 ( 1 . 8 ) Big group 2 . 9 ( 11 . 6 ) 1 . 8 ( 7 . 2 ) D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 146 PELAEz , Yu , And LAng expressed emotion . The emotional messages imply stress as well as conflicts , and they may stimulate even more arousal among the other group members when they receive them , and thus further increase task complexity . Our analysis of buyer activity suggests that introducing a communication channel can help group buyers coordinate better bidding tactics , but also that if buyers use the communication channel inappropriately , information overload may occur . Given the ambiguity between improved bidding tactics but unchanged buyer surplus , we can draw the conclusion that increasing communication capacity will not by itself improve buyer surplus in a group buying auction setting . This outcome is also consistent with the efficient market hypothesis that publicly posted price signals ( bids ) contain all the information needed to discover efficient transaction prices in transparent markets [ 16 , 50 ] . Discussion Our study finds some partial support for Galbraith’s original skepticism re - garding the potential for countervailing power from consumers [ 15 ] . While adding a communication channel improved the groups’ ability to form , it did not prove sufficient to help them negotiate better prices . In other words , the communication channel provided groups the necessary capacity to accomplish the coordination task of group formation but was insufficient to successfully ac - complish the more complex task of price negotiation . As a possible explanation for this finding , we suggest that a simple messaging box may be sufficient to support the former but not the latter task and that more advanced communica - tion tools , such as social media tools with better information filtering features , may be necessary to provide consumers with the communication capacity to more effectively negotiate better prices in group buying settings . In our experiments simple message exchange appeared too unstructured and distracting to efficiently aid price finding within the given time restric - tions participants had to work with . Smaller groups were the most effective in using communication technology but became bogged down with informa - tion overload as group size increased and more messages were posted and Table 10 . Sample Messages Shared Through a Communication Channel . Nonemotional examples Emotional examples “i joined 14” “this is getting boring” “price might be too low” “i hate this game . ” “i like 22” “ * no PRESSURE ! ” “worth a try” “damn” “i think 20 is fair” “ ? ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ? ! ? ? ! ? ! ? ! ? ! ? ! ? ! ? ! ? ! ? ! ? ” “what’s your values ? ” “hopeless” “mine is 83” “you definitely did not read the instructions ! ” “how about 23 first then bit up ? ” “u bettah watch yoself b4 u reck urself playa” D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 IntERnAtIonAL JouRnAL of ELECtRonIC CoMMERCE 147 needed processing . The larger groups with a communication channel actually performed worse and were ineffective in using communication technology to better support coordination ; they performed slower and only got marginally better prices . The complexity from larger groups offset any advantages that adding communication capacity could enable . This interesting trade - off between the benefits from IT - enabled coordination capabilities and its associated costs due to increased task complexity raises the question of how to best manage consumer interactions on social buying platforms . Implications Our findings have implications for both research and business practice . Par - ticularly , they make a contribution to the literature on IT - enabled coordination by showing that introducing a consumer - to - consumer communication tool can create an effective coordination mechanism with significant consumer value that can change the social commerce relations between sellers and buyers . For business practice , our study suggests that group buying site operators need to be concerned about both the level and the kind of communication tools they want to offer to their buyer customers and should be mindful that larger buyer groups may need different kinds of communication support from those needed by smaller groups . Possible Future Research Directions We have investigated the role of communication technology in group buy - ing from a decision - making theoretical perspective that emphasizes task - technology fit and advocates a positivist research approach [ 20 ] . To more accurately capture the dynamics among buyer groups , such as leadership , conflict management , or atmosphere , an interpretive research method such as qualitative interviews or protocol analysis should be applied in future research to better understand the decision - making process from the buyer’s point of view [ 11 ] . In addition , the interdependent role of task complexity , conflicts , and group diversity [ 22 ] should be investigated more deeply to develop more efficient market mechanism and provide more personalized technology platform designs . Another research possibility is to drop the design assumption of fixed , preassigned groups and let buyers decide whether and when to join a group , thereby introducing some level of competition between buyers . More specific seller analysis should be done as well and might include a seller design with more complex seller cost structure with explicit reservation prices . Another interesting direction concerns the evaluation of other , possibly more sophisticated social technology tools that could be used in online group buying . Using Internet - based field experiments offers an interesting complementary approach to controlled lab experiments , and they could be used to examine D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 148 PELAEz , Yu , And LAng group size effects and impact of communication , allowing researchers to work with very large and dynamic groups and a variety of social tools in a real - world setting . Finally , we limited our study to a group buying model with an adaptive price threshold , but we suggest examining different types of price thresholds , including fixed and adaptive ones , in future research . Limitations This study has a number of limitations . While the experimental design was tested in early pilot tests and subsequently refined and improved several times , a number of potential design limitations became apparent only after data collection had been under way or completed . The following seven appear to be the most critical ones : 1 . The number of rounds in which groups failed to successfully form and transact was higher than expected . This may be related to the perhaps too restrictive time restrictions ( two and a half minutes per round ) . 2 . The bidding mechanism that was implemented ( incremental bid changes only ) might have complicated price negotiation among buyers in cases where the valuation spreads were high . 3 . Buyers were preassigned to groups and did not have a choice to form alternative groups if the existing one did not match their pref - erence structure well . 4 . Participants were compensated with course credit , which might not have been sufficient to fully induce economic behavior in every case . 5 . The experiment implemented only one specific type ( buyer - initiat - ed ) of group buying model , which limits generalization beyond this particular model . 6 . It is unclear how robust our results are with respect to changes in the preassigned buyer preferences ( i . e . , the set of WTP values ) . 7 . Buyers were not made aware of time costs in the experiment and were not given extrinsic rewards for quicker deal completion times . Another limitation was the exclusion of analyzing the seller data in the present study ; however , future studies should closely look at the interaction between the sellers and buyers in this type of setting . Conclusion Our paper makes two principal contributions . First , it contributes to the social commerce research literature by showing that the benefits of social technology may diminish when complex group tasks—such as coordinating and negotiating group bids under heterogeneous buyer preferences—need to D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 IntERnAtIonAL JouRnAL of ELECtRonIC CoMMERCE 149 be performed by large groups . Our study provides empirical evidence that platforms offering users social technology to support group work trade off the benefits from having a better coordination mechanism available with increas - ing the complexity of the task . As groups grow in size , this effect of trading off better coordination capabilities against higher task complexity becomes stronger and the costs may eventually outweigh the benefits . Second , our study also contributes to research in design science by pre - senting a novel approach to evaluating newly developed IT - based systems . We argue that combining design science [ 18 ] with experimental econom - ics [ 49 ] —designing an IT artifact ( e . g . , an IT - enabled market mechanism for electronic group buying platforms ) , implementing it , and then evaluating it using economic performance measures , as demonstrated in this particular study , offers researchers a useful and versatile approach to systematically designing and evaluating new electronic market mechanisms and platform features that is applicable for a large range of research problems . We particu - larly recommend this approach to researchers who study how incorporating IT - enabled features and mechanisms in electronic market or electronic business platform designs creates economic value . NOTES 1 . The market has grown strongly over the past few years , particularly in the United States and China . For example , Groupon , which was founded in 2008 , has had a rapid rise , expanding business globally and generating $ 1 . 6 billion in revenue in 2011 , but at the same time has also been struggling to find a sustainable business model . According to a report released by the China Investment Consulting group [ 6 ] , group buying sites generated 14 . 6 billion renminbi in sales in 2012 , an increase of 124 percent over the previous year . The China market is fiercely competitive and highly fragmented . By June 2012 , a total of 6 , 069 group buying businesses were registered , with 3 , 210 companies ( 52 percent ) still in operation . 2 . In addition to theoretical support , innovators have sought and obtained a number of patents that describe the use of IT - enabled coordination features and mechanisms specifically to help buyers on electronic group buying platforms to bet - ter coordinate and achieve cost savings ( e . g . , [ 14 , 25 , 54 ] ) . 3 . The z - Tree software package is widely used in the experimental economics field . z - Tree ( Zurich Toolbox for Readymade Economic Experiments ) was originally developed in the Economics Department at the University of Zurich . It is distributed under a free user license ( www . iew . uzh . ch / ztree / ) . The software allows research - ers to design and run economic experiments in the laboratory . It is a distributed computing application that offers features that support communication between the participants’ computer workstations , data collection and management , time management , surplus calculation , and some user interface tools for screen layout . Customizable modules are available to implement a number of standard experi - ments such as market experiments , auctions , public good experiments , and struc - tured bargaining experiments . Other experiments can be composed and combined from existing modules and additional user - written code . 4 . In general , for practical reasons , experimenters will choose the smallest number of human participants that is sufficient to bring out ( existing ) differences between experimental conditions . We base our specific parameterization on previ - ous experimental research on group task performance showing that two and four are appropriate choices for group size . Using this operationalization , differences in group behavior and performance have been shown in various research areas , D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 150 PELAEz , Yu , And LAng including auction experiments in economics [ 43 ] and team performance in group decision support systems research [ 13 ] . With group size 2 ( dyad ) , each buyer has equal opportunity to voice opinions and exercise rights . Simmel [ 48 ] recommends three as the minimum group size for experiments that require nondyadic , multi - lateral negotiations . When group size grows from two to four , the complexity with respect to potential conflicts of interest among group members and with respect to communication demanded increases substantially . 5 . The seller and buyer instructions are available from the authors upon request . 6 . The coefficients for Period 1 to Period 9 indicate the differences in surplus or time between a specific period and the arbitrarily chosen reference period 10 . Mathemati - cally , it does not matter which period is chosen as the reference period . Any of the periods could have been used , and the same results would have been obtained . By statistically controlling for the effects of repeated measures , we can claim more valid results regarding the treatment effects in the experiment . 7 . The larger group / smaller group odds ratio of 2 . 625 shows that a larger group is much more likely to fail in the bidding task than a smaller group ( p < 0 . 01 ) . The later stage / early stage odds ratio of 0 . 530 shows that in the later stage , groups are much less likely to fail in a bidding task than in the early stage ( p < 0 . 01 ) . REFERENCES 1 . Anand , K . S . , and Aron , R . Group buying on the web : A comparison of price - discovery mechanisms . Management Science , 49 , 11 ( 2003 ) , 1546 – 1562 . 2 . Baron , R . M . , and Kenny , D . A . The moderator – mediator variable dis - tinction in social psychological research : Conceptual , strategic , and sta - tistical considerations . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology , 51 , ( 1986 ) , 1173 – 1182 . 3 . Brynjolfsson , E . , and Smith , M . Frictionless commerce ? A comparison of Internet and conventional retailers . Management Science , 46 , 4 ( 2000 ) , 563 – 585 . 4 . Campbell , D . J . Task complexity : A review and analysis . Academy of Man - agement Review , 13 , 1 ( 1988 ) , 40 – 52 . 5 . Chen , J . ; Chen , X . ; Kauffman , R . J . ; and Song , X . Should we collude ? Ana - lyzing the benefits of bidder cooperation in online group - buying auctions . Electronic Commerce Research and Applications , 8 , 4 ( 2009 ) , 191 – 202 . 6 . China Investment Consulting Co . 2013 – 2017 nian Zhongguo Tuangou hangye touzi fenxi ji qianjing yuce baogao [ Investment and forecast report on China Tuangou industry , 2013 – 2017 ] . Shenzhen , China , 2012 ( available at www . ocn . com . cn / 2012 / 1187tuangou . htm ) . 7 . Clemons , E . K . How information changes consumer behavior and how consumer behavior determines corporate strategy . Journal of Management Information Systems , 25 , 2 ( fall 2008 ) , 13 – 40 . 8 . Clemons , E . K . ; Reddi , S . P . ; and Row , M . C . The impact of information tech - nology on the organization of economic activity : The “move to the middle” hypothesis . Journal of Management Information Systems , 10 , 2 ( fall 1993 ) , 9 – 36 . 9 . De Dreu , C . K . W . , and Weingart , L . R . Task and relationship conflict , team performance , and team member satisfaction : A meta - analysis . Journal of Ap - plied Psychology , 88 , 4 ( 2003 ) , 741 – 749 . 10 . Dennis , A . R . ; Fuller , R . M . ; and Valacich , J . S . Media , tasks , and commu - nication processes : A theory of media synchronicity . MIS Quarterly , 32 , 3 ( September 2008 ) , 575 – 600 . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 IntERnAtIonAL JouRnAL of ELECtRonIC CoMMERCE 151 11 . DeSanctis , G . , and Poole , M . S . Capturing the complexity in advanced technology use : Adaptive structuration theory . organization Science , 5 , 2 ( 1994 ) , 121 – 147 . 12 . Fischbacher , U . z - Tree : Zurich Toolbox for Ready - Made Economic Experi - ments . Experimental Economics , 10 , 2 ( 2007 ) , 171 – 178 . 13 . Fjermestad , J . , and Hiltz , S . R . An assessment of group support systems experimental research : Methodology and results . Journal of Management Infor - mation Systems 15 , 3 ( winter 1998 – 99 ) , 7 – 150 . 14 . Fortuna , G . ; James , P . ; and Nguyen A . Group buying incentivized by im - pact and risk adjusted rewards . U . S . Patent 20120253910 A1 , issue October 12 , 2012 . 15 . Galbraith , J . K . American Capitalism—the Concept of Countervailing Power . Boston : Houghton Mifflin , 1952 . 16 . Granados , N . ; Gupta , A . ; and Kauffman , R . The impact of IT on market information and transparency : A theoretical frame work . Journal of the Associa - tion for Information Systems , 7 , 3 ( March 2006 ) , 148 – 178 . 17 . Hammond , K . A theoretically based review of theory and research in judgment and decision making ( Report No . 260 ) . University of Colorado , Center for Research on Judgment and Policy , Boulder ( 1986 ) . 18 . Hevner , A . R . ; Salvatore , T . M . ; Park , J . ; and Ram , S . Design science in infor - mation systems research . MIS Quarterly , 28 , 1 ( 2004 ) , 75 – 105 . 19 . Huang , Z . , and Benyoucef , M . From e - commerce to social commerce : A close look at design features . Electronic Commerce Research and Applications , 12 , 4 ( 2013 ) , 246 – 259 . 20 . Jarvenpaa , S . L . The effect of task demands and graphical format on infor - mation processing strategies , Management Science , 35 , 3 ( March 1989 ) , 285 – 303 . 21 . Jehn , K . , and Mannix , E . The dynamic nature of conflict : A longitudinal study of intragroup conflict and group performance . Academy of Management Journal , 44 , 2 ( April 2001 ) , 238 – 251 . 22 . Jehn , K . ; Northcraft , G . B . ; and Neale , M . A . Why differences make a dif - ference : A field study of diversity , conflict , and performance in workgroups . Administrative Science Quarterly , 44 , 4 ( December 1999 ) , 741 – 763 . 23 . Jiang , Z . ; Chan , J . ; Tan , B . C . Y . ; and Chua , W . S . Effects of interactivity on website involvement and purchase intention . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 11 , 1 ( 2010 ) , 34 – 59 . 24 . Jing , X . , and Xie , J . Group buying : A new mechanism for selling through social interactions . Management Science , 57 , 8 ( 2011 ) , 1354 – 1372 . 25 . Kahn , A . Internet based forum allowing individual consumers to pool their buying power . U . S . Patent 20130006795 A1 , issued January 3 , 2013 . 26 . Kauffman , R . J . , and Wang , B . New buyers’ arrival under dynamic pricing market microstructure : The case of group - buying discounts on the Internet . Journal of Management Information Systems , 18 , 2 ( fall 2001 ) , 157 – 188 . 27 . Kauffman , R . J . ; Lai , H . ; and Ho , C . T . Incentive mechanisms , fairness and participation in online group - buying auctions . Electronic Commerce Research and Applications , 9 , 3 ( 2010 ) , 249 – 262 . 28 . Kauffman , R . J . ; Lai , H . ; and Lin , H . Consumer adoption of group - buying auctions : An experimental study . Information technology and Management , 11 , 4 ( 2010 ) , 191 – 211 . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 152 PELAEz , Yu , And LAng 29 . Lai , H . ; Doong , H . S . ; and Yang , C . Y . The effect of price dispersion in an e - market on consumers’ intentions to join group buying . In Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences . Los Alamitos , CA : IEEE Computer Society Press , 2006 . 30 . Li , C . ; Chawla , S . ; Rajan , U . ; Sycara , K . Mechanism design for coalition formation and cost sharing in group - buying markets . Electronic Commerce Research and Applications 3 , 4 ( 2004 ) , 341 – 354 . 31 . Liang , T . - P . , and Turban , E . Introduction to the special issue : Social com - merce : A research framework for social commerce . International Journal of Electronic Commerce , 16 , 2 ( winter 2011 – 12 ) , 5 – 14 . 32 . Liang , T . - P . ; Ho , Y . - T . ; Li , Y . - W . ; and Turban , E . What drives social com - merce : The role of social support and relationship quality . International Journal of Electronic Commerce , 16 , 2 ( winter 2011 – 12 ) , 69 – 90 . 33 . Lind , M . R . , and Zmud , R . W . The influence of a convergence in under - standing between technology providers and users on information technol - ogy innovativeness . organization Science , 2 , 2 ( 1991 ) , 195 – 217 . 34 . Lustgarten , S . H . The impact of buyer concentration in manufacturing industries . Review of Economics and Statistics , 57 , 2 ( May 1975 ) , 125 – 132 . 35 . Malone , T . W . ; Yates , J . ; and Benjamin , R . I . Electronic markets and elec - tronic hierarchies . Communications of the ACM , 30 , 6 ( 1987 ) , 484 – 497 . 36 . McCulloch , C . E . , and Searle , A . F . M . generalized , Linear and Mixed Models . New York : John Wiley & Sons , 2001 . 37 . O’Leary , M . B . , and Cummings , J . N . The spatial , temporal , and configu - rational characteristics of geographic dispersion in teams . MIS Quarterly , 32 , 3 ( 2007 ) , 433 – 452 . 38 . Parameswaran , M . , and Whinston , A . B . Research issues in social com - puting . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 8 , 6 ( 2007 ) , 336 – 350 . 39 . Payne , J . Task complexity and contingent processing in decision - making : An information search and protocol analysis . organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 16 ( August 1976 ) , 366 – 387 . 40 . Porter , M . E . Strategy and the Internet . Harvard Business Review , 79 , 3 ( 2001 ) , 62 – 78 . 41 . Rezabakhsh , B . ; Bornemann , D . ; Hansen , U . ; and Schrader , U . Consumer power : A comparison of the old economy and the Internet economy . Journal of Consumer Policy , 29 , 1 ( 2006 ) , 3 – 36 . 42 . Rha , J . , and Widdows , R . The Internet and the consumer : Countervailing power revisited . Prometheus : Critical Studies in Innovation , 20 , 2 ( June 2002 ) , 107 – 118 . 43 . Ruffle , B . T . Some factors affecting demand withholding in posted - offer markets . Economic theory 16 , 3 ( 2000 ) , 529 – 544 . 44 . Rusbult , C . , and Van Lange , P . Interaction , interdependence and rela - tionships . Annual Review of Psychology , 54 , ( 2002 ) , 351 – 375 . 45 . Scherer , F . M . , and Ross , D . Industrial Market Structure and Economic Per - formance . Boston : Houghton Mifflin , 1990 . 46 . Schumacher , U . Buyer structure and seller performance in U . S . manu - facturing industries . Review of Economics and Statistics , 73 , 2 ( May 1991 ) , 277 – 284 . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 IntERnAtIonAL JouRnAL of ELECtRonIC CoMMERCE 153 47 . Shaw , M . group dynamics : the Psychology of Small group Behavior . New York : McGraw - Hill , 1976 . 48 . Simmel , G . the Sociology of georg Simmel , trans . and ed . by K . H . Wolf . New York : Free Press , 1950 . 49 . Smith , V . L . Theory , experiment and economics . Journal of Economic Per - spectives , 3 , 1 ( 1989 ) , 151 – 169 . 50 . Smith , V . L . Markets , institutions , and experiments . In L . Nadel ( ed . ) , Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science . New York : Macmillan , 2003 , pp . 1070 – 1079 . 51 . SPSS . Linear mixed - effects modeling in SPSS : An introduction to the MIXED Procedure table . SPSS Technical Report , Chicago , 2005 . 52 . Steinmann , D . The effects of cognitive feedback and task complexity in multiple - cue probability learning . organizational Behavior and Human Perfor - mance , 15 , ( 1976 ) , 168 – 179 . 53 . Taylor , M . S . The motivational effects of task challenge : A laboratory investigation . organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 27 , ( 1981 ) , 255 – 278 . 54 . Ulli , B . Online marketplace for collective buying . U . S . Patent 20130006805 A1 , issued January 3 , 2013 . 55 . Zigurs , I . , and Buckland , B . K . A Theory of task technology fit and group support systems effectiveness . MIS Quarterly , 12 , 4 ( 1998 ) , 313 – 334 . 56 . Zwass , V . Co - creation : Toward a taxonomy and an integrated research perspective . International Journal of Electronic Commerce , 15 , 1 ( fall 2010 ) , 11 – 48 . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 154 PELAEz , Yu , And LAng Appendix A : Experimental Flow Chart D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 IntERnAtIonAL JouRnAL of ELECtRonIC CoMMERCE 155 Appendix B : Seller Screen Design Appendix C : Buyer Screen Design Figure C1 . Buyer Screen Without Communication Box D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 156 PELAEz , Yu , And LAng Figure C2 . Buyer Screen with Communication Box Appendix D : WTP Value Assignment Scheme Table D1 . WTP Values : 10 Numbers , Randomly Generated from U ( 25 , 100 ) V1 V2 V3 V4 V5 V6 V7 V8 V9 V10 Table D2 . WTP Rotation Method Round Larger group Smaller group Buyer 1 Buyer 2 Buyer 3 Buyer 4 Buyer 1 Buyer 2 1 V1 V2 V3 V4 V1 V2 2 V2 V3 V4 V5 V2 V3 3 V3 V4 V5 V6 V3 V4 4 V4 V5 V6 V7 V4 V5 5 V5 V6 V7 V8 V5 V6 6 V6 V7 V8 V9 V6 V7 7 V7 V8 V9 V10 V7 V8 8 V8 V9 V10 V1 V8 V9 9 V9 V10 V1 V2 V9 V10 10 V10 V1 V2 V3 V10 V1 D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015 IntERnAtIonAL JouRnAL of ELECtRonIC CoMMERCE 157 ALEXANDER PELAEZ ( alex . pelaez @ baruch . cuny . edu ) is a Ph . D . candidate in infor - mation systems at the Zicklin School of Business , Baruch College , City University of New York and a visiting assistant professor of information technology and quantitative methods at Hofstra University . He holds a B . A . in computer science and mathematics and an M . S . in computer science from New York University and an MBA in marketing from Hofstra University . His research interests include information economics , social media , health - care information technology , and technology management . MARTIN Y . YU ( yuechengyue @ gmail . com ) is a postdoctoral research fellow working on the IS & M team at the School of Information Systems , Singapore Management Univer - sity . He obtained his Ph . D . from Baruch College , City University of New York , in 2012 . His research focuses on improving IT - enabled exchange and collaboration platforms . His research has been published in Communications of the Association for Information Systems , International Journal of Electronic Collaboration , and other venues . KARL R . LANG ( karl . lang @ baruch . cuny . edu ) is a professor of information systems at the Zicklin School of Business , Baruch College , City University of New York . He holds a Ph . D . in management science from the University of Texas at Austin . His research interests include management of digital businesses , experimental economics , and issues related to the informational society . He held previous positions at the Free University of Berlin and the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology ( HKUST ) . His findings have been published in diverse journals , including Journal of Management Information Systems , Communications of the ACM , decision Support Systems , Long Range Planning , Computational Economics , and Annals of operations Research . He is an associate editor of decision Support Systems , Information & Management , and Electronic Commerce Research and Applications . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f V i c t o r i a ] a t 02 : 27 26 F e b r u a r y 2015