130 Brief Communication Dendritic organization of actin comet tails Lisa A . Cameron * , Tatyana M . Svitkina ‡ , Danijela Vignjevic ‡ , Julie A . Theriot * † and Gary G . Borisy ‡ Polymerization of actin filaments is necessary for Results and discussion The high density of actin filaments in comet tails formed both protrusion of the leading edge of crawling cells and propulsion of certain intracellular by pathogenic bacteria such as Listeria monocytogenes or Shigella flexneri has hindered their structural analysis . Con - pathogens [ 1 ] , and it is sufficient for generating force for bacterial motility in vitro [ 2 ] . Motile sequently , we examined tails formed by latex beads coated with the L . monocytogenes surface protein , ActA [ 11 ] , intracellular pathogens are associated with actin - rich comet tails containing many of the same where we could control density of the tails by varying bead size and ActA concentration . Like L . monocytogenes molecular components present in lamellipodia [ 3 ] , and this suggests that these two systems use a in infected host cells , ActA - coated beads in Xenopus egg cytoplasmic extracts initially form a symmetric cloud of similar mechanism for motility . However , available structural evidence suggests that the organization actin filaments , which subsequently breaks symmetry to form the comet tail [ 11 , 12 ] . The frequency of symmetry of comet tails differs from that of lamellipodia . Actin filaments in lamellipodia form branched arrays breaking for beads 0 . 5 m m in diameter increased dramati - cally when the crude extract was diluted to 40 % of its [ 4 ] , which are thought to arise by dendritic nucleation mediated by the Arp2 / 3 complex [ 5 , 6 ] . initial concentration , while the average speed decreased only moderately ( Figure 1 ) . In contrast , comet tails have been variously described as consisting of short , randomly oriented filaments [ 7 ] , with a higher degree of alignment at Photoactivation experiments have shown that fiducial the periphery [ 8 ] , or as containing long , straight axial marks placed on the actin polymer of comet tails inside filaments with a small number of oblique filaments infected cells remain stationary with respect to the host [ 9 ] . Because the assembly of pathogen - associated cell while the bacterium advances , and these results sug - comet tails has been used as a model system for gest that actin polymerization occurs exclusively at the lamellipodial protrusion , it is important to resolve bacterial surface [ 13 ] . To obtain direct evidence for the this apparent discrepancy . Here , using a platinum site of actin polymerization in tails associated with ActA - replica approach , we show that actin filament arrays coated beads in cytoplasmic extracts , we used the recently in comet tails in fact have a dendritic organization with the Arp2 / 3 complex localizing to Y - junctions as in lamellipodia [ 10 ] . Thus , comet tails and Figure 1 lamellipodia appear to share a common dendritic nucleation mechanism for protrusive motility . However , comet tails differ from lamellipodia in that their actin filaments are usually twisted and appear to be under significant torsional stress . Addresses : * Departments of Biochemistry and † Microbiology and Immunology , Beckman Center , Stanford University School of Medicine , Stanford , California 94305 , USA . ‡ Department of Cell and Molecular Biology , Northwestern University Medical School , Chicago , Illinois 60611 , USA . Correspondence : Tatyana M . Svitkina E - mail : t - svitkina @ northwestern . edu Received : 22 September 2000 Revised : 29 November 2000 Speed and propensity for comet tail formation under different Accepted : 29 November 2000 conditions . The bead size , ActA surface density , and extract concentration are listed for each of eight conditions in which bead Published : 23 January 2001 average speed ( m m / sec ) and percent tail formation were measured . Speed of 0 . 2 m m beads did not vary significantly among the conditions Current Biology 2001 , 11 : 130 – 135 tested . The number of beads tracked for average speed is listed . Between 100 and 1000 beads were scored at each condition for percent tail formation . 0960 - 9822 / 01 / $ – see front matter (cid:211) 2001 Elsevier Science Ltd . All rights reserved . Brief Communication 131 Figure 2 extracts . Beads with a 0 . 2 m m diameter formed tails and moved over a broad range of conditions , though more slowly than did 0 . 5 m m beads ( Figure 1 ) . Decreasing the density of ActA surface coating from the optimal 37 . 5 % [ 11 ] down to 3 % had little effect on average speed ( Figure 1 ) . However , structurally these tails and clouds were sparser and allowed for better visualization of actin fila - ment organization ( Figure 3e ) . The number of filaments contacting the bead surface as well as the filament density along the tail varied widely , and this finding is consistent with the theoretical predictions of fluctuation behavior previously reported for bead - tail association [ 12 ] . At sub - optimal ActA concentrations , often fewer than 10 fila - ments from the tail contacted the surface of 0 . 2 m m beads ( Figure 3e ) , but this seemed sufficient for motility . For the smallest beads tested , which were 0 . 05 m m in diameter , we could not observe persistent motility and Fluorescence speckle microscopy of comet tails . We incubated 0 . 5 m m beads with 37 % of their surface area coated with ActA in full - therefore could not measure average speed . In EM prepa - strength Xenopus egg extract in the presence of trace amounts of rations , these beads were never seen with more than one rhodamine - actin to obtain a speckled pattern of tail labeling . The filament attached ( Figure 3f ) . Many beads were devoid of time sequence shows movement of a bead in the rhodamine channel . filaments , and many branched filament assemblies lacked The formation of new speckles only at the front of the tail indicates that actin filament assembly is restricted to the bead - tail interface . beads ( not shown ) , both of which suggest that filaments Speckles remain stationary while the bead is moving . Colored arrows were nucleated at the bead surface but were subsequently point to individual actin speckles , with the same color referring to the detached . This is consistent with the hypothesis that the same speckle at different time points . Time is indicated in the upper - filament - bead interaction is not permanent but undergoes right corner in seconds . The scale bar represents 1 m m . cycles of association and dissociation . A bead with only one filament could easily lose it and therefore not move regularly , whereas the many crosslinked filaments of introduced speckle microscopy technique [ 14 , 15 ] . When larger beads ensure a more stable association and persis - comet tails were assembled on 0 . 5 m m ActA - coated beads tent movement . in the presence of trace amounts of rhodamine - actin , new actin speckles appeared only at the tail - bead interface as the bead advanced and , once formed , the speckles remained Y - junctions between actin filaments in sparse tails were clearly seen near the bead surface and throughout the stationary with respect to the substratum ( Figure 2 ) . The speckle pattern within the tail did not change significantly tail , and long , axial , nonbranching filaments were not ob - served in such tails . Y - junctions had the same characteris - with time except for stochastic disappearance of individ - ual speckles during depolymerization . Although the inten - tic angle of approximately 70 8 ( Figures 3 and 4a , b ) as in lamellipodia [ 4 , 10 ] or in Arp2 / 3 - actin assemblies in vitro sity of spots showed fluctuations , no new speckles appeared away from the bead . Thus , actin filaments assemble pri - [ 5 , 6 ] . Filament branches near the bead were frequently of similar length ( Figure 4a ) , and this finding suggests marily , if not exclusively , at the bead - tail interface . that branch formation occurred near the barbed end as in the observations of Pantaloni et al . [ 16 ] . In our system , Electron microscopy ( EM ) of comet tails under these conditions ( Figure 3a ) , as well as EM of bacterial tails however , branching at the barbed end may be explained simply by restriction of activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( see Supplementary material ) , revealed dense arrays of actin filaments . Dilution of the extract to 40 % did not by ActA , which is localized at the bead surface . This is consistent with biochemical evidence showing that ActA significantly change the overall structure of tails . The superposition of filaments precluded clear visualization stimulates Arp2 / 3 nucleation of actin polymerization [ 17 , 18 ] . However , Y - junctions were also often highly asym - of their organization in the tail core . However , Y - junctions between actin filaments were consistently observed in metric , with branches differing in length ( Figure 4e ) , and this observation suggests that capping activity terminated sparser regions , including on the surface of the bead away from where the tail emerged ( Figure 3b ) and at the sides the elongation of barbed ends . Some filaments appeared kinked at approximately 110 8 ( supplementary angle to ( Figure 3c ) and rear ( Figure 3d ) of the tails . 70 8 ) ( Figure 4e , i ) , which suggests that capping of a paren - tal filament could occur shortly after nucleation of a daugh - To gain insight into the structure of the tail core , we used smaller beads , lower ActA densities , and more - diluted ter filament . Actin clouds , which were always present in 132 Current Biology Vol 11 No 2 Figure 3 preparations , had the same basic structure as tails except for the distribution of the actin array around the bead . Localization of the Arp2 / 3 complex was performed by immunogold EM with a polyclonal antibody raised against the p21 - Arc component of the Arp2 / 3 complex [ 19 ] . In agreement with light microscopic data [ 19 ] , the Arp2 / 3 complex was found throughout the tails ( not shown ) . Us - ing sparse actin filament arrays , we detected the Arp2 / 3 complex at individual Y - junctions ( Figure 4c , d ) , as it was previously found for Y - junctions in lamellipodia [ 10 ] . These results are consistent with the concept that Y - junc - tions in comet tails are formed in the course of dendritic nucleation mediated by the Arp2 / 3 complex . To distinguish such Y - junctions from other kinds of junc - tions formed by crosslinks after nucleation , we analyzed filament polarity by decorating actin filaments with myo - sin subfragment 1 ( S1 ) and showed that Y - junctions had pointed ends at the junction and barbed ends facing away from the junction ( Figure 4h – j ) . This finding is consistent with the prediction of the dendritic nucleation model . Although these pointed - end - to - side Y - junctions were the most abundant crosslinks between actin filaments in tails and clouds , barbed - end - to - side ( Figure 4j ) and side - to - side junctions ( not shown ) were also observed . Even in the absence of a polarity marker , the existence of these cross - links could be deduced from the formation of closed loops of actin filaments ( Figure 4f , g ) . Such junctions indicate the presence in the comet tail of crosslinking molecules other than the Arp2 / 3 complex , such as a - actinin [ 20 ] . A striking feature of clouds and tails associated with ActA - coated beads was the twisted appearance of the actin filaments . The persistence length for a filament of pure actin is approximately 10 m m [ 21 ] , and they break at a radius of curvature of less than 180 nm [ 22 ] . However , many filaments in tails appeared curved or twisted over distances less than 1 m m , with some showing curvature of less than 50 nm ( e . g . , Figure 4f , g ) . Although we cannot exclude that some twisting may have resulted from sample preparation , we note that free filaments or filaments hav - ing just one point of interaction with another filament were usually straight , whereas twisted filaments were usu - ally restrained by at least two crosslinks ( Figure 4f , g ) . These observations suggest that twisting is a consequence of a force applied to crosslinked filaments . One possible origin of the force that causes twisting may be the binding energy of ADF / cofilin , which is known to change the intrinsic twist of actin filaments [ 23 ] and may also change Comet tails assembled by ActA - coated beads under different conditions . ( a – d ) 0 . 5 m m bead with 37 . 5 % of its surface area coated with ActA in 40 % Xenopus egg extract . ( a ) An overview shows the very dense array of twisted actin filaments in the tail . ( b - d ) 37 . 5 % of its surface area coated with ActA in 40 % extract is associated Enlargements of the boxed regions show Y - junctions ( arrows ) in with a single branching filament . The scale bars represent ( a ) 1 m m and different parts of the tail . ( e ) A 0 . 2 m m bead with 12 . 5 % of its ( e , f ) 0 . 2 m m . surface area coated with ActA in 30 % extract forms a sparse tail ; Y - junctions are seen everywhere in the tail . ( f ) A 0 . 05 m m bead with Brief Communication 133 Figure 4 Filament - filament interactions in comet tails . ( a , b ) Y - junctions at the bead surface . ( c , d ) Immunogold staining ( 10 nm colloidal gold ) with an antibody to p21 - Arc detects Arp2 / 3 complex at Y - junctions ( arrows ) . ( e ) Asymmetric Y - junctions where one of two sister branches is very short ( arrows ) result in a kinked filament appearance . ( f ) A twisted filament that has two points of interaction with another filament ; there is one interaction at the Y - junction , and there is a linkage near the free end . ( g ) Numerous closed loops within the tail suggest other types of filament crosslinking in addition to Y - junctions . ( h – j ) S1 decoration reveals filament polarity in different types of junctions ( arrowheads point to the direction of the pointed ends ) . ( h ) In a Y - junction at the bead , the barbed end of the shorter branch is associated with the bead , and the pointed end interacts with the side of another filament . ( i ) Y - junctions lacking one of the two branches give an impression of kinked filaments . ( j ) Barbed - end - to - side interactions between actin filaments ( asterisks ) in a tail . Conditions : 0 . 2 m m beads with ( a – d , f – h ) 12 . 5 % , ( i , j ) 6 % , or ( e ) 3 % of their surface area coated with ActA were incubated in ( f ) 20 % , ( c , d ) 25 % , ( a , b ) 30 % , ( e ) 40 % , or ( g – j ) 50 % extract . The scale bars represent ( a – g ) 50 nm and ( h – j ) 100 nm . its mechanical properties . Torsional stress operating on a mechanism for protrusive motility [ 10 ] . The simple ki - netic properties of comet tails in combination with their filament constrained at both ends would be expected to cause writhing of the filament and result in deformations defined structure permit a further evaluation of actin poly - merization – driven motility . The fluorescence speckle mi - such as we observe . croscopy assay demonstrates that moving comet tails as - semble actin filaments only at the bead - tail interface , The twisted nature of the filaments may explain the dis - parity between our observations and previous reports us - and this result is in agreement with conclusions drawn previously from photoactivation analysis [ 13 ] . A conse - ing thin - section EM . In thin sections , a dendritic and twisted structure would produce images of short , ran - quence of this property is that the spatial organization of the tail reflects the kinetics of actin assembly and there - domly oriented filaments , as has been reported [ 7 , 8 ] . The parallel axial filaments reported by Sechi et al . [ 9 ] fore permits us to infer the age of a structural element from its position within the tail , the youngest structures are definitely distinct from our observations , but these may be characteristic only of comet tails that have pro - being located next to the bead or bacterium and the older structures being located progressively farther away along truded substantially beyond the cellular surface and are in contact with the plasma membrane all along their the tail . Conservation of the dendritic structure through - out the length of the tail , therefore , implies continuous length . Such protrusions have different protein composi - tion from that of intracellular tails [ 9 ] , and the actin fila - nucleation of new filaments at the bead surface . Since barbed filament ends arise only at the bead - tail interface , ment half life is more than 10 - fold longer than the half life in intracellular tails [ 24 ] . the abundance of apparently free barbed ends throughout the tail suggests both the continuous release of the barbed ends of filaments from the bead surface and their capping . Our observations of comet tails associated with ActA - Both characteristics are predicted by the array treadmilling coated beads demonstrate significant similarity at the su - model [ 3 ] but have not been previously demonstrated pramolecular level with the structure of lamellipodia in experimentally . three distinct ways : dendritic organization of comet tails , localization of the Arp2 / 3 complex to branch points , and pointed - end - to - side polarity of Y - junctions . These struc - The observation that a small number of actin filaments interacts with the bead surface at any one time suggests tural features are consistent with the hypothesis that comet tails , like lamellipodia , use a dendritic nucleation that only a few working filaments are needed to generate 134 Current Biology Vol 11 No 2 David and Lucile Packard Foundation ( J . A . T . ) , and by American Cancer the force required for motility . Consistent with this obser - Society grant CB - 95 ( G . G . B ) . vation , significant reduction of ActA density on the bead surface and the concomitant reduction of actin filament density in the tail did not substantially affect the rate of References 1 . Dramsi S , Cossart P : Intracellular pathogens and the actin bead movement . This finding suggests that the number cytoskeleton . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1998 , 14 : 137 - 166 . of pushing filaments was not a limiting factor under our 2 . Loisel TP , Boujemaa R , Pantaloni D , Carlier M - F : Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure experimental conditions . The elastic Brownian ratchet proteins . Nature 1999 , 401 : 613 - 616 . model for force generation by actin polymerization [ 25 ] 3 . Borisy GG , Svitkina TM : Actin machinery : pushing the envelope . requires some freedom of association for an individual Curr Opin Cell Biol 2000 , 12 : 104 - 112 . 4 . Svitkina TM , Verkhovsky AB , McQuade KM , Borisy GG : Analysis filament to grow and push . Implicit in this concept is that of the actin - myosin II system in fish epidermal keratocytes : only an ensemble of filaments can provide a statistically mechanism of cell body translocation . J Cell Biol 1997 , 139 : 397 - 415 . stable association of the machinery with the interface 5 . Mullins RD , Heuser JA , Pollard TD : The interaction of Arp2 / 3 and support persistent bead motility . Filaments in the complex with actin : nucleation , high affinity pointed end ensemble may not all be behaving identically at any given capping , and formation of branching networks of filaments . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998 , 95 : 6181 - 6186 . time ; while some may be adding subunits and pushing , 6 . Blanchoin L , Amann KJ , Higgs HN , Marchand JB , Kaiser DA , Pollard others may be in transient tight association . The working TD : Direct observation of dendritic actin filament networks comet tail seems to have a high degree of crosslinking nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP / Scar proteins . Nature 2000 , 404 : 1007 - 1011 . in addition to branching , which allows accumulation of 7 . Tilney LG , Portnoy DA : Actin filaments and the growth , torsional stresses to twist the actin filaments , the signifi - movement , and spread of the intracellular bacterial parasite , Listeria monocytogenes . J Cell Biol 1989 , 109 : 1597 - 1608 . cance of which remains to be determined . Our results 8 . Zhukarev V , Ashton F , Sanger JM , Sanger JW , Shuman H : suggest that a dendritic nucleation mechanism is responsi - Organization and structure of actin filament bundles in ble for creating a coherent filament ensemble and that an Listeria - infected cells . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 1995 , 30 : 229 - 246 . 9 . Sechi AS , Wehland J , Small JV : The isolated comet tail array treadmilling process is responsible for maintaining pseudopodium of Listeria monocytogenes : a tail of two actin it in a steady state that can generate the pushing force filament populations , long and axial and short and random . J Cell Biol 1997 , 137 : 155 - 167 . necessary to propel bacteria or ActA - coated beads . 10 . Svitkina TM , Borisy GG : Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin in dendritic organization and Materials and methods treadmilling of actin filament array in lamellipodia . J Cell Biol 1999 , 145 : 1009 - 1026 . Purification of ActA , coating of polystyrene beads ( Polysciences ) , and 11 . Cameron LA , Footer MJ , van Oudenaarden A , Theriot JA : Motility light microscopic motility assays were performed as described [ 11 ] . For of ActA protein - coated microspheres driven by actin motility assays with fluorescent speckle microscopy , rhodamine - actin polymerization . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999 , 96 : 4908 - 4913 . was added to extracts at 150 - fold lower concentrations compared to 12 . van Oudenaarden A , Theriot JA : Cooperative symmetry - breaking regular conditions , and this resulted in a proportion of labeled actin of by actin polymerization in a model for cell motility . Nat Cell approximately 0 . 1 % . To allow for easy localization of tails , we also added Biol 1999 , 1 : 493 - 499 . fluorescein - a - actinin to the extracts at concentrations sufficient for con - 13 . Theriot JA , Mitchison TJ , Tilney LG , Portnoy DA : The rate of actin - tinuous tail labeling and visualized it in a different channel . For EM , thicker based motility of intracellular Listeria monocytogenes motility chambers than those for light microscopic assays allowed us to equals the rate of actin polymerization . Nature 1992 , 357 : 257 - 260 . decrease the shearing force upon the separation of coverslips . A 2 m l 14 . Waterman - Storer CM , Salmon ED : Actomyosin - based retrograde sampleofmotilitymix ( ActA - coatedbeadsin Xenopus eggextractsupple - flow of microtubules in the lamella of migrating epithelial mented with tetramethylrhodamine iodoacetamide – labeled G - actin and cells influences microtubule dynamic instability and turnover an ATP - generating mix ) was sandwiched between two coverslips ( 22 3 and is associated with microtubule breakage and 22 mm and 22 3 18 mm ) separated by two strips ( 2 mm wide ) of teflon treadmilling . J Cell Biol 1997 , 139 : 417 - 434 . tape attached near the edges of the larger coverslip . After incubation 15 . Keating TJ , Borisy GG : Speckle microscopy : when less is more . at room temperature in a humid environment , chambers were opened Curr Biol 2000 , 10 : R22 - R24 . in a dish containing 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 in Xenopus buffer ( XB ) [ 11 ] with 16 . Pantaloni D , Boujemaa R , Didry D , Gounon P , Carlier MF : The Arp2 / 3 complex branches filament barbed ends : functional or without 2 m M phalloidin . The structure of the tails was similar in the antagonism with capping proteins . Nat Cell Biol 2000 , 2 : 385 - presence or absence of phalloidin . The fluorescence intensity of comet 391 . tails in the living population did not significantly change after detergent 17 . Welch MD , Iwamatsu A , Mitchison TJ : Actin polymerization is treatment and fixation , and this finding indicates that our procedure was induced by Arp2 / 3 protein complex at the surface of Listeria adequate to preserve filaments in tails . Although some tails were washed monocytogenes . Nature 1997 , 385 : 265 - 269 . out during this procedure , many tails remained attached to the coverslip . 18 . Zalevsky J , Grigorova I , Mullins RD : Activation of the Arp2 / 3 Coverslips were washed with XB , fixed with 2 % glutaraldehyde , and complex by the Listeria ActA protein : ActA binds two actin processed for EM as described [ 26 ] . Immunostaining for the Arp2 / 3 monomers and three subunits of the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Biol complex [ 10 ] and S1 decoration [ 26 ] were done as described . Chem 2000 , in press . 19 . Welch MD , DePace AH , Verma S , Iwamatsu A , Mitchison TJ : The human Arp2 / 3 complex is composed of evolutionarily Supplementary material conserved subunits and is localized to cellular regions of A supplementary figure showing comet tails assembled by L . monocyto - dynamic actin filament assembly . J Cell Biol 1997 , 138 : 375 - genes in full - strength Xenopus egg extract can be found with the elec - 384 . tronic version of this article at http : / / current - biology . com / supmatin . htm . 20 . Dabiri GA , Sanger JM , Portnoy DA , Southwick FS : Listeria monocytogenes moves rapidly through the host - cell cytoplasm by inducing directional actin assembly . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA Acknowledgements 1990 , 87 : 6068 - 6072 . We gratefully acknowledge Peter Jackson for providing X . laevis to make egg 21 . Ott A , Magnasco M , Simon A , Libchaber A : Measurement of the extract and Steve Limbach for excellent maintenance of electron microscopic persistence length of polymerized actin using fluorescence equipment . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants R01 AI36929 ( J . A . T ) . and GM 25062 ( G . G . B ) , by a fellowship from the microscopy . Physics Review E 1993 , 48 : R1642 - R1645 . Brief Communication 135 22 . Arai Y , Yasuda R , Akashi K , Harada Y , Miyata H , Kinosita K Jr , Itoh H : Tying a molecular knot with optical tweezers . Nature 1999 , 399 : 446 - 448 . 23 . McGough A , Pope B , Chiu W , Weeds A : Cofilin changes the twist of F - actin : implications for actin filament dynamics and cellular function . J Cell Biol 1997 , 138 : 771 - 781 . 24 . Robbins JR , Barth AI , Marquis H , de Hostos EL , Nelson WJ , Theriot JA : Listeriamonocytogenes exploitsnormalhostcellprocesses to spread from cell to cell . J Cell Biol 1999 , 146 : 1333 - 1350 . 25 . Mogilner A , Oster G : Cell motility driven by actin polymerization . Biophys J 1996 , 71 : 3030 - 3045 . 26 . Svitkina TM , Borisy GG : Correlative light and electron microscopy of the cytoskeleton of cultured cells . Methods Enzymol 1998 , 298 : 570 - 592 .