Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33483 - 7 Membrane - assisted assembly and selective secretory autophagy of enteroviruses Selma Dahmane 1 , 2 , 3 , Adeline Kerviel 4 , Dustin R . Morado 5 , Kasturika Shankar 1 , 2 , 3 , Björn Ahlman 1 , 2 , 3 , Michael Lazarou 6 , Nihal Altan - Bonnet 4 & Lars - Anders Carlson 1 , 2 , 3 Enteroviruses are non - enveloped positive - sense RNA viruses that cause diverse diseases in humans . Their rapid multiplication depends on remodeling of cytoplasmic membranes for viral genome replication . It is unknown how virions assemble around these newly synthesized genomes and how they are then loaded into autophagic membranes for release through secretory autophagy . Here , we use cryo - electron tomography of infected cells to show that poliovirus assembles directly on replication membranes . Pharmacological untethering of capsids from membranes abrogates RNA encapsidation . Our data directly visualize a membrane - bound half - capsid as a prominent virion assembly intermediate . Assembly progression past this intermediate depends on the class III phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase VPS34 , a key host - cell autophagy factor . On the other hand , the canonical autophagy initiator ULK1 is shown to restrict virion production since its inhibition leads to increased accumulation of virions in vast intracellular arrays , followed by an increased vesicular release at later time points . Finally , we identify multiple layers of selectivity in virus - induced autophagy , with a strong selection for RNA - loaded virions over empty capsids and the segregation of virions from other types of autophagosome contents . These ﬁ ndings provide an integrated structural framework for multiple stages of the poliovirus life cycle . Enteroviruses are a major genus of positive - sense RNA viruses within the Picornaviridae family . They causea wide variety of human diseases such as poliomyelitis ( poliovirus ) , related acute ﬂ accid myelitis con - ditions ( e . g . , EV - D68 ) , and viral myocarditis ( Coxsackievirus B3 ) . The enterovirus particle is a non - enveloped particle of ~ 30nm diameter , encapsidating a single - stranded RNA genome of about 7500 nucleotides . Upon infection , enteroviruses rapidly remodel cytoplasmic mem - branes to create an optimal environment for virus replication 1 – 3 . This startswithdisassemblyofthesecretorypathway , inparticulartheGolgi apparatus as seen by dispersion of Golgi marker proteins throughout the cytoplasm 4 . Ensuing single - membrane tubules and vesicles are the site of viral RNA replication ( along with later double - membrane vesi - cles ) , but little is known about the site of virion assembly 3 , 5 . The viral genome has preferential interaction sites with the capsid but contains no known high - af ﬁ nity packaging signal suf ﬁ cient for RNA loading into capsids 6 , 7 . This suggests that virion assembly may take place in immediate vicinity of RNA production sites to ensure speci ﬁ c RNA encapsidation , which is supported by the ﬁ nding that the viral membrane - bound helicase 2C interacts with the capsid protein VP3 7 , 8 . Received : 11 March 2022 Accepted : 20 September 2022 Check for updates 1 Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics , Umeå University , Umeå , Sweden . 2 Wallenberg Centre for Molecular Medicine , Umeå University , Umeå , Sweden . 3 TheLaboratoryforMolecularInfectionMedicineSweden ( MIMS ) , UmeåUniversity , Umeå , Sweden . 4 LaboratoryofHost - PathogenDynamics , National Heart Lung and Blood Institute , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD , USA . 5 Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics , Science for Life Laboratory , Stockholm University , Stockholm , Sweden . 6 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Biomedicine Discovery Institute , Monash University , Melbourne , Australia . e - mail : lars - anders . carlson @ umu . se Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5986 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 ( ) : , ; 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 ( ) : , ; A biochemically distinct late stage of replication starts around 6 h post - infection ( h p . i . ) . It is characterized by the lipidation of host proteins belonging to the LC3 subfamily of ATG8s , a hallmark of the autophagy pathway 9 . Induction of LC3 lipidation in infected cells is mediated by the viral protein 2BC and is independent of the ULK1 / ULK2 protein kinases that initiate canonical autophagy 9 , 10 . At this late stage , the single - membrane tubes and vesicles are observed to be replaced by ( suggested to transform into ) double - membrane struc - tures reminiscent of autophagic membranes 11 , 12 . The inherently non - envelopedpicornaviruses have recentlybeen shown toleavecells non - lytically as groups of virions contained in LC3 - positive lipid vesicles , utilizing the secretory autophagy pathway 13 – 17 . It thus seems plausible that autophagy - like double - membrane structures observed ininfected cellsrelate tonon - lytic virus egress . However , conventionalEMsample preparation istoodestructive to macromolecularstructuretoallowan insituanalysisofautophagosomecontents — theexperimentneededto directly test this hypothesis . To shed light on how enteroviruses are assembled and packaged into autophagosomes , we took advantage of recent advances in focused - ion - beam milling and cryo - electron tomography 18 – 22 . The in situ structures of poliovirus - infected cells revealed that enter - oviruses assemble directly on replication membranes . Completion of virus assembly requires the host lipid kinase VPS34 , and RNA loading into virions correlates with their membrane tethering . Inhibiting the initiation of canonical autophagy surprisingly increased virion pro - duction and release . The cryo - electron tomograms further revealed that virus - induced autophagy has a striking degree of selectivity , selecting RNA - containing virions over empty capsids , and segregating virions from other types of autophagosome contents . Results Cryo - electron tomography reveals that poliovirus RNA loading correlates with capsid tethering to membranes Toinvestigateenterovirusassembly insitu , weinfectedHeLacellswith poliovirus type 1 and imaged the cytoplasm with cryo - electron tomo - graphy at different time points post infection ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . At 3 h p . i . ﬁ rst new virions had already assembled in the cells ( Sup - plementary Fig . 2a – d ) . Tomograms recorded at 6h p . i . showed a more starkly remodeled cytoplasm ( Fig . 1a , b , Supplementary Movie 1 ) . Compared to uninfected cells and 3h p . i . , there was a signi ﬁ cant increase in both open cup - shaped structures resembling phagophores and closed double - membrane vesicles ( Fig . 1a , b , Supplementary Fig . 2a – g ) . These membranes will collectively be referred to as autophagy - like membranes ( ALMs ) . From the tomograms we could clearly distinguish empty capsids from RNA - loaded virions ( Fig . 1a , b ) . At 6h p . i . the cytoplasmic con - centration of empty and RNA - loaded particles wasonaverage 7 and 20 times higher than at 3 h p . i . , respectively , as measured by a template matching procedure ( Fig . 1e ) . Strikingly , both empty capsids and RNA - loaded virions were frequently tethered to membranes through mac - romolecular complexes ( Fig . 1a – d , yellow arrowheads ) . The tether appeared to have a de ﬁ ned size and keep the virions at a de ﬁ ned distance from the membrane . A subtomogram average of 179 tethered virions revealed the tether as having a height of ~ 6 nm , width ~ 12nm and an approximate molecular mass of ~ 230kDa ( Fig . 1f , Supplemen - tary Fig . 2j ) . At 6h p . i . , virions were tethered to both single - membrane tubes and vesicles ( SMs ) and ALMs , and the fraction of empty vs . RNA - loaded virions was similar on both types of membranes ( Fig . 1f ) . We noticed that virions were only tethered to the outer face of ALMs and SMs , whereas virions engulfed by ALMs had lost the tether ( Fig . 1a , red arrow and Fig . 1g ) . The visualization of capsids tethered to replication mem - branes suggested that capsid RNA loading took place on mem - branes rather than in the cytosol . To test this we used ( 5 - 3 , 4 - dichlorophenyl ) - methylhydantoin ( henceforth Hydantoin ) , an antiviral drug that inhibits RNA loading of PV capsids 23 . Cells were infected with PV and treated with Hydantoin at a concentration of 50 µ g / ml that did not interfere with viral RNA replication 23 ( Sup - plementary Fig . 4h ) before processing for cryo - ET at 6 h p . i . This revealed both an increase in the fraction of empty capsids to ~ 70 % and a ~ 3 - fold decrease in the fraction of tethered capsids in Hydantoin - treated cells ( Fig . 1h – k ) . Notably , that the abundance of SMs and ALMs remained unchanged ( Supplementary Fig . 2h ) . Together , these data show that newly assembled poliovirus cap - sids are tethered to the cytoplasmic face of SMs and ALMs and tethering facilitates viral RNA encapsidation . Enterovirus capsid assembly takes place on membranes and requires VPS34 activity Tomograms of infected cells at 6h p . i . frequently contained novel structures that had a size and shape consistent with partial capsids ( Fig . 2a – e , Supplementary Fig . 3a , b ) . Strikingly , in 15 tomograms of infected cells , 96 % of these bona ﬁ de capsid intermediates were membrane - associated ( 58 % SM , 38 % ALM ) whereasonly4 % werefound in the cytoplasm ( Fig . 2f ) . The capsid intermediates were clearly thin - ner than , and often discontinuous with , the replication membranes , ruling out that this was an extension of the lipid membrane ( Fig . 2b – d , Supplementary Fig . 3a – e ) . The localization of capsid assembly inter - mediatestomembraneswassupportedbyanimmuno ﬂ uorescenceco - staining using an anti - LC3 antibody and the monoclonal antibody A12 which speci ﬁ cally recognizes the canyon region of assembled capsids and capsomers 24 , showing a high degree of colocalisation ( Supple - mentary Fig . 3f , g ) . The capsid intermediates contained variable luminal densities and were observed at different angles to the mem - branes ( Fig . 2b – e ) . Due to this structural variability , we characterized them by a simple angle of closure , which resulted in a unimodal dis - tribution with an average of 169° , i . e . , closely corresponding to half a capsid ( Fig . 2g ) . The clear clustering around a single value indicates that the membrane - bound capsid intermediate is a single , or a set of closely related , molecular species . Given the frequent association of partial and complete capsids with ALMs , we inhibited autophagy using two selective inhibitors : MRT68921 and Vps34 - IN1 . MRT68921 inhibits the ULK1 / ULK2 protein kinases that initiate canonical autophagy 25 , whereas Vps34 - IN1 inhibits the lipid kinase VPS34 that produces phosphatidylinositol - 3 - phosphate ( PI ( 3 ) P ) on the growing phagophore membrane 26 . Con - sistent with previous studies , PV - induced ULK - independent LC3 lipi - dation at 6 h p . i . 10 . However , co - treating infected cells with both inhibitors decreased LC3 lipidation ( Supplementary Fig . 4a ) . Tomo - grams of co - treated cells revealed reduced membrane proliferation and a two - orders - of - magnitude decrease in both empty and RNA - loaded capsids ( Fig . 3a – e ; Supplementary Fig . 4b and Supplementary Movie 2 ) . However , the number and distribution of membrane - bound capsid intermediates were unaffected ( Fig . 3e ; Supplementary Fig . 4c , d ) . The stalled progress from capsid intermediates to full capsids meant that we could observe a rare , more advanced assembly stage that may represent the transition from the half - capsid intermediate to a complete membrane - tethered virion ( Fig . 3d ) . Moreover Vps34 - IN1 treatment alone had a similar effect as the combination of inhibitors ( Supplementary Fig . 4e – h ) . The decrease in intracellular assembled virus was mirrored by a decrease in virus release from VPS34 - inhibited cells ( Fig . 3f , Supplementary Fig . 4k ) . Notably , VPS34 inhibition caused adecreaseinintracellularviralRNA , suggestingthatareductioninviral RNA replication might be the inhibitory mechanism of Vps34 - IN1 on capsid assembly ( Supplementary Fig . 4h ) . Since VPS34 inhibition decreased LC3 lipidation , we sought to determine if Vps34 - IN1 ’ s effect on virus assembly was mediated by ATG8 family proteins . We infected CRISPR - generated triple knock out ( 3KO ) cells of the LC3 subfamily , and 3KO cells of the GABARAP sub - family and imaged them at 6h p . i . The only signi ﬁ cant change to Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33483 - 7 Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5986 2 membranestructureswasadecreaseinALMsininfected LC3 3KOcells ( Supplementary Fig 4i ) . This was paralleled by a decrease of intracel - lular virions in LC3 KO cells ( Fig . 3g ) . Interestingly , those areas of LC3 3KO cytoplasm that still contained ALMs also contained virions , whereas areas with large SMs were devoid of virions ( Fig . 3h , i ) . By comparison , GABARAP 3KO cells still robustly accumulated ALMs ( Fig . 3j ) , and there was less change in intracellular virus concentration upon GABARAP deletion ( Fig . 3g ) . Together this indicates that VPS34 activity , rather than any individual ATG8 protein , are necessary for enterovirus assembly . This notion was strengthened by the observa - tion that VPS34 inhibition further reduced virus release from LC3 3KO cells , similar to its effect on wild - type cells ( Fig . 3k ) . Fig . 1 | Cryo - electron tomography allows the visualization of poliovirus repli - cation and assembly sites in situ . a Slice through a representative cryo - electron tomogram of a lamella milled through a PV - infected cell at 6h p . i . , revealing PV - induced SM ( single membranes ) and ALM ( autophagy - like membranes ) prolifera - tion . Yellow arrowheads indicate densities tethering intracellular empty capsids and darker RNA - loaded virions to membranes . Red arrowhead indicates a virion enclosed inside a DMV ( double - membrane vesicle ) , proximal but not tethered to the membrane . b Segmentationof the tomogram presentedin ( a ) . Colorlabelsare de ﬁ ned for each structure . Empty capsids ( pink ) and RNA - loaded virions ( red ) are represented by their subtomogram averages . c , d Magni ﬁ ed view of an empty capsid and RNA - loaded virion tethered to a DMV shown in ( a ) with black boxes . e Percentage of empty ( n = 223 ) and RNA - loaded virions ( n = 281 ) observed on SM andALM . f Subtomogramaverageofthetetheredviralcapsidat70Åresolution . Its height and width are marked , and its molecular mass is estimated to be ~ 230kDa . g Percentage of ( n ) virions observed on the outside ( n = 520 , blue ) and inside ( n = 22 , red ) of ALM having avisible tether to amembrane asindicated inthe inset . h Percentage of empty capsids observed in ( n ) tomograms of untreated ( n = 43 ) and Hydantoin - treated cells ( n = 14 ) at 6h p . i . , as measured by template matching . Horizontallines represent the average . i Cryo - electron tomogramof a PV - infected , Hydantoin - treated cell at 6h p . i . , containing several empty capsids which are not tethered to the surrounding membranes . j Segmentation of the tomogram in ( i ) . Color labels for each structure are the same in ( b ) and empty capsids are repre - sented by their subtomogram average . k Percentage of tethered virions as observed in ( n ) cryo - tomograms of untreated ( n = 33 ) and Hydantoin - treated ( n = 14 ) cellsat6hp . i . Horizontallinesrepresenttheaverage . Inallgraphs , eachdot corresponds to one tomogram analyzed ( see also Supplementary Table 2 ) . Statis - tical signi ﬁ cance by unpaired two - tailed Student ’ s t test : g * * * * p < 0 . 0001 , h * * p = 0 . 0138 , k * * p = 0 . 0089 . Scale bars : a – i 100nm , c , d 50nm . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33483 - 7 Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5986 3 In summary , enterovirus capsid assembly takes place on mem - branes with a prominent half - capsid intermediate , and activity of the lipid kinase VPS34 is required for assembly to progress beyond this intermediate . Inhibition of ULK1 leads to formation of intracellular virus arrays and increased vesicular release Although inhibition of the canonical autophagy initiators ULK1 and ULK2 did not affect PV - induced LC3 lipidation or the generation of ALMs ( Fig . 4a , b , Supplementary Fig . 5a ) , we found that ULK - inhibited cells contained large cytoplasmic arrays of virions ( Fig . 4a , b , Supple - mentary Movie 3 ) . The arrays contained several hundred virions , vir - tually all RNA - loaded , in what seemed to be a close - packing arrangement . Virus arrays were also visible in freeze - substituted sec - tions , which allowed sampling of a larger number of cells ( Supple - mentary Fig . 5c – e ) . Arrays were found in 3 % of untreated cells and 56 % of ULK - inhibited cells ( Fig . 4c ) , a signi ﬁ cantly higher fraction , showing that ULK inhibition indeed upregulates intracellular virus array for - mation . Re ﬂ ecting the fact that virions in arrays are not membrane - proximal , the fraction of membrane - tethered virions was reduced in ULK - inhibited cells ( Supplementary Fig . 5b ) . The formation of virus arrays may either be due to a defect in virion release from ULK - inhibited cells , or the arrays may be part of an increased intracellular virion pool en route to release . The ‘ release scenario ’ was supported by the observation that RNA - loaded virions were abundant in ALMs in ULK - inhibited cells ( Fig . 4d – g ) . Multilamellar structures , previously reported to be occasionally present in PV - infected cells 12 , were frequently seen in ULK - inhibited cells . To further discriminate between these two scenarios , we measured released infectious virus from ULK - inhibited cells at different time points and compared it to untreated cells . While extracellular PV titers were unchanged at 6 h p . i . , we measured one order of magnitude increase over untreated cells at 8 h p . i . ( Fig . 4h ) . To determine if the increased virus release at late time point still took place through secretory autophagy , we isolated the extracellular vesicular fraction . A strong increase in capsid protein as well as lipidated LC3 from ULK - inhibited cells con ﬁ rmed that the virions were released in vesicles positive for LC3 ( Fig . 4i ) . Imaging the periphery of non - FIB - milled , ULK - inhibited , and PV - infected cells we were also able to record a cryo - electron tomogram of extracellular vesicles containing RNA - loaded virions just outside the PM ( Fig . 4j – n ) . Taken together , ULK activity in infected cells is not necessary for downstream autophagy processes such as LC3 lipidation but instead appears to put a break on the intracellular accumulation and vesicular release of virions . Selective packaging of RNA - loaded virion and contents segre - gation in autophagy - like membranes The observation that virions are tethered to the outside of ALMs but not to the inside ( Fig . 1g ) indicated that cryo - ET can provide structural insights into the process of virion packaging into autophagy - like membranes . Indeed , the tomograms of PV - infected cells at 6 h p . i . showed several stages of autophagic engulfment of virions , ranging from wide open phagophores to completely sealed DMVs ( Fig . 5a – e ) . We then re - evaluated the statistics of empty capsids and RNA - loaded virions at 6h p . i . taking particle location ( outside or inside ALMs ) into consideration . Strikingly , this revealed that autophagic engulfment strongly selects for RNA - loaded virions . Outside ALMs , empty capsids represent 23 % of particles , whereas only 1 % of particles in ALMs were empty capsids ( Fig . 5f ) . Fig . 2 | A membrane - bound capsid intermediate . a 3D segmentation of a tomo - gram showing capsid assembly intermediates , containing luminal densities , directlyboundtosingle - membranetubules ( correspondingsliceinSupplementary Fig . 3a , b ) . b – e Zoomed tomogram slices and segmentations of the capsids assembly intermediates marked in ( a ) . f Percentage of capsid assembly intermediates found on SMs , ALMs or not associated with membranes , as counted in 29 tomograms at 6h p . i . g Distribution of capsid intermediate closures ( α ) , as de ﬁ nedintheinset , measuredat6hp . i . Averageclosurewas169° ( SD = 26° , n = 59 ) . Scale bars : 50nm . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33483 - 7 Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5986 4 Fig . 3 | VPS34 inhibition stalls PV assembly at the half - capsid intermediate . a Cryo - electron tomogram of a PV - infected cell co - treated with Vps34 - IN1 and MRT68921 at 6h p . i . b – d Magni ﬁ ed views of capsid intermediates indicated in ( a ) , and their corresponding segmentations . Capsid intermediates ( red ) , intra - capsid densities ( yellow ) , ALM ( purple ) , SM ( green ) , luminal densities ( orange ) . d The magni ﬁ ed view shows a near - complete capsid tethered to a double - membrane vesicle . e Concentration of intracellular capsid intermediates , empty capsids and RNA - loaded virions as observed in ( n ) tomograms of untreated ( n = 51 ) and Vps34 - IN1 + MRT68921 ( n = 32 ) treated cells at 6h p . i . , bars represent the averages ( see also Supplementary Table 2 ) . Statistical signi ﬁ cance by unpaired two - tailed Stu - dent ’ s t test ; * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . f Released virus titer at 0 , 6 , and 8h p . i . in WT cells treated with DMSO , Vps34 - IN1 , and Vps34 - IN1 + MRT68921 . Bars represent the means of biological triplicates±SEM . g Concentration of intracellular empty cap - sids and RNA - loaded virions observed in ( n ) tomograms WT ( n = 51 ) , LC3 ( n = 24 ) , and GABARAP 3KO ( n = 13 ) cells at 6h p . i . Statistical signi ﬁ cance by unpaired two - tailed Student ’ s t test ; * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . h , i Slices through representative cryo - electrontomogramsoflamellasmilledthroughPV - infectedLC33KOcellsat6hp . i . , revealingtwotypes of membraneproliferation : largesingle - membranevesicles ( h ) and ALM proliferation ( i ) . j Slice of cryo - tomogram of a GABARAP 3KO PV - infected cell at 6h p . i . , where ALMs were observed . ( h – j ) Red arrowheads indicate the presenceof RNA - loaded virions . k Time course ofPVrelease from LC33KOcellsin the presence or absence of autophagy inhibitors as indicated in the ﬁ gure . Error bars represent the means of biological triplicates±SEM . Scale bars : a 100nm , b – d 50nm , h – j 200nm . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33483 - 7 Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5986 5 The tomograms allowed further classi ﬁ cation of ALMs based on their contents ( Fig . 5g – m ) . At 52 % , the most abundant class was ALMs containing RNA - loaded virions ( Fig . 5a – e , g ) . The second most abun - dant class , at 15 % , was ALMs containing amorphous granular material that was clearly denser than the remaining cytoplasmic contents ( Fig . 5g , h ) . These dense granules were frequently co - packed with virions ( Fig . 5g , j ) . One distinct class representing 13 % of ALMs con - tained tightly packed bundles of protein ﬁ laments ( Fig . 5g , i , Supple - mentary Fig . 6a , b , Supplementary Movie 4 ) . As opposed to the dense granules , ﬁ laments were rarely co - packaged with other ALM contents ( Fig . 5g ) . The ﬁ laments were not affected by VPS34 inhibition , but instead completely absent in both LC3 and GABARAP 3KO cells VP1 LC3I LC3II EVs 8hpi 10 3 10 4 10 5 10 6 10 7 DMSOMRT68921 pe r c en t age o f c e ll s DMSO MRT68921 PV arraysno arrays 0 50 100 M R T 68921 D M S O e x t r a c e ll u l a r T CD I 50 / m l 0 0 h p . i . 6 h p . i . 8 h p . i . 56 % 97 % 3 % 44 % + - - + + - - + + c i h j k l m n PM PM a b e d f g ( m ) ( k - l ) z + 20 nm z + 10 nm 35 KDa 15 KDa Fig . 4 | InhibitionofULK1 / ULK2inducesformationofintracellularvirusarrays and increases infectious virus release . a Cryo - electron tomogram of an MRT68921 - treated , PV - infected cell containing cytoplasmic virion arrays . b Segmentation of the tomogram in ( a ) . Virions are represented by their sub - tomogram averages . Colors are as in Fig . 1b . c Percentage of cells containing virus arrays in DMSO and MRT68921 - treated cells as measured from freeze - substituted sections . d – g Several examples of virion recruitment to ALMs in tomograms of MRT68921 - treated , PV - infected cells . h Time course of PV release from MRT68921 and DMSO - treated cells . Error bars represent the means of biological triplicates± SEM . i Westernblotanalysisofextracellularvesicles ( EVs ) harvestedat8hp . i . from infected cells treated or not with MRT68921 . j Slice through a cryo - electron tomogramrecorded attheplasmamembrane ( PM ) ofanon - FIB - milled MRT68921 - treated , PV - infected cell . k – m Magni ﬁ ed views of PV - containing released vesicles indicatedin ( j ) . n 3Dsegmentationofthetomogramin ( j ) . PM ( yellow ) , RNA - loaded virions ( red ) , extracellular vesicles ( purple ) , luminal densities ( orange ) . Scale bars : 100nm . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33483 - 7 Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5986 6 ( Supplementary Fig . 6c ) . This is the opposite dependence on autop - hagy host factors than that displayed by virus assembly ( Fig . 3g ) . We determined the ﬁ lament structure by subtomogram averaging to 18 . 5 Å resolution , which yielded a helix with an average diameter of 10nm , 29° twist and 52Å rise per subunit ( Supplementary Fig . 6d , e ) . From this map the identity of the ﬁ lament could not be positively determined , but the map did allow de ﬁ nitive exclusion of protein ﬁ laments with known structure . A systematic comparison of the ﬁ la - ment to all relevant mammalian protein ﬁ laments in the electron microscopy database allowed exclusion of all except decorated actin ﬁ laments ( Supplementary Fig . 7 and Supplementary Table 3 for com - plete list ) . Thus , the ﬁ lament iseither actin decorated by a vinculin - like actin - binding protein , or an unknown viral or cellular protein ﬁ lament of similar size and shape . Altogether , these data reveal an exquisite speci ﬁ city in virus - induced autophagy : autophagy - like membranes selectively engulf RNA - loaded virions while excluding empty capsids , and co - package virions with dense granular material while segregating them from a second class of ALMs that contains bundles of protein ﬁ laments . Discussion Herewe present anin situ structuralanalysis of enterovirus replication by cryo - electron tomography . Our study focuses on the involvement of autophagy proteins and autophagy - like membranes in virion Fig . 5 | Autophagy - likemembranesselectandsorttheircontentsinPV - infected cells . a – e TomogramsofPV - infectedcellsat6 hp . i . showingdifferentstagesof engulfment of RNA - loaded virions by ALMs , including initial recruitment to phagophores ( a – c ) and enclosure in DMVs ( d , e ) . Each panel contains a slice through the tomogram and the corresponding segmentation , colored as in Fig . 1b . f Percentage of empty capsids on the outside and inside of ALMs . Each dot corresponds to one tomogram analyzed ( n = 41 ) ; horizontal line is the average ( see also Supplementary Table 2 ) . g Relative abundance of seven classes of ALMs by contents ( single / mixed ) , in tomograms of PV - infected cells at 6 h p . i . h – m Segmentations and corresponding tomographic slices of examplesofthe differentALM classes , aslabeled in ( g ) . Colors areasinFig . 1b . Protein ﬁ lament bundles are shown in yellow . Statistical signi ﬁ cance by unpaired two - tailed Student ’ s t test ; * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . Scale bars : 50nm . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33483 - 7 Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5986 7 assembly and egress , and the data are consistent with the model pre - sentedinFig . 6 . ComparedtoviralRNAreplication , muchlessisknown about the site and pathway of enterovirus assembly . A membrane - proximal location of the assembly has been suggested , but direct evidence has been missing . In tomograms of infected cells , we iden - ti ﬁ ed an abundant capsid assembly intermediate structurally equiva - lenttohalfofanenteroviruscapsid ( Fig . 2 ) . Itwasto96 % founddirectly docked to membranes in infected cells , and at roughly equal propor - tions on the cytosolicfaceof SMs and ALMs , which suggests thatthese two membrane types both serve as virus assembly platforms . Our ﬁ ndings are consistent with ultracentrifugation studies of enterovirus - infected cells that detected an abundant capsid - related species equivalent to half of an empty capsid , without being able to elucidate its identity 27 , 28 . Thecurrentparadigmofnon - envelopedvirusassemblyholdsthat the proteinaceous capsid either assembles independently followed by energy - expending genome loading , or is templated by the genome 29 . Our ﬁ nding extends that paradigm with a third mode : assembly that is assisted by the replication membrane and its bound components . A slow transition past the half - capsid intermediate may help ensure that the viral RNA has been incorporated before the capsid closes . This is consistent with a previously proposed “ late proofreading ” mechanism that aimed to explain why only recently produced viral RNA , present on the replication membrane , is incorporated into virions 30 . A direct structural coordination between the membrane - bound RNA replica - tion and capsid assembly seems an appealing hypothesis but remains to be visualized in situ . WeshowedthatthelipidkinaseVPS34isahostfactorrequiredfor assembly to progress past the half - capsid intermediate ( Fig . 3 ) , possi - bly due to its requirement for effective viral RNA replication ( Supple - mentary Fig . 4h ) . The VPS34 requirement may explain why the membrane - bound picornaviral helicase 2C binds the classIII PI3kinase complex 31 , in which VPS34 is the catalytic subunit . Hence , 2C may enable the virus to activate VPS34 independently of ULK1 - dependent canonical autophagy induction . In fact , we show that pharmacological inhibition of ULK1 further boosts virus assembly and release ( Fig . 4 ) , and it was previously reported that poliovirus infection partially depletes ULK1 10 . The picture that emerges is that the virus optimizes the cellular environment by suppressing the master switch of canoni - cal autophagy , ULK1 , while at the same time activating necessary subsystems of the autophagy pathway , such as VPS34 , in alternative ways . Notably , the class III PI3 kinase complex exists in two versions , with its fourth subunit being either ATG14 or UVRAG 32 . It remains to be seen ifthesetwoVPS34 - containing complexes play differentialroles in enterovirus assembly . The cryo - electron tomograms revealed several layers of selectiv - ity in enterovirus - induced autophagy ( Fig . 5 ) . Perhaps most remark - ably , there is a strong selectivity for packaging of RNA - loaded virions Fig . 6 | The interplay between autophagy and enterovirus replication is dynamic , selective , and sequential . This model illustrates how remodeled cyto - plasmicmembranesact asaplatformfor viral RNAreplication and asaproduction line for virion assembly . ( 1 ) Capsid proteins , produced as part of the membrane - associatedviralpolyprotein , assembleonthereplicationmembranetothepointof half - capsid intermediate . The antiviral drug Hydantoin leads to premature capsid release frommembranes . Awayfromthe replicationmembrane , capsids cannotbe loaded with RNA . ( 2 ) The assembly pauses at the long - lived half - capsid inter - mediatethatcarriesoutthe “ lateproofreading ” resultinginexclusiveincorporation of newly synthesized membrane - associated viral RNA 30 . The inhibition of VPS34 stalls the assembly at the half - capsid checkpoint , possibly by reducing RNA replication . ( 3 ) RNA - loading of the capsid leads to the formation of complete vir - ions tethered to the replication membrane . ( 4 ) Phagophores selectively package RNA - loaded virions while excluding empty capsids . The virion - containing class of phagophoresis distinct fromasecondclassof phagophorescontaining bundlesof protein ﬁ laments . ( 5 ) A balance between ULK1 - induced canonical autophagy and virus - induced proviral autophagy regulates the level of virion production . Inhibi - tion of remaining ULK1 activity by MRT68921 further increases virion production . Created with BioRender . com . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33483 - 7 Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5986 8 over empty capsids . Selectivity had not previously been demonstrated for virus - induced autophagy , but it is frequent in other forms of autophagy . There , so - called autophagy receptors mediate the degra - dation of speci ﬁ c cytoplasmic components by linking them to LC3 on the growing phagophore membrane 33 . The case of enterovirus parti - cles thus seems to present a conundrum : How can phagophores selectively package RNA - loaded virions over empty capsids when the external surfaces of both these particles are virtually identical 34 ? Fur - therstudieswillbeneededtoelucidatethismechanism , butacluemay be provided by the correlation between RNA loading of capsids and their membrane tethering , as well as the loss of tethering upon autophagic engulfment ( Fig . 1 ) . The tomograms allowed further structural catalogization of ALM contents in infected cells ( Fig . 5 ) . Viruses were frequently co - packaged with dense granular material which has also been seen in tomograms of vesicles released from enterovirus - infected cells 35 . While the com - position of these granules is unknown , their high electron density is compatible with them containing RNA , which could mean that non - encapsidated viral or cellular RNA is released in the same vesicles as virions . As opposed to the copackaging with dense granules , virions were markedly segregated from ALMs that contained bundles of pro - tein ﬁ laments . The ﬁ laments had a structural signature compatible with decorated F - actin . This tentative identity of the ﬁ laments would tie together previous reports that the actin cytoskeleton largely dis - appears in both starved and enterovirus - infected cells 36 , 37 . In starved cells , this is linked to presence of F - actin in the lumen of LC3 - positive membranes ( where it was suggested to play a role in shaping the phagophore ) 37 . It is thus possible that the ﬁ lament - ﬁ lled ALMs repre - sent structural snapshots of this process . In summary , our study of poliovirus - infected cells by cryo - electron tomography reveals membrane - assisted capsid assembly and a link between membrane tethering and RNA - loading of virions . It further shows the multi - faceted nature of autophagy in enterovirus - infected cells , balancing virion production and autophagic engulf - ment , making sure that only RNA - loaded virions are packaged in phagophores and segregating them from other types of autophagic cargoes . Methods Cell lines and cultures HeLa cells were obtained from ATCC ( # CRM - CCL - 2 ™ ) . HeLa LC3 and GABARAP 3KO cells were described previously 38 . All cell lines were grown in ( D ) MEM supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) / 25mM HEPES / GlutaMAX ™ / Penicillin - / Streptomycin ( Gibco ) and maintained at 37 °C in a 5 % CO 2 atmosphere . Cells were regularly screened for the presence of mycoplasma infection . Antibodies and virus Rabbit monoclonal anti - LC3B ( D11 , Cell Signaling — diluted 1 : 1000 ) , Mouse monoclonal anti - β - actin ( A2228 , Sigma — diluted 1 : 10 , 000 ) , Mouse monoclonal anti - VP1 ( clone B3 / H1 — diluted 1 : 500 ) , Rabbit poly - clonal anti - 3D gifted by George Belov ( UMD — diluted 1 : 500 ) , Human anti - A12 gifted by Konstantin Chumakov ( FDA — diluted 1 : 10 , 000 ) , Rabbit monoclonal anti - P62 ( SQSTM1 ) ( PM045 , MBL — diluted 1 / 1000 ) . Goat anti - Rabbit IgG ( H + L ) Cross - Adsorbed Secondary Antibody , Alexa Fluor 555 ( A21428 , Invitrogen — diluted 1 : 1000 ) and Goat anti - Human IgG ( H + L ) Cross - Adsorbed Secondary Antibody , Alexa Fluor 488 ( A11013 , Invitrogen — diluted 1 : 1000 ) . HRP Goat Anti - Rabbit IgG H & L ( ab205718 — diluted 1 : 10 , 000 ) and HRP Mouse Rabbit Anti - Mouse IgG H & L ( ab6728 — diluted 1 : 10 , 000 ) . Poliovirus Type 1 Mahoney strain was a gift from George Belov ( UMD ) . Drug treatments HeLa cells were pre - treated with DMSO or 1 µ M MRT68921 ( SML1644 , Merck ) in culture medium , 1h before the infection . Medium was replaced with serum - free media containing DMSO or 1 µ M MRT68921 andcellswereinfectedwithPoliovirus ( PV ) atMOI5 ( MOI1andMOI0 , 1 for qPCR ) for 1 h . Inoculum was then removed , and cells were incu - bated in fresh media containing 2 % FBS and 1 µ M MRT68921 and / or 5 µ M Vps34 - IN1 or 50 µ g / mL hydantoin ( 5 - ( 3 , 4 - dichlorophenyl ) - 5 - methylimidazolidine - 2 , 4 - dione ( EN300 - 21815 ) ) , or 2 mM Guanidine hydrochloride ( Sigma ) for 3 h to 8 h . Vps34 - IN1 ( 17392 , Cayman che - micals ) was added to the cell media at 1 h p . i . to not interfere with the endocytosis - based viral entry . MRT68921 was added at 1h p . i . After addition , all inhibitors were kept in the cell media throughout the experiments . LC3 lipidation assay For each condition and time point , HeLa cells were seeded in two T25 ﬂ asks ( 2 ×10 6 cells / ﬂ ask ) and infected with poliovirus at MOI 5 . Infec - ted cells were collected by trypsinization , then centrifuged at 500× g for 5min , pellets were resuspended in PBS and washed twice with PBS . Cells were lysed with lysis buffer ( 20mM Tris - HCl pH8 , 300 mM KCl , 10 % glycerol , 0 . 25 % Nonidet P - 40 , 0 . 5mM EDTA , 0 . 5 mM EGTA ) on ice for 15min , passed through a 22G needle and centrifuged at 21 , 000× g for 20min . After centrifugation , supernatants were stored at − 80°C andproteinconcentrationswerefurtherdeterminedusingthePierce ™ BCA Protein Assay Kit ( 23225 , ThermoFisher Scienti ﬁ c ) . SDS - PAGE / western blot Proteins were separated by SDS - PAGE and gels were transferred via a semi - dry blotter to PVDF transfer membranes and blocked for 1 h with TBS - T containing 5 % ( w / v ) milk powder or 5 % ( w / v ) BSA , followed by probingwithprimaryantibodiesandovernightincubation , andfurther re - probed with corresponding HRP conjugated secondary antibodies , for 1 h . Blots were developed using SuperSignal West Pico PLUS Che - miluminescent Substrate ( Thermo Scienti ﬁ c ) and imaged using the Amersham Imager 600 ( GE Healthcare Biosciences ) or the Biorad ChemiDoc TM Touch , and analyzed with imageJ . Uncropped western blots are available in data source and supplementary information ﬁ les . Sample preparation for cryo - electron tomography 24 h before infection , cells were seeded on R2 / 2 gold UltrAufoil grids ( 200 mesh , Quantifoil Micro Tools GmbH , Großlöbichau , Germany ) in µ - Slide 8 Well chamber ( IBIDI ) at 2× 10 4 cells / well . Prior to use , UltrA - ufoil grids were glow - discharged , dipped in ethanol , and then washed with cell media for 30min . HeLa cells were infected with poliovirus at MOI 5 for 1 h in serum - free media at 37°C . The µ - Slide was gently agitated every 15min to ensure an even coverage and maximize virus contact with the cell monolayer . After 1h of virus absorption , the inoculum wasreplaced withfreshDMEM mediasupplemented with 2 % FBS . Infected cells were plunge - frozen in liquid ethane - propane mix 3 h or 6 h post - infection using a Vitrobot plunge freezer ( Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁ c ) at 23°C , 90 % humidity , with blot force − 5 and blot time 6 . 5s . Cryo - lamella generation and characterization Cryo - lamellas of poliovirus - infected cells were generated employing the wedge - milling method 39 using a Scios focused - ion - beam scanning electron microscope ( ThermoFisher Scienti ﬁ c ) . To prevent sample drift during the milling process and to enhance sample conductivity , the samples were ﬁ rst coated with platinum using the gas injection system ( GIS , ThermoFisher Scienti ﬁ c ) operated at 26 °C , at 12 mm stage working distance and 7 s gas injection time . The milling was performed at a tilt angle within a range of 17° – 23° stage tilt . Lamella preparation was performed in a stepwise milling using parallel rectangular pattern above and below the area of interest , with reducing the ion beam current throughout the milling process , from 0 . 3 nA for the ﬁ rst milling step to remove the bulk material to 0 . 03 nA at the ﬁ nal cleaning Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33483 - 7 Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5986 9 step to obtain the lamella which was set to a minimum thickness of 200 nm . To minimize the contamination of lamellas with ice crystals , they were stored in liquid nitrogen for less than a week before tilt - series collection at the Titan Krios ( ThermoFisher Sci - enti ﬁ c ) . The ﬁ nal thickness of lamellas was measured at the Titan Krios . Two images of the same area of a lamella were recorded at an intermediate magni ﬁ cation ( ×8700 ) : an energy - ﬁ ltered image ( F image ) , and non - ﬁ ltered image for which the energy ﬁ lter slit was removed ( nF image ) . The lamella thickness was estimated as 350 * ln ( I ( nF ) / I ( F ) ) , where I ( nF ) and I ( F ) are the intensities in the non - ﬁ ltered and ﬁ ltered images , respectively , and 350 the esti - mate of the electron mean - free path at 300 kV in ice ( in nm ) . Cryo - electron tomography Data was collected using a Titan Krios ( ThermoFisher Scienti ﬁ c ) operated at 300kV in parallel illumination mode . Tilt series were recorded using SerialEM software on a K2 Summit detector ( Gatan , Pleasanton , CA ) operated in super - resolution mode . The K2 Summit detector was mounted on a BioQuantum energy ﬁ lter ( Gatan , Plea - santon , CA ) operated with a 20eV slit width . A condenser aperture of 70 μ m and an objective aperture of 100 μ m were chosen for tilt - series collection . Coma - free alignment was performed with AutoCtf / Sherpa ( ThermoFisher Scienti ﬁ c ) . Tilt - series were acquired in dose - symmetric or bi - directional mode . Due to the pre - tilt of the lamellas , the starting angle used was + 13° for dose - symmetric , and − 21° to − 25° for bi - directional tilt series acquisition . The following parameters were used for acquisition : 33 kx nominal magni ﬁ cation corresponding to a spe - cimen pixel size of 2 . 145Å ; defocus range − 3 to − 5 µ m , tilt - range depending on the lamella pre - tilt and thickness typically ±50° to ±60° ; tilt increment 2° or 3° ; total electron dose ~ 100e − / Å 2 ( bi - directional tilt series ) and 130e − / Å 2 ( dose - symmetric tilt series ) . The exposure dose was not varied as a function of tilt angle . At each tilt angle , the expo - sure was saved as a non - gain - corrected TIFF movie containing a dose per frame of around 0 . 25 per super - resolution pixel . Cryo - electron tomography data processing Super - resolution TIFF movies were unpacked and gain - reference corrected , and subsequently corrected for sample motion using MotionCor2 40 . The motion correction included a factor 2 binning resulting in a specimen pixel size of 4 . 29 Å . After reassembly of tilt - series image stacks they were processed using IMOD 41 . Tilt series were aligned using patch tracking . The aligned stacks were CTF - corrected with a custom - made script using CTFFIND4 42 and CTFPHASEFLIP 43 , a part of IMOD 41 . Tomograms were then gener - ated in IMOD using weighted back projection , no low - pass ﬁ ltering was performed at this stage . For visualization , tomograms were 3 times binned using IMOD , resulting in a pixel size of 12 . 87 Å . The isotropic resolution and signal - to - noise of the tomograms were improved using the deep - learning software IsoNet software 44 . Fil - tered tomograms were further segmented using Amira for the representation of membranes , protein densities and ﬁ laments , the last using the Fiber tracing module . Subtomogram averages of empty capsids and RNA - loaded virions were integrated in these 3D renderings through UCSF Chimera 45 . Subtomogram averaging of viruses Subtomogram averaging of tethered virions and virus particles was performed using Dynamo 46 , 47 . 241 tethered virions were manually picked from several tomograms ( box size 180 * 180 * 180 voxels ) , of these particles , 179 could be clearly oriented and centered manually . The orientated particles were further used for single - class alignment with spherical mask with radius of 80px , ﬁ rst allowing shifts only ( Supplementary Fig . 8A ) . A second round of alignment was performed allowingfullazimuthalrotationsand30°tilt . Theresolutionofthe ﬁ nal average was calculated to 70Å using the Gold - standard Fourier Shell Correlation with a threshold of 0 . 143 . For RNA - loaded virions , a total of 566 particles were manually picked in several tomograms ( Supplementary Fig . 8B ) . For empty capsids , a total 426 particles were manually picked ( Supplementary Fig . 8C ) . Subvolumes of unbinned particles ( 4 . 29Å / px ) were extracted with a box size of 140 * 140 * 140 voxels . Subvolumes were ﬁ rst centered on their average allowing onlyshifts using a spherical mask with radius of 60px and a Gaussian falloff of 3 px . After centering , two rounds of a ﬁ ve - iteration single - class alignment were performed , each with icosa - hedral symmetry imposed and rotational alignment allowing for full rotations within one symmetric unit ( + / − 45° ) . Before the second round , starting angles were randomized . The subtomograms were then subjected to a four - class multireference alignment ( MRA ) in Dynamo . Two of the ﬁ ve classes for both empty and RNA - loaded vir - ions had a similar appearance , and were pooled for a second round of Gold - standard single - class alignment with imposed icosahedral sym - metry . Gold - standard FSC curves for resolution estimation of the virus averages were calculated in Dynamo , resulting in a resolution estimate of 21 . 4Å for empty capsids and 28 . 0 Å for RNA - loaded virions at a Fourier shell correlation threshold of 0 . 143 . Subtomogram averages were low - pass ﬁ ltered to their respective resolution and the 3D ren - derings were created in UCSF Chimera . Subtomogram averaging of ﬁ laments The subtomogram selection , extraction and averaging followed the work ﬂ ow schematically presented in Supplementary Fig . 9 . 1856 ﬁ la - ments weretraced in16 tomograms using the ﬁ ber tracing module 48 in Amira ( Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁ c ) . The tracing was performed within manually segmented regions corresponding to ﬁ lament - ﬁ lled autop - hagy - like membranes , and the tracing parameters were selected so that the number and length of the ﬁ laments was consistent with their visual appearance in the tomograms . Filament coordinates were exported from Amiraand imported toDynamousing a custom - written MATLAB ( Mathworks ) script ( available at https : / / github . com / Lars - AndersCarlson / Filament ) , after which Dynamo was used to extract subtomograms at regular intervals . Initially , an oversampled sub - tomogram extraction was performed , with ( 100px ) 3 subtomograms extracted along the ﬁ lament axis at 5px intervals . This resulted in 55 , 376 subtomograms . Each subtomogram was assigned initial Euler angles that aligned it with the traced ﬁ lament axis , but gave it a ran - domized rotation along that axis . The subsequent alignments and classi ﬁ cationswereperformedusing acylindricalmaskwitha radiusof 16px and a Gaussian falloff of 3 or 5px . Subtomogram averaging was performed in Dynamo . After an initial single iteration allowing for centering of the subtomograms perpendicularly to the ﬁ lament axis , several iterations were performed allowing for shifts , free rotations around the ﬁ lament axis , and a + / − 30° tilt with respect to the ﬁ lament axis . At this stage of the data processing , efforts to determine ﬁ lament polarity by allowing each subtomogram in a given ﬁ lament to change orientation during alignment , and then imposing the majority orien - tation on all subunits of the ﬁ lament were not yet successful . From the full oversampled dataset , overlapping subtomograms were removed using a distance threshold of 10 px ( 42 . 9 Å ) , resulting in a set of 16 , 682 subtomograms . These subtomograms were subjected to a ﬁ ve - class multireference alignment ( MRA ) in Dynamo . Three of the ﬁ ve classes had a similar , regularhelical appearance , and were pooled for a second round of MRA with ﬁ ve classes , from which one class of 3517 subtomograms was better de ﬁ ned than the others . This class was subjected to a half - set gold - standard re ﬁ nement in Dynamo resulting in a resolution estimate of 23 . 8Å at a Fourier shell correlation threshold of 0 . 143 . The resulting average allowed a ﬁ rst estimation of the helical parameters as a rise of ~ 56Å per subunit and a rotation of ~ 36° per subunit . At this point , tomograms were re - reconstructed Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33483 - 7 Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5986 10 using NovaCTF to allow for 3D CTF correction by phase ﬂ ipping 49 . Subtomograms were reextracted at positions corresponding to the helical subunits , which after removal of overlapping particles resulted in an enlarged data set of 10897 subtomograms . These subtomogram poses and positions were exported from Dynamo for further proces - sing in the subTOM package written in MATLAB with functions adap - ted from the TOM 50 , AV3 51 , and Dynamo packages . The scripts and relevant documentation areavailableto download [ https : / / www2 . mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk / groups / briggs / resources ] . In addition , instead of a binary wedge mask , a modi ﬁ ed wedge mask was used 52 . The missing wedge was modeled at all processing stages as the average of the amplitude spectra of subtomograms extracted from regions of each tomogram containing empty ice , and was applied during alignment and averaging . We applied both principal component analysis ( PCA ) andmultivariatestatisticalanalysis ( MSA ) toclassifysubtomogramsby ﬁ lament straightness and similar helical parameters . The PCA was performed on wedge - masked difference ( WMD ) maps 53 with calcula - tions implemented in MATLAB using code adapted from PEET 53 and Dynamo packages , and MSA also implemented in MATLAB using code adapted from I3 54 . Movies detailing the variability related to each Eigenvolume from MSA classi ﬁ cation were generated using Eigen - ﬁ l - tering / reconstruction methods , and similar movies from WMD classi - ﬁ cations were generated by producing class averages sorted by determined Eigencoef ﬁ cients . Improved class averages allowed for recalculation of helical parameters and further sub - boxing as well as determining the ﬁ lament polarity . Speci ﬁ cally , the sub - box poses and positions were determined by auto - correlation of the reference after rotation along the ﬁ lament axis , which yielded a helical symmetry with a rise of 51 . 5Å and rotation of 29° , and then duplicates within a sphere of diameter 50Å were removed . Poses were not adjusted from their gold - standard alignment values and the Fourier shell correlation determined resolution was improved to 18 . 5Å at the 0 . 143 threshold . Following the FSC calculation , the half - maps were averaged , ﬁ ltered to the measured resolution by the determined FSC - curve and sharpened using a heuristically determined B - factor of − 4000 Å 2 , 55 . Quantitative analysis of membrane structures and virions Tomograms were visually inspected and membrane structures such as single - membrane vesicles and tubes were assigned as single mem - branes . Double membrane structures were assigned as phagophore - like membranes if they had a clear opening within the tomogram volume ( i . e . , were cup - shaped ) , and as double - membrane vesicles if they did not have an opening . Collectively , these two types of double - membrane structures were referred to as autophagy - like membranes . Virus particles were localized and counted in each tomogram with template matching using PyTom 56 . For empty capsids and RNA - loaded virions template matching was performed using respectively the re - sampled , ﬁ ltered empty capsid ( EMD - 9644 ) and mature virion ( EMD - 9642 ) cryo - EM structures of the human coxsackievirus A10 57 . The concentration of each structures was obtained by dividing the total number of structures by the volume of the corresponding tomogram . The number of tomograms obtained for all the conditions are listed in Supplementary Table 1 . The closure of viral capsid intermediates was calculated using IMOD . First , in a central section through the capsid intermediate , the circumference was traced and measured with IMOD drawing tools , then the open length was divided by the circumference of a complete virus particle . This fraction was multiplied by 360 to get the angle of the cone that describes the capsid assembly intermediate . Freeze substitution Poliovirus - infected HeLa cells non - treated and treated with MRT68921 were grown on carbon - coated sapphire discs and high - pressure frozen at 6 h p . i . using a Leica HPM100 . Freeze substitution was performed as a variation of the Kukulski protocol 58 . Brie ﬂ y , sapphire discs placed in adapted carriers were ﬁ lled with freeze substituent ( 0 . 1 % uranyl acetate in acetone , 1 % H 2 O ) and placed in a temperature - controlling AFS2 ( Leica ) equipped with an FPS robot . In the ﬁ rst step , freeze - substitution occurred at − 90 °C for 48 h then the temperature was raised to − 45 °C . The samples were maintained in the freeze substituent at − 45 °C for 5 h before washing 3 times with acetone followed by a temperature increase and in ﬁ ltration with increasing concentrations of Lowicryl HM20 . Finally , the samples were gradually warmed up to − 25 °C before in ﬁ ltrating 3 times with 100 % Lowicryl and UV - polymerized for 48 h at − 25 °C . Polymerization then continued for another 24 h at room tempera - ture . The embedded samples were sectioned with a diamond knife ( DiATOME - 90 ) to slices of 60 – 120 nm thickness by using ultra - microtome ( Reichart ULTRACUT S ) . Imaging was performed in FEI Talos electron microscope operating at 120 kV . Grids were exam - ined at a Talos L120C ( FEI , Eindhoven , The Netherlands ) operating at 120 kV . Micrographs were acquired with a Ceta 16M CCD camera ( FEI , Eindhoven , The Netherlands ) using TEM Image & Analysis software ver . 4 . 17 ( FEI , Eindhoven , The Netherlands ) . Confocal microscopy analysis HeLa wild - type ( WT ) , LC3 3KO , and GAB 3KO cells were infected with PV for 1 h at MOI 5 in serum - free media , washed and kept in 2 % FCS DMEM / high glucose for 3 h or 6h . Cells were ﬁ xed in 4 % paraf - ormaldehyde ( PFA ) / phosphate buffer solution ( PBS ) for 10min at room temperature . Primary and secondary antibody incubations were carried out in PBS / 10 % FBS supplemented with saponin at 0 . 2 % for 1 h atroomtemperature . CellswererinsedtwiceinPBS , twiceinwaterand mounted with Dapi Fluoromount - G ( Electron Microscopy Science ) . Image acquisition was performed using a LSM780 confocal micro - scope ( Carl Zeiss ) with a 63X / 1 . 4 NA oil objective or a 40X / 1 . 4 NA oil objective . Cell numbers and individual cells respective mean ﬂ uores - cence intensities and area were obtained using ImageJ . Virus titration analysis of cell supernatants Extracellular medium was collected from infected cell cultures and serially diluted in 96 - well plates ( 10 − 1 to 10 − 8 ) . Dilutions were subse - quently used to inoculate in triplicates HeLa WT cells seeded at 6×10 4 cells / well in 96 - well plates . Cells were incubated at 37 °C for 44 h , ﬁ xed with10 % paraformaldehyde , andstainedwithcrystalviolet . TCID50 / ml was calculated using the Spearman & Kärber algorithm . Vesicle isolation HeLa wild - type ( WT ) , LC3 3KO , and GAB 3KO cells were infected with PVfor1 hatMOI5 , washed , andkeptinserum - freeDMEM / highglucose for 8h . Supernatants obtained from one well of a 6 - well plate ( 1 . 5mL , ~ 500 , 000 cells ) were harvested and centrifuged at1000 × g for 10min , then at 20 , 000 × g for 30min . Pellets were either resuspended in 1X loading buffer and analyzed by western blot , or resuspended in RNA lysis buffer and processed for RT - PCR . Quantitative ( q ) PCR analysis Cell supernatants and cell lysates were harvested at speci ﬁ c time points and lysed using RNA lysis buffer provided in the RNA isolation kit ( Quick - RNA Microprep Kit , Zymo Research ) . RNA isolation was performed as per the manufacturer ’ s instructions and cDNA was pre - pared using Thermo Scienti ﬁ c Maxima First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit for RT - qPCR ( Fisher Scienti ﬁ c ) . RT - PCR was performed using iTaq Universal SYBR® Green Supermix ( BioRad ) in Roche LightCycler 96 system ( Roche ) , using the following thermal cycling conditions : 95°C for 90s , 40 cycles at 95°C for 10s , 57°C for 10 s , and 72 °C for 110s . The samples were run in duplicate for each data point . Primers used : For 5 ′ - CGGCTAATCCCAACCTCG - 3 ′ , Rev 5 ′ - CACCATAAGCAGCC ACAATAAAATAA - 3 ′ . The genome copy numbers were standardized using a series of 10 - fold dilutions ( 10 3 – 10 10 copies mL - 1 ) of synthetic cDNA oligos : 5 ′ - CCCCTGAATGCGGCTAATCCCAACCTCGGAGCAGGT Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33483 - 7 Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5986 11 GGTCACAAACCAGTGATTGGCCTGTCGTAACGCGCAAGTCCGTGGCG GAACCGACTACTTTGGGTGTCCGTGTTTCCTTTTATTTTATTGTGGCT GCTTATGGTGACAATCACAG - 3 ′ ( gBlocks® Gene Fragments , IDT ) . Statistics and reproducibility Data and statistical analysis were performed using Prism ( GraphPad SoftwareInc . , USA ) . Details about replicates , statisticaltest used , exact values of n , what n represents , and dispersion and precision measures used can be found in ﬁ gures and corresponding ﬁ gure legends . Values of p < 0 . 05 were considered signi ﬁ cant . All tomograms shown are representative of larger data sets as indicated in Supplementary Table 2 . Reporting summary Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article . Data availability The subtomogram average maps have been deposited in the Electron Microscopy Data Bank ( EMDB ) under accession codes EMD - 15390 ( empty capsid ) , EMD - 15391 ( RNA - loaded virion ) , EMD - 15392 ( tethered virion ) , and EMD - 13682 ( ﬁ lament ) . Source data are provided with this paper . Code availability The script used to pick ﬁ lament subtomograms from Amira ﬁ lament tracings is available at https : / / github . com / Lars - AndersCarlson / Filament . References 1 . vanderLinden , L . , Wolthers , K . C . & vanKuppeveld , F . J . Replication and inhibitors of enteroviruses and parechoviruses . Viruses 7 , 4529 – 4562 ( 2015 ) . 2 . Romero - Brey , I . & Bartenschlager , R . Membranous replication fac - tories induced by plus - strand RNA viruses . Viruses 6 , 2826 – 2857 ( 2014 ) . 3 . Jackson , W . T . Poliovirus - induced changes in cellular membranes throughout infection . Curr . Opin . Virol . 9 , 67 – 73 ( 2014 ) . 4 . Hsu , N . Y . et al . Viral reorganization of the secretory pathway gen - erates distinct organelles for RNA replication . Cell 141 , 799 – 811 ( 2010 ) . 5 . Wolff , G . , Melia , C . E . , Snijder , E . J . & Barcena , M . Double - membrane vesicles as platforms for viral replication . Trends Microbiol . 28 , 1022 – 1033 ( 2020 ) . 6 . Chandler - Bostock , R . et al . Assembly of infectious enteroviruses depends on multiple , conserved genomic RNA - coat protein con - tacts . PLoS Pathog . 16 , e1009146 ( 2020 ) . 7 . Jiang , P . , Liu , Y . , Ma , H . C . , Paul , A . V . & Wimmer , E . Picornavirus morphogenesis . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 78 , 418 – 437 ( 2014 ) . 8 . Liu , Y . et al . Direct interaction between two viral proteins , the nonstructural protein 2C and the capsid protein VP3 , is required for enterovirus morphogenesis . PLoS Pathog . 6 , e1001066 ( 2010 ) . 9 . Taylor , M . P . & Kirkegaard , K . Modi ﬁ cation of cellular autophagy protein LC3 by poliovirus . J . Virol . 81 , 12543 – 12553 ( 2007 ) . 10 . Corona Velazquez , A . , Corona , A . K . , Klein , K . A . & Jackson , W . T . Poliovirus induces autophagic signaling independent of the ULK1 complex . Autophagy 14 , 1201 – 1213 ( 2018 ) . 11 . Limpens , R . W . et al . The transformation of enterovirus replication structures : a three - dimensional study of single - and double - membrane compartments . mBio . 2 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / mBio . 00166 - 11 ( 2011 ) . 12 . Belov , G . A . et al . Complex dynamic development of poliovirus membranous replication complexes . J . Virol . 86 , 302 – 312 ( 2012 ) . 13 . Feng , Z . et al . A pathogenic picornavirus acquires an envelope by hijacking cellular membranes . Nature 496 , 367 – 371 ( 2013 ) . 14 . Robinson , S . M . et al . Coxsackievirus B exits the host cell in shed microvesicles displaying autophagosomal markers . PLoS Pathog . 10 , e1004045 ( 2014 ) . 15 . Chen , Y . H . et al . Phosphatidylserine vesicles enable ef ﬁ cient en bloc transmission of enteroviruses . Cell 160 , 619 – 630 ( 2015 ) . 16 . Bou , J . V . , Geller , R . & Sanjuan , R . Membrane - associated enter - oviruses undergo intercellular transmission as pools of sibling viral genomes . Cell Rep . 29 , 714 – 723 . e714 ( 2019 ) . 17 . Mutsa ﬁ , Y . & Altan - Bonnet , N . Enterovirus transmission by secretory autophagy . Viruses 10 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / v10030139 ( 2018 ) . 18 . Hagen , C . et al . Structural basis of vesicle formation at the inner nuclear membrane . Cell 163 , 1692 – 1701 ( 2015 ) . 19 . Zila , V . et al . Cone - shaped HIV - 1 capsids are transported through intact nuclear pores . Cell 184 , 1032 – 1046 . e1018 ( 2021 ) . 20 . Klein , S . et al . SARS - CoV - 2 structure and replication characterized by in situ cryo - electron tomography . Nat . Commun . 11 , 5885 ( 2020 ) . 21 . Wolff , G . et al . A molecular pore spans the double membrane of the coronavirus replication organelle . Science 369 , 1395 – 1398 ( 2020 ) . 22 . Turk , M . & Baumeister , W . The promise and the challenges of cryo - electron tomography . FEBS Lett . 594 , 3243 – 3261 ( 2020 ) . 23 . Vance , L . M . , Moscufo , N . , Chow , M . & Heinz , B . A . Poliovirus 2C region functions during encapsidation of viral RNA . J . Virol . 71 , 8759 – 8765 ( 1997 ) . 24 . Chen , Z . et al . Chimpanzee - human monoclonal antibodies for treatment of chronic poliovirus excretors and emergency post - exposure prophylaxis . J . Virol . 85 , 4354 – 4362 ( 2011 ) . 25 . Petherick , K . J . et al . Pharmacological inhibition of ULK1 kinase blocks mammalian target of rapamycin ( mTOR ) - dependent autop - hagy . J . Biol . Chem . 290 , 11376 – 11383 ( 2015 ) . 26 . Bago , R . et al . Characterization of VPS34 - IN1 , a selective inhibitor of Vps34 , reveals that the phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate - binding SGK3 protein kinase is a downstream target of class III phosphoinositide 3 - kinase . Biochem . J . 463 , 413 – 427 ( 2014 ) . 27 . Su , R . T . & Taylor , M . W . Morphogenesis of picornaviruses : char - acterization and assembly of bovine enterovirus subviral particles . J . Gen . Virol . 30 , 317 – 328 ( 1976 ) . 28 . Rombaut , B . , Vrijsen , R . , Delgadillo , R . , Vanden Berghe , D . & Boeye , A . Characterization and assembly of poliovirus - related 45 S parti - cles . Virology 146 , 111 – 119 ( 1985 ) . 29 . Twarock , R . , Bingham , R . J . , Dykeman , E . C . & Stockley , P . G . A modelling paradigm for RNA virus assembly . Curr . Opin . Virol . 31 , 74 – 81 ( 2018 ) . 30 . Nugent , C . I . , Johnson , K . L . , Sarnow , P . & Kirkegaard , K . Functional coupling between replication and packaging of poliovirus replicon RNA . J . Virol . 73 , 427 – 435 ( 1999 ) . 31 . Gladue , D . P . et al . Foot - and - mouth disease virus nonstructural protein 2C interacts with Beclin1 , modulating virus replication . J . Virol . 86 , 12080 – 12090 ( 2012 ) . 32 . Baskaran , S . et al . Architecture and dynamics of the autophagic phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase complex . eLife 4 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 05115 ( 2014 ) . 33 . Gatica , D . , Lahiri , V . & Klionsky , D . J . Cargo recognition and degradation by selective autophagy . Nat . Cell Biol . 20 , 233 – 242 ( 2018 ) . 34 . Basavappa , R . et al . Role and mechanism of the maturation clea - vage of VP0 in poliovirus assembly : structure of the empty capsid assembly intermediate at 2 . 9 A resolution . Protein Sci . 3 , 1651 – 1669 ( 1994 ) . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33483 - 7 Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5986 12 35 . Yang , J . E . et al . Complexity and ultrastructure of infectious extra - cellular vesicles from cells infected by non - enveloped virus . Sci . Rep . 10 , 7939 ( 2020 ) . 36 . Sobo , K . , Stuart , A . D . , Rubbia - Brandt , L . , Brown , T . D . K . & McKee , T . A . Echovirus 11 infection induces dramatic changes in the actin cytoskeleton of polarized Caco - 2 cells . J . Gen . Virol . 93 , 475 – 487 ( 2012 ) . 37 . Mi , N . etal . CapZregulatesautophagosomalmembraneshaping by promoting actin assembly inside the isolation membrane . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 1112 – 1123 ( 2015 ) . 38 . Nguyen , T . N . et al . Atg8 family LC3 / GABARAP proteins are crucial for autophagosome - lysosome fusion but not autophagosome for - mation during PINK1 / Parkin mitophagy and starvation . J . Cell Biol . 215 , 857 – 874 ( 2016 ) . 39 . Schaffer , M . et al . Optimized cryo - focused ion beam sample pre - paration aimed at in situ structural studies of membrane proteins . J . Struct . Biol . 197 , 73 – 82 ( 2017 ) . 40 . Zheng , S . Q . et al . MotionCor2 : anisotropic correction of beam - induced motion for improved cryo - electron microscopy . Nat . Methods 14 , 331 – 332 ( 2017 ) . 41 . Kremer , J . R . , Mastronarde , D . N . & McIntosh , J . R . Computer visualization of three - dimensional image data using IMOD . J . Struct . Biol . 116 , 71 – 76 ( 1996 ) . 42 . Rohou , A . & Grigorieff , N . CTFFIND4 : Fast and accurate defocus estimation from electron micrographs . J . Struct . Biol . 192 , 216 – 221 ( 2015 ) . 43 . Xiong , Q . , Morphew , M . K . , Schwartz , C . L . , Hoenger , A . H . & Mastronarde , D . N . CTF determination and correction for low dose tomographic tilt series . J . Struct . Biol . 168 , 378 – 387 ( 2009 ) . 44 . Liu , Y . T . et al . Isotropic reconstruction of electron tomograms with deep learning . Preprint at bioRxiv https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2021 . 07 . 17 . 452128 ( 2021 ) . 45 . Pettersen , E . F . et al . UCSF Chimera — a visualization system for exploratory research and analysis . J . computational Chem . 25 , 1605 – 1612 ( 2004 ) . 46 . Castano - Diez , D . , Kudryashev , M . , Arheit , M . & Stahlberg , H . Dynamo : a ﬂ exible , user - friendly development tool for sub - tomogram averaging of cryo - EM data in high - performance com - puting environments . J . Struct . Biol . 178 , 139 – 151 ( 2012 ) . 47 . Castano - Diez , D . , Kudryashev , M . & Stahlberg , H . Dynamo Catalo - gue : Geometricaltoolsanddatamanagementforparticlepickingin subtomogram averaging of cryo - electron tomograms . J . Struct . Biol . 197 , 135 – 144 ( 2017 ) . 48 . Rigort , A . etal . Automatedsegmentationofelectrontomogramsfor a quantitative description of actin ﬁ lament networks . J . Struct . Biol . 177 , 135 – 144 ( 2012 ) . 49 . Turonova , B . , Schur , F . K . M . , Wan , W . & Briggs , J . A . G . Ef ﬁ cient 3D - CTF correction for cryo - electron tomography using NovaCTF improves subtomogram averaging resolution to 3 . 4A . J . Struct . Biol . 199 , 187 – 195 ( 2017 ) . 50 . Nickell , S . et al . TOM software toolbox : acquisition and analysis for electron tomography . J . Struct . Biol . 149 , 227 – 234 ( 2005 ) . 51 . Förster , F . , Medalia , O . , Zauberman , N . , Baumeister , W . & Fass , D . Retrovirus envelope protein complex structure in situ studied by cryo - electron tomography . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 4729 – 4734 ( 2005 ) . 52 . Wan , W . et al . Structure and assembly of the Ebola virus nucleo - capsid . Nature 551 , 394 – 397 ( 2017 ) . 53 . Heumann , J . M . , Hoenger , A . & Mastronarde , D . N . Clustering and variance maps for cryo - electron tomography using wedge - masked differences . J . Struct . Biol . 175 , 288 – 299 ( 2011 ) . 54 . Winkler , H . et al . Tomographic subvolume alignment and sub - volume classi ﬁ cation applied to myosin V and SIV envelope spikes . J . Struct . Biol . 165 , 64 – 77 ( 2009 ) . 55 . Rosenthal , P . B . & Henderson , R . Optimal determination of particle orientation , absolute hand , and contrast loss in single - particle electron cryomicroscopy . J . Mol . Biol . 333 , 721 – 745 ( 2003 ) . 56 . Hrabe , T . et al . PyTom : a python - based toolbox for localization of macromolecules in cryo - electron tomograms and subtomogram analysis . J . Struct . Biol . 178 , 177 – 188 ( 2012 ) . 57 . Zhu , L . et al . Structures of Coxsackievirus A10 unveil the molecular mechanisms of receptor binding and viral uncoating . Nat . Com - mun . 9 , 4985 ( 2018 ) . 58 . Kukulski , W . et al . Correlated ﬂ uorescence and 3D electron micro - scopy with high sensitivity and spatial precision . J . Cell Biol . 192 , 111 – 119 ( 2011 ) . Acknowledgements We would like to thank Carlson lab members , Sven Carlsson , and Richard Lundmark for constructive suggestions , Dale Corkery for help with the LC3 lipidation assay , as well as Nitesh Mistry for help with virus puri ﬁ cation ( all Umeå University ) . We are also thankful to Sebastian Schultz and Andreas Brech ( Oslo University ) for sharing their experience in freeze substitution . Cryo - EM data were collected at the Umeå Centre for Electron Microscopy ( UCEM ) , a SciLifeLab National Cryo - EM facility and part of National Microscopy Infrastructure , NMI VR - RFI 2016 - 00968 ) , supported by instrumentation grants from the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation and the Kempe Foundations . This project was funded by a postdoctoral grant to S . D . from the European Union ’ s Hor - izon 2020 research and innovation program under the Marie Sk ł odowska - Curie grant agreement No 795892 . Additional funding came from the Human Frontier Science Program ( Career Development Award CDA00047 / 2017 - C to L . - A . C . ) , the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation ( through the Wallenberg Centre for Molecular Medicine Umeå ) . N . A . - B . and A . K . were intramurally funded by the National Insti - tutes of Health ( USA ) . Author contributions S . D . , A . K . , K . S . , N . A . - B . , andL . - A . C . conceivedtheproject . S . D . performed cryo - electron tomography . A . K . performed virus replication and egress assays . S . D . , D . R . M . , and L . - A . C . performed subtomogram averaging . S . D . , A . K . , K . S . , B . A . , D . R . M . , N . A . - B . , and L . - A . C . analyzed data . S . D . and L . - A . C . wrote the original draft . All authors reviewed and edited the manuscript . Funding Open access funding provided by Umea University . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . Additional information Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33483 - 7 . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Lars - Anders Carlson . Peerreviewinformation NatureCommunications thanksMihneaBostina and the other , anonymous , reviewer ( s ) for their contribution to the peer review of this work . Peer reviewer reports are available . Reprints and permission information is available at http : / / www . nature . com / reprints Publisher ’ s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur - isdictional claims in published maps and institutional af ﬁ liations . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33483 - 7 Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5986 13 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International License , which permits use , sharing , adaptation , distribution and reproduction in any medium or format , as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author ( s ) and the source , provide a link to the Creative Commons license , and indicate if changes were made . The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article ’ s Creative Commons license , unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material . If material is not included in the article ’ s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use , you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder . To view a copy of this license , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . © The Author ( s ) 2022 Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33483 - 7 Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5986 14