The prestige and status of research ﬁelds within mathematics Jean - Marc Schlenker 1 ∗ 1 Department of mathematics , University of Luxembourg ∗ To whom correspondence should be addressed ; E - mail : jean - marc . schlenker @ uni . lu v1 , September 1 , 2020 Abstract While the “hierarchy of science” has been widely analysed , there is no corresponding study of the status of subﬁelds within a given scientiﬁc ﬁeld . We use bibliometric data to show that sub - ﬁelds of mathematics have a diﬀerent “standing” within the mathematics community . Highly ranked departments tend to specialize in some subﬁelds more than in others , and the same subﬁelds are also over - represented in the most selective mathematics journals or among recipients of top prizes . Moreover this status of subﬁelds evolves markedly over the period of observation ( 1984 – 2016 ) , with some subﬁelds gaining and others losing in standing . The status of subﬁelds is related to diﬀerent publishing habits , but some of those diﬀerences are opposite to those observed when considering the hierarchy of scientiﬁc ﬁelds . We examine possible explanations for the “status” of diﬀerent subﬁelds . Some natural explana - tions – availability of funding , importance of applications – do not appear to function , suggesting that factors internal to the discipline are at work . We propose a diﬀerent type of explanation , based on a notion of “focus” of a subﬁeld , that might or might not be speciﬁc to mathematics . Contents 1 Motivations , questions and results 2 1 . 1 The prestige of subﬁelds , and why they matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 1 . 2 Questions , observations , results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 1 . 3 Why study mathematics ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 2 Data description 6 2 . 1 A database of selected mathematics articles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 2 . 2 A database of authors and PhDs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 2 . 3 A limited list of subﬁelds of mathematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 2 . 4 The MCQ as proxy for the “impact” of journals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 3 First observations : Fields medals and top journals 8 3 . 1 Fields medalists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 3 . 2 Papers in the “top 3” journals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 4 Departments 10 4 . 1 Specialization of departments , by publications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 4 . 2 Specialization of departments , by active mathematicians . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 4 . 3 Recruitments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 4 . 4 Individual mobility between subﬁelds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 1 a r X i v : 2008 . 13244v1 [ c s . D L ] 30 A ug 2020 5 Journals 15 5 . 1 Discipinary focus of journals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 5 . 2 A ﬁner look at the evolving weights of subﬁelds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 6 Publishing habits and status 19 6 . 1 Length of papers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 6 . 2 Number of co - authors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 7 Scientiﬁc productivity in diﬀerent ﬁelds 20 7 . 1 What are proper indicators of “production” ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 7 . 2 Diﬀering production between ﬁelds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 8 Analysis 22 8 . 1 How can the “status” of subﬁelds be explained ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 8 . 2 The focus of a ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 8 . 3 Departmental and institutional strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 A List of journals used 25 1 Motivations , questions and results 1 . 1 The prestige of subﬁelds , and why they matter Certain ﬁelds of science beneﬁt from a higher degree of prestige and status than others . This “status” of ﬁelds or subﬁelds can vary in time and between country , but it has deep consequences on the advancement of science , for instance : • Through the allocation of talented researchers , since talented students tend to disproportely choose some ﬁelds over others . • Through its impact on institutional policy , and the choice by universities or research institutions to invest in some ﬁelds more than others , depending on their proﬁle and objectives . • Through its impact on science policy , and the allocation by governement or research funding agencies of priorities in research . The prestige of a ﬁeld should be distinguished from how fashionable it is . Some ﬁelds sometimes undergo rapid progress and promise to have a huge impact in the short or medium term ( a recent example is for instance found in deep learning ) and therefore attract both researchers and funding . Other ﬁelds can attract talented students because they are considered as stepping stones towards successful careers . We will see that , in mathematics , a clear distinction should be made between ﬁelds which are considered as “high status” and those oﬀering the best career perspective – in fact , a case could be made that there is a negative relation between the two notions , see Section 8 . 1 . We investigate whether and why some directions of research appear to be valued by top departments or top journals more than others , using quantitative and bibliometric tools and methods . It is diﬃcult to compare diﬀerent ﬁelds , since they tend to have diﬀerent publishing practices , venues , etc . It is easier , at least when using bibliometric tools , to consider diﬀerences between subﬁelds of a given ﬁeld . Here we focus on mathematics , and on the dynamics of its diﬀerent subﬁelds . The analysis of status between subﬁelds of mathematics should be compared to the wider debate and ample bibliography on a “hierarchy of sciences” going back at least to Auguste Comte , see e . g . [ 6 , 5 ] . The main indicator of a higher “status” of a ﬁeld is generally considered to be the consensus 2 level , which is also related to the level of complexity of the object of study . The reader can ﬁnd in [ 8 ] an analysis of the relations between the hierarchy / level of consensus of a ﬁeld and diﬀerent types of bibliometric characteristics , such as the average number of authors , number of pages , or number of cited references . For instance , it appears that at the level of ﬁelds , shorter papers or less old references should be related to higher consensus level and “status” , which might contrast with the situation within subﬁelds of mathematics ( see below ) . Among scientiﬁc ﬁelds , mathematics is generally considered as having a high level of consensus . In a slightly diﬀerent direction of analysis , proposed by Hargens [ 11 ] , see also [ 2 ] , mathematics is characterized by a high level of normative integration – the sharing of common beliefs and values – but a low level of functional integration – the activity of mathematicians does not depend directly much on those of her colleagues . 1 . 2 Questions , observations , results Mathematicians often have strong preferences for some ﬁelds over others , and preferences vary widely . However they also often express the idea that some ﬁelds of mathematics are “more diﬃcult” , “more central” , or “more important” than others , and some convergence seems to appear in those opinions . While the assessment of each subﬁeld varies from one author to the other , it is interesting to ask whether there is a “general pattern” in the way diﬀerent mathematicians gauge the “diﬃculty” , “centrality” or “importance” of a each ﬁeld , and to explain it . One might expect that the “importance” attributed to subﬁelds is directly related to their relevance to applications in science and technology – we will see however that this does not seem to be the case . This observation leads to several questions . • Can a “hierarchy” of mathematical ﬁelds be observed , and how ? • Do diﬀerent observations provide similar rankings of ﬁelds ? • Is this ranking stable over time ? If not , how does it evolve ? • How can it be explained ? One way to approach those questions is through existing and established hierarchies : • of mathematics journals ( as measured here by their MCQ , a kind of IF adapted to mathematics ) , • of mathematics departments . We can assume that if some ﬁelds were more valued than others , the “best” journals and the “best” departments would focus more on those ﬁelds than on others , while less prestigious departments and journals would have to do with less prestigious ﬁelds . Those observations , conﬁrmed by a set of biblio - metric observations , will serve as the basis for the analysis conducted here . Some of the key ﬁndings presented below are : 1 . There is a clear “ranking” of subﬁelds of mathematics , with some more prestigious ﬁelds having a much larger relative share of the mathematics departments of the most prestigious universities , of the papers published in the most respected journals ( Section 3 . 2 ) , of the top prizes ( Section 3 . 1 ) . 2 . Diﬀerent “measures” of the rank of ﬁelds within mathematics tend to give very similar results , compare Section 3 , 4 and 5 . 3 3 . The subﬁelds with the highest apparent “status” are typically the most abstract ones and those with little direct applications , such as Algebraic Geometry , while applied ﬁelds like numerical modelling or statistics have low status – this in spite of eﬀorts by some funding agencies to promote precisely those low - status ﬁelds . 4 . The “status” of subﬁelds can certainly not be explained by commonly used notions of impact , such as citation count , since the most prestigious ﬁelds tend to be those with lowest citations numbers , and conversely . 5 . The prestige of some ﬁelds has changed quite dramatically over the period of observation considered here ( 1984 – 2016 ) in one direction or in the other . For instance the prestige of Diﬀerential geometry or of Analysis seems to have declined considerably , while those of Probability or Partial Diﬀerential Equations has increased markedly . 6 . The status of a subﬁeld is related to diﬀerences in publishing habits : higher status is rather strongly related to less authors / article , and to longer articles . 7 . The recruitment strategy of departments varies greatly with their “status” , measured here by their ranking according to an indicator of production . Top departments tend to favor disproportionately the “noble” subﬁelds , while low - ranking departments hire more experts of subﬁelds with a lower status , see Section 4 . 3 . 8 . There is a signiﬁcant mobility of mathematicians between subﬁelds . This mobility is higher in highly ranked universities , and tends to follow the evolution of the “status” of ﬁelds – mathematicians at better departments tend to move out of subﬁelds of decreasing status , and into subﬁelds of improving status , see Section 4 . 4 . 9 . The scientiﬁc productivity of authors is diﬀerent between subﬁelds . In some high - status ﬁelds it tends to be highly concentrated on a small number of highly productive authors , while in other ﬁelds it decreases more slowly , see Section 7 . 2 . This fact might explain why the optimal strategy of diﬀerent departments might to focus on some ﬁelds more than others , see Section 8 . 3 . Along the way , we consider in Section 7 . 1 what indicator of scientiﬁc productivity should be used for authors . We use data on grants from the European Research Council to calibrate diﬀerent indicators of production based on the MCQ of journals ( see Section 2 below ) and come to the conclusion that indicators that best ﬁt with the opinions of panels of mathematicians tend to give a much higher weight to a small number of journals with a high MCQ . Section 8 is dedicated to possible explanations of the “value” attributed to diﬀerent ﬁelds . We consider several characteristics of subﬁelds of mathematics that could be related to how “prestigious” an area of research is . We then concentrate on the focus of a subﬁeld : to what extent researchers in this subﬁeld tend share an interest for a small number of questions ( or conjectures ) which therefore become important . The notion of focus considered here is related to , but distinct from , the notion of level of consensus in a ﬁeld . It is closer to the notion of normative integration considered by Hargens [ 11 ] , but with a twist : what is shared is not only beliefs and values , but more speciﬁcally the interest in a small set of questions or conjectures which are considered as particularly important . We will see that this notion can explain at least to some extend why some subﬁelds of mathematics seem to enjoy a higher degree of prestige than others . Section 8 . 2 shows how a keyword analysis – the use of the word “conjecture” in the title of articles or their Math Reviews entry – correlates well with other measures of “status” identiﬁed here . 4 1 . 3 Why study mathematics ? Mathematics is a suitable ﬁeld of study for the questions considered here for a number of reasons . It is a “international” scientiﬁc ﬁeld , present in one form or another in almost all universities ( since mathematics teaching is always present ) . It has well - deﬁned ﬁelds and subﬁelds , with relatively clear boundaries . The number of authors in each article is usually relatively low , allowing for better identiﬁcation of author’s roles . Another interesting feature is that the level of funding is probably less important for research in mathematics than in experimental ﬁelds , so that decision on topics to study might be less inﬂuenced by the availability of funding . Mathematics as a ﬁeld has other signiﬁcant feature that make it an interesting object of study . • It is fully international , in the sense that while some nations tend to specialize more in some subﬁelds , there is no main diﬀerence either in the main questions being considered or in the methods applied by mathematicians across the world . This diﬀers from some ﬁelds ( e . g . economics ) where cultural and political factors can play a major role . • Mathematics is a large ﬁeld , measured by the number of active mathematicians . For instance , the number of mathematicians with a faculty position in US post - secondary institutions was estimated in 2017 as 25 , 632 ( see [ 10 ] ) , to be compared to a total of 822 , 513 across all disciplines [ 12 , Table 315 . 20 ] ( so that mathematicians represents close to 3 % of faculty in the US ) . By comparison , the number of physicists with a full - time faculty position in US post - secondary institution was estimated at 10100 , so 2 . 5 times less than mathematicians . 1 The size comparison between ﬁelds might vary from one country to the other , but one can expect that mathematics remains one of the larger academic ﬁelds . • Mathematics is also an ancient ﬁeld of study , with continuous development in the last centuries . As a consequence of this development , mathematics has branched into a variety of subﬁelds , each with its own problems , methods and traditions . • Mathematics is also well determined as a ﬁeld , with a clear deﬁnition : mathematicians insist on proving the statements that they consider as results . This distinguishes them quite clearly from scientists from other scientists , who might be interested in the same questions and the same objects but with diﬀerent methods . This clear line can be seen for instance in mathematical physics , with on one side mathematicians intending to prove results , on the other physicists who do not need a formal proof once they have reached a high degree of conﬁdence in the truth of a statement . Similarly , computational engineers might be satisﬁed by an program providing numerical approximations of solutions of a partial diﬀerential equations that are close to observed solutions , while applied mathematicians tend to search for a proof that the numerical solutions are close to the real ones . Mathematics is also a convenient object of study thanks to the carefully curated and very complete bibliographic information that is available , in particular through Mathematical Reviews , a database pro - duced by the American Mathematical Society . It has a number of very interesting features that don’t have analogs in most other ﬁelds , for instance : • It provides a clear identiﬁcation of each institution and even each department within a given instition ( each department is assigned a code , composed of a ﬁrst block describing the country and a second block the institution ) . • It assigns to each individual author a number , so that even authors with the same ﬁrst and last name can be clearly distinguished . 1 A similar picture is obtained through the U . S . Bureau of Labor Statistics data on the somewhat larger group of “Postsecondary teachers” , which includes professors at post - secondary institutions . In 2018 they estimated the total number at 1 , 350 , 700 , including 51 , 250 in mathematics , 13 , 780 in physics , and 13 , 270 in economics . See https : / / www . bls . gov / ooh / education - training - and - library / postsecondary - teachers . htm 5 • Each article is given a primary and one or several secondary Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation ( M . S . C . ) code , so that one can easily determine to what extend a given article is related to a certain subﬁeld of mathematics . We believe that a hierarchy of subﬁelds might also be observed also in other ﬁelds of science . One can for instance ﬁnd a hint in the description in [ 3 ] of the attitude of high - energy physicists towards condensed - matter physics . 2 Data description 2 . 1 A database of selected mathematics articles We use data collected selectively from Math Reviews , a journal published by the American Mathematical Society containing synopsis of most articles published in the area of mathematics as well as in some related ﬁelds . The data available through Math Reviews has a number of important qualities that make it particularly useful for bibliometric studies on mathematics . For instance , it attributes a unique code to each author – even when two authors have the same ﬁrst and last name . It also attributes to each articles a series of precises disciplinary classiﬁcation codes . Finally the Math Reviews database attributes stable codes to each institution , so that aﬃliations of authors can be easily followed . Within the Math Reviews database , we selected a list of approximatively 140 journals , which can be considered to be leading journals in pure and applied mathematics . The choice of the journals was made in two steps : • A ﬁrst list of journals was selected for a previous study [ 7 ] . At the time the journals selected were those with the highest impact factor among those having a cited half - life above a threshold , according to the Journal Citation Report 2006 . • More recently , this list was completed by adding the journals ranked as A ∗ in the journal list of the Australian Math . Society 2 for mathematical sciences , one of the very few journal rankings in mathematics produced by consulting with experts ( rather than using only bibliometric data ) . This list can be considered as a reasonable proxy for a “consensus” among mathematicians of which journals are most selective and important . For each journal , we used the full list of articles published between 1984 and 2016 , recording for each article the most relevant data only ( journal name , publication year , number of pages , number of authors , MSC ( Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation ) codes , and for each author , the MR code of the author and his / her aﬃliation ) . The total number of articles in the database that we used is 247 677 . We assume that although this list of papers represents only a small fraction of the whole mathematics literature published during the period of study , it does contain most of the articles considered as really signiﬁcant by mathematicians . The list of journals considered here can be considered as somewhat arbitrary – while most of those journals should be in any study intending to study the most relevant papers in mathematics , some of the less central journals could be replaced by others with a similar standing . Moreover this collection of journals gives a certain weight for each subﬁeld , and diﬀerent choices of journals would lead to diﬀerent weighting of the subﬁelds . However this weight of each ﬁeld is not so important for the considerations made here , since our analysis of the status of subﬁelds is based on the diﬀerences in weights of subﬁelds in diﬀerent departments ( resp . journals , etc ) rather than on the weight themselves . 2 See https : / / www . austms . org . au / Rankings / AustMS _ final _ ranked . html 6 2 . 2 A database of authors and PhDs The data from Mathematical Reviews was then merged with data from Mathematical Genealogy , a re - markably complete and apparently quite accurate freely accessible database of mathematics PhD thesis . It appears that most “active” mathematicians appearing in our data from Mathematical Reviews ( those with at least 2 papers ) also appear in Mathematical Genealogy . This second source contains additional information which is used in some of the results presented below , including the date of the defense and the PhD - granting institution for many PhD theses in mathematics . Most of the data presented below are followed over the time frame of the study , from 1984 to 2016 . To avoid too much random noise , we consider 8 periods each of 4 years ( except the ﬁrst one , 1984 - 1988 , which is 5 years long ) . 2 . 3 A limited list of subﬁelds of mathematics For the purpose of this article , we deﬁned a small group of subﬁelds of mathematics , each corresponding to a small set of 2 - digit MSC codes : • Algebra , corresponding to codes 06 , 08 , 20 , 18 , 15 , 16 , 17 , • AlgGeom ( for Algebraic Geometry ) for codes 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , • DiﬀGeom ( for Diﬀerential Geometry ) for codes 51 , 52 , 53 , 32 , 58 , • Topology for codes 19 , 54 , 55 , 57 , 22 , • Analysis for codes 26 , 28 , 30 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 46 , 47 , 33 , 34 , 39 , 40 , • PDE ( for Partial Diﬀerential Equations ) for codes 31 , 35 , 44 , 45 , 49 , • DynSys ( for Dynamical Systems ) for code 37 ( appearing only 2000 ) , • Physics ( for mathematical physics ) for codes 70 , 74 , 76 , 78 , 80 , 81 , 82 , 83 , 85 , 86 , • Numerics for code 65 , • Probability for code 60 , • Statistics for code 62 , • Other for codes 00 , 01 , 04 , 97 , 03 , 05 , 68 , 73 , 90 , 91 , 92 , 93 , 94 . Note that all subﬁelds do not have the same weight , and in fact the weight of the diﬀerent ﬁelds , measured in terms of total number of articles in the database , varies quite a bit over time , see Table 1 . Note also that DynSys ( Dynamical Systems ) only appears in the period 1997 - 2000 , since it did not have a speciﬁc 2 - digit code before the 2000 revision of MSC . 1984 - 88 1989 - 92 1993 - 96 1997 - 00 2001 - 04 2005 - 08 2009 - 12 2013 - 16 Other 13 . 2 12 . 1 12 . 6 12 . 4 12 . 5 12 . 2 13 . 1 12 . 8 Algebra 4 . 6 4 . 5 4 . 7 4 . 8 4 . 6 6 . 4 7 . 4 7 . 3 AlgGeom 9 . 5 9 . 1 9 . 2 8 . 7 8 . 7 7 . 9 7 . 9 8 . 1 DiffGeom 12 . 5 13 . 4 12 . 6 10 . 3 8 . 8 7 . 8 8 . 1 8 . 5 Topology 6 . 0 5 . 7 5 . 0 4 . 6 3 . 9 3 . 8 3 . 5 3 . 8 Analysis 16 . 6 15 . 6 16 . 2 15 . 1 15 . 6 16 . 5 13 . 1 11 . 8 PDE 10 . 2 10 . 8 10 . 9 11 . 5 12 . 6 13 . 2 14 . 7 17 . 6 DynSys 0 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 0 2 . 2 4 . 5 4 . 7 4 . 1 4 . 0 Physics 3 . 5 4 . 6 4 . 5 6 . 3 6 . 7 7 . 5 6 . 8 6 . 8 Numerics 6 . 7 7 . 0 7 . 7 8 . 1 6 . 3 6 . 6 6 . 2 6 . 5 Probability 6 . 4 7 . 2 7 . 2 6 . 5 7 . 1 6 . 5 7 . 1 7 . 0 Statistics 10 . 4 9 . 4 8 . 9 8 . 9 8 . 2 6 . 5 7 . 3 5 . 2 Table 1 : Proportion of papers in diﬀerent subﬁelds 7 2 . 4 The MCQ as proxy for the “impact” of journals Part of the analysis of the status of subﬁelds of mathematics uses , or is based on , a stratiﬁcation of the journals appearing in our database , in terms of their prestige or level of selectivity . The choice of the proper indicator , to be used as a proxy for the prestige of a journal , requests some care , especially in the area of mathematics . The use of any type of bibliometric indicators has been the object of heated debates within the mathe - matics community . Its use for individual evaluations is often considered quite negatively . Moreover , some of the bibliometric indicators widely used , such as the Journal Impact Factor , are sometimes considered as crude and not well adapted to mathematics [ 1 , 9 ] . In addition to general methodological objections , one main limitation of the use of IF for mathematics is that it is based on couting citations in a 2 - year window which is too short for mathematics , where the cite half - life of articles tends to be much higher . This short window creates biases between subﬁelds of mathematics depending on their citation habits . Perhaps for this reason , Math . Reviews also provides a measure of impact of journals , the Mathematics Citation Quotient ( MCQ ) . It measures the mean number of citations to articles published by each journal over a 5 - year period , in a selected list of journals . The longer citation window , and the selection of citation sources , make it better suited than other impact measures for mathematics . This MCQ appears much better suited to mathematics than the IF . Mathematicians tend to have a very precise idea of the ranking of journals , and anecdotical evidence ( coming from e . g . evaluation panels or recruitment committees ) indicates that diﬀerent mathematicians usually have relatively similar assessment of the prestige of diﬀerent journals , even when they specialize in diﬀerent subﬁelds . It appears – although more research on this topic would be welcome – that this subjective “prestige” of journals is much better captured by the MCQ than by the IF . Here we use the MCQ 2016 as an ( imperfect ) proxy for the “prestige” of journals . This view is supported by a analysis presented in Section 7 . 1 , where it is shown that weighing each paper by a certain power of the MCQ provides an indicator that works well to identify mathematicians obtaining the highly competitive grants from the European Research Council . 3 First observations : Fields medals and top journals The ﬁrst indications of the “value” attributed to diﬀerent ﬁelds can be found by following two sources of prestige or status that are widely accepted in the mathematics community . • From the main specialties of recipients of the Fields medal , the best known and most revered prize in mathematics . • From the share of diﬀerent ﬁelds in papers published by the “top 5” mathematics journals . 3 . 1 Fields medalists A ﬁrst indication of the “status” of subﬁelds can be obtained by observing the specialties of the math - ematicians who received the top prizes in mathematics . This is done in Table 1 of the Supplementary material for the Fields medal , by far the best known and most prestigious prize in mathematics . A number of observations follow from the list of subﬁelds of Fields medalists . • Algebraic and Diﬀerential Geometry , as well as Topology , tend to dominate . • Probability , Dynamical systems , pPartial diﬀerential equations appear in the 1990s . • Statistics or Numerical mathematics do not appear at all ( yet ) . 8 Figure 1 : Share of main ﬁelds in top 3 journals There are other well - known prizes in mathematics , such as the Wolf prize , 3 or more recently the Breakthrough Prize 4 , the Abel prize 5 or the Chern Medal 6 . It appears that similar conclusions would follow from considering the recipient of those prizes . Of course a diﬀerent picture would emerge from specialized prizes focusing only on one or several subﬁelds , but none of those specialized awards has yet reached the same reputation as the Fields medal . 3 . 2 Papers in the “top 3” journals Other indications can be obtained from the primary and secondary MSC classiﬁcations of the papers published in the “top 3” journals in mathematics . There is a relatively large consensus among mathemati - cians on what the most selective journals are , with a standard list : Annals of Mathematics , Inventiones Mathematicae , and Journal of the American Mathematical Society . Those journals are for instance those considered as “Top” journals in mathematics by the ARWU ranking 7 and therefore used for their ranking of universities in the area of mathematics . Some mathematicians would tend to add a very small number of journals to this list , in particular Acta mathematica and Publications Math´ematiques de l’IHES , but those two journals are publishing a small number of articles ( typically less than 10 per year each ) and adding them to the list would not change the results of any bibliometric study much . The share of articles with primary MSC codes in the main subﬁelds is shown in Figure 1 Those three journals are highly selective , and typically publish less than 200 articles / year together , for instance they published 139 articles in 2019 . ( This contrasts strongly with other scientiﬁc ﬁelds , such as Physics , where one top journal such as Physical Review Letters publishes around 4000 articles / year , while Nature published around 4000 items in 2019 . ) For this reason , publishing in one of the top 3 journals is seen as a signiﬁcant achievements among mathematicians and can have a real impact on a mathematician’s career . The main conclusions are similar to those from the main areas of Fields medalists , although in a quantitatively more precise manner . Algebraic and Diﬀerential geometry dominate , and their weight is much larger than in the database of articles as a whole , as seen in Table 1 . But some ﬁelds – in particular Diﬀerential Geometry an Topology – see a clear decrease in their share , while others – Dynamical Systems and PDEs – have an increasing share of the number of papers . 3 The list of recipients of the Wolf prize can be found at https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Wolf _ Prize _ in _ Mathematics . 4 See https : / / breakthroughprize . org / Prize / 3 . 5 See https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Abel _ Prize . 6 See https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Chern _ Medal . 7 See http : / / www . shanghairanking . com / subject - survey / top - journals . html 9 4 Departments This section is focused on the disciplinary proﬁles of diﬀerent groups of universities . We base this analysis on the well - accepted idea that departments tend to have well - established and relatively stable levels of “status” , see [ 4 ] for a more reﬁned analysis of department hierarchies in computer science , business and history . We consider diﬀerent groups of universities , and diﬀerent ways of asserting their disciplinary special - ization . • By their scientiﬁc production ( articles published ) . • By the main ﬁelds of publication of their active mathematicians . • By their recruitments , that is , the disciplinary focus of mathematicians moving to those depart - ments . To obtain a synthetic view of the scientiﬁc focus of diﬀerent universities , we deﬁned several groups of universities , aiming towards some homogeneity within each group . • Ivy - league type universities : Columbia , Cornell , Dartmouth , Harvard , Princeton , U . of Pennsylva - nia , Yale . • Technology Institutes : Caltech , GeorgiaTech , ETH , EPFL , MIT , Stanford . • Among the remaining universities we determined 4 groups depending on their total scientiﬁc pro - duction over the whole period : those ranked 1 – 10 , 11 – 30 , 31 – 100 and 101 – 300 . Note that more reﬁned analysis are possible , for instance diﬀerentiating US and non - US institutions , or by country , etc . We have not included such analysis here for lack of space . The motivation for deﬁning those groups of universities might be clear to the reader . • Ivy - league universities are generally considered to be among the top universities in the US . They also share a certain number of characteristics , for instance they are all ( by deﬁnition ) relatively old and well - established institutions . They are not chosen here as the “best” universities , but as a rather homogeneous group of universities which are presumably aiming at academic excellence . • The small group of Technology Institutes considered here are also considered as “excellent” insti - tutions , but with a somewhat diﬀerent outlook then the Ivy - league universities . The student of those institutions tend to be mostly oriented towards engineering , and one can assume that their research activity is oriented at least in parts towards innovation and real - life applications , rather than academic research . This would lead to a specialization in subﬁelds of mathematics somewhat diﬀerent from other , more academically - oriented universities . • The other universities ( in fact those publishing a suﬃcient number of papers , since we limit our study to the top 300 institutions ) are broken down into four groups of decreasing total production according to an indicator that puts a relatively heavy weight on article in the top journals : each paper is weighted by its number of pages times the square of the MCQ of the journal . This weighting ensures that the institutions with a better rank tend to be those producing more papers in highly selective journals ( see Section 2 . 4 ) . 10 Figure 2 : Share of some subﬁelds in diﬀerent groups of universities 4 . 1 Specialization of departments , by publications The weight of diﬀerent subﬁelds varies widely depending on the type of department . Some subﬁelds have a much larger role in “elite” departments , while others tend to be much more present in less ambitious institutions . Figure 2 shows the evolution over time of the share of publication ( weighted by number of pages and MCQ of the journal ) in a limited group of subﬁelds , depending on the type of department – the full data , for all subﬁelds , can be found in Figure 1 of the Supplementary material . Algebraic geometry provides an prime example of a high - status ﬁeld : in spite of a somewhat decreasing share , it remains dominant in Ivy league departments ( approximately 17 % of papers ) while it plays a much more reduced role in less prestigious departments ( approximately 8 % in departments ranked 101 – 300 ) . Its share is much more limited in Technology Institutes , which is to be expected since its applications to engineering are relatively limited . Diﬀerential Geometry oﬀers a similar “elite” proﬁle at the beginning of the observation period , but the most striking phenomenon is that its share in Ivy league universities , and in fact in all groups of universities except ITs , decreases very markedly . The opposite can be observed for Probability theory , which is almost absent from Ivy league universities and ITs at the beginning of the observation period , but becomes important by the end . On the opposite end of the spectrum , Analysis and Numerics appear to be low - status ﬁelds at the end of the period , with a very limited role in Ivy league departments and a much larger role in the less prestigious institutions ( those ranked 101 – 300 ) . Partial diﬀerential equations ( PDEs ) shows a similar proﬁle , with a notable increase in status by the end of the observation period . It is quite apparent in the graphs that the Technological Institute have , as could be expected , a somewhat diﬀerent focus than the other universities . They have less focus on Algebraic geometry and more on Numerics , as could be expected from institutions with a strong focus on engineering programs and students , but the share of Algebraic geoemtry is still larger in those institutions than in lower - ranked universities . However they do have a strong focus on Diﬀerential geometry , which cannot really be considered as an applied ﬁeld . 11 The evolution over time of the status and share of some subﬁelds is quite striking . For instance Analysis already appeared to be a low - status area in the 1980s , with a larger role in department with a lower ranking . By the 2010s , it had almost disappeared from the Ivy - league departments , while retaining a signiﬁcant place in the departments ranked 101 – 300 . On the opposite , Partial Diﬀerential Equations was almost absent from Ivy league institution in the 1980s , but had acquired a signiﬁcant position there by the 2010s . 4 . 2 Specialization of departments , by active mathematicians Another way to look at the specialization of departments is through the specialties of their researchers . One obstacle in this direction is that articles appearing in our database are not necessarily written by members of mathematics departments . This is particularly true in some applied ﬁelds like statis - tics or numerical modelling , where authors might not be aﬃliated to a department of Mathematics ( or Mathematics and statistics , or even of Statistics ) . We intend here to measure the number of mathematicians , in the sense of scientists who devote a signiﬁcant portion of their activity to mathematics research over a long period of time , and therefore prefer excluding PhD students who leave academia after their thesis , or scientists of other ﬁelds producing only occasionally a paper that is related to mathematics and included in the data we use . For this reason , we only consider authors who have over their lifetime produced a total of 100 pages in the journals we consider , each page being weighted by the MCQ of the journal in which it is published and divided by the number of authors ( reﬂecting the relative contribution of the author ) . For each period , each mathematician is attributed a primary subﬁeld , determined as the most com - mon ﬁeld of their paper ( weighted by MCQ and number of pages ) . Note that the primary ﬁeld of mathematicians can change from one period to another . Figure 3 shows the relative weights of a selection of subﬁelds in diﬀerent types of universites , over time . Here a relative weight of 1 . 2 for Algebra in ITs , for instance , would mean that there are 120 mathematicians with main focus on Algebra in ITs when the expected number ( knowing the total number of mathematicians in ITs and the proportion of those specializing in Algebra overall ) is 100 . Figure 3 shows the resulting data for the same subﬁelds as in Figure 2 . Again , the full data for all subﬁelds is available in the Supplementary material . The results are somewhat diﬀerent from that presented in Section 4 . 1 since diﬀerent subﬁelds tend to publish more papers than others , on average ( see below ) . Comparing numbers of active mathematicians gives a better view of the focus put on diﬀerent subﬁelds by departments . The results are also quite clear , for instance Algebraic geometry appears again as a high - status ﬁelds , with a strong over - representation in Ivy league departments and under - representation in departments ranked 101 - 300 . Diﬀerential geometry is also a “high - status” ﬁeld , but with a clear decrease in its position at the end of the period , while Probability went from low status to high status over the period . Analysis , Numerics and PDEs appear as low - status ﬁelds , with a strong under - representation in top departments and a strong over - representation in 100 + departments . 4 . 3 Recruitments The graphs shown in the previous two sections show that the weight of some subﬁelds in some departments — for instance Diﬀerential geometry , or Probability theory — varies very quickly . In this section and the next we analyze the mechanism for those rapid variations , ﬁrst by considering in what subﬁelds recruitments are made , and in the next section to what extend mathematicians change from one subﬁeld to the other . One key results is that both departments and individual mathematicians tend to be quite dynamic , but that the departments with a higher “status” ( and their members ) move more quickly . To extend the analysis and obtain a more dynamics view , one can look at the proportion of diﬀerent ﬁelds among mathematicians recruited in diﬀerent groups of universities , see Figure 4 . 12 Figure 3 : Relative weights of mathematicians in selected ﬁelds depending on groups of universities Figure 4 : Share of recruitments in diﬀerent ﬁelds for diﬀerent groups of universities 13 Figure 5 : Relative share of recruitments in diﬀerent ﬁelds for diﬀerent groups of universities Figure 4 shows the proportion or recruitments ( deﬁned as arrivals of new authors in an institution , at least 2 years after the PhD ) . It displays interesting diﬀerences between the main ﬁelds where diﬀerent groups of institutions choose their new recruits . Top departments ( Ivy league and top 10 “other” de - partments ) continue to give a strong preference to Algebraic Geometry , and a decreasing place is given to Diﬀerential Geometry . Partial Diﬀerential Equations and Probability see their role increasing in basi - cally all groups of universities , while Analysis and Algebra remain important in lower - ranked institution ( ranked 301 and below ) . Figure 5 is somewhat simpler to interpret as it shows the relative shares of diﬀerent ﬁelds in the recruitments of diﬀerent groups of institutions 8 . For each group , only the 5 subﬁelds with the largest relative share of recruitments at the end of the period appear . There is again a very clear distinction between top institutions ( Ivy league , ITs , institutions ranked 1 – 10 in our list ) where “high - status” ﬁelds such as Topology and Algebraic Geometry dominate , with a relative weight close or larger than 2 , together with “new” highly regarded ﬁelds such as Probability , while Diﬀerential Geometry keeps a signiﬁcant but slightly decreasing place . On the opposite , in less regarded institutions ( ranked below 301 and even more below 901 ) the recruitments disproportionately favor Numerics , Analysis or and PDEs . 4 . 4 Individual mobility between subﬁelds It can be noted that the recruitments made in diﬀerent ﬁelds are not suﬃcient to explain the important variation in the weight of diﬀerent ﬁelds seen for instance in Figure 2 . Another possible explanation can be found in diﬀering attrition rates : at all stages of their careers , a certain proportion of mathematicians tend to stop publishing , see [ 7 ] , and this rate could vary from one ﬁeld to another . Another important element , however , is the mobility of mathematicians between ﬁelds . Figure 6 shows the mobility in and out of some “core” ﬁelds of mathematics ( excluding Statistics , Physics and Other , where an important part of publications is not from members of mathematics departments ) . More complete data can be found in tables in the Supplementary material . Here we record only the number 8 Note that the subﬁelds Statistics , Physics and Others were not considered here , again because they appear to reﬂect in an important manner recruitments made in non - mathematics departments . 14 of mathematicians who changed their main ﬁeld of publication from one period to the next ( without considering incomers who did not publish before , or outgoers who stop publishing ) , where the “main ﬁeld” is determined as the most common ﬁeld deﬁned by primary classiﬁcation of papers published in a given period . Some remarks that can be made are : • The in and out mobility is quite large for most ﬁelds and most periods – this can be explained by the fact that a signiﬁcant proportion of mathematicians are at the interface between two ﬁelds , and can lean towards one side or the other from one period to the next . • The level of mobility tends however to decrease with decreasing rank of universities – mathemati - cians at “better” universities tend to change their topics more than those at “lower” institutions . • There are very signiﬁcant imbalances between incoming and outgoing ﬂow in some periods for some ﬁelds , for instance out of Diﬀerential Geometry in the periods 1997 – 2000 and 2001 – 2004 ( out ﬂow in red ) and towards Probability in 2009 – 2012 ( in ﬂow in orange ) . Figure 6 hints at the role of individual strategies of researchers , who tend to leave some subﬁelds of decreasing status and move towards those of increasing prestige . It is conceivable that publishing in the most selective journals is perceived as easier in some subﬁelds than in others . However , moving to a new ﬁeld can be very costly in terms of time and energy , especially when moving to subﬁelds where an important background is needed , which tends to be the case of most high - status subﬁelds ( such as Algebraic geometry or Topology ) . However the transfers of authors from one subﬁeld to another , as seen in Figure 6 , might not be suﬃcient to explain the variations in the number of publications in some subﬁelds in some groups of uni - versities . The priority given to some subﬁelds in recruitments can also play a role , see Section 4 . 3 . Other explanations can be found in the attrition rate ( the proportion of mathematicians who stop publishing ) , which also appears to diﬀer markedly between subﬁelds and over time . We do not include an analysis of this phenomenon here since it would need to be relatively complex and various factors need to be taken into consideration ( e . g . the diﬀerent numbers of PhD students in diﬀerent subﬁelds , relations to industry , risk of “missing” some publications in some ﬁelds more than others , etc ) . 5 Journals 5 . 1 Discipinary focus of journals As mentioned in the introduction , another way to look at the “status” of subﬁelds of mathematics is to consider whether top - ranked journals tend to publish more often papers in some subﬁelds than in others . To perform this analysis , we use the MCQ provided by Math Reviews as a proxy for journal “quality” ( speciﬁcally , we use the 2016 value of the MCQ ) . One should note however that this analysis is somewhat complicated by the diﬀerence in publishing and in citing behaviors between subﬁelds of mathematics . Typically , papers in some subﬁelds ( for instance Partial diﬀerential equations or Statistics ) tend to be cited faster , and therefore more often in the 5 - year timeframe of the MCQ , than in others ( for instance Algebraic Geometry ) . As a consequence , journals which are specialized in some ﬁelds or just tend to publish more papers in papers in certain subﬁelds can have a higher MCQ than would be estimated from their “quality” as perceived by mathematicians . To avoid this bias , we provide two ﬁgures : Figure 7 shows the weight of diﬀerent subﬁelds in groups of journals depending on their MCQ , while Figure 8 provide the same data but excluding journals with a high degree of specialization . ( The degree of specialization used here is computed as the sum of the squares of the relative weight of each subﬁeld among papers published by the journal , where the relative weight in a given ﬁeld is 1 if the proportion of papers in that ﬁeld is the same as in the whole database ) . Although the two ﬁgures are quite comparable , some speciﬁc artifacts tend to disappear in Figure 8 . 15 Figure 6 : Transfers between subﬁelds . Top : Ivy , IT and top 10 . Bottom : 101 – 300 . 16 Figure 7 : Share of some ﬁelds according to journal MCQ Those ﬁgures quite precisely support the idea of a “ranking” of subﬁelds as already seen in Section 3 . 2 and in Section 4 , as well as the dynamics of this ranking . Algebraic Geometry is heavily over - represented in journals with a high MCQ , while Diﬀerential Geometry is over - represented , but with a declining share in top journals . On the other hand , Analysis for instance is under - represented in top journals , with a declining share , while the “status” of Probability is clearly increasing . The ﬁgures presented here only concern the same six subﬁelds as above , more complete data is available in the Supplementary materials . The general picture is again that Algebraic Geometry appears as a high - status ﬁeld , with a much higher weight in high - MCQ journals , while Diﬀerential Geometry has a high but decreasing status – its weight in high - MCQ journal decreases markedly , while its weight in lower - impact journals decreases more slowly – and the status of Probability theory increases . On the lower side of the pictures we see that Analysis , Numerics and PDEs tend to be of lower status , with a clear increase for PDEs . Removing highly specialized journals changes the picture to some ( limited ) extend , for instance it appears that the relatively high weight of Numerics in journals with MCQ between 1 and 2 is largely due to specialized journals . 5 . 2 A ﬁner look at the evolving weights of subﬁelds The “subﬁelds” introduced above can be analysed further by considering separately the main 2 - digit MSC classiﬁcation codes associated to each article by Mathematical Reviews . This more detailed analysis is interesting for instance for the ﬁeld DiﬀGeom considered above , which is deﬁned by merging 5 diﬀerent 2 - digit MSC codes : 32 ( Several Complex Variables And Analytic Spaces ) , 51 ( Geometry ) , 52 ( Convex And Discrete Geometry ) , 53 ( Diﬀerential Geometry ) and 58 ( Global Analysis , Analysis On Manifolds ) . Figure 9 shows a ﬁner analysis of the share over time of those 2 - digit MSC codes in high - impact journals . It shows quite cleary that the decline of Diﬀerential Geometry is due entirely to two 2 - digit codes : 32 ( Several Complex Variables And Analytic Spaces ) and 58 ( Global Analysis , Analysis On Manifolds ) . A similar detailed analysis could be performed for other subﬁelds , to get a better view and understanding of the evolving share of diﬀerent subﬁelds . 17 Figure 8 : Share of some ﬁelds according to journal MCQ , excluding specialized journals Figure 9 : Share of 2 - digit MSC codes in Diﬀerential Geometry in top 5 journals and in journals with MCQ between 2 and 4 18 Figure 10 : Mean number of pages / article depending on the ﬁeld 6 Publishing habits and status We have considered so far data that can reasonably be related to the “status” of a subﬁeld , such as its relative weight in diﬀerent departments or in diﬀerent journals . In this section , we consider diﬀerences in publishing habits between diﬀerent ﬁelds , ﬁrst in terms of lengths of papers , second in terms of number of co - authors . It is quite striking that in both cases there appears to be a strong relation between the “status” of a subﬁeld as seen above and the publishing habits of its authors . The results presented here can be compared to , and contrasted with , those in [ 2 , 8 ] concerning comparisons between diﬀerent ﬁelds of science . In the next section we will see how those diﬀerences in publishing habits can hint at explanations of the diﬀerences in “status” between subﬁelds . 6 . 1 Length of papers The ﬁrst parameter that we can consider is simply the average length of papers , see Figure 10 . Two remarks should be quite clear from the graphs . 1 . There is a general increase in the average length of papers , as already documented for mathematics in [ 7 ] . 2 . There is a remarkably direct relation between the “status” of subﬁelds as seen in Section 4 and in Section 5 , on one hand , and the average lengths of papers . Papers tend to be signiﬁcantly longer in “high - status” ﬁelds like Algebraic geometry , Diﬀerential Geometry – where the length of papers compared to Algebraic Geometry decreases over time – or Topology , and shorter in “low - status” ﬁelds such as Numerics or Analysis . It should be noted that the second point is in strong contrast with the inverse relation between consensus level of a ﬁeld and the average length of papers , observed when comparing diﬀerent ﬁelds of science , see e . g . [ 8 ] . This diﬀerence could be explained by the nature of papers in mathematics , which might play a diﬀerent role than in other ﬁelds of science . While in many ﬁelds a paper reports on the results of research , for instance of a series of experiments , a paper in mathematics is expected to contain a full proof of its main results – the paper is the research . Longer papers could therefore correlate with a higher level of complexity in the proofs . 6 . 2 Number of co - authors The second parameter is the mean number of co - authors of papers , as see in Figure 11 . Here too , there is a very signiﬁcant rise in the mean number of co - authors over time ( as also documented for mathematics 19 Figure 11 : Mean number of authors / article depending on the ﬁeld in [ 7 ] . Moreover , the higher the “status” of a ﬁeld , the less co - authors a papers has on average : at the end of the period of study , papers had on average less than 2 co - authors in Algebraic Geometry , Algebra , Diﬀerential Geometry and Topology , but more than 2 , 5 in Numerics , Others , Physics and Statistics . Note that the interpretation of those data might require some care . The number of co - authors tends to be higher in more applied areas , and one possible source of diﬀerence might be diﬀerences in habits towards co - authorship , for instance it is more common in some subﬁeld than in others for a PhD advisor to co - author papers with her / his PhD students . 7 Scientiﬁc productivity in diﬀerent ﬁelds It should come as no surprise , given the varying weight of diﬀerent subﬁelds as seen in Section 4 and in Section 5 , that the “productivity” of mathematicians in diﬀerent ﬁelds vary , with the amount of variation depending on the indicator of production which is considered . 7 . 1 What are proper indicators of “production” ? Before comparing scientiﬁc production between subﬁelds of mathematics , it is necessary to deﬁne a proper indicator of “quality” of scientiﬁc production . Clearly many indicators can be imagined : one could for instance count the number of pages published , or weight this number in many diﬀerent ways . One therefore needs a measure of how “reasonable” an indicator is . For the purpose of this study , the most relevant indicators are those which best ﬁt with the assessments of experts in the ﬁeld of mathematics . To assess the quality of possible indicators , we use a large set of projects positively evaluated by experts : the projects funded by the European Research Council ( ERC ) in the area of mathematics ( panel PE1 ) . This is a total of 389 projects , in three categories ( “Starting” , “Consolidator” and “Advanced” grants ) corresponding to diﬀerent age groups , always with only one principal investigator . Since the main data on the funded projects is freely available ( including the identity of the PI ) , it is possible to estimate to what extend a given bibliometric indicator correlates well with the obtention of ERC grants . We considered what type of bibliometric indicator to use in this light . Speciﬁcally , we tried to estimate to what extend diﬀerent indicators based on the number of pages , co - authors and MCQ of the journal . We particularly focused on the best way to take into account the MCQ of journals . For diﬀerent indicators , we computed how many ERC grantees would be within the top 50 , 100 , 200 , 500 , 1000 and 5000 authors in our database ( over all years ) . The results are shown in Table 2 using as indicator the sum , for each author , over all the papers in our database of the number of pages times a power of the MCQ 2016 of the journal where it was published : from power 0 ( ﬁrst column ) to power 3 ( rightmost column ) . As can be seen , the best results are obtained , depending on the line , by a power 2 or 2 . 5 of the MCQ . In addition : 20 Group MCQ 0 MCQ 1 MCQ 2 MCQ 2 . 5 MCQ 3 top 50 5 7 11 10 10 top 100 13 16 16 16 15 top 200 29 34 33 36 32 top 500 54 62 73 69 63 top 1000 93 109 110 113 113 top 5000 241 257 267 266 261 Table 2 : Number of ERC grantees among top producers according to diﬀerent indicators Figure 12 : Mean production ( pages times MCQ 2 shared between authors ) of diﬀerent groups of authors depending on the ﬁeld • Taking into account the number of pages leads to clearly better results than just counting the number of papers . • Taking into account the number of co - authors ( for instance by dividing the weight attributed of a paper by the number of co - authors ) leads to worse results . In the following section we use one of the indicators that gives the best ﬁt – each paper is weighted by the product of the number of pages by the square of the MCQ of the journal – to give an estimate of the “production” of mathematicians in diﬀerent ﬁelds . 7 . 2 Diﬀering production between ﬁelds Using the indicator above , it is possible to measure the “productivity” of mathematicians in diﬀerent subﬁelds . The results are presented in Figure 12 . For each subﬁeld , the graphs present the average “production” of the mathematicians in a group deﬁned through the “ranking” of all authors by production in a given period , for instance the ﬁrst two graphs are for the top 50 authors in each ﬁeld , in each period , the graphs number 3 and 4 for the authors ranked between rank 51 and 200 , etc . In each case we split the subﬁelds in two groups for clarity . 21 To avoid biases related to specialized journals having a relatively high MCQ due to faster citation rates in some ﬁelds , the data here was limited to journals having a specialization index ( as deﬁned in Section 5 . 1 ) at most 70 . This excludes a relatively small number of journals with a higher level of specialization . The data is quite reminiscent to the results presented above concerning the relative weights of diﬀerent ﬁelds in top 5 journals or with journals with higher MCQ ( as could be expected ) but also with recruitments in higher status departments . The mean production is highest in ﬁelds that were identiﬁed as “high - status” , in particular Algebraic and Diﬀerential geometry , lower in statistics . Two relatively striking phenomena however can be noted in the second part of the time frame consid - ered here . • Authors in Partial diﬀerential equations have a high production – as high as those in “high - status” ﬁelds for highly productive authors ( top 50 of each ﬁeld ) and much larger among less productive authors ( more than twice higher , in the last period , for authors ranked 501 – 2000 ) . • Some authors in Numerics also have a relatively high “productivity” , as high in the last period , in the group of most productive authors , as for Algebra or Analysis . Those phenomena should be considered with some care , since they could to some extend be explained by diﬀerences in the publication and citation practices in diﬀerent ﬁelds . 8 Analysis 8 . 1 How can the “status” of subﬁelds be explained ? The data presented above leads to a simple question : what can explain the preference of top depart - ments / journals for certain ﬁelds ? We can propose some possible answers . • Some ﬁelds are more useful or important for applications than others . This does not seem to be the correct explanation since top departments tend to have preferences which are opposite to this orientation . Funding agencies tend to prefer those application - oriented ﬁelds , which should provide departments another strong reason to develop them , but that’s not what’s happening . 9 • Maximizing external funding . For the same reason , this explanation does not seem to resist scruti - nity , since funding agency tend to prefer more applied ﬁelds , which also tend to have lower “status” as determined above . • The “impact” of a ﬁeld , as measured by standard indicators such as the number of citations that a paper can be expected to attract . Here again the data seems to clearly invalidate this explanation , since the “high - status” ﬁelds , such as Algebraic Geometry , are typically those where the impact of papers ( at least in the 2 years after publication considered by the Impact factor ) is the lowest , while ﬁelds with much higher citation impact , such as Statistics of Numerics , appear as having a much lower “status” . 10 • Departments tend to maximize another type of impact , closer to the indicator used in the previous Section 7 . 1 , and to the assessment that other mathematicians have of the relevance and importance of results . This explanation seems broadly validated by comparing the results of Sections 4 . 2 and 4 . 3 and Section 7 . 2 , but it is somewhat circular and leads to another very close question : why do the results in some ﬁeld appear more relevant or important to mathematicians than in others ? 9 As an example , in 2011 , EPSERC decided to fund PhD scholarships only in the areas of statistics and applied probability , see http : / / blogs . nature . com / news / 2011 / 09 / uk _ mathematicians _ protest _ fell . html . 10 A simple experiment conﬁrming this view can be performed by checking the number of citations of say the 10th most cited author in google scholar with a given “label” . On June 21 , 2020 , this yields for instance 10 156 citations for the 10th most cited author with the label “algebraic geometry” , vs 166 049 citations for the 10th most cited author with the label “statistics” . 22 • Consensus level . One can be tempted to extend to mathematics a main explanation of the “hierarchy of science” , namely , by a diﬀerence in level of consensus between diﬀerent subﬁelds . This explanation however runs into an obvious diﬃculty : the consensus level tends to be extremely and uniformly high across mathematics , since all published papers are expected to contain full and complete proofs and therefore to only present results that are unquestionably true . • Focus . This is the main explanation which we would like to put forward . Preferred ﬁelds tend to correspond to those where there is a strong and shared focus on well - identiﬁed problems . This can be reﬂected in some bibliometric data : – Longer papers , because more eﬀorts and technical developments are often necessary to make progress on a problem which is well identiﬁed and on which other experts already tried to make progress . – Less co - authors / paper , for a similar reason – depth and technical diﬃculties tend to increase the cost / beneﬁt ratio of collaboration ( too much time is spent explaining new ideas to collab - orators ) . We present in the next section some ( limited ) data supporting this assumption , showing that subﬁelds where the word conjecture is used more often tend to be higher - status . • Relation to teaching . Another possible hypothesis is that some subﬁelds are more relevant to teach - ing , in the sense that their researchers tend to be more involved in or dedicated to the teaching activities of their departments . We don’t have any data here to support or contradict this hypoth - esis . • Some ﬁelds oﬀer better job perspectives . This is another simple explanation that does not appear to resist scrutinity . In fact , a quick search by keywords on the available positions on mathjobs . org , which is perhaps the main source of job advertisements in mathematics ( whether academic or non - academic ) seems to indicate that more jobs are available in lower - status subﬁelds such as Statistics or Numerical analysis than in “high - status” ﬁelds such as Algebraic geometry . In the rest of this section we discuss evidence supporting the idea that the level of focus of a subﬁeld of mathematics is related to its position in the “hierarchy of subﬁelds” . 8 . 2 The focus of a ﬁeld The notion of focus of a ﬁeld , as deﬁned above , cannot be directly measured or even rigorously deﬁned here . A ﬁeld should be considered as more focused if • it is structured around a limited number of important questions ( or conjectures ) , • the active researchers in the ﬁeld are aware of most of those questions , • they agree that progress on one of those questions would be highly valuable for the ﬁeld . Algebraic geometry is an example of a strongly focused ﬁeld , with a number of well - known conjecture ( including for instance the Riemann Hypothesis , Fermat’s last theorem until it was proved in 1994 , and a number of others ) shaping the ﬁeld . There remain a number of old , well - known and more or less central conjectures in the ﬁeld . 11 Diﬀerential geometry was probably more focused in the 1980s than it is now , since a number of key conjectures ( the Calabi and Yamabe conjecture , the Geometrization conjecture , etc ) were proved 11 One can consult for instance the somewhat random list on https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / List _ of _ conjectures to see that Algebraic geometry , and in particular Number theory , appear prominently . 23 Figure 13 : Proportion of papers for which the word “conjecture” occurs in the Math Reviews entry between the late 1970s and the early 2000s . On the opposite , One could consider that Probability theory also became much more focused on some key conjectures from the 1980s on , thanks in particular to new connections to statistical physics ( e . g . the conformal invariance of the Ising model at critical temperature ) or through internal motivations ( e . g . the self - intersection properties of the Brownian motion ) . Other ﬁelds , such as Statistics or Numerical modelling , appear much less focused on a small number of important problems , and much more on ﬁnding new methods to solve problems that are important in applications . The focus of a ﬁeld is related directly to its place in the awards of Fields medals , as seen in Section 3 . 1 , since Fields medals tend to be awarded to individuals who have solved ( or made a key progress ) in a well - known problem . The same applies to a lower extend to publications in top 5 journals , as seen in Section 3 . 2 , since the high level of selectivity of those journals means that papers that are accepted also often provide an important progress on a well - established problem . One indirect way to assess the focus of a subﬁeld of mathematics is by measuring how often the word “conjecture” appears in the Math Reviews entry of papers . Some results are shown in Figure 13 . ( The results are obtained by directly using the mathscinet web interface to Math Reviews and counting the number of papers in a given period with a given primary MSC code , and then the number of those for which the word “conjecture” appears in the entry . ) Although partial only , this data appears to conﬁrm a relation between the focus of a ﬁeld , as measured in this manner , and the status of subﬁelds as seen above . Algebraic geometry makes a considerable use of the word , which appears in the entries of more than 15 % of articles . On the opposite , Statistics barely uses it , while Probability theory is in an intermediate situation and the use of the word is increasing markedly over the period of study . 8 . 3 Departmental and institutional strategies The data presented in Section 4 . 3 provides a glimpse into the recruitments choices of mathematics depart - ments . Can the “status” of subﬁelds explain the thematic choices made by diﬀerent types of departments , as seen in Section 4 . 3 ? Clearly , diﬀerent types of departments have diﬀerent needs . For instance , mathematics departments in Technology Institutes have a responsibility towards teaching mathematics to future engineers , and this could explain a stronger activity in areas like Partial diﬀerential equations or in Probability ( since a strong background in probability theory is necessary for curricula in data science or quantitative ﬁnance ) . This might explain some speciﬁcities in Figures 4 and 5 . However the “productivity” data in Section 7 . 2 can also explain the diﬀerences in the recruitment policy of diﬀerent types of departments , if we assume ( as an obviously simplistic model ) that departments aim at maximizing their output , in the sense of the indicator used in Section 7 . 2 . Indeed , under this hypothesis : 24 • Top departments would tend to give priority to ﬁelds with high output for top researchers , and therefore to “high - status” ﬁelds such as Algebraic geometry – as seems to be the case , see Figures 4 and 5 . • Lower - ranking departments might not be able to compete for the most productive researchers in the “high - status” ﬁelds . Figure 12 shows that the output of authors drops quite dramatically between say the group of authors ranked 1 – 50 ( according to their output ) and those ranked 200 – 500 . As a consequence , a better strategy for less competitive departments might be to attract highly productive researchers in a somewhat lower - status ﬁelds , such as Analysis or Algebra , or on newly fashionable ﬁelds , such as Probability . Clearly , more research is needed into understanding how institutions or departments choose to orient their resources towards one ﬁeld or research direction or another . Acknowledgements The author is grateful to Pierre - Michel Menger and Yann Renisio for many discussions , remarks and helpful comments on this work and related results , and to Fr´ed´erique Sachwald useful remarks on a preliminary version of the text . A List of journals used Tables 3 , 4 and 5 show the list of journals considered here , with , for each journal , its short code , the number of papers published , and the MCQ 2016 of the journal . 12 References [ 1 ] Robert Adler , John Ewing , and Peter Taylor , Citation statistics : a report from the international mathematical union ( imu ) in cooperation with the international council of industrial and applied mathematics ( iciam ) and the institute of mathematical statistics ( ims ) , Statistical Science 24 ( 2009 ) , no . 1 , 1 – 14 . [ 2 ] John M Braxton and Lowell L Hargens , Variation among academic disciplines : Analytical frame - works and research , Higher education – New York – Agathon press incorporated 11 ( 1996 ) , 1 – 46 . [ 3 ] Davide Castelvecchi and Barry Simon , The mathematician who helped to reshape physics , Nature 584 ( 2020 ) , no . 7819 , 20 – 20 . [ 4 ] Aaron Clauset , Samuel Arbesman , and Daniel B Larremore , Systematic inequality and hierarchy in faculty hiring networks , Science advances 1 ( 2015 ) , no . 1 , e1400005 . [ 5 ] Stephen Cole , The hierarchy of the sciences ? , American Journal of Sociology 89 ( 1983 ) , no . 1 , 111 – 139 . [ 6 ] Auguste Comte , Cours de philosophie positive : La philosophie astronomique et la philosophie de la physique , vol . 2 , Bachelier , 1835 . [ 7 ] Pierre Dubois , Jean - Charles Rochet , and Jean - Marc Schlenker , Productivity and mobility in academic research : Evidence from mathematicians , Scientometrics 98 ( 2014 ) , no . 3 , 1669 – 1701 , Working Paper IDEI 606 and TSE 10 - 160 , May 2010 . 12 Errors in the table , to be corrected , in particular MCQs added not taken into account . 25 Journal name Code # papers MCQ 2016 ACM Trans . Math . Software acmms 648 1 . 72 Acta Math . acta 469 3 . 51 Acta Numer . actaNum 98 5 . 31 Adv . Comput . Math . advCompMath 978 0 . 91 Adv . Differential Equations AdvDiffEq 379 1 . 07 Adv . Math . advances 4243 1 . 52 Adv . Nonlinear Stud . AdvNLStud 466 0 . 88 Adv . Theor . Math . Phys . ATMP 316 0 . 96 Adv . in Appl . Probab . AdvApplProba 1925 0 . 64 Adv . in Math . advances 208 1 . 52 Algebr . Geom . Topol . agt 985 0 . 69 Amer . J . Math . ajm 1595 1 . 35 Anal . PDE AnalPDE 321 1 . 88 Ann . Appl . Probab . AnnApplProba 1751 1 . 33 Ann . Appl . Stat . AnnApplStat 647 0 . 32 Ann . Comb . annalsCombi 384 0 . 61 Ann . Inst . H . Poincar’e Anal . Non Lin’eaire ihpan 1250 2 . 25 Ann . Inst . H . Poincar’e Probab . Statist . ihpProba 1252 1 . 18 Ann . Probab . AnnProba 2881 1 . 77 Ann . Sc . Norm . Super . Pisa Cl . Sci . ( 5 ) pisa 360 1 . 24 Ann . Sci . ’Ecole Norm . Sup . ( 4 ) asens 846 2 . 17 Ann . Statist . AnnStat 3546 1 . 65 Ann . of Math . ( 2 ) annals 1547 3 . 81 Appl . Comput . Harmon . Anal . acha 935 1 . 11 Arch . Ration . Mech . Anal . ARMA 1015 2 . 44 Ark . Mat . arkiv 692 0 . 75 Automatica J . IFAC Automatica 3801 0 . 95 Bernoulli bernoulli 1196 0 . 91 Biometrika biometrika 2524 0 . 8 Bull . Amer . Math . Soc . ( N . S . ) bams 974 0 . 74 Calc . Var . Partial Differential Equations cvpde 500 1 . 65 Chaos Chaos 1498 0 . 24 Combin . Probab . Comput . CombProbaComput 1134 0 . 78 Combinatorica combinatorica 1256 0 . 88 Comm . Math . Phys . cmp 2578 1 . 45 Comm . Partial Differential Equations commpde 2343 1 . 78 Comm . Pure Appl . Math . cpam 1452 2 . 85 Comment . Math . Helv . cmh 1146 1 . 03 Compos . Math . compositio 940 1 . 35 Compositio Math . compositio 1318 1 . 35 Comput . Complexity computcomp 414 0 . 41 Constr . Approx . constr 1013 1 . 0 Discrete Comput . Geom . dcg 2086 0 . 61 Discrete Contin . Dyn . Syst . dcds 4087 0 . 8 Duke Math . J . compositio 2656 2 . 29 Table 3 : List of journals considered [ 8 ] Daniele Fanelli and Wolfgang Gl¨anzel , Bibliometric evidence for a hierarchy of the sciences , PLoS one 8 ( 2013 ) , no . 6 . [ 9 ] Antonia Ferrer - Sapena , Enrique A S´anchez - P´erez , Fernanda Peset , Luis - Mill´an Gonz´alez , and Rafael Aleixandre - Benavent , The impact factor as a measuring tool of the prestige of the journals in research assessment in mathematics , Research evaluation 25 ( 2016 ) , no . 3 , 306 – 314 . [ 10 ] Amanda L Golbeck , Colleen A Rose , and Thomas H Barr , Fall 2017 departmental proﬁle report , Notices of the American Mathematical Society 66 ( 2019 ) , no . 10 , 1721 – 1730 . [ 11 ] Lowell L Hargens , Patterns of scientiﬁc research , Washington , DC : American Sociological Associa - tion ( 1975 ) . [ 12 ] Thomas D Snyder , Cristobal De Brey , and Sally A Dillow , Digest of education statistics 2017 , nces 2018 - 070 . , National Center for Education Statistics ( 2019 ) . 26 Journal name Code # papers MCQ 2016 Dyn . Syst . DynSys 436 0 . 46 Econometric Theory EconTheory 478 0 . 25 Econometrica econometrica 1622 0 . 85 Electron . Comm . Probab . ElectrCommunProba 908 0 . 61 Electron . J . Combin . elecJComb 3070 0 . 52 Electron . J . Probab . ElectronJProba 1204 0 . 99 Ergodic Theory Dynam . Systems etds 949 0 . 91 Expo . Math . expo 395 0 . 57 Exposition . Math . expo 340 0 . 57 Finance Stoch . FinancStoch 495 1 . 26 Geom . Funct . Anal . gafa 1107 2 . 0 Geom . Topol . geotopo 907 1 . 37 IMA J . Numer . Anal . imajna 1362 1 . 5 Indiana Univ . Math . J . indiana 2181 1 . 06 Infin . Dimens . Anal . Quantum Probab . Relat . Top . InfinDimAnal 642 0 . 6 Inst . Hautes ’Etudes Sci . Publ . Math . ihes 280 4 . 2 Int . Math . Res . Not . irmn 3221 1 . 08 Interfaces Free Bound . interface 221 0 Invent . Math . inventiones 2735 2 . 89 Inverse Problems inverse 3397 1 . 24 J . Algebra JAlgebra 4680 0 . 62 J . Algebraic Geom . jag 661 1 . 41 J . Amer . Math . Soc . bams 853 3 . 56 J . Amer . Statist . Assoc . JAmStatAssoc 3185 0 . 84 J . Bus . Econom . Statist . JBusEconStat 355 0 . 17 J . Combin . Theory Ser . A JCombThA 3072 1 . 01 J . Combin . Theory Ser . B JCombThB 2012 1 . 1 J . Comput . Graph . Statist . JComputGraphStat 330 0 . 4 J . Cryptology jcryptol 450 1 . 47 J . Differential Equations jde 6754 1 . 74 J . Differential Geom . jdg 1551 1 . 56 J . Eur . Math . Soc . ( JEMS ) jems 420 2 . 06 J . Fluid Mech . JFluidMech 3467 0 . 16 J . Funct . Anal . cmh 6113 1 . 31 J . Geom . Phys . jGeomPhys 2843 0 . 64 J . Lond . Math . Soc . ( 2 ) jlms 896 1 . 04 J . London Math . Soc . ( 2 ) jlms 2328 1 . 04 J . Math . Anal . Appl . commpde 20090 0 . 8 J . Math . Biol . JMathBio 962 0 . 75 J . Math . Log . jmathlog 84 1 . 02 J . Math . Pures Appl . ( 9 ) jmpa 1326 1 . 8 J . Mech . Phys . Solids JMSS 1001 0 . 42 J . Nonlinear Sci . jnls 305 1 . 25 J . R . Stat . Soc . Ser . B Stat . Methodol . JRStatSocB 515 1 . 83 J . R . Stat . Soc . Ser . B . Stat . Methodol . JRSSB 190 1 . 67 J . Reine Angew . Math . crelle 3250 1 . 3 Table 4 : List of journals considered , cont’d 27 Journal name Code # papers MCQ 2016 J . Statist . Plann . Inference JStatPlan 5841 0 . 28 J . Theoret . Biol . JThBio 600 0 . 22 J . Theoret . Probab . JTheorProba 1442 0 . 68 J . Topol . jTopol 337 1 . 15 Math . Ann . mathann 4138 1 . 28 Math . Comp . mathcomput 3608 1 . 3 Math . Oper . Res . MOR 530 1 . 08 Math . Program . mathprog 1684 1 . 38 Math . Programming mathprog 1210 1 . 69 Math . Res . Lett . mrl 1823 0 . 81 Math . Z . mathz 4631 0 . 83 Mem . Amer . Math . Soc . bams 879 2 . 5 Nonlinearity nonlinearity 3222 1 . 18 Nuclear Phys . B NuclPhysB 2256 0 . 14 Numer . Linear Algebra Appl . numLinAlgA 1035 1 . 07 Numer . Math . numermath 2720 1 . 56 Oper . Res . OpRe 932 0 . 57 Phys . D physicad 4908 0 . 75 Probab . Theory Relat . Fields PTRF 86 1 . 81 Probab . Theory Related Fields PTRF 2202 1 . 81 Proc . Lond . Math . Soc . ( 3 ) plms 686 1 . 36 Proc . London Math . Soc . ( 3 ) crelle 1153 1 . 26 Publ . Mat . PublMath 848 0 . 78 Q . J . Math . qjm 732 0 . 68 Quart . J . Math . Oxford Ser . ( 2 ) qjm 549 0 . 68 Random Structures Algorithms random 1206 1 . 16 Rev . Mat . Iberoam . rmibero 442 1 . 11 Rev . Mat . Iberoamericana rmibero 458 1 . 19 SIAM J . Appl . Math . siamjam 3116 1 . 01 SIAM J . Comput . siamjc 2651 1 . 24 SIAM J . Control Optim . siamco 3425 1 . 08 SIAM J . Math . Anal . siamma 3381 1 . 55 SIAM J . Matrix Anal . Appl . siamjmaa 2160 1 . 63 SIAM J . Numer . Anal . siamjsc 3766 1 . 88 SIAM J . Optim . siamopti 1812 1 . 84 SIAM J . Sci . Comput . siamjsc 3440 1 . 56 SIAM Rev . siamrev 1165 1 . 03 Scand . J . Stat . ScandJStat 447 0 . 39 Scand . J . Statist . ScandJStat 838 0 . 39 Siberian J . Differential Equations jde 17 0 . 0 Statist . Sci . StatSci 711 0 . 54 Statist . Sinica StatSinica 1646 0 . 6 Stochastic Process . Appl . SochProcAppl 3435 1 . 01 Stud . Appl . Math . studAM 1031 0 . 74 Topology topology 1199 1 . 15 Trans . Amer . Math . Soc . jfa 6956 1 . 23 Table 5 : List of journals considered , cont’d 28