Strategic Management Journal Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) Published online EarlyView 8 July 2013 in Wiley Online Library ( wileyonlinelibrary . com ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj . 2159 Received 11 August 2011 ; Final revision received 16 July 2012 COMPLEMENTARY ASSETS AS PIPES AND PRISMS : INNOVATION INCENTIVES AND TRAJECTORY CHOICES BRIAN WU , 1 ZHIXI WAN , 2 and DANIEL A . LEVINTHAL 3 * 1 StephenM . RossSchoolofBusiness , UniversityofMichigan , AnnArbor , Michigan , U . S . A . 2 CollegeofBusiness , UniversityofIllinoisatUrbana - Champaign , Champaign , Illinois , U . S . A . 3 WhartonSchool , UniversityofPennsylvania , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , U . S . A . The issue of the failure of incumbent ﬁrms in the face of radical technical change has been a central question in the technology strategy domain for some time . We add to prior contributions by highlighting the role a ﬁrm’s existing set of complementary assets have in inﬂuencing its investment in alternative technological trajectories . We develop an analytical model that considers ﬁrm heterogeneity with respect to both technological trajectories and complementary assets . Complementary assets play a dual role in incumbents’ investment behavior toward radical technological change : they are not only resources ( pipes ) that can buffer ﬁrms from technology change , but also prisms through which ﬁrms view those changes , inﬂuencing both the magnitude of resources that should be invested and the trajectory to which these resources should be directed . Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . INTRODUCTION A long - standing interest in the technology strat - egy domain has been the question of the failure of incumbent ﬁrms in the face of radical tech - nical change ( Christensen , 1997 ; Henderson and Clark , 1990 ; Tushman and Anderson , 1986 ) . In explaining such failure , early work within eco - nomics , such as Arrow ( 1962 ) and Reinganum ( 1983 ) , stressed the incentives established ﬁrms face with respect to innovations that might replace their existing products or services . The strategy literature , such as Tushman and Anderson ( 1986 ) , and work on evolutionary economics , such as Dosi Keywords : radical technological change ; incumbent fail - ure ; complementary assets ; innovation incentives ; techni - cal trajectory * Correspondence to : Daniel A . Levinthal , Wharton School , Uni - versity of Pennsylvania , 3209 Steinberg - Dietrich Hall , Philadel - phia , PA 19104 – 6370 , U . S . A . E - mail : dlev @ wharton . upenn . edu Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . ( 1982 ) and Nelson and Winter ( 1982 ) , emphasized the distinct capabilities that alternative technolo - gies may require . An innovation is radical in the economic sense if the new technology is a preferred substitute for the old technology ( Arrow , 1962 ; Reinganum , 1983 ) ; for such innovations , the incumbent’s investment in innovation will cannibalize its existing prod - ucts . 1 The incumbent’s marginal beneﬁt of invest - ment is lower than that of the entrant and hence it will have less incentive to invest than the entrant . Thus , the economics literature explicitly suggests that the incumbent failure stems from an under - investment in radical technologies . An innovation is viewed as radical in the organizational sense 1 Germane to the current work , Dew , Goldfarb , and Sarasvathy ( 2006 ) extend the Arrow ( 1962 ) and Reinganum ( 1983 ) analyses to include the effect of complementary assets on an incumbent’s incentives in a patent race . 1258 B . Wu , Z . Wan , and D . A . Levinthal if the innovation is competence destroying with respect to a ﬁrm’s technical capabilities ( Tushman and Anderson , 1986 ) . With their existing capabil - ities rendered obsolete , incumbent ﬁrms are less likely to introduce radical innovations compared to new entrants equipped with the relevant tech - nical capabilities ( Tushman and Anderson , 1986 ) . Consistent with this implication , Henderson shows that ‘incumbent ﬁrms appear to have rationally anticipated less productive research efforts when they invested in innovation that was radical in the organizational sense , and thus to have invested no more than entrants’ ( Henderson , 1993 : 264 ) . That is , the destruction of capabilities is likely to lead to a reduction in investment in the associated new technologies . In this explanation , incumbent ﬁrms’ lower investment in radical innovations is not the cause of incumbent failure ; rather , both lower investments and incumbent failure are driven by the obsolescence of underlying capabilities . Contrary to the association between lower investments and incumbent failure , however , some in - depth case studies point out a puzzling diver - gence : incumbent ﬁrms often invest signiﬁcant amounts in radical innovations , but develop infe - rior versions of the new technology ( Rosenbloom , 2000 ; Tripsas , 1997 ; Tripsas and Gavetti , 2000 ) . Tripsas ( 1997 ) shows that a lack of investment in R & D was not responsible for incumbent fail - ure within the typesetter industry , which went through three generations of radical transforma - tions . Incumbents actually invested heavily in the new product generations : ‘qualitative data from interviews with both management and develop - ment engineers indicate that the level of invest - ment by incumbents was at least equivalent to that of new entrants’ ( Tripsas , 1997 : 130 ) . However , the technical performance of products developed by incumbents during each new technology period was inferior to the performance of the entrant’s products . Relatedly , Tripsas and Gavetti ( 2000 ) show that Polaroid committed substantial invest - ments to digital imaging technologies when such technologies ﬁrst emerged as a potential threat to its instant camera business : ‘An electronic imag - ing group was formed in 1981 , and as part of this effort work began on a microelectronics labora - tory . The microelectronics laboratory opened up in 1986 after a capital investment of about $ 30 mil - lion , and with an operating budget of about $ 10 million / year . By 1989 , 42 percent of [ Polaroid’s ] R & D dollars were devoted to exploring a broad range of digital imaging technologies’ ( Tripsas and Gavetti , 2000 : 1152 ) . Despite such signiﬁ - cant efforts , Polaroid declared bankruptcy in 2001 . Rosenbloom ( 2000 ) shows that National Cash Register Company ( NCR ) was among the pioneers seeking to make a transition to electronics from mechanical cash registers . NCR began to engage in in - house electronics research activities as early as 1938 and entered the computer industry in 1953 by acquiring Computer Research Corporation ( CRC ) , one of the ﬁrst computer companies . While NCR eventually survived the technological change after decades of restructuring , it encountered a deep cri - sis in the early stages of this transition . This gap between the theoretical literature and empirical observations is further illustrated by Kodak’s investment behavior vis - ` a - vis digital pho - tography ( Benner , 2010 ; Benner and Tripsas , 2012 ) . Digital photography appears to represent a radical technological change in both an eco - nomic and organizational sense . First , from an economic perspective , digital imaging can dis - place traditional ﬁlm - based imaging . As Kodak entered the digital imaging ﬁeld , it had to can - nibalize its own traditional ﬁlm sales . In con - trast , the entrants from the computer and consumer electronics industries , such as HP and Sony , did not face the same problem . Thus , other things being equal , this cannibalization effect should have decreased Kodak’s incentive to invest in the digital imaging ﬁeld . Perhaps a more fundamental factor in determin - ing Kodak’s investment behavior , however , is the shift away from the chemistry - based technology domain of silver halide ﬁlm to the electronic - based digital technology domain of digital cam - eras . R & D initiatives along the new technology domain rendered obsolete the skills and knowledge that Kodak accumulated in the chemistry - based domain . In contrast , new entrants , including both new ventures and de alio entrants coming from electronic and computer industries , had a capabil - ity set consonant with the new technology domain . Thus , existing theories of both economic sub - stitutes and competence - destroying change would predict that Kodak would lag behind in investing in digital photography . However , in spite of these considerations , Kodak made aggressive investment very early on in digital ( Benner , 2010 ) and , indeed , invented the ﬁrst digital camera in 1975 . More generally , Kodak had one of the highest patenting rates in digital Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Complementary Assets as Pipes and Prisms 1259 technology ( Benner and Tripsas , 2012 ) and by the early 1990s , 40 to 50 percent of Kodak’s patents were already directed at digital . 2 Despite these early , enormous efforts , Kodak did not achieve commercial and technical success in the digital camera market . Indeed , Kodak ﬁled for bankruptcy protection in January 2012 . One explanation for this paradox is agency behavior : managers in incumbent ﬁrms may squan - der their retained earnings on new technologies in which they should not have invested in an attempt to sustain ultimately unsustainable com - petitive positions . As a consequence , these incum - bents may spend enormous amounts of capital on such technologies without obtaining adequate returns for their shareholders . From this perspec - tive , such incumbent ﬁrms would better serve their shareholders by returning cash via dividends or share buybacks ( Jensen , 1993 ) . We do not disagree with this possibility . In this study , however , we ask whether there is an economic rationale for incum - bents’ substantial investments in radical innova - tions , even in a setting in which these investments yield little in the way of competitive success . By doing so , we believe we contribute to a more complete understanding of the various mechanisms underlying incumbent ﬁrm strategic reorientation processes ( Agarwal and Helfat , 2009 ) . A PERSPECTIVE ON COMPLEMENTARY ASSETS AND TECHNOLOGICAL TRAJECTORIES Theoretical basis To address the puzzling divergence between investment efforts and innovation outcome , we suggest that it is important to examine not only the impact of a ﬁrm’s existing capabilities on the magnitude of its investments in new technologies , but also the qualitative nature of those investments and , in particular , the speciﬁc technological trajec - tories the ﬁrm pursues . The direction of techno - logical change is a central element in Christensen’s ( 1997 ) argument that established ﬁrms pursue tech - nological trajectories that are consonant with the 2 This ﬁgure is based on Kodak’s patent data from the NBER Patent Data Project ( https : / / sites . google . com / site / patentdataproject / Home / downloads ) and uses the digital camera patent classes deﬁned by Benner and Tripsas ( 2012 ) . ﬁrms’ existing consumers . Christensen’s ( 1997 ) important contribution pointed to the critical role of ﬁrms’ resource allocation processes and to the strong claim that existing customers and market segments served might have on such processes . He argues that incumbent disk drive manufacturers did not lack in resource commitments to research and new product development or in underlying capa - bilities but , as a result of being embedded in a particular set of customer relations , were led to continue to invest in the established market seg - ment and to largely ignore promising new techno - logical approaches . In a similar vein , Adner and Snow ( 2010 ) highlight the role of demand hetero - geneity on incumbent ﬁrms’ strategic reorientation . The arrival of the new technology reveals het - erogeneous consumer preferences on the demand side . While incumbent ﬁrms can choose to com - pete head - to - head with new entrants on the new technology , they may also choose to strategically retreat to a smaller niche where their old technolo - gies are still applicable or possibly redeploy their old technologies to a new market . As a result , it might appear that the incumbent failed in the main - stream market , although it could have strategically chosen to exit the market or create a hybrid prod - uct , melding the old and new technology to serve the mainstream market . This loose coupling between the magnitude of investment and commercial outcome is also addressed by recent work that takes a cognitive perspective on ﬁrms’ technology strategies ( Ben - ner and Tripsas , 2012 ; Gilbert , 2005 ; Tripsas and Gavetti , 2000 ) . Incumbent ﬁrms may choose to invest in radical innovations because they believe in the importance of major inventions , somewhat independent of their technological capabilities to pursue these innovations . For instance , Polaroid decided to invest in digital innovation , not because it is similar to instant photography in terms of capability requirements , but because digital inno - vation was viewed as another ‘major invention’ like instant photography ( Tripsas and Gavetti , 2000 ) and consistent with the ﬁrm’s , and in partic - ular Edwin Land’s ( Polaroid cofounder and pres - ident ) sense of identity as an ‘innovator . ’ In gen - eral , cognitive frames , often formed in incum - bents’ antecedent competitive contexts , may work as road maps in the face of high uncertainty during periods of technological discontinuity ( Benner and Tripsas , 2012 ) . However , such beliefs can also hin - der the commercialization of the research output if Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj 1260 B . Wu , Z . Wan , and D . A . Levinthal the business model underlying commercialization conﬂicts with the ﬁrm’s prior belief , such as the case of Polaroid’s effort to impose the razor / razor blade business model on the commercialization of the digital camera ( Tripsas and Gavetti , 2000 ) . Such a cognitive bias may manifest itself via the introduction of a hybrid product to the market , which melds elements of the old product tech - nology even though consumers may prefer a pure play new product unencumbered by this prior history . The explanation put forth here follows in the spirit of these explanations , examining both the magnitude and direction ( technological trajectory ) of an established ﬁrm’s investment in new technologies in the face of possible technological change and the threat of new entrants . We offer a supplemental perspective based on forward - looking rational calculations on the part of ﬁrms and incorporating a fundamental asymmetry between established incumbent enterprises and new entrants . Clearly , as early arguments by Dosi ( 1982 ) and Tushman and Anderson ( 1986 ) suggest , incumbents and entrants may differ in their technological capabilities , with incumbent ﬁrms developing distinct technological capabilities along speciﬁc technological trajectories . However , even if one puts this factor aside , there is another basis of asymmetry , which is that established ﬁrms are likely to have an array of complementary assets in manufacturing , distribution , marketing and the like ( Teece , 1986 ) . While Teece points to the important role that complementary assets have on the ability of ﬁrms to appropriate the returns to innovative efforts , Mitchell ( 1989 ) and Tripsas ( 1997 ) demonstrate the importance of complementary assets in buffering incumbent ﬁrms from technological transitions . Perhaps because the original motivation for considering complementary assets was the issue of an inno - vator’s ability to appropriate value from R & D investments conditional on a successful R & D outcome ( Teece , 1986 ) , the previous literature on complementary assets tends to focus on the effect of complementary assets on the ex post perfor - mance of incumbent ﬁrms ( Hill and Rothaermel , 2003 ) . We wish to build on these important prior contri - butions regarding the role of complementary assets and examine the ex ante investment incentives created by the presence ( or absence ) of comple - mentary assets . In particular , we examine both how a ﬁrm’s choice of technological trajectory and how its level of investment along the cho - sen trajectory may be inﬂuenced by the mag - nitude of its complementary assets . Incumbent ﬁrms may choose technological trajectories that are arguably less promising , but comprise tech - nological approaches that are compatible with , and leverage , its existing array of complementary assets . This observation suggests a further reﬁne - ment in what is meant by a ‘radical’ technological change . In this regard , a change is viewed as rad - ical if it disrupts the relation between the ﬁrm’s existing set of complementary assets and the new technological trajectory . We examine the condi - tions under which a ﬁrm’s complementary assets may cause it to choose to invest in what is viewed a priori as an inferior technology . Further , we con - sider the competitive consequences of the choice of technological trajectory and the magnitude of investment on the part of an established and entrant ﬁrm in view of their differential levels of comple - mentary assets . Complementary assets and trajectory choices The prototypical setting one might imagine is an established ﬁrm with a substantial stock of com - plementary assets ( e . g . , substantial downstream resources with regard to distribution and brand name ) , but having its old technical basis negated by the emergence of a radical technological change and facing a decision as to which technologi - cal trajectory along which to invest . We use the term ‘technological trajectory’ to connote the par - ticular class of technologies the ﬁrm is building upon and the nature of the technological perfor - mance attributes it is attempting to enhance ( Dosi , 1982 ) . For simplicity , we consider two trajec - tories : a trajectory that may have lower inher - ent promise to be preferred by the market but allows the incumbent to leverage its existing com - plementary assets or a trajectory that has higher inherent promise but would diminish the value of its complementary assets . We term the for - mer as a complement - preserving trajectory and the latter as a complement - disrupting trajectory . In contrast , potential entrants , lacking comple - mentary assets , face no such trade - off and will favor the complement - disrupting approach . Our analysis recognizes that the link between invest - ments , trajectory choices , and market outcomes is inﬂuenced by the presence of complementary Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Complementary Assets as Pipes and Prisms 1261 assets . Central to this perspective is the hetero - geneity along different dimensions of the ﬁrm’s capabilities and the interdependence among them ( Helfat , 1997 ; Mitchell , 1989 ; Sosa , 2009 ; Taylor and Helfat , 2009 ; Teece , 1986 ; Tripsas , 1997 ) . Speciﬁcally , complementary assets can have a dual role in affecting incumbents’ R & D invest - ment . On the one hand , complementary assets , if fungible , amplify returns on R & D investments for incumbent ﬁrms , thereby increasing incumbent ﬁrms’ economic incentive to invest in the new technical domain . Speciﬁcally , given the same R & D efforts , a larger stock of complementary assets allows a ﬁrm to appropriate more of the returns from its R & D investments ( Teece 1986 , Arora , Fosfuri , and Gambardella , 2001 ; Girotra , Terwiesch , and Ulrich , 2007 ) . This implies a higher marginal beneﬁt from R & D investment and , thus , a higher investment incentive . The empirical ﬁndings of Mitchell ( 1989 ) and King and Tucci ( 2002 ) that experience in prior sub - ﬁelds is positively associated with a ﬁrm’s likelihood of entering new , related subﬁelds is consistent with this argument . Even more directly supportive of this argument is Helfat’s ( 1997 ) work that indicates that ﬁrms are more likely to develop technologies that can utilize existing complementary technologies . On the other hand , complementary assets may also bias incumbents’ choice of technological tra - jectories . As Teece ( 1986 ) notes , complementary assets may be cospecialized to a speciﬁc tech - nology and , therefore , complementary assets can be trajectory speciﬁc in the sense that they are valuable in conjunction with a certain trajectory but much less valuable in conjunction with others . Therefore , incumbents endowed with complemen - tary assets may have an incentive to choose a tech - nological trajectory along which they can leverage their complementary assets , even if such a trajec - tory has lower inherent promise to be preferred by the market . Combining these two perspectives , we exam - ine the dual role complementary assets play with respect to incumbents’ investment behaviors toward radical technological change : complemen - tary assets are not only resources—in the con - text of network ties Podolny ( 2001 ) refers to as ‘pipes , ’ that can buffer ﬁrms from technology change—but are also ‘prisms’ through which they view those changes , in terms of both the mag - nitude of resources that should be invested and the trajectory to which these resources should be directed . When complementary assets are speciﬁc to a less promising technological trajectory , the incumbent is faced with a trade - off between fully leveraging its complementary assets and choosing a more promising technological trajectory . To illustrate this trade - off , reconsider the case of NCR noted earlier . After NCR acquired an early leader in the computer industry ( CRC ) , NCR integrated CRC’s research activities in computer technology into the framework of NCR’s ‘overall product development program’ to leverage NCR’s extensive sales force—one type of comple - mentary assets ( Rosenbloom , 2000 : 1087 ) . The technological trajectory choice was also modiﬁed . ‘The binary arithmetic and limited input – output ( I / O ) capabilities of the 102 - A [ a general purpose computer ] were well suited to scientiﬁc use , but appeared to the people in Dayton [ where NCR’s headquarters is located ] as obstacles to business application . As a senior engineer commented , ‘when you talked about a binary machine , you scared our salesmen’ ( Rench , 1984 : 26 ) . . . Under pressure from Dayton , CRC designed the 102 - D , using decimal arithmetic . . . ’ ( Rosenbloom , 2000 : 1089 ) . Likewise , while Polaroid invested a signiﬁ - cant amount in digital photography very early on , their digital efforts were ‘ . . . guided by a desire to eventually develop an instant digital camera / printer product termed ‘PIF’ for Printer In the Field . . . The 1984 Annual Report’s Letter to shareholders stated , ‘We believe that there is considerable potential in developing new hybrid imaging systems that combine instant photography and electronics’ . . . Since the output was to be on instant ﬁlm , [ the PIF concept ] leveraged the ﬁrm’s strong ﬁlm - manufacturing capabilities . It was also , however , consistent with the ﬁrmly held belief in a razor / blade model’ ( Tripsas and Gavetti , 2000 : 1152 ) . Similarly , much of Kodak’s early investment in digital photography derived from its attempt to leverage complementary assets accumulated around ﬁlms , from ﬁlm production to photo ﬁnishing . Kodak was able to design high - quality ﬁlms using its ﬁlm capabilities and manufacture them at a low cost based on mass production . Further , Kodak developed strong relationships with retailers by providing services and supplies to those with photoﬁnishing facilities and wholesale services to those without processing facilities . Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj 1262 B . Wu , Z . Wan , and D . A . Levinthal In addition , Kodak built an extensive network of Kodak Express franchises . 3 Photo CD and Advanced Photo System are two hybrid products embodying Kodak’s ‘ﬁlm - based digital imaging strategy’ ( Eastman Kodak Company , 1991 : 3 ) in the early 1990s . 4 After the image is captured with an analog camera , the Photo CD system allows photoﬁnishers to scan consumers’ 35 mm negatives to a digital format and store them on a compact disc ( Benner , 2010 ) . These images can be shown on TV through a special CD player or on a computer using a CD - ROM . Consumers can further edit the pictures , transfer them , and print them . The Advanced Photo System ( APS ) adds to the ﬁlm a transparent magnetic coating , which can store data such as the level of brightness and the use of ﬂash when the picture was taken . Such data can help photoﬁnishers enhance the quality of the print ( Cohen and Tripsas , 2012 ) . Ex ante , such a hybrid approach may be a ratio - nal choice given the uncertain technological path ( e . g . , the low home PC adoption rate and nar - row Internet bandwidth at the time , which might limit the diffusion of digital cameras ) . By blend - ing digital technologies with traditional ﬁlm tech - nology and processes , this approach leveraged Kodaks’ ﬁlm - based complementary assets . Con - sumers would still want to buy ﬁlms , particularly when ﬁlms still offered higher resolution than the digital images available at the time . In this way , Kodak was able to leverage its capabilities in ﬁlm production . Using their relationships with retailers , Kodak was able to persuade many retailers to add the Photo CD system to their photoﬁnishing facil - ities , offering digitization , editing , and additional features , such as printing greeting cards . The digi - tal information stored through the APS system also allowed Kodak - related photoﬁnishing facilities to produce higher - quality prints . The APS system also permitted Kodak to more effectively introduce self - service kiosks . With this approach , Kodak would still be able to make money from consum - ables like photo paper and services . This hybrid 3 Kodak also has other complementary assets , such as distribu - tion channels , to sell ﬁlms . However , such complementary assets were fungible to the new technological trajectory , since digital cameras can be sold through many of the same channels . In an analysis of the model , we examine how our results are inﬂuenced by the degree of fungibility of complementary assets . 4 We thank an anonymous reviewer for suggesting these aspects of Kodak’s efforts . approach is in contrast to a pure digital approach , where pictures are taken through digital camera , do not need to be processed and printed out , and can be viewed on a computer and transmitted through the Internet . Such a pure digital approach would deprive Kodak of its ﬁlm - based complementary assets and force Kodak to compete head - to - head with consumer electronics ﬁrms . Thus , a hybrid approach had appeal to Kodak , as it allowed the ﬁrm to try to retain its advantage along part of the value chain , while introducing some digital fea - tures to enhance the performance of the product and services it offered . At a minimum , such efforts might delay consumers’ switch to digital and might even inﬂuence consumers’ behavior in using digi - tal products in the future by setting a new industry standard . Ex post , however , hybrid products tended to look clumsy due to rapid technological advances . In particular , with the further development of the Internet , Internet bandwidth quickly reached a point where it was sufﬁciently high for image transmission . In addition , households widely adopt personal computers , the price of digital cam - eras dropped , and the quality of digital cameras improved . Ultimately , the convenience of taking and sharing pictures through products like smart phones and Facebook greatly reduced the need to print images . In considering these examples , it is important to bear in mind that while the probability with which the technological trajectory chosen by the incum - bents will ultimately be preferred by the market might have been lower than that for alternative technological trajectories , the probability was not zero ( Furr and Snow , 2012 ) . Should the chosen tra - jectory ultimately be preferred by the market , the incumbent would be better able to fully leverage its existing complementary assets and gain greater market success . Therefore , for a given range of complementary assets , it may be optimal for the incumbent to choose the less promising techno - logical trajectory . Moreover , these complementary assets may provide an incentive for the incum - bent to invest more than the entrant ex ante . Ex post , however , should the trajectory chosen by the incumbent prove to be an ineffective way to engage the market , either as a result of the limits of technical progress along the performance dimen - sions pursued by the ﬁrm or the market’s valuation of those performance dimensions , the incumbent may experience an inferior market outcome under Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Complementary Assets as Pipes and Prisms 1263 certain conditions despite its higher investments . The incumbent ﬁrm bets on the trajectory that yields , in expectation , the greatest proﬁts ; how - ever , due to the impact of its existing stock of com - plementary assets , this is a different calculation than choosing the technological trajectory that is most likely to prove promising . As a consequence , we should observe at times incumbent ﬁrms mak - ing what appear to be ex post bad ‘bets . ’ The dual role of complementary assets can help explain sit - uations such as Kodak’s investment behavior and resulting market outcomes in digital photography . Kodak’s stock of relevant complementary assets in the imaging industry created strong economic incentives to invest in the new technical domain . However , in order to leverage its complementary assets , Kodak chose a technological trajectory that engaged digital technology in a manner that facil - itated the ﬁrm linking this new technology to its existing assets and ways of competing . 5 Complementary assets are an asset to be lever - aged , but at the same time , they bias a ﬁrm’s strategic choices . As a result of this dual effect , ﬁrms may rationally invest large sums in tech - nology efforts that yield a relatively modest rate of technical advance . The incumbent may invest heavily but achieve a lower likelihood of techni - cal leadership than similar investments yield for new enterprises established to pursue these new technological opportunities . It is important to rec - ognize that the incumbent may choose different technological trajectories and , therefore , it is crit - ical to distinguish between the magnitude of the investment and its qualitative nature ( i . e . , the par - ticular technological trajectory pursued ) . The ulti - mate consequences or outcomes that stem from such investments ( relative distance from the tech - nology frontier , product market success , and the like ) will be a function of the ﬁrm’s investments , technical capabilities , complementary assets , com - petitors’ actions , and what emerges to constitute consumer preferences . An important backdrop to these arguments is the degree of imperfection in the market for 5 This argument , however , cannot explain the totality of Kodak’s investments , as Kodak did make substantial early investments in charge - coupled device ( CCD ) image sensors for digital cameras . Kodak was an early market leader in this area and introduced the ﬁrst 1 Megapixel CCD in 1986 . Such investments are not fully consistent with the proposed argument , since CCDs can replace ﬁlm as image sensors , thus representing a complement - disrupting technology . complementary assets and technology . To the degree that these markets do not function well , the entrant cannot gain access to complementary assets ( e . g . , through contracting ) and the incum - bent may not gain access to external technology ( e . g . , through licensing ) . It is likely to take time for the entrant to internally develop com - plementary assets because the adjustment costs of developing complementary assets in a short period of time are prohibitive ( Dierickx and Cool , 1989 ; Pacheco - de - Almeida and Zemsky , 2007 ) . Furthermore , as Teece ( 1986 ) argues , the market for complementary assets is imperfect , because such assets tend to be cospecialized or specialized to the ﬁrm , creating high transaction costs . In the absence of these properties , the competitive supply of complementary assets would cause the asymmetry between the incumbent and the entrant to disappear or certainly dissipate . An analogous set of issues holds for the markets for technology ( Arrow , 1962 ; Nelson , 1959 ) . How well markets for technology are able to function depends on a number of factors , including the nature of knowledge , intellectual property rights regime , and related institutions ( Arora et al . , 2001 ; Dushnitsky , 2010 ; Dushnitsky and Lenox , 2005 ; Dushnitsky and Shaver , 2009 ; Elfenbein , 2007 ; Goldfarb , 2008 ) . We discuss possible extensions that include such issues in the discussion section . MODEL SETUP We consider a stylized two - stage model to exam - ine ﬁrms’ investment decisions with respect to a radical technological change . While radical in the sense of one generation of a product supplanting another , the investment may be made along differ - ent technological trajectories that either preserve or disrupt a ﬁrm’s existing complementary assets . We term the former type as complement - preserving trajectory and the latter type as complement - disrupting trajectory . In the ﬁrst stage , an incumbent ﬁrm , denoted by I , chooses to invest along either of the two trajectories . Let r ∈ { 0 , 1 } represent ﬁrm I ’s chosen trajectory , where 1 rep - resents the complement - disrupting trajectory and 0 represents the complement - preserving trajectory . We assume the market’s preferred trajectory , denoted by t ∈ { 0 , 1 } , is uncertain . We further let the complement - disrupting trajectory be more promising , i . e . , p = Prob ( t = 1 ) > 0 . 5 . As a result , Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj 1264 B . Wu , Z . Wan , and D . A . Levinthal the incumbent faces a trade - off between choosing a less promising technological trajectory along which it can leverage its complementary assets and choosing a more promising technological trajectory along which it cannot fully leverage its complementary assets . Given the entrant E is assumed to lack complementary assets and the value of p is postulated to be greater than 0 . 5 , the entrant ﬁnds it in its interest to invest in the complement - disrupting trajectory . In this stage , we assume ﬁrm I plays as a Stackelberg leader who chooses its trajectory r and its R & D investment level u I before ﬁrm E chooses its R & D investment level u E . 6 Firm i ’s technological trajectory , R & D invest - ment , and the market’s preferred trajectory together determine the ‘base utility’ of its product , denoted by V i . In particular , we assume the base utility for ﬁrm E ’s product is V E = δ 1 − t u E , 0 < δ < 1 . Namely , while the base utility increases in its R & D investment , it is discounted by δ if there is a mismatch between its trajectory ( i . e . , the complement - disrupting trajectory ) and the realized market - preferred trajectory . Similarly , if ﬁrm I chooses the complement - disrupting trajectory , we assume that V I = δ 1 − t u I . However , if ﬁrm I chooses the complement - preserving trajectory , we assume that V I = δ t A 1 − t u I , where A > 1 represents ﬁrm I ’s complementary assets ( the entrant’s complementary assets are normalized as one ) . Thus , the critical asymmetry between the incumbent and the entrant is the incumbent’s possession of complementary assets along the complement - preserving trajectory . 7 Speciﬁcally , ﬁrm I is assumed to have some complementary 6 Furthermore , we also examine a case where the entrant is the Stackelberg leader ; our main results hold . We also examine the model using a Nash equilibrium , in which the ﬁrms move simultaneously . However , multiple Nash equilibria can exist , including mixed strategy equilibria , under a simultaneous move setting . Therefore , for simplicity we focus on the Stackelberg setting . While there is no direct correspondence between the particular solutions that characterize the Nash equilibrium and the Stackelberg game , the basic tensions and trade - offs at play are present in both . Finally , the fact that the same qualitative results emerge whether the incumbent or entrant is the leader or the follower in the Stackelberg game indicates the robustness of these properties . 7 One could also explore the effect of asymmetry in their techno - logical capabilities with respect to the different trajectories . If so , a natural assumption would be that the incumbent is less capable , perhaps as reﬂected in a lower marginal return to R & D invest - ment than the entrant . Clearly , such a property would decrease the incumbent’s incentive to invest . We wish to explore a , in some sense , stronger case , where the incumbent has no intrinsic assets that may increase its product’s base utility , but such complementary assets are trajectory speciﬁc—they can be leveraged only when the incumbent chooses the complement - preserving trajectory and the market prefers the complement - preserving trajectory . We make this assumption regarding the limited fungibility of complemen - tary assets to highlight the central trade - off faced by the incumbent . At the end of the analysis section , we show the robustness of the model by allowing complementary assets to have some degree of fungibility and retain some value in the complement - disrupting trajectory . Table 1 summarizes the two ﬁrms’ base utility functions under different scenarios . In the second stage , the two ﬁrms engage in quantity competition in the market . They simultaneously and independently choose their production quantities . Let q i denote ﬁrm i ’s product quantity . We consider a linear demand system where ﬁrm i ’s product price equals V i − β q i − γ q j with β > γ > 0 for i ∈ { I , E } and j ∈ { I , E } , j (cid:3) = i . This linear demand curve can be derived by considering a representative consumer with utility given by V ( q 1 + q 2 ) = V 1 q 1 + V 2 q 2 − 12 (cid:2) β q 21 + 2 γ q 1 q 2 + β q 22 (cid:3) ( Vives , 2001 : 145 ) and , as a result , the intercept V i in the linear demand curve can be interpreted as capturing the base utility of ﬁrm i ’s product deﬁned above . A similar demand relationship has also been used by Sutton ( 1997 : 58 – 59 ) in modeling the impact of R & D investment on product quality . We normalize both ﬁrms’ marginal production costs to zero . 8 Market competition equilibrium in the second stage Given the ﬁrms’ technological trajectories and R & D investment levels , we can specify their second - stage proﬁt functions stemming from prod - uct market competition . Let (cid:5) i ( V I , V E ) denote the equilibrium second - stage proﬁt of ﬁrm i given V I and V E . Intuitively , as ﬁrm i ’s product base disadvantage with respect to the complement - disrupting techno - logical trajectory , but faces , as a result of its complementary assets , a different decision calculus than that of the entrant . 8 Complementary assets can either increase quality ( willingness to pay ) or reduce marginal production cost . What matters is the wedge between willingness to pay and marginal production cost ( Adner and Zemsky , 2006 ) . For the sake of simplicity , we normalize marginal production cost to zero and focus on willingness to pay . Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Complementary Assets as Pipes and Prisms 1265 T a b l e 1 . T h e u ti lit y f un c ti on s f o r e n t r a n t ’ s a nd i n c u m b e n t ’ s p r odu c t s I n c u m b e n t ’ s c ho i ce : r ∈ { 0 , 1 } R ea li ze d m a r k e t p r e f e r e n ce : t ∈ { 0 , 1 } C o mm e n t s E n t r a n t ’ s p r odu c t qu a lit y V E I n c u m b e n t ’ s p r odu c t qu a lit y V I G e n e r a li za ti on w it h f ung i b l e c o m p l e m e n t a r y a ss e t s r = 0 t = 0 T h e i n c u m b e n t c hoo s e s t h e c o m p l e m e n t - p r e s e r v i ng t r a j ec t o r y a nd t h e c o m p l e m e n t - p r e s e r v i ng t r a j ec t o r y i s p r e f e rr e d by m a r k e t . T h e i n c u m b e n t ca n f u ll y l e v e r a g e c o m p l e m e n t a r y a ss e t s A , a nd it s R & D e ff o r t i s f u ll y e ff ec ti v e . H o w e v e r , t h e e n t r a n t s u ff e r s a d i s c oun t δ i n it s R & D e ff o r t du e t o t h e m i s m a t c h o f t r a j ec t o r i e s . V E = δ u E V I = A u I V I = A u I r = 0 t = 1 T h e i n c u m b e n t c hoo s e s t h e c o m p l e m e n t - p r e s e r v i ng t r a j ec t o r y , bu t t h e m a r k e t p r e f e r s t h e c o m p l e m e n t - d i s r up ti ng t r a j ec t o r y . T h e r e f o r e , t h e i n c u m b e n t ca nno t l e v e r a g e it s c o m p l e m e n t a r y a ss e t s A a nd s u ff e r s a d i s c oun t δ i n it s R & D e ff o r t du e t o t h e m i s m a t c h o f t r a j ec t o r i e s . T h e e n t r a n t ’ s R & D e ff o r t i s f u ll y e ff ec ti v e . V E = u E V I = δ u I V I = δ A κ 1 u I r = 1 t = 0 T h e i n c u m b e n t c hoo s e s t h e c o m p l e m e n t - d i s r up ti ng t r a j ec t o r y , bu t t h e m a r k e t p r e f e r s t h e c o m p l e m e n t - p r e s e r v i ng t r a j ec t o r y . T h e i n c u m b e n t ca nno t l e v e r a g e it s c o m p l e m e n t a r y a ss e t s A . B o t h t h e i n c u m b e n t a nd t h e e n t r a n t s u ff e r a d i s c oun t δ i n t h e i r R & D e ff o r t du e t o t h e m i s m a t c h o f t r a j ec t o r i e s . V E = δ u E V I = δ u I V I = δ A κ 2 u I r = 1 t = 1 T h e i n c u m b e n t c hoo s e s t h e c o m p l e m e n t - d i s r up ti ng t r a j ec t o r y , a nd t h e m a r k e t p r e f e r s t h e c o m p l e m e n t - d i s r up ti ng t r a j ec t o r y . T h e r e f o r e , t h e i n c u m b e n t ca nno t l e v e r a g e it s c o m p l e m e n t a r y a ss e t s A . T h e R & D e ff o r t f o r bo t h i n c u m b e n t a nd e n t r a n t i s f u ll y e f f ec ti v e . V E = u E V I = u I V I = A κ 2 u I Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj 1266 B . Wu , Z . Wan , and D . A . Levinthal utility V i increases , its demand increases and the competitor ﬁrm j ’s demand decreases ; further - more , if V i far exceeds V j , ﬁrm i can produce so much that ﬁrm j sees the market price even lower than its marginal production cost , in which case ﬁrm j ﬁnds it optimal not to produce at all . In particular , both ﬁrms choose positive pro - duction quantity if and only if 2 β V i − γ V j > 0 for both i = I , E and , in such a case , the equili - brium production quantities and proﬁts are given by q i = 1 4 β 2 − γ 2 (cid:2) 2 β V i − γ V j (cid:3) and (cid:5) i ( V I , V E ) = β q 2 i . However , if 2 β V i − γ V j > 0 holds for only one ﬁrm , for example , i = I , then only ﬁrm I produces and we have q I = 12 β V I , q E = 0 , (cid:5) I ( V I , V E ) = β q 2 I , and (cid:5) E ( V I , V E ) = 0 . This is similarly true for i = E . R & D investment equilibrium and incumbent trajectory choice in the ﬁrst stage Following the literature ( Rosen , 1991 ; Sutton , 1997 ) , we assume that the cost of achieving u i , C ( u i ) , is sufﬁciently convex such that all proﬁt functions have an interior optimum . 9 Let (cid:7) ri ( u I , u E ) be ﬁrm i ’s expected total proﬁt given u I and u E , if ﬁrm I chooses trajectory r . Thus , we have (cid:7) 1 i ( u I , u E ) = p (cid:5) i ( u I , u E ) + ( 1 − p ) (cid:5) i ( δ u I , δ u E ) − C ( u i ) ( 1 ) (cid:7) 0 i ( u I , u E ) = p (cid:5) i ( δ u I , u E ) + ( 1 − p ) (cid:5) i ( Au I , δ u E ) − C ( u i ) ( 2 ) Conditional on ﬁrm I ’s trajectory choice r , let u r ∗ i denote ﬁrm i ’s R & D invest - ment in equilibrium . In particular , we have u r ∗ I = arg max u I (cid:4) rI (cid:2) u I , u rE ( u I ) (cid:3) , where u rE ( u I ) = arg max u E (cid:4) rE ( u I , u E ) and u r ∗ E = u rE (cid:2) u r ∗ I (cid:3) . Let (cid:7) r ∗ i (cid:2) (cid:7) ri (cid:2) u r ∗ I , u r ∗ E (cid:3) be ﬁrm i ’s equilibrium total proﬁt given ﬁrm I ’s trajectory choice r and let q rt i be ﬁrm i ’s equilibrium production quantity 9 Technically , when C ( u i ) is convex and its second - order derivative is sufﬁciently large everywhere , each ﬁrm i ’s expected total proﬁt is quasi - concave in u i , and , thus , there exists a unique and ﬁnite investment level u i that maximizes its expected total proﬁt . given ﬁrm I ’s trajectory choice r and the market preference t . Firm i ’s equilibrium total proﬁt (cid:7) r ∗ i is the expected value with respect to the uncertain market preference , given ﬁrm i ’s tra - jectory choice r . However , ﬁrm i ’s equilibrium production quantity q rti is the realized value given both ﬁrm i ’s trajectory choice r and the realization of market preference t . In equilibrium , ﬁrm I chooses trajectory r = 0 over r = 1 if and only if (cid:7) 0 ∗ I > (cid:7) 1 ∗ I . ANALYSIS In this section , we address the central question we posed in the Introduction : why incumbent ﬁrms often invest signiﬁcant amounts in radical inno - vations , but develop inferior versions of the new technology . We investigate when the two ﬁrms’ trajectories differ , which ﬁrm invests more , and which ﬁrm leads the market in terms of achieving larger market share ; in particular , we focus on how the answers to these questions depend on the size of the incumbent’s complementary asset A , the mismatch discount factor δ , and the market preference probability p . It is important to note that the comparison in terms of ex post market outcome may be different than the comparison in terms of ex ante investment . Speciﬁcally , although the investment amount and market outcome have a one - to - one relationship when the two ﬁrms choose the same technological trajectory , such a relation - ship does not hold when they are likely to take different technological trajectories . With heteroge - neous technological trajectories , an equal invest - ment in R & D may not lead to an equal market outcome . Firm behavior : trajectory choices , investment level , and market share Proposition 1 shows that these comparisons can be characterized by different regions deﬁned by three threshold values of the incumbent’s complementary assets . Proposition 2 provides existence conditions for these regions . Proposition 1 : For any 0 ≤ δ ≤ 1 , there exist three thresholds 10 A r ( δ ) ≤ A u ( δ ) ≤ A l ( δ ) such that 10 The superscript ‘ r ’ refers to the threshold regarding the incumbent’s trajectory choice ‘ r , ’ above which the incumbent chooses the complement - preserving trajectory . The superscript Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Complementary Assets as Pipes and Prisms 1267 i ) if 1 < A < A r ( δ ) , ﬁrm I chooses the complement - disrupting trajectory r = 1 ( i . e . , (cid:7) 0 ∗ I < (cid:7) 1 ∗ I ) , ii ) if A r ( δ ) < A < A u ( δ ) , ﬁrm I chooses the complement - preserving trajectory r = 0 ( i . e . , (cid:7) 0 ∗ I > (cid:7) 1 ∗ I ) and invests less than ﬁrm E , iii ) if A u ( δ ) < A < A l ( δ ) , ﬁrm I chooses the complement - preserving trajec - tory r = 0 ( i . e . , (cid:7) 0 ∗ I > (cid:7) 1 ∗ I ) , invests more than ﬁrm E , but does not lead the market ( i . e . , q 01 I < q 01 E ) if the market prefers the complement - disrupting trajectory t = 1 , iv ) if A l ( δ ) < A , ﬁrm I chooses the complement - preserving trajectory r = 0 , invests more than ﬁrm E and leads the market ( i . e . , q 01 I > q 01 E ) , even if the market prefers the complement - disrupting trajectory t = 1 . Proposition 2 : For any 0 ≤ δ < 1 , there exists 0 < p ( δ ) < 1 such that A r ( δ ) > 1 when p > p ( δ ) . Further , there exists δ > 0 such that for all δ < δ , A u ( δ ) < A l ( δ ) . Proof : See Appendix . Proposition 1 shows that ﬁrm I ’s trajectory choice and investments depend on both the level of complementary assets and the penalty from tech - nical mismatch . A higher level of complemen - tary assets encourages the incumbent to choose the complement - preserving trajectory and encour - ages larger investment given its choice of the complement - preserving trajectory . Further , when we look at the choice of technological trajectory and investment level simultaneously , various inter - esting possibilities emerge . Speciﬁcally , by vary - ing the degree of heterogeneity with regard to the stock of complementary assets and the penalty from technical mismatch , Proposition 1 character - izes distinct regimes with respect to choices of technological trajectory and product market out - comes . Table 2 summarizes these results . Figure 1 illustrates these regimes for the case where p = 0 . 7 , β = 1 and γ = 0 . 5 , where the vertical axis A cap - tures the incumbent’s higher complementary assets ( recall the entrant’s complementary assets are nor - malized as one ) , while the horizontal axis δ cap - tures the penalty from the mismatch between its chosen trajectory and the realized market - preferred ‘ u ’ refers to the threshold regarding the comparison of the two ﬁrms’ investment level ‘ u , ’ above which the incumbent invests more . The superscript ‘ l ’ refers to the threshold regarding the incumbent’s market leadership , above which the incumbent leads in market share . trajectory . In all the numeric analyses , we use the cost function C ( u i ) = ( max ( u i − 1 , 0 ) ) 2 . 11 The dotted region in Figure 1 The dotted region corresponds to a setting in which the incumbent chooses the complement - disrupting trajectory and competes on the same basis as the entrant . In some cases , the incumbent has a mod - est set of complementary assets and therefore these complementary assets do not bias the incumbent away from the complement - disrupting technologi - cal trajectory . As a result , the incumbent is willing to give up its historical endowment and take on the complement - disrupting technological trajectory . The gray region in Figure 1 The gray region corresponds to a setting in which the incumbent chooses the complement - preserving technological trajectory , invests less than the entrant , and experiences a lower market share if the market prefers the complement - disrupting technological trajectory . The lower technological development on the part of the established ﬁrm may not be the difﬁculty of altering organizational routines to ﬁt with the new environment ( Leonard - Barton , 1992 ; Nelson and Winter , 1982 ) ; the lower research productivity may well be the endogenous outcome of how the ﬁrm chooses to respond to the technological opportunities they face . Of course , if the market ends up preferring the complement - preserving technology , we may observe , ex post , that the incumbent invests less than the entrant but obtains a higher market share . Figure 1 , however , conditions on that the market prefers the complement - disrupting trajectory and , in such a scenario , the value of complementary assets A does not matter . As a result , the incumbent can never have higher market share since its complementary assets are not effective . The white region in Figure 1 The white region depicts a setting in which the incumbent chooses the complement - preserving 11 This cost function is chosen solely for the ease of numeric study . It guarantees that the proﬁt function is well behaved . Further , we can understand the 1 in this functional form as a normalization of the minimum investment required to enter and provide a product that achieves some minimum base utility level . Numeric results are similar if we use a different normalization value such as 0 . 5 . Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj 1268 B . Wu , Z . Wan , and D . A . Levinthal Table 2 . Variables and results Notation Deﬁnition Nature t ∈ { 0 , 1 } The market’s preferred trajectory , where 1 represents the complement - disrupting technological trajectory and 0 represents the complement - preserving technological trajectory . Exogenous parameters to be manipulated p The probability the complement - disrupting trajectory is preferred by the market . A > 1 Incumbent I ’s complementary asset ( the entrant’s complementary assets are normalized as one ) . δ The discount in a ﬁrm’s R & D effort due to the mismatch between the ﬁrm’s chosen trajectory and the market’s preferred trajectory . Exogenous parameters not to be manipulated β , γ Degrees of price sensitivity and product substitution in the demand function at the second stage . Investment decisions at the ﬁrst stage , determined by p , A , δ deﬁned above . r ∈ { 0 , 1 } Incumbent I ’s chosen trajectory , where 1 represents the complement - disrupting technological trajectory and 0 represents the complement - preserving technological trajectory . u i R & D investment level by ﬁrm i ( i = incumbent I and entrant E ) . Market outcomes at the second stage , determined by investment decisions at the ﬁrst stage V i Firm i’s ( i = incumbent I and entrant E ) product base utility , determined by the two ﬁrms’ trajectory choice and R & D investment . (cid:5) i ( V I , V E ) The equilibrium second - stage proﬁt of ﬁrm i ( i = incumbent I and entrant E ) given V I and V E . Thresholds that deﬁne regimes characterizing both investment decisions ( r and u i ) and market outcomes (cid:5) i ( V I , V E ) A r ( δ ) The equal trajectory threshold ( the upper bound of the dotted region ) . The superscript ‘ r ’ refers to the threshold regarding the incumbent’s trajectory choice ‘ r , ’ above which the incumbent chooses the complement - preserving trajectory . The dotted region is where the incumbent chooses the complement - disrupting trajectory . A u ( δ ) The equal investment curve A u ( δ ) ( the boundary between the gray and the black region ) . The superscript ‘ u ’ refers to the threshold regarding the comparison of the two ﬁrms’ investment level ‘ u , ’ above which the incumbent invests more . The gray region is where the incumbent chooses the complement - preserving trajectory , invests less , and has less market share . The black region is where the incumbent chooses the complement - preserving trajectory , invests more than the entrant , but has less market share . A l ( δ ) The equal market share curve A l ( δ ) ( the lower boundary of the white region ) . The superscript ‘ l ’ refers to the threshold regarding the incumbent’s market leadership , above which the incumbent leads in market share . The white region is where the incumbent chooses the complement - preserving trajectory but nonetheless invests more than the entrant and leads in market share . Robustness checks κ 1 , κ 2 The degree to which complementary assets are trajectory speciﬁc . If the incumbent chooses the complement - preserving trajectory r = 0 but the market prefers the complement - disrupting trajectory t = 1 , the incumbent’s effective complementary assets becomes A κ 1 , where 0 ≤ κ 1 ≤ 1 . Similarly , if the incumbent chooses the complement - disrupting trajectory r = 1 , the incumbent’s effective complementary assets become A κ 2 , 0 ≤ κ 2 ≤ 1 , whether the market prefers the complement - preserving or the complement - disrupting trajectory . trajectory but still ‘wins’ despite the fact that the market prefers the complement - disrupting trajec - tory . This setting represents a kind of ‘lock - in’ to an inferior technology , in that there is an inherent preference for the complement - disrupting technol - ogy ( δ ) , but not with sufﬁcient intensity relative to the incumbent’s stock of complementary assets ( A ) to result in displacing the incumbent ﬁrm’s market position . 12 This ﬁnding is akin to work on standards or platforms ( Arthur , 1989 ; Shapiro and Varian , 1999 ; Zhu and Iansiti , 2012 ) which shows 12 In Figures 1 and 4 , due to the choice of parameter values , the white region hits the ceiling of the ﬁgures when the penalty from technical mismatch is very high ( δ is close to zero ) . In fact , the white region exists even when δ is close to zero . Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Complementary Assets as Pipes and Prisms 1269 δ A 1 0 . 5 0 1 1 . 5 2 A r ( δ ) A l ( δ ) A u ( δ ) Figure 1 . Illustration of Proposition 1 p = 0 . 7 , β = 1 , γ = 0 . 5 . This ﬁgure is conditional on the case where the complement - disrupting trajectory is preferred by the mar - ket : ( 1 ) The white region is where the incumbent chooses the complement - preserving trajectory but nonetheless invests more than the entrant and leads in market share . ( 2 ) The black region is where the incumbent chooses the complement - preserving trajectory , invests more than the entrant , but has less market share . It is also the region highlighted by Proposition 2 . ( 3 ) The gray region is where the incumbent chooses the complement - preserving trajectory , invests less , and has lower market share . ( 4 ) The dotted region is where the incumbent chooses the complement - disrupting trajectory and competes on the same basis as the entrant that inherently inferior technologies may come to dominate as a result of early market presence and the presence of strong network externalities . In the work on standards , the lock - in stems from the direct effect of network externalities or the presence of complementary goods or service that enhance the value of the use of the dominant technology . Here , the complement is not a distinct good or service possibly provided by a third party , but an element of the focal ﬁrm’s business system , possibly in manufacturing , distribution , or marketing . If the incumbent has indeed amassed a sufﬁ - ciently large stock of complementary assets , these complementary assets may create a sufﬁcient incentive for the incumbent to invest signiﬁcantly more than the entrant . In this case , even if the incumbent takes an inferior technological trajectory , the incumbent may still maintain a larger market share due to its large investment . Consider the engagement of newspaper ﬁrms in digital media as characterized by Gilbert ( 2005 ) and Kim ( 2011 ) . Gilbert ( 2005 ) shows that while most newspapers invest signiﬁcant ﬁnancial resources in digital media , they continue to follow the traditional business models and try to leverage resources from the print media . Their newspaper sites often do not incorporate features such as online forums and search tools commonly available in new entrants . Kim ( 2011 ) shows that ﬁrms such as The New York Times , which have a large set of complementary assets ( e . g . , content , journalist team , social status ) , are more inclined to develop Web sites that create digital media in a manner similar to that of print media , while ﬁrms such as the Denver Post , which lack such complementary assets , are more likely to develop Web sites that are more characteristic of the technology of digital media . The look and feel of the two Web sites and the degree of interactive components seem consistent with this argument . In contrast , a new entrant , such as Slate or Yahoo , adopts a pure digital form with little reference to traditional print news . Gilbert ( 2005 ) uses a cognition lens to explain this behavior . The perception of the new technol - ogy as a threat works as the catalyst of change and , thus , reduces resource rigidity . As such , ﬁrms may be willing to invest a large amount in ﬁnancial resources and human resources . However , the perception of threat also increases threat rigidity , due to the reduction of information processing and the constriction of control . Threat rigidity , in turn , leads to routine rigidity where ﬁrms may integrate the new business with the parent company , reduce experimentation , and utilize their existing resources . The black region in Figure 1 The black region corresponds to the puzzle we introduced in the beginning of the article ; the incumbent chooses the complement - preserving tra - jectory , invests more , but achieves a lower market share than the entrant if the market prefers the complement - disrupting trajectory . It helps explain why an incumbent can fare poorly in the face of radical technological change despite its heavy investment . In our model , radical technological change is captured by the fact that , due to the emer - gence of a complement - disrupting technological trajectory , the entrant is not in a disadvantageous position vis - ` a - vis the incumbent in terms of tech - nical capabilities ; in that regard , the entrant can compete on the same basis as the incumbent . Fur - thermore , the incumbent has to choose between Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj 1270 B . Wu , Z . Wan , and D . A . Levinthal the complement - preserving and the complement - disrupting trajectory to pursue the radical techno - logical change . Should the incumbent choose the complement - preserving trajectory , it would have an incentive to invest more than the entrant due to the existence of complementary assets , which can amplify the return from a given level of invest - ment . However , the existence of complementary assets also makes it more attractive for the incum - bent to choose the complement - preserving trajec - tory , as it can fully leverage complementary assets when the market prefers this trajectory . When the parameters are in the black region of Figure 1 , these two forces generate this distinct regime . The prior examples of Kodak , Polaroid , and NCR all correspond to this regime . Thus , we suggest that these ﬁrms , despite their unfavorable outcomes , may have made rational investments that attempted to engage emerging technologies in ways that allowed them to leverage their existing comple - mentary assets . Indeed , as Benner ( 2010 ) shows , stock analysts reacted quite favorably when Kodak invested in ‘hybrid’ products . Proposition 1 lays out the overall distribution of various possible regions ; however , it does not specify the conditions under which each region will occur . In particular , Proposition 1 consists of a set of weak inequalities . Proposition 2 char - acterizes when the distinct regions will , in fact , exist . Proposition 2 states that for the dotted region ( where the incumbent chooses the complement - disrupting trajectory ) to exist , the likelihood of the complement - disrupting trajectory being preferred by the market needs to be sufﬁciently large . In other words , it may be possible that the incum - bent always chooses the complement - preserving trajectory even when the level of its complemen - tary assets is very low ( i . e . , A r ( δ ) approaches one from above ) . Similarly , Proposition 2 states that for the black region to exist , the penalty of tech - nical mismatch needs to be sufﬁciently high ( i . e . , δ is sufﬁciently small ) . Propositions 1 and 2 characterize a kind of path dependency , but it differs from the standard notion of path dependency , which generally suggests some behavioral mechanism that reinforces the ﬁrm’s current pattern of action and investment . In our model , the incumbent is acting rationally and is forward looking . It is induced by its complementary assets to make its particular technical choice . The incumbent has the option to give up its complementary assets and take the complement - disrupting trajectory , but it may be a rational decision for it to refrain from doing so . It is true that the complement - disrupting technologi - cal trajectory is more likely to be preferred by the market , but it is uncertain . Therefore , a little bit of uncertainty and the inducement of complementary assets can generate the pattern that , ex post , the incumbent seems to make a mistake . The incum - bent invests heavily in its complement - preserving trajectory despite evidence to suggest that the complement - disrupting trajectory is more likely to be preferred by the market . Such behavior may appear irrational and perhaps reﬂect some pathol - ogy of organizational inertia . But , ex ante , despite the likelihood that the complement - disrupting trajectory may be preferred , it still may be rational for the incumbent not to , effectively , throw away their complementary assets and become equivalent to the entrant . A ﬁrm may irrationally ignore the possible beneﬁts of leveraging new technologies , but it is important to recognize that incumbents , in the face of radical technological change , may be sensibly maximizing their ex ante expected returns rather than failing to realize the full strategic implications of their decisions . Impact of complementary assets on market outcomes We next examine the impact of complementary assets on relative market shares when the market prefers the complement - disrupting trajectory . This analysis offers testable implications of the model and highlights the mechanisms that lead to such implications . Proposition 3 : There exists 0 < δ < 1 such that when 0 < δ < δ , p > p ( δ ) , and the complement - disrupting trajectory is preferred by the mar - ket , ﬁrm I’s market share is nonmonotonic as A increases from 1 to arbitrarily high levels . In particular , ﬁrm I’s market share is constant with respect to its level of complementary assets when A < A r ( δ ) , at A r ( δ ) ﬁrm I’s market share drops and subsequently increases as A expands beyond A r ( δ ) , and exceeds ﬁrm E’s market share when A > A l ( δ ) . Proof : See Appendix . Proposition 3 states that we can observe a non - monotonic relationship between the level of com - plementary assets and ﬁrm I ’s market share for a given level of δ when the complement - disrupting Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Complementary Assets as Pipes and Prisms 1271 trajectory is preferred by the market . By recog - nizing the endogeneity of the ﬁrm’s choice of technological trajectory and , in particular , how this choice is inﬂuenced by the level of complemen - tary assets , we show that complementary assets may not only allow incumbents to appropriate more value given their innovation success ( Teece , 1986 ) and buffer incumbents from exit given their innovation failure ( Tripsas , 1997 ) , but by distorting the incumbent’s choice of technological trajectory , complementary assets can be linked to inferior market outcomes in some settings . This result has two conceptual drivers . One driver is a switch in ‘regime’ ( choice of complement - preserving or complement - disrupting trajectory ) and the other is the marginal impact of changes in complementary assets on performance within the same regime . As a result , an increase in A may lead to a jump shift downward in performance with the change in regime . Further increases lead to incremental increases in market outcomes within a given regime . Speciﬁcally , when the level of complementary assets is low , it is not worthwhile for the incumbent to choose the complement - preserving trajectory . Therefore , the incumbent chooses the complement - disrupting trajectory , becoming , in some sense , equivalent to the entrant . As the level of complementary assets increases to an intermediate level , however , the incumbent switches to the complement - preserving trajectory . Now , when the complement - disrupting trajectory is preferred , clearly the incumbent will be penalized , ex post . Note that such penalty is compensated for by the possibility , albeit perhaps small , that the complement - preserving trajectory may be preferred . When the level of complemen - tary assets is sufﬁciently high , the incumbent will do well even if the complement - disrupting tra - jectory is realized . The ﬁrm’s strong performance is not the result of buffering by complementary assets . Rather , the ﬁrm’s complementary assets induce the ﬁrm to invest in high levels of R & D , resulting in the superior performance . We illustrate this case with a numerical example in Figure 2 ( δ = 0 . 8 , p = 0 . 7 , β = 1 , γ = 0 . 5 ) . We can see the incumbent’s market share is U - shaped with respect to the level of complementary assets when the complement - disrupting trajectory is preferred by the market . In particular , we observe a sharp drop in sales around A = 1 . 2 ( the point at which the incumbent shifts from the complement - disrupting to the complement - preserving trajectory ) . 1 1 . 5 2 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 δ = 0 . 8 , p = 0 . 7 , β = 1 , γ = 0 . 5 A M a r k e t s h a r e o f i n c u m b e n t if m a rket p refers com p lement− d isr up tin g tr a jector y if m a rket p refers com p lement− p reser v in g tr a jector y Figure 2 . Illustration for Proposition 3 Strategic differentiation Up to this point , the analysis of the incumbent’s trajectory choice has focused on the incumbent’s incentive to leverage its complementary assets as a source of potential competitive advantage if the ﬁrm chooses the complement - preserving trajectory . However , it is important to note that the incumbent may also ﬁnd it optimal to choose the complementary - preserving trajectory even when its complementary assets are very small ( i . e . , A is close to one ) . In this case , the incumbent’s trajectory choice decision is instead driven by what we call ‘strategic differentiation’—a strategic choice of a different trajectory from the entrant merely to mitigate competition . Consider the case in which the incumbent’s complementary assets are low . If the incumbent chooses the complement - disrupting trajectory , it competes with the entrant in a duopoly regard - less of the market preference . In contrast , if the incumbent chooses the complement - preserving trajectory , it makes a bet on the ultimate nature of market preferences . Should the market prove to prefer the technological trajectory adopted by the incumbent , the incumbent would gain an advan - tage over the entrant ( i . e . , obtain higher proﬁt than the duopoly proﬁt ) not only because of its com - plementary assets , which in any case are low , but because the market discounts the entrant’s ‘wrong’ trajectory choice . Obviously , under such a circumstance , the incumbent’s advantage and , hence , proﬁt , increases as the mismatch discount is heavier ( i . e . , δ approaches zero ) . Of course , this circumstance arises only if the market prefers Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj 1272 B . Wu , Z . Wan , and D . A . Levinthal 1 0 . 75 0 . 5 0 . 25 0 1 1 . 25 1 . 5 1 . 75 2 δ A β = 1 , γ = 0 . 5 p = 0 . 6 p = 0 . 7 p = 0 . 8 p = 0 . 9 Figure 3 . Effect of market preference probability p on the equal trajectory threshold A r ( δ ) the complement - preserving trajectory , which hap - pens with probability 1 - p . In other words , should the market preference prove to be for the complement - disrupting trajectory , the incumbent would fare poorly relative to the entrant and earn a lower proﬁt than the duopoly level achieved when both the entrant and the incumbent choose the same , complement - disrupting trajectory . As a result , it is clear that the incumbent would prefer strategic differentiation only when there is a reasonable chance that the market will prefer the complement - preserving trajectory ( i . e . , the probability the market prefers the complement - disrupting trajectory p is close to 0 . 5 ) and the mismatch discount is sufﬁciently severe ( i . e . , a low value of δ ) . We ﬁnd that the incumbent indeed prefers strategic differentiation under these cases . For example , in Figure 3 , when the market preference probability p equals 0 . 6 , the trajectory choice threshold A r ( δ ) equals one for all δ < 0 . 25 . This implies that when the incumbent ﬁnds the two trajectories almost equally promising or when the market preference is most uncertain , the incumbent will always choose the complement - preserving trajectory even when its complementary assets are very low . Although the market preference for the two trajectories is nearly equal , the incumbent ﬁnds it preferable to choose the complement - preserving trajectory to avoid competition with the entrant given that the entrant will choose the complement - disruption trajectory . The intensity of product market competition , as determined by the ratio of the parameters β and γ in the demand function , also affects the value of the threshold A r . As the ratio γ / β approaches one , the products become closer substitutes and , as a result , the incumbent ﬁnds strategic differentiation increasingly favorable . This incentive for strategic differentiation , in turn , leads to a decrease in the threshold A r . The incumbent’s incentive for strategic differ - entiation has an interesting implication : the equal trajectory threshold A r ( δ ) ( the upper bound of the dotted region ) exhibits an inverse - U shape as δ changes from 1 to 0 ( Figure 1 ) . This nonlinear relationship implies that for an incumbent with low complementary assets , it is less proﬁtable to choose the complement - disrupting trajectory when δ is either too large ( close to 1 ) or too low ( i . e . , close to 0 ) , but more proﬁtable to do so when δ is moderate . While the complement - preserving trajectory is obviously attractive to the incumbent when it can leverage its complementary asset with a low mismatch penalty ( δ relatively high ) , the complement - preserving trajectory is also attractive to the incumbent when the mismatch penalty is high ( δ relatively low ) because the beneﬁt from the strategic differentiation increases as the mismatch penalty increases ( i . e . , δ decreases ) . As discussed in the prior paragraph , a higher mismatch penalty means that the entrant’s product would be more severely discounted in consumers’ valuations . In the extreme case when δ = 0 , the incumbent would gain a monopoly proﬁt should the incumbent choose the complementary - preserving trajectory and the markets prefer this trajectory . As the market preference probability p approaches 0 . 5 , the incumbent’s incentive for strategic differentiation increases , leading to a more pronounced downward slope for the inverse - U shape of the equal trajectory threshold . For example , when p = 0 . 6 , the threshold A r ( δ ) ﬁrst increases and then decreases to and remains at zero as δ decreases from 1 to 0 ( Figure 3 ) . To summarize , we ﬁnd that the incumbent’s choice of strategic differentiation could be an ex ante rational choice given high technical uncer - tainty and competitive interactions in product markets . Thus , technological strategies that may appear to be associated with inertia ( Leonard - Barton , 1992 ) may be driven by an incentive to minimize competitive interaction . The inﬂuence of competitive interaction on ﬁrms’ innovation activities has received growing interest in the ﬁeld of technological strategy , complementing the consideration of internal resource allocation Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Complementary Assets as Pipes and Prisms 1273 ( Adner and Zemsky , 2005 ; Turner , Mitchell , and Bettis , 2010 ) . Supplementing this stream of prior work , we show that in the presence of uncertainty , strategic differentiation need not require engaging distinct segments of the product market . Rather , the differentiation can occur by placing different bets on more or less promising technological trajectories . We have discussed the shape of the equal trajectory threshold as the mismatch discount factor δ and the market preference probability p change . Finally , we brieﬂy discuss the impact of these two parameters on the other two thresholds . Both the equal market share curve A l ( δ ) ( the lower boundary of the white region ) and the equal investment curve A u ( δ ) ( the lower boundary of the black region ) increase nearly monotonically in δ as Figure 1 shows , because a larger penalty associated with the choice of the less preferred technological trajectory requires a higher level of complemen - tary assets to compensate and generate equal investment incentives and market outcome . 13 We also vary the market preference probability p . The two thresholds increase in p since a higher p value provides the entrant with a higher expected payoff over the incumbent , who chooses the less promis - ing trajectory . As a result , the entrant increases its investment level with p . Consequently , the incumbent requires a higher level of complemen - tary assets to justify a higher investment level that matches the entrant’s ( i . e . , A u increases in p ) or to achieve a guaranteed leading position in terms of market share ( i . e . , A l increases in p ) . Robustness to fungible complementary assets In our analysis , we assumed that the incumbent is able to leverage its complementary assets only when it chooses the complement - preserving trajec - tory and the complement - preserving trajectory is preferred by the market ( second to last column of Table 1 ) . We made this assumption to focus on the central mechanism at work in determining ﬁrms’ choices and their market outcomes . In this section , 13 The equal market share curve A l ( δ ) increases monotonically . However , there is a slight drop between the upward increasing part and the ﬂat part of the equal investment curve A u ( δ ) . This drop is caused by the exit of the incumbent’s product when the market favors the complement - disrupting trajectory at a criti - cal threshold of δ such that 2 β V I − γ V E = 2 βδ u I − γ u E = 0 . Given the exit of the incumbent from product market competi - tion , the entrant reduces its investment ex ante and , as a result , the equal investment curve A u ( δ ) drops at this point . we relax this assumption by allowing for a cer - tain degree of fungibility of complementary assets in the case that the complement - disrupting trajec - tory is preferred . 14 The last column of Table 1 presents a fairly general form of the fungibility of complementary assets . If the incumbent chooses the complement - preserving trajectory r = 0 but the market prefers the complement - disrupting trajec - tory t = 1 , then the incumbent can still lever - age its complementary assets but suffers from a discount in the value of these assets . In par - ticular , the incumbent’s effective complementary assets become A κ 1 , where 0 ≤ κ 1 ≤ 1 . Similarly , if the incumbent chooses the complement - disrupting trajectory r = 1 , the incumbent can leverage its complementary assets to only a certain degree , with the incumbent’s effective complementary assets becoming A κ 2 , 0 ≤ κ 2 ≤ 1 . 15 We can inter - pret κ 1 and κ 2 as the degree to which com - plementary assets are trajectory speciﬁc . When complementary assets are fully trajectory spe - ciﬁc to the complement - preserving trajectory , then κ 1 = κ 2 = 0 ; that is , the incumbent’s advantage from complementary assets will disappear if the ﬁrm chooses the complement - disrupting trajectory or if the ﬁrm chooses the complement - preserving trajectory but the market prefers the complement - disrupting trajectory . In contrast , when comple - mentary assets are fully trajectory independent , then κ 1 = κ 2 = 1 and the incumbent’s advantage from complementary assets will be fully retained regardless of its trajectory choice or which trajec - tory is ultimately preferred by the market . Our results are robust to this more general setup . In particular , the black regime we identiﬁed in Propositions 1 and 2 always exists . The black regime characterizes the case when the complementary asset is sufﬁciently large that the incumbent prefers the complement - preserving trajectory and invests more than the entrant , but the penalty from technical mismatch is sufﬁciently high ( i . e . , the value of δ is sufﬁciently 14 While we are treating the degree of fungibility as a function of inherent breadth of applicability of complementary assets , Taylor and Helfat ( 2009 ) point out that effective fungibility may , to an important degree , be a function of organizational structures and integrative mechanisms that facilitate resource sharing across units . 15 We could further introduce a κ 3 to separately represent the case where the ﬁrm chooses the complementary - destroying trajectory and the market prefers the complement - preserving trajectory , but the mechanisms we show do not change . Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj 1274 B . Wu , Z . Wan , and D . A . Levinthal small ) that the product market payoff from the incumbent’s investment greatly diminishes and the entrant would garner more product market success should the complement - disrupting tra - jectory be preferred . The existence of the black regime persists when κ 1 , κ 2 > 0 because κ 1 and κ 2 inﬂuence only the incumbent’s preference between the two trajectories and determine how large a value of complementary asset A is required to turn the incumbent’s preference toward the complement - preserving trajectory . However , since the factors that affect the degree to which complementary assets are speciﬁc to a given technological trajectory , κ 1 and κ 2 , can inﬂuence the incumbent’s trajectory choice , the shape of the regimes in Figure 1 is affected when we allow for a certain degree of fungibility of complementary assets . A larger value of κ 1 makes the complement - preserving trajectory more prefer - able and , hence , leads to higher investment and proﬁt for the incumbent but lower investment and proﬁt for the entrant if the incumbent chooses the complement - preserving trajectory . Therefore , as κ 1 increases , the region ( in the A - δ plane ) where the incumbent prefers the complement - disrupting trajectory ( the dotted region ) shrinks and the thresholds of equal investment ( the lower bound - ary of the black region ) and equal market share ( the lower boundary of the white region ) decrease . The four ﬁgures in Figure 4a show this pattern . A larger κ 2 makes the complement - disrupting trajectory more preferable and , hence , it leads to higher investment and proﬁt for the incumbent but lower investment and proﬁt for the entrant if the incumbent chooses the complement - disrupting trajectory . In contrast to its impact on trajectory choice , κ 2 does not affect the equal investment and equal market share thresholds because these thresholds only apply when the complement - preserving trajectory is chosen . If the complement - preserving trajectory is chosen , the value of κ 2 does not affect the outcome ( i . e . , the two ﬁrms’ investment decisions ) . Therefore , as κ 2 increases , the dotted region will expand and may ultimately encompass part or all of the gray region . The four ﬁgures of Figure 4b show this pattern . CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION Complementary assets not only shield ﬁrms from radical technical changes , but also affect investment incentives . While the existing literature has made the important point that complementary assets can , ex post , inﬂuence product market and ﬁnancial outcomes , the potential effect of com - plementary assets on economic incentives for ex ante investment behavior has been underexplored . In this work , we examine how the incumbent’s complementary assets impact its choice of techno - logical trajectory , as well as its investments along the chosen trajectory . Technological change generally presents multi - ple technological trajectories among which a ﬁrm must choose . In making such choices , a ﬁrm must not only evaluate the inherent promise of the alter - native technologies , but also the degree to which alternative approaches leverage its existing com - plementary assets or renders these assets valueless . Bringing attention to the issue of the existence of alternative technological trajectories highlights an important distinction between investment inten - sity , the qualitative nature of the ﬁrm’s investment ( i . e . , choice of trajectory ) , and ﬁnal product market outcomes . We formally examine ﬁrms’ technology investment behaviors and outcomes by analyzing the inﬂuence of their complementary assets on their technological trajectory choices . Our analy - sis identiﬁes several distinct regimes with corre - sponding empirical implications regarding invest - ment levels , trajectory choices , and product market outcomes . In particular , we are able to identify settings in which established ﬁrms make substan - tial technological investments in the face of radical technical change , but may pursue inferior techno - logical trajectories in order to leverage their exist - ing complementary assets . As a result , the incum - bent’s inferior market outcome may be a conse - quence of its endogenous choice of technological trajectories , rather than a consequence of inferior technical capabilities . As a result , an incumbent ﬁrm’s trajectory choice may empirically exhibit a form of path dependency not as a consequence of cumulative technical knowledge ( Dosi , 1982 ) , but as a consequence of its existing complementary assets . Further , an incentive for strategic differenti - ation may amplify this complementary asset - based path dependence , as the presence of complemen - tary assets creates a basis for asymmetry in the ﬁrms’ approach to the market that leads to some mitigation of product market competition . The distinct regimes identiﬁed in this study can generate nonlinear relationships between market success and the level of complementary Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Complementary Assets as Pipes and Prisms 1275 ( a ) Change in the shape of regimes as k 1 varies ( b ) Change in the shape of regimes as k 2 varies δ p = 0 . 7 , β = 1 , γ = 0 . 5 , κ 1 = 0 , κ 2 = 0 A 1 0 . 5 0 1 1 . 5 2 δ p = 0 . 7 , β = 1 , γ = 0 . 5 , κ 1 = 0 . 2 , κ 2 = 0 A 1 0 . 5 0 1 1 . 5 2 δ p = 0 . 7 , β = 1 , γ = 0 . 5 , κ 1 = 0 . 4 , κ 2 = 0 A 1 0 . 5 0 1 1 . 5 2 δ p = 0 . 7 , β = 1 , γ = 0 . 5 , κ 1 = 0 . 6 , κ 2 = 0 A 1 0 . 5 0 1 1 . 5 2 δ p = 0 . 7 , β = 1 , γ = 0 . 5 , κ 1 = 0 . 4 , κ 2 = 0 . 1 A 1 0 . 5 0 1 1 . 5 2 δ p = 0 . 7 , β = 1 , γ = 0 . 5 , κ 1 = 0 . 4 , κ 2 = 0 . 2 A 1 0 . 5 0 1 1 . 5 2 δ p = 0 . 7 , β = 1 , γ = 0 . 5 , κ 1 = 0 . 4 , κ 2 = 0 . 3 A 1 0 . 5 0 1 1 . 5 2 δ p = 0 . 7 , β = 1 , γ = 0 . 5 , κ 1 = 0 . 4 , κ 2 = 0 . 4 A 1 0 . 5 0 1 1 . 5 2 Figure 4 . Robustness to more fungible complementary assets Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj 1276 B . Wu , Z . Wan , and D . A . Levinthal assets . Firms with low levels of complementary assets may give up such assets and pursue complement - disrupting technological trajectories and , in that respect , become equivalent to the new entrant . It is also possible that ﬁrms with sufﬁciently high levels of complementary assets can still dominate the market , even with the choice of seemingly less promising technological trajectories . However , in a broad range of settings , established ﬁrms , with investment decisions inﬂu - enced by their existing stock of complementary assets , may choose less promising technological trajectories and suffer adverse product market outcomes as a consequence . Of course , there are a number of limitations to our analysis that open opportunities for future research . First , the dynamic nature of the setting could be enriched . The current study assumes that complementary assets are ﬁxed and , therefore , treats them as exogenous parameters . It is cer - tainly the case that this factor evolves over time ( Pacheco - de - Almeida , 2010 ) . The research could be extended by examining ﬁrms’ investments not only with respect to R & D investment , but also with respect to investments in complementary assets . The investments along these two dimen - sions may be made simultaneously or sequentially . Further , we treat the technical capabilities of the ﬁrms as being homogenous . In some sense , this assumption strengthens our ﬁndings , as we show that inertia ( keeping to a prior technology ) may emerge even in the absence of the incumbent having an inherent disadvantage in the new complement - disrupting technology . However , a more general model would allow for the possi - bility of heterogeneity of technical capabilities along different technological trajectories , whether as an inherent property of the ﬁrm’s ‘type’ or an outcome of prior R & D investment activity , as well as heterogeneous complementary assets . Second , as discussed in the model setup , a crit - ical assumption is that the market for complemen - tary assets and technical capabilities are imperfect and , as such , an entrant cannot gain access to complementary assets ( e . g . , through contracting ) , while the incumbent may not gain access to exter - nal technology ( e . g . , through licensing ) . Relaxing this working assumption can lead to a fruitful research avenue that examines the role of licens - ing or mergers and acquisitions ( M & A ) activi - ties between the incumbent and the entrant ( Gans , Hsu , and Stern , 2002 ; Gans and Stern , 2000 ) . Building on the logic of Gans and Stern ( 2000 ) , in the presence of licensing , alliances , and M & As , complementary assets can increase the incum - bent’s bargaining power in the licensing process , thereby lowering the licensing fee paid to the entrant . The effects of complementary assets on the licensing fees that might be earned by an entrant , in turn , amplify the incumbent’s preinnovation incen - tives , as well as its postinnovation returns . A large stock of complementary assets would favor the incumbent by enhancing its returns on R & D rela - tive to the entrant . This is , ultimately , the critical factor underlying our results regarding the ratio - nality of the incumbent’s R & D investments in the face of radical technical change . Furthermore , the choice of technological trajectory in a given domain may impact the cost and effectiveness with which a ﬁrm can access and acquire these capabili - ties in the form of licensing , alliances , and acquisi - tions ( Cohen and Levinthal , 1990 ) . Future research can extend this line of investigation to settings of broader innovation ecosystems ( Kapoor and Lee , 2012 ) . While these are important possible extensions , the current effort provides an important enrich - ment of our current treatment of the effect of complementary assets . Complementary assets are not merely asset stocks that buffer ﬁrms from competitive dynamics ; they are also an impor - tant element of the investment context for ﬁrms’ R & D decisions . Complementary assets can be leveraged to amplify the returns to an existing competitive position , but that act of leverage is not neutral with respect to the direction of the ﬁrm’s technical efforts . In this regard , comple - mentary assets have a dual role , somewhat akin to the duality of network ties as ‘pipes , ’ con - veying resources , and ‘prisms , ’ providing gen - eral signals of quality and legitimacy , put forth by Podolny ( 2001 ) . Complementary assets are a resource . As noted by a number of prior schol - ars , such resources may buffer ﬁrms from subse - quent competitors ( Mitchell , 1989 ; Tripsas , 1997 ) . However , these resources also inﬂuence a ﬁrm’s perception of what might constitute more or less promising technological directions . We examine the ‘prism’ of complementary assets from a ratio - nal choice , proﬁt - maximizing perspective , as we highlight some of the tensions between the incen - tive to leverage existing resources and the need to make technologically appropriate choices , and we suggest how the balance of such tensions may help Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Complementary Assets as Pipes and Prisms 1277 explain some of the empirical patterns and puzzles we observe . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Daniel Levinthal gratefully acknowledges the Mack Center for Emerging Technologies at the Wharton School for ﬁnancial support ; Brian Wu gratefully acknowledges support from both the Mack Center for Emerging Technologies and the Ross School of the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor ; and Zhixi Wan gratefully acknowl - edges support from HEC Paris , France , and the College of Business of the University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign . We have beneﬁted from comments on prior drafts by Rajshree Agarwal , Sendil Ethiraj , April Franco , Joshua Gans , Anil Gupta , Joseph Mahoney , Stephen Mezias , Atul Nerkar , SMJ Coeditor Rich Bettis , and two anony - mous referees , as well as seminar audiences at the Brown Bag Seminar at the Ross School of the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor , the Strategy Group Seminar at the University of Illi - nois at Urbana Champaign , the University of Maryland Smith Entrepreneurship Research Con - ference , the CRES Foundations of Business Strat - egy Conference at Washington University in St . Louis , the Atlanta Competitive Advantage Confer - ence , and the Darden Entrepreneurship and Inno - vation Research Conference at the University of Virginia . REFERENCES Adner R , Snow D . 2010 . Old technology responses to new technology threats : demand heterogeneity and technology retreats . Industrial and Corporate Change 19 ( 5 ) : 1655 – 1675 . Adner R , Zemsky P . 2005 . Disruptive technologies and the emergence of competition . RAND Journal of Economics 36 ( 2 ) : 229 – 254 . Adner R , Zemsky P . 2006 . A demand - based perspective on sustainable competitive advantage . Strategic Man - agement Journal 27 ( 3 ) : 215 – 239 . Agarwal R , Helfat CE . 2009 . Strategic renewal of organizations . Organization Science 20 ( 2 ) : 281 – 293 . Arora A , Fosfuri A , Gambardella A . 2001 . Markets for Technology : The Economics of Innovation and Corporate Strategy . MIT Press : Cambridge , MA . Arrow K . 1962 . Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention . In The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity , Nelson R ( ed ) . Princeton University Press : Princeton , NJ ; 609 – 625 . Arthur WB . 1989 . Competing technologies , increasing returns , and lock - in by historical events . Economic Journal 99 ( 394 ) : 116 – 131 . Benner MJ . 2010 . Securities analysts and incumbent response to radical technological change : evidence from digital photography and Internet telephony . Organization Science 21 ( 1 ) : 42 – 62 . Benner MJ , Tripsas M . 2012 . The inﬂuence of prior industry afﬁliation on framing in nascent industries : the evolution of digital cameras . Strategic Manage - ment Journal 33 ( 3 ) : 277 – 302 . Christensen C . 1997 . The Innovator’s Dilemma : When New Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail . Harvard Business School Press : Boston , MA . Cohen S , Tripsas M . 2012 . Managing technological transitions : the importance of disengaging from the old . University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , NC : Working paper . Cohen WM , Levinthal DA . 1990 . Absorptive capacity : a new perspective on learning and innovation . Adminis - trative Science Quarterly 35 ( 1 ) : 128 – 152 . Dew N , Goldfarb B , Sarasvathy S . 2006 . Optimal inertia : when organizations should fail . In Ecology and Strategy : Advances in Strategic Management , Volume 23 , Baum JAC , Dobrev SD , van Witteloostuijn A ( eds ) . Emerald Group Publishing : Bingley , U . K ; 73 – 99 . Dierickx I , Cool K . 1989 . Asset stock accumulation and sustainability of competitive advantage . Management Science 35 ( 12 ) : 1504 – 1512 . Dosi G . 1982 . Technological paradigms and technological trajectories . Research Policy 11 : 147 – 162 . Dushnitsky G . 2010 . Entrepreneurial optimism in the market for technological inventions . Organization Science 21 ( 1 ) : 150 – 167 . Dushnitsky G , Lenox MJ . 2005 . When do ﬁrms undertake R & D by investing in new ventures ? Strategic Manage - ment Journal 26 ( 10 ) : 947 – 965 . Dushnitsky G , Shaver JM . 2009 . Limitations to interor - ganizational knowledge acquisition : the paradox of corporate venture capital . Strategic Management Jour - nal 30 ( 10 ) : 1045 – 1064 . Company EK . 1991 . Annual Report . Rochester , N . Y : Eastman Kodak Company . Elfenbein DW . 2007 . Publications , patents , and the market for university inventions . Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 63 ( 4 ) : 688 – 715 . Furr N , Snow D . 2012 . Threat rigidity or threat action ? Rethinking threat response in light of technology’s last gasp . Brigham Young University , Provo , UT : Working paper . Gans JS , Hsu DH , Stern S . 2002 . When does start - up innovation spur the gale of creative destruction ? RAND Journal of Economics 33 ( 4 ) : 571 – 586 . Gans JS , Stern S . 2000 . Incumbency and R & D incentives : licensing the gale of creative destruction . Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 9 ( 4 ) : 485 – 511 . Gilbert CG . 2005 . Unbundling the structure of inertia : resource versus routine rigidity . Academy of Manage - ment Journal 4 8 ( 5 ) : 741 – 763 . Girotra K , Terwiesch C , Ulrich KT . 2007 . Valuing R & D projects in a portfolio : evidence from the Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj 1278 B . Wu , Z . Wan , and D . A . Levinthal pharmaceutical industry . Management Science 53 ( 9 ) : 1452 – 1466 . Goldfarb B . 2008 . The effect of government contracting on academic research : does the source of funding affect scientiﬁc output ? Research Policy 37 ( 1 ) : 41 – 58 . Helfat CE . 1997 . Know - how and asset complementarity and dynamic capability accumulation : the case of R & D . Strategic Management Journal 1 8 ( 5 ) : 339 – 360 . Henderson R . 1993 . Underinvestment and incompetence as responses to radical innovation : evidence from the photolithographic alignment equipment industry . RAND Journal of Economics 24 ( 2 ) : 248 – 270 . Henderson RM , Clark KB . 1990 . Architectural innova - tion : the reconﬁguration of existing product technolo - gies and the failure of established ﬁrms . Administra - tive Science Quarterly 35 ( 1 ) : 9 – 30 . Hill CWL , Rothaermel FT . 2003 . The performance of incumbent ﬁrms in the face of radical technological innovation . Academy of Management Review 2 8 ( 2 ) : 257 – 274 . Jensen MC . 1993 . The modern industrial revolution , exit , and the failure of internal control systems . Journal of Finance 4 8 ( 3 ) : 831 – 880 . Kapoor R , Lee JM . 2012 . Coordinating and competing in ecosystems : how organizational forms shape new technology investments . Strategic Management Jour - nal 34 ( 3 ) : 274 – 296 . Kim BK . 2011 . New wine in old bottles : the role of status and market identity in creating a ‘digital media’ category . University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , MI : Dissertation . King AA , Tucci CL . 2002 . Incumbent entry into new market niches : the role of experience and managerial choice in the creation of dynamic capabilities . Man - agement Science 4 8 ( 2 ) : 171 – 186 . Leonard - Barton D . 1992 . Core capabilities and core rigidities : a paradox in managing new product devel - opment . Strategic Management Journal , Summer Spe - cial Issue 13 : 111 – 125 . Mitchell W . 1989 . Whether and when ? Probability and timing of incumbents’ entry into emerging industrial subﬁelds . Administrative Science Quarterly 34 ( 2 ) : 208 – 230 . Nelson R . 1959 . The simple economics of basic sci - entiﬁc research . Journal of Political Economy 67 ( 3 ) : 297 – 306 . Nelson R , Winter S . 1982 . An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change . Belknap Press : Cambridge , MA . Pacheco - de - Almeida G . 2010 . Erosion , time compression , and self - displacement of leaders in hypercompetitive environments . Strategic Management Journal 31 ( 13 ) : 1498 – 1526 . Pacheco - de - Almeida G , Zemsky P . 2007 . The timing of resource development and sustainable competitive advantage . Management Science 53 ( 4 ) : 651 – 666 . Podolny JM . 2001 . Networks as the pipes and prisms of the market . American Journal of Sociology 107 ( 1 ) : 33 – 60 . Reinganum JF . 1983 . Uncertain innovation and the persistence of monopoly . American Economic Review 73 ( 4 ) : 741 – 748 . Rench C . 1984 . Interview by William Aspray , 18 April . Charles Babbage Institute : Minneapolis , MN . Rosen RJ . 1991 . Research and development with asym - metric ﬁrm sizes . RAND Journal of Economics 22 ( 3 ) : 411 – 429 . Rosenbloom RS . 2000 . Leadership , capabilities , and technological change : the transformation of NCR in the electronic era . Strategic Management Journal 21 ( 10 / 11 ) : 1083 – 1103 . Shapiro C , Varian HR . 1999 . Information Rules : A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy . Harvard Business School Press : Boston , MA . Sosa ML . 2009 . Application - speciﬁc R & D capabilities and the advantage of incumbents : evidence from the anticancer drug market . Management Science 55 ( 8 ) : 1409 – 1422 . Sutton J . 1997 . Technology and Market Structure . MIT Press : Cambridge , MA . Taylor A , Helfat CE . 2009 . Organizational linkages for surviving technological change : complementary assets , middle management , and ambidexterity . Orga - nization Science 20 ( 4 ) : 718 – 739 . Teece DJ . 1986 . Proﬁting from technological inno - vation : implications for integration , collaboration , licensing and public policy . Research Policy 15 ( 6 ) : 285 – 305 . Tripsas M . 1997 . Unraveling the process of creative destruction : complementary assets and incumbent sur - vival in the typesetter industry . Strategic Management Journal , Summer Special Issue 1 8 : 119 – 142 . Tripsas M , Gavetti G . 2000 . Capabilities , cognition , and inertia : evidence from digital imaging . Strategic Management Journal 21 ( 10 / 11 ) : 1147 – 1161 . Turner SF , Mitchell W , Bettis RA . 2010 . Responding to rivals and complements : how market concentration shapes generational product innovation strategy . Orga - nization Science 21 ( 4 ) : 854 – 872 . Tushman ML , Anderson P . 1986 . Technological disconti - nuities and organizational environments . Administra - tive Science Quarterly 31 ( 3 ) : 439 – 465 . Vives X . 2001 . Oligopoly Pricing : Old Ideas and New Tools . MIT Press : Cambridge , MA . Zhu F , Iansiti M . 2012 . Entry into platform - based mar - kets . Strategic Management Journal 33 ( 1 ) : 88 – 106 . SUPPORTING INFORMATION Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this article : Appendix S1 . Online Appendix : Proof For The Propositions Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 35 : 1257 – 1278 ( 2014 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj