Focus Review Let’s go bananas : revisiting the endocytic BAR code Britta Qualmann * , Dennis Koch * and Michael Manfred Kessels * Institute for Biochemistry I , University Hospital Jena—Friedrich Schiller University Jena , Jena , Germany Against the odds of membrane resistance , members of the BIN / Amphiphysin / Rvs ( BAR ) domain superfamily shape membranes and their activity is indispensable for a plethora of life functions . While crystal structures of different BAR dimers advanced our understanding of membrane shaping by scaffolding and hydrophobic inser - tion mechanisms considerably , especially life - imaging techniques and loss - of - function studies of clathrin - mediated endocytosis with its gradually increasing curva - ture show that the initial idea that solely BAR domain curvatures determine their functions is oversimpliﬁed . Diagonal placing , lateral lipid - binding modes , additional lipid - binding modules , tilde shapes and formation of macromolecular lattices with different modes of orga - nisation and arrangement increase versatility . A picture emerges , in which BAR domain proteins create macromo - lecular platforms , that recruit and connect different bind - ing partners and ensure the connection and coordination of the different events during the endocytic process , such as membrane invagination , coat formation , actin nuclea - tion , vesicle size control , ﬁssion , detachment and uncoat - ing , in time and space , and may thereby offer mechanistic explanations for how coordination , directionality and effectiveness of a complex process with several steps and key players can be achieved . The EMBO Journal ( 2011 ) 30 , 3501 – 3515 . doi : 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2011 . 266 Subject Categories : membranes & transport Keywords : BAR domain superfamily proteins ; BAR hypothesis ; clathrin - mediated endocytosis ; curvature ; vesicle formation Cellular membranes—between relaxation and deﬁned topology The lipid bilayers of a cell represent natural barriers and thereby bring about the required compartmentalization of life functions . Well - controlled transport processes across membranes and vesicular transport ensure crosstalk and material exchange among the different compartments and with the extracellular space . The functions of the plasma membrane hereby involve the generation of functional micro - domains , which can often also be deﬁned structurally . Structural membrane inhomogeneities are brought about ( i ) by lipid components ( e . g . , phosphoinositides and lysopho - sphatidic acid ) that are inverted conical lipids and induce positive curvatures ( i . e . , convex surfaces ) , ( ii ) by integral proteins and ( iii ) by proteins associating transiently with the membrane surface and manifest in different sorts of cellular protrusions and invaginations . Shaping membranes with BAR domains The local shape of a membrane depends on which compo - nents are present and on how they are spatially distributed . Vice versa , a given membrane will resist bending because alteration of its topology will create tension in the lipid bilayer and / or requires spatial redistribution of topology - inﬂuencing membrane components ( Figure 1 ) . Despite these obstacles , proteins evolved that are able to overcome predeﬁned membrane topologies and bending resistances and have the power to shape membranes . Two major mechanistic principles of membrane bending and curvature sensing were suggested , the hydrophobic insertion mechan - ism and scaffolding mechanisms ( McMahon and Gallop , 2005 ; Zimmerberg and Kozlov , 2006 ; Figure 1 ) . The BIN / Amphiphysin / Rvs ( BAR ) domain protein super - family of membrane shapers allows for highlighting both mechanisms , the conceptual requirements and the functional importance of membrane shaping . The BAR domain was ﬁrst recognized as conserved domain in BIN1 , amphiphysins and the yeast proteins Rvs167p and Rvs161p ( David et al , 1994 ) . The crystal structure of the amphiphysin BAR domain a decade later then revealed that BAR domains are dimers ( Peter et al , 2004 ) . The core of these dimers ( also called BAR modules ) is a 6 - helix bundle formed by three , relatively long helices of each monomer ( helix 1 – 3 ) . From the central helix bundle , two arms protrude ( Figure 2 ) . Since overall the shape of BAR modules is curved and amphiphysin was known to tubulate liposomes ( Takei et al , 1999 ) , Peter et al ( 2004 ) suggested that a variety of proteins that are structurally related to amphiphysins may also sense and / or induce membrane curvatures upon recruitment from the cytosol to the cytosolic membrane surface . A number of crystal structures , lipid - binding studies and liposome tubulation assays since then conﬁrmed this hypothesis and expanded the superfamily , which according to ( weak ) sequence homologies and structural similarity today contains classical BAR , N - BAR , BAR - PH , PX - BAR , F - BAR and I - BAR proteins ( Frost et al , 2009 ; Suetsugu et al , 2010 ; Figure 2 ) . Received : 30 June 2011 ; accepted : 15 July 2011 * Corresponding author . B Qualmann or D Koch or MM Kessels , Institute for Biochemistry I , University Hospital Jena—Friedrich Schiller University Jena , Nonnenplan 2 - 4 , Jena , Thueringen D - 07743 , Germany . Tel . : þ 49 3641 9396 300 ; Fax : þ 49 3641 9396 302 ; E - mail : britta . qualmann @ mti . uni - jena . de or dennis . koch @ mti . uni - jena . de or michael . kessels @ mti . uni - jena . de The EMBO Journal ( 2011 ) 30 , 3501 – 3515 | & 2011 European Molecular Biology Organization | All Rights Reserved 0261 - 4189 / 11 www . embojournal . org & 2011 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 30 | NO 17 | 2011 EMBO THE EMBO JOURNAL THE EMBO JOURNAL 3501 Scaffolding mechanism Common to the scaffolding mechanisms is the binding of a hydrophilic protein domain with an intrinsically curved shape to the membrane surface forcing it to adopt a similar shape . In curvature sensing , already existing lipid topologies are preferentially interacting with protein scaffolds of suitable curvature . Both processes are not mutually exclusive but may also occur simultaneously ( Figure 1 ) . The scaffolding mechanism relies on several prerequisites : First , a deﬁned membrane - binding interface is needed . As shown by a plethora of mutational studies ( Peter et al , 2004 ; Gallop et al , 2006 ; Masuda et al , 2006 ; Suetsugu et al , 2006 ; Henne et al , 2007 ; Mattila et al , 2007 ; Pylypenko et al , 2007 ; Shimada et al , 2007 , 2010 ; Frost et al , 2008 ; Reider et al , 2009 ; Saarikangas et al , 2009 ; Wang et al , 2009 ; Rao et al , 2010 ) , BAR superfamily proteins bind to membranes exclusively by the so - called N - surface , which is composed of residues of helix 1 not oriented towards the helix bundle ( Millard et al , 2005 ) and which is complemented by lipid - binding residues of the ﬂanking arms . Thereby , the lipid - binding surface correlates well with the concave surface of the banana - shaped BAR modules ( Figure 2 ) . The positively charged nature of the membrane - interacting residues ﬁts very well with the negatively charged lipids , such as phosphoinositides and phosphatidylserine , that BAR domains select for binding ( e . g . , see Peter et al , 2004 ; Itoh et al , 2005 ; Mattila et al , 2007 and Dharmalingam et al , 2009 ; Figure 1 ) . The second requirement is that the lipid - binding surface has intrinsic curvature . BAR superfamily proteins have a variety of very different curvatures , which ﬁrst was suggested to be speciﬁc for the subfamilies ( Figure 2 ) . One extreme is sharp convex curvatures , such as those observed in the crystal structures of arfaptin ( classical BAR ; Tarricone et al , 2001 ) , APPL ( PH - BAR ; Li et al , 2007 ; Zhu et al , 2007 ) and endophilin A1 ( N - BAR ; Weissenhorn , 2005 ; Gallop et al , 2006 ; Masuda et al , 2006 ) . The curvatures of these molecules correspond to circles with diameters of only B 15 – 17 nm ( Figure 2 ) . Also , the crystal structures of amphiphysins have strongly curved lipid - binding surfaces ( Peter et al , 2004 ; Casal et al , 2006 ; Figure 2 ) . Structurally , the overall shape of BAR modules is mainly determined by the angle of dimerization . In strongly curved structures , the angle of helix 2 interception is B 30 1 , whereas for F - BAR proteins it is only B 10 1 ( Henne et al , 2007 ; Shimada et al , 2007 ; Wang et al , 2009 ) . Also , helix kinks contribute to the shape of BAR modules ( reviewed in Masuda and Mochizuki , 2010 ; Figure 2 ) . One extreme case is the so - called I - BAR ( inverse BAR ) family with its cigar - shaped dimers . Their overall straight , cigar - like shapes provide slightly concave surfaces promoting negative curvatures , such as those found inside of plasma membrane protrusions ( Zhao et al , 2011 ) . The third prerequisite for curvature induction by scaffold - ing is a rigid surface . Mutational analyses of endophilin conﬁrmed the general requirement of rigidity for scaffolding ( Masuda et al , 2006 ) . It seems that the stiffness of BAR modules is brought about by the central , tightly packed six - helix bundle . Crosslink experiments with endogenous pro - teins in brain extracts ( Ringstad et al , 2001 ; Kessels and Qualmann , 2006 ) suggest that also in vivo , dimers are very stable and represent the prevalent state of BAR superfamily proteins . Also , the crystal structures showing many hydro - phobic surface residues being buried upon dimerization suggest that BAR modules are very stable ( Masuda and Mochizuki , 2010 ) . Furthermore , successful reconstructions of solution structures of BAR domains ( Wang et al , 2008 , 2009 ) as well as visualizations of lipid - bound F - BAR dimers by cryo - EM ( Frost et al , 2008 ) suggest that BAR modules have a deﬁned , invariant shape . The fourth prerequisite is that the membrane - binding interface is large enough to impose a deﬁned topology on a signiﬁcant area of membrane . The lipid - binding surfaces of BAR domains are only B 16 – 23nm in length and ribbony ( Figure 2 ) . Clusters of positive residues may explain how BAR modules can attach their entire N - surface to the membrane but calculations suggest that the energy releases of mem - brane binding do not provide the energy required for deform - ing a signiﬁcant portion of the bilayer . This demands cooperation among many BAR modules ( Ayton et al , 2007 ) . For endophilin , syndapins , SNXs , and APPL , self - associations were directly shown biochemically ( Ringstad et al , 2001 ; Kessels and Qualmann , 2006 ; Shin et al , 2007 ; Chial et al , 2008 ; Dislich et al , 2010 ) . The observation of coats of BAR superfamily proteins around lipids in in vitro experiments ( for review , see Gallop and McMahon , 2005 and Itoh and Takenawa , 2009 ) , crystal structures and cryo - EM analyses also suggest that BAR modules self - assemble into larger complexes and that , in these lattices , individual members may be in contact in an organized manner ( Shimada et al , 2007 ; Frost et al , 2008 ; Wang et al , 2009 ; Henne et al , 2010 ) . Interestingly , tubule formation of CIP4 and self - association of syndapin I was based on similar acidic residues just A B C Figure 1 Mechanisms of membrane shaping by BAR domains . ( A ) Scaffolding mechanism promoted by binding to inverted cone - shaped negatively charged lipids ( red ) . ( B , C ) Hydrophobic insertion mechanisms embedding protein parts into the lipid layer . Let’s go bananas : revisiting the endocytic BAR code B Qualmann et al The EMBO Journal VOL 30 | NO 17 | 2011 & 2011 European Molecular Biology Organization 3502 Lateral view Top view I - B A R PX - B A R B A R - P H N - B A R C l a ss i ca l B A R Arfaptin ( 1I49 ) Endophilin ( 1X03 ) 90˚ 61˚ 37˚ PH PX Amphiphysin ( 2FIC ) APPL ( 2Q13 ) SNX9 ( 3DYT ) FCHo ( 2V0O ) FBP17 ( 2EFL ) Syndapin ( 3HAH ) MIM ( 2D1L ) F - B A R Figure 2 BAR modules adopt folds with different degrees of curvature . BAR modules ( one monomer in yellow and the other in blue ) from different subfamilies viewed from the side ( left ) and from top ( right ) . Additional domains ( PH and PX ) are in grey . PDB codes are given in brackets . Note that FCHo and syndapin have tilde shapes . Arrowheads mark positions within the BAR modules for hydrophobic insertion into membranes . Let’s go bananas : revisiting the endocytic BAR code B Qualmann et al & 2011 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 30 | NO 17 | 2011 3503 C - terminal of the F - BAR domain ( Kessels and Qualmann , 2006 ; Frost et al , 2008 ) that were suggested to form lateral interactions in CIP4 crystal structures ( Frost et al , 2008 ) . In general , lattice formation adds macromolecular aspects to BAR domain function . Hydrophobic insertion mechanism Partial embedding of hydrophobic or amphipathic protein domains into the membrane matrix was shown by biochem - ical and spectroscopical analyses for endophilin and amphi - physin ( Farsad et al , 2001 ; Gallop et al , 2006 ; Henne et al , 2007 ) . It is a powerful mechanism for strong hydrophobic interactions and for bending membranes and / or for recogniz - ing sharply bent membranes , which easily allow for such insertions at sites of positive curvature ( Figure 1 ) . The presence of N - terminal amphipathic helixes distinguishes the N - BAR subfamily composed of amphiphysins / BINs and endophilins and nadrins from the rest of the BAR superfamily ( Figures 1 and 2 ) . Intriguingly , Bhatia et al ( 2009 ) demonstrated that the amphipathic a - helix of endophilin is required for sensing a given membrane curvature , whereas the positively charged , curved N - surface of the BAR domain was unable to do so . Similarly , elegant genetic analyses in D . melanogaster questioned the general importance of the BAR domain core for endophilin function in vivo , as mutations in the central amphipathic helix located in the BAR domain did not affect larval viability or synaptic function . In contrast , a mutation in the membrane - inserted helix 0 , that is , outside of the BAR domain core , lacked membrane binding and tubulation ac - tivity in vitro and was unable to rescue the impaired synaptic function in endophilin mutants ( Jung et al , 2010 ) . Also in worms , deleting the membrane - inserting helix 0 failed to restore functions in endophilin ( unc - 57 ) mutants , while mutations in helix 1 of the BAR domain core at least partially rescued ( Bai et al , 2010 ) . In addition to N - BAR proteins at least one member of the F - BAR family uses hydrophobic insertion mechanisms , syndapin I dimers contain two loops of hydrophobic residues , which protrude from the lipid - binding surface and seem to be inserted into the membrane like wedges ( Wang et al , 2009 ; Rao et al , 2010 ) . This is a mechanism to promote membrane bending and / or sensing of bent membranes . Testing the BAR domain hypothesis in vivo using the deﬁned stages of endocytic vesicle formation Intriguingly , many cellular processes do not seem to involve single members of the BAR domain superfamily but diverse , however , distinct sets of BAR domain - containing proteins from different subfamilies . It , therefore , has been suggested that classical BAR , BAR - PH , PX - BAR , N - BAR , I - BAR and F - BAR domains induce and / or prefer different membrane curvatures ( BAR domain hypothesis ) and that this predeter - mines their temporal and spatial involvement in cellular membrane shaping processes . These hypotheses were based on the shape of BAR modules seen in crystal structures and of the membrane tubulation reactions observed in in vitro reconstitutions with liposomes and proteins . A particularly well - deﬁned membrane shaping process is clathrin - mediated endocytosis proceeding through sequential , well - deﬁned stages with different membrane curvatures ( Figure 3 ) . Nucleation of adaptors and clathrin at the plasma membrane is followed by the invagination of the plasma membrane . When the deformation has led to a deeply invaginated clathrin - coated pit with an appropriately narrow neck , scission mediated by the large GTPase dynamin releases a clathrin - coated vesicle , which then is rapidly uncoated aided by synaptojanin , GAK / auxilin and Hsc70 and then undergoes further endosomal trafﬁcking ( reviewed in Doherty and McMahon , 2009 and Schmid and Frolov , 2011 ; Figure 3 ) . Over several decades , biochemical and structural approaches have revealed the protein machineries for endo - cytic vesicle formation and their properties . Advanced live - imaging techniques now allow for investigation of individual endocytic events , characterization of their heterogeneity and examination of the temporal and spatial organization of the endocytic machinery by determining the order of recruitment and release of ﬂuorescently tagged individual components , by correlating them with distinct stages ( i . e . membrane curvatures ) and by determining whether the composition of a forming clathrin - coated pit affects its properties ( reviewed in Merriﬁeld , 2004 ; Rappoport , 2008 and Kirchhausen , 2009 ) . Some studies applying life - cell total internal reﬂection ( TIRF ) microscopy , a technique that allows to visualize ﬂuorescent molecules selectively within , at or just adjacent to the plasma membrane , have correlated the recruitment of a few BAR superfamily proteins to the disappearance or in - creased mobility of clathrin - coated pits . Using this approach as an indicator for endocytosis , endophilin A2 ( Perera et al , 2006 ) , APPL1 ( Erdmann et al , 2007 ; Zoncu et al , 2009 ) , FBP17 ( Shimada et al , 2007 ) and SNX9 ( Soulet et al , 2005 ) were assigned to be recruited to late stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . For the endosomal BAR - PH protein APPL1 , time - lapse TIRF microscopy demonstrated the appearance of GFP – APPL1 at a subset of clathrin - coated pits right after the disappearance of the clathrin signal ( Zoncu et al , 2009 ) . Recent studies have highlighted that an even closer look both at the temporal dynamics and at the apparent hetero - geneity of forming clathrin - coated structures at the plasma membrane is necessary . In addition to rather spot - like clathrin - coated pits , larger so - called clathrin - coated patches or plaques were described at the coverslip - attached surface in certain cell types ( Gaidarov et al , 1999 ; Ehrlich et al , 2004 ; Keyel et al , 2004 ; Saffarian et al , 2009 ; Batchelder and Yarar , 2010 ; Figure 3 ) . Furthermore , clathrin - coated pit lifetime distribution analyses suggested two short - lived abortive populations and a longer lived productive population ( Loerke et al , 2009 ) . Recently , Taylor et al ( 2011 ) assessed the accuracy of clathrin disappearance as reference point for internalization in TIRF microscopy and showed that the error is as large as the time course of clathrin - coated structure invagination and vesicle formation . For precise timing of endocytic protein recruitments relative to scission , the authors thus monitored the accessibility of pH - sensitive ﬂuorescent cargo of clathrin - mediated endocytosis to rhyth - mically imposed changes in extracellular pH to detect single scission events by TIRF microscopy ( Merriﬁeld et al , 2005 ; Taylor et al , 2011 ) . The process of formation of a clathrin - coated vesicle is characterized by a continuous increase in membrane Let’s go bananas : revisiting the endocytic BAR code B Qualmann et al The EMBO Journal VOL 30 | NO 17 | 2011 & 2011 European Molecular Biology Organization 3504 curvature ( Figure 3 ) and according to the BAR domain hypothesis should , therefore , offer a direct correlation of the recruitment pattern of the differentially curved BAR superfamily proteins and the increasing curvature during vesicle formation . This predictability offered a unique possi - bility to experimentally test the BAR domain hypothesis . Taylor et al ( 2011 ) analysed the recruitment patterns of 34 endocytic proteins including 10 proteins of the BAR domain superfamily . Interestingly , in these examinations , the same set of proteins was recruited in the same order to scission events at diverse dynamic classes of clathrin - coated struc - tures ( deﬁned by size , lifetime , terminal versus non - terminal events ) . Detailed analyses of the kinetics of appearance and dis - appearance of the BAR superfamily proteins revealed that only some of these proteins showed recruitment dynamics correlating with the curvature of their BAR domains ( Figure 4 ) . The FCHo F - BAR domain has a very shallow curvature ( Henne et al , 2007 ; Figure 2 ) . In line with this shape , FCHo proteins were suggested to have a role in clathrin - coated pit nucleation and in the induction of curva - ture early in the invagination of the coated membrane based on biochemical examinations and loss - of - function analyses in cell culture experiments ( Henne et al , 2007 , 2010 ) . Consistently , Taylor et al ( 2011 ) observed that FCHo1 and FCHo2 were indeed recruited very early to clathrin - coated structures with very similar kinetics and scaling relationships between both clathrin - coated structure size and lifetime and the relative amount of protein recruited when compared with clathrin , but particularly when compared with the clathrin adaptor AP2 ( Taylor et al , 2011 ; Figure 4B ) . In contrast , the F - BAR protein syndapin II and the N - BAR proteins endophilin A2 , BIN1 and amphiphysinI showed a burst of recruitment right before scission . This time of appearance reﬂects the highest degree of membrane curva - ture occurring during clathrin - coated vesicle formation—the deeply invaginated clathrin - coated pit and particularly the narrow vesicle neck ( Figure 4 ) . Syndapins , endophilins and amphiphysins indeed have a more sharply curved lipid - bind - ing N - surface than the very shallow F - BAR proteins of the FCHo family with a circle diameter of B 200nm ( Peter et al , 2004 ; Casal et al , 2006 ; Gallop et al , 2006 ; Henne et al , 2007 ; Wang et al , 2009 ) . Upon amphipathic helix insertion , endo - philins have the sharpest curvature of all three ( Gallop et al , 2006 ) . Amphiphysins have slightly shallower curvatures cor - responding to a circle diameter of B 22nm ( Peter et al , 2004 ; Casal et al , 2006 ) . Syndapins , ﬁnally , have even shallower curvatures with N - surfaces corresponding to roughly 50nm circle diameter ( Wang et al , 2009 ) . The observation that members of these F - BAR and N - BAR subfamily members with their different , distinct shapes nevertheless appear together and also show a synchronous disappearance after scission when the highly curved membrane neck collapses ( Taylor et al , 2011 ) thus was unexpected . Interestingly , their dynamic appearance and disappearance parallels the tempor - al signatures of two of the main binding partners of synda - pins , amphiphysins and endophilins , dynamin and N - WASP ( David et al , 1996 ; Ringstad et al , 1997 ; Qualmann and Kelly , 2000 ; Kessels and Qualmann , 2002 ; Otsuki et al , 2003 ; Yamada et al , 2009 ; Figure 4A – C ) . Also , the recruitment of the very sharply curved BAR - PH protein APPL1 only after the scission event cannot simply be based on the geometry of the BAR domain ( Li et al , 2007 ) , but may rather coincide with the pattern of recruitment of inter - action partners of APPL1 including the endosomal compo - nent Rab5 ( Miaczynska et al , 2004 ) . Strikingly , the post - scission recruitment of the PX - BAR protein SNX9 and the complex , biphasic recruitments of the Membrane Clathrin coat Diameter of circle corresponding to curvature Curvature A B Figure 3 Vesicle formation correlates with increased curvature . The formation of a clathrin - coated vesicle from pre - existing clathrin - coated plaques ( A ) and from a clathrin - coated pit ( B ) is marked by an increase of membrane curvature and a drop of the corresponding circle diameters ( black circles in ( A ) and ( B ) ) . Let’s go bananas : revisiting the endocytic BAR code B Qualmann et al & 2011 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 30 | NO 17 | 2011 3505 Type of curvature – 0 + + + + Degree of curvature Very shallow Shallow Strong Very strong A D E F B C Endo2 Amph1 SNX9 APPL1 FCHo2 Synd2 FBP17 1 . 0 Endo2Amph1SNX9APPL1 FCHo2 Dyn1LifeActN - WASP Synd2FBP17 0 . 8 0 . 6 0 . 4 N o r m . f l uo N o r m . f l uo 0 . 2 0 . 0 1 . 0 0 . 8 0 . 6 0 . 4 0 . 2 0 . 0 N o r m . f l uo 1 . 0 0 . 8 0 . 6 0 . 4 0 . 2 0 . 0 – 40 – 20 0 20 40 t ( s ) 60 – 40 – 20 0 20 40 t ( s ) 60 – 40 – 20 0 20 40 t ( s ) 60 Figure 4 Changes of membrane topology during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . ( A – C ) Detailed view of recruitment traces of BAR superfamily proteins ( A ) , F - BAR proteins ( B ) and dynamin , F - actin ( lifeact ) and N - WASP ( C ) . At time t ¼ 0 , ﬁssion of a clathrin - coated vesicle was detected . Images modiﬁed from Taylor et al ( 2011 ) . ( D ) Colour - coded changes in membrane topology at distinct sites of vesicle formation . ( E ) Localization of BAR superfamily proteins to different sites of membrane curvature during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . For simplicity , clathrin is omitted . F - BAR domains with very shallow curvature ( yellow ) , shallow curvature ( orange ) and strongly tilde shape ( red ) are shown in different orientations of binding . Strongly curved BAR modules are in purple . White bars mark deﬁned positions on the molecules to visualize rotations . ( F ) Electron micrograph of a stimulated lamprey synapse injected with anti - endophilin antibodies ( reprinted from Ringstad et al , 1999 with permission from Elsevier ) displays an unusual accumulation of clathrin - coated pits that were arrested at different stages of vesicle formation , that is , with different curvatures ( arrows ) . Bar , 100nm . Endo2 , endophilin A2 ; Amph1 , amphiphysin I ; Synd2 , syndapin II ; Dyn1 , dynamin I . Let’s go bananas : revisiting the endocytic BAR code B Qualmann et al The EMBO Journal VOL 30 | NO 17 | 2011 & 2011 European Molecular Biology Organization 3506 F - BAR proteins FBP17 and CIP4 with phases of recruitment both before and after scission ( Taylor et al , 2011 ) cannot be explained solely on the basis of structural information . Based on the curvatures deduced from the crystal structures of the F - BAR domains of FBP17 and CIP4 ( Shimada et al , 2007 ) and of the PX - BAR domain of SNX9 ( Pylypenko et al , 2007 ) , with curvatures ranging from B 40 to 60nm , a recruitment pattern during the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles rather similar to that of syndapin II would have been expected . An alter - native explanation , that the kinetics of binding partners dictate the kinetics of FBP17 and SNX9 , also is inconsistent with the experimental data . Clear temporal discrepancies were observed between SNX9 and CIP4 / FBP17 / Toca on one side and their binding partners dynamin and N - WASP ( Lundmark and Carlsson , 2003 ; Ho et al , 2004 ; Kamioka et al , 2004 ; Tsujita et al , 2006 ; Yarar et al , 2007 ; Hartig et al , 2009 ) on the other side . The kinetics were opposed ( Taylor et al , 2011 ; Figure 4A – C ) . This indicates that the original BAR domain hypothesis is oversimpliﬁed . Versatility of BAR domain interactions with membranes Solving the ﬁrst structures of different versions of BAR domains served the recognition and the establishment of different subfamilies within the BAR domain superfamily . Structural analyses have also contributed signiﬁcantly to our understanding of the general properties of BAR domains and furthermore revealed specialized features of individual members of the superfamily . Some of these observations also give hints towards why the direct correlation of N - surface curvature with stages of endocytic vesicle formation reﬂecting distinct membrane curvatures ( Figure 3 ) is too simplistic and therefore , in several cases , did not lead to the expected results . Multiple modes of membrane interaction , geometric considerations and structural diversity of especially the F - BAR domain may explain some of the observations made in time - resolved localization studies of endocytosis . Frost et al ( 2008 ) observed by cryo - EM that the CIP4 F - BAR domain has at least two modes of lipid binding . Besides binding to curved surfaces using its N - surface , CIP4 F - BAR dimers were able to attach laterally to ﬂat membranes in in vitro reconstitutions , when the stiffness of the membrane was artiﬁcially raised by strong cooling . It has yet to be shown whether also other F - BAR or maybe even other BAR domain proteins have several modes of binding and how such observations relate to cellular processes in vivo . Another indication that F - BAR proteins may have different membrane - binding modes stems from the observation that , in vitro , syndapins and FCHo have the potential to induce a broad range of tubule diameters , which are by far shallower than their N - surface ( Wang et al , 2009 ; Henne et al , 2010 ) . The situation is additionally complicated by the fact that the F - BAR protein subfamily possesses an extreme diversity of shapes . Whereas the N - surface of F - BAR domains is relatively shallow , and the F - BAR domain of srGAP even has been shown to induce negative curvatures ( Guerrier et al , 2009 ) , some F - BAR domains exhibit sharp helix kinks in the arms , which in the case of FCHo and syndapins result in tilde shapes when viewed from top ( Figure 2 ) . In syndapin I and syndapin II , with two angles of 61 1 , the kinks are extreme ( Wang et al , 2009 ) and would offer curvatures completely different from that of the N - surface . Lateral bind - ing to ﬂat membranes , in contrast , will be impaired by tilde structures , as geometrical considerations would only allow for few lipid contact points . Intriguingly , tilde shapes can also be used for establishing a tight clamp around extremely curved lipid surfaces . For this , the N - surface has to be placed diagonal onto the axis of the cylinder instead of perpendicular ( Figure 4E ) . This way , syndapins can be ﬁt onto tubules of a diameter of as little as B 15nm . This situation ﬁts very well with the ﬁssion reaction in vesicle formation processes . These geometrical considera - tions would give an explanation for the fact that syndapins just appear right before and disappear right after ﬁssion ( Taylor et al , 2011 ) . Another unique feature of the curved and tilde - shaped F - BAR protein syndapin is that such geometry allows syn - chronous binding to two different curvatures , a key function at the transition from the constricted neck to the vesicle formed ( Figure 4D ) . Association at such zones requires a diagonal placement onto the lipid tubule ( Figure 4E ) and a slight rotation of the axis of the syndapin dimer , that is , again , some degree of lateral binding versatility ( Figure 4E , white indicator bar ) . These geometrical considerations and the ﬁnding that there seems to be some rotation ﬂexibility in how at least F - BAR domains are placed onto membranes may explain some of the ﬁndings in time - resolved localization studies of endocytic vesicle formation . They also highlight why mole - cules that apparently have the same curvature of the N - surface behave so differently and why the members of the F - BAR subfamily although all providing shallow N - surfaces seem to prefer and / or promote different membrane curvatures during vesicle formation . Testing the BAR domain hypothesis in vivo by loss - of - function paradigms As described above , TIRF analyses revealed only some corre - lations between recruitment of a BAR superfamily protein and the curvature of its BAR domain . Also , such analyses leave entirely open the question whether transient appear - ances of BAR superfamily proteins at some sites of endocy - tosis reﬂect a crucial role of these proteins in vesicle formation . Therefore , a closer look at the loss - of - function analyses of BAR superfamily proteins involved in clathrin - mediated endocytosis conducted thus far is consequential . I - BAR family During formation of clathrin - coated pits , ﬂat membranes need to be converted into positively curved structures , although also small areas of negative curvature occur at the basis of the forming invagination ( Figure 4D ) . Based on the structure – function relationships in vitro , I - BAR proteins generate negative curvature ( Zhao et al , 2011 ) , suggesting that they are not involved in clathrin - mediated endocytosis or may even have inhibitory effects . Quinones et al ( 2010 ) tested this hypothesis and found that silencing the vertebrate I - BAR protein MIM in mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts led to increased clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Also , the Drosophila ortholo - gue DMIM had an inhibitory effect on endocytosis that was Let’s go bananas : revisiting the endocytic BAR code B Qualmann et al & 2011 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 30 | NO 17 | 2011 3507 accompanied with border cell migration defects of dmim mutants , suggesting conservation of MIM function among species . Interestingly , the antagonistic mechanism of MIM on endocytosis seemed to be based on the competition between distinct BAR superfamily proteins for common endocytic effector proteins ( Quinones et al , 2010 ) . In contrast to I - BAR proteins , almost all other BAR domain proteins induce positive curvature in vitro ( Frost et al , 2009 ) . These proteins should thus induce or stabilize the progres - sively increasing positive curvature of the membrane during vesicle formation ( Figure 4 ) . In general , the N - surface of classical BAR , BAR - PH , PX - BAR and especially N - BAR domains turned out to be much stronger curved than that of F - BAR domains ( Figure 2 ) . These observations suggested a hierarchical order during progression of endocytosis with F - BAR proteins functioning at earlier stages , that is , at sites of low curvature and wide tubular diameters . Other BAR super - family proteins would participate at later stages , that is , at sites of high curvature and thin tubular diameters , such as those found at the constricted neck of a forming vesicle ( Figures 3 and 4D ) . Endocytic proteins—FCHo and N - BAR family Overexpression of the shallow F - BAR protein FCHo led to increased nucleation of clathrin - coated pits , whereas silen - cing FCHo strongly reduced clathrin - coated pit formation and blocked clathrin - mediated endocytosis . FCHo even preceded the recruitment of AP2 / clathrin ( Henne et al , 2010 ) . Thus , it seems to function as a nucleator for clathrin - coated pit formation during very early phases of membrane invagina - tion . These phases correspond to very shallow curvatures . FCHo appearance , structure and function are thus fully consistent with the BAR domain hypothesis . At the ﬁrst look , the same is true for the N - BAR proteins endophilin and amphiphysin . Gene knockout ( KO ) of endo - philin A in worm and ﬂy as well as attacking endophilin A by antibody or peptide introduction in the lamprey all revealed a conserved function of endophilin A in late stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis , as increased levels of deeply invagi - nated clathrin - coated pits devoid of dynamin rings were observed . Consequently , in neurons , the replenishment of synaptic vesicles was disturbed and the synaptic vesicle pool was strongly depleted ( Ringstad et al , 1999 ; Gad et al , 2000 ; Verstreken et al , 2002 ; Schuske et al , 2003 ) . These data suggest that endophilin A acts upstream of dynamin recruit - ment , a stage during clathrin - mediated endocytosis with high curvature and small radius at the neck of the clathrin - coated pit and is in line with the proposed function of N - BAR proteins and their highly curved structure . These studies furthermore show a functional relationship between endo - philin A and synaptojanin . Recent in vitro studies suggest that interaction of synaptojanin with SH3 domain - containing curvature sensors , such as endophilin , recruits synaptojanin and controls its enzymatic activity thereby leading to a preferential dephosphorylation of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 at curved membranes ( Chang - Ileto et al , 2011 ) . Consistently , in Drosophila , single mutants of endoA and synj phenocopy each other both on the ultrastructural and the electrophysio - logical level and synaptojanin was mislocalized and destabilized in endoA mutants ( Verstreken et al , 2003 ) . Drosophila endoA null mutants are sluggish and die as second or early third instar larvae ( Verstreken et al , 2002 ) . Worm endophilin A null mutants ( unc - 57 ) are viable but show an uncoordinated phenotype and thereby phenocopy synaptojanin / unc - 26 mutants ( Schuske et al , 2003 ) . Recently , data by Bai et al ( 2010 ) in C . elegans questioned the SH3 domain - mediated role of endophilin in synaptojanin recruit - ment , as endophilin D SH3 ( i . e . , of an N - BAR domain - containing mutant lacking synaptojanin binding ) expression rescued unc - 57 mutants . It remains possible , however , that this apparent contradiction does not reﬂect species differences but the fact that the importance of the endophilin / synaptojanin interaction is activity dependent ( Mani et al , 2007 ) . Attacking the N - BAR protein amphiphysin in the lamprey also led to severe depletions of the synaptic vesicle pool . The number of clathrin - coated pits was drastically increased and most of them had a small homogenous size with a narrow neck , suggesting an arrest or strong kinetic delay of endocy - tosis at a late stage preceding ﬁssion ( Shupliakov et al , 1997 ; Gad et al , 2000 ) . Since no spirals around the neck were observed , these data suggested that , in line with the predic - tions from its highly curved N - BAR domain structure , also amphiphysin mainly acts upstream of dynamin at the vesicle scission step . Thus far , the loss - of - function analyses described strongly support the concept that BAR superfamily proteins become functionally important at stages of clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis , in which membrane curvature exactly corresponds to the curvature of their BAR modules . There are , however , several ﬁndings that dismiss this simple correlation . Thorough analysis of endophilin - deﬁciency phenotypes in worm , ﬂy and lamprey additionally revealed accumulations of shallow - coated pits without constricted necks ( Figure 4F ) . These data emphasize a role for this N - BAR protein in early stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis with low membrane curvature ( Ringstad et al , 1999 ; Verstreken et al , 2002 ; Schuske et al , 2003 ; Andersson et al , 2010 ) and thereby challenge the BAR domain hypothesis . Furthermore , Mettlen et al ( 2009 ) reported that clathrin - coated pit dynamics in endophilin A2 knockdown cells had no effect on the relative proportions of abortive and produc - tive clathrin - coated pits , but selectively decreased the lifetime of late abortive events . Therefore , the authors concluded that the N - BAR domain of endophilin may allow for sensing critical early stages in clathrin - coated pit maturation that generate curvature and feed this information into a so - called ‘endocytic checkpoint’ ( Mettlen et al , 2009 ) . In physiology , suppressed endophilin A expression , as seen in various tumours , for example breast carcinoma ( Sinha et al , 2008 ) , apparently has consequences for downregulation of EGF receptors or other growth factor receptors and may thereby promote tumour development or malignancy ( Petrelli et al , 2002 ; Soubeyran et al , 2002 ) . Further support for a more complex view of N - BAR pro - teins functioning at multiple stages corresponding to different degrees of membrane curvature comes from the analysis of amphiphysin I KO mice , which due to an induced instability of amphiphysin II forming heterodimers with amphiphysin I are deﬁcient for both amphiphysin isoforms in the brain . These mice displayed learning deﬁcits in the Morris water maze task and suffered from tonic – clonic seizures accompa - nied with reduced survival ( Di Paolo et al , 2002 ) . This argues for some imbalances between excitation and inhibition . However , there is no evidence that the human amphiphysin Let’s go bananas : revisiting the endocytic BAR code B Qualmann et al The EMBO Journal VOL 30 | NO 17 | 2011 & 2011 European Molecular Biology Organization 3508 gene loci are associated with idiopathic generalized epilepsies ( Turnbull et al , 2005 ) . At the synapse level , amphiphysin I KO mice showed synaptic vesicle repriming defects as well as a reduced functional synaptic vesicle pool but the total size of the synaptic vesicle pool was unaffected ( Di Paolo et al , 2002 ) . Biochemical analyses revealed reduced lipid associations of the late clathrin - mediated endocytosis component synap - tojanin , and of the early clathrin - mediated endocytosis com - ponents AP2 and clathrin , but not of dynamin in brain extracts from amphiphysin I KO mice ( Di Paolo et al , 2002 ) . These data were striking because amphiphysins were thought to recruit and activate dynamin at the neck of a forming vesicle based on the observations that amphiphysins associate with lipids ( Takei et al , 1999 ) , that they directly associate with dynamin ( David et al , 1996 ) and that they have the ability to stimulate dynamin’s GTPase activity in the presence of lipids ( Yoshida et al , 2004 ) . Subsequently , Lundmark and Carlsson ( 2004 ) revealed that dynamin recruitment to membranes in non - neuronal cells relies on SNX9 and our recent experimen - tation show that , in the murine brain , the F - BAR protein syndapin I is a crucial dynamin recruiter ( Koch et al , unpub - lished ) . The observed role of amphiphysin I in AP2 and clathrin recruitment , that is , in early stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis , emphasized the importance of amphiphysin’s AP2 / clathrin interaction interface , the CLAP domain ( McMahon et al , 1997 ; Ramjaun et al , 1997 ; Slepnev et al , 2000 ) . In line , microinjection of GST - amphiphysin CLAP or of anti - amphiphysin CLAP antibodies in the lamprey axons blocked early stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Evergren et al , 2004 ) . The importance of the CLAP domain for the endocytic functions of amphiphysins is also supported by the analysis of amphiphysin II KO mice and Drosophila amphiphysin mutants . Loss of both of these muscle - enriched amphiphysins lacking a CLAP domain led to muscle pheno - types and embryonic lethality but not to endocytosis defects ( Razzaq et al , 2001 ; Muller et al , 2003 ) . Strikingly , Drosophila amphiphysin did not only fail to bind clathrin , but also did not bind dynamin ( Razzaq et al , 2001 ) . Taken together , the modular domain organization of am - phiphysins with their membrane - and protein - interacting domains is essential for their overall function and for parti - cipation at distinct stages during clathrin - mediated endocy - tosis . This conclusion also applies to F - BAR proteins . Elegant rescue experiments of the FCHo RNAi phenotype on clathrin - coated pit formation with FCHo harbouring mutations in the AP2 - m homology domain ( m HD ) that abolished binding of eps15 and intersectin or with FCHo mutants with a defective F - BAR domain clearly demonstrated that both the F - BAR domain and its m HD were essential for its clathrin nucleation ability ( Henne et al , 2010 ) . These data exemplify that the modular domain organization of a BAR superfamily protein needs to be entirely intact to ensure the particular function of the protein at a distinct step during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . BAR proteins with additional lipid - binding modules Modular organization and complex formation with several endocytic proteins can also be observed for oligophrenin - 1 , which has a BAR domain fused with a PH domain ( BAR - PH protein ) and an Rho - GTPase - activating ( RhoGAP ) domain . Loss of oligophrenin - 1 has been associated with X - linked mental retardation ( Billuart et al , 1998 ) and gene KO in mice results in impaired spatial memory and dendritic spine immaturity ( Khelfaoui et al , 2007 ) . On the molecular level , postsynaptic oligophrenin - 1 has a critical role in the activity - dependent maturation and plasticity of excitatory synapses through its RhoGAP activity and AMPA receptor binding ( Nadif Kasri et al , 2009 ) and is important for presynaptic compensatory endocytosis ( Nakano - Kobayashi et al , 2009 ) . Interestingly , rescue experiments showed that proper oligo - phrenin - 1 function required both an interaction with endo - philin A1 and the RhoGAP domain ( Nakano - Kobayashi et al , 2009 ) . Thus , as for amphiphysin and FCHo , a modular organization and additional protein interactions are crucial for the function of the BAR - PH protein oligophrenin - 1 in synaptic endocytic vesicle formation . In PICK1 , an inhibitor of the Arp2 / 3 complex actin nuclea - tion machinery ( Rocca et al , 2008 ) , modularity in membrane interaction manifests in an additional use of a PSD - 95 / Dlg / ZO1 ( PDZ ) domain as a lipid - binding module ( Pan et al , 2007 ) . PICK1 was found to interact with postsynaptic AMPA receptors ( Xia et al , 1999 ) . A lack of cerebellar LTD in PICK1 KO mice suggested some role in AMPA receptor endocytosis . Interestingly , both the PDZ and the BAR domains were required for LTD ( Steinberg et al , 2006 ) . Recent studies , however , showed that PICK1 functions in NMDA receptor - induced intracellular retention of AMPA receptors rather than in AMPA receptor endocytosis ( Rocca et al , 2008 ; Citri et al , 2010 ) . Disruption of PICK1 interactions with metabotropic glutamate receptors is correlated with absence epilepsy and mutations in the PICK1 gene have been linked to schizo - phrenia ( Dev and Henley , 2006 ; Bertaso et al , 2008 ) . A combination of BAR domains with an additional mem - brane - binding module , in this case a phosphoinositide - binding phox homology ( PX ) domain , is realized in certain members of the sorting nexin ( SNX ) family . The SNX family is a large family with 33 members in mammals and seems to have roles in different membrane transport processes ( van Weering et al , 2010 ) . It is important to note that , whereas 12 members of the family seem to have PX - BAR domains , only the 3 members , which additionally harbour an Src homology 3 ( SH3 ) domain , are implicated in endocytosis . Theses proteins ( SNX9 , 18 and 33 ; previously annotated as SNX30 ) constitute the so - called SNX9 subfamily ( Lundmark and Carlsson , 2009 ) . KO studies on SNX9 family members are not yet available but SNX9 knockdown led to a diminished transferrin internalization in HeLa cells ( Soulet et al , 2005 ) . In the presynaptic terminal , SNX9 knockdown signiﬁcantly slowed synaptic vesicle endocytosis ( Shin et al , 2007 ) . SNX33 ( Heiseke et al , 2008 ; Scho¨bel et al , 2008 ) and SNX18 ( Park et al , 2010 ) seem to function in clathrin - mediated endocytosis similar to SNX9 , but there are also ﬁndings suggesting that SNX18 has a more unique role in endosomal trafﬁcking ( Ha˚berg et al , 2008 ) . At nerve terminals , primarily the interaction of SNX9 with dynamin I was required for endocytosis ( Shin et al , 2007 ) . In line with this observation , SNX9 contributes to the mem - brane recruitment of dynamin II in non - neuronal cells and stimulates dynamin’s GTPase activity when bound to the membrane ( Lundmark and Carlsson , 2004 ; Soulet et al , Let’s go bananas : revisiting the endocytic BAR code B Qualmann et al & 2011 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 30 | NO 17 | 2011 3509 2005 ) . Mechanistically , SNX9 is able to stimulate dynamin’s GTPase activity when bound to the membrane ( Soulet et al , 2005 ) , and thereby shows some functional similarity to amphiphysin ( Yoshida et al , 2004 ) . These data suggest that SNX9 is important for proper clathrin - mediated endocytosis progression during the ﬁssion step where it recruits and subsequently activates dynamin during vesicle release . However , this conclusion does not ﬁt with the observations that the SNX9 recruitment to clathrin - coated pits during clathrin - mediated endocytosis peaked after the scission of a clathrin - coated pit and thus signiﬁcantly later than dynamin ( Taylor et al , 2011 ; Figure 4A – C ) . F - BAR proteins of the CIP4 / FBP17 / Toca - 1 and the syndapin family The F - BAR family forms the largest subfamily of all BAR superfamily proteins and with the exception of PSTPIP2 and FCHo all members additionally contain SH3 domains . Especially the F - BAR proteins of the CIP4 / FBP17 / Toca - 1 and syndapin ( also called PACSIN ) family resemble the endocytic N - BAR proteins amphiphysin and endophilin because with dynamin , synaptojanin and N - WASP they also share major SH3 domain interaction partners . Consistently , functional analyses on the cellular level suggested that these proteins have roles in endocytosis ( Qualmann and Kelly , 2000 ; Chang et al , 2002 ; Kamioka et al , 2004 ; Braun et al , 2005 ) . Some genetic data , however , appear contradictory at a ﬁrst glance . In D . melanogaster , loss - of - function analyses of syn - dapin did not reveal any endocytic roles , syndapin was found to be completely dispensable for synaptic vesicle endocytosis ( Kumar et al , 2009a ) . This is in line with its localization , ﬂy syndapin was found on the postsynaptic , that is , muscular side of neuromuscular junctions , in which it participates in the biogenesis of the subsynaptic reticulum ( Kumar et al , 2009b ) . Somewhat similar , also amphiphysins apparently lack endocytic functions in lower organisms , such as worms ( Pant et al , 2009 ) and ﬂies ( Razzaq et al , 2001 ) . Interestingly , also ﬂy amphiphysin is expressed at the mus - cular side of neuromuscular junctions ( Razzaq et al , 2001 ) . The BAR superfamily has greatly been expanded during evolution to higher eukaryotes . Therefore , it seems that endocytic functions of individual subfamily members evolved later . Along these lines , C . elegans endophilin A ( unc - 57 ) mutants can be rescued with mammalian endophilin A but not with B ( Bai et al , 2010 ) . Syndapins seem to work in clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis in close conjunction with their direct binding partners dynamin and the Arp2 / 3 complex activator N - WASP ( Qualmann et al , 1999 ; Modregger et al , 2000 ; Qualmann and Kelly , 2000 ; Braun et al , 2005 ) and are even able to physically link dynamin and N - WASP in vivo ( Kessels and Qualmann , 2006 ) . Syndapins integrate N - WASP into clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Kessels and Qualmann , 2002 ) . Consistently , the cytoskeletal component N - WASP has not only been shown to be recruited to sites of endocytic vesicle formation ( Merriﬁeld et al , 2004 ) but to have an important role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis by acute impairments of N - WASP functions ( Kessels and Qualmann , 2002 ) and by analyses of N - WASP - deﬁcient ﬁbroblasts ( Benesch et al , 2005 ) . Further analyses showed that syndapin is able to recruit N - WASP to the membrane and to control N - WASP / Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin nucleation by N - WASP auto - inhibition release ( Dharmalingam et al , 2009 ) . In the F - BAR family , N - WASP autoinhibition release was also observed for Toca - 1 ( Ho et al , 2004 ) and FBP17 ( Takano et al , 2008 ) . Besides linking actin nucleation to endocytosis , the endo - cytic function of syndapins seems to centre on dynamin . Syndapin I is predominantly expressed in neurons and has thus been suggested to have an important role in compensa - tory , synaptic clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Qualmann et al , 1999 ) . In presynaptic terminals , synaptic vesicle endocytosis is regulated by phosphorylation and syndapin I has been identiﬁed as the phosphosensor of dynamin I ( Tan et al , 2003 ; Anggono et al , 2006 ) , a function that appears to be of special importance during elevated synaptic activity ( Clayton et al , 2009 ) . Consistently , in lamprey giant axons injected with antibodies directed against either syndapin full length or syndapin’s SH3 domain , membrane trafﬁcking defects were selectively obvious after stimulation . The synaptic vesicle numbers were decreased and a massive increase of membra - nous cisternae still connected to the plasma membrane and enriched with clathrin - coated pits were observed ( Andersson et al , 2008 ) . Interestingly , synaptopHluorin measurements in neurons showed that also dynamin 1 is selectively required for endocytic uptake after stimulation ( Ferguson et al , 2007 ) . Syndapin I KO mice partially phenocopy dynamin I KO mice , as exempliﬁed by loss of synaptic vesicle size control . Syndapin I turned out to be important for efﬁcient membrane recruitment of all three dynamin isoforms ( Koch et al , un - published ) . This intimate interplay ﬁts well with the coincidence detection of both proteins in TIRF analyses ( Taylor et al , 2011 ) and represents another example high - lighting the importance of BAR superfamily protein - mediated recruitment of binding partners to distinct membrane areas . The endocytic defects of syndapin I KO mice in the brain as well as those of a naturally occurring mouse mutant with a mutation in the ﬁrst alternatively spliced region of dynamin Ia ( ﬁtful mice ) lead to seizures with tonic – clonic convulsions ( Boumil et al , 2010 ; Koch et al , unpublished ) . Interestingly , the human gene locus 6p21 . 3 , which includes the syndapin I gene , is associated with idiopathic generalized epilepsies ( Turnbull et al , 2005 ) . In contrast , CIP4 KO mice did not show any neurological phenotypes . This probably reﬂects the very low abundance of CIP4 in the brain ( Aspenstro¨m , 1997 ) . Some role of CIP4 in endocytosis was shown by the ﬁnding that CIP4 KO mice display slightly increased early glucose uptake after glucose challenge . This phenotype was a result of elevated plasma membrane levels of the glucose transporter GLUT4 due to reduced and delayed rates of clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Feng et al , 2010 ) . Similar results for CIP4 - mediated GLUT4 trafﬁcking were observed in cell culture experiments after CIP4 knockdown ( Hartig et al , 2009 ) . Analysing transferrin uptake , single , double or triple knockdowns in cultured cells showed that also the other two members of the mammalian CIP4 / FBP17 / Toca - 1 family are involved in clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Itoh et al , 2005 ; Tsujita et al , 2006 ) . Analyses in ﬂies and worm revealed additional physio - logical processes relying on CIP4 / FBP17 / Toca - 1 family members and provided further insights into the molecular mechanisms these proteins employ during endocytosis . Targeted deletion of Drosophila CIP4 , the only member of the CIP4 / FBP17 / Toca - 1 family in ﬂies , resulted in defective wing hair development , a process that is dependent on Let’s go bananas : revisiting the endocytic BAR code B Qualmann et al The EMBO Journal VOL 30 | NO 17 | 2011 & 2011 European Molecular Biology Organization 3510 endocytic trafﬁcking ( Fricke et al , 2009 ) . Knockdown of CIP4 in ﬂies revealed that also regulated E - cadherin endocytosis in epithelial cells is dependent on CIP4 and that CIP4 functions through dynamin and WASP ( Leibfried et al , 2008 ) . Analyses of the C . elegans mutants of the two CIP4 / FBP17 / Toca - 1 orthologues showed diminished clathrin - mediated endocyto - sis - dependent yolk uptake into oocytes . The endocytic phe - notype was accompanied by reduced egg production and defects in embryonic morphogenesis manifesting in some embryonic lethality ( Giuliani et al , 2009 ) . Otherwise , animals behaved normal , that is , there were no signs for a block of neuronal transmission . In line with N - WASP being an im - portant interaction partner of CIP4 / FBP17 / Toca proteins , the defect in clathrin - mediated yolk uptake was mediated through WASP and WAVE , another Arp2 / 3 complex activator ( Giuliani et al , 2009 ) . Mechanistic insights into the function of CIP4 / FBP17 / Toca - 1 family members were also provided by a cell - free system suitable for high - resolution imaging of formed endo - cytic intermediates ( Wu et al , 2010 ) . This work allowed for a signiﬁcantly increased resolution in z - direction when com - pared with TIRF microscopy . FBP17 was localized to the shaft of tubulated plasma membrane generated by arresting dyna - min’s GTPase cycle with GTP g S ( Wu et al , 2010 ) leading to extended tubular , endocytic structures that are not commonly observed in unmanipulated cells , probably because they are strongly antagonized by membrane tension ( Zimmerberg and Kozlov , 2006 ) . Strikingly , FBP17 was found on wider portions of the tubules with diameters of 50 – 120nm , that is , diameters that correlate well with the sizes of tubules induced by FBP17 overexpression and those seen in in vitro reconstitutions , respectively ( Itoh et al , 2005 ; Tsujita et al , 2006 ) . FBP17 was axially segregated from the narrower neck of the tubules linking them to the clathrin - coated bud , which were coated with clathrin / dynamin and endophilin ( Wu et al , 2010 ) . These narrower diameters are consistent with B 35nm tu - bules observed upon liposome tubulations with dynamin or endophilin ( Takei et al , 1995 ; Ringstad et al , 1999 ) . Taken together , the functional data on BAR superfamily proteins suggest that the vesicle recycling machinery uses the functional diversity and the versatility of membrane binding and shaping offered by the BAR superfamily and the different complexes these proteins form with further components to provide means to efﬁciently retrieve membrane material . Conclusions The structures of single BAR dimers are informative and have advanced our understanding of membrane shaping by scaffolding and hydrophobic insertion mechanisms consider - ably . Cytosolic components capable of shaping membranes by transient membrane binding emphasize an intimate inter - play between membrane compartments and the underlying cytosol . In this respect , membrane shaping by BAR domain proteins represents an excellent example for the compart - mentalization of life functions . In vivo studies clearly show that the initial idea that the differentially curved N - surface of BAR superfamily proteins determines their functions are oversimpliﬁed . Diagonal pla - cing of BAR domain structures on tubular membranes , lateral lipid - binding modes , combinations with further lipid - binding modules integrating their own distinct properties , additional lateral kinks giving rise to tilde - shaped curved structures and presumably also the formation of macromolecular lattices , which are likely to be the actual actors in membrane topology modulations , and their putative versatility in organization and arrangement make the picture much more complex than ﬁrst thought . Future work will therefore have to concentrate on revealing the exact cellular and physiological functions of BAR super - family proteins by acute and constitutive loss - of - function para - digms in different organisms . These efforts will certainly also allow to better understand the diseases associated with altered functions of a variety of BAR superfamily proteins . Additionally , in order to reveal the molecular functions of BAR superfamily proteins and their mechanistic details , it will be of utmost importance to understand the different types of lattices formed and how they can be rearranged dynamically to empower BAR superfamily proteins to shape membranes . Besides the distinct intrinsic properties of BAR domains , these architectures are likely to be strongly inﬂuenced by interactions with lipid components in the membrane , by molecular mechan - isms that regulate BAR domain function ( Roberts - Galbraith and Gould , 2010 ) and by the interaction partners of BAR superfamily proteins . Certain protein associations , such as Rac binding of arfaptin ( Tarricone et al , 2001 ) , have been reported to interfere with the lipid binding of BAR domains . Also oligomerization and scaffolding of BAR superfamily protein interaction partners contribute to the functions of macromolecular assemblies . Dynamin , a prominent interaction partner of several endocytic BAR superfamily proteins , self - associates and forms spiral structures itself ( Schmid and Frolov , 2011 ) and will thereby inﬂuence the geometry of BAR domain protein lattices . Other binding partners of BAR superfamily proteins may contribute to lattice geometry by offering multiple binding interfaces for BAR proteins , such as recently shown for the syndapin interaction partner Cobl ( Schwintzer et al , 2011 ) . Vice versa , BAR domain lattice geometries themselves will have profound impact on the arrangement—and presumably function—of binding partners that are recruited by the BAR domain proteins to membranes . Thus , BAR superfamily proteins create macromolecular plat - forms , which have been shown to recruit and physically and functionally connect different binding partners and can thereby link and coordinate different processes that are of importance during endocytic vesicle formation , such as membrane invagi - nation , coat formation , actin nucleation , vesicle size control , ﬁssion , detachment and uncoating , in time and space . A BAR domain - determined sequential recruitment and function of endocytic proteins may offer mechanistic explanations for the cell biological problem how a complex process with several steps and key players can be coordinated and given direction - ality and effectiveness . Acknowledgements We apologize to those authors whose important work we were unable to cite due to space restrictions . We thank S Pabst for help with the literature list . This work was supported by DFG grants QU116 / 5 - 1 , 6 - 1 and 7 - 1 to BQ and BQ / MMK , respectively . Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest . Let’s go bananas : revisiting the endocytic BAR code B Qualmann et al & 2011 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 30 | NO 17 | 2011 3511 References Andersson F , Jakobsson J , Low P , Shupliakov O , Brodin L ( 2008 ) Perturbation of syndapin / PACSIN impairs synaptic vesicle recycling evoked by intense stimulation . J Neurosci 28 : 3925 – 3933 Andersson F , Low P , Brodin L ( 2010 ) Selective perturbation of the BAR domain of endophilin impairs synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Synapse 64 : 556 – 560 Anggono V , Smillie KJ , Graham ME , Valova VA , Cousin MA , Robinson PJ ( 2006 ) Syndapin I is the phosphorylation - regulated dynamin I partner in synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Nat Neurosci 9 : 752 – 760 Aspenstro¨m P ( 1997 ) A Cdc42 target protein with homology to the non - kinase domain of FER has a potential role in regulating the actin cytoskeleton . Curr Biol 7 : 479 – 487 Ayton GS , Blood PD , Voth GA ( 2007 ) Membrane remodeling from N - BAR domain interactions : insights from multi - scale simulation . Biophys J 92 : 3595 – 3602 Bai J , Hu Z , Dittman JS , Pym EC , Kaplan JM ( 2010 ) Endophilin functions as a membrane - bending molecule and is delivered to endocytic zones by exocytosis . Cell 143 : 430 – 441 Batchelder EM , Yarar D ( 2010 ) Differential requirements for cla - thrin - dependent endocytosis at sites of cell - substrate adhesion . Mol Biol Cell 21 : 3070 – 3079 Benesch S , Polo S , Lai FP , Anderson KI , Stradal TE , Wehland J , Rottner K ( 2005 ) N - WASP deﬁciency impairs EGF internalization and actin assembly at clathrin - coated pits . J Cell Sci 118 : 3103 – 3115 Bertaso F , Zhang C , Scheschonka A , de Bock F , Fontanaud P , Marin P , Huganir RL , Betz H , Bockaert J , Fagni L , Lerner - Natoli M ( 2008 ) PICK1 uncoupling from mGluR7a causes absence - like seizures . Nat Neurosci 11 : 940 – 948 Bhatia VK , Madsen KL , Bolinger PY , Kunding A , Hedegard P , Gether U , Stamou D ( 2009 ) Amphipathic motifs in BAR domains are essential for membrane curvature sensing . EMBO J 28 : 3303 – 3314 Billuart P , Bienvenu T , Ronce N , des Portes V , Vinet MC , Zemni R , Roest Crollius H , Carrie A , Fauchereau F , Cherry M , Briault S , Hamel B , Fryns JP , Beldjord C , Kahn A , Moraine C , Chelly J ( 1998 ) Oligophrenin - 1 encodes a rhoGAP protein involved in X - linked mental retardation . Nature 392 : 923 – 926 Boumil RM , Letts VA , Roberts MC , Lenz C , Mahaffey CL , Zhang ZW , Moser T , Frankel WN ( 2010 ) A missense mutation in a highly conserved alternate exon of dynamin - 1 causes epilepsy in ﬁtful mice . PLoS Genet 6 : e1001046 Braun A , Pinyol R , Dahlhaus R , Koch D , Fonarev P , Grant BD , Kessels MM , Qualmann B ( 2005 ) EHD proteins associate with syndapin I and II and such interactions play a crucial role in endosomal recycling . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 3642 – 3658 Casal E , Federici L , Zhang W , Fernandez - Recio J , Priego EM , Miguel RN , DuHadaway JB , Prendergast GC , Luisi BF , Laue ED ( 2006 ) The crystal structure of the BAR domain from human Bin1 / amphiphysin II and its implications for molecular recogni - tion . Biochemistry 45 : 12917 – 12928 Chang L , Adams RD , Saltiel AR ( 2002 ) The TC10 - interacting protein CIP4 / 2 is required for insulin - stimulated Glut4 trans - location in 3T3L1 adipocytes . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99 : 12835 – 12840 Chang - Ileto B , Frere SG , Chan RB , Voronov SV , Roux A , Di Paolo G ( 2011 ) Synaptojanin 1 - mediated PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 hydrolysis is modu - lated by membrane curvature and facilitates membrane ﬁssion . Dev Cell 20 : 206 – 218 Chial HJ , Wu R , Ustach CV , McPhail LC , Mobley WC , Chen YQ ( 2008 ) Membrane targeting by APPL1 and APPL2 : dynamic scaffolds that oligomerize and bind phosphoinositides . Trafﬁc 9 : 215 – 229 Citri A , Bhattacharyya S , Ma C , Morishita W , Fang S , Rizo J , Malenka RC ( 2010 ) Calcium binding to PICK1 is essential for the intracellular retention of AMPA receptors underlying long - term depression . J Neurosci 30 : 16437 – 16452 Clayton EL , Anggono V , Smillie KJ , Chau N , Robinson PJ , Cousin MA ( 2009 ) The phospho - dependent dynamin - syndapin interaction triggers activity - dependent bulk endocytosis of synap - tic vesicles . J Neurosci 29 : 7706 – 7717 David C , McPherson PS , Mundigl O , de Camilli P ( 1996 ) A role of amphiphysin in synaptic vesicle endocytosis suggested by its binding to dynamin in nerve terminals . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93 : 331 – 335 David C , Solimena M , De Camilli P ( 1994 ) Autoimmunity in stiff - Man syndrome with breast cancer is targeted to the C - terminal region of human amphiphysin , a protein similar to the yeast proteins , Rvs167 and Rvs161 . FEBS Lett 351 : 73 – 79 Dev KK , Henley JM ( 2006 ) The schizophrenic faces of PICK1 . Trends Pharmacol Sci 27 : 574 – 579 Dharmalingam E , Haeckel A , Pinyol R , Schwintzer L , Koch D , Kessels MM , Qualmann B ( 2009 ) F - BAR proteins of the syndapin family shape the plasma membrane and are crucial for neuro - morphogenesis . J Neurosci 29 : 13315 – 13327 Di Paolo G , Sankaranarayanan S , Wenk MR , Daniell L , Perucco E , Caldarone BJ , Flavell R , Picciotto MR , Ryan TA , Cremona O , De Camilli P ( 2002 ) Decreased synaptic vesicle recycling efﬁciency and cognitive deﬁcits in amphiphysin 1 knockout mice . Neuron 33 : 789 – 804 Dislich B , Than ME , Lichtenthaler SF ( 2010 ) Speciﬁc amino acids in the BAR domain allow homodimerization and prevent hetero - dimerization of sorting nexin 33 . Biochem J 433 : 75 – 83 Doherty GJ , McMahon HT ( 2009 ) Mechanisms of endocytosis . Annu Rev Biochem 78 : 857 – 902 Ehrlich M , Boll W , Van Oijen A , Hariharan R , Chandran K , Nibert ML , Kirchhausen T ( 2004 ) Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 118 : 591 – 605 Erdmann KS , Mao Y , McCrea HJ , Zoncu R , Lee S , Paradise S , Modregger J , Biemesderfer D , Toomre D , De Camilli P ( 2007 ) A role of the Lowe syndrome protein OCRL in early steps of the endocytic pathway . Dev Cell 13 : 377 – 390 Evergren E , Marcucci M , Tomilin N , Low P , Slepnev V , Andersson F , Gad H , Brodin L , De Camilli P , Shupliakov O ( 2004 ) Amphiphysin is a component of clathrin coats formed during synaptic vesicle recycling at the lamprey giant synapse . Trafﬁc 5 : 514 – 528 Farsad K , Ringstad N , Takei K , Floyd SR , Rose K , De Camilli P ( 2001 ) Generation of high curvature membranes mediated by direct endophilin bilayer interactions . J Cell Biol 155 : 193 – 200 Feng Y , Hartig SM , Bechill JE , Blanchard EG , Caudell E , Corey SJ ( 2010 ) The Cdc42 - interacting protein - 4 ( CIP4 ) gene knock - out mouse reveals delayed and decreased endocytosis . J Biol Chem 285 : 4348 – 4354 Ferguson SM , Brasnjo G , Hayashi M , Wolfel M , Collesi C , Giovedi S , Raimondi A , Gong LW , Ariel P , Paradise S , O 0 Toole E , Flavell R , Cremona O , Miesenbock G , Ryan TA , De Camilli P ( 2007 ) A selective activity - dependent requirement for dynamin 1 in synap - tic vesicle endocytosis . Science 316 : 570 – 574 Fricke R , Gohl C , Dharmalingam E , Grevelhorster A , Zahedi B , Harden N , Kessels M , Qualmann B , Bogdan S ( 2009 ) Droso - phila Cip4 / Toca - 1 integrates membrane trafﬁcking and actin dynamics through WASP and SCAR / WAVE . Curr Biol 19 : 1429 – 1437 Frost A , Perera R , Roux A , Spasov K , Destaing O , Egelman EH , De Camilli P , Unger VM ( 2008 ) Structural basis of membrane invagination by F - BAR domains . Cell 132 : 807 – 817 Frost A , Unger VM , De Camilli P ( 2009 ) The BAR domain super - family : membrane - molding macromolecules . Cell 137 : 191 – 196 Gad H , Ringstad N , Low P , Kjaerulff O , Gustafsson J , Wenk M , Di Paolo G , Nemoto Y , Crun J , Ellisman MH , De Camilli P , Shupliakov O , Brodin L ( 2000 ) Fission and uncoating of synaptic clathrin - coated vesicles are perturbed by disruption of interac - tions with the SH3 domain of endophilin . Neuron 27 : 301 – 312 Gaidarov I , Santini F , Warren RA , Keen JH ( 1999 ) Spatial control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 1 – 7 Gallop JL , Jao CC , Kent HM , Butler PJ , Evans PR , Langen R , McMahon HT ( 2006 ) Mechanism of endophilin N - BAR domain - mediated membrane curvature . EMBO J 25 : 2898 – 2910 Gallop JL , McMahon HT ( 2005 ) BAR domains and membrane curvature : bringing your curves to the BAR . Biochem Soc Symp 72 : 223 – 231 Giuliani C , Troglio F , Bai Z , Patel FB , Zucconi A , Malabarba MG , Disanza A , Stradal TB , Cassata G , Confalonieri S , Hardin JD , Soto MC , Grant BD , Scita G ( 2009 ) Requirements for F - BAR proteins TOCA - 1 and TOCA - 2 in actin dynamics and membrane trafﬁcking during Caenorhabditis elegans oocyte growth and embryonic epidermal morphogenesis . PLoS Genet 5 : e1000675 Let’s go bananas : revisiting the endocytic BAR code B Qualmann et al The EMBO Journal VOL 30 | NO 17 | 2011 & 2011 European Molecular Biology Organization 3512 Guerrier S , Coutinho - Budd J , Sassa T , Gresset A , Jordan NV , Chen K , Jin WL , Frost A , Polleux F ( 2009 ) The F - BAR domain of srGAP2 induces membrane protrusions required for neuronal migration and morphogenesis . Cell 138 : 990 – 1004 Ha˚berg K , Lundmark R , Carlsson SR ( 2008 ) SNX18 is an SNX9 paralog that acts as a membrane tubulator in AP - 1 - positive endosomal trafﬁcking . J Cell Sci 121 : 1495 – 1505 Hartig SM , Ishikura S , Hicklen RS , Feng Y , Blanchard EG , Voelker KA , Pichot CS , Grange RW , Raphael RM , Klip A , Corey SJ ( 2009 ) The F - BAR protein CIP4 promotes GLUT4 endocytosis through bidirectional interactions with N - WASp and Dynamin - 2 . J Cell Sci 122 : 2283 – 2291 Heiseke A , Schobel S , Lichtenthaler SF , Vorberg I , Groschup MH , Kretzschmar H , Schatzl HM , Nunziante M ( 2008 ) The novel sorting nexin SNX33 interferes with cellular PrP formation by modulation of PrP shedding . Trafﬁc 9 : 1116 – 1129 Henne WM , Boucrot E , Meinecke M , Evergren E , Vallis Y , Mittal R , McMahon HT ( 2010 ) FCHo proteins are nucleators of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 328 : 1281 – 1284 Henne WM , Kent HM , Ford MG , Hegde BG , Daumke O , Butler PJ , Mittal R , Langen R , Evans PR , McMahon HT ( 2007 ) Structure and analysis of FCHo2 F - BAR domain : a dimerizing and membrane recruitment module that effects membrane curvature . Structure 15 : 839 – 852 Ho HY , Rohatgi R , Lebensohn AM , Le M , Li J , Gygi SP , Kirschner MW ( 2004 ) Toca - 1 mediates Cdc42 - dependent actin nucleation by activating the N - WASP - WIP complex . Cell 118 : 203 – 216 Itoh T , Erdmann KS , Roux A , Habermann B , Werner H , De Camilli P ( 2005 ) Dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton cooperatively regu - late plasma membrane invagination by BAR and F - BAR proteins . Dev Cell 9 : 791 – 804 Itoh T , Takenawa T ( 2009 ) Mechanisms of membrane deformation by lipid - binding domains . Prog Lipid Res 48 : 298 – 305 Jung AG , Labarrera C , Jansen AM , Qvortrup K , Wild K , Kjaerulff O ( 2010 ) A mutational analysis of the endophilin - A N - BAR domain performed in living ﬂies . PLoS One 5 : e9492 Kamioka Y , Fukuhara S , Sawa H , Nagashima K , Masuda M , Matsuda M , Mochizuki N ( 2004 ) A novel dynamin - associating molecule , formin - binding protein 17 , induces tubular membrane invaginations and participates in endocytosis . J Biol Chem 279 : 40091 – 40099 Kessels MM , Qualmann B ( 2002 ) Syndapins integrate N - WASP in receptor - mediated endocytosis . EMBO J 21 : 6083 – 6094 Kessels MM , Qualmann B ( 2006 ) Syndapin oligomers interconnect the machineries for endocytic vesicle formation and actin polymerization . J Biol Chem 281 : 13285 – 13299 Keyel PA , Watkins SC , Traub LM ( 2004 ) Endocytic adaptor molecules reveal an endosomal population of clathrin by total internal reﬂec - tion ﬂuorescence microscopy . J Biol Chem 279 : 13190 – 13204 Khelfaoui M , Denis C , van Galen E , de Bock F , Schmitt A , Houbron C , Morice E , Giros B , Ramakers G , Fagni L , Chelly J , Nosten - Bertrand M , Billuart P ( 2007 ) Loss of X - linked mental retardation gene oligophrenin1 in mice impairs spatial memory and leads to ventricular enlargement and dendritic spine immaturity . J Neurosci 27 : 9439 – 9450 Kirchhausen T ( 2009 ) Imaging endocytic clathrin structures in living cells . Trends Cell Biol 19 : 596 – 605 Kumar V , Alla SR , Krishnan KS , Ramaswami M ( 2009a ) Syndapin is dispensable for synaptic vesicle endocytosis at the Drosophila larval neuromuscular junction . Mol Cell Neurosci 40 : 234 – 241 Kumar V , Fricke R , Bhar D , Reddy - Alla S , Krishnan KS , Bogdan S , Ramaswami M ( 2009b ) Syndapin promotes formation of a postsynaptic membrane system in Drosophila . Mol Biol Cell 20 ( 8 ) : 2254 – 2264 Leibfried A , Fricke R , Morgan MJ , Bogdan S , Bellaiche Y ( 2008 ) Drosophila Cip4 and WASp deﬁne a branch of the Cdc42 - Par6 - aPKC pathway regulating E - cadherin endocytosis . Curr Biol 18 : 1639 – 1648 Li J , Mao X , Dong LQ , Liu F , Tong L ( 2007 ) Crystal structures of the BAR - PH and PTB domains of human APPL1 . Structure 15 : 525 – 533 Loerke D , Mettlen M , Yarar D , Jaqaman K , Jaqaman H , Danuser G , Schmid SL ( 2009 ) Cargo and dynamin regulate clathrin - coated pit maturation . PLoS Biol 7 : e57 Lundmark R , Carlsson SR ( 2003 ) Sorting nexin 9 participates in clathrin - mediated endocytosis through interactions with the core components . J Biol Chem 278 : 46772 – 46781 Lundmark R , Carlsson SR ( 2004 ) Regulated membrane recruitment of dynamin - 2 mediated by sorting nexin 9 . J Biol Chem 279 : 42694 – 42702 Lundmark R , Carlsson SR ( 2009 ) SNX9 - a prelude to vesicle release . J Cell Sci 122 : 5 – 11 Mani M , Lee SY , Lucast L , Cremona O , Di Paolo G , De Camilli P , Ryan TA ( 2007 ) The dual phosphatase activity of synaptojanin1 is required for both efﬁcient synaptic vesicle endocytosis and reavailability at nerve terminals . Neuron 56 : 1004 – 1018 Masuda M , Mochizuki N ( 2010 ) Structural characteristics of BAR domain superfamily to sculpt the membrane . Semin Cell Dev Biol 21 : 391 – 398 Masuda M , Takeda S , Sone M , Ohki T , Mori H , Kamioka Y , Mochizuki N ( 2006 ) Endophilin BAR domain drives membrane curvature by two newly identiﬁed structure - based mechanisms . EMBO J 25 : 2889 – 2897 Mattila PK , Pykalainen A , Saarikangas J , Paavilainen VO , Vihinen H , Jokitalo E , Lappalainen P ( 2007 ) Missing - in - metasta - sis and IRSp53 deform PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - rich membranes by an inverse BAR domain - like mechanism . J Cell Biol 176 : 953 – 964 McMahon HT , Gallop JL ( 2005 ) Membrane curvature and mechanisms of dynamic cell membrane remodelling . Nature 438 : 590 – 596 McMahon HT , Wigge P , Smith C ( 1997 ) Clathrin interacts speciﬁcally with amphiphysin and is displaced by dynamin . FEBS Lett 413 : 319 – 322 Merriﬁeld CJ ( 2004 ) Seeing is believing : imaging actin dynamics at single sites of endocytosis . Trends Cell Biol 14 : 352 – 358 Merriﬁeld CJ , Perrais D , Zenisek D ( 2005 ) Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and mem - brane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 : 593 – 606 Merriﬁeld CJ , Qualmann B , Kessels MM , Almers W ( 2004 ) Neural Wiskott Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( N - WASP ) and the Arp2 / 3 complex are recruited to sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in cultured ﬁbroblasts . Eur J Cell Biol 83 : 13 – 18 Mettlen M , Stoeber M , Loerke D , Antonescu CN , Danuser G , Schmid SL ( 2009 ) Endocytic accessory proteins are functionally distinguished by their differential effects on the maturation of clathrin - coated pits . Mol Biol Cell 20 : 3251 – 3260 Miaczynska M , Christoforidis S , Giner A , Shevchenko A , Uttenweiler - Joseph S , Habermann B , Wilm M , Parton RG , Zerial M ( 2004 ) APPL proteins link Rab5 to nuclear signal transduction via an endosomal compartment . Cell 116 : 445 – 456 Millard TH , Bompard G , Heung MY , Dafforn TR , Scott DJ , Machesky LM , Futterer K ( 2005 ) Structural basis of ﬁlopodia formation induced by the IRSp53 / MIM homology domain of human IRSp53 . EMBO J 24 : 240 – 250 Modregger J , Ritter B , Witter B , Paulsson M , Plomann M ( 2000 ) All three PACSIN isoforms bind to endocytic proteins and inhibit endocytosis . J Cell Sci 113 : 4511 – 4521 Muller AJ , Baker JF , DuHadaway JB , Ge K , Farmer G , Donover PS , Meade R , Reid C , Grzanna R , Roach AH , Shah N , Soler AP , Prendergast GC ( 2003 ) Targeted disruption of the murine Bin1 / Amphiphysin II gene does not disable endocytosis but results in embryonic cardiomyopathy with aberrant myoﬁbril formation . Mol Cell Biol 23 : 4295 – 4306 Nadif Kasri N , Nakano - Kobayashi A , Malinow R , Li B , Van Aelst L ( 2009 ) The Rho - linked mental retardation protein oligophrenin - 1 controls synapse maturation and plasticity by stabilizing AMPA receptors . Genes Dev 23 : 1289 – 1302 Nakano - Kobayashi A , Kasri NN , Newey SE , Van Aelst L ( 2009 ) The Rho - linked mental retardation protein OPHN1 controls synaptic vesicle endocytosis via endophilin A1 . Curr Biol 19 : 1133 – 1139 Otsuki M , Itoh T , Takenawa T ( 2003 ) Neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein is recruited to rafts and associates with en - dophilin A in response to epidermal growth factor . J Biol Chem 278 : 6461 – 6469 Pan L , Wu H , Shen C , Shi Y , Jin W , Xia J , Zhang M ( 2007 ) Clustering and synaptic targeting of PICK1 requires direct interaction between the PDZ domain and lipid membranes . EMBO J 26 : 4576 – 4587 Pant S , Sharma M , Patel K , Caplan S , Carr CM , Grant BD ( 2009 ) AMPH - 1 / Amphiphysin / Bin1 functions with RME - 1 / Ehd1 in en - docytic recycling . Nat Cell Biol 11 : 1399 – 1410 Park J , Kim Y , Lee S , Park JJ , Park ZY , Sun W , Kim H , Chang S ( 2010 ) SNX18 shares a redundant role with SNX9 and modulates Let’s go bananas : revisiting the endocytic BAR code B Qualmann et al & 2011 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 30 | NO 17 | 2011 3513 endocytic trafﬁcking at the plasma membrane . J Cell Sci 123 : 1742 – 1750 Perera RM , Zoncu R , Lucast L , De Camilli P , Toomre D ( 2006 ) Two synaptojanin 1 isoforms are recruited to clathrin - coated pits at different stages . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103 : 19332 – 19337 Peter BJ , Kent HM , Mills IG , Vallis Y , Butler PJ , Evans PR , McMahon HT ( 2004 ) BAR domains as sensors of membrane curvature : the amphiphysin BAR structure . Science 303 : 495 – 499 Petrelli A , Gilestro GF , Lanzardo S , Comoglio PM , Migone N , Giordano S ( 2002 ) The endophilin - CIN85 - Cbl complex mediates ligand - dependent downregulation of c - Met . Nature 416 : 187 – 190 Pylypenko O , Lundmark R , Rasmuson E , Carlsson SR , Rak A ( 2007 ) The PX - BAR membrane - remodeling unit of sorting nexin 9 . EMBO J 26 : 4788 – 4800 Qualmann B , Kelly RB ( 2000 ) Syndapin isoforms participate in receptor - mediated endocytosis and actin organization . J Cell Biol 148 : 1047 – 1062 Qualmann B , Roos J , DiGregorio PJ , Kelly RB ( 1999 ) Syndapin I , a synaptic dynamin - binding protein that associates with the neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Mol Biol Cell 10 : 501 – 513 Quinones GA , Jin J , Oro AE ( 2010 ) I - BAR protein antagonism of endocytosis mediates directional sensing during guided cell migration . J Cell Biol 189 : 353 – 367 Ramjaun AR , Micheva KD , Bouchelet I , McPherson PS ( 1997 ) Identiﬁcation and characterization of a nerve terminal - enriched amphiphysin isoform . J Biol Chem 272 : 16700 – 16706 Rao Y , Ma Q , Vahedi - Faridi A , Sundborger A , Pechstein A , Puchkov D , Luo L , Shupliakov O , Saenger W , Haucke V ( 2010 ) Molecular basis for SH3 domain regulation of F - BAR - mediated membrane deformation . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 : 8213 – 8218 Rappoport JZ ( 2008 ) Focusing on clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Biochem J 412 : 415 – 423 Razzaq A , Robinson IM , McMahon HT , Skepper JN , Su Y , Zelhof AC , Jackson AP , Gay NJ , O 0 Kane CJ ( 2001 ) Amphiphysin is neces - sary for organization of the excitation - contraction coupling machinery of muscles , but not for synaptic vesicle endocytosis in Drosophila . Genes Dev 15 : 2967 – 2979 Reider A , Barker SL , Mishra SK , Im YJ , Maldonado - Baez L , Hurley JH , Traub LM , Wendland B ( 2009 ) Syp1 is a conserved endocytic adaptor that contains domains involved in cargo selection and membrane tubulation . EMBO J 28 : 3103 – 3116 Ringstad N , Gad H , Low P , Di Paolo G , Brodin L , Shupliakov O , De Camilli P ( 1999 ) Endophilin / SH3p4 is required for the transi - tion from early to late stages in clathrin - mediated synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Neuron 24 : 143 – 154 Ringstad N , Nemoto Y , De Camilli P ( 1997 ) The SH3p4 / Sh3p8 / SH3p13 protein family : binding partners for synaptojanin and dynamin via a Grb2 - like Src homology 3 domain . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94 : 8569 – 8574 Ringstad N , Nemoto Y , De Camilli P ( 2001 ) Differential expression of endophilin 1 and 2 dimers at central nervous system synapses . J Biol Chem 276 : 40424 – 40430 Roberts - Galbraith RH , Gould KL ( 2010 ) Setting the F - BAR : functions and regulation of the F - BAR protein family . Cell Cycle 9 : 4091 – 4097 Rocca DL , Martin S , Jenkins EL , Hanley JG ( 2008 ) Inhibition of Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin polymerization by PICK1 regulates neu - ronal morphology and AMPA receptor endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 10 : 259 – 271 Saarikangas J , Zhao H , Pykalainen A , Laurinmaki P , Mattila PK , Kinnunen PK , Butcher SJ , Lappalainen P ( 2009 ) Molecular mechanisms of membrane deformation by I - BAR domain proteins . Curr Biol 19 : 95 – 107 Saffarian S , Cocucci E , Kirchhausen T ( 2009 ) Distinct dynamics of endocytic clathrin - coated pits and coated plaques . PLoS Biol 7 : e1000191 Schmid SL , Frolov VA ( 2011 ) Dynamin : functional design of a membrane ﬁssion catalyst . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol ( advance online publication ; doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - cellbio - 100109 - 104016 ) Scho¨bel S , Neumann S , Hertweck M , Dislich B , Kuhn PH , Kremmer E , Seed B , Baumeister R , Haass C , Lichtenthaler SF ( 2008 ) A novel sorting nexin modulates endocytic trafﬁcking and alpha - secretase cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein . J Biol Chem 283 : 14257 – 14268 Schuske KR , Richmond JE , Matthies DS , Davis WS , Runz S , Rube DA , van der Bliek AM , Jorgensen EM ( 2003 ) Endophilin is required for synaptic vesicle endocytosis by localizing synapto - janin . Neuron 40 : 749 – 762 Schwintzer L , Koch N , Ahuja R , Grimm J , Kessels MM , Qualmann B ( 2011 ) The functions of the actin nucleator Cobl in cellular morphogenesis critically depend on syndapin I . EMBO J 30 : 3147 – 3159 Shimada A , Niwa H , Tsujita K , Suetsugu S , Nitta K , Hanawa - Suetsugu K , Akasaka R , Nishino Y , Toyama M , Chen L , Liu ZJ , Wang BC , Yamamoto M , Terada T , Miyazawa A et al ( 2007 ) Curved EFC / F - BAR - domain dimers are joined end to end into a ﬁlament for membrane invagination in endocytosis . Cell 129 : 761 – 772 Shimada A , Takano K , Shirouzu M , Hanawa - Suetsugu K , Terada T , Toyooka K , Umehara T , Yamamoto M , Yokoyama S , Suetsugu S ( 2010 ) Mapping of the basic amino - acid residues responsible for tubulation and cellular protrusion by the EFC / F - BAR domain of pacsin2 / Syndapin II . FEBS Lett 584 : 1111 – 1118 Shin N , Lee S , Ahn N , Kim SA , Ahn SG , YongPark Z , Chang S ( 2007 ) Sorting nexin 9 interacts with dynamin 1 and N - WASP and coordinates synaptic vesicle endocytosis . J Biol Chem 282 : 28939 – 28950 Shupliakov O , Low P , Grabs D , Gad H , Chen H , David C , Takei K , De Camilli P , Brodin L ( 1997 ) Synaptic vesicle endocytosis impaired by disruption of dynamin - SH3 domain interactions . Science 276 : 259 – 263 Sinha S , Chunder N , Mukherjee N , Alam N , Roy A , Roychoudhury S , Kumar Panda C ( 2008 ) Frequent deletion and methylation in SH3GL2 and CDKN2A loci are associated with early - and late - onset breast carcinoma . Ann Surg Oncol 15 : 1070 – 1080 Slepnev VI , Ochoa GC , Butler MH , De Camilli P ( 2000 ) Tandem arrangement of the clathrin and AP - 2 binding domains in amphiphysin 1 and disruption of clathrin coat function by amphiphysin fragments comprising these sites . J Biol Chem 275 : 17583 – 17589 Soubeyran P , Kowanetz K , Szymkiewicz I , Langdon WY , Dikic I ( 2002 ) Cbl - CIN85 - endophilin complex mediates ligand - induced downregulation of EGF receptors . Nature 416 : 183 – 187 Soulet F , Yarar D , Leonard M , Schmid SL ( 2005 ) SNX9 regulates dynamin assembly and is required for efﬁcient clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 2058 – 2067 Steinberg JP , Takamiya K , Shen Y , Xia J , Rubio ME , Yu S , Jin W , Thomas GM , Linden DJ , Huganir RL ( 2006 ) Targeted in vivo mutations of the AMPA receptor subunit GluR2 and its interacting protein PICK1 eliminate cerebellar long - term depression . Neuron 49 : 845 – 860 Suetsugu S , Murayama K , Sakamoto A , Hanawa - Suetsugu K , Seto A , Oikawa T , Mishima C , Shirouzu M , Takenawa T , Yokoyama S ( 2006 ) The RAC binding domain / IRSp53 - MIM homology domain of IRSp53 induces RAC - dependent membrane deformation . J Biol Chem 281 : 35347 – 35358 Suetsugu S , Toyooka K , Senju Y ( 2010 ) Subcellular membrane curvature mediated by the BAR superfamily proteins . Semin Cell Dev Biol 21 : 340 – 349 Takano K , Toyooka K , Suetsugu S ( 2008 ) EFC / F - BAR proteins and the N - WASP - WIP complex induce membrane curvature - dependent actin polymerization . EMBO J 27 : 2817 – 2828 Takei K , McPherson PS , Schmid SL , De Camilli P ( 1995 ) Tubular membrane invaginations coated by dynamin rings are induced by GTP - gamma S in nerve terminals . Nature 374 : 186 – 190 Takei K , Slepnev VI , Haucke V , De Camilli P ( 1999 ) Functional partnership between amphiphysin and dynamin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 33 – 39 Tan TC , Valova VA , Malladi CS , Graham ME , Berven LA , Jupp OJ , Hansra G , McClure SJ , Sarcevic B , Boadle RA , Larsen MR , Cousin MA , Robinson PJ ( 2003 ) Cdk5 is essential for synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 5 : 701 – 710 Tarricone C , Xiao B , Justin N , Walker PA , Rittinger K , Gamblin SJ , Smerdon SJ ( 2001 ) The structural basis of Arfaptin - mediated cross - talk between Rac and Arf signalling pathways . Nature 411 : 215 – 219 Taylor MJ , Perrais D , Merriﬁeld CJ ( 2011 ) A high precision survey of the molecular dynamics of mammalian clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS Biol 9 : e1000604 Tsujita K , Suetsugu S , Sasaki N , Furutani M , Oikawa T , Takenawa T ( 2006 ) Coordination between the actin cytoskeleton and membrane deformation by a novel membrane tubulation domain of PCH proteins is involved in endocytosis . J Cell Biol 172 : 269 – 279 Turnbull J , Lohi H , Kearney JA , Rouleau GA , Delgado - Escueta AV , Meisler MH , Cossette P , Minassian BA ( 2005 ) Sacred disease Let’s go bananas : revisiting the endocytic BAR code B Qualmann et al The EMBO Journal VOL 30 | NO 17 | 2011 & 2011 European Molecular Biology Organization 3514 secrets revealed : the genetics of human epilepsy . Hum Mol Genet 14 : 2491 – 2500 van Weering JR , Verkade P , Cullen PJ ( 2010 ) SNX - BAR proteins in phosphoinositide - mediated , tubular - based endosomal sorting . Semin Cell Dev Biol 21 : 371 – 380 Verstreken P , Kjaerulff O , Lloyd TE , Atkinson R , Zhou Y , Meinertzhagen IA , Bellen HJ ( 2002 ) Endophilin mutations block clathrin - mediated endocytosis but not neurotransmitter release . Cell 109 : 101 – 112 Verstreken P , Koh TW , Schulze KL , Zhai RG , Hiesinger PR , Zhou Y , Mehta SQ , Cao Y , Roos J , Bellen HJ ( 2003 ) Synaptojanin is recruited by endophilin to promote synaptic vesicle uncoating . Neuron 13 : 733 – 748 Wang Q , Kaan HY , Hooda RN , Goh SL , Sondermann H ( 2008 ) Structure and plasticity of Endophilin and Sorting Nexin 9 . Structure 16 : 1574 – 1587 Wang Q , Navarro MV , Peng G , Molinelli E , Goh SL , Judson BL , Rajashankar KR , Sondermann H ( 2009 ) Molecular mechanism of membrane constriction and tubulation mediated by the F - BAR protein Pacsin / Syndapin . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 : 12700 – 12705 Weissenhorn W ( 2005 ) Crystal structure of the endophilin - A1 BAR domain . J Mol Biol 351 : 653 – 661 Wu M , Huang B , Graham M , Raimondi A , Heuser JE , Zhuang X , De Camilli P ( 2010 ) Coupling between clathrin - dependent endocytic budding and F - BAR - dependent tubulation in a cell - free system . Nat Cell Biol 12 : 902 – 908 Xia J , Zhang X , Staudinger J , Huganir RL ( 1999 ) Clustering of AMPA receptors by the synaptic PDZ domain - containing protein PICK1 . Neuron 22 : 179 – 187 Yamada H , Padilla - Parra S , Park SJ , Itoh T , Chaineau M , Monaldi I , Cremona O , Benfenati F , De Camilli P , Coppey - Moisan M , Tramier M , Galli T , Takei K ( 2009 ) Dynamic interaction of amphiphysin with N - WASP regulates actin assembly . J Biol Chem 284 : 34244 – 34256 Yarar D , Waterman - Storer CM , Schmid SL ( 2007 ) SNX9 couples actin assembly to phosphoinositide signals and is required for membrane remodeling during endocytosis . Dev Cell 13 : 43 – 56 Yoshida Y , Kinuta M , Abe T , Liang S , Araki K , Cremona O , Di Paolo G , Moriyama Y , Yasuda T , De Camilli P , Takei K ( 2004 ) The stimulatory action of amphiphysin on dynamin function is dependent on lipid bilayer curvature . EMBO J 23 : 3483 – 3491 Zhao H , Pykalainen A , Lappalainen P ( 2011 ) I - BAR domain proteins : linking actin and plasma membrane dynamics . Curr Opin Cell Biol 23 : 14 – 21 Zhu G , Chen J , Liu J , Brunzelle JS , Huang B , Wakeham N , Terzyan S , Li X , Rao Z , Li G , Zhang XC ( 2007 ) Structure of the APPL1 BAR - PH domain and characterization of its interaction with Rab5 . EMBO J 26 : 3484 – 3493 Zimmerberg J , Kozlov MM ( 2006 ) How proteins produce cellular membrane curvature . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 : 9 – 19 Zoncu R , Perera RM , Balkin DM , Pirruccello M , Toomre D , De Camilli P ( 2009 ) A phosphoinositide switch controls the maturation and signaling properties of APPL endosomes . Cell 136 : 1110 – 1121 Let’s go bananas : revisiting the endocytic BAR code B Qualmann et al & 2011 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 30 | NO 17 | 2011 3515