Anthropology ' s Contributions to Marketing Author ( s ) : Charles Winick Reviewed work ( s ) : Source : Journal of Marketing , Vol . 25 , No . 5 ( Jul . , 1961 ) , pp . 53 - 60 Published by : American Marketing Association Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 1248962 . Accessed : 01 / 08 / 2012 20 : 34 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use , available at . http : / / www . jstor . org / page / info / about / policies / terms . jsp . JSTOR is a not - for - profit service that helps scholars , researchers , and students discover , use , and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive . We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . . American Marketing Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize , preserve and extend access to Journal of Marketing . http : / / www . jstor . org Anthropology ' s Contributions to Marketing * CHARLES WINICK Of the social sciences which deal with man and society , only eco - nomics , psychology , and sociology have been widely used in marketing . Economics is at the core of much of the content of marketing ; psychol - ogy has yielded a variety of interviewing and projective testing pro - cedures ; sociology has contributed concepts like social class . Marketers have been relatively slow in using anthropological insights and approaches , even though anthropology is also concerned with man and society . This article considers why anthropology has been used relatively seldom , and how it has been and might be employed . THE RELATIVE slowness of anthropolo - gists and marketers in finding common ground is surprising . ' Anthropologists have served as colonial administrators , in foreign - aid programs , and in other situa - tions requiring a special sensitivity to for - eign cultures . They have also developed sales - training procedures which involve the analysis of the rate of speech of salesmen with potential customers , through devices which measure the rate of interaction be - tween people talking . 2 Another specialized industrial situation in which anthropolo - gists have worked involves the application of their knowledge of the field of anthro - pometry or measurement of the body , in ' John Gillin , " The Application of Anthro - pological Knowledge to Modern Mass Society , " Human Organization , Vol . 15 ( Winter , 1957 ) , pp . 24 - 30 . 2 Eliot D . Chapple , " The Interaction Chrono - graph , " Personnel , Vol . 25 ( January , 1949 ) , pp . 295 - 307 . * ABOUT THE AUTHOR . Charles Winick has applied the social sciences to marketing as researcher , con - sultant , and teacher . He has taught at the Uni - versity of Rochester , Queens College , MIT , Columbia , New York University , and City College . Most recently , he has been directing a program of basic research in marketing for J . Walter Thomp - son Company , New York . Among his publications is " Dictionary of Anthropology " ( New York : Phil - osophical Library , 1956 ) . the design of products like chairs and knobs . 3 Other anthropologists have worked in applied fields such as : reactions to disaster , the operation of internment and relocation centers , mental health , medical care , labor - management relations , 4 the culture of a factory , 5 community organization , social work , 6 military government , the cultural change associated with economic develop - ment , 7 contact between cultures , the nature of small - town life , behavior in extreme situ - ations , the study of culture at a distance , 8 the reconstruction of the themes of a cul - ture , relations among minority groups , the 3 Earnest A . Hooton , A Survey In Seating ( Cambridge : Harvard Department of Anthro - pology , 1945 ) . 4 Charles R . Walker , The Man on the Assem - bly Line ( Cambridge : Harvard University Press , 1952 ) . 5 Eliot Jaques , The Changing Culture of A Factory ( New York : Dryden Press , 1953 ) . 6 Franklin K . Patterson , Irving Lukoff , and Charles Winick , " Is Society the Patient , " Jour - nal of Educational Sociology , Vol . 30 ( October , 1956 ) , pp . 106 - 112 . 7 Almost every issue of Economic Develop - ment and Cultural Change carries relevant articles . 8 Margaret Mead and Rhoda Metraux , The Study of Culture At A Distance ( Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1952 ) . 53 JOURNAL OF MARKETING social structure of a hospital , 9 American national character , 10 and television . " Although anthropologists have published their findings on America in very accessible formats , 12 there has been little discussion of how their findings could be applied to marketing problems . 13 One advertising pub - lication has published an article on the possibility of using anthropology in adver - tising . 14 The journal of applied anthro - pology , formerly called Applied Anthro - pology and now called Human Organization , almost never carries any material on mar - keting ; and the national journal , American Anthropologist , also ignores the subject . ANTHROPOLOGY , SOCIOLOGY , AND PSYCHOLOGY Anthropology is usually defined as the study of man . Such a definition is so all - inclusive that the field is generally divided into four sub - fields : archeology , cultured anthropology , linguistics , and physical an - thropology . Archeology is concerned with the historical reconstruction of cultures which no longer exist . Cultural anthro - pology examines all the behaviors of man which have been learned , including social , linguistic , technical , and familiar behaviors ; often it is defined as the study of man and his works . Linguistics is the comparative study of the structure , interreIationships , and development of languages . Physical 9 Charles Winick , " The Hospital As A Social System , " New York State Nurse , Vol . 26 ( January , 1954 ) , pp . 9 - 13 . 10 David M . Potter , People of Plenty ( Chi - cago : University of Chicago Press , 1954 ) . 1 Charles Winick , Taste and the Censor In Television ( New York : Fund For the Republic , 1959 ) . 12 Margaret Lantis , editor , " The U . S . A . As Anthropologists See It , " American Anthro - pologist Vol . 57 ( December , 1955 ) , pp . 1 , 113 - 1 , 380 . 13Richard C . Sheldon , " How The Anthro - pologist Can Help The Marketing Practitioner " in W . David Robbins , editor , Successful Mar - keting at Home And Abroad ( Chicago : Ameri - can Marketing Association , 1958 ) , pp . 209 - 304 . 14Alan S . Marcus , " How Agencies Can Use Anthropology in Advertising , " Advertis - ing Agency , Vol . 49 ( September 14 , 1956 ) , pp . 87 - 91 . anthropology is concerned with human bi - ology and the development of the human organism , with special interest in race dif - ferences . When anthropology is employed in mar - keting , it is usually cultural anthropology which is relevant . Cultural anthropology began with the study of primitive cultures , and its comparative analyses documented the different ways in which cultures have solved their problems of living . Cultural anthropology has much in com - mon with psychology and sociology . All three are concerned with the examination of man in his cultural setting . They differ in the emphases which they place on differ - ent elements of the relationship between a person and his environment . It can be said that all human behavior essentially is a function of the interrelations of person - ality , the social system , and culture . Oversimplifying , psychology is concerned with personality , sociology addresses itself to the social system , and anthropology ex - plores the culture . The interdisciplinary field of social psychology may draw on all three of these fields , and there are inte - grated social psychology texts which do so . 15 A shaper focus on the differences among these three social sciences may be obtained by speculating on how each of the three might look at a family . The psychologist would be interested in the personal adjustment and emotional health of each member of the family . He would want to examine their attitudes , mu - tual perceptions , and motivational systems . Their happiness or lack of it would interest him . The sociologist would be concerned pri - marily with the dimensions of role and status within the family and with the number of different kinds of families . He would examine how the social structure created various kinds of internal arrange - ments which made it possible for the fam - 15 Steuart Henderson Britt , Social Psychology of Modern Life . ( New York : Rinehart & Com - pany , 1949 revised edition ) . S . Stanfeld Sargent and Robert C . Williamson , Social Psychology ( New York : The Ronald Press Company , 1958 ) . 54 JULY , 1961 ANTHROPOLOGY ' S CONTRIBUTIONS TO MARKETING ily to exist . He would be interested in the norms of behavior and the stresses and strains shown by the deviations from the norm and resulting from role conflict . He would study class membership as well as the rates of various kinds of behavior , such as the birth rate . The cultural anthropologist would examine the technological level which the culture had reached and the interrelations of tech - nology with culture . He would scrutinize the procedures for inheritance of property and how kinship was reckoned and de - scribed , and how the spouses got to know each other . He would study the family ' s food and housing . He would be interested in the language level and dialects and in who talked to whom . He would be concerned with how the age of different members of the family affected their behavior , and with trends in illnesses . He would study how the culture " rubbed off " on the family unit . The anthropologist thus does not have in - formation which it would be impossible for the sociologist or psychologist to obtain , but he has a special sensitivity to certain facets of social life . The sociologist and psychologist bring a powerful and varied arsenal of concepts and approaches to the study of social life . In what ways is the anthropologist able to contribute insights and experience toward the science of " marketology , " and to what extent may they not be immediately accessi - ble , for example , to the sociologist ? 16 The anthropologist is especially trained to have empathy with groups other than his own and to " tune in " on their patterns of cul - ture . Inasmuch as his training has exposed him to a wide variety of cultures , he can take a global view of a situation and see it in the context of a larger background . His training makes him sensitive to cross - cultural differences which may be of crucial importance in many different situations , because his entire training is geared toward awareness of such differences . 16 Robert Bartels , " Sociologist and Marketol - ogists , " JOURNAL OF MARKETING , Vol . 24 ( October , 1959 ) , pp . 37 - 40 ; Christen T . Jonas - sen , " Contributions of Sociology to Marketing , " JOURNAL OF MARKETING , Vol . 24 ( Octo - ber , 1959 ) , pp . 29 - 35 . Anthropology has less of the factional - ism which characterizes . psychology and sociology . This is not to suggest that all is serene in anthropology or that it has never been troubled by theoretical or methodological issues . However , even though anthropologists may disagree on something like the exact value of the con - tribution of a particular anthropologist , they would generally agree on what the cultural anthropologist looks for , and there are standardized check lists on how to view a culture . 17 In contrast , a psychologist ' s al - legiance to the Gestalt , behaviorist , psycho - analytic , learning - theory , or perception schools is likely to influence what he does with a given problem . A sociologist ' s commitment to the structure - function , his - torical , ecological , " middle range , " en - vironmental - determinism , or demographic schools would largely determine the empha - ses of his approach to a problem . Since such divergent schools are less likely to exist in cultural anthropology , it is prob - able that anthropological guidance on a given marketing problem would be rela - tively consistent . WHAT THE ANTHROPOLOGIST KNOWS The anthropologist is specifically trained to study national character , or the differ - ences which distinguish our national group from another . He should be able to pro - vide measures for distinguishing the subtle differences among a Swede , a Dane , and a Norwegian ; or between a Frenchman and an Englishman ; or a Brazilian and an Ar - gentinian ; or between a typical resident of Montreal and one of Toronto . The an - thropologist is also a specialist in the study of subcultures . He would be able , in a city like New York , to differentiate the patterns of living of such disparate but rapidly homogenizing groups as Puerto Ricans , Negroes , Italo - Americans , Jews , Polish - Americans , and Irish - Americans . Because almost any large community con - sists of a variety of subcultures , this aware - ness of subcultural trends can be especially 17 Royal Anthropological Institute , Notes and Queries on Anthropology ( London : The Insti - tute , 1956 ) . 55 JOURNAL OF MARKETING useful . A more subtle area of special in - terest to anthropologists is the silent lan - guage of gesture , posture , food and drink preferences , and other nonverbal cues to behavior . 18 Related to this is the anthropologist ' s professional interest in languages and sym - bols . He might , for example , be especially concerned about why a particular shape has special significance as a symbol in a society , or how the structure of a language or a regional speech pattern was related to how people think . 9l Another area of concern to the anthro - pologist , because of its symbolic meanings has to do with " rites de passage " or the central points in a person ' s life at which he may ritually be helped to go from one status to another , for example , birth , puberty , or marriage . 20 Taboos represent a continuing area of interest to the anthropologist . 21 Every cul - ture has taboos or prohibitions about vari - ous things , such as the use of a given color , or of a given phrase or symbol . The anthropologist is aware of the larger values of a culture , which represent the substra - tum of custom which is taken for granted and the violation of which represents a taboo . The anthropologist ' s method is primarily the exposure of his highly developed sen - sitivity to the area in which he is working , via observation and extended interviews with informants . Projective tests have also been widely used in anthropological studies . The anthropologist can bring a wealth of insight to marketing situations . USE OF ANTHROPOLOGY IN MARKETING There are at least three kinds of situa - tions in which the knowledge of the anthro - 18 Edward T . Hall , The Silent Language ( New York : Doubleday & Co . , 1959 ) . 19 Benjamin Lee Whorf , Collected Papers on Metalinguistics ( Washington : Department of State Foreign Service Institute , 1952 ) . 20Jan Wit , Rites De Passage ( Amsterdam : De Windroos , 1959 ) . 21 Franz Steiner , Taboo ( London : Cohen and West , Ltd . , 1957 . pologist has been employed in marketing : specific knowledge ; awareness of themes of a culture ; sensitivity to taboos . Specific Knowledge Here are a few cases in which the spe - cific knowledge of an anthropologist was ap - plied to marketing situations . A manufacturer of central heating equip - ment was planning to introduce central heating to an area which previously had used other heating . Since people generally grow up to accept a certain approach to heating which they take for granted , in - troduction of the new central heating posed marketing problems in coping with deeply imbedded consumer resistance to what would be a major innovation . An anthro - pologist was able to draw on his knowledge of the folklore and symbolism of heat and fire in order to suggest methods of present - ing the new system , so as to make it as consonant as possible with the connotations of heat , even though the nature of the heating method had changed radically . There was considerable consumer resistance to the central heating , but it decreased sub - stantially after the first year . In addition to a marketing problem , the introduction of central heating also posed problems of public policy which the manu - facturer had to overcome before he could obtain approval for the introduction of the heating equipment . The area was one which suffered from a declining birth rate , and officials were concerned about the extent to which central heating might cause the birth rate to decline further , because of their belief that heated bedrooms would cause a decline in sexual activity and ulti - mately in births . The anthropologist was able to point to some cultures in which the birth rate had declined and some in which it had not done so after the introduction of central heating . The anthropologist ' s data made it possible for the manufacturer of the central - heating equipment to discuss its probable effects realistically with the ap - propriate officials . Another field in which the anthropologist has specific knowledge that other social scientists are not likely to have is that of JULY , 1961 56 ANTHROPOLOGY ' S CONTRIBUTIONS TO MARKETING clothing and fashion . The only empirical study of the fashion cycle in woman ' s cloth - ing which has successfully been used for predictive purposes by clothing manufac - turers was conducted by anthropologists . 22 In marketing situations , the anthropologist has often been able to combine his special knowledge of the needs of the body for clothing of various kinds at different ages , his sensitivity to what technology makes possible ' and his awareness of fashion . For example , an anthropologist was con - sulted by a leading manufacturer of overalls for young children , a product which had remained unchanged for decades . He ex - amined the product in the light of the spe - cial needs of children who wear overalls , the growing use of washing machines to launder the overalls , their relative fre - quency of laundering , and contemporary technology . He suggested that the overall straps have a series of sets of metal grip - pers instead of buttons , thus making it possible to use different sets of grippers as the child grew instead of tying or knotting the straps . Noting that the straps often fall off the shoulders when children played , he suggested that the shirts which children wore under the overalls have either a loop for the straps to pass through or a synthet - ic fastener which faced matching material on the strap , so that the shoulder of the shirt could be pressed against the strap and remain attached to it until shoulder strap and shirt were pulled apart . He also recommended that the seams of the overalls , previously single stitched , be double stitched like those of men ' s shirts , which have to withstand frequent launder - ings . The double - stitched overalls would be less likely to come apart as a result of frequent launderings in a washing machine . These recommendations were adopted , and within a few years substantially changed and expanded the nature of the overall mar - ket for young children . The children ' s par - ents were more pleased with the overalls because they lasted longer and looked better 22Jane Richardson and Alfred L . Kroeber , Three Centuries of Women ' s Dress Fashions ( Berkeley : University of California Press , 1940 ) . on the children , and they were far more functional than before . The special knowledge of the anthropolo - gist has been called into play where there are special subcultural groups to which the marketer wishes to address himself . One beer manufacturer wished to extend his market share among Negroes in a large eastern city in the United States . He was advised about reaching this group by an anthropologist who was familiar with the special subculture of Negroes , and who pointed to the profound effects of Negroes ' caste membership on their purchasing be - havior . The ambiguity of their role has led many Negroes to be especially aware of articles that have status connotations and of whether a brand symbolizes racial progress . Examination of the manufac - turer ' s marketing program by the anthro - pologist led to several recommendations for change . The manufacturer began to help in the support of several major social events related to the arts in Negro communities , and to stress that the beer was a national brand with quality - control procedures . He changed the content of his advertising in the direction of enhancing its status and quality connotations . These changes were all directed toward improving the status connotations of the beer to Negroes . Guidance on related problems with re - spect to the Puerto Rican and Jewish mar - kets has also been used constructively . Since 35 to 40 per cent of the population of the United States consists of minority sub - cultures , the anthropologist ' s contributions may be considerable . Another situation had to do with the selection of specific symbols for various purposes . A major manufacturer of wo - men ' s products was uncertain about whether to continue using the Fleur de Lis emblem on his package . Anthropological analysis of the symbol suggested that its association with French kings and other cultural connotations of maleness made it more masculine than feminine . The anthro - pologist ' s recommendations were confirmed by subsequent field testing . In a related case , a manufacturer of wo - men ' s cosmetics conducted an anthropologi - cal study of the comparative symbolism in 57 JOURNAL OF MARKETING our culture of women ' s eyes and mouth , which suggested that the eye tends to be experienced as a relatively protecting organ while the mouth tends to be experienced as more nurturing . This knowledge of the differences between the special meanings of eye and mouth could constructively be used in marketing the products , and especially in advertising . The advertising explicitly and implicitly mentioned the role of the eye in protection of the woman . It stressed the role of the mouth as the organ which both symbolically and literally gives love . This replaced the manufacturer ' s previous advertising , in which both eye and mouth were treated in the same way , as organs which could be made beautiful . Awareness of Themes The anthropologist has functioned in sit - uations in which he can use his special understanding of themes of a culture , of - tentimes taken for granted . A major chain of candy shops was suffer - ing a decline in sales . A marketing - research study had established that the brand was usually bought as a gift , either for others or as a gift for the purchaser . The chain was unable to develop any ways of using this finding that were not hackneyed . An - thropological guidance on the symbolism of gift - giving enabled the chain to develop merchandising , packaging , and advertising formats for the gift theme . Anthropological study of the connotations of the major holidays suggested themes for window dis - plays , and advertising of the candy in con - junction with the holidays . The chain ' s mar - keting strategy was revised on the basis of the anthropological interpretation and clari - fication of the marketing - research study . Anthropologists are the only social scien - tists who have systematically studied gift - giving and gift - receiving . 23 Another example of anthropological in - terpretation of a marketing - research study was provided by a shirt manufacturer . The study had established that women buy more than half of men ' s shirts in a particular price range . The anthropologist was able 23Marcel Mauss , The Gift ( London : Cohen & West , Ltd . , 1954 ) . to interpret this finding in the light of several anthropological studies of the re - lations between husbands and wives in America . The manufacturer had been thinking of placing advertising for his men ' s shirts in selected women ' s magazines . The anthropologist was able to point to a number of studies of husband - wife relations which suggested growing resentment by men over the extent to which women had been borrowing and buying men ' s clothing , and which suggested that the proposed ad - vertising campaign might not be propitious . Another anthropologist ' s special sensi - tivity to the " rites de passage " helped a shoe manufacturer whose sales were de - clining because of aggressive foreign and domestic competition . The anthropologist was able to point to the extent to which shoes represent major symbols of our going from one stage of life to another , and to assist the manufacturer in developing meth - ods for using the relationship between shoes and " rites de passage . " 24 A landmark along the road of an infant becoming a child usually is found between the ages of 4 and 6 when he can tie his own shoe laces . The manufacturer devel - oped some pamphlets and other instruc - tional material for parents on how to help children to learn to tie their shoe laces . Distribution by local retailers contributed toward making parents favorably aware of the brand ' s line for children in this age group . The teenager signalizes her entrance into a new social world by her first high heels . Window displays and advertising which explicitly stressed the new social activities of the teenager wearing her high heels , and naming specific shoe models after teenage social events ( " The Prom " ) con - tributed toward associating the manufac - turer ' s name with the excitement of the new world symbolized by the high heels . Older people see the wearing of special " old people ' s shoes " as the ultimate re - minder that they are becoming old . The manufacturer was able to redesign his line 24 Charles Winick , " Status , Shoes , and the Life Cycle " Boot and Shoe Recorder , Vol . 156 ( October 15 , 1959 ) , pp . 100 - 202 . 58 JULY , 1961 ANTHROPOLOGY ' S CONTRIBUTIONS TO MARKETING for older people so that it retained its spe - cial health features but still looked as sty - lish as any adult shoe , and had no visible stigma of " old people ' s shoes . " Sensitivity to Taboos Marketers may unwittingly violate a taboo , whether cultural , religious , or politi - cal , especially in selling overseas . Blue , for example , is the color for mourning in Iran and is not likely to be favorably received on a commercial product . Green is the nationalist color of Egypt and Syria and is frowned on for use in packages . Showing pairs of anything on the Gold Coast of Africa is disapproved . White is the color of mourning in Japan and , therefore , not likely to be popular on a product . Brown and gray are disapproved colors in Nica - ragua . Purple is generally disapproved in most Latin American markets because of its association with death . Feet are re - garded as despicable in Thailand , where any object and package showing feet is likely to be unfavorably received . The anthropologist can cast light on taboos and on their opposite : favored colors and symbols . The reason for the people in a country or an area liking or not liking a particular color or symbol may be a func - tion of political , nationalist , religious , cul - tural , or other reasons . SOME APPLICATIONS IN CANADA Canada represents a special opportunity for the application of anthropology in mar - keting situations . Twenty - nine per cent of the country ' s entire population is in French - speaking Quebec , and over half of this num - ber know no English . Canada thus offers a changing kind of bilingual and culture contact situation with major cross - cultural differences for anthropological analysis . Both the farm community and the indus - trial community of Quebec have been studied by anthropologists . 25 The re - evalua - tion of the nature of Quebec family and community life sparked by Dean Phillipe 25 Horace Miner , St . Denis ( Chicago , Univer - sity of Chicago Press , 1939 ) ; Everett C . Hughes , French Canada In Transition ( Chi - cago : University of Chicago Press , 1943 ) . Garigue of the University of Montreal and a team at Laval University has led to re - newed interest in Quebec on the part of anthropologists . Their studies have pro - duced considerable information on styles of life in Quebec which should be trans - latable into marketing data on pricing policies , colors , package size , flavor and taste of various food items , texture of fabrics , automobile symbolism , product scents , and related subjects . Specific Knowledge Perhaps the most frequent occasion for the anthropologist to demonstrate specific knowledge in Canada has to do with lan - guage . One laundry - soap company had point - of - sale material on its soap describing it as extra strong and the best one to use on especially dirty parts of wash ( " les parts de sale " ) . After sales of the soap had declined , an anthropologist who was called in by the company pointed out that the phrase is comparable to the American slang phrase " private parts . " This kind of mistake might have been avoided if anthro - pological guidance had been available be - fore sales declined . Some products do not sell well in Quebec because the English name may be almost unpronounceable to a French speaker , or the name of the product may be meaningless even when translated idiomatically . Even the English spoken in Montreal differs somewhat from the English spoken in Tor - onto , creating potential hazards for the marketers who may not know , for example that a " tap " in a " flat " in Toronto is likely to be a " faucet " in a Montreal " apartment . " Awareness of Themes A study done by an anthropologist for a food manufacturer demonstrated the re - lationship between the purchases of certain food items and the gradual decline of the wood - burning stove which used to be a staple of Quebec farm kitchens . The wood stove would almost always have a stew pot ( " pot au feu " ) simmering all day . Various ingredients were put into the pot to pro - vide flavor . With the introduction of gas and electric kitchen ranges , it not only became relatively expensive to keep the 59 JOURNAL OF MARKETING stew pot going but the simmering could not be sustained because the pot would tend to boil rather than simmer . This change was accompanied by some radical adjustments in food consumption which were of great relevance to food mar - keting . The manufacturer was able to begin distribution of canned soups and stews which soon found a very large market and rapidly replaced the " pot au feu . " Taboos Alertness to taboos was illustrated by an anthropologist ' s suggestion to a manufac - turer of canned fish for changing a series of advertisements which were appearing in Quebec magazines and newspapers . The same advertisement was run repeatedly . The advertisements showed a woman in shorts playing golf with her husband . The caption read that the woman would be able to be on the golf links all day and still prepare a delicious dinner that evening if she used the product . Every element in the advertisement represented a violation of some underlying theme of French Cana - dian life ; the wife would not be likely to be playing golf with her husband , she would not wear shorts , and she would not be serving the particular kind of fish as a main course . In this case , the anthropolo - gist was consulted after the series had been running for awhile . THE MARKETER AS AN ANTHROPOLOGIST A good case could be made for the thesis that marketing researchers do more an - thropological research on modern cultures than do anthropologists . Marketing re - searchers are studying national character , subcultures , themes , and ways of life . The kind of information which marketing - research studies seek on how people live and what products they use represent first - rate material for the cultural anthropologist . The questionnaire , panel , audit , sales analysis , and other methods of modern mar - keting differ in degree but not in kind from the trained observations of the anthropolo - gist , but there is no reason why the two methods cannot complement each other . Greater communication between these two fields can and should lead to mutual enrich - ment of both . MARKETING MEMO Are American Businessmen Inhumane ? I do not mean they are inhuman ; they are all too human . I do not mean that they are insufficiently humanitarian . I mean that American businessmen , like most other Americans , are de - ficient in the discipline that nurtures the spirit . Humanism is a discipline that traces its origin back to the Hebrew prophets and the Greek philosophers , and has existed ever since to humanize men . Cicero and Seneca and Marcus Aurelius were at once the Roman exemplars and the Roman pre - ceptors of this humanizing process , for which our term is a " liberal education . " The humanists believe that through the study of great lives and great thoughts the minds of earnest men could be molded nobly . The process was both ethical and intellec - tual . This humane discipline , passed along in the literature of Christian theology , classic philosophy , poetry , history , biography , dominated the thinking of the whole of the Western World - until very late in the 19th Century . Humanism persists today , but with influence greatly weakened . - Russell Kirk , " The Inhumane Business - man , " an address before The Presi - dent ' s Committee for Education Be - yond High School , New York Univer - sity , April 30 , 1957 . JULY , 1961 60