Creative metacognition and self - ratings of creative performance : A 4 - C perspective ☆ James C . Kaufman a , ⁎ , Ronald A . Beghetto a , Cody Watson b a University of Connecticut , United States b California State University at Long Beach , United States a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 11 September 2014 Received inrevised form 29 April 2015 Accepted 7 May 2015 Available online xxxx Keywords : Creativity Metacognition Four C Model of Creativity Self - beliefs Creativemetacognition ( CMC ) referstoacombinationofself - andcontextual - knowledgeusedtomakedecisions aboutone ' sowncreativeefforts andaccomplishments . Competent creators useCMCtojudgewhethertheircon - tributionsmightbeconsideredcreative . Donovicecreatorshavetheabilityestimatetheirownlevelofcreativity ? The purpose of this study was to examine this question . Speci ﬁ cally , this article reports on an exploratory study that examined whether elementary students ' domain speci ﬁ c mini - c and little - c self - ratings aligned with exter - nal ratings of creativity . Students ( N = 242 ) completed three performance tasks ( i . e . , a visual , verbal , and scien - ti ﬁ c task ) . Immediately following each task , students were asked to judge whether their resulting product was creative at the mini - c level ( i . e . , creative to the self , but not others ) and little - c level ( i . e . , recognized as creative by others ) . External raters also scored the creativity of each completed task . Results indicate that students were able to differentiate their performance on different creative domains ( i . e . , visual , verbal , scienti ﬁ c ) and across levels of quality ( i . e . , mini - c and little - c ) . In addition , their self - ratings were also predictive of creativity scores as assigned by expert raters . The speci ﬁ c patterns of the relationships between students ' self - ratings and creativity are discussed and implications for subsequent research are provided . © 2015 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . “ I had a pleasant talent but not an incredible talent . I was not my father or my son . And you have to abandon all kinds of things . ” – Mary Rodgers ( daughter of composer Richard Rodgers , mother of composer Adam Guettal ) , quoted in Green ( 2003 ) Mary Rodgers , whopassed awaythis year , wasa remarkable creator . She wrote the hit Broadway musical Once Upon a Mattress and the pop - ular kids ' book Freaky Friday , which spawned two ﬁ lm adaptations . She contributed songs to many well - known revues ( such as Free to Be You and Me and The Mad Show ) and was the chair of the board at Juilliard for years . Yet Rodgers recognized that her talent , while prodigious , had a limit . In contrast , her father was Richard Rodgers , the composer of Oklahoma , South Paci ﬁ c , and other classic shows . Her son , Adam Guettal , is a groundbreaking , Tony Award - winning composer of Floyd Collins and Light in the Piazza . Her father was clearly Big - C ( demonstrat - ing genius - level creativity ) , and her son is a strong contender to join these ranks someday . Rodgers herself will be remembered , but is probably a better ﬁ t for high Pro - c , or expert creativity ( Kaufman & Beghetto , 2009 ) . In her quote , is Rodgers just being disarmingly modest ? Or is she showing a level of self - insight that is painfully rare ? Knowing your own limitationsisnotthe ﬁ rstattributethatmightcometomindwhenconsid - ering a creative life , yet it is an underrated ability . Self - con ﬁ dence is often trumpeted as an essential quality for successful performance . Yet too much self - con ﬁ dence can lead to narcissism , and although narcissists be - lieve themselves to be more creative , they do not demonstrate actual higher creative performance ( Furnham , Hughes , & Marshall , 2013 ; Goncalo , Flynn , & Kim , 2010 ) . Past theorists have argued that creativity represents an investment in ideas ( Sternberg & Lubart , 1996 ) . People with overcon ﬁ dence or narcissism may overvalue mediocre ideas and spend their time pursuing these paths . They may continue to believe themselves to be very creative yet not demonstrate high creative ability , leadingtoapotentiallyharshencounterwithrealitywhentheyencounter professional - level feedback . Another topic to consider is that people show an implicit dislike of creativity both in everyday life ( Mueller , Melwani , & Goncalo , 2012 ) , the workplace ( Mueller , Goncalo , & Kamdar , 2011 ) , and , especially , in the classroom ( Aljughaiman & Mowrer - Reynolds , 2005 ; Westby & Dawson , 1995 ) . Such views can obscure the relationship between crea - tivity and learning ( Beghetto , in press ) and undermine efforts aimed at the development of students ' creative competence ( Beghetto & Kaufman , 2007 , 2014 ) . Are these feelings rooted in an actual dislike of Learning and Individual Differences xxx ( 2015 ) xxx – xxx ☆ TheauthorswouldliketothankYessseniaSilva , AlexMcKay , andZacharyCaddickfor theirassistancewiththisprojectandconveytheirdeepappreciationtoEvaFritschforher support and trust . ⁎ Corresponding author at : University of Connecticut , Neag School of Education , 2131 Hillside Road , Storrs , CT 06269 - 3007 , United States . E - mail address : james . kaufman @ uconn . edu ( J . C . Kaufman ) . LEAIND - 01101 ; No of Pages 6 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . lindif . 2015 . 05 . 004 1041 - 6080 / © 2015 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Learning and Individual Differences journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / lindif Please cite this article as : Kaufman , J . C . , et al . , Creative metacognition and self - ratings of creative performance : A 4 - C perspective , Learning and Individual Differences ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . lindif . 2015 . 05 . 004 creativity ? Or are the negative associations due to people not liking creative people who do not know when or how to be creative ? Creative metacognition ( CMC ) has been de ﬁ ned as “ a combination of creative self - knowledge ( knowing one ' s own creative strengths and limitations , both within a domain and as a general trait ) and contextual knowledge ( knowing when , where , how , and why to be creative ) ” ( Kaufman & Beghetto , 2013b , p . 160 ) . This de ﬁ nition is consistent with the larger concept of metacognition ( e . g . , Flavell , 1979 ; Pintrich , Wolters , & Baxter , 2000 ) , which focuses on how people can recognize and monitor their own intellectual abilities . Creative metacognition ( not always explicitly given this label ) has been studied along a few different lines of research . Some people have explored the relationship between metacognitive ability and creativity . For example , several theorists ( Davidson & Sternberg , 1998 ; Feldhusen & Goh , 1995 Jausovec , 1994 ; Sternberg , 1998 ) have argued that meta - cognition is connected to creative problem solving and that someone who is high in metacognition should be a more creative problem solver . Feldhusen ( 1995 ) further argued that metacognition is one of the key factors related to creativity . It is possible , however , thattherelationship couldbetheexactoppo - site . Beinghigher at metacognitive abilities and being better able to reg - ulate your performance could also mean that one is less prone to daydreaming or mind - wandering . Both daydreaming ( McMillan , Kaufman , & Singer , 2013 ) and mind - wandering ( Baird et al . , 2012 ) are linked to increased creativity . Some initial studies have shown thatthe presence of higher levels of metacognitive processing are correlated with more creative work in both art ( Kozbelt , 2008 ) and engineering ( Zeng , Proctor , & Salvendy , 2011 ) . Another study examined self - reported creative metacognitive processes and found that this variable was correlated with creativity as measured by divergent thinking tests ( de Acedo Lizarraga & de Acedo Baquedano , 2013 ) . There is a danger in measuring any type of metacognition with self - report , given that people with low metacogni - tion may not be able to respond to such a measure in an accurate way ; indeed , the Dunning - Kruger effect ( Dunning , Johnson , Ehrlinger , & Kruger , 2003 ; Kruger & Dunning , 1999 ) argues that people low in metacognitive abilities not only underperform but also are unable to recognize their own low level of ability . A different way to examine this question is to see if people can iden - tify their most creative ideas . Silvia ( 2008 ) asked participants to choose which responses to a divergent thinking task they felt were their most creative . He found that people were generally able to select the same responses that external raters chose as the most creative . In both his study and earlier work ( e . g . , Grohman , Wodniecka , & Klusak , 2006 ) , more creative people tend to be better at this type of evaluation . Another way of studying creative metacognition is to examine gen - eral self - reported creativity and see how it is related to actual creative performance . Many studies have a correlation between creativity self - beliefs and scores on measures such as divergent thinking ( Batey , Furnham , & Sa ﬁ ullina , 2010 ; Furnham , Batey , Anand , & Man ﬁ eld , 2008 ; Park , Lee , & Hahn , 2002 ; Phillips , 1973 ) , rated creativity ( Beghetto , Kaufman , & Baxter , 2011 ) , and self - reported creative activi - ties ( Furnham et al . , 2008 ; Reiter - Palmon , Robinson - Morral , Kaufman , & Santo , 2012 ) . However , there are also a stream of studies that show no relationship between self - reported creativity and divergent thinking ( Lee , Day , Meara , & Maxwell , 2002 ) and rated creativity ( Kaufman , Evans , & Baer , 2010 ; Priest , 2006 ) . A more speci ﬁ c way of studying this question is to have people en - gage in a creative activity , ask them to assess their performance , and then see how accurate they are in their assessments ( comparable to Silvia , 2008 , but with actual creative products ) . Pretz and McCollum ( 2014 ) conducted this type of study on a population of college students using divergent thinking , an essay task , and a caption . They found that globalself - assessments ofcreativitywere notparticularlyrelatedtocre - ative performance ( consistent with some of the past ﬁ ndings discussed earlier ) . However , when people speci ﬁ cally rated their creativity on each individual task , these self - assessments did predict how experts rated their creativity on each task . In most studies of creative metacognition , participants are asked to rate their creativity with broad terms . The two questions used by Pretz and McCollum ( 2014 ) , for example , were “ My responses to the task were creative ” and “ My responses were more creative than those of the average person my age ” ( p . 230 ) . One way of studying the question of creative metacognition with greater depth would be to align the responses within the larger framework of the Four - C Model of Creativity . Building off of the little - c / Big - C distinction , Kaufman and Beghetto ( 2009 , 2013a ) , Beghetto and Kaufman ( 2007 , 2014 ) propose four “ C ” s of creativity that follow a developmental trajectory . First there is mini - c , or personal creativity , which represents the subjective self - discoveries that are part of the learning process . These new and personally meaning - ful insights and interpretations may not be considered creative by other people . Theycan , undertheright conditions , develop intocreativecontri - butions that are recognized by others ( Beghetto & Kaufman , 2014 ) . Next is little - c , or everyday creativity , is the kind of creativity that all of us can reach ; it is work that others would recognize and enjoy as being creative . Pro - c , or expert - level creativity , comes from years of practice and hard work ( e . g . , Hayes , 1989 ) ; this level may be the highest that most people can strive for in their lifetime . Big - C , or genius creativity , is the type of ﬁ eld - changing contributions that are remembered for generations to come . If people were to rate their creativity with speci ﬁ c questions that targeted the different types of C ' s as opposed to a broad scale , might the accuracy of their creative metacognition rise ? Laypeople are able to distinguish the concepts of not creative , mini - c , and little - c ( although Pro - c is harder to separate from little - c ; Kaufman & Beghetto , 2013a ) . Past investigations of crea - tive metacognition have typically focused on college students ( e . g . , Furnham et al . , 2008 ; Pretz & McCollum , 2014 ) . Younger students have been shown to demonstrate some level of creative metacognition ( Beghetto et al . , 2011 ) ; we would argue that it is important to determine whether elementary school - age children are capable of creative self - awareness to know whether potential interven - tions to improve creative metacognition are poised to succeed ( Kaufman & Beghetto , 2013b ) . Further , elementary school creativity is a particularly important developmental time . Creativity often is shown to grow up to a certain point ; some studies have found that a slump begins around fourth grade ( Torrance , 1968 ) and more recent studies have found that a decline can occur around sixth grade ( Lau & Cheung , 2010 ) . One example of a natural population to study would be children who have not yet entered into such a decline . Do young students have the ability to recognize different levels of creativity ( i . e . , mini - c and little - c ) and can they differentiate between their creative performances on different domains ( e . g . , visual , verbal , scienti ﬁ c ) ? The goal of this study was to examine whether students had the metacognitive ability to judge their creative performance on a task such that their ratings would correspond with expert ratings . 1 . Method 1 . 1 . Participants The 242 participants were elementary school students enrolled in grades one through six . Slightly over half of the participants reported their gender as female ( n = 122 , 50 . 4 % ) . Breakdowns of gender by grade can be seen in Table 1 . There were 37 students in 1st grade , 47 students in 2nd grade , 41 students in 3rd grade , 48 students in 4th grade , 29 students in 5th grade , and 40 students in 6th grade . In - formation on ethnicity was not collected , but the school was in a dis - trict in Southern California composed of primarily lower to middle socioeconomic status Caucasian and Hispanic American students . 2 J . C . Kaufman et al . / Learning and Individual Differences xxx ( 2015 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Kaufman , J . C . , et al . , Creative metacognition and self - ratings of creative performance : A 4 - C perspective , Learning and Individual Differences ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . lindif . 2015 . 05 . 004