Waiting for Q : An Exploration of QAnon Users’ Online Migration to Poal in the Wake of Voat’s Demise Antonis Papasavva ‡ and Enrico Mariconti † ‡ Department of Computer Science , University College London , United Kingdom , antonis . papasavva @ ucl . ac . uk † Department of Security and Crime Science , University College London , United Kingdom , e . mariconti @ ucl . ac . uk Abstract Controversial and hateful online communities often face bans on mainstream social networks as part of mod - eration efforts . One platform known for implementing such measures is Reddit , which has banned various com - munities and users in recent years . Although banning these communities eliminates the problem on one platform , the dispersal of these communities to other alternative social networks with more lenient policies and moderation remains a challenge . One alternative to Reddit was Voat , a Reddit - like social network that provided a haven for the sharing of controversial and hateful discourse . Voat experienced significant growth and popularity with every Reddit ban , sustaining itself for four years before its eventual shutdown in December 2020 . In this study , we examine the migration patterns of QAnon adherents across Reddit , Voat , and Poal following the sudden bans on Reddit and the announced shutdown of Voat . This work performs a large - scale measurement of the migrations involving different platforms , including Poal , which has not been studied before under this lens . We observe , among other things , that Reddit users suspected their subreddits would be taken down , so they suggested Voat as an alternative . However , after their most - used subreddit , / r / CBTS _ Stream , was banned , users moved to / r / greatawakening instead . It was only after the banning of all pro - QAnon subreddits on Reddit that users migrated to Voat . Similarly , Voat users proposed Poal as an alternative to Voat immediately after Voat announced its shutdown , but their migration primarily occurred on the last day of Voat , resulting in approximately half of Voat’s QAnon user base moving to Poal . This represents a significantly higher percentage compared to the migration from Reddit to Voat ( 9 . 7 % ) , indicating that a warning with little time left , can aid towards an effective coordination among the users of the community . Lastly , our research uncovers evidence suggesting that discussions and planning related to the January 6th , 2021 attack on the US Capitol emerged shortly after the shutdown of Voat , predominantly among Poal users , many of whom were Voat migrants . 1 Introduction Online social networks have rules , terms , and conditions for users to follow . Often , users do not abide with these rules , which , in turn , requires the content moderators of a platform to take action . Content moderation is the or - ganized governance , detection , assessment , and intervention taken on user - created content or behavior that stands against a platform’s rules and policies [ 21 ] . A mainstream social network that received much attention due to its communities’ hateful speech , self - harm promotion , misinformation , and controversial discussions is Reddit [ 6 ] . Reddit has had a history of hosting various communities that were controversial and sometimes involved hate speech or offensive content [ 10 ] . Due to the nature of the platform allowing its users to create and moderate their own communities , a wide range of communities emerged covering diverse topics , including those that have garnered criticism for promoting hate , harassment , or extremist ideologies . Over time , Reddit has taken actions to address problematic communities and content on its platform . One of these actions was to permanently ban ( deplatform ) several communities , with the first banned community being / r / beatingwomen in June 2014 [ 17 ] , which featured women being brutally beaten . 1 a r X i v : 2302 . 01397v3 [ c s . S I ] 27 J u l 2023 Since then , Reddit has continued enforcing this policy on controversial subreddits , resulting in thousands of banned communities [ 28 ] . Alas , although somewhat successful for one platform , this practice does not necessarily reduce overall toxicity on the web . Researchers demonstrate that many banned communities subsequently migrate to other platforms and , in some cases , exhibit even more toxicity [ 25 ] . A platform that many users decided to use as a Reddit alternative after a ban is Voat [ 36 , 40 ] , which was a Reddit - like news aggregator launched in April 2014 . Previous work demonstrates that Voat received an influx of user registrations consistently after all subreddits with a similar topic were banned [ 36 ] . One of the many Reddit - banned communities that chose Voat as a Reddit alternative was GreatAwakening [ 40 ] , which was devoted to the QAnon conspiracy theory . More specifically , previous work that collected and analyzed the entire activity of Voat [ 36 ] demonstrates that the most active subverses on Voat were focused on QAnon . QAnon is a Donald Trump - supporting conspiracy theory , which claims , among other things , that supposedly pedophile politicians and celebrities are en - gaged in a war to destroy society and democracy , while Donald Trump fights to expose them [ 39 ] . Voat endured several troubles since its conception , and it eventually had to shut down on December 25 , 2020 due to financial problems . 1 Voat’s shutdown announcement gave users less than four days to organize their migration . Many users declared that they will open a new account on Poal ; 2 Poal was mentioned more than a hundred times in the comments of the Voat shutdown announcement alone . Poal is , like Voat , a social network that works very similar to Reddit , with discussions being divided into subverses ; the equivalent of a subreddit . Motivation . The study of user migration patterns and behavior during moderation efforts or platform shutdowns is of great importance in understanding the dynamics of online communities and the impact of such events on alternative platforms . While there has been research on migration from mainstream platforms to alternative platforms , there is limited understanding of the specific factors that influence user migration when faced with platform deplatforming or shutdown announcements . The announcement of Voat’s shutdown provides a unique opportunity to investigate the effects of an impending platform closure on user migration behavior . By examining how users organized their migration and exploring the subsequent activity on alternative platforms , we can gain insights into the strategies and preferences of users navigating a changing online landscape . We focus on QAnon communities since they were the most active on Voat [ 36 ] , thus we know that QAnon was a community that migrated to Voat after Reddit banned all QAnon - related subreddits . Hence , we aim to compare the migration patterns from Reddit to Voat and from Voat to Poal as we believe such analysis offers valuable insights into the dynamics of user migration within the context of moderation efforts . This study aims to address these research gaps by investigating the migration patterns and discussions within QAnon communities on Reddit , Voat , and Poal . By analyzing the discussions and activities surrounding these migrations , we can examine the motivations and behaviors of users during times of transition , shedding light on the factors that influence their choices and the level of engagement on different platforms . By exploring the extent of migration to Poal following Voat’s shutdown announcement and comparing it with the migration from Reddit to Voat , which was sudden , we can gain a comprehensive understanding of the user responses to deplatforming and the subsequent dynamics of alternative platform adoption . Through this research , we aim to contribute to the existing knowledge on user migration during moderation efforts and platform shutdowns , providing insights into how users adapt to changing online environments and how they organize or decide on alternative platforms . Additionally , our findings can inform platform operators and policymakers about the potential implications of moderation actions . More specifically , we demonstrate how users that are banned from well - moderated platforms ( like Reddit ) often migrate to communities where their activity and discussions are obscured . This raises many questions for policymakers , which are not within the scope of this paper , such as : Is it worth banning these users knowing that they can go into other fringe social networks that are not monitored ? This is discussed further in Section 8 . By focusing on the specific case of Voat’s premeditated shutdown and the migration to Poal , we can uncover valuable insights that can provide a foundation for future research on community online migration dynamics . An - other reason we choose to study the migration patterns between Reddit , Voat , and Poal is due to the visual and 1 https : / / searchvoat . co / v / announcements / 4169936 2 https : / / poal . co / hot 2 functional similarities of these social networks . Importantly , previous works [ 36 , 40 ] demonstrate how Voat gained popularity once Reddit decisively banned all QAnon subreddits . In this study , we investigate , among other things , whether Poal experiences a similar influx of users after Voat shuts down due to its similarities with Reddit and Voat , and how users come about suggesting and deciding on an alternative . This investigation provides valuable informa - tion on the kind of platforms that users migrate to after a ban . Lastly , given how QAnon was the conspiracy theory that shocked the world with the January 6th , 2021 US Capitol storm , we believe it is important to study and monitor the activity of this conspiracy throughout the web . Research Questions . In an effort to better understand the differences between Reddit - to - Voat and Voat - to - Poal migration , we collect data from QAnon communities on Reddit , Voat , and Poal , to answer the following research questions : • RQ1 : To what extend do users migrate to Poal following the Voat shutdown announcement ? • RQ1b : How does the premeditated Voat - to - Poal migration compare to the sudden Reddit - to - Voat migration ? • RQ2 : What is the discussion on Reddit and Voat regarding alternative social networks during the moderation efforts and the shutdown announcement , respectively ? • RQ2b : What is the sentiment of users regarding these alternatives ? Contributions . Our contributions are threefold . First , this work is the first , to the best of our knowledge , to study a premeditated , organized online migration of users . More specifically , we investigate the differences between the sudden ban and migration of Reddit users to Voat , and the premeditated decision and suggestion of alternatives to Voat when Voat announced it would shut down . We find that the most popular suggestion of a Voat alternative was Poal . Second , we perform an analysis on Poal , a social network that has not been studied before , in the context of the unique scenario of a planned closure of Voat . Poal is an alternative social network that closely resembles Reddit and Voat in terms of appearance and functionality . What makes Poal particularly relevant is its support for “free speech , ” which is expected to attract many banned fringe and hateful communities . This work sheds light on a social network that hosts dangerous individuals . More specifically , we find evidence that QAnon adherents on Poal , of which half are Voat migrants , began planning the attack on the US Capitol on January 6th , 2021 , shortly after Voat shut down . This study highlights the importance of studying Poal , a fringe community that we have limited knowledge about , as it becomes evident that discussions and organization for the January 6th insurrection took place on Poal prior to the event itself . Furthermore , since many banned communities are now compelled to use fringe social networks , studying them becomes a crucial to understand and moderate their discussions . Lastly , the findings of our work strengthen the findings of previous works . We find that the user base of the QAnon conspiracy theory tends to decrease with each ban , consistent with the findings of Ribeiro et al . [ 25 ] , whose work focuses on two communities , one of which is not related to QAnon ( Incels ) . Our work arrives at the same result while analyzing a wider spectrum of aspects related to the migration of QAnon users . Specifically , we examine the discussions of users regarding alternatives and how they express their opinions about them . Additionally , we investigate the effects of unexpected bans compared to announced ones , where coordination could have played a mitigating factor in the loss of community members . We find that even in the case of premeditated and organized online migration , we still observe patterns similar to communities that differ from QAnon and had no time to decide on a new platform when they were abruptly banned . At the same time , although only half of the known Voat QAnon user base migrated to Poal , it still appears to be more organized than the QAnon user migration following the September 12th , 2018 ban on the largest QAnon - focused subreddit on Reddit , which resulted in only 9 . 7 % of the Reddit QAnon user base choosing Voat as their new platform . Despite the Voat shutdown announcement allowing users to plan ahead , not everyone seemed to be on the same page regarding which platform to migrate to . Overall , we observe that even though the migration from Voat to Poal was more organized compared to the migration from Reddit to Voat , users clung to their existing platform until the last minute . For example , Reddit users moved to a different community after their popular subreddit was banned and only moved to Voat once there were no other viable communities left on Reddit . Similarly , Voat users became active on Poal only after Voat permanently shut down . 3 # Date Event 1 October 28 , 2017 Q posts their first Q drop 2 March 14 , 2018 Reddit bans / r / CBTS _ Stream 3 September 12 , 2018 Reddit bans / r / greatawakening 4 December 25 , 2020 Voat shuts down 5 January 6 , 2021 United States Capitol attack Table 1 : QAnon important dates . 2 Background In this Section , we briefly discuss the history of QAnon and the social networks on which this work focuses . QAnon . QAnon is a conspiracy theory that originated on 4chan’s Politically Incorrect board on October 28 , 2017 [ 39 ] . The creator of this conspiracy is an anonymous user that used the nickname “Q” for all of their posts , hence the name of the conspiracy : Q from the user nickname and anon for anonymous . The posts that Q made on 4chan and 8chan since then , are referred to by the adherents of the conspiracy as “Q drops . ” In these cryptic Q drops , Q explains how a network of blood - thirsty pedophile politicians , celebrities , and influential people are part of the deep state : an undercover organization that controls and runs governments worldwide [ 34 ] . At the same time , Q gives information to adherents about the great plan of Donald Trump to uncover the deep state and bring its members to justice . Previous works also describe this conspiracy as a super - conspiracy theory as it is one conspiracy to rule them all [ 40 ] . For example , QAnon also supports the idea that 5G spreads COVID and that Bill Gates supposedly tries to inject microchips in people through vaccinations [ 22 ] , that J . F . Kennedy Jr . is alive and hidden by the CIA [ 44 ] , and many more . Notably , “Pizzagate” is the conspiracy that evolved into what is known today as QAnon . 3 Since its inception , QAnon has spread on various social networks . After Reddit banned QAnon from its plat - form [ 28 ] , reportedly , many users moved to Voat [ 40 ] . During that time , the conspiracy grew , even creating its own archiving sites to store information about the conspiracy and Q drops [ 39 ] , and hosting online forums for adherents to have a “safe space” to discuss their ideas . 4 Although QAnon is known for various crimes its adherents committed [ 29 ] , the most well - known QAnon crime was the attack on the United States Capitol [ 5 ] . On January 6 , 2021 , QAnon adherents and Donald Trump supporters stormed the US capitol in an attempt to reinstate Donald Trump as the US president . Shortly after , many mainstream social networks took action to ban QAnon discussions from their platforms [ 8 ] . At the same time , other alternative social networks were banned by their hosting providers , like Parler [ 4 ] . This work focuses on how QAnon adherents organizing their online migration after a shutdown . To this end , we highlight five major events related to the conspiracy’s online evolution , including the creation of the conspiracy on October 28 , 2017 , the two Reddit bans in 2018 , the Voat shutdown in 2020 , and the US capitol attack in 2021 . Table 1 lists these QAnon important events that we analyze . Voat . Voat was a news aggregator that operated and looked similar to Reddit , launched in April 2014 . Subverses categorize conversations around specific topics on Voat , as subreddits on Reddit . The founders of Voat often pro - moted their platform as a safe space for users to express themselves without the need to be politically correct . Users could view discussions and subverses on Voat without registering , but to participate , they needed to register for an account using a username and password . Overall , Voat provided some form of anonymity and supposedly complete “free speech . ” Voat started gaining more popularity in 2015 , a year after being founded , due to various hateful subreddits being banned [ 2 , 36 ] . Voat had a troubled history with various periods of downtime due to their web hosting service canceling their contract , PayPal freezing Voat’s payment processing services , DDoS attacks , and the influx of Reddit users overloading their limited servers , causing failures [ 36 ] . Finally , on December 21 , 2020 , Voat’s co - founder 3 For more information regarding the Pizzagate conspiracy theory , see [ 19 ] 4 https : / / greatawakening . win / 4 announced that it would shut down due to a lack of funds . At noon on December 25 , 2020 , Voat shut down after its co - founder posted a goodbye submission . Poal . Similarly to Voat , Poal is a Reddit - like , Reddit - alternative social network , launched on April 29 , 2018 . Dis - cussions on Poal are divided into “subs” but , as with Voat , we refer to them as subverses henceforth for simplicity . The website’s slogan is “Say what you want , ” and its mascot is a polar bear . The first ever submission on Poal was on the s / whatever subverse with the title : “Free speech is the priority here . ” Based on the comments on that first submission , it is evident that the developers or founders of Poal had associations with Voat co - founder ( username PuttItOut ) as they mention his name and how they tried to help his efforts to keep Voat afloat . Users can register on Poal using a username and a password . There is an option to enter an email for password resetting purposes . Once a member is registered , they need to introduce themselves on the welcome subverse before they can post or comment anywhere else . Usernames on Poal can appear in a specific color based on the user’s level . A user starts from level 0 and can achieve up to level 100 . Users can increase their level by gaining points by posting new submissions or commenting on existing submissions often . Users who remain inactive for a long time start losing their level as their points expire . The reason user points expire is , as Poal explains on its user welcome page , “offer something of a reward to the people who contribute a lot to Poal , ” and also to “make shills easier to spot . ” The term shill refers to someone who pretends to be a conspiracy believer but is allegedly a spy . The higher the level of a user on Poal , the more privileges , functionalities , and freedom they have . For example , a level 0 user cannot send personal messages to other people and cannot post new submissions , while level 6 users can post up to 60 submissions per day , level 10 users can create subverses , users at level 30 can report posts , etc . On Voat and Reddit , the downvote button on comments and submissions usually indicates disagreement , whereas , on Poal , it is not used for this purpose . Poal uses the downvote button to indicate that a post is irrelevant to the subverse , or spam , in order to get the attention of high - level users ( moderators ) to remove it . 3 Related Work In this Section , we discuss related work on deplatforming . One of the first works on Reddit migrations is the one of Chandrasekharan et al . [ 10 ] . This work analyzes the ban of fatpeoplehate and CoonTown and the effects these bans had on the participating users and other subreddits . The study finds that the bans of those two subreddits were successful for what Reddit intended to do : lower its toxicity . The majority of participating accounts stopped using Reddit , and the ones that stayed lowered their hate speech usage drastically . Importantly , the subreddits that received migrants from the two banned subreddits had no changes in hate speech usage . A similar study from Newell et al . [ 38 ] focused on the 2015 Reddit bans on hateful communities to analyze changes in user behavior . They find that a small migration took part during the summer of 2015 and explain that a diverse ecosystem of social network alternatives emerged to suit different user preferences . Engel et al . [ 16 ] study the early QAnon supporters on Reddit . They explain that most of the early QAnon users only started being active on Reddit after the emergence of the conspiracy theory . After the Reddit bans , the QAnon users that remained active on Reddit mostly engaged with a wide range of subreddits that focused on matters other than QAnon but were sympathetic towards the conspiracy . This study demonstrates how many users cling on the same platform , even after their community is banned . Importantly , the activity of engaged users that remain on a platform after their primary community is banned depicts significant decrease . That is not the case for our study . When / r / CBTS _ Stream was banned , the activity of / r / greatawakening , a subreddit that focuses on exactly the same issues as / r / CBTS _ Stream peaked to levels higher than the ones of the banned subreddit . We find that , in some cases , users on Reddit just move to a different community that supports the concepts of the displaced subreddit , until Reddit moderation and policy enforcement efforts catches up with them . Previous works [ 31 , 43 ] explain that although bans prove to be sufficient to eliminate specific discussions , behav - iors , and users from one platform , those users tend to migrate to other more lenient platforms [ 3 ] . More specifically , Ribeiro et al . [ 26 ] show that although Reddit moderation measures cause only fractions of the banned user base to migrate to other platforms , leading to reduced activity and newcomers , at the same time , the new smaller community that migrated to other platforms tends to be more toxic than the banned one . On a similar note , Habib et al . [ 24 ] explain that Reddit administrators struggle to prevent or contain toxic activity . They add that proactive identification 5 strategies could potentially facilitate early interventions , which is more appropriate than banning or quarantining to - wards mitigating problematic discourse . Chandrasekharan et al . [ 9 ] collect 85M posts from Reddit’s TheRedPill and The _ Donald subreddits to examine the quarantine’s effects on them . They find that quarantining subreddits makes it difficult to recruit new members , but the existing user base of those communities remained as toxic and racist as before . Ribeiro et al . [ 25 ] collect data from Reddit’s The _ Donald and Incels that reportedly migrated to their standalone platforms . The authors explain that the activity of these two communities on their new platforms was significantly decreased compared to the activity on Reddit . Notably , the authors explain that The _ Donald community demon - strated higher toxicity on their new platform , similar to the findings of Ali et al . [ 3 ] , which focuses on Gab users that were suspended from Twitter and Reddit . Looking further back , before the Reddit bans , based on the findings of Gilbert [ 20 ] , it is apparent that Reddit faces significant challenges in effectively moderating toxic content within its platform . This is also shown by all the previous studies mentioned in this section thus far . Gilbert discusses a prevalent issue of underprovision , where users rely on others to contribute without actively participating themselves . This underprovision poses a threat to Reddit’s core objective of surfacing the best content through user voting . In response to the difficulty in curbing toxicity , Reddit resorts to banning communities that violate its policies , which by itself can be problematic for other forums that receive the displaced users . These findings underscore the ongoing struggle Reddit faces in balancing user - generated content and maintaining a healthy and inclusive online environment . Our work differs from previous research in that we study a platform’s shutdown where its users were informed beforehand and had time to organize an online migration . We are interested in understanding where the Voat QAnon - focused user base intended to migrate . Also , we focus on three functionally and aesthetically similar social networks to show how the overall QAnon user base has changed over the years . Moving off Reddit , Fiesler and Dym [ 18 ] explore the phenomenon of online platform migration within fandom communities . The authors investigate how and why fandom communities transition from one online platform to another by conducting surveys and interviews online . The authors find that fandom communities engage in platform migration due to concerns over platform policies , changes in community norms , and shifts in platform features . The study also highlights the importance of social connections and community identity in driving and facilitating these migrations , as well as the challenges and complexities involved in transitioning from one online platform to another . Notably , we study three platforms that are aesthetically and operationally almost identical , which appears to be one of the reasons a users would select a platform to move to based on the findings of [ 18 ] . Griggio et al . [ 23 ] conducted 1 . 5K surveys focusing on the January 2021 WhatsApp update to their privacy policy that caused millions of users to try other messaging apps such as Telegram and Signal . Similarly to [ 18 ] , the reason behind this migration was a change in policy . The authors find that about 25 % of the participants wanted to switch to other apps , but the majority of them did not do so . This finding is aligned with what we find in our work . More specifically , users failed to abandon ship after / r / CBTS _ Stream is banned and instead move to / r / greatawakening . The authors of this work also note that only 16 % of the participants actually used WhatsApp less . Also , users struggle to choose alternative apps , especially if there are differences in their design and functionality . Zhang et al . [ 45 ] study the ban of the Chinese - based social platform WeChat in the US . The ban was due to alleged theories that WeChat posed a national security risk . The authors conduct 15 interviews of WeChat users and online participant observation , to examine the expectations of WeChat users regarding the imminent ban . The authors find , among other things , the frustration of users regarding this ban due to it being an indispensable part of their daily lives . 4 Datasets For our analysis , we collect data from Reddit , Voat , and Poal . We attempt to show how QAnon conspiratory com - munities managed to regroup and stay active after being banned from one social network and having their second one shut down . In this Section , we detail the three datasets used in this work . Table 2 lists the dates of our dataset and the number of posts per community . Reddit . We collect our Reddit dataset from Pushift [ 7 ] . We search Pushift for all the data regarding three popular QAnon - focused subreddits , namely , / r / greatawakening , / r / CBTS _ Stream , and / r / The _ GreatAwakening [ 41 ] . In this 6 Community # Submissions # Comments Date Span R e dd it / r / CBTS _ Stream 30 , 176 267 , 744 20 Dec 2017 - 28 Feb 2018 / r / greatawakening 79 , 952 926 , 676 9 Jan 2018 - 19 Aug 2018 V o a t / v / news 176 , 948 1 , 397 , 955 1 Oct 2016 - 25 Dec 2020 / v / GreatAwakening 100 , 699 982 , 702 9 Jan 2018 - 25 Dec 2020 / v / QRVoat 185 , 929 2 , 225 , 702 22 Sep 2018 - 25 Dec 2020 P o a l / s / News 26 , 919 74 , 431 29 Mar 2018 - 6 Sep 2021 / s / GreatAwakening 1 , 889 2 , 032 13 Jul 2019 - 6 Sep 2021 / s / QPatriots 5 , 930 22 , 167 09 Feb 2021 - 6 Sep 2021 / s / QStorm 19 , 966 109 , 358 12 Jul 2019 - 6 Sep 2021 Table 2 : Number of submissions and comments collected from Reddit , Voat , and Poal . work , we only focus on / r / greatawakening and / r / CBTS _ Stream since the / r / The _ GreatAwakening dataset on Pushift is not complete ; it consists of only 1 . 4K submissions , with no comment data . We specifically collect data from QAnon - focused communities on Reddit and ommit collecting a baseline subreddit like News for our study . This decision stems from our interest in examining the impact of Reddit bans and the Voat shutdown not only on QAnon - focused subverses but also on general - discussion subverses on Voat and Poal respectively . Given the size of Reddit and the general activity of its news subreddit , we do not expect , nor believe it is in the scope of this work to analyze that baseline subverse . Voat . Our Voat dataset includes data from / v / GreatAwakening and / v / QRVoat , the two most popular QAnon sub - verses on Voat , and / v / news , which we use as a baseline subverse to compare the activity of Voat overall later on . We collect the entire history of these three subverses from the public Voat dataset published by Mekacher and Papasavva [ 36 ] . We only consider data on / v / news created between October 2017 and December 2020 since any activity before the QAnon conspiracy is outside the scope of this work . Poal . Since there is no previous research on Poal or publicly available datasets , we implement a custom crawler to collect Poal data . To this end , we followed the methodology in [ 40 ] and implemented a DOM - tree scraper using HTTP requests and Beautiful Soup to visit Poal subverses and collect data . Our online scraper operated between July 1 , 2021 , and September 7 , 2021 . Poal shows submissions and com - ments made on its platform without the need for registration . Therefore , our scraper could go back to the beginning of every subverse and collect data from then on . To guarantee our dataset’s completeness , our scraper was following a list of subverses that it had to collect , and it would go through the entire history of every subverse on that list in a loop , after the list of subverses was exhausted , repeating this process constantly , until the last day of collec - tion , September 7 , 2021 . This way , our scraper visited submissions that it had already collected , looking for new comments , if any . To identify QAnon subverses on Poal , one of the authors visited the full list of Poal subverses and checked every subverse for possible QAnon association . 5 After careful inspection , we found tens of subverses devoted to QAnon , but they were mostly inactive , with less than a weekly submission and virtually no comments . To this end , we focus on three active Poal QAnon - focused subverses , namely / s / GreatAwakening , / s / QPatriots , and / s / QStorm . As a baseline , we also collect / s / News . Ethical Considerations . For our Reddit and Voat datasets , we use publicly available data already published , dis - cussed , and analyzed in previous works . Regarding Poal data collection , we followed the Terms and Conditions of the site and respected their operational data crawling services . We made no attempt to overload Poal services . More specifically , Poal’s robots . txt file clearly notes that it allows automatic script crawlers to reach the website’s root ( / ) , hence allowing our script to access publicly available links and content on the website ( subverses , posts , and comments ) . 6 Note that we do not use a registered user - bot in our crawler , hence we only collect publicly available data from Poal . The collected Poal data were saved in one of our institution’s server , protected by our institution’s 5 https : / / poal . co / subs 6 https : / / poal . co / robots . txt 7 antivirus and firewall . In addition , the only people that have access to the PostgreSQL database where the Poal data is saved are this paper’s lead author and the administrator of the institution’s data - center . Notably , the collection of the Poal dataset and the use of the public Reddit and Voat datasets was approved by our institution’s department ethics committee . The full name of our institution and department ethics committee that evaluated our ethics application will be disclosed upon publication of this manuscript . We note that we make no attempts to de - anonymize users , and we use encryption mechanisms to protect users’ privacy when the analysis is focused on specific usernames , as shown later in Section 5 . 2 . 5 A Longitudinal Analysis In this Section , we employ various analyses to showcase how the activity of the conspiracy adherents evolved over the years across the three platforms . 5 . 1 Temporal Analysis To visualize the activity of QAnon adherents , we plot the number of submissions and comments on Reddit , Voat , and Poal in Figure 1 . Note the log on the x - axis , along with red vertical lines marking the important dates shown in Table 1 . In Figure 1 ( a ) , we plot the number of submissions on the three platforms . It is apparent that the conspiracy started discussions on Reddit on December 20 , 2017 , which is when the first submission appears on / r / CBTS _ Stream . The subreddit / r / greatawakening appears shortly after , on January 9 , 2018 , which is the same date that / v / GreatAwakening makes its appearance on Voat as well . The / r / CBTS _ Stream subreddit went silent on February 28 , 2018 , since Reddit quarantined it before banning it on March 14 , 2018 . From March 2018 until August 2018 , the activity of / r / greatawakening increased tenfold , likely due to / r / CBTS _ Stream users turning to that subreddit for their discussions . On June 7 , 2018 , / s / GreatAwakening posted its first - ever submission on Poal . On August 19 , 2018 , Reddit quarantines / r / greatawakening before banning it on September 12 , 2018 . We notice that immediately after / r / greatawakening is banned , the activity on / v / GreatAwakening increases by approximately ten times , from approximately 90 comments daily to more than 1 K , on average , every day after the ban ( Figure 1 ( b ) ) . Notably , ten days after the / r / greatawakening ban , / v / QRVoat is created on Voat , posting more than 2 . 3 K comments , on average , every day ; more than double the pre - existing QAnon subverse on Voat . Overall , it is clear that / r / CBTS _ Stream , / r / greatawakening , and / v / GreatAwakening needed some time before becoming popular . On the other hand , / v / QRVoat immediately takes over QAnon discussions on Voat since the first day it was created . This is a clear indication of coordinated action , which prompted to find out how such activity took place on Voat’s / v / QRVoat so sudden . We find three different posts of Q ( q drops ) that were posted on 21 September , 2018 , on 4chan , prompting users to use QRVoat as an alternative for displaced users . 7 This finding was both surprising , and disturbing , as we uncover that activity that took place in 4chan , had clear and immediate impact on Voat . It also highlights how organized the QAnon community can be , having adherents in many platforms . Turning to Poal , the subverse / s / QStorm appeared for the first time on September 2 , 2019 . It gained more popularity near the end of 2020 , especially after the co - founder of Voat announced that the platform would shut down ( event 4 in Table 1 ) . After Voat shuts down , the activity on / s / QStorm and / s / GreatAwakening starts rising . Lastly , / s / QPatriots appears on Poal on February 9 , 2021 , and seems to be the second most popular subverse on the platform after / s / QStorm . Similar to / v / QRVoat taking over / v / GreatAwakening on Voat , / s / QStorm seems to take a second best place on Poal even though / s / GreatAwakening existed since June 2018 . Key findings . Overall , we notice that the activity of Voat’s / v / GreatAwakening increased by ten times since the Reddit bans , but more importantly , / v / QRVoat appeared long after / v / GreatAwakening and takes over as the most popular QAnon subverse on Voat , following Q’s recommendation on 4chan . Similarly , / s / QPatriots appears after / s / QStorm and / s / GreatAwakening but is almost as popular as / s / QStorm from its first week . This activity shows that the creation of specific communities was likely coordinated . Regarding the baseline subverses / v / news and / s / News , 7 https : / / qanon . pub / # t1537581143 , https : / / qanon . pub / # t1537581556 , and https : / / qanon . pub / # t1537576793 8 2 0 1 7 - 1 0 2 0 1 7 - 1 2 2 0 1 8 - 0 2 2 0 1 8 - 0 4 2 0 1 8 - 0 6 2 0 1 8 - 0 8 2 0 1 8 - 1 0 2 0 1 8 - 1 2 2 0 1 9 - 0 2 2 0 1 9 - 0 4 2 0 1 9 - 0 6 2 0 1 9 - 0 8 2 0 1 9 - 1 0 2 0 1 9 - 1 2 2 0 2 0 - 0 2 2 0 2 0 - 0 4 2 0 2 0 - 0 6 2 0 2 0 - 0 8 2 0 2 0 - 1 0 2 0 2 0 - 1 2 2 0 2 1 - 0 2 2 0 2 1 - 0 4 2 0 2 1 - 0 6 2 0 2 1 - 0 8 1 10 100 1 k 1 2 3 45 / r / CBTS _ Stream / r / greatawakening / v / GreatAwakening / v / QRVoat / v / news / s / QStorm / s / QPatriots / s / GreatAwakening / s / News ( a ) Submissions 2 0 1 7 - 1 0 2 0 1 7 - 1 2 2 0 1 8 - 0 2 2 0 1 8 - 0 4 2 0 1 8 - 0 6 2 0 1 8 - 0 8 2 0 1 8 - 1 0 2 0 1 8 - 1 2 2 0 1 9 - 0 2 2 0 1 9 - 0 4 2 0 1 9 - 0 6 2 0 1 9 - 0 8 2 0 1 9 - 1 0 2 0 1 9 - 1 2 2 0 2 0 - 0 2 2 0 2 0 - 0 4 2 0 2 0 - 0 6 2 0 2 0 - 0 8 2 0 2 0 - 1 0 2 0 2 0 - 1 2 2 0 2 1 - 0 2 2 0 2 1 - 0 4 2 0 2 1 - 0 6 2 0 2 1 - 0 8 1 10 100 1 k 10 k 1 2 3 45 / r / CBTS _ Stream / r / greatawakening / v / GreatAwakening / v / QRVoat / v / news / s / QStorm / s / QPatriots / s / GreatAwakening / s / News ( b ) Comments Figure 1 : Number of ( a ) submissions and ( b ) comments per day on Reddit , Voat , and Poal . we notice that the Reddit bans did not affect Voat’s baseline , but that is not the case for / s / News , which appears to be more active after Voat shuts down . 5 . 2 User Activity Taking a closer look at user activity , we plot the unique number of submitters and commenters per day on Voat / v / news , and QAnon subverses , along with Poal / s / News and QAnon subverses in Figure 2 . We omit Reddit data from this figure for better visualization . Again , the vertical red lines in the figure indicate the events listed in Table 1 . Examining QAnon subverses on Voat ( Voat Q in Figure2 ( a ) ) , we note that the range of daily submitters before September 11 , 2018 , is between 1 and 13 . Immediately after the last QAnon subreddit was banned on September 12 , 2018 , the average number of daily submitters on Voat QAnon subverses is 43 . 2 . Notably , the baseline subverse / v / news receives more popularity after the Reddit bans , but it does not last for too long . Overall , the average number of / v / news submitters was 42 . 7 before the Reddit bans and rose to 43 . 2 after the bans , indicating virtually no change . Turning to previous work [ 36 ] , it is unsurprising that / v / news receives virtually no additional activity since many fringe communities on Voat refrain from engaging with other communities . Overall , we notice a peak in / v / news activity between May 2020 and October 2020 . This is due to new and many old users discussing various news and events taking place during that period , including gun control in Canada [ 37 ] , the COVID lockdowns , Donald Trump denying links to Venezuela armed raid by US citizens [ 32 ] , the George Floyd Black Lives Matter protests [ 14 ] , etc . Considering the worldwide contemporaneous lockdowns , it is not unexpected to observe a peak in user activity during that period . Closer to the end of Voat in December 2020 , contrary to our expectations , the numbers of both unique submitters and commenters do not change much . More specifically , we expected “lurkers” to show up and comment on their plans of finding a new platform , but this was not the case . On the contrary , the activity of unique submitters and commenters per day on both QAnon and baseline subverses on Poal peaked immediately on December 21 , 2020 , 9 2 0 1 7 - 1 0 2 0 1 7 - 1 2 2 0 1 8 - 0 2 2 0 1 8 - 0 4 2 0 1 8 - 0 6 2 0 1 8 - 0 8 2 0 1 8 - 1 0 2 0 1 8 - 1 2 2 0 1 9 - 0 2 2 0 1 9 - 0 4 2 0 1 9 - 0 6 2 0 1 9 - 0 8 2 0 1 9 - 1 0 2 0 1 9 - 1 2 2 0 2 0 - 0 2 2 0 2 0 - 0 4 2 0 2 0 - 0 6 2 0 2 0 - 0 8 2 0 2 0 - 1 0 2 0 2 0 - 1 2 2 0 2 1 - 0 2 2 0 2 1 - 0 4 2 0 2 1 - 0 6 2 0 2 1 - 0 8 0 20 40 60 80 100 1 2 3 45 Voat News Voat Q Poal News Poal Q ( a ) Submitters 2 0 1 7 - 1 0 2 0 1 7 - 1 2 2 0 1 8 - 0 2 2 0 1 8 - 0 4 2 0 1 8 - 0 6 2 0 1 8 - 0 8 2 0 1 8 - 1 0 2 0 1 8 - 1 2 2 0 1 9 - 0 2 2 0 1 9 - 0 4 2 0 1 9 - 0 6 2 0 1 9 - 0 8 2 0 1 9 - 1 0 2 0 1 9 - 1 2 2 0 2 0 - 0 2 2 0 2 0 - 0 4 2 0 2 0 - 0 6 2 0 2 0 - 0 8 2 0 2 0 - 1 0 2 0 2 0 - 1 2 2 0 2 1 - 0 2 2 0 2 1 - 0 4 2 0 2 1 - 0 6 2 0 2 1 - 0 8 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 1 2 3 45 Voat News Voat Q Poal News Poal Q ( b ) Commenters Figure 2 : Number of ( a ) submitters and ( b ) commenters per day on Voat and Poal . when the Voat co - founder announced the Voat shutdown . Specifically , the average number of submitters on the Poal QAnon subverses was 4 . 8 and peaks at 239 . 7 per day after the announcement , while on / s / News , the average unique submitters per day were 4 . 8 and after the Voat shutdown , it rises to 25 . 3 . Key findings . Following the final Reddit ban , Voat experienced a significant increase in daily submitters on its QAnon subverses , suggesting a migration of QAnon adherents to Voat as an alternative platform . The baseline subverse on Voat , / v / news , also saw a slight increase in activity after the Reddit bans , but this boost was short - lived , indicating limited engagement between fringe communities on Voat . Despite the anticipated increase in activity and discussions on Voat as its shutdown approached , there was not a significant change in the number of unique submitters and commenters . In contrast , on Poal , both QAnon and baseline subverses experienced a peak in activity immediately after the Voat shutdown announcement , with a substantial increase in daily submitters on Poal QAnon subverses . That activity on Poal immediately after the Voat shutdown shows different signs compared to the Reddit banning / r / CBTS _ Stream . More specifically , users moved from / r / CBTS _ Stream to / r / greatawakening instead of / v / GreatAwakening , showing clear signs that users preferred to stay in a platform that would likely ban them in the future , than moving to a different one . Username intersection . Motivated by our findings in Figure 2 above , we now compare the usernames across all three platforms to detect any exact matches . In Figure 2 ( a ) we observe a huge peak in new submitters on Poal on the day Voat announced the shutdown ( event 4 in Table 1 ) . We hypothesize that many users from Voat rushed to register a new account on Poal since the platform was mentioned frequently after the Voat shutdown announcement , and Poal is a social network whose features and functionalities are similar to Voat . For this analysis , we plot the case insensitive , identical username intersection Venn diagram in Figure 3 . In addition , to protect the anonymity of users , we encrypt all usernames across all three platforms using the hash function SHA256 . 8 This guarantees that we do not track raw usernames across platforms but rather demonstrate the existence of identical usernames across them . 8 https : / / docs . python . org / 3 / library / hashlib . html 10 31 , 774 13 , 390 1 , 302 1 , 989 26 862 108 Reddit Voat Poal Figure 3 : Intersection of usernames on Reddit , Voat , and Poal QAnon communities . Overall , we find 108 usernames that are exactly the same across all three platforms . Also , Reddit and Voat share 1 . 3 K usernames ( 9 . 7 % of Voat QAnon engaging users ) , while Voat and Poal share 862 usernames ( 43 . 3 % of Poal QAnon engaging users ) . Although the username matches are not significant between Reddit and Voat ( 9 . 7 % ) , it is clear that Poal attracted a noteworthy amount of users from Voat ( more than 43 % match ) . This analysis indicates that about half of the users on Poal had an account on Voat . Notably , our findings are aligned with previous work [ 26 ] that shows how activity on new platforms or the appearance of newcomers decreases after a ban . More specifically , looking at the face value of the numbers in Figure 3 , if we consider that Reddit’s QAnon user base was 31 . 7 K , then we see that Voat only had the 42 . 1 % of QAnon users . Then , after the Voat shutdown , we observe that Poal only managed to attract 14 . 8 % of users compared to its predecessor , Voat . Key findings . There is a significant overlap of usernames between Voat and Poal , indicating migration of Voat users to Poal . The overlap of usernames between Reddit and Voat is less significant , suggesting a lower level of migration between these platforms . The analysis also highlights that approximately half of the users on Poal previously had an account on Voat . Overall , the findings demonstrate a decrease in QAnon communities with each ban or shutdown . 6 Topic evolution on Reddit , Voat , and Poal Following the analysis in Section 5 . 1 , we investigate how the discussions on Reddit , Voat , and Poal changed through - out the period of the Reddit bans and the Voat shutdown announcement . To do so , we perform bigram and statis - tical analysis . For Reddit , we perform bigram analysis on the two specific communities ; / r / CBTS _ Stream and / r / greatawakening . The first QAnon banned subreddit / r / CBTS _ Stream was banned on March 14 , 2018 but our dataset spans until 28 February 2018 , when the subreddit was quarantined and the activity on the subreddit ceased . Hence , for our Reddit bigram analysis we consider data from / r / CBTS _ Stream five days before it was quarantined ( between 23 Feb and 28 Feb , 2018 ) . For / r / greatawakening we consider data five days after / r / CBTS _ Stream gets banned ( between 14 Mar and 19 Mar , 2018 ) and five days before / r / greatawakening got quarantined ( between 14 Aug and 19 Aug , 2018 ) . For Voat , we consider data five days before the Voat shutdown announcement ( between Dec 16 and Dec 20 ) and data five days after the announcement ( between Dec 21 and Dec 25 ) . For Poal , we consider data five days before the Voat shutdown announcement ( between Dec 16 and Dec 20 ) and data ten days after the announcement ( between Dec 21 and Dec 30 ) . We extend the data we use for Poal since we want to capture discussions possibly related to 11 Voat shutting down and users being active on Poal after migrating there . We only focus on the last five days of each community being banned as we want to investigate whether users discussed alternative social networks close to the end of the lifetime of their existing communities . For the purpose of our analysis , we initially employed LDA and BERT topic modeling methods . However , due to the limited amount of available content during the five - day periods under investigation , these approaches did not yield coherent results in capturing shifts in topic discussions . Consequently , we opted to utilize a bigram analysis approach , complemented by a qualitative analysis through manual inspection of posts containing specific bigrams . Inspired by the methodology employed by Gauthier et al [ 12 ] , who conducted LDA topic - guided thematic anal - ysis on Reddit posts , we employed bigrams as thematic codes within a set of posts . Specifically , we adopted a purposeful sampling approach [ 12 ] to select posts that included specific bigrams . In the context of this study , when referring to manually inspecting our dataset , we are specifically referring to the following process . Firstly , we ran - domly select a subset , typically half , of the posts containing specific bigrams ( codes ) . Due to resource constraints in reviewing extensive posts , often numbering in the hundreds , we made the decision to focus our review on a rep - resentative portion of each set ( half , unless stated otherwise ) . Subsequently , the lead author examined the set of posts mentioning a given bigram , to identify meaningful concepts within the sentences containing the bigram ( while disregarding the remainder of the post ) . These posts would then be subjected to extensive discussion among all co - authors to uncover connections and patterns based on knowledge about the conspiracy theory , previous works , and knowledge about the events and happenings of the date of these posts . CBTS before quarantine GA after CBTS ban GA before quarantine Bigram f Bigram f Bigram f q post 151 deep state 122 q post 65 deep state 143 q post 96 red shoe 46 false flag 81 social media 87 q drop 31 god bless 76 bot action 65 security clearance 27 social media 71 action perfromed 65 wwg wga 26 red pill 67 cbts stream 61 anderson cooper 26 dr corsi 66 free speech 38 deep state 24 broward county 65 thank q 34 q said 22 free speech 64 trust plan 33 john brennan 22 school shooting 63 white hat 32 president trump 21 Table 3 : Popular bigrams on Reddit / r / CBTS _ Stream and / r / greatawakening five days before and five days after being quaran - tined . 6 . 1 What are Reddit Users Discussing ? In Table 3 , we list the ten most popular bigrams on : / r / CBTS _ Stream five days before it was quarantined ( CBTS before quarantine on the table ) ; / r / greatawakening five days after / r / CBTS _ Stream was banned ( GA after CBTS ban on the table ) ; and / r / greatawakening five days before it was quarantined ( GA before quarantine on the table ) . Looking at the / r / CBTS _ Stream bigrams five days before it was quarantined , we observe that discussions mostly revolve around QAnon topics ( “q post” mentioned 151 times , deep state 143 times ) . To better understand the discussions of “false flag” we perform qualitative analysis by manually inspecting all 81 posts that include this bigram . We find that users used “false flag” as “false warning” regarding the “deep state” passing a law regarding gun control , due to a “school shooting” that happened in “Broward county” that week [ 15 ] . Similarly , manual inspection shows that the majority of the “social medium” posts refer to the school shooting event , due to users discussing how unfortunate students began broadcasting the horror on social media . On other “social media” posts , many users where discussing the ban of users from social media . Lastly , “dr corsi” refers to Jerome Corsi , a conspiracy theorist author and academic [ 42 ] . Overall , at this point we do not detect clear signs that users were aware that their community would shut down . Moving on to the second part of our analysis , we look into the most popular bigrams in / r / greatawakening for 12 the first five days after / r / CBTS _ Stream is baned ( GA after CBTS ban on the table ) . This time , discussions revolve a lot around users blaming the “deep state” about the censorship of “social media” by banning their “cbts stream” subreddit . They refer to “free speech” being censored with this “action performed . ” We manually inspect all 87 posts that include the “social medium” bigram to investigate whether users start discussing alternatives , now that they know that Reddit is taking action on their subreddits . Only , 1 post of this subset discuss alternatives including Voat . We list those comments here : “ “I’ve tried to go over to Voat and I just don’t like it [ . . . ] but I’m not a social media user . ” ” On the other hand , users insist to “thank q” and “trust the plan . ” The posts that refer to alternatives is extremely low , showing that Reddit users do not really organize a migration at this point , even after their most popular com - munity was banned . During the last active days of / r / greatawakening , it seems like the users there were oblivious to their imminent quarantine , as all topics of discussion point to regular QAnon movement themes . For completeness , the “red shoes” posts refer to the conspiracy around elites who drink the blood of children and use their skin to make shoes , hence hinting to other elites that they are pedophiles too , by wearing red shoes [ 11 ] . Key Findings . Overall , our Reddit bigram analysis does not provide strong signs that users were suspected their imminent ban . On the contrary , most discussions seem to be expected expected QAnon topics based on previ - ous work [ 39 , 40 ] , like “deep state , ” “q post , ” “red pill , ” and “free speech . ” This analysis demonstrates that / r / CBTS _ Stream quarantine and ban were sudden , so users show no signs of organization towards choosing an alternative . Surprisingly , even after / r / CBTS _ Stream is banned , there no discussion regarding alternatives . Users focus on expressing their frustration regarding the bans , but are not really interested in finding an alternative . Lastly , during the last days of / r / greatawakening , users once more show no signs of suspicion regarding the upcoming ban . Overall , although this analysis shows that popular discussion analysis does not show any sign of organization regarding alternative sites , this does not definely state that there was no organization whatsoever . In this analysis we only study the popular discussions close to the dates of bans , which so far demonstrates only the frustration of users with social media moderation actions . Later on , in Section 6 . 4 we perform a deeper analysis into the mentions of Reddit alternatives in an effort to understand whether any action of an alternative platform took place . Voat Q before Voat Q after Voat News before Voat News after Bigram f Bigram f Bigram f Bigram f president trump 207 zee bad 214 account deleted 33 stimulus bill 5 martial law 205 bad jew 211 covid vaccine 15 still beating 5 deep state 199 merry christmas 195 prc government 13 comment section 5 supreme court 131 god bless 128 united state 11 covid vaccine 4 united state 131 wwg wga 90 covid death 9 account deleted 4 john robert 127 q post 78 san fransisco 9 election fraud 4 election fraud 120 gonna miss 77 trade fraud 7 opinion analysis 4 lin wood 115 greatawakening win 71 opinion analysis 6 analysis misleading 4 fake news 105 q larp 62 analysis misleading 6 misleading title 4 q post 104 free speech 55 misleading title 6 open source 4 Table 4 : Popular bigrams on Voat QAnon subverses and news subverse five days before and five days after the Voat shutdown announcement . 6 . 2 What are Voat Users Discussing ? In Table 4 , we list the ten most popular bigrams on / v / GreatAwakening , / v / QRVoat , and / v / news before ( Voat Q before and Voat News before on the table ) , and after ( Voat Q after and Voat News after on the table ) the Voat shutdown announcement ( Dec 16 - Dec 20 ) . The discussions before the Voat shutdown announcement focus on expected QAnon topics based on previous work [ 39 , 40 ] , like “president trump , ” “martial law , ” “deep state , ” “election fraud , ” and “q posts . ” 13 After the announcement , we notice that the most popular bigram on QAnon subverses is “zee bad . ” Zee in QAnon communities is a short for Nazi . The term zee tends to be very popular in QAnon discussions as adherents use it to describe anyone who is opposed to their ideas . This is quite surprising and contradictory , considering that the conspiracy is a far - right one . We manually inspect our dataset to explain the meaning behind these popular bigrams . In addition to “zee bad , ” users also refer to “bad jew” as they blame Jews along with Nazis for taking down Voat . The terms “merry christmas , ” “god bless , ” “wwg wga , ” and “gonna miss” are parts of many posts sharing wishes and last goodbyes with their comrades before the shutdown . Notably , “q post” does not have the same meaning on Voat Q after as the one found on Voat Q before . The “q post” term on Voat Q before on the table refers to actual Q drops , whereas later use of the term on Voat also refers to the action of Q posting on Voat to tell users where to go , as Q “supposedly” recommended users to migrate to Voat / v / QRVoat after the Reddit bans . More specifically , many users expect Q to post on Voat or other platforms to let them know where they should go , as we find many posts explaining : “Q will post on here , ” “Wait for Q to post [ . . . ] Q recommended QRV . ” The term “q larp” stands for Q Live Action Role Playing . Previous work [ 40 ] explains that this term was used to demonstrate that many adherents started losing faith in Q , explaining that Q is just role - playing with them . A manual examination of our dataset aligns with the findings of this study [ 40 ] . More specifically , users that are angry with Voat shutting down explain : “Q - LARP is a proven jewish hoax , ” “Q - LARP is entirely owned by jews , ” “Q - LARP exists to create an Orwellian narrative about the bad people being arrested , ” and many more . Although the users that agree with this narrative are but a handful , they created enough content to achieve the top ten most popular bigrams , trying to convince their compatriots that Q will not come to save them now . Finally , the term “greatawakening win” refers to the Voat alternative forum GA . win , and “free speech” appears when users discuss other Voat alternatives like Poal , Parler , and Gab . Turning our attention to Voat / v / news , we notice that , before the shutdown announcement , users discussed COVID , the government , the US , fraud , and misleading news . After the announcement , discussions are mostly similar , except they include “open source” ( referring to alternative social networks ) and “still beating” ( referring to Voat being alive still ) . Key Findings . In this section , we looked into the most popular bigrams and we manually inspected hundreds of posts referring to these bigrams . Similarly to Reddit , we notice that users mostly focus on expressing their frustration with their platform going down . The major difference with Reddit in this analysis , is that Voat users immediately started discussing alternatives after Voat announced its shut down . Also , we see that the discussions around “q post” changes meaning between Voat Q before and Voat Q after , as users expect Q to post on Voat to tell them where to go , as they did before , when Reddit started moderating their subreddits . Overall , this analysis demonstrates that once users knew definitevely that their communities would go down , they tried to organize their migration , discussing alternatives . On the other hand , Reddit users , decided to simply move to another subreddt ( / r / greatawakening ) clinging on Reddit for as long as they could , showing no signs of organization regarding finding an alternative . Poal Q before Poal Q after Poal News before Poal News after Bigram f Bigram f Bigram f Bigram f president trump 43 merry christmas 111 covid vaccine 5 covid death 9 supreme court 42 president trump 86 robert f 4 merry christmas 9 election fraud 23 election fraud 33 f kennedy 4 covid vaccine 8 dominion voting 20 united state 32 kennedy jr 4 immune system 8 covid vaccine 15 deep state 26 julian assange 4 news network 8 white house 15 electoral college 25 credit score 3 deep state 7 adverse reaction 15 insurrection act 23 billion dollar 3 common cold 7 live tv 14 jan th 23 bill gate 3 america news 7 deep state 14 white house 22 gate vaccine 3 white people 6 insurrection act 13 lin wood 20 gate foundation 3 voat shut 3 Table 5 : Popular bigrams on Poal QAnon subverses and news subverse five days before and five days after the Voat shutdown announcement . 14 6 . 3 What are Poal Users Discussing ? On Poal , we find expected QAnon discussions regarding Trump , election fraud , and the deep state on QAnon sub - verses before the Voat shutdown announcement . We also find posts referring to “adverse reaction” and “insurrection act . ” Manual inspection of the data posted between December 16 and December 20 , 2020 , on Poal QAnon sub - verses , indicates that “adverse reaction” refers to COVID vaccines . The bigram “insurrection act” refers to posts that question whether Donald Trump should invoke the Insurrection Act to arrest the ones responsible for the election fraud , for example : “We are out of plays here . There is only ONE option left , and that is invoke the Insurrection Act [ . . . ] to get our Republic back . ” After the Voat shutdown announcement , the most popular bigram is “merry christmas ; ” these wishes come from old users and newcomers alike . Other topics include expected QAnon discussions around “president trump , ” “election fraud , ” “united state , ” and “deep state . ” Disturbingly , the term “ jan th ” appears among the top ten , with 23 mentions . Manual inspection of our dataset indicates that this is due to users discussing plans for January 6 , 2021 attack on the US Capitol . We note that the data used for Poal Q after in Table 5 spans between December 25 , 2020 , and December 30 , 2020 . Discussions regarding the January 6th US Capitol attack shown here are premeditation and planning discussions since these discussions took place before the attack . We quote some disturbing comments regarding the planning of the January 6 US Capitol attack here , as posted by users before the attack : “ I thought , it wouldn’t start until after Jan 6th , but now it is clear that things are too broken , there seems to be no point in waiting that long any more . ” “ Trump wants a MASSIVE protest in DC on Jan 6 , 2021 . ” “ Jan 6th D . C . , Capitol Hill is a party / rally no PATRIOT is going to want to miss ! ” “ President Trump Calls For Protest in DC on Jan 6 . , Says ‘Be There , Will Be Wild’ ” “ Jan 6th will be D - Day . ” Regarding Poal / s / News , discussions focus on COVID and the Bill Gates conspiracy [ 22 ] as the bigrams “billion dollar , ” “gate vaccine , ” “bill gate , ” and “gate foundation” feature prominently . Other discussions focus on John F . Kennedy and his son , Kennedy Jr . , not surprising as QAnon adherents believe that Kennedy Jr . , is alive and would be the next US Vice - president , along with Donald Trump as President [ 44 ] . Users also refer to the founder of WikiLeaks , Julian Assange . Overall , we find that discussions on / s / News tend to be very conspiratory . After the Voat shutdown announcement , discussions focus on COVID , Christmas wishes , American news , and white people . Although in small frequency , the Voat shutdown event also appears in the top ten most popular bigrams on Poal / s / News . Key Findings . This part of our analysis exposed Poal as a platform that hosts potentially dangerous individuals . Poal users , of which half are Voat migrands , discussed and organized the January 6th insurrection to the US Capitol before it took place . Importantly , we find that the / s / News subverse is not as active as the QAnon - focused subverses on Poal . Similarly to Voat [ 36 ] , we show that Poal is a platform that hosts controversial discussions and communities . 6 . 4 Mentions to Reddit Alternatives . We recognize that the popular bigram analysis on Reddit did not yield valuable findings , other than the realization that users were frustrated with the moderation actions of Reddit against their subreddits . Our work focuses on un - derstanding the differences between Reddit - to - Voat and Voat - to - Poal QAnon - focused community migration . Hence , we dive deeper into Reddit discussions , this time longitudinally , to investigate whether Reddit users mentioned any Reddit alternatives , and when did such discussions , if any , took place . To do so , we plot the daily number of mentions to Voat , Gab , and thedonald . win over the lifetime of / r / CBTS _ Stream and / r / greatawakening on Reddit in Figure 4 ( a ) . We look specifically for these social networks as they are the ones we came across very often when we manually inspected our dataset for the analysis depicted in Section 6 , above . Also , these social networks showed up in discussions when we analyzed posts during manual inspection of our dataset for our bigram analysis above . In Figure 4 ( a ) , we observer that Voat was the social network most discussed on Reddit , with 1 , 211 mentions . Gab comes second with 708 mentions and the _ donald only has 38 . Importantly , we 15 1 1 / 1 7 1 2 / 1 7 0 1 / 1 8 0 2 / 1 8 0 3 / 1 8 0 4 / 1 8 0 5 / 1 8 0 6 / 1 8 0 7 / 1 8 0 8 / 1 8 0 9 / 1 8 1 10 100 1 2 3 Voat Gab the _ donald . win ( a ) Reddit 1 1 / 1 7 0 1 / 1 8 0 3 / 1 8 0 5 / 1 8 0 7 / 1 8 0 9 / 1 8 1 1 / 1 8 0 1 / 1 9 0 3 / 1 9 0 5 / 1 9 0 7 / 1 9 0 9 / 1 9 1 1 / 1 9 0 1 / 2 0 0 3 / 2 0 0 5 / 2 0 0 7 / 2 0 0 9 / 2 0 1 1 / 2 0 1 10 100 1 2 3 4 Gab Parler Poal the _ donald . win greatawakening . win ( b ) Voat Figure 4 : Number of alternative social networks mentioned on ( a ) Reddit and ( b ) Voat QAnon subreddits and subverses , respectively . immediately observe two peaks on Voat mentions on Reddit subverses : one on 13 February 2018 with 187 mentions , and another on 14 March 2018 with 102 mentions . To understand the discussions around Voat on the fist peak , we select and read all these posts to qualitatevly discuss the patterns and discussions of these posts . We find that about half of these posts express the frustration of the / r / CBTS _ Stream users towards a moderator that deleted many posts . We list some of these posts here and we remove the username of the Reddit moderator to respect their privacy : “ 100 + posts are being REMOVED EVERY DAY ! Our new site is voat . co ” “ After a year of subverting voat and deleting countless posts trying to Sasquatch Pizzagate [ Reddit moderator username ] has finally been outed ” “ [ . . . ] If there‘s a legit instance of a mod being “hacked , ” let us know about it . [ . . . ] ( FUCK YOU [ Reddit moderator username ! ] ) ” Reading through all these posts , it is apparent that / r / CBTS _ Stream moderators started deleting posts in an effort to abide with the Reddit policies . The reasoning behind the moderators deleting posts can only come down to specu - lation due to not having proof of the reason the moderators started deleting posts one month before / r / CBTS _ Stream was banned . What is clear is that / r / CBTS _ Stream users were not happy with this , and many of them suggesting Voat as an alternating . The second peak on Voat mentions shows up on the day that / r / CBTS _ Stream was actually banned . We collect all 102 posts that refer to Voat on that day for qualitative analysis , finding that the overwhealming majority of them were duplicates . More specifically , the same two posts seem to be posted by the same users , during various intervals of the day : “Let’s go to voat ! ! Fuck reddit . ” and “Post this link everywhere : voat . co / v / greatawakening . ” The 20 posts that were not duplicates , discuss their frustration with Reddit , and ask whether Voat is a good alternative . Key findings . This analysis reveals that Voat was the most discussed alternative social network , with Gab being the second most mentioned and the _ donald . win having fewer mentions . Two peaks in Voat mentions on Reddit were observed , coinciding with frustrations expressed by / r / CBTS _ Stream users towards a moderator who deleted numerous posts , which led to suggestions of Voat as an alternative platform . The second peak in Voat mentions 16 occurred on the day / r / CBTS _ Stream was banned , with many duplicate posts expressing frustration with Reddit and suggesting Voat as a potential alternative . 6 . 5 Mentions to Voat Alternatives . In our bigram analysis above and via qualitative analysis of posts , we found many Voat posts referring to other alternative social networks . Motivated by that analysis , we plot the daily number of mentions of Poal , Gab , Parler , thedonald . win , and greatawakening . win ( referred to as GA . win henceforth ) over the last six months in Figure 4 . We select these five social networks as they are the ones that appear most frequently when we manually inspect our dataset . Overall , Gab was mentioned 5 . 2 K times , Parler was mentioned 1 . 3 K times , Poal was mentioned 621 times , thedonald . win 1 . 2 K times , and GA . win 181 times . Although Gab is the most popular social network mentioned on Voat , it only rarely appears during the final days of Voat . Notably , Poal is the most popular social network mentioned in comments during the last week of Voat , with 79 mentions on December 24 , 2020 , alone . During the lifetime of Voat , the other social networks were discussed in general or linked for occasional discussion ; however , only Poal and GA . win take the spotlight after the shutdown announcement . To better understand what the Voat submissions and comments that mention Poal are about , we collect the posts that refer to Poal during the last days of Voat and find the most popular bigrams . The most popular bigrams on posts mentioning Poal include : “open source , ” “destroy voat , ” “voat try , ” “soap box , ” “source decentralized , ” “blog dias - porafoundation , ” “buddypress category , ” “user signin , ” “try friend , ” “free speech , ” and “going poal . ” Although many users believe that Poal was created to “destroy” Voat , many others support moving to Poal . More specifically , many users mention that they already created an account on Poal and explain how the “user signin” process works , how Poal supports “free speech , ” etc . In addition , we manually investigate our dataset and find many posts encouraging users to join Poal : “ Wanted to encourage everyone to head over to poal . It feels like home . ” “ HEY GUYS LET’S ALL MIGRATE TO POAL ! ” “ POAL the Place to Go ! ” Key findings . The analysis of Voat posts shows that Gab was the most mentioned social network overall , but its mentions decreased towards the end of Voat’s lifetime . Poal became the most popularly mentioned social network during the last week of Voat . Closer analysis of posts mentioning Poal revealed popular bigrams such as " open source , " " destroy voat , " and " free speech , " indicating both support and skepticism towards Poal . 1 . 00 0 . 75 0 . 50 0 . 25 0 . 00 0 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 75 1 . 00 Sentiment 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 C D F Voat Gab ( a ) Reddit 1 . 00 0 . 75 0 . 50 0 . 25 0 . 00 0 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 75 1 . 00 Sentiment 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 C D F Poal Parler Gab GA . win ( b ) Voat Figure 5 : Cumulative Distribution Function plots of ( a ) the compound sentiment value on Reddit discussions mentioning Voat and Gab , and ( b ) on Reddit discussions mentioning Poal , Parler , Gab , and GA . win . 17 7 Sentiment Analysis Taking note of how many Reddit users pushed for their fellow QAnon adherents to follow them on Voat , and from how Voat users urged their fellow “patriots” to join them on Poal ( or other alternatives ) , we perform sentiment analysis to understand the sentiment of Reddit and Voat users towards the suggested alternative platforms . We decide to use sentiment analysis for this part of our study since users discussing alternatives is a similar concept to users rating products , on which sentiment detection performs well [ 33 ] . To this end , we employ a pre - trained VADER sentiment detection model [ 27 ] to detect the sentiment of posts mentioning other social networks . The model takes as input a string and responds with four values . neg indicates negative sentiment and ranges between 0 to + 1 , with 0 being the lowest indication of negative sentiment and + 1 being the highest indication of negative sentiment . VADER returns the same range for pos , which indicates positive sentiment , and neut , which indicates neutrality . In addition to these three values , VADER also returns comp , which stands for compound . The compound score is computed by summing the neut , pos , and neg scores of each word in the lexicon of the string and then normalizes it to be within the range of − 1 ( extremely negative ) and + 1 ( extremely positive ) . This value , compound , is the one we rely on to determine whether a post has positive or negative sentiment . For Reddit , we take all the posts that mention Voat and Gab thoughout the lifetime of Reddit . Given how alternative social network discussion or Reddit only blooms after / r / CBTS _ Stream moderators started removing content , we don’t think there is a need to investigate specific periods of sentiment regarding alternatives on Reddit . We ommit sentiment analysis or the _ donald mentions on Reddit since it was only mentioned 38 times , usually to simply refer users to a discussion that took place there , and not to suggest it as an alternative . For posts that mention more than one social network , we break down the posts into sentences and only send to VADER for analysis the sentence that mentions one alternative social network . To clean our sentimen analysis subset , we clean posts that have no sentiment , like posts that simply post a link to Voat . This results to 546 posts mentioning Voat , and 405 mentioning Gab . We feed these posts to VADER and use the compound score to plot the Cumulative Distribution Function ( CDF ) in Figure 5 ( a ) . Overall , about 42 . 7 % ( 233 posts ) of all the posts that mention Voat have positive sentiment polarity , with 25 . 5 % ( 139 posts ) of them having strong positive sentiment polarity towards Voat ( compound > 0 . 5 ) . 33 . 7 % ( 184 posts ) of the posts mentioning Voat seem to have negative sentiment polarity ( compound < 0 ) . Regarding posts mentioning Gab , 49 . 4 % ( 200 posts ) show positive polarity , with 30 % ( 125 posts ) having strongly positive polarity . 34 % of the posts ( 138 ) depict a negative sentiment polarity towards Gab . Although Gab seems to be the social network that Reddit users discussed with more positive sentiment , at the same time , it is the one that was discussed with the most negative sentiment on Reddit . Manual inspection of half of all the positive and negative sentiment posts on Voat and Gab , that were selected randomly , did not yield any definitive reason regarding he preference of users on one specific alternative . In an attempt to better understand the findings of Figure 5 ( a ) , we also use the Kolmogorov - Smirnov test [ 35 ] to detect whether the distributions are statistically significant . We can not reject the null hypothesis for the distributions between Gab and Voat , which means that the two distributions are not significantly different ( p = 0 . 23 ) . For Voat , we analyze posts that mention Poal , Parler , Gab , and GA . win after the announcement that Voat will shut down ( December 21 , 2020 ) . We focus on these four social networks as they are the ones that came up more often when we manually inspected our QAnon community dataset during the last days of Voat . Following the same parsing mentioned above , we end up with 118 posts that mention Poal , 17 posts for Parler , 49 for Gab , and 85 for GA . win that are used to plot the CDF of the compound value in Figure 5 ( b ) . Overall , 45 . 7 % of the posts ( 54 posts ) that mention Poal have positive sentiment polarity . More specifically , 28 . 8 % of them ( 34 posts ) have compound scores greater than + 0 . 5 , which indicates that those posts are very likely to show a strong positive sentiment polarity towards Poal . On the other end of the spectrum , only ∼ 8 % of the posts ( 10 ) indicate a strong negative sentiment towards Poal ( meaning a negative sentiment score smaller than − 0 . 5 ) . Regarding Parler , 58 . 8 % of the posts indicate strong positive sentiment polarity ( 10 posts achieve a compound value greater than + 0 . 5 ) , and 17 . 6 % of them exhibit negative polarity ( 3 posts ) . 40 . 8 % of the posts that mention Gab have strong positive sentiment polarity ( 20 posts ) , and 24 . 5 % of them exhibit a negative one ( 12 posts ) . Lastly , 27 % of the posts on Voat that mention GA . win achieve strong positive sentiment polarity ( 23 ) , and 30 . 5 % of them ( 26 ) have a negative one . Although Parler has the highest percentage of posts that indicate positive sentiment , Poal was the social network 18 mentioned the most on Voat during its final days . Again , we perform the Kolmogorov - Smirnov test to detect whether the distributions are statistically significant . We reject the null hypothesis for the distributions between Poal and Par - ler , Poal and Gab , Gab and GA . win , and Parler and GA . win . That means that the four distributions are significantly different ; they have no similarity ( p = < 0 . 001 ) . The distributions of Poal and GA . win are not significantly different , so we cannot reject the null hypothesis ( p = 0 . 5 ) . The same is true for the distributions of Parler and Gab ( p = 0 . 18 ) . Key findings . In sentiment analysis of Reddit posts mentioning alternative social networks , Voat received both positive and negative sentiment with Gab showing both the highest positive sentiment and the highest negative sentiment . The two distributions are not significantly different which is a sign that users liked Gab as an alternative as much as they prefered Voat . On the other hand , Voat was mentioned more often , with more prompts to fellow users to join Voat . The sentiment analysis of Voat posts mentioning Poal , Parler , Gab , and GA . win after Voat’s shutdown announcement revealed that Poal received the most mentions on Voat . Parler had the highest percentage of posts indicating positive sentiment on Voat . The distributions of sentiment towards the mentioned alternatives were found to be significantly different from each other , except for Poal and GA . win , as well as Parler and Gab . 8 Discussion This study presents a comprehensive analysis of the shutdown crisis in QAnon - focused subverses on Voat , utilizing a mixed - methods approach and examining multiple platforms . Our analysis focuses on the migration patterns of Reddit users to Voat following Reddit bans , as well as the subsequent migration of Voat users to Poal after the announcement of Voat’s shutdown . In this section , we delve deeper into our findings , emphasizing the significance of studying fringe platforms like Poal , highlighting the differences between the Reddit - to - Voat and Voat - to - Poal migrations , and exploring the implications of deplatforming . Furthermore , we discuss potential future research directions and acknowledge the limitations of our study . 8 . 1 Why study Poal ? Here , we attempt to emphasize the importance of studying Poal , a social network similar to Reddit and Voat . As the first study to investigate Poal , we raise questions about its status as a fringe platform and its relevance to the research community . Our findings indicate that a substantial number of users from Voat’s QAnon - focused subverses migrated to Poal , resulting in a significant shift in the QAnon user base . Considering the contentious nature of the QAnon community and the presence of users discussing controversial topics on Poal , we argue that Poal has emerged as the new Voat , characterized by echo chambers and potentially harmful communities . Notably , our research provides evidence that users on Poal were involved in organizing the January 6th insurrection at the US Capitol prior to the event , highlighting the platform’s association with dangerous individuals . These findings highlight the need for attention towards platforms like Poal and their potential implications . Additionally , our analysis reveals significant similarities between Poal and Voat in terms of subverse activity , as highlighted in a previous study [ 36 ] . Specifically , baseline subverses on Poal exhibit much lower levels of activity compared to QAnon - focused subverses . While our current study does not explore other communities on Poal , other than QAnon - focused and / s / News , we strongly suspect that other banned and controversial communities have sought refuge there . Considering that the most active community on Voat , namely / v / QRVoat , suggested Poal as an alternative , it is highly plausible that other Voat communities , such as " fatpeoplehate , " may have migrated to Poal . Previous research [ 36 , 40 ] indicates that a small subset of the most active users on Voat participate in multiple communities , suggesting that QAnon adherents may have posted in baseline subverses on Voat , urging others to migrate to Poal . Overall , Poal represents just one of many fringe communities where discussions of controversial nature occur , often with lower activity compared to mainstream platforms like Reddit . However , delving deeper into these communities is crucial for a comprehensive understanding of their content and implications , leading us to the next point of discussion . 19 8 . 2 How do the two migrations differ ? During our analysis , we observed that the migration of users from Reddit to Voat appeared less organized compared to the migration from Voat to Poal . This disparity can be attributed to the fact that Voat users were aware of the impending shutdown of their platform , providing them with ample time to plan and seek alternative platforms . On Reddit , our findings indicate that users of the / r / CBTS _ Stream subreddit were well aware that their community had been targeted by Reddit moderators due to their intense discussions and frustrations surrounding censorship on the platform . Our analysis shed light on behavior after the ban of the / r / CBTS _ Stream subreddit . We observe that the ban triggered discussions about alternative platforms on Reddit , but surprisingly , activity on Voat did not experience a significant increase following the ban . Instead , users migrated to another QAnon - focused community within Reddit , / r / greatawakening . This finding suggests that given the opportunity , users prefer to join a different community within the same platform that aligns with their beliefs , rather than migrating to an entirely new platform . The activity on Voat , on the other hand , saw a notable increase only after the last active QAnon - focused subreddit , / r / greatawakening , was banned on Reddit . Notably , this finding demonstrates findings similar to the ones of Engel et al . [ 16 ] , which discusses how users tend to cling on the same platform , given the choise , even after a ban . Furthermore , we found evidence indicating that Q , the alleged " mastermind " behind the QAnon conspiracy , recommended users to migrate to the / v / QRVoat subreddit after the ban of / r / greatawakening , as evidenced by Q’s posts on September 21 , 2018 . 9 Indeed , our analysis revealed a noteworthy phenomenon regarding the migration of Reddit users to Voat and the subsequent emergence of / v / QRVoat . We observe a sudden influx of users to / v / QRVoat immediately after the posts from Q urging users to move there . Notably , the subverse was created 10 days after / r / greatawakening was banned ( 22 September , 2018 ) , one day after Q suggested it as a place for misplaced Reddit users . We note that the posts from Q took place on 4chan , which resulted in activity on Voat , proceeding Reddit’s bans . This demonstrates how well organized and multi - platform based the conspiracy is . In addition , there was no explicit activity on Reddit specifically encouraging users to migrate to / v / QRVoat , as we only find evidence of users suggesting migration to Voat in general or / v / GreatAwakening . This indicates some level of coordination among Reddit users to migrate to Voat , although the process appears to be more chaotic compared to the migration observed on Voat . Our findings also indicate that Gab and Voat were the most popular alternatives to Reddit , but both platforms exhibited similar patterns of sentiment polarity , with no significant difference in sentiment distribution . This suggests that Reddit users did not reach a clear consensus on a preferred alternative platform , adding to the complexity of the migration dynamics . These results show how well - organized online communities can be , spanning across various social networks , making the detection and identification of controversial content more challenging . Upon the announcement of the impending shutdown of Voat , users on the platform quickly engaged in discus - sions about alternative platforms . Among the various alternatives considered , Poal emerged as the clear preference for Voat users . This finding highlights the organized nature of a premeditated migration , with a larger percentage of users moving to a specific platform . In contrast , the migration of Reddit users to alternative platforms was driven by suspicions of potential bans rather than a confirmed shutdown . Consequently , Voat users were compelled to actively discuss alternatives , knowing that their platform would soon cease to exist . 8 . 3 What are the implications of these bans ? The study of deplatforming gained attention from researchers in 2017 , approximately two years after the first Reddit bans . One of the first works on deplatforming [ 10 ] studied the effects of the Reddit affected communities finding , among other things , that users that had their communities banned either left the platform , or dramatically reduced their hate speech usage , hence communities that inherited the displaced users did not suffer an increase in hate speech . Although this sounds like good news for Reddit , other works [ 13 , 25 , 31 , 40 ] argue that displaced users often migrate to other , laxer alt - tech platforms , taking their hateful and controversial discussions to non - moderated environments . 9 https : / / qanon . pub / # t1537581143 , https : / / qanon . pub / # t1537581556 , and https : / / qanon . pub / # t1537576793 20 The implications of platform bans and their effectiveness are complex and require nuanced analysis and discus - sion . In this study , we argue that when users are displaced from one platform , they often carry the same , if not worse , problems to another platform . Our findings demonstrate that a significant portion of Voat’s pro - QAnon user base mi - grated to Poal , a previously unstudied platform about which we have limited knowledge . Disturbingly , shortly after the migration , we observe users engaging in discussions that resembled terrorist - like chatter , including conversations related to the overthrow of the US government . Deplatforming has led to an overwhelming influx of information from various sources , presenting challenges for computational social scientists . Researchers in this field now face the task of identifying and understanding diverse communities on different sites , each with its own data accessibility challenges . Moreover , the proliferation of fringe alt - right platforms has made the detection of dangerous content online more difficult , further exacerbating the issue . We recognize that mainstream platforms have a responsibility to remove controversial content and content cre - ators from their sites , as they aim to create safe and inclusive environments . By doing so , they limit the exposure of harmful content to a wider audience and impede the organization of harmful activities . However , our findings high - light the presence of unmoderated fringe communities , such as Poal , where the organization of harmful activities continues to occur . These communities operate outside the purview of mainstream platform moderation . Further - more , it is important to consider the unintended consequences of deplatforming . In some cases , deplatforming can unintentionally draw more attention to individuals or topics , leading to the Streisand effect [ 30 ] , where attempts to suppress information result in its increased dissemination . This highlights the complexity of managing controversial content and the challenges that arise from efforts to control its spread . In conclusion , assessing the long - term impact of deplatforming is a complex task due to the ever - evolving nature of online ecosystems . We encourage researchers to continue their monitoring and investigation of these ecosystems in order to comprehensively understand the effectiveness of deplatforming strategies and their outcomes . Further research and evaluation are necessary to gain a deeper understanding of the implications of deplatforming efforts . Our study aimed to contribute to this ongoing research by examining a deliberate and premeditated online migration , providing valuable insights into the dynamics of such migrations . 8 . 4 Directions for future work . Previous works discussed how online bans could cause communities to shrink in size [ 25 , 31 ] . Usually , those bans are abrupt and without warning , but that was not the case for Voat . Voat co - founder , PuttItOut , wrote to Voat users , warning them that the platform would go down . Our work differs from previous works since , among other things , we study a premeditated online migration , but there are aspects that still need to be studied . First , we do not study the differences in toxicity between Poal and Voat , as it was outside the scope of this work , but it is part of future work plans . In addition , we plan to incorporate more data in a follow - up study , combining data from Parler , Gab , and GA . win to shed light on how the QAnon community reacted to this shutdown or other events like Q re - emerging and breaking their almost two - year - long silence [ 1 ] . Q’s first return post was in June 2022 , after the January 6th attack at the US Capitol . Finally , given that Poal is very likely to attract many dangerous individuals due to the platform’s laxer moderation efforts , we encourage future work to dive deeper into Poal’s various controversial communities . 8 . 5 Limitations . In this subsection , we briefly discuss the limitations of our work . Datasets . In the early stages of this study we attempted to collect data from greatawakening . win and Gab as they also operates as Reddit , Voat , and Poal . Regarding greatawakening . win we encountered difficulties due to its operating mechanism , which provides random submissions on the infinite scroll page , hence our random crawler was ony collecting random data . In addition to this , the site stops loading further submissions after twenty end - of - page loads . That means that we were only able to collect 500 submissions ( 25 submissions in each page ) before the infinite scroll would freeze . Consequently , we were uncertain about the completeness of our dataset from greatawakening . win , due to its nature of fetching random submissions in every page load . The technical difficulties were twofold : collecting historical data and ensuring that our dataset was complete . As a result we had to omit it from the scope of the analysis and this paper . We also decide to omit a Gab dataset collection and only focus on Reddit , Voat , and Poal , since they 21 are operationally and aesthetically almost identical . Our findings show clear signs that users showed interest towards other platforms we do not study herein , like Gab , Parler , and GA . win . We acknowledge that a study that uses data from all these platforms could shed light and provide more insights around the extend of user displacement after the Reddit bans and the Voat shutdown . Username similarity analysis . In Section 5 . 2 we compare identical usernames across the three platforms . It is important to highlight the limitation of our approach : users may choose to change their usernames when migrating to different platforms . While users have the option to register with a new username , our analysis focuses solely on identical usernames across Reddit , Voat , and Poal . This limitation arises from the need to respect user privacy and from the fact that there is no ethical way of tracking whether two different usernames on different platforms use the same IP address . Therefore , we acknowledge that our analysis may not capture all instances of user migration , as some users may choose to adopt new usernames during the process . Despite this limitation , we believe that examining identical usernames provides valuable insights into the migration patterns between these platforms and allows for meaningful comparisons . Moreover , the migration success is not evaluated only through the username intersection metric , but also by looking at the variation of commenters and submitters longitudinally as showed in the analysis of Figure 2 , above . 9 Conclusion In this study we provide important insights into the migration dynamics and behaviors of QAnon adherents during times of transition across Reddit , Voat , and Poal . Our findings highlight several significant observations . Firstly , the migration patterns differed between Reddit - to - Voat and Voat - to - Poal migrations , with the latter displaying a more organized and coordinated approach , resulting in a higher percentage of users migrating to a specific platform . This suggests that advance warning of platform shutdowns enables users to better coordinate their migration efforts . Secondly , we highlight the significance of studying fringe platforms like Poal , as it attracted dangerous individuals and witnessed discussions and planning related to the January 6th , 2021 attack on the US Capitol . This demonstrates the potential for fringe communities to organize and engage in harmful activities . Lastly , the implications of these findings uncover the challenges posed by deplatforming efforts , as controversial communities disperse to alternative platforms with laxer moderation , making it more difficult to detect and address harmful content . These insights contribute to our understanding of online migration dynamics and the potential consequences of deplatforming strategies , calling for further research and evaluation to better navigate the complex landscape of online communities . Acknowledgments . This project was funded by the UK EPSRC grant EP / S022503 / 1 , which supports the Center for Doctoral Training in Cybersecurity delivered by UCL’s Departments of Computer Science , Security and Crime Science , and Science , Technology , Engineering and Public Policy . The lead author expresses their sincere gratitude to Arianna Trozze , who provided valuable feedback and proofread this manuscript with great attention to detail . References [ 1 ] Adam Gabbatt . QAnon’s ‘Q’ re - emerges on far - right message board after two years of silence . https : / / www . theguardian . com / us - news / 2022 / jun / 27 / qanon - head - posts - message - board - 8kun , 2020 . [ 2 ] Adi Robertson . Welcome to Voat : Reddit killer , troll haven , and the strange face of internet free speech . https : / / www . theverge . com / 2015 / 7 / 10 / 8924415 / voat - reddit - competitor - free - speech , 2015 . [ 3 ] S . Ali , M . H . Saeed , E . Aldreabi , J . Blackburn , E . De Cristofaro , S . Zannettou , and G . Stringhini . Understanding the effect of deplat - forming on social networks . In 13th ACM Web Science Conference 2021 , pages 187 – 195 , 2021 . [ 4 ] M . Aliapoulios , E . Bevensee , J . Blackburn , B . Bradlyn , E . De Cristofaro , G . Stringhini , and S . Zannettou . A large open dataset from the parler social network . In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media , volume 15 , pages 943 – 951 , 2021 . [ 5 ] Aljazeera . QAnon supporter gets five years for January 6 Capitol attack . https : / / www . aljazeera . com / news / 2022 / 12 / 16 / qanon - supporter - gets - five - years - for - january - 6 - capitol - attack , 2022 . 22 [ 6 ] Andrew Marantz . Reddit and the Struggle to Detoxify the Internet . https : / / www . newyorker . com / magazine / 2018 / 03 / 19 / reddit - and - the - struggle - to - detoxify - the - internet , 2018 . [ 7 ] J . Baumgartner , S . Zannettou , B . Keegan , M . Squire , and J . Blackburn . The pushshift reddit dataset . In Proceedings of the international AAAI conference on web and social media , volume 14 , pages 830 – 839 , 2020 . [ 8 ] BBC . Facebook bans QAnon conspiracy theory accounts across all platforms . https : / / www . bbc . com / news / world - us - canada - 54443878 , 2020 . [ 9 ] E . Chandrasekharan , S . Jhaver , A . Bruckman , and E . Gilbert . Quarantined ! examining the effects of a community - wide moderation intervention on reddit . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) , 29 ( 4 ) : 1 – 26 , 2022 . [ 10 ] E . Chandrasekharan , U . Pavalanathan , A . Srinivasan , A . Glynn , J . Eisenstein , and E . Gilbert . You can’t stay here : The efficacy of reddit’s 2015 ban examined through hate speech . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , 1 ( CSCW ) : 1 – 22 , 2017 . [ 11 ] B . Cooke . What is the Red Shoe Club ? Bizarre Hollywood conspiracy explored . https : / / www . hitc . com / en - gb / 2022 / 08 / 19 / what - is - the - red - shoe - club - bizarre - hollywood - conspiracy - explored / , 2022 . [ 12 ] J . W . Creswell and V . L . P . Clark . Designing and conducting mixed methods research . Sage publications , 2017 . [ 13 ] E . Dehghan and A . Nagappa . Politicization and radicalization of discourses in the alt - tech ecosystem : A case study on gab social . Social Media + Society , 2022 . [ 14 ] Derrick Bryson Taylor . George Floyd Protests : A Timeline . https : / / www . nytimes . com / article / george - floyd - protests - timeline . html , 2021 . [ 15 ] H . Editors . Teen gunman kills 17 , injures 17 at Parkland , Florida high school . https : / / www . history . com / this - day - in - history / parkland - marjory - stoneman - douglas - school - shooting , 2018 . [ 16 ] K . Engel , Y . Hua , T . Zeng , and M . Naaman . Characterizing reddit participation of users who engage in the qanon conspiracy theories . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , 6 ( CSCW1 ) : 1 – 22 , 2022 . [ 17 ] Fernando Alfonso . Reddit bans infamous forum about beating women . https : / / www . dailydot . com / news / reddit - beating - women - banned / , 2014 . [ 18 ] C . Fiesler and B . Dym . Moving across lands : Online platform migration in fandom communities . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , 4 ( CSCW1 ) : 1 – 25 , 2020 . [ 19 ] M . Fisher , J . W . Cox , and P . Hermann . Pizzagate : From rumor , to hashtag , to gunfire in dc . Washington Post , 6 : 8410 – 8415 , 2016 . [ 20 ] E . Gilbert . Widespread underprovision on reddit . In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , pages 803 – 808 , 2013 . [ 21 ] T . Gillespie , P . Aufderheide , E . Carmi , Y . Gerrard , R . Gorwa , A . Matamoros - Fernández , S . T . Roberts , A . Sinnreich , and S . M . West . Expanding the debate about content moderation : Scholarly research agendas for the coming policy debates . Internet Policy Review , 9 ( 4 ) , 2020 . [ 22 ] J . Goodman and F . Carmichael . Coronavirus : Bill Gates ‘microchip’ conspiracy theory and other vaccine claims fact - checked . https : / / www . bbc . co . uk / news / 52847648 , 2020 . [ 23 ] C . F . Griggio , M . Nouwens , and C . N . Klokmose . Caught in the network : the impact of whatsapp’s 2021 privacy policy update on users’ messaging app ecosystems . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1 – 23 , 2022 . [ 24 ] H . Habib , M . B . Musa , M . F . Zaffar , and R . Nithyanand . Are proactive interventions for reddit communities feasible ? In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media , volume 16 , pages 264 – 274 , 2022 . [ 25 ] M . Horta Ribeiro , S . Jhaver , S . Zannettou , J . Blackburn , G . Stringhini , E . De Cristofaro , and R . West . Do platform migrations com - promise content moderation ? evidence from r / the _ donald and r / incels . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , 5 ( CSCW2 ) : 1 – 24 , 2021 . [ 26 ] M . Horta Ribeiro , S . Jhaver , S . Zannettou , J . Blackburn , G . Stringhini , E . De Cristofaro , and R . West . Do platform migrations compro - mise content moderation ? evidence from r / the _ donald and r / incels . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , 5 ( CSCW2 ) , oct 2021 . [ 27 ] C . Hutto and E . Gilbert . Vader : A parsimonious rule - based model for sentiment analysis of social media text . In Proceedings of the international AAAI conference on web and social media , volume 8 , pages 216 – 225 , 2014 . 23 [ 28 ] D . Ingram and B . Collins . Reddit bans hundreds of subreddits for hate speech including Trump community . bit . ly / 3Im5rWR , 2020 . [ 29 ] Jack Brewster . QAnon Believers Committed Nearly 80 Conspiracy - Motivated Crimes , Report Finds . https : / / www . forbes . com / sites / jackbrewster / 2021 / 05 / 27 / qanon - believers - committed - nearly - 80 - conspiracy - motivated - crimes - report - finds / ? sh = 684ca7e21840 , 2021 . [ 30 ] S . C . Jansen and B . Martin . The streisand effect and censorship backfire . 2015 . [ 31 ] S . Jhaver , C . Boylston , D . Yang , and A . Bruckman . Evaluating the effectiveness of deplatforming as a moderation strategy on twitter . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , 5 ( CSCW2 ) , oct 2021 . [ 32 ] Joe Parkin Daniels . Donald Trump denies link to Venezuela armed raid by US citizens . https : / / www . theguardian . com / world / 2020 / may / 05 / venezuela - donald - trump - denies - link - raid - us - citizens , 2020 . [ 33 ] S . Kumar , M . Yadava , and P . P . Roy . Fusion of eeg response and sentiment analysis of products review to predict customer satisfaction . Information Fusion , 52 : 41 – 52 , 2019 . [ 34 ] A . Martin . What is QAnon ? The bizarre pro - Trump conspiracy theory growing ahead of the US election . https : / / bit . ly / 3bEqUYL , 2020 . [ 35 ] F . J . Massey Jr . The kolmogorov - smirnov test for goodness of fit . Journal of the American statistical Association , 46 ( 253 ) : 68 – 78 , 1951 . [ 36 ] A . Mekacher and A . Papasavva . " i can’t keep it up . " a dataset from the defunct voat . co news aggregator . In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media , volume 16 , pages 1302 – 1311 , 2022 . [ 37 ] Moira Warburton . Canada bans assault - style weapons in aftermath of mass shooting . https : / / www . reuters . com / article / us - canada - guns - idUSKBN22D62V , 2020 . [ 38 ] E . Newell , D . Jurgens , H . M . Saleem , H . Vala , J . Sassine , C . Armstrong , and D . Ruths . User migration in online social networks : A case study on reddit during a period of community unrest . In Tenth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media , 2016 . [ 39 ] A . Papasavva , M . Aliapoulios , C . Ballard , E . De Cristofaro , G . Stringhini , S . Zannettou , and J . Blackburn . The gospel according to q : Understanding the qanon conspiracy from the perspective of canonical information . In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media , volume 16 , pages 735 – 746 , 2022 . [ 40 ] A . Papasavva , J . Blackburn , G . Stringhini , S . Zannettou , and E . D . Cristofaro . “is it a qoincidence ? ” : An exploratory study of qanon on voat . In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021 , pages 460 – 471 , 2021 . [ 41 ] A . Robertson . Reddit has banned the QAnon conspiracy subreddit r / GreatAwakening . https : / / bit . ly / 2Lslsj1 , 2018 . [ 42 ] I . Stanley - Becker . Jerome Corsi is a Harvard - trained conspiracy kingpin . But is he the link between WikiLeaks and the Trump campaign ? https : / / www . washingtonpost . com / nation / 2018 / 11 / 28 / jerome - corsi - is - harvard - trained - conspiracy - kingpin - is - he - link - between - wikileaks - trump - campaign / , 2018 . [ 43 ] A . Trujillo and S . Cresci . Make reddit great again : assessing community effects of moderation interventions on r / the _ donald . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2201 . 06455 , 2022 . [ 44 ] J . Vallejo and P . Thomas . Why some QAnon believers think JFK Jr is still alive – and about to become vice president . https : / / www . independent . co . uk / news / world / americas / us - politics / qanon - jfk - jr - alive - trump - b1995594 . html , 2022 . [ 45 ] B . Z . Zhang , O . L . Haimson , and M . Thomas . The chinese diaspora and the attempted wechat ban : Platform precarity , anticipated impacts , and infrastructural migration . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , 6 ( CSCW2 ) : 1 – 29 , 2022 . 24