Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 15 , 256 – 267 , January 2004 Modulation of Rac Localization and Function by Dynamin □ V Gu¨nther Schlunck , * † Hanna Damke , ‡ William B . Kiosses , * Nicole Rusk , § Marc H . Symons , § Clare M . Waterman - Storer , ‡ Sandra L . Schmid , ‡ and Martin Alexander Schwartz * (cid:2) ¶ * Division of Vascular Biology , ‡ Department of Cell Biology , The Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla , California 92037 ; and (cid:3) Center for Oncology and Cell Biology , North Shore - Long Island Jewish Research Institute , Manhasset , New York 11030 Submitted January 17 , 2003 ; Revised September 3 , 2003 ; Accepted September 8 , 2003 Monitoring Editor : Anne Ridley The GTPase dynamin controls a variety of endocytic pathways , participates in the formation of phagosomes , podosomal adhesions , and invadopodia , and in regulation of the cytoskeleton and apoptosis . Rac , a member of the Rho family of small GTPases , controls formation of lamellipodia and focal complexes , which are critical in cell migration and phago - cytosis . We now show that disruption of dynamin (cid:1) 2 function alters Rac localization and inhibits cell spreading and lamellipodia formation even though Rac is activated . Dominant - negative K44A dynamin (cid:1) 2 inhibited cell spreading and lamellipodia formation on ﬁbronectin without blocking cell adhesion ; dynamin (cid:1) 2 depletion by speciﬁc small interfering RNA inhibited lamellipodia in a similar manner . Dyn2 ( K44A ) induced Rac mislocalization away from cell edges , into abnormal dorsal rufﬂes , and led to increased total Rac activity . Fluorescence resonance energy transfer imaging of Rac activity conﬁrmed its predominant localization to aberrant dorsal rufﬂes in the presence of dominant - negative dyn2 ( K44A ) . Dyn2 ( K44A ) induced the accumulation of tubulated structures bearing membrane - bound Rac - GFP . Consti - tutively active but not wild - type GFP - Rac was found on macropinosomes and Rac - dependent , platelet - derived growth factor - induced macropinocytosis was abolished by Dyn2 ( K44A ) expression . These data suggest an indispensable role of dynamin in Rac trafﬁcking to allow for lamellipodia formation and cell spreading . INTRODUCTION Endocytosis , actin polymerization , and intracellular signal transduction are intimately coupled ( reviewed in Ceresa and Schmid , 2000 ; Di Fiore and De Camilli , 2001 ) . The endocytic uptake of plasma membrane receptors may serve to switch off receptor signaling by ligand dissociation in endosomes and receptor degradation in lysosomes . Endocytosis and subsequent membrane trafﬁcking are also essential to posi - tion signaling molecules in speciﬁc subcellular compart - ments , allowing for spatio - temporal regulation of down - stream signaling pathways . Finally , endocytosis is needed to recycle membrane proteins in rapid demand , for example , in neuronal signaling and cell migration . Dynamin is a 96 - kDa GTPase that was initially thought to function mainly in the receptor - mediated internalization of clathrin - coated vesicles ( van der Bliek et al . , 1993 ; Damke et al . , 1994 ) but is now known to control clathrin - independent uptake of caveolae ( Henley et al . , 1998 ; Oh et al . , 1998 ; Pelkmans et al . , 2002 ) and noncaveolar lipid rafts as well ( Lamaze et al . , 2001 ) . Dynamin is generally thought to me - diate the detachment of nascent vesicles from the plasma membrane . Three different mammalian dynamin isoforms have been described : neuronal dynamin - 1 , ubiquituously expressed dynamin - 2 , and dynamin - 3 , which is found in testes , lung , and brain . Increasing evidence implicates dy - namin in a range of membrane trafﬁcking and signaling functions ( reviewed in Schmid et al . , 1998 ; McNiven et al . , 2000a ) . Dominant - negative dynamin can interfere with mi - togen - activated protein kinase activation ( Kranenburg et al . , 1999 ; Hislop et al . , 2001 ) . Overexpression of WT dynamin - 2 is able to induce apoptosis ( Fish et al . , 2000 ) and its interac - tions with the cytoskeleton inﬂuence the movement of in - tracellular vesicles ( Lee and De Camilli , 2002 ; Orth et al . , 2002 ) , modulate cell shape ( McNiven et al . , 2000b ) , affect podosomal adhesions ( Ochoa et al . , 2000 ; Lee and De Cam - illi , 2002 ) , invadopodia ( Baldassarre et al . , 2003 ) , and phago - cytosis ( Gold et al . , 1999 ) . In growth factor - stimulated cells , dynamin localizes to lamellipodia and their derivatives , dor - sal membrane rufﬂes ( Cao et al . , 1998 ) . Most recently , dy - namin was shown to form a cytoskeleton - regulatory com - plex with cortactin and Arp2 / 3 ( Schafer et al . , 2002 ) that has a role in actin reorganization after growth factor stimulation ( Krueger et al . , 2003 ) . Speciﬁc functions for dynamin in Article published online ahead of print . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 . 1091 / mbc . E03 – 01 – 0019 . Article and publication date are available at www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E03 - 01 - 0019 . □ V Online version of this article has video material for some ﬁgures . Online version is available at www . molbiolcell . org . Present addresses (cid:3) Departments of Microbiology and Biomedical Engineering , Cardiovascular Research Center , University of Vir - ginia , Charlottesville , VA 22908 ; and † University Eye Hospital , Division of Experimental Ophthalmology , Josef - Schneider Strasse 11 , D - 97080 Wu¨rzburg , Germany . ¶ Corresponding author . E - mail : maschwartz @ virginia . edu . Abbreviations used : FN , ﬁbronectin ; FRET , ﬂuorescence reso - nance energy transfer ; GFP , green ﬂuorescent protein ; GST , glutathione S - transferase ; HRP , horseradish peroxidase ; PBD , p21 - binding domain of PAK1 ; PDGF , platelet - derived growth factor ; PRD , proline - , arginine - rich domain ; siRNA , small inter - fering RNA ; WT , wild type . 256 © 2003 by The American Society for Cell Biology regulating protrusive actin polymerization have been envi - sioned ( Orth and McNiven , 2003 ) . Lamellipodia are essential for cell spreading and migration ( Bray and White , 1988 ) . They are sites of protrusive actin po - lymerization and early adhesion formation initiated at the lead - ing edge of migrating cells . The Rho - family GTPase Rac con - trols the formation of lamellipodia and membrane rufﬂes ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ) . Rac is also important in regulating cell growth , transcription , and apoptosis . In the cytosol , activated Rac is shielded from substrate interactions by Rho guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor . On integrin engagement , a speciﬁc high - afﬁnity Rac binding site becomes available at the plasma membrane . Rac binding to this site uncouples it from Rho guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor , allowing for downstream signaling ( Del Pozo et al . , 2002 ) , which mediates actin polymerization and thus cell protrusion . Cell spreading and migration require continuous recycling of plasma mem - brane , Rac , and other essential signaling and structural pro - teins ( Small et al . , 2002 ) . However , little is known about the termination of Rac signaling and its relationship to membrane recycling . In this article , we report that inhibition of dynamin - 2 strongly affects Rac localization and thus , function . Domi - nant - negative dynamin - 2 leads to the segregation of acti - vated Rac in aberrant dorsal membrane rufﬂes away from cell edges to inhibit cell spreading and lamellipodia forma - tion . Membrane - bound Rac is internalized with macropino - somes , and platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) - induced , Rac - dependent macropinocytosis is blocked by dominant - negative dynamin - 2 . These results suggest that dynamin - 2 is an essential modulator of Rac localization and therefore Rac - dependent cytoskeletal remodeling . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cells and Reagents Rat1 cells stably expressing the tetracycline - regulatable chimeric transcription activator ( tTA - Rat1 ) were cultured in DMEM , supplemented with 5 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , G418 ( 0 . 4 mg / ml ) penicillin , and streptomycin . ( Geneti - cin ; Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . NIH3T3 cells were cultured in DMEM with 10 % bovine calf serum . Recombinant adenoviruses encoding HA - dyn1WT ( human dynamin - 1ba splice variant ) , HA - dyn1K44A , HA - dyn1 (cid:1) PRD , HA - dyn2WT ( rat dynamin - 2ba splice variant ) , HA - dyn2K44A , HA - dyn2 (cid:1) PRD , HA - dyn2S45N (cid:1) PRD , HA - dyn2 / 1 WT - GTPase , and HA - dyn2 / 1 S45N - GT - Pase under control of a tetracycline regulatable promoter were used as described previously ( Altschuler et al . , 1998 ; Fish et al . , 2000 ) . For infection , tTA - Rat1 cells were incubated for 90 min with viruses at (cid:2) 10 multiplicity of infection ( m . o . i . ) in serum - free DMEM . SNB19 glioblastoma cells were main - tained in DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS . Microinjection and Transfection NIH3T3 cells were plated on coverslips coated with ﬁbronectin ( 10 (cid:1) g / ml phosphate - buffered saline [ PBS ] ) and cells were microinjected with cDNAs encoding HA - dynamin - 2 ( WT ) , HA - dynamin - 2 ( K44A ) , GFP - Rac ( WT ) , or GFP - V12Rac into their nuclei . When Rac and dynamin constructs were coex - pressed , each construct was used at low doses of 0 . 01 (cid:1) g cDNA / ml and the cells incubated for 12 – 18 h . To express single Rac constructs in macropino - Figure 1 . Dynamin is necessary for PDGF - induced lamellipodia . ( A – I ) Rat1 ﬁbroblasts overexpressing dynamin (cid:3) 2 constructs were plated on FN - coated coverslips , serum - starved for 16 h , stimulated with PDGF ( 20 ng / ml ) for 30 min and stained for over - expressed dynamins ( anti - HA ) and ﬁlamentous ac - tin ( rhodamine - phallodin ) . ( J ) Lamellipodial extent was quantiﬁed as fraction of cell circumference on 20 randomly selected cells in each group . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m ; mean (cid:4) SEM ; * p (cid:5) 0 . 001 . Dynamin Modulates Rac Localization Vol . 15 , January 2004 257 cytosis assays ( see below ) , 0 . 5 (cid:1) g cDNA / ml were injected and the cells were incubated for 90 min . For transfection , 2 (cid:6) 10 5 NIH3T3 cells were seeded in 60 - mm cell culture dishes and transfected with a total of 2 (cid:1) g of DNA / dish by using Effectene ( QIAGEN , Valencia , CA ) as recommended by the manufacturer . Short Interfering RNA ( siRNA ) siRNAs were obtained from Dharmacon Research ( Lafayette , CO ) . Control siRNA sequences targeted GL2 luciferase , corresponding to coding region 153 – 173 , dynamin 2 siRNA sequences were directed against dynamin - 2 at coding regions 1732 – 1753 for oligo 1 and at 130 – 151 for oligo 2 . SNB19 cells were transfected with siRNAs by using oligofectAMINE ( Invitrogen ) as de - scribed by the manufacturer . Cells were transfected with 60 pmol of siRNA duplex per well in 24 - well plates . siRNA efﬁciency was tested by Western blot . Cells plated at 10 5 cells / well were transfected with the respective siRNAs and lysed directly in Laemmli sample buffer ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) . After separation by SDS - PAGE and transfer onto polyvinylidene diﬂuoride mem - brane , membranes were incubated with either anti - dynamin - 2 antibody ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Santa Cruz , CA ) at a 1 : 500 dilution or antibody against cortactin ( Upstate Biotechnology , Lake Placid , NY ) at a 1 : 500 dilution to control for equal amounts of protein in the samples . Standard immuno - blotting was carried out using enhanced chemoluminescence ( Amersham Biosciences , Piscataway , NJ ) . Lamellipodia Formation and Cell Spreading Assays To assess lamellipodia formation , tTA - Rat1 cells overexpressing adenovirally encoded dynamin constructs were starved in 0 . 4 % serum for 16 h and stim - ulated with PDGF - BB ( Invitrogen ) at 10 ng / ml DMEM . To test the inﬂuence of dyn2 siRNA on lamellipodia formation , SNB19 cells were plated and transfected with siRNA as described above . Twenty - four hours posttransfec - tion , cells were trypsinized , put onto glass coverslips and allowed to adhere for another 12 h in DMEM (cid:7) 10 % FBS . After serum starvation for 16 h , cells were stimulated for 10 min with 10 % FBS and ﬁxed in 4 % formaldehyde . To visualize the actin cytoskeleton , cells were stained with rhodamine - labeled phalloidin in PBS (cid:7) 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , and mounted using 70 % Vectashield ( Vector Laboratories , Burlingame , CA ) . To quantify lamellipodia , phalloidin - stained cells were analyzed using ISEE software ( Inovision , Raleigh , NC ) . The total cell periphery and the cell periphery occupied by lamellipodia as ap - parent in the rhodamine - phalloidin stain were outlined and measured in length . Lamellipodial extent was then expressed as percentage of total cell periphery length . Lamellipodia were identiﬁed as a smooth convex stretch of perpendicular actin stain at the peripheral edge of the cell . For cell spreading experiments , tTA - Rat1 cells were starved in 0 . 4 % serum for 16 h and then trypsinized and the trypsin stopped using soybean trypsin inhibitor . Cells were sedimented and resuspended in DMEM with 0 . 2 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) and 0 . 4 % serum and then replated onto cover - slips coated with ﬁbronectin at the indicated concentrations . To assess spread - ing , slide labels were blinded and all cells expressing dynamin were counted in randomly chosen ﬁelds until at least 100 cells were counted . The cells being counted were scored as “spread” or “nonspread” depending on the cell area . Nonspread cells were easily distinguished from cells that underwent spread - ing as nonspread cells were very small , more intensely stained and showed no lamellipodia ( see also Figure 3B ) . Microscopy NIH3T3 and Rat1 cells were plated on ﬁbronectin - coated coverslips as indi - cated in the text , ﬁxed with 2 % formaldehyde for 15 min , and permeabilized with 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 / phosphate - buffered saline . Cells were stained with the respective antibodies or rhodamine - phalloidin ( Molecular Probes , Eu - gene , OR ) ( 0 . 1 (cid:1) g / ml ) as indicated . Mouse monoclonal anti - hemagglutinin ( HA ) ( Babco , Richmond , CA ) , anti - dynamin ( HUDY - 1 ; Warnock et al . , 1995 ) and rabbit polyclonal anti - cortactin ( Santa Cruz ) were used , followed by FITC - or tetramethylrhodamine B isothiocyanate - labeled secondary antibod - ies ( Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories , West Grove , PA ) . After mounting in Immunomount C ( ICN Biomedicals , Costa Mesa . CA ) , coverslips were viewed by ﬂuorescence microscopy with an MC1024 ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) confocal laser microscope . For phase contrast and ﬂuorescence videomicros - copy , an IX70 microscope ( Olympus , Tokyo , Japan ) with a CoolSNAP - Pro - camera ( Media Cybernetics , Silver Spring , MD ) and ISEE software on a LINUX - PC were used . Live cell confocal time - lapse sequences were taken on a spinning disk confocal microscope system equipped with a 50 - mW Kryp - ton - Argon ion laser ( OmniChrome ; Melles Griot , Carlsbad , CA ) that deliv - ered its radiation by a single ﬁber optic ( Point Source , Southampton , UK ) to a Yokogawa spinning disk confocal scan - head ( UltraView ; PerkinElmer Life Sciences , Boston , MA ) . The system used a TE300 inverted microscope ( Nikon , Tokyo , Japan ) with a 100 (cid:6) 1 . 4 numerical aperture Plan - Apo differential interference objective lens ( Nikon ) and an Orca 2 camera ( Hamamatsu , Bridgewater , NJ ) . MetaMorph software ( Universal Imaging , Downingtown , PA ) controlled the microscope functions and was used for image processing ( Salmon et al . , 2002 ) . Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer ( FRET ) Assays Fluorescence - based in situ Rac assays were carried out as described previ - ously ( Del Pozo et al . , 2002 ) . NIH3T3 cells on coverslips were microinjected with GFP - Rac together with wild - type ( WT ) and DN dynamin constructs as indicated . After 16 – 24 h to allow protein expression , 50 (cid:1) g / ml Alexa - PBD was injected into the cytosol . At 30 min , the coverslips were ﬁxed for 15 min in 2 % formaldehyde and mounted with ﬂuoromount C ( ICN Biomedicals ) . Images were taken with a Bio - Rad 1024 confocal microscope by using the following ﬁlters : 1 ) GFP - Rac , excitation 488 , emission 522 ; 2 ) Alexa 546 , excitation 568 , emission 598 ; and 3 ) FRET excitation 488 , emission 598 nm . Bleedthrough and FRET background levels were determined and subtracted as described previously ( Kraynov et al . , 2000 ) . Image analysis was performed using ISEE ( Inovision ) software on a UNIX workstation . Fluorescence inten - sity was displayed using a color spectrum as indicated in the scale bar . Rac - GTP Pull - Down Assays tTA - Rat1 cells infected with recombinant adenoviruses as described above were incubated in DMEM with 0 . 4 % serum for 18 h and then were chilled on ice , washed once with PBS and lysed in a buffer containing 0 . 5 % NP - 40 , 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride , 1 (cid:1) g / ml aprotinin , 1 (cid:1) g / ml leupteptin , and 20 (cid:1) g of recombinant glutathione S - transferase - p21 - binding domain of PAK1 ( GST - PBD ) as described previ - ously ( Benard et al . , 1999 ; del Pozo et al . , 2000 ) . Cleared lysates were incubated with glutathione - agarose beads ( Amersham Biosciences ) for 30 min at 4°C , washed three times with lysis buffer , and eluted with SDS sample buffer at 95°C for 5 min . Bound Rac was analyzed by SDS - PAGE separation on a 12 % polyacrylamide gel , transferred onto a nitrocellulose ﬁlter , and probed with monoclonal anti - Rac antibody ( Upstate Biotechnology ) . For normalization , whole cell lysates were run in parallel . Rhodamine - Dextran Uptake NIH3T3 cells were microinjected as described above . The cells were incubated with 0 . 5 mg / ml rhodamine - labeled lysine - ﬁxable 70k - Da dextran ( Molecular Probes ) in regular growth medium for 30 min at 37°C , and then ﬁxed and mounted as described above . Figure 2 . Dynamin - 2 siRNA inhibits lamellipodia formation . ( A ) SNB 19 glioblastoma cells were plated on glass coverslips and treated with two different siRNA oligomers against dynamin 2 ( dyn2 ) or luciferase ( control ) for 48 h . After serum starvation for 16 h , 52 h after transfection , cells were stimulated for 10 min with 10 % FBS . After ﬁxation in 4 % formaldehyde , cells were stained with FITC - labeled phalloidin to visualize lamellipodia formation . Bar , 20 (cid:1) m . ( B ) Quantitation of lamellipodial extent as in Figure 1J . mean (cid:4) SEM ; * p (cid:5) 0 . 001 . ( C ) SNB 19 cells were transfected with siRNA directed against either dynamin - 2 or luciferase and harvested 48 h posttransfection . Expression of dynamin - 2 was determined using Western blot with an anti - dynamin - 2 antibody . An antibody against cortactin controls for nonspeciﬁc alterations in expression of cy - toskeletal proteins . G . Schlunck et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 258 Figure 3 . Dynamin mutants inﬂuence cell spreading but not cell adhesion . Rat1 ﬁbroblasts overexpressing dynamin - 2 constructs were serum starved for 16 h , replated on FN as indicated and stained for overexpressed dynamin and F - actin . ( A ) Cell spreading time course on FN - coated coverslips ( 15 (cid:1) g / ml coating solution ) . Noninfected Rat1 cells were used as control ( n (cid:8) 100 cells for each data point ) . ( B ) Cells spreading for 20 min as in A , stained with rhodamine - phallodin and anti - HA for overexpressed dynamin proteins . Bars , 20 (cid:1) m . ( C ) FN dose - response in cell spreading . ( D ) Effect of dynamin mutants on cell adhesion . Adherent cells were counted ( n (cid:8) 100 for each data point ) and the fraction of cells overexpressing dynamin constructs was determined . Results are representative of three experiments ( A – D ) . ( E ) Comparison of dynamin constructs in cell spreading on FN ( 15 (cid:1) g / ml coating solution ) for 30 min . Noninfected Rat1 cells served as control . Results are means (cid:4) SEM from three experiments . Dynamin Modulates Rac Localization Vol . 15 , January 2004 259 Quantiﬁcation of Pinocytosis by Horseradish Peroxidase ( HRP ) Uptake Assays For the analysis of ﬂuid phase uptake , tTA - Rat1 cells were grown on 35 - mm plates . Cells were starved in 0 . 4 % serum for 16 h . During this time cells were infected with the appropriate adenoviruses ( (cid:2) 10 m . o . i . ) in the absence or presence of tetracycline ( 1 (cid:1) g / ml ) . Cells were incubated with 4 mg / ml HRP in DMEM with 20 mM HEPES , 0 . 2 % BSA , pH 7 . 4 , for 7 min at 37°C or 4°C (cid:4) PDGF - BB at 20 ng / ml ( Invitrogen ) . The uptake was stopped by quick aspi - ration of the medium and ﬁve washes with PBS , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 % BSA , pH 7 . 4 , for 5 min at 4°C and 2 short rinses with PBS at 4°C . The cells were then treated with 0 . 1 % pronase in PBS , pH 7 . 4 , to detach cells and remove residual HRP nonspeciﬁcally bound to the plasma membrane . Cell suspensions were then spun at 4°C through a sucrose cushion ( 0 . 5 M in PBS , pH 7 . 4 ) for 5 min at 1 , 000 rpm followed by 20 s at 14 , 000 rpm . The cells were lysed in PBS , 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 , and aliquots were assayed for enzyme activity ( A490 nm ) by using o - phenylenediamine as a substrate and for protein concentration ( A600 nm ) using the MicroBCA assay ( Pierce Chemical , Rockford , IL ) . RESULTS Dynamin Function Is Necessary for Lamellipodia Formation Dynamin has been shown to localize to the leading edge of growth factor - stimulated migrating cells ( Cao et al . , 1998 ; McNiven et al . , 2000a ) . To investigate the functional signiﬁ - cance of dynamin localization to lamellipodia , we assessed the inﬂuence of dynamin mutants . Rat1 cells constitutively expressing a tetracycline transactivator ( tTA ) were infected with recombinant adenoviruses encoding dyn2 ( WT ) , domi - nant - negative dyn2 ( K44A ) or dyn2 ( (cid:1) PRD ) lacking the C - terminal proline - , arginine - rich domain . The proline - argi - nine – rich domain ( PRD ) mediates binding to cortactin and other SH3 domain - containing proteins that are critical to dynamin function ( McNiven et al . , 2000b ) . The adenoviral expression system allows for highly reproducible protein overexpression . Proteins were expressed for 18 h in cells plated on ﬁbronectin in 0 . 4 % FBS . To induce lamellipodia , 20 ng / ml PDGF was applied for 30 min . Cells expressing dyn2 ( WT ) formed large lamellipoda that comprised an av - erage of 30 % of the cell circumference ( Figure 1 , A , D , G , and J ) . At these times after infection , dyn2 ( WT ) cells were not noticeably different from untransfected cells ( our unpub - lished data ) . In contrast , expression of dyn2 ( K44A ) signiﬁ - cantly inhibited the formation of lamellipodia in response to PDGF ( 9 . 8 % of cell circumference , p (cid:5) 0 . 001 ; Figure 1 , B , E , H , and J ) . Dyn2 ( (cid:1) PRD ) - expressing cells formed slightly smaller lamellipodia ( 25 % of cell circumference ) , but the effect was statistically insigniﬁcant ( Figure 1 , C , F , I , and J ) . The expression levels for dynamin constructs were equal under these conditions as determined by Western blot ( our unpublished data ; but see Figure 4 ) . As an alternative approach , we used siRNA - mediated gene silencing to decrease dynamin - 2 levels in cells . Human SNB19 glioblastoma cells were chosen for their high siRNA transfection efﬁciency . Cells treated with two different dy - namin - 2 siRNA oligomers decreased dyn2 expression by 80 % without altering the expression levels of the dynamin - interacting cytoskeletal protein cortactin ( Figure 2C ) , clath - rin adapter protein - 2 or dynamin 1 ( our unpublished data ) . Treated cells failed to form lamellipodia upon serum stim - ulation ( Figure 2A ) . The effect of both dyn2 siRNA oli - gomers on lamellipodia formation was signiﬁcant compared with control siRNA ( Figure 2B ) . We also observed that siRNA - mediated down - regulation of dynamin - 2 inhibited cell spreading in several cell types ( our unpublished data ) . Thus , blocking of dynamin - 2 function either by overexpres - sion of a dominant - negative mutant or by suppression of endogenous dynamin - 2 expression inhibits lamellipodia for - mation . Dynamin Mutants Inﬂuence Cell Spreading but Not Cell Adhesion Lamellipodia mediate cell spreading ( Price et al . , 1998 ) ; thus , we tested the inﬂuence of dynamin mutants on integrin - mediated cell adhesion and spreading . In these experiments , we used a low m . o . i . so that only 40 – 50 % of the cells ex - pressed dynamin constructs at levels detectable by anti - HA immunoﬂuorescence microscopy , thereby providing an ad - ditional control . When plated on a surface coated with 15 (cid:1) g ﬁbronectin / ml , noninfected control cells and cells overex - pressing dyn2 ( WT ) spread equally well ( Figure 3A ) . Over - expression of dyn2 ( (cid:1) PRD ) delayed spreading but cells spread fully at later times . Only those cells that showed appreciable dyn2 ( (cid:1) PRD ) staining were delayed in spread - ing ; low or nonexpressors in the same population were unaffected . In contrast , overexpression of dyn2 ( K44A ) inhib - ited cell spreading at all times examined . Figure 3B shows typical ﬁelds with cells expressing either dyn2 ( WT ) or dyn2 ( K44A ) 20 min after replating on ﬁbronectin ( FN ) . Changes in integrin activation state or surface expression could conceivably account for these results . Either of these alterations should result in decreased adhesion and a shift in the dose response to FN . We therefore measured cell adhe - sion and spreading on various concentrations of FN . Serum - starved cells were plated for 60 min and then ﬁxed and stained for dynamin expression by using an anti - HA anti - body and for F - actin by using rhodamine - phalloidin . In random microscopic ﬁelds , all dynamin expressors were counted and scored as spread or nonspread ( Figure 3 , A and C ) . The fraction of adherent cells expressing dynamin was taken as an indication of cell adhesion ( Figure 3D ) . As be - fore , dyn2 ( K44A ) overexpression strongly inhibited cell spreading compared with dyn2 ( WT ) ( Figure 3C ) . Dyn2 ( (cid:1) PRD ) overexpression gave a smaller degree of inhi - bition . However , no shift in the dose - response curves for FN was detected . Importantly , no decrease in the proportion of expressing cells was observed even at low concentrations of FN ( Figure 3D ) . The slight apparent increase in percentage of transfected cells at low FN density probably reﬂects in - creased brightness of round cells that makes low expressors more apparent . This is most obvious with dyn2 ( K44A ) , where greater numbers of poorly spread cells were present . We conclude that dyn2 ( K44A ) and dyn2 ( (cid:1) PRD ) did not signiﬁcantly affect integrin function . Figure 4 . Dominant - negative dyn2 ( K44A ) leads to increased Rac activity . Rat1 cells overexpressing dynamin constructs were starved in 0 . 4 % serum for 16 h , lysed , and active Rac was assessed in a GST - PBD pull - down assay . Noninfected cells served as control . Active Rac ( PBD ) , total Rac ( WCL ) , and dynamin construct expres - sion levels ( HA ) were detected by Western blot . Results are repre - sentative of three experiments . G . Schlunck et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 260 Isoform Speciﬁcity and the Role of the Proline - Arginine – rich Domain We also examined effects of dynamin - 1 in spreading assays ( Figure 3E ) . Dominant - negative constructs of dynamin - 1 and - 2 isoforms are equally effective at blocking clathrin - dependent and clathrin - independent endocytosis ( Alts - chuler et al . , 1998 ; Lamaze et al . , 2001 ; Pelkmans et al . , 2002 ) . Surprisingly , dyn1 ( K44A ) was much less effective than dyn2 ( K44A ) at inhibiting cell spreading . Given that the in - hibitory effects of dynamin - 2 were due to mutations in its GTPase domain , we investigated the basis for this functional difference by generating GTPase domain chimeras of dy - namin - 1 and - 2 . Thus , we replaced the dynamin - 1 GTPase domain with the GTPase domain of dynamin - 2 , with or without the S45N dominant - negative mutation ( dyn2 / 1 ) . The K44A and S45N mutations both inactivate the GTPase domain and can be used equivalently in cell spreading ex - periments ( our unpublished data ) . Control experiments showed that the dyn2 / 1 ( S45N ) mutant chimera inhibited clathrin - mediated endocytosis as potently as dyn2 ( S45N ) ( our unpublished data ) . Similarly , cell spreading was also strongly inhibited in cells expressing the dyn2 / dyn1 ( S45N ) chimera , but not the dyn2 / dyn1 ( WT ) chimera . Thus , the difference between dynamin - 1 and - 2 correlates with the GTPase domain . Interestingly , this difference occurs even though the GTPase domains of dynamin - 1 and dynamin - 2 are 88 % identical . These data also indicate that the 399 – 444 splice site is not critical to these effects , because we used dyn1 ( aa ) and dyn2 ( ba ) splice variants and a chimeric dyn2 / dyn1 ( S45N ) ( aa ) construct . Dynamin - 1 and - 2 interact with numerous SH3 domain - containing partner molecules through their C - terminal PRD . To determine whether these interactions were necessary for the inhibitory effects of DN - dynamin - 2 , we generated a dou - ble mutant lacking the C - terminal PRD and bearing the inactivating S45N mutation in the GTPase domain . This double mutant potently inhibited clathrin - mediated endocy - tosis ( unpublished data ) , but failed to inhibit cell spreading ( Figure 3E ) . Thus , interactions via the PRD , which are lost in the double mutant , are also necessary to exert a dominant - negative effect on cell spreading . These results further dis - tinguish effects on cell spreading from those on clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Dominant - negative Dyn2 ( K44A ) Leads to Increased Total Rac Activation Rac activity is essential for cell spreading and lamellipodia formation ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ; Price et al . , 1998 ) . Given that integrin function seemed unaffected , we next investigated the effects of dynamin mutants on total Rac activation ( Fig - Figure 5 . Dominant - negative dyn2 ( K44A ) induces Rac mislocalization . NIH3T3 ﬁbro - blasts were injected with plasmids encoding GFP - tagged constitutively active V12Rac and either dyn2 ( WT ) or dyn2 ( K44A ) . When the GFP signal indicated proper protein ex - pression , phase contrast and GFP - V12Rac ﬂuorescence images were taken once per minute with a videomicroscope . Arrow - heads indicate typical peripheral membrane rufﬂes ( A and B ) and abnormal dorsal rufﬂes ( E and F ) , respectively . Images ( A , B , E , and F ) are frames of time - lapse videos available as supplemental material . Bar , 20 (cid:1) m . To characterize the localization of the Rac sig - nal in the rufﬂes , cells were ﬁxed , stained , evaluated with confocal microspcopy ( C , D , G , and H ) , and z - axis reconstructions ( D and H ) were generated along the bars indicated in C and G . Bar ( C ) , 30 (cid:1) m ; ( G ) , 25 (cid:1) m . Dynamin Modulates Rac Localization Vol . 15 , January 2004 261 ure 4 ) . Dyn2 ( WT ) , dyn2 ( K44A ) , and dyn2 ( (cid:1) PRD ) were ex - pressed in tTA - Rat1 cells as described above . Similar expres - sion levels were obtained for all constructs . After overnight starvation in 0 . 4 % serum , cell lysates were prepared , active Rac was precipitated with GST - PBD and analyzed by West - ern blot . To our surprise , overexpression of dyn2 ( K44A ) led to increased Rac activation compared with dyn2 ( WT ) and dyn2 ( (cid:1) PRD ) ( Figure 4 ) , despite the inhibition of Rac - depen - dent lamellipodia formation ( Figure 1 ) . Dyn2 ( K44A ) Induces Mislocalization of Rac Despite increased total Rac activation , Rac signaling seemed to be perturbed by dominant - negative dynamin . One possi - ble explanation is that the activated Rac is mislocalized . To visualize Rac localization and to test whether constitutively active Rac could override a possible effect of dominant - negative dynamin , NIH3T3 cells were microinjected with plasmids coding for constitutively active GFP - V12Rac to - gether with dyn2 ( WT ) or dyn2 ( K44A ) ( Figure 5 ) . Microin - jection of cDNA in NIH3T3 cells allowed for reliable coex - pression of different constructs . When coexpressed with dyn2 ( WT ) , GFP - V12Rac induced typical lamellipodia and dorsal membrane rufﬂes that originated at the cell edge and moved rapidly toward the center of the cell where they dissipated ( arrowheads in Figure 5 , A and B , and Video 1 ; another example with z - axis reconstruction in Figure 5 , C and D ) . In contrast , coexpression of dyn2 ( K44A ) and GFP - V12Rac abolished membrane rufﬂing at the cell edges . In - stead , abnormal , irregularly shaped , rufﬂes enriched in GFP - V12Rac were prevalent in the central region of the dorsal surface and could be seen moving slowly in time lapse imaging ( arrowheads in Figure 5 , E and F , and Video 2 ) . The movement is not centripetal as for regular rufﬂes and their localization to the central part of the apical surface is un - usual ( Figure 5 , G and H ) . GFP - Rac ( WT ) was similarly mis - localized with dyn2 ( K44A ) expression ( our unpublished data ; but see Figure 6 ) . Rac Mislocalized by dyn2 ( K44A ) Is Active To gain further insight into the effects of dyn2 ( K44A ) , the subcellular distribution of Rac activity was visualized using a recently developed FRET assay ( Figure 6 ) . When GFP - Rac ( WT ) was coexpressed with dyn2 ( WT ) , the active Rac was localized at lamellipodia and membrane rufﬂes and in a perinuclear region as described previously ( Figure 6 , A , B , and E ) ( Kraynov et al . , 2000 ) . When GFP - Rac ( WT ) was ex - pressed with dyn2 ( K44A ) , Rac activity was markedly higher but absent from cell edges , instead being concentrated in zones corresponding to the abnormal membrane rufﬂes seen with GFP - V12Rac ( Figure 6 , C – E ) . To quantitate these ob - servations , cells were scored for the presence or absence of FRET - positive central or peripheral rufﬂes ( Figure 6E ) . The analysis shows that dyn2 ( K44A ) causes loss of peripheral rufﬂes and appearance of central rufﬂes . Dyn2 ( K44A ) Induces Accumulation of Membrane - bound Rac in Tubulo - vesicular Structures To explore the translocation of Rac from the plasma mem - brane and possible effects of dominant - negative dynamin - 2 on Rac trafﬁcking in more detail , we studied the spatio - temporal distribution of GFP - Rac ( WT ) with high - resolution confocal time - lapse microscopy . The cells were studied at early time points of dynamin expression ( 12 – 14 h after low - dose injection as opposed to 18 h ) , before the aberrant rufﬂe phenotype was apparent , to capture the origin of this phe - notype . When GFP - Rac ( WT ) was coexpressed with dyn2 ( WT ) , a distinct GFP - Rac signal was apparent in peripheral mem - brane rufﬂes moving centripetally , the cytosol contained diffuse GFP - Rac and dark tubular organelles ( Figure 7 , A and B ) . The perinuclear zone was enriched in GFP - Rac and tiny puncta of GFP - Rac seemed to move centripetally to - ward this zone . Very few larger vesicles bearing membrane - bound GFP - Rac were present . When dominant - negative dyn2 ( K44A ) , which inhibits the severing of membrane ves - icles , was expressed with GFP - Rac ( WT ) , fewer peripheral rufﬂes were observed , streaks of GFP - Rac signal stretched from the cell membrane into the cytoplasm ( Figure 7 , C and D , arrowhead ) , and , most strikingly , tubulo - vesicular struc - Figure 6 . Rac mislocalized by dyn2 ( K44A ) overexpression is ac - tive . NIH3T3 cells containing wild - type Rac - GFP , dyn2 ( WT ) ( A and B ) or dyn2 ( K44A ) ( C and D ) were analyzed . Corrected FRET images are representative of four independent experiments . FRET signal intensity from 20 to 120 is displayed using pseudocolor as indicated by the scale bar . Blue represents low and red high FRET signal . ( E ) Scoring of FRET signal localization . Cells were scored for presence or absence of central and peripheral FRET - positive rufﬂes . Values are means of four independent experiments (cid:4) SEM , 50 cells / group were assessed in each experiment . G . Schlunck et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 262 tures positive for GFP - Rac accumulated in the cytoplasm ( Figure 7 , C and D , arrows ) . At the same time , punctate GFP - Rac was diminished in the perinuclear zone ( Figure 7 , C and D , “x” ) . These data argue that mutant dynamin alters the inward vesicular transport of GFP - Rac ( WT ) . One vesicle is depicted pinching off the tubulo - vesicular complex to - ward the diminished perinuclear zone ( Figure 7D , left ar - row ) . Membrane - bound Activated Rac Is Internalized with Macropinosomes The confocal time - lapse images suggested a vesicular inter - nalization of membrane - bound Rac from the plasma mem - brane and its inhibition by dominant - negative dyn2 ( K44A ) . In a process induced downstream of Rac , rufﬂing membrane is internalized via the formation of macropinocytic vesicles ( Swanson and Watts , 1995 ; Dharmawardhane et al . , 2000 ) . To study a possible link between macropinosomes and Rac trafﬁcking , we next assessed macropinosomes for the pres - ence of membrane - bound Rac . NIH3T3 cells were injected with plasmids coding for constitutively active GFP - V12Rac or GFP - Rac ( WT ) . After 90 min of protein expression , the cells were incubated with rhodamine - labeled 70 - kDa dex - tran for 30 min , ﬁxed and evaluated by confocal microscopy . Indeed , constitutively active GFP - V12Rac was found on the membranes of macropinocytic vesicles ( Figure 8 , A – D ) . By contrast , GFP - Rac ( WT ) was not strongly associated with macropinosomes ( Figure 8 , E – H ) , although some macropi - nosomes were associated with a much weaker punctate GFP - Rac ( WT ) signal . Dyn2 ( K44A ) Inhibits Rac - dependent , PDGF - induced Macropinocytosis Given that dynamin is generally critical for internalization of plasma membrane , the above - mentioned effects of K44A dynamin could be explained if rufﬂing membrane were trapped at the cell surface and could not internalize in macropinosomes . To test this hypothesis , we assessed mac - ropinocytosis in NIH3T3 cells microinjected with plasmids encoding constitutively active GFP - V12Rac and dyn2 ( WT ) or dyn2 ( K44A ) . After proteins were expressed , the cells were incubated with rhodamine - dextran for 30 min , ﬁxed , and evaluated by confocal microscopy . When coexpressed with dyn2 ( WT ) , GFP - V12Rac induced membrane rufﬂes ( Figure 9A ) and increased uptake of rhodamine - dextran ( Figure 9A , right , arrowheads ) . When high levels of dyn2 ( K44A ) were coexpressed , GFP - V12Rac was mislocalized as shown above ( Figure 9A , arrow ) , and rhodamine - dextran uptake was comparable to noninjected , unstimulated cells . Those cells that had only low levels of dyn2 ( K44A ) retained normal GFP - V12Rac localization ( Figure 9A , left , arrowhead ) and showed increased rhodamine - dextran uptake similar to dyn2 ( WT ) - expressing cells . This effect is therefore dose de - pendent . To quantitate macropinocytotic activity in response to a physiological stimulus , PDGF - stimulated ﬂuid phase uptake of HRP was measured ( Figure 9B ) . Incubation of cells with PDGF , which is known to activate Rac ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ; Hawkins et al . , 1995 ; Sander et al . , 1999 ) , increased ﬂuid phase uptake by approximately twofold . This increase was completely abolished by dyn2 ( K44A ) expression but only partially reduced by expression of dyn1 ( K44A ) ( Figure 9B ) and was not inhibited by overexpression of the double mu - tant , dyn2 ( S45N / (cid:1) PRD ) . Basal rates of ﬂuid - phase endocy - tosis are largely unaffected by overexpression of either of these mutants ( Figure 9B ) , even though all of them effec - tively inhibit clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( our unpub - lished data ) . Importantly , the isoform speciﬁcity and struc - tural requirements for inhibition of Rac - induced macropinocytosis paralleled those found for inhibition of integrin - dependent lamellipodia formation and cell spread - ing ( Figure 3E ) . Figure 7 . GFP - Rac ( WT ) trafﬁcking in the presence of dyn2 ( WT ) and dyn2 ( K44A ) . NIH3T3 cells were microinjected with plas - mids encoding GFP - Rac ( WT ) and Dyn2 ( WT ) or Dyn2 ( K44A ) . The GFP - Rac ( WT ) signal was recorded in a time lapse series with a high - resolution spinning disk confocal microscope at the onset of protein expression , before abnormal rufﬂes became apparent with dyn2 ( K44A ) . N , nucleus ; x , perinuclear GFP - Rac ( WT ) - enriched region ; arrowhead , GFP - Rac ( WT ) signal streaks emanating from the zone of membrane ruf - ﬂes ; arrows , tubulo - vesicular structures bearing a membrane - associated GFP - Rac ( WT ) signal . Time - lapse videos are available as supplemental material . Bar , 5 (cid:1) m , time as minutes : seconds . Dynamin Modulates Rac Localization Vol . 15 , January 2004 263 DISCUSSION The large GTPase dynamin and the Rho - family GTPase Rac are both involved in cytoskeletal regulation ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ; Orth and McNiven , 2003 ) . We now provide evidence that dynamin is able to modulate Rac function . Dynamin localizes to lamellipodia and membrane rufﬂes ( Cao et al . , 1998 ; McNiven et al . , 2000b ) in spatio - temporal synchrony with Rac . Integrin engagement actuates Rac downstream signaling ( Price et al . , 1998 ; Del Pozo et al . , 2002 ) to drive lamellipodia formation . Integrin stimulation is sufﬁcient to recruit dynamin to lamellipodia , even in the absence of growth factors ( our unpublished data ) . Our data indicate that dynamin - 2 is essential for lamelli - podia formation and cell spreading . When dynamin func - tion was disrupted by expression of a dominant - negative mutant , integrin - mediated ( Figure 3 ) as well as growth fac - tor - dependent induction of lamellipodia were abolished ( Figure 1 ) . Similarily , an siRNA - induced reduction in dy - namin - 2 inhibited growth - factor induced lamellipodia for - mation ( Figure 2 ) . Alterations in integrin activity or signal - ing ( Price et al . , 1998 ) could conceivably account for these ﬁndings , however , neither the rate of cells adhering to ﬁ - bronectin , nor the dose response to ﬁbronectin was signiﬁ - cantly altered by dominant - negative dynamin . Thus , inte - grin function per se seems unaffected . Because some dynamin - mediated effects are isoform spe - ciﬁc ( Cao et al . , 1998 ; Fish et al . , 2000 ) , we compared dy - namin - 1 and - 2 isoforms in cell spreading experiments ( Fig - ure 3E ) . Dominant - negative dyn2 ( K44A ) inhibited cell spreading to a much greater extent than dyn1 ( K44A ) . Dy - namin - 1 and dynamin - 2 are (cid:2) 70 % identical , with the great - est sequence divergence occurring in the C - terminal pro - line - , arginine - rich domain and within splice variants located in the middle domain . Thus , it was surprising that a chimeric molecule consisting of dynamin - 1 with the dyn2 ( S45N ) GTPase domain was almost as potent as full - length dyn2 ( S45N ) . Based on these data , we speculate that effectors of the GTPase domain might be required for the speciﬁc dominant - negative effects of dynamin - 2 on cell spreading . In addition to speciﬁc interactions of the dy - namin - 2 GTPase domain , inhibition of cell spreading re - quired the C - terminal PRD . These data therefore suggest that both the GTPase and the SH3 - binding PRD contribute to lamellipodia formation . Although the dominant - negative mutants dyn2 ( S45N (cid:1) PRD ) and dyn1 ( K44A ) both strongly inhibit clathrin - mediated endocytosis , they had no signiﬁ - cant effect on cell spreading and Rac - induced macropinocy - tosis . We conclude that the modulation of Rac localization by dynamin differs from clathrin - mediated endocytosis and that dynamin functions in a distinct manner in these differ - ent membrane - trafﬁcking events . Loss of lamellipodia could indicate a blockade of Rac activation . However , dominant - negative dynamin led to in - creased total Rac activity ( Figure 4 ) . Because Rac localization is also critical for downstream signaling ( del Pozo et al . , 2000 ) , we examined the subcellular distribution of green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - tagged Rac in the presence of dy - namin mutants ( Figure 5 ) . Dominant - negative dynamin in - duced Rac mislocalization to aberrant dorsal membrane ruf - ﬂes . The expression of constitutively active GFP - V12Rac could not override the effect of dyn2 ( K44A ) . These data and results from FRET assays ( Figure 6 ) indicate that dyn2 ( K44A ) leads to sequestration of active Rac in aberrant membrane rufﬂes . At the same time , an increase in total Rac activity suggests either a failure in Rac deactivation or an abnormal activation of Rac . Confocal time - lapse microscopy of GFP - Rac constructs at the onset of dynamin construct expression provided some insights into the effects of dominant - negative dynamin on Rac dynamics . With dyn2 ( WT ) , punctate GFP - Rac ( WT ) sig - nals seem close to the plasma membrane and some move toward a perinuclear region enriched in Rac . It is not clear whether this perinuclear zone is an endosomal recycling compartment , part of the Golgi apparatus , or both . Dyn2 ( K44A ) , however , attenuates the perinuclear accumu - lation of Rac and leads to streaks of Rac signal emanating from the plasma membrane region and to the accumulation Figure 8 . Membrane - bound Rac is internalized with macropino - somes . NIH3T3 cells were microinjected with plasmids encoding GFP - V12Rac or GFP - Rac ( WT ) , incubated for 90 min , exposed to rhodamine - labeled 70 - kDa dextran ( 0 . 5 mg / ml ) for 30 min , ﬁxed , mounted , and subjected to confocal microscopy . ( B – D ) Close - up as indicated in A . ( F – H ) Close - up as indicated in E . ( B and F ) Rhoda - mine - dextran indicating pinosomes . ( C ) GFP - V12Rac . ( G ) GFP - Rac ( WT ) . ( A , D , E , and H ) Merged images . Bars , 10 (cid:1) m . G . Schlunck et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 264 of tubulo - vesicular structures that are positive for GFP - Rac ( WT ) . The tubular structures seen with dyn2 ( K44A ) are consistent with the well characterized effect of dominant - negative dynamin on membrane structures of nascent vesi - cles ( Damke et al . , 2001 ) . When vesicle ﬁssion is retarded but not yet fully blocked at the onset of dyn2 ( K44A ) expression , small unsevered vesicles elongate and grow to larger vesi - culotubular complexes . These data suggest that in the pres - ence of dyn2 ( WT ) , Rac is internalized in small vesicles and that this process is perturbed by dominant - negative dy - namin . The ﬁnding that dominant - negative dynamin does not affect outward transport of vesicles from the Golgi to the plasma membrane ( Altshuler et al . , 1998 ) , together with the depletion of perinuclear Rac - containing vesicles , argues against direct inhibition of outward transport of Rac to the plasma membrane . Macropinosomes are vesicular structures that arise from membrane rufﬂes ( Swanson , 1989 ) in a process mediated by the Rac effector PAK ( Dharmawardhane et al . , 2000 ) . Thus , macropinosomes are a candidate vehicle for Rac internaliza - tion from membrane rufﬂes that might be susceptible to modulation by dynamin . We found that GFP - V12Rac is internalized with macropinosomes ( Figure 8 ) . Because the constitutively active mutant GFP - V12Rac cannot be deacti - vated , it remains membrane - bound , allowing for its detec - tion on macropinosomes . GFP - Rac ( WT ) , by contrast , can be rapidly deactivated , leading to its dissociation from mem - branes so that only a very weak GFP - Rac ( WT ) signal could be detected in association with some macropinosomes . Dominant - negative dyn2 ( K44A ) speciﬁcally inhibited V12Rac - or PDGF - induced macropinocytosis without affect - ing baseline ﬂuid phase uptake ( Figure 9 ) . This result is consistent with the idea that plasma membrane internaliza - tion is impaired by dominant - negative dyn2 ( K44A ) . We have shown ( Damke et al . , 1995 ; Altschuler et al . , 1998 ) that a compensatory , dyn1 - and dyn2 - insensitive and clathrin - independent ﬂuid phase endocytic mechanism is induced after inhibiting clathrin - mediated endocytosis by either dyn1 ( K44A ) or dyn2 ( K44A ) . The results in this article con - ﬁrm that neither dyn1 ( K44A ) nor dyn2 ( K44A ) inhibit this baseline constitutive ﬂuid phase uptake mechanism but that dyn2 ( K44A ) speciﬁcally inhibits the PDGF - induced compo - nent of ﬂuid phase uptake . Importantly , clathrin - dependent endocytosis is strongly inhibited by the dominant - negative double mutant dyn2 ( S45N DPRD ) and by dyn1 ( K44A ) , but these constructs had little or no effect on PDGF - induced HRP uptake . This correlates well with the isoform - speciﬁc effects on cell spreading . Thus , we conclude that disruption of dynamin function inhibits the internalization of Rac from the plasma membrane and leads to the accumulation of activated Rac in abnormal membrane rufﬂes , depleting Rac needed for the formation of new lamellipodia ( Figure 10 ) . Rac was recently reported to be in dynamin immunopre - cipitates after PDGF stimulation ( Krueger et al . , 2003 ) . How - ever , we did not detect coimmunoprecipitation of Rac and HA - tagged overexpressed dynamin after PDGF - stimulation in our system ( our unpublished data ) . Because the antibod - ies and systems used are different , an interaction of Rac and Figure 9 . Dyn2 ( K44A ) inhibits PDGF - induced macropinocytosis . ( A ) NIH3T3 cells were microinjected with plasmids encoding GFP - V12Rac and Dyn2 ( WT ) or Dyn2 ( K44A ) . When the GFP signal indicated proper expression , the cells were incubated with rhoda - mine - labeled dextran for 30 min . ( B ) HRP uptake assay . Rat1 cells expressing dynamin constructs were serum starved , and HRP uptake was measured 10 min after stimulation with PDGF ( 20 ng / ml ) or vehicle . Results are mean (cid:4) SEM of three independent experiments . Dynamin Modulates Rac Localization Vol . 15 , January 2004 265 dynamin in a protein complex is a possibility . Dynamin - 2 - dependent internalization of membrane - bound Rac could be a prerequisite to GAP - mediated Rac deactivation in a spe - cialized protein complex or subcellular compartment . Rac signaling is terminated by GTPase - activating proteins that act in a spatio - temporally regulated manner . The accumula - tion of membrane - associated GFP - Rac ( WT ) on tubulated cy - toplasmic vesicles and streaks emanating from the zone of membrane rufﬂing seen with early dyn2 ( K44A ) expression ( Figure 7 , C and D , and Video 4 ) is consistent with this hypothesis . The presence of constitutively active but not WT Rac on the membrane of macropinosomes further strength - ens this idea ( Figure 8 ) . Finally , an inhibition of Rac - or PDGF - dependent macropinocytosis by dyn2 ( K44A ) ( Figure 9 ) indicates a role for dynamin in the pinocytotic internal - ization of membranes from rufﬂes , a mechanism that can serve to translocate Rac . Further work will be required to elucidate the mechanism by which dynamin - 2 controls Rac activity and localization . However , our results connect dynamin’s known function in membrane trafﬁcking to Rac localization and function , pro - viding a new functional link between dynamin and regula - tion of the actin cytoskeleton . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft fellowship Schl563 / 1 - 1 , 1 - 2 ( to G . S . ) , California Cancer Research Program 00 - 00743V - 20070 ( to H . D . ) , American Heart Association fellowship 0120068Y ( to W . B . K . ) , National Cancer Institute grant CA - 87567 ( to M . H . S . ) , National Institutes of Health grant GM - 42455 ( to S . L . S . ) , and U . S . Public Health Service grants GM - 47214 and HL - 57900 ( to M . A . S . ) . REFERENCES Altschuler , Y . , Barbas , S . M . , Terlecky , L . J . , Tang , K . , Hardy , S . , Mostov , K . E . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1998 ) . Redundant and distinct functions for dynamin - 1 and dynamin - 2 isoforms . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 1871 – 1881 . Baldassarre , M . , Pompeo , A . , Castaldi , C . , Cortelino , S . , Beznoussenko , G . , McNiven , M . A . , Luini , A . , and Buccione , R . ( 2003 ) . Dynamin participates in focal extracellular matrix degradation by invasive cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1074 – 1083 . Benard , V . , Bohl , B . P . , and Bokoch , G . M . ( 1999 ) . Characterization of rac and cdc42 activation in chemoattractant - stimulated human neutrophils using a novel assay for active GTPases . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 13198 – 13204 . Bray , D . , and White , J . G . ( 1988 ) . Cortical ﬂow in animal cells . Science 239 , 883 – 888 . Cao , H . , Garcia , F . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Differential distribution of dynamin isoforms in mammalian cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 2595 – 2609 . Ceresa , B . P . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2000 ) . Regulation of signal transduction by endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 204 – 210 . Damke , H . , Baba , T . , Warnock , D . E . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1994 ) . Induction of mutant dynamin speciﬁcally blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 915 – 934 . Damke , H . , Baba , T . , van der Bliek AM . , Schmid SL . ( 1995 ) . Clathrin - inde - pendent pinocytosis is induced in cells overexpressing a temperature - sensi - tive mutant of dynamin . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 69 – 80 . Damke , H . , Binns , D . D . , Ueda , H . , Schmid , S . L . , and Baba , T . ( 2001 ) . Dynamin GTPase domain mutants block endocytic vesicle formation at morphologi - cally distinct stages . Mol . Biol . Cell , 12 , 2578 – 2589 . Del Pozo , M . A . , Kiosses , W . B . , Alderson , N . B . , Meller , N . , Hahn , K . M . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2002 ) . Integrins regulate GTP - Rac localized effector interac - tions through dissociation of Rho - GDI . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 232 – 239 . del Pozo , M . A . , Price , L . S . , Alderson , N . B . , Ren , X . D . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2000 ) . Adhesion to the extracellular matrix regulates the coupling of the small GTPase Rac to its effector PAK . EMBO J . 19 , 2008 – 2014 . Di Fiore , P . P . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2001 ) . Endocytosis and signaling : an inseparable partnership . Cell 106 , 1 – 4 . Dharmawardhane , S . , Schurmann , A . , Sells , M . A . , Chernoff , J . , Schmid , S . L . , and Bokoch , G . M . ( 2000 ) . Regulation of macropinocytosis by p21 - activated kinase - 1 . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 3341 – 3352 . Fish , K . N . , Schmid , S . L . , and Damke , H . ( 2000 ) . Evidence that dynamin - 2 functions as a signal - transducing GTPase . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 145 – 154 . Gold , E . S . , Underhill , D . M . , Morrissette , N . S . , Guo , J . , McNiven , M . A . , and Aderem , A . ( 1999 ) . Dynamin 2 is required for phagocytosis in macrophages . J . Exp . Med . 190 , 1849 – 1856 . Hawkins , P . T . , et al . ( 1995 ) . PDGF stimulates an increase in GTP - Rac via activation of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase . Curr . Biol . 5 , 393 – 403 . Henley , J . R . , Krueger , E . W . , Oswald , B . J . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Dy - namin - mediated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 85 – 99 . Hislop , J . N . , Everest , H . M . , Flynn , A . , Harding , T . , Uney , J . B . , Troskie , B . E . , Millar , R . P . , and McArdle , C . A . ( 2001 ) . Differential Internalization of mam - malian and non - mammalian gonadotropin - releasing hormone receptors . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 39685 – 39694 . Kranenburg , O . , Verlaan , I . , and Moolenaar , W . H . ( 1999 ) . Dynamin is re - quired for the activation of mitogen - activated protein ( MAP ) kinase by MAP kinase kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 35301 – 35304 . Kraynov , V . S . , Chamberlain , C . , Bokoch , G . M . , Schwartz , M . A . , Slabaugh , S . , and Hahn , K . M . ( 2000 ) . Localized rac activation dynamics visualized in living cells . Science 290 , 333 – 337 . Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . , and McNiven , M . ( 2003 ) . A dynamin - cortactin - Arp2 / 3 complex mediates actin reorganization in growth factor - stimulated cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1085 – 1096 . Lamaze , C . , Dujeancourt , A . , Baba , T . , Lo , C . G . , Benmerah , A . , and Dautry - Varsat , A . ( 2001 ) . Interleukin 2 receptors and detergent - resistant membrane domains deﬁne a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Mol . Cell 7 , 661 – 671 . Lee , E . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2002 ) . Dynamin at actin tails . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 161 – 166 . Figure 10 . Model for dynamin - dependent Rac localization . ( A ) Rac has been localized to an ARF - 6 – dependent endosomal - plasma membrane recycling pathway ( Radhakrishna et al . , 1999 ) . In migrat - ing and spreading cells , integrins control binding sites for active Rac at the plasma membrane to induce lamellipodia and membrane rufﬂes ( Del Pozo et al . , 2002 ) . Peripheral rufﬂes move centripetally and give rise to macropinosomes . Rac is internalized with macropi - nosomes in a dynamin - dependent manner as a prerequisite for its deactivation and recycling . ( B ) Dominant - negative dynamin (cid:3) 2 ( DN Dyn2 ) inhibits Rac internalization leading to segregation of acti - vated Rac into aberrant dorsal membrane rufﬂes . Subsequently , the Rac recycling pathway is depleted and lamellipodia formation sub - sides . G . Schlunck et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 266 McNiven , M . A . , Cao , H . , Pitts , K . R . , and Yoon , Y . ( 2000a ) . The dynamin family of mechanoenzymes : pinching in new places . Trends Biochem . Sci . 25 , 115 – 120 . McNiven , M . A . , Kim , L . , Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . , and Wong , T . W . ( 2000b ) . Regulated interactions between dynamin and the actin - binding pro - tein cortactin modulate cell shape . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 187 – 198 . Ochoa , G . C . , et al . ( 2000 ) . A functional link between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton at podosomes . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 377 – 389 . Oh , P . , McIntosh , D . P . , and Schnitzer , J . E . ( 1998 ) . Dynamin at the neck of caveolae mediates their budding to form transport vesicles by GTP - driven ﬁssion from the plasma membrane of endothelium . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 101 – 114 . Orth , J . D . , Krueger , E . W . , Cao , H . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2002 ) . The large GTPase dynamin regulates actin comet formation and movement in living cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 167 – 172 . Orth , J . D . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2003 ) . Dynamin at the actin - membrane inter - face . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 31 – 39 . Pelkmans , L . , Puntener , D . , and Helenius , A . ( 2002 ) . Local actin polymeriza - tion and dynamin recruitment in SV40 - induced internalization of caveolae . Science 296 , 535 – 539 . Price , L . S . , Leng , J . , Schwartz , M . A . , and Bokoch , G . M . ( 1998 ) . Activation of Rac and Cdc42 by integrins mediates cell spreading . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 1863 – 1871 . Radhakrishna , H . , Al - Awar , O . , Khachikian , Z . , and Donaldson , J . G . ( 1999 ) . ARF6 requirement for Rac rufﬂing suggests a role for membrane trafﬁcking in cortical actin rearrangements . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 855 – 866 . Ridley , A . J . , Paterson , H . F . , Johnston , C . L . , Diekmann , D . , and Hall , A . ( 1992 ) . The small GTP - binding protein rac regulates growth factor - induced mem - brane rufﬂing . Cell 70 , 401 – 410 . Salmon , W . C . , Adams , M . C . , and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2002 ) . Dual - wave - length ﬂuorescent speckle microscopy reveals coupling of microtubule and actin movements in migrating cells . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 31 – 37 . Sander , E . E . , ten Klooster , J . P . , van Delft , S . , van der Kammen , R . A . , and Collard , J . G . ( 1999 ) . Rac downregulates Rho activity : reciprocal balance be - tween both GTPases determines cellular morphology and migratory behav - ior . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 1009 – 1022 . Schafer , D . A . , Weed , S . A . , Binns , D . , Karginov , A . V . , Parsons , J . T . , and Coo - per , J . A . ( 2002 ) . Dynamin2 and cortactin regulate actin assembly and ﬁlament organization . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1852 – 1857 . Schmid , S . L . , McNiven , M . A . , and De Camilli , P . ( 1998 ) . Dynamin and its partners : a progress report . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 , 504 – 512 . Small , J . V . , Stradal , T . , Vignal , E . , and Rottner , K . ( 2002 ) . The lamellipodium : where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol . 12 , 112 – 120 . Swanson , J . A . ( 1989 ) . Phorbol esters stimulate macropinocytosis and solute ﬂow through macrophages . J . Cell Sci . 94 , 135 – 142 . Swanson , J . A . , and Watts , C . ( 1995 ) . Macropinocytosis . Trends Cell Biol . 5 , 424 – 428 . van der Bliek , A . M . , Redelmeier , T . E . , Damke , H . , Tisdale , E . J . , Meyerowitz , E . M . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1993 ) . Mutations in human dynamin block an inter - mediate stage in coated vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 553 – 563 . Warnock , D . E . , Terlecky , L . J . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1995 ) . Dynamin GTPase is stimulated by crosslinking through the C - terminal proline - rich domain . EMBO J . 14 , 1322 – 1328 . Dynamin Modulates Rac Localization Vol . 15 , January 2004 267